A True relation of the faction begun at Wisbech, by Fa. Edmonds, alias
Weston, a Jesuit, 1595. and continued since by Fa. Walley, alias Garnet, the
Provincial of the Jesuits in England, and by Fa. Parsons in Rome, with their
adherents:

Against us the Secular Priests their brethren and fellow Prisoners, that
disliked of novelties, and thought it dishonorable to the ancient
Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Catholic Church, that Secular Priests
should be governed by Jesuits.

Newly Imprinted.

1601.

To the true Catholic Reader.
IN such books as some of our brethren have bin lately constrained to set out
for your satisfaction: there is often mention made of the contention at Wisbich
begun 1595. Of this contention, there have gone many reports: and as yet the
truth thereof has not bin so fully published, as it is convenient: the
indirect course of our new adversaries considered. Such as are infected with
our English Iesuitisme, do ascribe all the blame in that behalf unto us, that
are secular Priests: in that we could not be brought to alter our old orders
for the advancement of Fa. Weston a Jesuit to become our Governor or Agent;
as his faction termed him. To make this matter therefore as clear as the
sun, and that no indiscreete Catholic may be ignorant of the truth herein,
if he will not wilfully shut his eyes, or stop his ears, as our Archpriest
would have them: we have thought it our duties to deliver unto you from point
to point (as in the sight of God) the beginning and proceeding of those
garboyles then amongst us. And at this time, we are the rather moved so to do:
because it has pleased Master Blackwell our said Archpriest, very lately to
send to his twelve Assistants to be diuulged a certain Censure, or (we know
not what to term it) a sheet of paper, fraught neither with wit, honest
dealing, discretion, or learning: but in effect with as many shifts and lies
almost as lines, in derogation not only of some of the said books set out by
our brethren, tearming the same (as if either he himself, or some of his
commanders the Jesuits had made them) to be seditious books: but likewise
takes upon him, to touch the said contention, not in many words, but with much
folly and great untruth. We will be bold by way of Preface, a little to touch
them.

These are his words. The first point (says he, meaning the division at
Wisbich) was a thing long since ended with great edification, and by the means
principally of those which are most condemned. It touches the greater and
better part of that company. It nothing concerns our authority: it being
more ancient, and having orders taken at the atonement by their own consent.
It is well known at Rome by whose means they were disanulled. Neither is it
more unfitting for those which lived in one house to institute rules for such
as voluntarily demanded and accepted them then to procure a sodality abroad.
Thus far our Archpriest: and it is all he writes to his assistants of this
matter: which we the rather note to show the extremity of his pride, in
supposing by such an answer to the said books concerning that division to
wipe away those imputations and matters, wherewith both Fa. Garnet, and Fa.
Weston, and he himself in some sort are charged. That which here he says
either touching our contention at Wisbich, or any thing whereof he has written
to his said assistants against the said books, is fully answered in print by
one of our brethren, a true Catholic Priest: We heartily pray you to procure
the book, and then judge of our Archpriest as you find him. In the mean
while and because this our treatise may come to your hands before the other,
although the history following does sufficiently confute his words by us now
cited: yet will we give you some little trial of our new Governors wisdom
and sincerity, by that which here he writes.

The first point (says he) was a thing long since ended. And what then master
Blackwell? will you reason thus? It was long since ended: ergo, master Garnet
and master Weston, the firebrands of that garboile with their factious
adherents are not to be blamed as our brethren have writ of them in their said
book? But we beseech you sir upon your small credit tell us, is that
contention long since ended? Nay rather (speak man) is it ended as yet? It was
in effect: whether it were meet, and according to the ancient ecclesiastical
Discipline, that a Jesuit should have the commandment over secular Priests.
And is this point yet decided? There was we confess (as we thought) an end
made amongst us 1596. by master Mush, and master Dudley, and that with
edification: but it fell out far otherwise. The edification you make mention
of was nothing suitable to that edification, whereof the Apostle speaks: but
was much more agreeable to the building of Babell that tower of confusion. For
whilst we of the unity were quiet, and supposed all had bin well: master
Garnet, and his subject master Weston, were so moved, that they had bin
disappointed of their said government amongst us, as like proud Nymrods and
boisterous hunters they cast about how to bring us under them by an other
stratageme, as by the history it will appear.

When he also further says, that the end he mentions was made by the means
principally of those which are most condemned: he means master Garnet and
master Weston to be those principal persons; or else his speech is
senseless: and then also he writes most falsely. For true it is, that the end
which we supposed had bin made, was compassed by master Mush and master
Dudley full sore against the hearts and good likings of the said two Jesuits.
Mary if he mean such an end of the said contention as they two propounded to
themselves, which was but an interim to a further mischief, such an end, as
then they respected and sought after, and do now persuade themselves to have
found it (whilst master Garnet rules the roast) then indeed Fa. Garnet and
Fa. Weston may truly be said to have bin the especial contriuers of it:
otherwise it proceeds from incredible boldness to pretend them to be authors
of any good peace, who breathe forth nothing but dissension and cruelty.

And where he says (as we suppose) that master Garnet and master Weston, are
two men now most condemned: it is true that they are indeed condemned for their
Machiuilian practices against their brethren: being (under pretense of their
Fatherhoods) so puffed up with pride and arrogancic, as it is scarce probable to
relate. But yet some exception may justly be taken to his words, in that he
says, they are most condemned. For in good sooth, we think his maistership as
far too blame as either of them, or more: in that being a secular Priest, he
does so tyrannize over his own brethren by calling, and has not the wit to
see, how he is abused and made a puppie to dance after their pipe, and to
execute what they do command him.

But it follows for sooth: that the said division touches the greater and
better part of that company. Alack alack, does it so? It touches indeed the
greater part: and that very nearly: for it showed them for the time to be very
factious: such as secretly banded, and combined themselves with a Jesuit
against their fellow prisoners and brethren. And therefore in that he says
those conspiring companions were the better part, he speaks like himself
very untruly, as we in our indgements do esteem of honest men. Mary in his
sense, and according to the common saying, the veryer knaves, the better luck:
they may well be reckoned the better part: because none are judged virtuous or
of any estimation that oppose themselves against the Jesuits, or refuse to
worship their Jesuitical Idol our Archpriest. And yet we will be content to
let them go for once as he would have them: so he join those words with the
other that follow: and to this effect. The said contention touches the better
part, and therefore it concerns neither himself, nor any of his loving
assistants, nor their impregnable authority. But in good sooth master
Blackwell, speak truly man: does not that contention in some sort touch your
high authority? Was it not the ground of it? If we had yielded to Fa. Westons
agencie, had you bin ever advanced as you are? Did not our garboyles beget
your greatness? If master Weston had prevailed with us, master Garnet would
have wiped your nose for dealing like a young prince abroade-as you do. And
therefore indeed in a right good sense, we are your good masters, and so you
ought to esteem us. But if we should deal more seriously with you, and urge
you to set down, wherein the said great part was, or is the better: what durst
you say, if you have any spark of the fear of God before your eyes? Are they
better learned? for shame you will not say it. Are their lives more sincere? I
hope you will charge us with no dishonestie: or if you dare, we defye you:
being in our lives we trust blameles before men, and every way as honest as
your self at the least.

As touching the orders you speak of; they were yielded unto (it is true) by
our consent, and that most willingly: but as for master Weston, it so stroke
him to the heart to yield unto them, as he fell down presently before the
company into a swoune: such was his pride, and so unwilling he was to be
ouer-ruled for the time. And whereas our Archpriest says: that it is well
known at Rome by whose means the said orders were disanulled: we are glad to
hear it, and have taken some little pains in this treatise, to make it also
as well known here in England. If his meaning be that we of the Unity did
first disanull them, he says untruly, and they in Rome are falsely informed.
No, no, those orders crossed too much the Jesuits deseignements to have any
long continuance, where they had any factious creatures to infringe them.

But that which follows, is worthy some especial consideration. Neither was
it more unfitting (says master Blackwell) for those which lived in one house
to institute rules, for such, as voluntarily demanded and accepted them, then
to procure a sodality abroad. In good faith we are sorry, that we are compelled
to disclose this fellows fals^hood, and how much he is sunne-burnt with
Iesuitisme. It is a world to see how artificially he does smooth over in thi^
place diverse false, and some very absurd points. And first consider we pray
you: whether it was as fit for Priests i^ prison to choose a Jesuit to rule
them, as for other Priests abroad, to desire to have a Bishop to govern them:
and whether suiteth better with the ancient discipline of the Catholic Church
for secular Priests to sue to the Provincial of the Jesuits to have a Jesuit
for their head: or for others to sue to his holiness to assign them a Bishop.
But let this pass: and proceed we to the rest: and when you hear the truth
in a word, then consider the man's sincerity. It will appear unto you by the
history following, that Fa. Weston had bin laboring for a superiority over his
brethren for the space of seven years. To that purpose he had insinuated
himself by hypocrisy, and unequal distribution of money into the favors of
the younger sort, such as were either themselves Jesuits, or else inclining
thereunto. The Rules he speaks of, were of Fa. Westons own making. And all
this was done secretly, the grauer sort of the company being never acquainted
with it. When they had contrived their business, as you have heard: they pretend
themselves to be more holy, then the rest of us whom they misliked: and that
therefore, in respect of the sins that reigned amongst us; they would no more
either eat or drink with us, but would have their diet by themselves. And in
conclusion, they severed themselves from us, and dealt as you shall perceive in
this treatise at large; more like Donatists, then Catholic Priests. And all
this inquitie does this Jesuitical Archpriest cover in the said words, so
Clarkly masked with good terms, without any regard either of conscience, or
common honesty, but to abuse the world, for the better upholding of his own
credit: which being gotten by falsehood, is still yet so maintained. But we
keep you too long from the story it self: and therefore referring you for
this matter to the said printed discourse, in answer both of it, and many
other points, we commit you by our prayers to Almighty God, who open your eyes
and hearts, that you may truly discern between wolves and true pastors of your
souls, and accordingly to embrace them, as heretofore you have done, and we
hope will do hereafter.

A true relation of the faction begun at Wisbech.
IN the year 1579. M. Saunders was dispatched from Rome to Ireland: and not
long after the Pope sent other forces thither. About the same time also, the
King of Spain intending to assail Portugal, upon the death of King Henry the
late Cardinal, prepared an Army and a Navy (as it was pretended) for England.
And to countenance the same, he procured by Cardinal Alexandrino his means,
the renouation of the Bull published by Pius quintus against her Majesty: and
printing of them to the number of 1500. at the least, he was content they
should be spread abroad. Not long after Father Parsons, and two other Jesuits
his subjects, Father Campion and Father Cotham, came into England with such a
noise, as moved great expectation in some, and diligent caution to be had of
their proceedings by others. These things happening thus together: her Majesty
and the State (as fearing the worst) disposed of the affairs in the Realm
accordingly: and thought it convenient to carry a hand more hardly upon the
Catholics. So as in the year 1580. Doctor Watson Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor
Fecknam Abbot of Westminster, Doctor Young, master Metham, Doctor Oxenbridge,
and master Bluet, were sent to remain as prisoners in the Castle of Wisbich,
where they lived in great unity and brotherly kindness: every man intermedling
only with his own affairs and private meditations. They were all in commons
with the keeper: and for their recreation, had a Garden there to walk in, and
to solace themselves as they thought good. Such money as was sent to any
particular man he had himself the disposition of it as he thought it
conuement, that which came for the common use, was by all their consents
delivered still to master Bluet, who divided the same to every man alike.
There was then no affectation of superiority, but every man yielded of his own
accord that duty and precedencie which to every one was due, the keeper having
the commandment over them all. Afterward within about three years, eight or
nine Gentlemen were likewise sent to remain there as prisoners, upon certain
speeches that the Duke of Guise had some intendment against England, whereby
the number of the prisoners increased, without any disturbance at all to the
foresaid unity. These Gentlemen lived at their own charges, and as most
dutiful children demeaned themselves toward their fellow prisoners, and
spiritual fathers. If at any time some little indiscretion happened in any, a
word (especially of his ghostly father) was more then sufficient to reform it:
or if upon such like an occasion Bishop Watson were moved to reprove this or
that, his answer was, What? are we not fellow prisoners? Are we not at the
commandment of an other? Shall Iadde affliction to one that is afflicted? Are
we men who profess our selves to be examples to others in suffering for our
consciences, and shall we not be thought then able without controllers to
govern our selves? Be content: I will not take upon me to reprove my fellow
prisoners. And indeed this was the course that every man held: so as by
submitting themselves one to an other, every man had a commanding power one
over an other, such was the most christian and brotherly affection amongst
them. In this sort they lived till all were either dead or gone, but master
Metham and master Bluet, which was for the space of about six or seven
years.

Afterward (upon new attempts by Babington and his associates against her
Majesty, and by reason of the rumors of the King of Spaines preparations)
above thirty priests that were prisoners elsewhere, were in the year 1587 (as
we remember) sent likewise to Wisbich. In which number was master Edmonds,
alias Weston, a Jesuit: a man, who after Heywoods departure out of England,
was sent hither by Parsons from Paris to be his substitute, or Provincial:
Upon whose apprehension master Walley, alias Garnet, by order from Fa.
Parsons, did succeed him in that office. This company had scarsely consorted
themselves with master Metham and master Bluet by the space of a week, but
Fa. Weston (having in him the relics of his late prouincialitie) began to
cast about how he might advance himself above his brethren. To which effect,
entering amongst his best acquaintance into a great commendation of discipline,
he offered to their considerations a very simple man one master Dryland (a
Seminary priest, and his ghostly father) for a fit person, to take upon him the
direction and oversight of the whole company: adding, that if they thought
that there were any thing in him (the said Weston) worthy the reckening of, he
would employ the same at their commandment to the assisting and directing of
him the said Dryland for the full supplying of any defects in him. This motion
finding little success, it being very absurd to make choice of a head, that
must borrow his discretion and directions of an other (as at this day our
Archpriest Blackwell does of Fa. Garnet the Jesuit) he the said Weston gave
it over for about three weeks. And then he began again (though in a more
general sort) to insist very gravely upon his said pretended discipline:
aiming with all his skill at his own particular preferment: for thus the case
stood. Master Bluet (being a man that had bin chiefly employed in the
affairs of that house) was junior to master Metham: and he the said master
Metham (having more lately entered into the society of the Jesuits then master
Weston) was thereby (notwithstanding that otherwise he was far his ancient)
yet his inferior according to the rules of that calling. Now one of these three
(if there should have bin a governor chosen) being supposed to be the fittest
amongst all the rest for such a place: master Weston gessed, that in that
choice they would have omitted master Bluet in respect of master Metham; and
him the said master Metham in regard of himself, and that so they should have
bin driven to have chosen him the said Weston. But it fell out otherwise: for
in their consultation it was thought that master Bluet, by reason of his long
experience in that house, and of his acquaintance in that town, together with
the general knowledge had of him with all Catholics in England, in respect of
his long dealings with the common money, could in no sort be omitted: So as
they concluded, that if they must be driven to have any such government over
them, it was most expedient to choose them all three. Whereupon master Weston
perceiving that he could not get the whole regiment to himself, gave that
attempt over: under pretense, that he being a Jesuit, was forbidden by the
rules of his order, and others his superiors, to meddle in matters of
government.

But it is here to be observed: that the Jesuits long before this time, having
gotten the regiment of the English Seminary at Rome: our countriemen of that
order no sooner came into England, but presently (as the sequel declared) they
began to lay their plots how they might bring the secular priests heads under
their girdles. For notwithstanding their said rule (of not intermedling with
government) mentioned by Fa. Weston, they have so many ways to qualify it, as
indeed it is but a mask to cover their sleights with, till opportunity does
serve them. Whereof Fa. Weston having sufficient intelligence and skill, did
not from time to time (almost by the space of seven years) omit to put the
same in practice. He labored, as cunningly as he could, to creep into the
favor of the younger sort. When strangers came, it should escape him narrowly,
but he would be the first that should bid them welcome: and no friendship could
be held with him, except he might make the collation at such times usual. In
which collations he would seldom omit to insist upon the commendation of order
and discipline: which being things in themselves of great worth, he was still
therein to them that understood him not very plausible. Being a man as
impatient as some of his fellows, and of as haughty a spirit as any man can
be: it was wonderful to consider, what humblenes and simplicity he would
pretend. His sighs and zeal seemed to be extra ordinary: as though the
perfection of true mortification had bin the only thing he aimed at. Marry,
with all this hypocrisy he deceived none, but such as did not look more
narrowly into his proceedings: a righter Pharisee cannot easily be found. In
the midst of his humility nothing troubled him more, then that master Doct.
Bagshaw (being a Doctor of Divinity) should have place before him at the
table: insomuch as the better to content him, we were driven to place him at
the tables end with him. The Jesuits abroad having gotten the greatest part of
co^tribution for prisoners into their hands, much was sent to be distributed,
by this good father: wherewith (through his unequal distribution of it) he
labored nothing more, then how he might draw, and bind men unto him, to make
his side and faction strong enough against the time, he had occasion to use
them. These and many other such his underhand practices being well discerned
by master Metham and others, he the said master Metham was very much moved,
and did greatly lament the same. This master Metham was a virtuous learned
Priest, who when he was prisoner in the Tower vowed to become a Jesuit; as
admiring that calling, because he was not acquainted with their courses: but
afterward at his being in Wisbich, he found by woeful experience that all was
not gold that glistered. Sundry times he has said to some of our company, not
without tears in his eyes, Keep this fellow down as much as you can, meaning
Fa. Weston: by laboring to be popular, he becomes the ringleader of all
mutinies in the house, which in time will breed faction against you. This
house will come to utter shame through his folly. I pray God that I dye before
it comes to pass, for I do foresee such a mischief. Thus master Metham.

Cardinal Alane, when the Jesuits first came into England, told sundry of his
friends, that certainly they (the said Jesuits) would raise great garboyles
in this country, by seeking to disgrace secular priests, and to advance
themselves above them. He had great experience of the ambition which reigned in
many of that society, and therefore endeavored (as he might conveniently) to
repress that humor in our English Jesuits, which kept them within some
reasonable compass whilst he lived. But afterward they heard no sooner of
his death, and shortly after of the death of Doctor Lewys Bishop of Cassane (of
whom they stood in some fear, suspecting he should have bin made Cardinal in
the others place) but their insolency burst forth as a flame that had bin
long suppressed. They depraved both those worthy persons now dead very
slanderously, charging the Cardinal to have bin but a simple man, and of no
great worth; and the Bishop to have bin a factious person in Rome: and all this
(forsooth) because sometimes they both had crossed sundry of their lewd
attempts. Fa. Weston at Wisbich (as a man who had long travailed with his
imaginary discipline) hearing of these men's deaths, and being as he thought,
backed sufficiently by his confederates, began to bring forth the fruits
thereof. He lifted up his countenance, as if a new spirit had bin put into him,
and took upon him to control, and find fault with this and that: (as the
coming into the Hall of a Hobbyhorse in Christmas) affirming that he would no
longer tolerate these and those so gross abuses, but would have them reformed.
At this his pride and vanity some of us greatly maruayled, but the reason
thereof (which we then knew not) was this. We were then prisoners in the house
to the number of 34. whereof by his foresaid practices he had allured unto him
19. who by his direction had chosen him to be their head, and given him the
name of their Agent. Whereupon this grand senior thus promoted, withdrew
himself to his chamber by the space of a fortnight, of purpose (as we
afterward perceived) to rowze himself, and to devise some such new orders and
laws, as he thought most convenient for the government of his subjects, which
being resolved upon by him, he did dedicate them upon Candlemas day to the
blessed Virgin, as himself afterward confessed. You must understand, that he
did not proceed thus far, without Fa. Garnets priuity and consent. Howbeit,
his said subjects being ignorant thereof, they poor fools must needs write a
letter to his fatherhood, to crave his approbation of their said election.
Besides, Fa. Weston had to practiced under hand with some of his said 19.
subjects, as this his new preferment must be obtruded upon him, whether he
would forsooth or not. And accordingly the said letter was framed: signifying
to master Garnet, that he the said master Weston was as a man taken with the
palsy of the mind, and would in no wise accept of their election, except that
he by his commanding authority, would bid him rise up and walk before them
in the way of the righteous.

With this letter they sent also the said laws or rules, being in number 22.
where of some of them were ridiculous, and some of them very scandalous. These
things (as we conjecture, for the distinct times were kept close from us) being
sent to Fa. Garnet; the new Agent after he had withdrawn himself from the
rest of the company by the space of a fortnight, directed master Southworth a
Priest, and our fellowprisoner unto master Bluet, to signify unto him, that
Fa. Weston desired him to allot to him, and to his company being 19. the high
table in the Hall: and that leaving the ordinary Kitchen to them, he the said
master Bluet, with the rest (but twelve in number) would be content to provide
themselves of another. What mean you by this message, quoth master Bluet?
Cannot the Hall and Kitchen serve us all now, as heretofore they have done? No,
says master Southworth, we are determined (20. of us) to draw our selves into
a more strict order of life: and have therefore resolved to keep commons
together amongst our selves, thereby the better to avoid such sins, as
whoredom, drunkenness, and dieing, the same being too ordinary with some in
this house. What, quoth master Bluet: has Fa. Weston sent you unto me with
this message? and he answering, yea: He the said master Bluet went to Fa.
Weston, who justified the said message: saving that he qualified the mentioning
of the said crimes with humme and hah: saying at the last (as though butter
would not have melted in his mouth) indeed we reverence you, and master Doct.
Bagshaw: but amongst the rest, there are some enormities, which we would be
glad to avoid: and do therefore purpose to impose upon our selves a more strict
order, leaving you and others, to follow such courses, as you shall think
good. With this his answer, master Bluet being somewhat moved: Have you kept
your chamber (says he) all this while, for this? Shall we have a new Donatus
amongst us, to revive again that pestilent schism? Can you name any in the
house, worse then your selves? Well, well: I pray you leave this course: it is
naught. Be content to eat and drink with us still: for, assure your self, we
will never yield, that you should have any several rooms granted unto you;
thereby to sever your selves from us. And so after many other speeches, for
that time they parted.

When master Bluet had imparted unto us the said message, and his said
discourse with Fa. Weston, it did very much grieve us all, as foreseeing what
public scandale it would grow unto: and therefore diverse of us dealt with them
particularly, that they would desist from that their purpose, and be content
that we might live together still, like prisoners, and loving brethren, as we
have done before. But all was in vain: they enlarged their calumniation and
slauders of us, and began to spread the same abroad to our great discredits:
and would in no wise be stayed from the course they had begun. Howbeit, we
hindered as long as we could their public separation from us, by keeping our
old places, some of us, at every table: so as they could not choose, except
they would have forborne their dinners and suppers, but that they must needs
sit amongst us. Whereupon Fa. Weston sent the said Southworth to our keeper,
with the like message in effect to the former, concerning their intent (for the
avoiding of sin) to keep commons by themselves, apart from the rest: and
therefore to entreat him, that they might have a room assigned them, to make
a Kitchen of, and some other places meet and convenient for them; offering him
some large consideration for his good will therein. But he consulting with some
of the grauer sort, disliked their attempt: and rejecting their suite,
commanded them to continue in peace and quietness, as the State had appointed,
and as he found them, at his first coming to be their keeper: unless they
could show unto him against the rest, some capital crimes which might warrant
him to grant their separation: for (said he) I am a Justice of peace,
qualifyed to take notice of such crimes. To whom master Southworth answered:
that in this case, the Queen could not make him a competent judge: and that
the crimes were such and so great, as in conscience they could not keep
company with us. Why (said master Medlye) what crimes are those so horrible,
that the Queens authority cannot reach to take knowledge of? Master Bluet can
tell you (says master Southworth) for I have signified them unto him. Very
well quoth master Bluet: I see the old proverb verified now in you: An English
man Italionate, is a Devil incarnate. If you told me the causes why Weston and
you do attempt to make this schism and division in the house, why may not your
slaundering tongue utter the same to master Medlye our keeper? Must I be your
Bedle to proclayme your lies? But master Medly, this Italionated company on
has this craft in his budget: if I should now relate unto you what he has
told me of this matter, then would he being merely Iesuited, deny it, and so
turn the blame upon me, that I telling it you publicly, do slander the
house, and not he, nor his fellows, that told it but secretly. Upon this, and
such like communication, master Medlye fell to the commendation of the quiet
behauior of those prisoners, which were first sent to Wisbich: saying, that it
was nothing, but the turbulent spirits, and humor of youth, that wanting due
wisdom, discretion, and gravity, thrust them into these noueltyes.

Much iangling they kept both at this time and afterward for several rooms:
but failing of their desire therein, they grew to a great dislike with the
keeper: and to be revenged upon him, procured in short time two Priests to
escape from him out of prison, which they knew would grieve him much. Besides,
the ordinary Chapel belonging to the Bishop of Ely, lying fitly by them, they
adventured of themselves to dedicate the same to Bacchus for their Buttery: and
entertayning an other Brewer (one Palmer) laid such Beer in it as they thought
meet. It is not almost credible what brablings were about these matters: and
with what malice and impiety they did also prosecute us, by seeking to blemish
our good names, as though they had quite forgot that we were Catholic Priests,
and their fellow prisoners. The common enemy could not have used us much more
despitefully.

By this time Fa. Garnet having perused the said rules and letter, returned his
approbation of them in a general letter to that company, and alluding to a
point mentioned in their letter to him, commanded his subject Fa. Weston as an
hypocritical paralytick, to take up his bed and walk: that is, he gave him
leave to accept of the Agency, imposed forsooth by them upon him: but
underhand sent to Fa. Weston himself a private letter; wherein he admonished
him in any sort so to take upon him that his new Prelacy, as both his the laid
fathers name for avoiding of envy might be concealed: and that it might seem
to proceed wholly, from the importunity of those that had chosen him. All these
particulars were at this time unknown unto us: they played fast and loose in
corners (as you see) buying and selling of us (as honest men as themselves) at
their pleasures.

Whilst they were thus in this garboyle with us, animated therein by Fa.
Garnet: it happened that master Dolman (a grave Priest) came to Wisbich, with
some contribution for the whole company: who perceiving and lame^ting what a
breach he found of our ancient unity, did endeavor for the space almost of a
week, to have reduced us thereunto again, being earnestly desired by us all
so to do. At this his being there, master Southworth drew him with
importunity into his chamber, and did show unto him their foresaid letter, and
rules, which they had sent to Fa. Garnet, entering into a long discourse with
him, concerning their purpose, to separate themselves from us. Whereunto
master Dolman aunswering, that in so doing, they would assuredly be the
occasion of great scandale: he replied, that their company were resolute to go
through with it.

We had heard before of the said letter and rules sent to Fa. Garnet: but (as
we then told M. Dolman) we could never come to the sight of them: and therefore
we desired him to be a means, that we might have the perusing of them.
Whereunto he did very willingly yield; as thinking our motion therein very
reasonable: and thereupon going to master Southworth, he so prevailed with
him, as that he the said master Dolman brought them unto us: which when we had
read, we were much perplexed, finding our credits to be greatly touched by
them. Howbeit, master Doctor Bagshaw, in a very mild and charitable sort, did
then desire master Dolman, that by his mediation he might have conference with
Fa. Weston: promising, that he would be a means, that this controversy
should be ended to his honor and credit, and to a further increase of amity and
charity, then ever there had bin for a long time amongst us. Master Dolman
being a glad man to hear so much from him, dealt with Fa. Weston accordingly:
whom he found so stiff, as he could by no means persuade him to admit of
that godly offer: notwithstanding it was made unto him thrice; and so often
pressed by him the said Dolman. Whereby master Dolman gathered, that Fa.
Weston had received some commandment from master Garnet, to take upon him
his said Agency: and for the better contenting of Doctor Bagshaw and his
friends (being somewhat moved, that master Weston had so often refused
conference) told them so much: adding, that he thought master Weston his said
refusal to be thereupon grounded: it being unlawful for him to reject, or
call into question that, which his Provincial had imposed upon him. But
afterward he the said master Dolman imparting to master Weston what he had
said to Doctor Bagshaw and his friends, master Weston flatly denied that he
had received from master Garnet any such approbation or commandment, either
by letter, or otherwise. With which his answer, master Dolman acquainting
us, we did the more marvel why he disdayned the said offer of conference.
Howbeit, seeing their courses, we said that we would not impeach any order,
which they themselves thought meet to live under: only we desired to live in
commons together with them, that the world might not take notice of any such
schism amongst us: but this was rejected. Whereupon master Dolman demanded
of Fa. Weston whether they meant to keep any more strict or large diet by
themselves, then the rest? who answered, that they did not. Why then (quoth he)
have you taken another Brewer? Master Weston answered: it was, for that he
brewed better Beer then the other. Upon occasion of these speeches betwixt
them, master Dolman told him, that by reason of the choice of the said new
Bruer, the Townsmen began to talk at large of their great breach in the
Castle: and further said, that some scandale was already grown, by appointing
the said Chapel for their Buttery. To which last point master Weston
replying, answered: that he thought (as the case stood now in England) they
might use things here as they found them: which words of his gave master
Dolman occasion to show the contrary, both out of S. Thomas, and out of
Navarre, in his Commentaries De spolijs. It were too long to set down what
then passed amongst us, at this time of master Dolmans being with us: but he
perceived such opposition to his godly motions, as that he desired to have some
joined with him: and that he might then depart, and return with his Colleague,
named by them one Doctor Bauin, a fortnight after Easter. Hereunto we all
willingly yielded: and so after six days travail amongst us, he bade us
farewell. But consider now a Jesuitical trick that happened. As master Dolman
was going to horseback, master Southworth met him in the Porters lodge, and
told him with great vehemency of spirit, that Fa. Weston had greatly abused
both him the said master Dolman, and the whole company: in that he had
received a fortnight before a letter from Fa. Garnet in approbation of their
choice to have him for their Agent: and had kept the same in his hands so long,
without making his company acquainted with it: which he termed to be double
dealing, as indeed it was in them both. But master Southworth pretending his
great coffeehouse in that respect, persuaded master Dolman to return back
to master Weston, and then hearing the said letter read, and perceiving that
it was ambiguously written, so as the time did not serve him to enter into any
discourse of it (having a great journey that night) he departed, without making
any of us acquainted with the said letter: much meruailing (as since he has
confessed) to find so gross a falsehood in master Weston.

In the mean time that we were in expectation of master Dolmans return with
his Colleague, it was a world to hear the people, that before had honored and
admired us, so long as we kept unity and integrity, how they changed their
opinions of us, especially of the Jesuits, tearming them in all ordinary
assemblies, proud, ambitious, and vndicatiue persons: perturbers of states,
countries, and commonwealths. What would these men do (say they) if they had
all in their hands: that being in a Jail, dare take upon them to raise up such
tumults and garboyles? Certain good men relating these things to master
Weston, desired him humbly upon their knees, to consider what scandale he gave
to the world, and how God and his truth were much blasphemed by this
dissension: but he, with great contempt and irrision answered, that he waighed
not any man's judgment: let them alone (says he) caeci sunt and duces
caecorum: if it be a scandal, it is scandalum per accidens, which I care not
for: this matter is gone further then may be controlled by man: you shall see
it with hands and seals confirmed, ere it be long. With this fathers obstinacy
many were discontented: and master Bluet did thereupon think it convenient to
write to master Perpoint, and to desire him (having bin a prisoner before at
Wisbich) to move master Weston by his letter to some better quietness. But the
said master Perpoint being now altogether Iesuited (which master Bluet knew
not of) showed his letter to Fa. Garnet, who taking it in evil part, writ
himself thereof to Fa. Weston, aduising him, that seeing master Bluet had
begun to write abroad of the affairs in that place, they should not now spare
either him or any of the rest, to requite them with the like. So as thereupon
master Weston stirred up a young Priest very well learned, to write a bitter,
railing, and an vnghostly letter to a Gentleman in London (a lay brother of
that society) against Doctor Bagshaw and master Bluet: to the intent that the
said lay brother (being well esteemed amongst all the chiefest Catholics)
should blaze and spread the same abroad, to their exceeding discredits. But
Doctor Farbeck being about that time in London, and knew very well the affairs
then at Wisbech: upon the sight of this letter by a Noble man, dealt very
roundly with the said lay Jesuit, for the indignity and unchristian dealing
offered to those two persons secretly behind their backs, where they could not
defend their innocence. He did at that time after a sort, satisfye the
Gentleman so far forth, as the spirit of that generation will be qualified in
such a matter: and besides so informed the Nobleman of such things as he knew,
as that he was pleased with some disdain to tear the letter in pieces. But
the poor Priest that was urged against his conscience to write it, being
admonished thereof, fell out of his wits, and threatened to kill those that set
him on work: whereby they were driven to entreat their keeper to shut him up
in a close chamber, where he remained a tweluemoneth, and confessing willingly,
that for abusing his pen against innocents, he was thus tormented: he asked
the said parties forgiveness. You have heard peradventure of a Machiuilian
maxim: detrahe audacter, aliquid adhaerebit: and here you have seen the
practice of it.

Master Doleman (as you have heard before) being departed from us, has
reported upon occasion, how carefully he employed himself on our behalf. I
met (says he) with a dear friend to you all: a man well known to be
excellently well learned in both laws, and for his virtuous wisdom and other
singular good parts in him well beloved, and greatly esteemed of all that know
him. I mean Doctor Windam: unto whom, I opened plainly and sincerely the whole
matter, and craved it earnestly at his hands, that he would take some pains
therein, and for the love he bare the general cause, the especial affection
he had to your company, which I know is as great as he can give and you desire,
and for the old acquaintance and love, that was between us beyond the seas, he
would advise and instruct me what to deliver unto you. How much he lamented
this controversy amongst you, I am not able to express. After three days
aduisement, he told me, for any that lived together as you do (presupposing he
understood your state very well) to divide themselves from the board, from the
rest of the company (things so standing as they do now) though their purpose
were right good, was both against charity and policy. Whereupon hearing his
great mislike, I made some hasty return, and let Fa. Weston, with some of his
company, understand his resolution, with mine own therein. Thus far master
Dolman. This his return was within ten days after his departure, and before
the time limited to him and his Colleague to deal in our causes. Upon which
his said speeches and communication with Fa. Weston concerning Doctor Windams
opinion: Would God (said master Weston) with most earnest affection (as it
seemed) that you master Dolman were as well able to persuade the rest, as you
have done me. For mine own part, I mind to give over and meddle no further, but
to commend the cause wholly to God: assuring you, if I could do the least of
this house good for his souls health, by laying my head under his feet, I
would most willingly do it. I pray you talk with some of our company, and see
whether you can persuade them. And thus far this dissembling Jesuit (by
master Dolmans report) very well putting Father Garnets advise in practice, so
to enter into his course of government, as that it might be thought to be
imposed upon him in effect against his will. But how found master Dolman this
Agents subjects? Fa. Weston could have told him, like a crafty company on, if
he had list to have saved the poor old man's labor. For he no sooner moved
them to reunite themselves, but they startled thereat, and said, they were
still resolute to proceed in the course which they had undertaken: and would
hear nothing to the contrary.

At this time (as we remember) of master Dolmans being at Wisbich, master
Bluet entered into speech with master Weston in his the said master Dolmans
presence, concerning both their desire of several commons, and also their
rules and laws before mentioned: and said unto him: that it seemed very
strange that he should persist as he did, in defense of these his proceedings.
To whom master VVestons ghostly father answered: that as he, and Doctor
Bagshaw, had carried away the glory and fame of all that was heretofore lawdably
done in that Castle: so from henceforth Fa. Weston would endure it no longer,
but would have the same ascribed to himself, and to the Jesuits. Fa. Weston
half ashamed of this so plain a confession, took upon him to mend it:
saying, that their intent of separation was, rather to avoid such sins as
were in the house, as whoredom, dronkennes, and dicing, then for any such
cause, as the party before had mentioned. And being further urged to speak
plainly, whether he knew himself of any such sins to be in the house, he
answered, that he spoke not in particular, but in general of them. Whereunto
master Bluet replying, affirmed, that in saying as he did, and charging no man
in particular, he inuolued the whole house as guilty of those sins, and was
a detractor thereby in the highest degree. He also the said master Bluet
proceeded further in effect, as follows. If there be such enormious sins
amongst us, have we not ghostly fathers to reform them? or can you name any
that herein has bin refractarious? Is not the sacrament of healthful penance
a sufficient remedy for men in our cases, to keep us from such enormities? If
the means appointed by Christ, have not sufficient force to remedy these
evils: what extraordinary grace or power can we expect from your supposed
authority and laws to effect the same? Again, if such sins were in the
house: either some particular men were guilty of them, or all: if some, why are
they not denounced, that the rest may know, as well those that committed them,
as those that favor or defend them in such their turpitudes? And whereas we
are prisoners here against our wills, and therefore cannot choose but of
necessity must daily converse and be together, by order and commandment of
the State, and condition of the prison: how dare you (except you will incroach
upon her Majesty's authority) thus violently attempt to separate her subjects,
promulgate laws, execute punishments, and make your self in effect to have as
full power as the Pope has himself? In that you seem without his authority
to make a new order of Religion, or I know not what, with bands, laws, rules,
and punishments, except your power be more then we can dream of: you incur
thereby the sentence of excommunication: and by the laws of this Realm, it is
well known, that omnis coitio in the kingdom not prescribed by her Highness,
is subject to a very heavy censure. When James and John privately and therefore
unlawfully sought by inediation of their mother, the right hand and the left:
the rest of the Apostles did worthily dislike that attempt: but when Peter and
these two were called up to Mount Tabor to behold Christ in his Majesty; all
the rest took it in good part, and never grudged, because they were called
thither by lawful authority. Besides* if you and your pretended subjects will
keep no company with us, because of our sins (as you pretend) be your
surmises true or false: yet (as you proceed) you join therein with the
Donatists; who because they would not defile themselves (pure creatures) with
other men's sins, departed from the Church, and perished in their foul
schism and heresy. In the proceeding of this discourse there were sundry
interruptions: but the sum was, that master Weston did little regard it:
notwithstanding his pretense of yielding mentioned before, if his company
would be thereunto persuaded.

When master Dolman was to depart, he moved master Weston and others, that
forasmuch as he had acquainted them already both with Doct. VVindams opinion
and his own, concerning the intent of his company for dividing themselves in
Commons from their brethren: he might with their good favors be released of
his promise of coming again after Easter. But they would in no sort yield
thereunto: but desired him in any wise, as he loved them, to keep the time
appointed. Which made some of us to marvel, knowing now by master Dolman,
that Fa. Garnet had approved master Westons Agency: although neither then nor
since we could ever obtain a copy of his letter to that effect. Howbeit
afterward we perceived his drift herein: which was to make trial, if by any
possible means he could win of the said Arbitrators; to determine that some
other order, then formerly had bin used in that place, was necessary to be
appointed. For then presently by way of a consequent depending upon Fa. Garnets
authority, he would have obtruded upon us his own Agency: or at the least have
gotten some advantage against us, to have depraved us to those, who would not
consider, that the admitting of master Weston for our head, we had thereby
submitted our selves to Garnet, and should so have become mere subjects to the
Jesuits.

At the time appointed our two Arbitrators, Doctor Bauyn and master Dolman
coming to Wisbich: we found him the said Bauyn much more stiffely lyned with
Iesuitisme, then ever we could have suspected. He being in master Bluets
chamber, and demanding the cause why they were sent for: answer was made,
that their presence was desired for the examining and deciding a fact of great
scandale and deformity: yea a flat schism (as we thought) begun, and
prosecuted in prison by Fa. Weston: and to reduce us again to our ancient
unity. To this Doctor Bauyn said, that he would do his best endeavor, to set
quietness amongst us: and further told us; that he had with disdain read Father
Westons laws and platform, and was fully resolved to casheere them,
whatsomeuer came ofit: but yet (quoth he) you must have some order and form of
government amongst you. It was answered him; that we had desired their
company, but to judge, whether the breach they had made, was lawful or no:
judge that first (quoth we) and then we will friendly confer, what is meet
to be done hereafter. We are in prison, and sometimes close prisoners, not in
case to speak one with an other: and perhaps must be, as heretofore we were at
the Keepers diet: what shall we then trouble our selves, with rules, orders, or
common wealths? Are not the Canons of Councels, the laws of the Church, and
the sacrament of penance sufficient for Priests, that are in prison for the
Catholic faith? Did the Bishop of Lincoln when he lived here, trouble
himself with any such matters: or has this yonker amongst us, a Jesuit, more
wit, grace, experience, and authority, then he had, being the Popes Legate over
all England? To admit these his new laws and penal statutes, were to confess
in effect, that we had lived inordinatly, until this Jesuitical youth came to
reform us. No, no, they shall have no such advantage against us: it is the
But, they aim at, to make the simpler sort of Catholics believe, that we
secular Priests are no body, nor able to do any thing of our selves, except the
Jesuits may have the commandment over us, to direct and command us, as they
think good.

After such communication had in master Bluets chamber, master Dolman and he
went to master Weston, and his adherents, to know wherein they would command
their service. But master Weston after the new fashion, desired them first to
fall down and pray with him: which done, he arose; and framing his countenance
as though he would have wept, said unto them thus in effect. Your coming
hither makes us glad, and heavy: glad, if that you will assist us in that we
have begun; and so we will give you praise and benediction: but if you will
cross our designements, and condemn our endeavors, you shall give us very
great cause of sorrow. Advise therefore your selves very well what you do: for
the matters are of great importance, which we put into your hands. Then Doctor
Bauyn (to pay master Weston with his own coin) pretended to be so moved
with his words, as if he likewise could scarsely have refrayned from tears:
which master Dolman and we observing, we doubted to find him but an halting
Arbitrator. Besides it seemed, that they were half unwilling, to commit their
former designements to these men's arbitrament: had it not bin for fear, that
else the world would have condemned them: and therefore they labored them in
secret, with all their might and maine to approve their enterprises. Whilst
we were in consultation (says master Dolman) good Lord, how were we dealt
with underhand, to allow wholly of their doings, and to reprove the others.
Many iarres happened in these conferences. One of them that stood for the unity,
told the Arbitrators that a brother of the separation, threatened him, and all
the rest that stood against master Weston, that if they would not submit
themselves under the Jesuits obedience, and live under their statutes and
laws, they should starve, and not have a morsel of bread to put in their
mouths.

When Doctor Bauyn and master Dolman grew to the consideration of Fa. Westons
rules, and other his designements, he the said Doctor Bauyn did utterly reject
them. Marry withal he made mention of a certain draught and form of
discipline, which was more beneficial to the Jesuits, then their own: and
such a one (as he himself has confessed) the Jesuits abroad had agreed unto.
In this platform, eight (besides master Weston) were to have bin chosen out
of the brethren of the separation, and two of the united to make up ten:
which ten should have governed all the rest; master Weston being appointed
ever for their mouth. So that as before in his own common wealth called the
Agenage, he was master Agent: so in this other of Doct. Bauyns (termed the
ten men, and the mouth) this our devout Jesuit was to have bin called in
proper speech, master mouth. In communication about this new platform of
Doctor Bauyns, there grew some heat betwixt him, Doctor Bagshaw, and master
Bluet: both of them with great earnestnes, and very forcible arguments
impugning the same, which Doctor Bauyn took in evil part, but was afterward
well enough appeased. Then after a day or two our said Arbitrators (having taken
great pains this way and that way) agreed together upon a form of
pacification, to be offered unto us all: the principal effect whereof was:
that we should reconcile our selves generally one to an other, remitting freely
and wholly each to other, all pretended or supposed injuries past, uttering the
same in order by some short word or speech, without any rehearsal, debating,
or reasoning of any matters past, and without any condition, or exception for
the time to come. This pacification being first showed to Doctor Bagshaw, and
master Bluet, they did most joyfully receive it: and desired the Arbitrators
very instantly, that for Gods sake, they would go forward with it. Afterward
they went to Fa. Weston, and master Southworth, and delivering them the copy
of it, they seemed very willing to accept the same: so as an hour the next day
after dinner was appointed for the mutual reco^ciliation of all the company,
according to the effect of the pacification before mentioned. Against which
time master Dolman being in the Gallery ready to go into the Hall to dinner,
Fa. Weston drew him aside to a window, and used these words unto him: I trust
(master Dolman) this reconciliation shall not prejudice our determination, of
division of Commons: to whom master Dolman answered, that all their breach
was about that matter: and that therefore, he and his fellow could in no sort
like thereof, nor permit the same. Then says master Weston very sharply, you
do us great wrong. I mean you no wrong, quoth master Dolman, but all the good
I can wish or devise: yes mary do you (says he) and so you would confess, if
you saw but our extract: which conteyneth three sheets of paper of the
enormious crimes, that we have to charge them withal. But I pray you (says
he) let us entreat master Doctor Bauyn, and you to stay this reconciliation,
until to morrow: for we have certain Articles to show you first, that cannot
so soon be made ready. Unto this motion the Arbitrators condescended, hoping
it would have turned unto the best: but it fell out quite contrary. For they
found that nothing would content them, except they would agree unto the
separation of Commons.

The Articles exhibited concerning us, together with our Articles which we were
constrained thereby to offer to our said Arbitrators, we have thought good here
to set down. First theirs (which are rather indeed Interrogatories to examine
the Arbitrators, then matters that do much touch us) and then our own: which
we offer to all men, to be censured, as they shall think good.

1 Whether (say they to the Arbitrators) will you stay the time to examine
those Articles, which any may be accused of?

2 Whether you think it secure for us, that live and meet together many times
in the day (not having the means to avoid each other) to have those things
proposed, and examined, and whether you can compass our quiet?

3 That whosoever does come to declare any matter, shall submit themselves to
you, as to their Ordinary, to declare without all equivocation, or lying, any
thing, whereof you think necessary to the manifestation of the verity.

4 That you do take the promise of every one that is called before you, to
behave themselves with modesty and good terms.

5 This supposed: we are all for our parts contented, that they object, what
they can against us.

6 We require also, that they shall give their consent, that they are all
contented, to hear what may be laid out against them.

7 Every thing being heard: that you pronounce sentence against those, that you
shall find culpable.

When our said Arbitrators had perused these Interrogatories, no marvel
though they troubled the^, being so contrary to their expectation: and devised
of purpose to break off all hope of reconciliation by their means: and such
likewise, as by Jesuitical shifts might have bin prolonged, if they had list,
for we know not how many years. With these Articles we were no sooner
acquainted: but presently we set down these four in some sort to aunfwere them.

1 We require that sufficient satisfaction may be made for the slander and
diffamation of us by their breach and letter: if sufficient causes cannot be
proved for their so doing.

2 We require that every accusation be set down in writing under the accusers
hands, sub poena talionis, if it be not proved.

3 We will answer in all things according to the order in the Canon law:
supposing these men to be our lawful Judges.

4 We will sustain any censure, with this condition, that being censured by
these men, we may be secured thereby from all other censures concerning that
matter.

When these our Articles were delivered to Fa. Weston, and he with some others
had perused them: they began first (says master Dolman) to take exceptions
against the fourth Article: and in the end against them all, plainly showing
indeed, that they liked nothing, but their own designements, being resolved to
proceed in them: let it fall how it should either back or edge, as the common
proverb is. Whereas we (by the testimony of the said master Dolman) professed
our selves very desirous of reconciliation: and offered our readynes to answer
any matters, that might be objected against us: protesting that we would only
endeavor to maintain our own credits, without any recrimination at all.

But the truth is, that our said Arbitrators saw so many inconveniences that
would have followed, if they had entered into this course, as they by no means
would be drawn unto it: but still insisted to have lapped up all
discontentments in their said general reconciliation. Whereunto we for our
parts, were all of us well inclined: insomuch as master Dolman himself
protests, that he he will ever charge master Weston and his company, to have
bin the causes that the said goodworke so greatly urged by him and Doctor
Bauyn, was not effected by them. For (says he the said master Dolman) all our
motions were irksome unto them: and two or three, one after another came unto
me: and told me, that except I would remove my opinion touching the breach of
commons, they wished me to be gone. Whereupon he writ a letter to our whole
company, and concluded thus. As before God I speak it in conscience, I am
thoroughly persuaded: you, that shall under pretense of submitting your selves
under a head, and to live under an order, divide your selves from the rest,
shall do a thing sinful. This is my mind: this is my censure. And so the good
old man departed from us.

After his departure, notwithstanding that Doctor Bauyn, to our own knowledge
was very resolute against our dividing of Commons; as master Dolman and diverse
others can also witness: yet we know not, how afterward it came to pass
(through their Jesuitical practices with him) but (as we have heard) within
two days he turned his tippet, and encouraging them to take their own course,
went his way like a charitable Priest, and never bade us farewell. We would be
loath to do him injury, if this matter has bin misreported unto us: but this
we do affirm, that since that time his credit has so increased amongst the
Jesuits, as now he is become one of their Archpriests assistants: and that
within a day or two after his departure from Wisbich, master Weston and his
company, entered into an actual and public schism: they refused either to
eat or drink with us: they left the Hall altogether: they made the Chapel
their Buttery, master Brampstons lodging their Kitchen, and their Agents
chamber their Refectory.

Whilst Fa. Weston and his consorts were talking, as you have heard before, of
certain great matters which they had against us, why they could not keep
company with us any longer: he the said good father, to show what good stuff
they had in store, called one Garret forth, and persuades him to unfold to the
Arbitrators his own confession, that unto Weston his ghostly father, he had
made a year and a half before. This demy-Iesuite, although the thing seemed
most absurd and irreligious, obeys willingly to unfold to the Commissioners,
either what he had uttered in his confession of one of his fellows, or at the
least, what he had devised between him and master Agent. Well: propter bonum
societatis, he comes most sadly (as if he had bin compelled) and tells the^
that he is most unwilling to unfold that which turns to the diffamation of a
Priest: but yet for disciplines sake, which was seen decayed in the house, and
for the obedience which he ought unto his ghostly father, he will inform them
of that, which may give the^ light to proceed, as they thought good. Marry he
will not have it known, but unto themselves in secret. This protestation made,
he says, that one of master Medlye his men, an heretic told him, how that a
Priest (and named him) was in the green chamber (which was the keepers
lodging) talking with Mary master Medlyes may de: and that the Porter (who was
in love with her) was by master Southworth willed to go up to the green
chamber, for that there was such a Priest talking with Mary: who in all have
went up, and finding the Priest not in the chamber with Mary, he looked into
the Study within the chamber, and found him there with an english book in his
hand, whereat he was offended. Now (says master Weston) you see matter
sufficient for to lead you to give sentence with us. Indeed (says Doctor
Bauyn) this is a matter that moves me to be willing to give my judgment: what
think you master Dolman? The Romans being Pagans (quoth M. Dolman) would not
condemn S. Paul upon the request, and accusations of the Jews, before they
heard Paul defend himself in a public place: and shall we here condemn a
Priest, and in him, 12. more, unheard, unexamined, and no place of defense left
them? Master Ba. I will not do it: but I will hear what the Priest can say
for himself. I do not think (quoth Bau.) that we can do so: for this matter
is uttered to us in secret, not to be opened again. How then, shall we
pronounce an external sentence (quoth master Dolman) as we are external
judges, and condemn these 13. but it must be known? Well, well, this is very
strange: and so that matter was dashed.

If master Agent and Doct. Bauyn had proceeded with the rest of their supposed
enormious crimes against us (so many as filled up three sheets of paper) and
that M. Dolman would have bin advised by the^: you see what a pretty course of
justice would have bin held in these assizes. What all those several
accusatio^s were, we could never have the favor to be informed: either by M.
Agent or his assistants. You may suppose they were not great, in that we had
been received with great applause, as companyons with them of their holy order:
if we would but have yielded to Fa. Ed. Westons Agenage, thereby admitting a
kind of Friar to be the head of secular Priests: as rare a devise, as lightly
has happened. But to return where we left. A separation is made, and master
Agent is in his ruff, sitting in a corner with his obedient subjects. If we
should have termed him Usher of their new Hall, which was his own chamber,
and master Brampston in the like respect, their chief master Cook, having
good opportunity, though he had lain in his bed, to have ruled the roast: the
phrases had not bin very improper. Howbeit, such manner of conceits were then
far from us: our hearts being very greatly replenished with grief, to see so
many of our brethren Catholic Priests, and imprisoned for the same cause with
us, so irreligiously to separate themselves from us. Besides: we were otherwise
set on work by them, in laboring to defend our selves from their devilish
practices in slaundering of us: as though we had bin the men, that had made the
faction, and not they: whereas it was most apparent to those that would not
shut their eyes, that we swarued not one jot from that course which had bin
held both by us, and our very honorable and reverend predecessors in that
prison: as me^ that detested such childish innouatio^s. Furthermore, our said
grief was greatly increased, in that we were daily advertised from our friends
abroad, how many Catholics in every corner (otherwise very grave and zealous)
began to favor this new devise: being possessed with a conceit, that we
(formerly reputed their dear and loving fathers) were become on the sudden,
without any change at all in us, persons of great licentiousnes; such as could
neither endure any good order nor wholesome discipline. Lord (thought we)
whither do these things tend: or what will be come of the most ancient and
Catholic Roman Religion; if the old and constant professors thereof do begin
to delight in change and innouations? And here by the way, we would gladly have
it observed, that as well in all the aforesaid garboyles, as in the rest that
follow hereafter: we that stood for unity, have always been in effect
merely passive, standing still upon our defense: our adversaries (for so our
brethren did make themselves) practicing their best actiuitie to hurt and
wound'vs.

For to keep their hands and tongues in ure, this Gentleman our said new Agent
was no sooner invested in his Jesuitical authority, but presently he sends
abroad certain reasons (five in number) to his friends, least he should
(forsooth) have been mistaken in his said public separation from us. In which
pretended reasons, many points being childish, and many false, we hold them not
fit to be here inserted: only we have mentioned them, because they drive us
again to our Apology, by incountring them with five others, which we will
also pretermit: the fact it self attempted by the Agent and his confederats
being so absurd, and schismatically handled, as whosoever does well know it,
his own reason and judgment (if he have any) are sufficient to condemn it.

You have heard at large before of our troubles, which Doctor Ba. and master
Dolman would gladly (we are persuaded) at the first, have compounded, but as
the matter fell out, their pains therein, did not only, not end them, but
through master Agents Jesuitical skill in shifting and false glosing, were
the beginning of other new garboyles. For he having gotten into his hands
certain writings and letters of Doct. Bauyns, did pretend and give it out
amongst his friends, that he and his adherents had been very willing to have
entered into any good pacification, had we not been so obstinate as no reason
would content us. He showed some Priests of the said Doctors letters, wherein
(as it should seem) he affirmed, that their separation was in effect, no
separation. Besides, it was given out, that we utterly refused to have the
crimes objected against us, sifted by the arbitrators and looked into. Again,
they said, that we having given the said Commissioners full authority to
decide all matters betwixt us, did for fear, or because we would be still
wilful in our disorderly courses, revoke the same: so as thereby nothing could
be effected. Also they quarrelled with us concerning our yielding to have
received such new laws, as the Arbitrators should think good to impose upon
us. All which particulars, with many more such like, being most falsely laid to
our charges, they went from hand to hand, far and near, and were received by
such Catholics, as began to be infected with Iesuitisme, as if they had been
true: thereby taking occasion to deprave us exceedingly. Insomuch as the good
old Father master Dolman was driven to write diverse letters, for the clearing
of the said false accusations, and was so earnest in them, as these and diverse
others such like sentences fell sometimes from his pen: Detrahere, aut
detrahentem audire quid horum sit damnabilus non facile dixerim: it is hard to
say, whether is the greater sin to be a slaunderer, or give ear unto him:
sub Christi specie demon inique lates? thou art disguised (Satan) in the
habit of Christ? O secula nostra, hoc pharisaismo plenissima! our times are
pestered with pharisaicall hypocrisy!

By these and such like courses which this Iesuitical faction did thus practice
against us, the Catholics abroad were greatly distracted: some leaned to us,
but more inclined to them: it being the fatal calamity of our Nation to be
too much addicted to faction and novelties. They of the new guise, sent us word
that in opposing our selves against the Jesuits, we labored but in vain, and
lost thereby our reputation: that order being of such excellency, as it might
not be withstood. An other writ unto us a long discourse, dated the 26. of June
1595, how unwilling the Jesuits are to take upon them any superiority: that
Father Westons Agencie was not worthy to be termed by the name of
superiority, because it was not praeesse sed prodesse: that Cardinal Allen a
little before had willed sundry Priests that came for England, to acknowledge
the Jesuits for such men, as had been their superiors and masters: and that
therefore, they should make no difference but keep peace with them, and go
unto them for their advise and direction. And afterward in the same letter, the
Catholics (says he) are so wholly affected to the society, and have them in
such estimation, that whosoever shall show himself to favor any part against
them, or not so thoroughly to affect them, yea though he be one of our own
coat (meaning a Priest) he shall be less grateful and welcome to them. And
a third: in his letter dated in August 1595. the same year, writes thus unto
us: I can assure you, that in the general opinion of the best sort of
Catholics, the tide is against you; and if you love me, contend not with
Father Weston. This and much such like stuff we received from the fancifull.
But on the other side, they that plodded in the old steps of antiquity, and
had a great disgust of novelties, did now and then write unto us, after another
sort: Sometimes they signified unto us with great indignation, the abuses
offered unto us, how our fellow prisoners of the faction did write in such
manner against us, and they were in horror to think of it: and how also the
gallants abroad (being at liberty) did insult upon our miseries, treading us
under their feet, as though no secular Priest were worthy to be named the same
day, that mention is made of a holy Jesuit. And some of great fame said unto
others, that Father Westons separation from us, was so odious, as they thought
it expedient in their opinions, that seeing they divided themselves from our
table, we should divide our selves from their prayers. An other moved us to
this effect: that seeing the old sigillum Salomonis, and our Saviors direction
failed, we would invent some new pentacle to bind these furious spirits
(meaning the Jesuitical faction) which will do much hurt, if God be not
merciful, and men provident. An other also in one man's person describes unto
us, the right qualities of our English Jesuits, as we our selves have found by
experience, and the world in the end shall try them. The man he writes of, is
now one of the assistants to the Archprelate: and these are his words: he is
the Jesuits Cursitor, always in motion for them, either for gathering of
money, or for harkening after news. If he can learn of any legacy given to
your house, he seeks by all the means he may, to convert it from you to
their uses, so (as I verily think) there is not of a Priest a greater enemy
to your company then he is. Notwithstanding if he talk with any, yea, that
he likes not, he will most palpablie flatter him; but behind his back he
will most monstrouslie detract him. Let him be told again of it in such sound
manner, as with no face he may deny it; then he looks a while up to the
heavens, and after answers: he remembers no such matter. Nevertheless for
humilities sake, he will say he will render what satisfaction you will: and so
with that gesture, and this hypocrisy, he will shuffle over all matters, be
they never so foul, that he shall be charged with. O Lord grant him better
grace. And some there have bin, who have by their letters, bin so far from
disliking of our proceedings at that time: as in Iulie 1595. they moved us
earnestly to continue, as we had begun, and in no wise to give place to
faction, and novelties: adding that they had not talked with any, that were
either of learning or judgment, which did not greatly condemn father Weston
for his unquietness: deeming him either to be grown into great melancholines,
or else unto too much simplicity. We spare to trouble you with more to this
effect; our purpose only being in this point to let you see the division in
the Church: procured by this breach amongst us then at Wisbich. Whereof a
godly father writing thus generally unto us al, says: if through the
continuance of your dissentions and discord, you will so greatly terrify us,
as we shall think: our holy anchor drayling a floote: our visible Church to be
hid under a bushel: our form (through the great good conceit we abroad had
of you) of heaven, to be now a figure of hell: look then hereafter for small
commiseration and pity, when too late you shall lament your incurable woe,
which by giving the full reins to your passions, you have indrenched and
implunged your selves into.

But howsoever at this time, many Catholics were grown to be of Father
Westons faction: yet it seems that some of themselves, who best knew the
impiety of it, and what a dangerous scandal it gave to the Catholic cause,
began to draw back, as repenting very much that ever the said Agenage was
attempted. For if M. Perpoint the lay Jesuit, be an honest man, and his report
to M. Dolman true, made in Iulie 1595. M. Garnet himself upon occasion said:
that he was never willing with the breach or division of commons: which being
made plain to him the said M. Perpoint to be as false as God is true, his own
letters testifiyng the contrary, he the said M. Perpoint answered, that he was
well assured of it, that M. Garnet did now utterly mislike it. Whether this
last cause was true or no, it does not much concern us, because no man is able
to bind upon any Jesuits word, they have so many shifts, and so little
conscience in speaking truly, except it be one of themselves to another.
Otherwise their manner is, to frame their speeches, according to their
company: always applying themselves to the times and occasions, as they fall
out: if their disseignements prove well, they take the contriuing ofthem to
themselves: if not, there is none will more condemn them: utterly renouncing
them, as having never liked them, or consented unto them. Some further
experience hereof, you shall find in the process following concerning this
good Provincial.

You have heard before in some sort, how we were used by the aforesaid faction
amongst us at home, and by their adherents abroad in deprauing us, and
slaundering us, far beyond the limits of all Christianity. They charged us
to be straglers, backbiters, livers upon rapine, extortioners, impugners of
order, men of confusion, violent persons, deteyners of other men's goods, and
with we know not how many other impieties: whereof our consciences bear us
witness, we were as clear and free as the best Jesuit in Christendom.
Neither durst the devil himself have bin so impudent (as we suppose) to have
fraught their hearts with these conceits of us, or framed their tongues to have
uttered them, had he not first inueagled them with this most odious opinion:
That detractio^ in general (so that a singular person be not named) is no
offense. Upon which ground, they ran a great while, not daring to touch us
with any particularities till at the last in plain terms, they laid theft in
effect to some of our charges. Now these and such other like reports, flying
far and near against us, as though we had bin not Catholic Priests, but
devils incarnate, it pleased God to move the discreeter sort of Catholics in
the North, to send unto us about a quarter of a year (after the aforesaid
separation of commons) two learned Priests, M. Mush, and M. Dudley, to see and
understand how matters went with us, and whether we were such men, as the
reports (made by our adversaries) went of us. These two, both of them very
discreet and zealous persons, men of great traueile and pains in their
vocations, and of especial estimation in the parts of their abode, for their
great wisdom, learning, and sincerity, coming unto us, and finding such
garboyles amongst us: they so demeaned themselves, as on all sides, we were
content to impart our griefs unto them, and to be advised by them. Whereupon,
after the debating of many things, having considered with themselves, what
course it were best to hold, for the repayring of the rent that was amongst us
(so scandalous and offensive to all true Catholics) they drew twelve
articles, whereof one was, that we should all join again in commons in the
common Hall: and the rest did contain such other orders, as they thought meet
for quietness to be observed by the whole company. Which articles, they first
offered to M. Weston and his favorers to be perused, allowed, and subscribed
by them: but they albeit they showed then no dislike of them, yet they
entreated M. Mush and M. Dudley to carry the same, first unto M. D. Bagshaw
and M. Bluet (hoping as the event declared) that they would presently have
rejected them, as they had done before D. Bauyns ten men and the mouth: whereby
he himself, and his adherents might have more just color likewise to
disclame them. But contrary to his expectation, we of the unity, having well
considered them, did presently without any further delay, subscribe unto them
very willingly and readily. Whereat master Agent and his subjects were much
amazed: and in fine it pleased the good Father utterly in effect to reject
them: saying, that he and his, had certain rules of their own approved unto
them, which they must follow, and minded not now to alter or change them, for
these which they offered or any such like. Hereupon master Mush and master
Dudley (supposing they should not be able to do any good amongst us) left us:
and took their journey toward London, of purpose to confer with the
Catholics there, about these matters and scandals amongst us. At their
coming to the City, they found the laytie generally, and likewise many of
the Clergy, exceeding stiffely bent to justify master Weston, with all his
proceedings, and to condemn us, especially D. Bagshaw, and master Bluet, as
men of no worth, unruly, disordered, and disobedient persons, not to be
favored or respected by any. Besides, such a prejudicial opinion, they
perceived to have possessed men's hearts, through their admiration of
Iesuitisme, as if the Catholic faith had never been truly preached, nor any
good order rightly established, or practiced, by us poor secular Priests, or
any of our predecessors: before these yonkers thrust themselves, with high
looks and great bragges into our labors, and that it might be sufficient for
us, if we might have but some curateshippes to say Mass, and so much favor as
to attend upon them, to know their maistershippes pleasures what they would
command us. These two godly Priests, seeing the violence of this stream,
offered at the first but little resistance: but as though they had inclined to
the imputations against D. Bagshaw and master Bluet, drew forth their said
articles before mentioned: and having read them in the hearing of some
principal Catholics, addicted as you have heard, desired their judgments of
them: who (thinking they had been master Westons rules) did answer very
readily, that they were reasonable, discreet and godly: such as no honest
Priest would, or could refuse to admit and allow of. And these be the articles
(quoth master Mush) that D. Bagshaw and the rest of the united company have
very willingly subscribed unto: but have been very peremptorily rejected by
Father Weston and the ninteene his adherents: whereby you see, that matters go
not at Wisbich, as (I well perceive) you have been informed. Here they that
were so ready to condemn us, began to blush, and hold down their heads,
being willing to hear and know, what before (like proper judges condemning
Catholic Priests unheard upon an imagined opinion that the Jesuits could not
do amiss) they would not endure to hear mentioned. So as after true
knowledge, taken of the estate and disposition of both sides, and remembering
what letters Father Weston and his adherents had sent abroad against D. Bagshaw
and master Bluet, and the rest of the thirteen united to the effect, that no
Catholics should send them any relief, or countenance them, that thereby
through want, they might be compelled to yield to the regiment imposed upon
them by Father Garnet: they repented them of some courses, which formerly they
had held against us: and desired very instantly these two learned Priests to
go back again to Wisbich, and to spare no pains, until they had brought us
all to peace and concord, giving them great thanks, praise, and benediction,
for that which they had done already. Whereunto they answered, that they could
be well content, to spend if it were their lives to bring that to pass; but at
Wisbich, they thought they could do no good, except they could first persuade
him to order, who had been the author and contriuer of those novelties (which
had procured such garboyles there) and that was (as they were informed) Father
Garnet the Provincial of the Jesuits. If we can (said they) bring him to argue
with us touching that action, we doubt not, but that we shall prevail with
him: and then our trouble is in effect at an end before we begin: Eius est
soluere, cuius est ligare; his letters to master Weston and his favorers,
were the cause of their separation, and a word from him, will be sufficient to
reunite them. Now (as God would have it) it so fell out, that according to
their desire, they met with master Garnet, who at their first encounter,
seemed to be inexorable, affirming that he saw no reason why the Jesuits might
not govern, and have as well the pre-eminence over all the secular priests in
England, as they had at Rome, over the English Seminary. With which proud
answer they were somewhat sharpened, and entered more Roundly into farther
communication with him: no whit fearing to tell him what they thought, as well
of his said words unto them, as of other the Jesuits proceedings in matters of
state, succession of the Crown, and such like (having lately perused master
Parsons book of titles:) and also what account the secular Priests have had
with all true Catholics, before his society was borne, and must still have
of necessity, except God in his secret judgment, do purpose some greater
overthrow to the Catholic faith, then they relying upon his mercy, did any
ways expect. Many words passed betwixt them, and some in such heat, as he
threatened to be even with them for their good wills to the Jesuits: but in the
end he was content to yield unto them, and bidding them farewell, did write
his letters to master Weston, D. Bagshaw and some others, of his pleasure and
purpose, that the said Agencie should be committed to their further
consideration, to be either retained, or disanulled, as they should think
meet: very heartily desiring them so to compound all matters amongst
themselves, as that hereafter they might live in quietness.

Amongst many fair florishes, used by him to master Doctor Bagshaw, he
writes thus: Edmundum meu^ tibi socium and adiutorem adhibeo. In this business,
I assign unto you, as your company on and assistant, my beloved master
Edmonds. And again: hisce ego literis eum vehementer moneo etc. by these my
letters to you, I do earnestly admonish him (master Edmonds) alias Weston, and
also in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the virtue of his obedience,
command him, that he apply his mind seriously to the propounding and
establishing of some rules, whereby an honest and firm friendship may grow and
continue amongst you. And in an other of his letters to a friend of his in
Wisbich at that time, he says after this sort: I do determine, that if an
agreement be not now made, to write to the 20. that Fa. Edmonds may live
priualty as the rest, all or some by course performing that which was laid upon
him. What he writ to Fa. Weston we know not: but craftily enough, we are
assured by his practices toward us since: being as mere a Jesuit, as if he
had bin spit out of Fa. Parsons mouth.

The aforesaid two godly Priests, having wrought with master Garnet as you
have heard, returned to Wisbich, where notwithstanding the said letters, they
found Fa. Weston exceeding loath to lay down the scepter of his Agencie,
casting out some words, as though he had not bin bound in that case to the
obedience of his Provincial. Howbeit master Mush, and master Dudley so urged
him before all the company, that sundry of his own adherents, perceiving how
the matter went, began to draw back from him, and said, they would have peace
with their brethren, and divide themselves no longer from them. Whereupon
(quoth master Weston) very pitifully: Ha, my masters, will you for sake me
thus? I would never have left you, but since it is so, I am content to give
over: and thus speaking, corruit inter manus discipuloru^, he fell down as if
he had bin in a swoune, and much ado there was in recovering him. This entrance
toward our unity being made, then many things came in course to be debated,
and particularly the report of theft published abroad by them of the Agenage:
viz. that master Bluet and master Potter had riotously deteyned from them so
much Pewter, and other furniture, as amounted to the value of 17. pound, and
that they could have no justice for the recovering of it. And first for the
better trial thereof, Fa. Weston, master Bluet, and master Potter, were
required by the said two Priests, that they would cause all the Pewter, and
other kitchen furniture which they had in their hands, severally to be brought
forth: which was done by them all accordingly. Then master Mush and master
Dudley, sent for a Pewterer, and willed him to view all the said Pewter, and
kitchen furniture, and to tell them truly, what he judged it to be worth: which
upon due consideration, and view had of it by the said party, he affirmed it to
be all scarce worth four pound. Well then (said master Mush) yesterday, you
master mine (naming the party) exclaimed that we had not the courage to say
with Saint John Baptist, non licet tibi habere, but now we answer, that
although we are not comparable to Saint John Baptist, yet as Priests must tell
you plainly: non licet, it is not lawful for you to infame and belie your
fellow prisoners, as we find you have dealt with M. Bluet, and M. Potter. For
we saw your letters abroad, wherein you charged them two, to withold from
you 17. pound value in Pewter and kitchen furniture: and now we see, that all
that both you and they have, is scarce worth 4. pound. And therefore we say
again with Saint John Baptist: non licet. You ought not so to have belyed
them, but are bound in conscience to ask them forgiveness: and with your second
letters to revoke this slander that you have so raised against them: which if
you shall refuse to do, we must be glad to do it for you. Now it is to be
observed, that when master Weston and his adherents divided themselves from
us, and made master Brampstons chamber their kitchen, they found an opportunity
to go into the common kitchen, and took from thence such Pewter and other
furniture, as had bin provided, and ever before used for the company in the
common Hall; and afterward thought it a kind of theft, that any was deteyned
from them, but that they might have had all.

These matters and others likewise, these two good Priests having compounded
amongst us, they fell to the draught of new Articles, increasing the said 12.
after much discussing of them on all sides to the number of 19. Whereunto we
all subscribed in the year 1595. the 6. of November; and so after our long
dissensions, a general peace was concluded to our great contentment, we dare
be bold to say it; and master Weston and his friends returned unto us again,
and took their commons with us in the common Hall, as before their breach made
they were accustomed. Now we being all of us thus reunited, not long after it
pleased master Garnet to write an other letter to master Doctor Bagshaw,
dated the 17. of November 1595. Wherein it is very strange to consider, what
joy he pretends in that behalf, whereas indeed, we are able to affirm it
upon our own knowledges, that the overthrow of master Westons agencie went to
his heart: we mean vexed him, and angered him exceedingly. But hear the
devilish Politician how he transformeth himself into an angel of light. When
the blessed souls in heaven (says he) did sing with one consent, Glory be to
God on high, you at Wisbich preached, and restored comfort and in earth peace
to men of good will: then no doubt the princes went before, the singers
followed after, and in the midst were the damsels playing on their tymbrels.
Also he tells us, that as there is a celestial Hierarchy in Heaven, so we
had then an other at Wisbich, which all England did reverence: which the Queen
of Saba admired: and which many from the uttermost borders of the earth came to
see and behold: adding, that those men were blessed together with our servants
that stood in our presence, that heard our wisdom, and beheld our mutual
love. Hereunto also, it may please you, that we add some other words of his
written to master Doctor Bagshaw two years before, after himself had bin with
us at Wisbich in the year 1593. concerning his judgment of our whole company
at that time: I assure you (says he) that the being with you has wrought such
effect in the barts of all that were with me (being indeed three or four
Gentlemen, whom we afterward termed his Deacons, and Subdeacons) that they
never saw place or persons which more delighted them: and for mine own part, I
tell you very sincerely, that it was the greatest comfort to be amongst you,
which I had these whole seven years. Testis enim mihi est Deus, quomodo
cupiam omnes vos in visceribus Jesus Christi: Which sentence of S. Paul being
read that very day in the Epistle in the Church, when I came first unto you,
with other many most comfortable sentences, I was both not a little recreated,
with a conscience of an unfeigned love toward every one of you, and moved to
thank God almighty, Super communicatione vestra in Euangelio Christi a prima
die vsque nunc: considerans quia qui caepit in vobis opus bonum, perficiet,
sicut est mihi iustum sentire de omnibus vobis: And (that which contented me
most of all) comforted with an assured hope, that you are they, who in your
singular charities will have me daily in cord and in vinculis vestris, and in
defensione and confirmatione Euangelij socium gaudij vestri. Hitherto master
Garnet then: and now again in the letter before mentioned he professes: that
being at that time with us, he thought himself all that while to have felt the
joys of Heaven. Now we refer our selves and our cause to your
considerations, to judge as God shall move you: If he the said Garnet did
think then truly of us, and writ sincerely as he thought, what cause had his
subject master Weston before the year 1593. or afterward, we continuing as
before we were, to moyle and make a faction amongst us for the setting up of
his Agency, as though we had bin not such men, as master Garnet says he found
us, but as Fa. Weston to color his ambition reputed us, that is, persons of
all disorder, licentionsnes, and confusion. And again if master Garnet at his
being with us three or four days, did think himself all that while in
Heaven: what a hell did he afterward find in his conscience, when he had bin
the chief cause that Father Weston and his adherents did separate themselves
from us. Moreover if the said letter congratulatorie for our uniting proceeded
from master Garnets heart: and that thereby we were indeed in his opinion so
charitable, so wise, and so admirable persons: how justly may all Catholics,
that took part with the said separators from us, and factious against us,
blame and condemn themselves, in that we continuing our former courses without
alteration, either in our conversation, or in our regiment (if it may so be
termed) from the time that master Garnet was with us, unto the very instant
of our said reconciliation: the joining again of master Weston and his
adherents unto us, is now reckoned by him the said master Garnet to be a
matter so glorious both to God and men, as he has described it. But we will
proceed.

The aforesaid Agencie being thus overthrown, and a peace concluded amongst
us, we for our parts, were replenished with great joy: but you are far
deceived, as we our selves were, if you think as we then thought: that either
master Garnet, master Weston, or their Jesuitical crew, did take this so
great a foil in good part: we afterward perceived to our grief, that master
Weston would never have yielded to have joined in commons with us again,
except master Mush, and master Dudley underhand had consented unto them,
that if afterward he and his company should think it convenient to separate
themselves again from us, they should have these, and those rooms, such a
table in the Hall, such a place for their Kitchen, and such other rooms, as
they held convenient for them: all which they set down particularly under
their hands, and left the same sealed up with them: which God knows, we
never dreamed of. Besides, master Weston did not long sit at the upper Table
with us, and below master Bluet, and Doctor Bagshaw, where his due place was,
but that he desired, and had it easily granted unto him, that he might leave
his said place, and sit in some other as he thought good Whereupon as
disdaining to sit where he did before, he bound himself afterward to no
certain place, but sat (you must think) for humilities sake, now here, now
there, as he list. Moreover notwithstanding our said reunion, such abroad as
had depraved us poor Priests, and charged us as you have heard: did continue
(to show their constancy in their former good wills toward us) justifying in
their common assemblies, what before they had reported of us. Master Dolman
who dealt like a very honest man, to have compounded all strifes amongst us, as
is before expressed, was likewise very sharply galled by them, because he
deemed their said separation from us to be a sin, and that he had before
greatly blamed them for making the Chapel at Wisbech their Buttery. Which
particulars being reprochfully cast into his teeth, he maynteyned his former
assertions: adding, that by their said profaning that Chapel, they were
scandalous, sacrilegious, irregular, and excommunicated persons. Whereof
master Garnet having notice, he desired master Doctor Bagshaw, by his letter
to pacify and stay master Dolman, from these or any such like speeches, which
might tend to the renewing of the memory of our former breach. Which master
Doctor Bagshaw undertook, putting him the said Fa. Garnet, notwithstanding in
mind how vilely he the said master Dolman had bin dealt with, by such as he
the said Garnet had great interest in: in that first Fa. Parsons had set out
the book of Titles in master Dolmans name, which (notwithstanding that he
detested the contents of it) might have brought him into great danger: and
secondly, for that one (a jesuit) under his command, had very cunningly
thrust him out of a place, where of long time he had found great
entertaynement, and so wrought, as four pound yearly have since bin deteyned
from him, which was given unto him, as a legacy by will. Again: within some
quarter of a year, after our said established concord, great hartburning grew,
and many slanderous speeches were cast abroad against some of us by master
Weston and his old friends, concerning a priest and prisoner with us, his
escape ^^om Wisbich: who being advised so to do by some of that crew, and with
Fa. VVestons priuitie, ^is taking again was ascribed by them to master Doctor
Bagshaw and some others: which gave not only them occasion, but many of their
friends abroad to write and rail against us exceedingly. Not long after, viz.
in September, master Archer a Jesuit (that lived with us in prison) gave an
other occasion of very great garboyles by affirming that the stews in Rome
were there cum approbatione (testified under the hands of Doctor Norden,
master Buckley, master Meredith, and Doctor Bagshaw:) that the stews were as
lawful in Rome, as any Citizen there: (testified under the hands of Doctor
Norden, master Buckley, and master Meredith:) that the stews were in Rome,
as lawfully as any Magistrate in that City: (testified under the hands of
Doctor Norden, and Doctor Bagshaw:) that the stews were in Rome as lawfully as
the Pope himself, or any order of religious men (testified under the hand of
Doctor Norden, and Doctor Bagshaw:) and that they were most necessary
(testified under the hands of Doctor Norden, master Buckley, and Doctor
Bagshaw.) Which very lewd assertions, coming to Fa. Westons ears, and
understanding how they were impugned by master D. Norden, he the said M.
Weston, did take upon him by a fond and false distinction to defend them.
Whereupon master Doctor Bagshaw being drawn into that opposition, diverse long
treatises passed betwixt him, and Fa. Weston: he the said master Doctor
Bagshaw impugning those lewd positions, and master Weston with all his
shifts and skill laboring to defend them. About these points, there grew such
parts-taking and hatred, as that the said orders established amongst us by
master Mush and master Dudley, (in that they crossed these and such like
demeanors) were in the latter end of the year 1596. utterly cashierd and
rejected. So as notwithstanding we kept commons still in the Hall together: we
lived (God knows) there with great disquietnes: many of our old friends
abroad being so far drawn to Iesuitisme, as that they blamed us, and took
part with them in defense of these so abominable absurdities.

And now it may please you to leave us in our said troubles and
discontentments, and to be advertised of the beginning of a more bitter
tragedy. Whilst after our said peace we were lulled asleep for a time in
Wisbech, by master Garnets inchaunting letter of congratulation, and
exercised with the unjust afflictions of our brethren, as before we have
touched: he the said master Garnet with his accomplices bestirred themselves,
and that secretly, so as then we did not suspect, or look for any further
plots to be in contriuing against us. We will be bold to acquaint you with one
of their notable stratagemes, which argues more wit and foresight, then plain
dealing or honesty. It appears that by the Jesuits practices here amongst
us, in disgracing and abusing the secular priests very shamefully, there was
some rumor thereof in Rome, to the great impeachment of the Jesuits credits
there, being then as turbulent in that City in their dealing with our English
Seminary, as they had bin, and were still firebrands amongst us. For the better
incountering of which rumor, it being thought inconvenient, that any of their
own calling by commending themselves, should take upon them that office, a
secular priest was found out, a man of a quicker pen, then either of wisdom
or sincerity: who being well acquainted with all the iarres and quarrels
betwixt us, and the Jesuits; and having written himself a letter unto us, as
presuming to advise men of far greater experience then himself, concerning
our troubles about the said Agencie: this man (we say) did so harden his
forehead, or in his simplicity was so seduced, as contrary to his own
conscience he writ the tenth of January 1596. to Card. Caietan^, Protector of
the English Seminary, in the behalf of the Jesuits, a most false and impudent
letter. Wherein amongst many other things, he assures the Cardinal, that of
his own knowledge, for twenty years, there had not bin any dissension betwixt
the secular priests and the Jesuits: and that the reports made against these
good Fathers, concerning their ambition, were so far from the truth, as that
indeed the Jesuits were in all places most notable examples to the secular
priests of singular humility, gentleness, patience, piety, and charity. The
letter it self with some observations upon it, you shall find amongst other
things to this story annexed. With this cunning trick of these good Fathers, we
were not then acquainted: it was well handled of them, that they had got so
false a brother from amongst our selves to fit their deseignements so aptly,
that is so lewdly, according to their desire.

After that master Weston had begun his said Agencie, as has been before
mentioned, our brethren abroad of the grauer and wiser sort, began to foresee:
that if the same did continue, master Garnet would shortly after, as well by
M. Westons example in Wisbich, as also by the example of the Jesuits government
of the Seminary at Rome, challenge, and take unto himself, ere it were long,
the Prelacie and government over all the Priests in England. For the preventing
whereof, as also there being many Catholic Priests in England, and many
wants, as of authority of confirmation for the full accomplishing of the
effects of Baptism, and of holy oil, being of so necessary employment, they
thought it convenient to devise certain orders, for a general association,
amongst all secular Priests: and in the end concluded to refer the estate of
our Church here, together with their reasons and most humble supplication to
the Popes Holiness, that it might stand with his good pleasure (if he thought it
convenient) to grant unto them that they might have some Bishop or suffragane
here: as he had yielded heretofore to our brethren in Ireland. In these
consultations, one master Standish a Priest was a great intermedler, no man
being therein more forward then himself: but finding in the end so many fitter
men in all respects then himself for any employment or extraordinary
preferment in that company: he shortly after shifted his sails, and going to
the Jesuits, did acquaint them with the whole course that the secular Priests
had taken, and intended to proceed in. Whereof they (the Jesuits) having full
notice (as we guess by the event) sent into Spain, to admonish Father Parsons
of all the premises, as well concerning master VVestons said Agencie, and the
overthrow of it, as of the enterprise, which our brethren the secular Priests
here had in hand: and likewise to impart unto him, an other course devised by
them, and to be better managed and brought to pass by his great policy,
wisdom and credit. What answer Father Parsons returned unto them, we can
but also guess. But we think we may conjecture it, by that which followed,
viz. that he would think of the matter, and that they should send one to meet
him at Rome with further instructions, for his better proceeding to the
accomplishment of their desires. Now you have heard before, what a way they had
made already for themselves, and for the repayring of their credit in Rome, by
master Blackwell his false letter mentioned, very well knowing, that if any
means might be had to advance their credits, and set them aloft, it must come
from thence, and therefore laid that machiuilian ground for Father Parsous
their only hope to work upon afterward: which as you see fell out, as they
could have wished at that time.

Also the said Father Parsons (then as we suppose) or shortly after, having
taken notice what our brethren the secular Priests were in hand with in
England, did send to some of the best account amongst them, and likewise to
some others that in any sort, they should not proceed in that course: assuring
them that it would be very offensive to his holiness, because of this knowledge,
the very same in effect, having heretofore been offered to his consideration,
he did utterly reject the same as inconvenient in all respects as things
stood for England. Besides to our further abuse, and to keep us occupied with
our own concits, that we might not so much as suspect any thing of theirs: we
in our plain dealing acquainted them with our whole drift, and purpose.
Whereunto for a time, they craftily applauded: as hoping shortly, by their
former courses to have it dashed: but afterward perceiving that their own
purposes could not so soon be compassed: (as wise men in their generation
fearing the worst) the^ they mightily opposed themselves, and depraved ours.
And then master Blackwell himself amongst others could write a discoursing
letter with very much earnestnes and rhetorical arguments against so ambitious
a cogitation, as once to think of any one man's Sovereignty over all his
brethren, during the times of our persecution.

Howbeit we continuing resolute in our former purpose, but prosecuting the
same with great dulnes, master Garnet and his fellowers, dispatched the said
master Standish, our false brother to Rome in the latter end of the year
1596. there to expect Father Parsons coming. We will here leave this honest
man about his business in that City, and put you in mind, that after Cardinal
Allens death, the students in the English College there, felt no less
oppression by the Jesuits their tyranizing governors, then we did at home:
because we withstood their deseignements in aspiring to the like sovereignty
over us here. It may be that hereafter some of our brethren, will set out those
tragedies at large, which endured long, and will appear to all men of
indifferency to have been very intolerable. In the mean while you shall
understand that two or three, being of likelihood more grieved then the rest,
or having a greater sense of our calamities, both at home and abroad, then
many others: did write a treatise of the Jesuits dealing, and naming it a
memorial, dedicated the same in Latin to his holiness in the year 1597. about
which time Father Parsons being come to Rome, was in the midst of all his
machiuilian plots, and under pretense of compounding the stirs in that
Seminary, first so dealt, as in very short time by cousoning the Rector, he
got that place for himself, and now enjoys it.

The imputations laid upon the Jesuits in the said memorial (the effect
whereof you shall find at the end of this history) were so very sharp, and
touched their freehold so nearly, as no marvel if Father Garnet bestirred
his stumps to salve their credits by all the means and ways he could devise.
And therefore he held it best to write his letter to all the secular Priests:
wherein after certain flourishes, how much they were beloved and honored by
him and all his brethren of the society, he entreats very earnestly their
testimonies in their behalf, against those reports made of the Jesuits in the
said memorial. And that he might obtain a fair show of many hands, he was
content to play small game before he would sit out (as our English proverb
says:) and therefore he commends to them such a triple answer, as he thought
would fit the most. Although (says he) we are not so well known to many of
you, as you all peradventure will pronounce the whole contents of the said
treatise to be false: yet one of these three answers may sit all your turns.
Some may say all is false: other that they themselves have nothing to accuse
the Jesuits with, and do not therefore believe the said reports to be true:
and the rest may affirm without any scruple, that for their parts, they never
dreamed of the said memorial, nor do in any sort approve the same. And the
better to persuade them thus to answer, he swears by more then his little
honesty, that there is not a true word in it. There is a saying amongst such
lawyers as are of experience, that they seldom fall out to be the honestest
men, who aredriuen so often to seek testimonials for the approving of their good
behauior. But that is no matter with them, and peradventure, that conceit here
holds not at Rome, so as master Garnet did content himself with his own
course, and made such haste therein, as before August the same year, the
testimonial he got, was with Fa. Parsons in the English Seminary. And here we
cannot omit one thing, which indeed made us a little merry in the midst of
our sorrow, how good Fa. Parsons was troubled with one man's subscription to the
said testimonial. For thus he writes: as he pretends from Naples, primo
Augusti 1598. to the said party. After I saw a particular testimony of your
own hand in latin, concerning the memorial given up against the society, I
could have bin content you had not written it: but either have subscribed
simpliciter, as many other ancient and grave Priests did to the cunning
letter, as it was written (being very modest and most true) or that you had
said nothing at all: as well you might have omitted: the memorial being writ
and sent from Plaunders, whilst you were yet in Italy: and so that it was
done, and exhibited, Te neque consentiente, neque conscio (for those are only
the words of testimony that you give) was not needful: the thing being
evident of it self, and your particular writing so bare a thing under the
common letter, was to detract from all the letter before: and for the matter it
self (which was most abominable, false, and slanderous,) you leave it
indifferent to be believed, or not believed etc. Were it not that you might
hereby perceive what packing, and practicing is amongst these fellows for the
maintenance of their own credit: and how swift they are in the expeditions
they take in hand: we would have made no mention hereof, because thereby our
own dulnes may justly be condemned, who all this while had not sent our
messengers to Rome, for the information of his holiness, as touching our estates
here, and the common desire of us secular Priests, for a Bishop as before is
mentioned. In which slow proceeding, we will leave our brethren for a time, and
return to master Standish attending upon Fa. Parsons in Rome.

After this good Father had gotten the Rectorship of the English Seminary, it
then pleased his Worship to proceed with the cause commended unto him by his
subjects in England, Fa. Garnet and the rest. We doubt not, but that in the
mean time he had conferred with his friends, and was resolved of the plot he
meant to effect: the execution whereof was in manner as follows. Standish
that honest man must have access to the Popes holiness, accompanied with two
runnagates, both of them Priests, Doctor Haddock, and master Martin Array.
These must take upon them, and so they did, that they were men deputed from the
secular Priests in England, most humbly to entreat his Holiness that he would
be pleased by his most preheminent Authority, to appoint a superior over the
Church of England. And the rather to persuade him thereunto, they affirmed like
very lying wretches, that there was such great dissension betwixt the secular
priests and the laytie, as great inconveniences would certainly ensue, except
one were placed amongst them, that by his authority might reform and reconcile
them. Now it is too well known, that the strife which was here, rested
betwixt us and the Jesuits; no one lay Catholic (for ought we know) being at
enmity with any other secular Priests, then with some few of us, that were at
Wisbich, and one or two more abroad that took our parts: and the dislike that
such lay persons had of us, was procured by the false practice of the Jesuits:
we our selves, otherwise having never offended them, nor interteyned any
quarrel with them, God is our judge. His Holiness hearing and marking well
their suite, demanded of them, in express terms, if that which they had
said unto him, proceeded from the desire and consent of his loving Priests in
England, affirming that otherwise he would in no sort give any ear unto them.
Where-unto master Sandish, very well instructed before by Father Parsons, and
sufficiently assisted by the said two lying Priests, answered, that what he had
presumed to deliver to his Holiness, he had done it most assuredly by their
consent. If Ananias was justly charged with lying to the holy Ghost, in telling
Saint Peter an untruth, being replenished with that holy spirit, we see no
cause, why we may not so charge this dishonest company on with all his
assistants (Fa. Parsons and the rest) in that they Iyed so apparently to Saint
Peter's successor the Popes Holiness, who we doubt not, but that he is likewise
endued with the spirit of God in such plentiful sort, as the excellency of his
high calling does require. For it is well known, and may be proved most
evidently, (if any dare be so shameless as to deny it) that if you except Fa.
Garnet, and some one or two of his adherents, the rest of the Priests in
England generally were altogether ignorant of that devise. Insomuch as the said
Standish after his return into England, being asked by certain Priests, how
he durst presume so impudently to abuse his Holiness with so intolerable an
untruth, he excused himself in this sort, viz. that when he said, he had the
consent of the secular Priests in England to make that motion, his answer
therein was made by him Caute, that is, subtly, or by equivocation, meaning
to himself, viz. as he supposed, or presumed; which words he kept in his mind
and uttered not. By which ungodly shift, the tyranny wherewith now we are
oppressed, was hatched.

By this so false and Jesuitical a slight, the Popes Holiness being abused as
you have heard, committed that matter (so propounded unto him) to the further
consideration of Cardinal Caietane, protector of the English Seminary, and to
Cardinal Burghesius, which was the very plot that Fa. Parsons before had laid:
the said Cardinal protector, being one, with whom he the said Parsons had
especial familiarity and friendship; and by reason of his protectorship
ouerruled the other Cardinal as he thought good: so as they two being
appointed for this service, Parsons deseignement was in effect thereby
accomplished. Well it had happened to us, if his Holiness had bin at that time
endued with that worthy gift of the holy Ghost, termed discretio spirituum:
that when he made this deputation to the Cardinal, he might have said to the
aforesaid false wretches: why have you lied to the holy Ghost, that thereby,
either some extraordinary calamity might have fallen upon them, or his Holiness
have taken some other course for the inflicting upon them such punishment as
they deserved. But the matter passed as you have heard: and Parsons must
contriue it as he thinks it convenient, which he did in sort as follows.
One must govern all the Priests in England, but Parsons durst not name a
Jesuit for that purpose: that had bin too gross dealing, he must then be a
secular Priest, there was no remedy. And who should that be, but master
Blackwell, who was known to be a chief parasite of the Jesuits, and would be
sure, if he might have this authority by them, never to do any thing, that
might in any sort displease them. Whereupon Blackwell is named for the
Archpriest of England: assistants are appointed to wayt upon him: a letter
with the Cardinals consent is framed by Father Parsons, dated the seventh of
March 1598. rules are made, and one in effect you may be sure, that master
Archpriest and his assistants shall do nothing in any matter of importance,
without the Jesuits consents. All things thus dispatched, master Standish (as
we think) is sent back with this stuff into England; and even when our two
messengers were ready at the last to go toward Rome, he arriueth: master
Blackwell receives his authority, and publishes the same for want of a Crier
by his own letters: requiring all Priests to subscribe unto it.

Hereof when sundry of us had notice, we conferred together as we could: and
finding that the Cardinals directions were not warranted, by any Breue from his
Holiness: we feared some false packing by Father Parsons. Also some of our
brethren talking with master Blackwell, about the Cardinals constitutions,
took him directly with a manifest forgery, in pretending certain to have come
from the Cardinal which he was driven to confess, were of his own making.
Besides we considered, that if the Pope were made acquainted with the said
Cardinals designements; what he did, or allowed therein, was upon false
suggestion, (for as then we did not certainly know, how Standish had played
the Jesuit by Parsons advise as is before expressed. Again, we perceived by
the Cardinals instructions, that master Blackwell was made no better in deed
then an Archpriest of cloutes, being limited to do nothing, but as it should
please master Garnet. And it could not sink into our heads, that his Holiness
being thoroughly acquainted with these plots, would ever have bin drawn to have
yielded, that his Clergy of England should be ouertopt, and controuled by the
new vpstart Jesuits. We also did easily see into what danger this
subordination would bring us, being left in effect to Father Parsons
directions. For these, and sundry other considerations, we desired that we
might not be urged to subscribe to the said authority, until we might either
see the Popes Breue to ratify it, or have time to know his Holiness further
pleasure: when we should have informed him the truth in these matters. Upon our
stay herein, (which seemed to us so reasonable,) it is scarce credible, how we
were slaundered and abused: insomuch as through such and many other injuries
offered by the Archpriest and Jesuits unto us, we were compelled to appeal to
his Holiness. But we were still too slow and dull in our proceedings, and
indeed wanted money, and other fit oportunities to make such quick dispatch as
we desired. Whereupon Father Garnet, and master Blackwell abounding in all
things, and perceiving our intent, they presently dispatched their cursitors
into every part of the Realm, to get hands to certain letters (drawn either
by them, or by their direction) of thanksgiving to the Pope, and Protector,
for their singular care over the Church here, in appointing unto them so
excellent a form of government: with much more to this purpose. And such a
course was taken with our poor brethren, who many of them had never heard of
this matter before, as partly through ignorance in some, through threatening and
fear in others, and by fair promises to many; a number of hands were gotten
to the said letters. This exployt thus effected, they sent the said letters
with all speed to Rome, and procured by their messengers as they went, other
letters, from sundry persons beyond the seas to their friends in that City to
deprave our enterprise as much as possibly they could, affirming that what our
messengers, when they came thither, should propound against the subordination
in England, did proceed only from a few that were factious, and that it would
be very dishonorable to his Holiness former proceedings, if they should find
any favor or countenance there.

With these aforesaid Machiuilian practices, we were not then acquainted, but
as honest and plain dealing men; when our said messengers, master Bishop and
master Charnock, two learned Priests, were ready to go to Rome to prosecute
our causes there: we acquainted our Archpriest therewith and desired, (if so it
might stand with his pleasure) to send some thither also, that might be
furnished to answer for him, if we should be thought to inform amiss. This
motion of ours, was so greatly disdained by his maistership, as we think the
highest Cardinal in Christendom, could not with greater contempt have
rejected ye meanest Priest his suit yt lives. And relying upon Father Parsons,
and his other said plots, he presumed to tell us plainly (to the great
prejudice of justice in the Court of Rome) that if we sent any thither, they
should not be heard, but find that entertainment, which they little expected.
Howbeit we never imagined, nor could in deed think, either of those messages
which they had sent before, or of that which followed: but rather supposed he
had used such speeches unto us of purpose to stay us from proceeding in our
former determination. And therefore we dispatch them hence, who being gone, our
Archpriest chafeth: the Provincial his good master, clappes him on the back
and eggs him forward: the rest of the Jesuits whet their tongues and prepare
their pens to speak and write what they can falselie devise against us to make
us odious: so as presently, we are become a byword in their mouths, and are
nothing with them but Rebels, Apostataes, and what they list to report of us.
One Lister a Jesuit writes a book to prove us al schismatikes, who had
appealed to Rome, and both master Blackwell and Father Garnet subscribed unto
it. In this book, besides the terms before expressed, we are said to have
fallen from the Church, and the spouse of Christ: to have trodden under our
feet our obedience due to the highest bishop: to have lost our faculties,
whereby we ought to have won souls unto Christ: to have made our selves
irregular: to have incurred the sentence of excommunication: to have given a
scandal to all goodmen: to be in all men's mouths as infamous persons: to be
as publicanes and sinners, and to be nothing better then soothsayers and
Idolaters.

We have now brought this story to the setting out against us of the said
treatise of schism: and for the rest do refer you for a larger discourse to
the books lately printed and published by some of our brethren. Therein you
shall find that by Father Parsons practices, our said messengers no sooner
came to Rome, but within six or seven days they were cast into prison, and
could never be suffered to come to the Pope. Whilst they were in prison, his
Holiness Breue is procured for the confirmation of master Blackwels authority.
Afterward the poor men are set at liberty, but kept asunder, and banished
into diverse Provinces, not to repair into England, until they should have
leave from Rome. The said Breue comes hither: we being informed thereof,
submit our selves to our Archpriest: showing our selves to be far from
schismatics; and such was our desire of peace, as we were well content to
remit all the former slanders imputed most falsely unto us.

Besides, for the avoiding of further contention, we desired our Archpriest,
(whom now we reverenced as we were bound in duty) to take such order, as that
hereafter there might not be so much as once mention made of the said pretended
schism. Whereunto he yielded very willingly, and made a Decree to that effect:
promising to be a means that our said two brethren might be released of their
banishment. His dealing with us in this kind sort did very much comfort us,
because we being men, who still had bin afflicted, any thing seemed a great
benefit to us. But shortly after we well perceived, that our former appellation
and sending to Rome with our refusal in the mean time to bow unto him, did
stick in his stomach. For whether provoked by the malicious Jesuits, or
stirred up by his own pride, and rancor to be revenged upon us, now that we
had submitted ourselves unto his government, he renewed the remembrance of the
old sore, contrary to his said decree, and that under the pretense of a letter
that should come unto him from Rome, from two Jesuits, Tichborne, and Warford:
wherein he said, it was exprestely set down, that we were judged in Rome to be
schismatics before the obteyning of the said Breue, in that we did not
subscribe to his authority, when the Cardinals first letters were intimated
unto us. And upon this false ground (except these two Jesuits and some one or
two more of that crew had so judged us) he writ his letters abroad to that
effect, as well what forsooth he had received from Rome, (concealing the names
of the said two Machiuilian Jesuits) as also that he would receive none to his
favor or absolve them, which would not acknowledge that they had sinned, and
given a great scandale by their said prolonging to acknowledge his authority.
When we heard hereof, it grieved us much to see the weakness of our new
Governor: but more in that we perceived what new troubles and dissensions
would thereby ensue. We did write therefore both to him and to his assistants,
that they would be pleased, the old controversy amongst us might lie buried
still in the grave of oblivion, and not to be again now renewed. But they shut
their ears to our humble suites, and reject us with contumelious and
reproachful words, for presuming so rashly (forsooth) to intermeddle with any
thing that they had resolved of. Notwithstanding because they were our
brethren, and many of them before that time some of our inferiors; we
adventured once again to entreat this favor at their hands, that two or
three of the best learned amongst them, might be appointed to confer of this
matter with as many of us: that so the controversy might be compounded, before
it brake out any further. How this was taken at our hands, it is scarcely
credible: they termed our supplication a tumultuous expostulation, being
fraught (as they said) with the forgetfulness of our duties, and with the spirit
of pride and presumption. And hereupon even now, that we were become his
subjects, after we had understanding of the Popes Breue, and looked to have bin
greatly cherished and defended from injuries by the strength of his sovereign
authority, we are again as sharply prosecuted with imputations of schism and
rebellion as we were before, which caused us to propound the question in
controversy amongst us, to the famous University of Paris: having offered to
them before, but in vain, if it pleased them to join with us therein. That
worthy company after due consideration, determined the matter on our side.
Whereof the Archpriest being informed, addresseth out his own edict, and
condemns therein their said judgment: inflicteth great censures upon those
Priests that should at any time maynteine that determination: and spares not
likewise to mulct the laytie (over whom for ought we know he has no authority
at all) as many as should incline to the embracing and favoring of it.

When we saw this our Archpriest with his assistants thus peremptorily bent
by strong hand to oppress us: and without either conscience, or consideration
of moral honesty to spread abroad again to our discredits their former
calumniations, and very gross and palpable slanders: we thought it our best
course if it were but to heap coals upon their heads, to commend unto them
this consideration: whether it might not stand with their good liking to send
two Priests to be chosen by them, with two others of ours to Rome to know his
Holiness opinion and direction in this cause so hotely impugned by them: the
same being the assured rule for the ending and final determination of it:
adding, that if we were condemned for schisinaticks, for delaying our
obedience, as is before expressed, till we knew his Holiness pleasure, we would
most willingly subject our selves to the heauiest censures that might be
imposed upon us: and if cleared, the least satisfaction that they would think
good to award us, should fully please and content us. But this our last suite
was more disdained (if it were possible) then either of the former: and so
far the Archpriest was from yielding unto us herein, or to afford us
otherwise the least shadow of his favor, as he cast abroad his decrees, that
our said deferring to receive his authority before the Breue came, was
schism, and prohibiteth any under grievous pains, either by word or writing
to affirm the contrary. Whereupon we were compelled, as having no other refuge
at all, to appeal again to the infallible seat of the holy Apostle Saint
Peter: thinking with our selves that thereby (at the least till the cause were
decided) our adversaries would have forborne the prosecution of their malice
against us. But the humor they are possessed with, being altogether
Jesuitical, that is violent and implacable, they ceased not but still
continued, contrary to all course of law and justice, every day more and more
to wound and oppress us. Our said appellation subscribed with the hands of 30.
Priests, men of good desert and reputation, they term an infamous libell, and
presently upon the sight thereof, de facto, do suspend and deprive ten of
them from their faculties: eight of them being prisoners at Wisbich, and two
others, both of them persons of extraordinary note and worth. There has bin of
long time an old saying in England: that set a beggar on horseback, and he will
ride a gallop: our said new governors sitting in their thrones, and scorning
that any should refuse to worship them, can find no limits for the stay of
their fury, but still run on from one mischief to an other. For, our cause
thus depending, they forbid all the lay Catholics to keep us company, to
relieve us, or to suffer us to execute any spiritual function with them:
affirming, that whosoever shall be present at one of our Masses, or assist us
therein, does commit a great sin: and that to receive the sacraments at our
hands, is loco medicaminis, to receive a deadly poison. None may confess their
sins unto us, and none may hear us preach, (at the least of those which are
to too many) that yield themselves to the direction and pleasure of such absurd
commanders, and wicked condemners of their brethren, notwithstanding we be
exempted from such their prohibitions by our appellation, and do therefore
still mioy the full liberty of our Priesthood. The course they hold against
us, or at the least their stomach, may appear unto you, by that which a
Jesuit has written concerning us, to one of his friends: Detest (says he) my
dear mother the cursed crew of the disobedient to lawful authority: if you
know any, either of our coat, or of the lay sort, that be tainted with this
pestilent poison, eschew his company, as you would avoid one that has a
plague sore running upon him, assuring your self, that if such rebelliow
persons do not submit their necks to the yoke of their superiors, that unless
God show them some extraordinary fanour (which in such cases he usually denies
to such malicious Rebels) their revolt and Apostasy from the Catholic
unity, will be the just reward of their obstinacy and malapert opposition
against their ordinary. God be merciful unto us poor men: some of us are
prisoners, and are daily in the Magistrates hands to be cut off, and finish our
miseries at their pleasures; and on the other side, where we should find
comfort, we are dealt with, as you see: and all is either because we are ready
to offer our lives for the Catholic faith, or refuse, till we may be heard by
the Popes Holiness* to acknowledge our selves to be Rebels, Schismatics,
contemners of the Sea Apostolic, Ethnicks, Publicanes, Idolaters, Apostataes,
and what not? because we did not at the first subscribe to our Archbishops
authority, but appealed as you have heard. Which acculations, we trust no man
living by learning or arguments shall be able to prove against us: and in the
mean time, God is our witness, how free we are in foro conscientiae, from any
of these wicked imputations. In the aforesaid process with these our
adversaries, some of our brethren have bin as careful to defend us from
schism by writing, as they have bin busy to accuse us: and amongst sundry of
our discourses to that effect, two have bin lately published in print, which we
desire you would procure: and having duly perused them, then think and judge
of us as you shall find cause. Now for our conclusion, if any Iesuitical
humorist, shall blame or seek to discredit us, because in the premises of
this Narration we have forborne to use any sharp speeches against our common
enemies, we think it convenient for the preventing of their malicious
collections, to yield unto you our reasons thereof. First, the story gave us no
occasion so to do. Secondly, we reteyne still the opinion which we have
signified to his Holiness, that the Jesuitical persecution begun against us, is
much more grievous unto us, then that which we are subject unto from the State.
Thirdly, we have found by experience, that the railing course which the
Jesuitical crew have taken and used in many of their treatises against her
Majesty: and the proceedings by the laws of the Realm: has done the
Catholic cause exceeding much hurt. Fourthly, as our case stands, and for
ought we see, if the pretended holy Fathers may have their wills, we shall be
driven to rely more upon her Highness favor for our temporal relief, that we
perish not with famine, before we be cut off by her laws, then upon all the
world besides. And lastly, howsoever we dissent from the State in the
profession of our Religion: yet we are her Majesty's borne subjects, and
vassals, and ought not for any cause, as we are persuaded, to withdraw in that
respect, our duties, love, and allegiance from her Highness, or our native
Country: much less to slander, or secke the cruel overthrow of both, as our
traiterous adversaries of the society, not indeed of Jesus, but of the
Devil, and their adherents have done. And thus praying to God with all our
hearts, to heap upon her Majesty all temporal and heavenly blessings, and
upon our state sufficient wisdom and providence, for the good continuance of
it: and upon our Country all prosperity and happiness, and upon the Church a
daily increase of zeal for the propagation and maintenance of the Catholic
faith, and upon our Jesuitical adversaries such riches of his mercy, as
seeing the height of their own pride, and the excremities of their
proceedings, they may become humble in their own eyes, and desist from their
very proud Machiuilian and cruel deseignements: and upon all Catholics
sufficient grace to take heed of those that are the authors of schism and
contention: delighting in nothing, but in factions and novelties: and upon our
selves constancy to continue in his obedience, and patience, to be able to
endure whatsoever calamities shall happen unto us for our profession of the
truth, and the discharge of our consciences: we take our leaves, and do here
end for this time.

The memorial mentioned Page 52. is hard to be got: few or none of us that are
secular Priests could ever come unto the sight of it. Certain abstracts of it
are common. We have seen two: whereof one has annexed unto it certain
observations of the Jesuits carriage of themselves in Rome: and both are as
follows.

An abstract of the memorial sent by certain Englishmen out of the
Low-countryes, to the Popes holiness Clement the eight, against the Jesuits
laboring in the English Vineyard, September 1597.
The inscription of the memorial.
A brief declaration of the miserable state of Catholics in England.
After the Preface, it follows in these words.
THe Jesuits that are in England, desirous either to bring under bondage, or
utterly to bear down the Clergy of the Church of England, have dared to
attempt it by a wonderful stratagem. First, their will is, that in every
Catholics house, (and such houses are in steed of the Church) either they
themselves may be the Pastors, or others deputed by them in their rooms. And
if happily there be any, that do de^y the faculties granted by them; or will
not take notice that such assemblies, or companies of Catholics depend on
them; or will not obediently (as it were at a beck) execute those things, that
they have commanded; such shall be censured either as Apostataes, or
Heretics, or taynted at least with some infection of heresy. So holy, so
godly, so religious would they seem to be; as nothing is holy, that they have
not sanctified; no doctrine Catholic, and sound, that comes not from them;
no dispensation auailable, that is not granted by them: and which is worse,
they have beaten into the heads of the most, that the Mass is not rightly, and
orderly celebrated of any, but a Jesuit.

When any of the Clergy grants a dispensation in any case; by and by there
is doubt made of his power and authority; some question arises of his life,
and conversation; as if his Priesthood, and calling were not certain, or
assured. It is not enough for the Clergy to live a godly, and an holy life,
unless withal they will acknowledge the lesuites to be their superiors; thus
some man shall be tormented, another some turmoyled, a third some troubled: for
who so gathers not for and with them only, he shall be judged altogether to
scatter. And that they may the better set this their devise abroeh, they cause
to be made known to all men the faculties granted unto them by his holiness
the Bishop of Rome; and they give it out, that the most unlearned Jesuit does
far excel the most learned secular Priest, both in faculties, and
privileges. And it is noysed about, as it were by the common crier that they
have power from his holiness to grant to all, and every one, all and singular
their faculties; insomuch as it shall not be lawful and safe for any to use
their priniledges though granted them many years before from his holiness, but
with the leave, and consent of these Fathers of the society. And when they do
give out their faculties, they do not bestow them on learned, godly, or holy
men; but on unlearned, ungodly, and irreligious; nay seditious persons, such as
follow their humor, stoop at their beck, and stand bound ever after unto them.

Further they endeavor, that by all means possible, both those alms which are
given for the relief of them that are in prison, or any other poor afflicted
whatsoever; as also whatsoever is paid in cases of dispensation, may come to
their hands. Heretofore (when Priests had the collection of these alms)
prisons were therewith maintained; the want in Colleges was supplied; the
banished Catholics (whose goods were forciblie taken from them by Heretics)
were yearly succored: but now, what is done with them we know not. Prisons and
Colleges are deprived of them; the banished have them not; the Priests see
them not: but there are hired herewith seditious persons; deuisers of fables,
slaunderers of their brethren, and skorners of the Saints are herewith
enriched; these, and such as these, receive large stipends of their labors.

And yet so great a mass of moneys cannot be consumed, with so small charges,
and expenses, but that the Fathers also bestow much upon themselves. For they
go indeed in great gallantrie; no Jesuit goes but to visit any one, or
trauelleth from one place to another, but he is richly apparrelled, he is
attended on with a great train of servants, as if he were a Baron, or an
Earl; which is not necessary, but plainly ridiculous and absurd. The secular
Priests themselves do go also Gentlemen-like because of danger; but not arrayed
in that sumptuous manner, nor guarded with so many attendants, as the Jesuits.
They wrangle, and reprove the Priests garments, and spendings; whereas the
expenses of one Jesuit were able to maintain twenty Priests plentifully, and
richly. Neither by this means also could so great a quantity of alms be
wasted, but that (as the report goes) much treasure is conveyed beyond the
Seas, but to what purpose, we know not, unless it be bestowed upon their
body, their corporation, or society.

Besides they desire (as some conceive) that England should be converted of
none but Jesuits only. For they will admit no fellow-laborers: and they use
the same means they heretofore used in Colleges, to dissuade many for the
order of their calling, counselling them by all means to enter into their
society; and this they daily attempt by flattery, by gifts, and rewards, and
sometimes by threatenings. They never send one scholar out of England to the
College at Doway to study there, but hinder what they may them that are going
thither. They care not for that College, because they cannot draw it into
their society: nay they have labored by all means utterly to dissolve it.

Moreover, they challenge unto themselves a spiritual Monarchy over all
England, as it may appear by a certain contention in the prison at Wisbich, in
which there were, and are in hold for the profession of their faith 32.
Priests, daily looking for their death. These living a long time a godly, and
an holy life, did eat altogether, studied altogether, used every day to
preach, to dispute, to entreat of cases of conscience, to expound the
scriptures; and exercised the same studies, as they were wont to practice in
the Universities: all were of one mind; all of one heart; all as brethren; one
bearing with another. The town of Wisbich loved them; all the land praised
them; the heretics admired them; the keepers of the prisons greatly affected
them: so that they inioyed every day more and more liberty. Their maintenance
came to them from all places yea the very Ministers (though heretics) very
often helped to reheue them. Many years lived they in this godly, holy, and
devout kind of life, until a Jesuit, one Edmunds by name (inspired we know
not with what spirit) gave to some occasion to doubt of the well employing of
the alms received. This foundation laid, he so insinuated himself with fair
demeanor and false devises into the hearts of many, as that he divided the
Priests into two parts, whereof the one part drew to him, the other stood
against him.

They use also to fawn upon men of noble birth, especially if they be rich,
and mueigle them by all fair means to sell all that they have, and enter into
their Society. Women also are induced by them to become Nuns, and to leave
such goods as they have, to them. Which thing many that are godly-wise allow
not. For such rich Laity (all circumstances considered) are able to further
more the establishing of the faith in England, then the Jesuits consider of.
For such as they, might give maintenance to Priests; enrich the prisons of
Catholics with their gifts; help the afflicted: they may more freely, and with
less danger speak of the Catholic religion, and faith; more commonly argue
and discourse with heretics. But the Jesuits consider not, that these, and
such other things may be done, and would be done by them without any
difficulty. But in this manner do they make merchandise of the conversion of
England; thus do they dispose of the last wills of the sick; thus love they to
intermeddle with the marriages of many, with their temporal goods, and indeed
with all things: Always taking that course with all men, that something happen
to their share, having mind indeed of nothing, but their own gain. They
skorne to come to any one, but where they may be daintily, and costly
entertained: they look not after the cottages of the poor, nor minister their
help to them, be there never so much need.

Moreover, they are so delighted with equivocation, or a subtle and
dissembling kind of speech, as that to the scandal of others they are not
ashamed to defend it in their public writings. There were read before the
Judges on the bench in open Court, and in the hearing of all the people the
letters of a certain Jesuit named Southwell, wherein equivocations were most
absurdly defended, which gave cause of laughter to the heretics, and occasion
of scandal to the Catholics. They take pleasure also to scatter rumors, and
to suggest certain novelties in the ears of Catholics, yea to forge and
invent things that are not, insomuch as they are commonly held now a days
great liars; and it is come to that pass, that though they swear, men will
not believe them.

All University men, and such as have taken any degree in schools (and such
in our country are most regarded) they hate most, despise, contemn, and
reproach. It is a common report in England, that had it not bin for the pride,
and ambition of the Jesuits, there had ear this bin granted some toleration
in Religion.

To conclude, omitting all other things (which are very many) I will only
rehearse one, which I have heard of many; that it is come to this pass now,
that the Catholics stand in more fear of the Jesuits, then of the heretics.
For the heretics (say they) can but chasten the body only; but the Jesuits
wound both their bodies, and their good name. They do not indeed directly cause
Priests to be apprehended, but indirectly. That is, having spread some reports
of them, whereby their good name is taken away, so as they stand suspected
either of heresy, or of some other heinous offense, no Catholic entertayneth
them, and so consequently, they are driven to poverty, how can they escape the
hands of the heretics? And albeit they lie in prison, and bonds, and are many
ways tormented, if they be not crowned with the glory of martyrdom, they shall
never be purged from that former suspicion, but shall be accounted every day
more and more, as heretics.

Certain chief points of accusations, wherewith many English men have justly
charged the Jesuits unto the Pope, and diverse Cardinals: taken out of the
Memorial and other letters: some of them dated at Rome 8. of November 1597.
Touching the Jesuits in England.
THe Fathers of the Society do dissent among themselves, Fa. Henry the
superior, and Fa. Edmonds, in the Prison at Wisbich, and there 26. Articles of
their dissension.

If any Priest have a convenient place of residencie, the Jesuits will not
cease until they have cast him out, and that by wicked means, by defaming
him, and bringing him into suspicion.

That the Jesuits are the firebrands of all soditions.

That the Jesuits by right or wrong seek simply and absolutely the Monarchy
of all England.

They are enemies to all secular Priests.

They are the causes of all the discord in the English Nation.

They are called of the schismatics horse-leaches, or bloud-suckers.

That Fa. Parsons, and Sir Fra. Inglefeild Knight, devised the complot to set
the Cardinals Aldobrandinus, Caietane, and the Bishop of Cassana together by
the cares: and to fall foul one upon an other.

N. wrote to Cardinal Allen, that Fa. Holt stood guilty, and might be
accused by him of such infamous matters, as he durst not make mention of in his
letters.

That Fa. Holt did not only intend, but would indeed give wretched England in
Conquest to himself and his favorites.

That Fa. Holt and his companions had gathered such an infinite mass of money
from the Catholics in England, for dispensations, or under the color of
expending it to their uses, as many credibly affirmed it to exceed the sum
of 50000. pounds english, which make two hundredth millions of Italian Scutes.

That the Jesuits have driven certain excellent men to desperation, enforcing
them to leave England, and to enter into some religious order, or to take some
other miserable course.

That the Jesuits in England by certain cunning sleights, having gotten into
their hands all authority, good estimation, and all the stock or treasure of
money, do what they list at home and abroad. They thrust out, and let in,
hire, and buy, intercept letters, and maintain factions as they please them
selves.

That Fa. Holt in Belgia, and Parsons in Spain, have continued these nine
whole years, to the great gricfe of the Nobility and Clergy: and have
procured themselves to be continued the Kings servants.

That there are many things in the dealings of these Fathers which offend good
men: viz. the contempt of Nobility: the turning away of Students from the
College at Doway: the attempting to bring the most flourishing kingdom of
England into a Province: the polling and pilling of Catholics in England,
under the color of holy uses by intolerable fraud: a continual enterdeale
with heretics, and men of suspected religion.

There must be care taken that the Priests in England may have either equal or
greater faculties then the Jesuits, seeing their pride by reason of their
large faculties is fenced (as it were) with authority.

That the English Nobles which are in Belgia, wonder that his Holiness suffers
Jesuits in England, who are the firebrands of all contentions especially in
any place of authority, and that these ten years and more, notwithstanding the
miserable clamor and lamentations of our Nobles and Gentlemen, who be oppressed
under the yoke of slavery and their tyranny.

The Jesuits do withstand any man's coming out of England into Belgia, unless
they know him prepared to write, to speak, to do what they will: and that he
swear to be ruled by them: and herein they exercise notorious tyranny.

Other infinite matters of this nature are omitted, which are contained in the
letters that are kept upon record: Taken out of letters dated at Rome, 8.
November 1597.

Concerning the whole Society, and the Jesuits at Rome.
THe Jesuits are so ambitious, as not content with the bounds which their
Fathers placed, in their insatiable desire they have already swallowed up
Kingdoms and Monarchies.

That being led by this ambition, they go about to change the form of the
Hierarchy, or supreme government of the ancient Church by disordered packing.

That this pride and ambition of the Jesuits, is the cause of seditions not
only in England, in the very prisons there, in the Low Cuntries, and in Italy,
but all the world over.

That this their ambition has taken footing not only in Provinces and Cities,
but also in private families: it separateth brethren one from an other, and the
husband from the wife, inflaming them with rancor and envy one against another.

That men must give way to the time (as in the controversy at Rome) least
while they set a damme against the stream of this their pride, the raging
course thereof do burst asunder all the bands of honestic and modesty, and
carry away headlong many with the force thereof.

That if this ambition do remain unpunished, the age that is to come shall see
that it will bring into bondage not only Prelates, but the very Princes and
Monarchs themselves, whom yet she flattereth in her infancy.

They beseech the Pope that he would lay the axe to the root of the tree, and
cut off this pride of the Society, spreading it self far and near, least
if once it arm it self with the authority of his Holiness, it power forth a
full revenge upon all others to their destruction, and make an infinite
slaughter and massacre of souls, which they have already begun to attempt in
wretched England, to the great decay of the common cause.

That the Priests of England can find in their banishment no harbor safe
enough from this their ambition, unless they have first received the mark of
this beast in their forehead.

That the Pope can command nothing in all his Mandates but the Jesuits find
means to frustrate it by the secular power, to the great scandal of many.

That the revenge of these Jesuits has never an end but with the death of
their adversaries, and their reproach after their death.

That the Jesuits (meaning them of Rome) do use to intercept all manner of
letters of all men whosoever, not forbearing the packets neither of the
Cardinals nor of Princes.

N. calls God and his Angels to witness, that the greatest part of the
Nobility and Clergy in England both at home and abroad do bewail with
sighs and tears their miserable estate, in that they suffer more grievous
things under these new Tyrants the Jesuits, then in their daily persecutions.

That the persecution of the Jesuits is more grievous to the Catholics then
of the heretics in England, in this respect, because they suffer under them
for their virtue, but under these in the name of treachery and unfaithfulness.

The Jesuits have so persecuted some Priests that are now Martyrs, as that
their death has bin imputed partly to the heretics, and partly to the
Jesuits.

That it is a known position among the Jesuits (divide and govern) and
therefore those Fathers at Rome do both stir up, and maintain dissensions.

That the Jesuits Confessors are wont to abuse the consciences of their
penitentiaries to their own commodity.

That of 300. Priests which have entered into England, scarce six or seven
have fallen away. But of twenty Jesuits eight have revolted: which is a
notable slander, seeing there can not be found one of them to have revolted
which were sent in by the Society.

That the Jesuits in the Low Countries are so cruel, as that they have not
only brought many excellent men to a miserable end, but have reproched them
after their death.

That nothing does so vex the English Catholics as the contempt and hatred of
the President that now is: and the slanderous reproach falsely imputed to the
renowned Cardinals, Tolet, and Alexandrinus.

That the Jesuits do eagerly wayt for the death of the Pope, and of the
renowned Cardinal Tolet, that they might bring upon all those that slaughter
and bloodshed, which they long since assayed against as many as have dared to
oppose themselves against their tyranny.

The chief remedy wherein the state of all controversies at Rome depends
is, that the affairs of all the Colleges be committed to an assembly of
honorable Cardinals that are regular, both to look into, and to determine of.
For there is nothing that these tyrants more fear, then that they should be
compelled before the Cardinals to render an account of their dealings. Neither
does any thing give them greater liberty of their insolency, then that they
are free welnie from being called before any judgment seat.

See you see (quoth N) my letters secretly and effectually, because the enemy,
if he be not prevented, flattereth himself in an assured hope of a Monarchy.
While the iron is hot, strike: work out your business while your Patrones
live. Your enemies seek but to gain the time; and if they once set free
themselves from the streights wherein they are yet incombred, they will
(believe me) domineere most tyrannously.

The Jesuits seek also the government of the College at Doway, neither fear
they any bridle wherewith they can be curbed, but only, that the Jesuit
Rectors should be made subject to the regular Congregations.

The Jesuits by their Machiuilian practices go about to procure the
dissolution of the College at Doway.

The tyranny and insolency of the Jesuits is horrible, especially of those
that living in Belgia, do reproach, disgrade, deprive whom they list: and I
fear (quoth he) do indirectly betray some unto the enemy.

The Censure of Paris before mentioned for our instification, in suspending our
obedience to master Blackwels authority, until we knew his Holiness further
pleasure.
IN the year of our Lord 1600. upon the third day of May, it was proposed to
the faculty of the Divines of the University of Paris, that by the letters of a
most illustrious Cardinal, an Ecclesiastical Superior was constituted in a
certain Kingdom with the title and dignity of an Archpriest, to have
authority and jurisdiction over all other Priests residing in that Kingdom.
This Cardinal did also declare in those his letters, that he did it according
to the will and good liking of the Pope. Notwithstanding, many of these Priests
refused to subscribe to the authority of the said Archpriest, before he had
obtained letters from the Sea Apostolic, containing the tenor of his
confirmation, as well because that kind of government was altogether new in
Gods Church, and hitherto never heard of, that an Archpriest should have
charge of a whole Kingdom, and such jurisdiction over every Priest in that
Realm: then also, for that it seemed to them by certain words of the
Cardinals letters, that the Archpriest and his authority was granted by false
information: then lastly, because they noted great partiality in the choice of
the Archpriest and of his counselors. Upon which and some other reasons,
these Priests sent messengers to the Pope, for laying open unto him these their
difficulties: and therewithal to signify their greatest readynes, as in this
matter, so evermore in all other, to obey his Holiness.

The Archpriest and those who are of his side accuse the other Priests of
schism, in that they deferred to obey the Cardinals letters, which moreover he
said were written according to his Holiness mind and pleasure.

The Question then is, whether these Priests be schismatics? and if not,
whether they did commit at the least some grievous sin?

The head and chief men of the faculty of Divinity in Paris chosen out of the
whole company, assembled together in the house of the Senior Bedle in the year
and day above written, after full and maturest consideration had of the matter,
gave this censure.

First, that those Priests, who upon the aboue-named causes deferred to obey,
were no schismatics.

Secondly, that they committed no sin at all in that fact in it self
considered.

By commandment of our Deane and masters deputed and selected by the whole
faculty of Divinity in Paris De lacourt.

The rash and unadvised answer of Master Blackwell to the Censure of Paris.

Reuerendi Patres and Fratres.
WHereas after the condemnation at Rome of the two Ambassadors together with
all their accomplices here; and also the Pope his Breue confirming the Cardinals
letters, as validas ab initio, and utterly condemning and inualidating all
things done to the contrary: Some unquiet persons have secretly sought to the
University of Paris, and thence pretend to have or have received a resolution,
that they neither incurred schism, nor any sin in their proceedings here
against mine authority. Whereas also it is manifest that after notice had from
their Ambassadors of the Pope his express will made known unto them partly by
their imprisonment, partly by the testification of the two Cardinals, Caietan,
and Burghesius, to whom their cause was committed: which also the aforesaid
two Ambassadors did certify hither by their letters, exhorting all here to
the quiet acceptance of their superior, as being ordained by his Holiness
special knowledge and absolute order, without dependence of their consent:
that yet notwithstanding this perfect knowledge they repugned and stood still
obstinate in their disobedience: so that the pretense of seeking to know the
Pope his will was altogether frivolous in those which remained here. And
thereby it appears, that the information given of the cause to the Parisians
was altogether wrong, and (as it may be thought) fraudulent. For so long as
they refused not their superior appointed by the known will of the Pope, they
never were condemned as schismatics: and since and whilst they acknowledged
their superior they were never censured, but only as seditious in opposing
against the Pope his order, and in disturbing the wished peace and tranquillity
of the Clergy and Laity of the Catholics, and yet could never be freed from
one of these two crimes. Propterea, In Dei nomine Amen. Nos Georgius
Blackwellus Archipresbyter Angliae, and Protonotarius Apostolicus ex
authoritate nobis sufficienter and legitime commissa praecipimus stricte in
virtute obedientia, and sub poena suspensionis a diuinis, and amissionis omnium
facultatum ipso facto incurrendarum, omnibus ecclesiasticis personis: omnibus
autem laicis Catholicis sub poena interdicti similiter ipso facto incurrendi,
that neither directly nor indirectly they maintain or defend in word, or in
writing the censure of the University of Paris (whether it be truly given or
forged: whether upon true information or otherwise) as being prejudicial to
the dignity of the Sea Apostolical, and expressly contrary to his Holiness
Breue: and to the sentence iudicially given by the two Cardinals appointed
judges in our cause: and to our common peace so much wished for by his Holiness.
And this we inuiolably command to be observed under the pains before
specified, and greater also, according to his Holiness pleasure. Yet hereby we
intend in no wise to disgrace the most famous University of Paris. For we hope
verily, that either there is no such censure of theirs: or else, that it was
procured by wrong informations, and without manifesting the sentence of the two
Cardinals: and the express confirmation of his Holiness of those first letters,
by which our authority was derived unto us, which (God willing) we will
speedily procure they shall receive from the Court of Rome. And so nothing
doubting of your duties toward your superiors, I leave further to instruct, or
exhort you, beseeching God to bless us all.

29. May. 1600. Georgius Blackwellus Archipresbyter Angliae and Protonotarius
Apostolicus.


Areioynder of Master Darrell Deane of Again, in defense of the censure of
Paris, against M. Blackwell.

Reuerendi Patres and Fratres.
THere is come unto my hands the sentence of M. George Blackwell Archpriest,
in condemnation of the censure and judgment of the Catholic, ancient, and
renowned University of Paris. Wherein was also thrust a very peremptory
Prouiso, but most necessary to avoid reprehension: that no man should undertake
either by word or writing to defend the said censure. I deemed it not
impertinent in few words to run over the said sentence, to show in part the
insufficiency of it, as well for the honor of the said sacred faculty of Paris
(which for the worthy scholars it has brought forth, is highly esteemed
throughout all Christendom) as for the advertisement of the abouenamed
Archpriest, that he may hereafter be somewhat better advised ere he thunder
out his censures: and do not vainly persuade himself, that he can either tie
the toongs, or stay the pens of men by any such unreasonable writ, unless he
take some more sober and considerate course of proceeding. And for bresities
sake to omit the frivolous preambles that are partly untrue and wholly to small
purpose: the first of importance is, where he says, That the information given
unto the Parisians, was altogether wrong, and (as it may be thought)
fraudulent. His reason is: for that they, who liked not his election at the
first stood still obstinate in their disobedience, after perfect notice of the
Popes breue in confirmation of it, sent them by their Ambassadors (who for
honors sake (you must think pardye) he always so terms) how sound and true
this assertion is, all England (as I think) knows right well. Sure I am, the
common fame spread in all countries betwixt England and Rome, (where the
English are resident) approved also by sundry letters out of England, and from
other coasts, was, and is clean contrary: viz. that they, who before suspended
their judgments attending his Holiness resolution, as soon as they were by the
Popes breue certified of his pleasure, submitted themselves to the Archpriest,
and acknowledged his authority. And that I stay not about needless proofs in
so notorious a matter, the very next words after in this his rescript, declare
as much. Mary I must needs confess, that they are so clarkly and clea^ely set
down, that they may perhaps cover some pretty equivocation. These be his
words. For so long as they refused not their superior, appointed by the known
will of the Pope, they were never condemned as schismatics: and since, whilst
they acknowledged their superior, they were never censured, but only as
seditious, in opposing against the Popes order etc. The sense in common
understanding must needs be: that at first, so long as they had not certain
notice by the Popes breue of his will, and therefore refused to accept the new
Magistrate, they were not condemned as schismatics. Afterward they
understanding of the Breue, acknowledged their superior: and therefore were not
censured as schismatics, but only as seditious. By the latter part of which
sentence, it is most evident and clear by his own express declaration: that
after certain knowledge of the Popes commandment, they acknowledged their
superior; and therefore were not censured, but only as seditious. What can be
more contrary to that which he said before? There, he avouches boldly, that
after certain notice given of the Popes will, they stood still obstinate in
their former disobedience here, that after intelligence had, they acknowledged
their superior. I dare not ask you, whether part of this flat contradiction
you will believe, because both cannot be true: for you must either hold
(contrary to the rules of reason) both parts to be true, or else discredit him,
that within the compass of a few lines affirmed them both. But no maruayle:
for I am almost astonished, to see so many foul ouersights in this one poor
sentence. Let that contradiction pass: and mark an other in the same end of
the sentence. They are censured only as seditious, says he: in opposing
against the Popes order. What order was that, I pray you? Was it any other,
then that they should receive Master Blackwell for Archpriest, and obey him?
No surely: how then did they oppose against that order, who in that very time
acknowledged their superior, as in the same period he has himself set down?
What a wilful peruersenes is this, and blind desire of slaundering others, to
censure those for seditious, whom they know and do confess to have
acknowledged their superiors. But not to stand upon these contrary points
(which give but small grace unto a grave sentence) I may not omit that strange
proposition contained in the former part of the sentence. It is: that they who
liked not of his authority, were not, before they received certain notice
thereof, by his Holiness breue, condemned as schismatics. This is so apparently
false, and so contrary unto every ones knowledge, that I much muse what he
means, and where the starting hole, and evasion lies. If he understand only,
that they were never condemned by sentence of judge, it may then pass: for so
indeed they could never have bin justly. But to say, that he and his fellows
did not so call them, so report of them, and so write of them, and in a rude
railing pamphlet in latin so denounce them to the wide world, were (as I take
it) to make open profession, that he had made shipwreck of verity, modesty, and
honesty. Having thus briefly examined the preamble, I come now to the
sentence itself: wherein I will yet be more brief. Me thinks he seems not a
little to abuse that great authority committed to his charge: ad aedificationem
non ad destructionem. For following his letters patents, and the right order of
correction, he is to punish enormous faults after they be committed, using also
before brotherly admonition: to try whether in the spirit of lenity, the party
may be amended. But he contrariwise goes about by new decrees to make faults
(which passes his Commission for ought that I ever yet could see) and to
punish faults without any warning most grievously. But you will say: that it is
for some heinous crime, or else he would never have bin so terrible and hasty
to revenge? well: let us hear what enormous fault it is? Mary sir, if any
maintain in word or in writing directly or indirectly, the grave, Catholic
and learned judgment of the famous University of Paris, although it be upon
due information truly given (for so much his words seem to import) when he
says: whether it be truly given or forged, whether upon true information or
otherwise) if he be of the Clergy, he is presently to be suspended, and to
lose all his faculties (the greatest penalty that he could lay on him) if of
the laity: he is ipso facto, interdicted. I pass over, that for a light
offense, or rather none at all, he has ordained a grievous punishment,
contrary to that rule of Justice: Proratione delicti, sit plagarum modus. But
this would I feign know, for the instruction of many others: how he comes by
the authority to interdict any of the Laity. Sure I am, that in his letters
patents, and the Popes breue, he has no authority given him, but over Priests
only: whom neither can he interdict, much less any of the Laity, over whom he
has no jurisdiction at all, for ought I have yet heard: let him then take
heed, that casting out those censures which belong not to him; he do not
himself incur the true censures of his superiors: and for censuring others
unjustly, fall into the just indignation and displeasure of almighty God. But
he takes it otherwise: and deemeth the University of Paris to have failed
much. Let that be his opinion.

But whether is likelier to fail, trow you: either one Bachelor in Divinity,
or many Doctors: one as yet raw, and little practiced in the discipline of the
church: or many, of long time daily conversant in Ecclesiastical affairs: one
hasty man (as it seems) and in the heat of faction: or diverse grave advised
men, free from all passion and affection? If he think by the privilege of his
titles, to be any whit helped: the University of Paris have in their faculty
present diverse Protonotaries Apostolic and Archpriests, and many greater
officers of their body, as Archdeacons, Chancellors, or Vicar generals: that I
may omit Bishops, who are commonly resident in their Diocesses. But perhaps
some will say; albeit our Archpriest be surmounted in all other respects: yet
in reasons and proofs, he passes them all. Let us therefore come unto his
reasons which are three in number, and barely auerred; but not one of them
proved. The first is, that the censure of Paris is prejudicial to the dignity
of the Sea Apostolic. Prove that good sir. For without proof, that assertion
will be taken for fond: and I in a word, will prove it also to be false: for
they say, it was neither schism nor sin in that doubtful case of the
Archpriests election, to seek unto the Popes holiness for certain resolution,
where they are so far off from derogating any whit, from the dignity of the
Sea Apostolic, that they do highly commend it; acknowledging the right of
appellation from all inferior courts, to appertain unto the Court of Rome,
which is a special prerogative, whereby we prove against heretics, the
supremacy of that Sea. This first worthy argument then, is drawn perhaps a
contrario sensu.

The second is, that their censure was contrary to the Popes breue. As just as
Iermaines lips. For their censure only was: whether it were schism or any
sin, before there was any breue, and wholly abstracting from the breue: How
could it then be opposite to that, with which it did nothing at all meddle, or
any whit concern? The third and last reason is: that their censures were
contrary to the sentence of the two Cardinals. No such matter good sir: For the
Cardinals sentence was only against two by name, and for no other matter, as
the sentence expresses, then for that they had exercised controversies with
some other men of their own order (which also how true it is, let them judge,
that know their conversation) therefore they thought it expedient, that they
should not return into the Country for a season without leave. Now let them
consider who are of higher capacity then my self: how this sentence is
opposite unto the censure of Paris: that in doubtful causes to appeal or sue
unto Rome, is neither schism nor sin: for my wit is too simple to reach unto
it. Well to draw toward an end. After that this good man had in over great
haste taxed the censure of the University of Paris, as prejudicial unto the
dignity of the Sea Apostolic, and contrary to the Popes breue and Cardinals
sentence: he forsooth (and if you lift to believe him) tells you that he
means not to disgrace that most famous University. Surely, if he thought,
that he could disgrace it, he deceived himself fowly. For the grace, credit,
and renown of the university of Paris, little depends upon the verdit of so
base and mean a Magistrate, and contemns the bald unlearned reprehensions of
such simple Clerks. If they mean in substantial arguing, to coape with so
honorable a companion: let them put down plainly the case, as it was
proposed unto them, with their censure, and withal in Latin (as they may
understand it) without passion disprove it like Divines: and then it may be, if
they see any thing worth the answering; that they will give sufficient
satisfaction to the world of their censure. In the mean season it must needs
be small honor unto the Archpriest and others of his band, to oppose
themselves against the most learned, catholic and famous University of
Paris, as he himself acknowledges it: who do still avouch, and will uphold
their censure for just and true in any place, wheresoever it shall be called in
question: which me thinks should much move all good Catholics, not so stiffly
to back that side against other innocent men, who after so long and fruitful
travels for our Country, are now for nothing (as it were) mightily wronged in
their good names and credits.

I for my part, who always have most tenderly loved the Catholic cause, am
most sorry to see such pitiful dissension about trifles: and do most
earnestly in visceribus Domini nostri Jesus Christi, request and require the
Archpriest, and those that are over passionate on that part; to content
themselves with the submissio^ of others unto the Popes Holiness Breue (which
was a high point of perfect obedience, considering what slender audience was
given unto those whom they sent) and leave off that fruitles iangling, whether
they sinned before or no: or what kind of sin it was. Who would not have
thought, but that upon the receite of the Popes Breue, and obedient acceptance
thereof, all would have been quiet and appeased: one forgiving another, if
ought before had passed amiss: and all joining together in defense of each
others credit and good name, which was and is most necessary for the
maintenance of the common cause and comfort of all Catholics. Well at the
length yet, for Gods honor, and the holy Churches good, and your own
quietness, return unto that Christianlike and brotherly peace and charity, so
much desired of all entire and devout Catholics: which that our loving Savior
may give you grace to do, my humble prayers have always been, and shall
never, I hope, fail. Thus in all duty and affection, recommending my self to
your good prayers, I desire to be partaker of your fruitful travails. At Again
the 4. of August.

Your humble brother and servant in our Lord: John Dorel.


We were here constrained to break off, for fear of some danger by an
intended search: so as we have omitted M. Blackwels letter, mentioned page 49.
with answer unto it: which together with some other matters you shall receive
ere it be long. In the mean while we commit our selves to your faithful
prayers: and you by ours, unto Almighty God.


