A Plain Declaration that our Brownists be full Donatists, by comparing them
together from point to point out of the writings of Augustine. Also a reply to
Master Greenwood touching read prayer, wherein his gross ignorance is
detected, which laboring to purge himself from former absurdities, does
plunge himself deeper into the mire. By George Gyffard Minister of Gods word
in Maldon.

BY PEACE PLENTY BY WISDOM PEACE

TO

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Printed for Toby Cook, dwelling at the Tigers head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, Sir William Cecill, Knight of the Garter, Baron of
Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Chauncellor of the University of
Cambridge: Grace and peace.
I Published a Book (Right Honorable) against the Brownists, who complain of
hard dealing, and not only they, but others, in that I have termed them
Donatists, and charge them with sundry foul matters. And having now received
from them an answer unto one part of that my book; I have also framed this
reply: In which I first set down from point to point out of the writings of
the holy Father Augustine, with what Scriptures and arguments it was defended,
and so compare our men's writings and doings with the same. They must for this,
choose either to affirm, that the Donatists had the truth, and the churches
were perished: or else show some material points of Donatisme, which they do
not hold. And then in the latter part of this my book, I answer to that which
is published now by them against read prayer. As I was bold to present the
former unto your Honor, so do I also humbly offer this, presuming upon your
Honors favorable acceptance. And thus I beseech the Lord God to bless and
prosper your Honor.

Amen.
To the Reader.
GOod Christian reader, I published a book against the Brownists, whom I have
in the same termed the Donatists of England. How far of I was from purposing
any such thing at the first, and how I was drawn into it afterward, I have in
that former book truly reported. And for warrant of my doing before the Lord,
I had no doubt but that it should be an acceptable service to Christ:
notwithstanding when I respect the waightines and necessity of the work, I
have always wished, and do wish, that some man of greater learning might deal
against the^. Neither as yet am I cast into any thoughts of doubting, by the
mislike, or fault finding of some in all places, which are no Brownists: But I
am rather thrust forward by beholding that weakness of judgment and want of
understanding not in a feaw, touching the foulnes of Donatisme, and by the
sight of such nerenes of multitudes unto the danger, which before I could not
suspect. Now touching the faults which are found, which causes the mislike,
they are partly for the matter it self, and partly for the manner of
dealing both in it, as also toward the persons themselves against whom I
write. In the matter some have found fault as though I should stand to clear
and to justify al things, not only in the Book of Common prayer, but also in
the calling and ordination of our Ministers, and in our Church government,
others affirm that I have diminished the faults which are esteemed to be in
these, and made them lighter, at the least by not reproouing them. The first
sort I cannot but marvel at, seeing I have in that my former book set down
expressie in these words, that the matter in question between the Brownists
and me, is not about the controversy in our Church, as whether there be
imperfections, corruptions and faults, in our Worship, Ministry and Church
government, nor how many great or small: but whether there be such heinous
enormities as destroy the very life, and being of a true Church, and make an
utter divorce from Christ. I do then lay open the state of this question so
plainly, as I know not how to make it more plain: now unless I should run
through every particular which we deal in, which I thought to be needless,
but now I will a little stand upon it. They reckon Romish fasts, Ember days,
Saints eues and Lent: Idol feasts, as Alhallowes, Candlemas, several Lady
days, Saints days, dedicating Churches unto Saints. Comminations, Rogations,
and Purifications, Tithes, Offerings, Mortuaries, howsling the sick, with the
Sacrament, absolution, and blasphemous dirges, and funeral Sermons, over and
for the dead. Corrupt manner of administering the Sacraments, the Font, the
cross in Baptism, Baptism by women, gossippings, blasphemous and heretical
collects. These and certain other have they set down, to be in the Book not
under the terms of faults, blemishes and corruptions, but as heresies,
blasphemies, and abominations, and that such as ouerturne the foundation of the
Christian faith, destroy the substance of Gods worship, and take away the life,
and being of a true Church. To this I have answered, that they be foul
slaunderours liars, and false accusers, showing that our Church has renounced
in those former things that which is blasphemous and heretical, or so
abominable, as that it approaches nearest to the destroying of the faith and
holy worship of the Lord. As namely the remission of sins, and merit of
eternal life by fasting, which is the doctrine of the Romish church. The
worship and invocation of Saints and Angels, the power of expelling Devils by
the sign of the cross, and such like things which the papacy is full of, but
rejected by us. If the Brownists in their reply against that I have written,
shall prove by the word of God, that there be great corruptions in our
prayers, in our fasts, in our keeping the Saints days, in the Cross, and in
many other things which be in our Church, as in our Ministry and Church
government. And further if their proofs be never so clear and strong from the
Scriptures, yet they answer not me at al, nor touch the question or
controversy between them and me, unless they can prove them to be such faults
as destroy the worship of God, ouerturne the foundation of the faith, and take
away the very life and being of true Christianity. If (I say) they do not
prove them, according as they have set the^ down, to be blasphemies,
heresies, abominations, yea the very worship and yoke of Antichrist, the
mark of the beast, and his power: I remain unanswered, and they stand
convicted as liars, slanderers and most wicked false accusers not of particular
persons, but of whole Churches. For I showed in express words that I do not
meddle at all in these questions, whether there be corruptions and faults in
our Church condemned by Gods word, whether they be many or few, whether they
be small or great, but only thus far whether they be such or so great, as
make our Churches Antichristian. Here therefore I do entreat the Christian
Reader to fix his eyes in reading my writings and theirs, only upon this
one question, whether there be in our Church any errors or faults that be found
amentall? Look if I have in this point by denying that there be swarued from
the sacred word of God, from the judgment of the holy Churches, and writings
of the most worthy and noble instruments which God has at all times given to
be the guides and lights in the same. And if it can be proved, that I have
gone awrie from the truth but an heir breadth, I will revoke it: for truth
is to be bowed unto and reverenced, wheresoever she shows her sweet face,
of all that look to have any part in her. Mark also their writings as they
shall come forth, and see wherein they can convince me of any error, falsehood
or corruption, touching this one forenamed question, unto which they are to be
held seeing we set all other controversies aside.

Then touching the second sort, which find fault about handling the matter,
as if that I should mitigate or make lighter the faults of our Churches, at
least in this, that I do not reprehend them. To this I answer, first, that
unless it can be showed, that our Church is guilty in some of those crimes
which I stand to clear it in, I see no reason why I should be charged to make
things lighter, which I meddle not withal, further than in showing that they be
not fundamental. Secondly, I entreat al men to consider that I stand to
defend a Church, and not the infirmities or offenses of a Church, in which as
there be many bad members, so the best are traile. If a godly man because of
some apparent sins, should be accused to be an Atheist, an infidel, a
traitor, or a most vile and filthy wretch: might not he clear himself of such
horrible crimes, but it must be said, he does mittigate his own infirmities
or make them lighter? Thirdly, I do request them to consider the state of our
people, how speedily very many are carried into great evils and dangers,
though not all in the same degree. I am of this mind, that where any thing is
amiss in Gods Church, it is the part and duty of the faithful Ministers of
Christ, all dutiful reverence and submission being observed toward
Magistrates and public authority, peaciblie to seek redress of the same,
with godly and charitable reprehension. I do also hold that every christian
man is wisely and soberly (with the like deuties of reverence, submission, and
peaceable behavior observed) to seek to have his conscience informed in all
matters, which may any way concern himself. But we see how far some have
swarued and do swerve from this. For the rule of charity and christian
duties being neglected, the vttet disgrace and contempt of men is sought, and
that on either part. The war is made as deadly, as if the grounds of
christianity were in question: while some passing the bounds of modesty,
others do reply against them after the same manner. Our Savior says Satan
does not cast forth Satan: and shall we think then that sin, shall cast
forth sin? Such as condemn and abhor Schism and errors, and inordinate
dealing, must be burdened and reproached with the same notwithstanding, which
is injurious. And what is in the mouths of many against this, but that the
Papists then may as well be excused, which condemn Master Luther and other as
the fathers of heretics, because swarms of Anabaptists did follow
immediately upon their preaching the Gospel? When shall we then here come to
an end? There will be contention in the Church: and human frailty has
showed it self this way, even among the holy teachers of old, to the sharp
reprehension, and in manner reproaching one of another, as Master Beza notes
in the Epistle of his Book against Erastus: but godly men when they have
somewhat gone awrie, seek to amend their fault, by subduing their passions. Now
look also upon the people, where we may see very many; who not regarding the
chief christian virtues and godly duties, as namely to be meek, to be
patient, to be lowly, to be full of love and mercy, to deal vprightlie and
justly, to guide their families in the fear of God, with wholesome
instructions, and to stand fast in the calling, in which God has set them)
give themselves wholly to this, even as if it were the sum and pith of
religion, namely to argue and talk continually against matters in the
Church, against Bishops and Ministers, and one against another on both sides.
Some are proceeded to this, that they will come to the assemblies to hear the
Sermons and prayers of the Preacher, but not to the prayers of the book, which
I take to be a more grievous sin than many do suppose. But yet this is not
the worst, for sundry are gone further, and fallen into a damuable Schism:
and the same so much the more fearful and dangerous, in that many do not see
the foulenes of it, but rather hold them as godly Christians, and but a
little ouershot in some matters. The sore is grievous, and the wound is deep;
as I have small joy to behold it, so have I less desire to make it deeper,
wishing from my heart, that it might rather be cured. Such as be of another
mind, either in this, or in any thing that I have written, I crave of them,
that they will give me leave, according to the doctrine and rule of the Apostle,
fraterne dissentire, to dissent in some thing, without the breach and hindrance
of brotherly love. For as I do greatly esteem that rule of S. Paul, let as
many as be perfect be thus minded: if any be otherwise minded, God will
reveal it. But so far as we are come, let us proceed by one rule, to be like
affectioned Phil. 3. so do I much lament to see it almost utterly neglected,
and the breach of love and concord as violent among many, for every matter
wherein they dissent, as if some ground of christianity were in question
between them. I do not mean that a man ought to consent unto any error, or
unto any evil committed by others, or to neglect the instructing and
admonishing, as his place and calling does require. But I had rather (as one
says) answer to God, if I must give account, for mercy, rather than for
rigor and severity. I know there be faults in extremities on both sides: as
on the one side under a persuasion of love, a man may be over favorable in
esteeming and bearing as brethren, such as hold the foundations of the faith,
and yet err in some things, and have great faults: so on the other side,
under a persuasion of zeal against all falsehood and wickedness, they may fall
into an uncharitable rigor, as very many do. The nature of man is more prone
to this latter, and the fall is more grievous than in that former; few are
carried with abundance of godly love, to offend in over favorable judging
their brethren: and because the elect of God have great infirmities, and the
Scripture does not warrant men to be rigorous in condemning, if a man holding
the hatred and zeal against all sin, judge and repute them as christian
brethren, which it may be are not, his fall is not great, although he be over
favorable; for through humility he is below. Whereas on the other part, such as
condemn with uncharitable rigor, they are lifted up with swelling, and so
their fall is deeper. This is my meaning in that I said, I had rather answer
to God for mercy than for rigor: now as I eschew it in my self, so would I be
loath, seeing rigor abounds among many, to give any occasion to nourish the
same by my writing. If I sin in this, yet I trust it is so, as no godly
charitable man and well advised will make an outcry against me for it; if I shake
hands with sin let me be condemned for it, otherwise I crave that I may follow
the rule of the Apostle. But now it will be said by the third sort which find
fault with my book that I have broken this rule toward the Brownists: as also
that rule of S. Paul, who wills to instruct with patience such as be contrary
minded, because I charg them not only with foul Schism, but also with
heresies, and for which I take it that obstinacy if it be found in the^, will
make them heretics. They differ not from us, say some, in matters of faith,
but do over shoot themselves, and that on the right hand: for answer unto
these, first touching the rules of Paul, I know he himself did practice the^.
And he that gave these rules, so far as we are come let us proceed by one
rule, etc. and instructing with patience etc. said also beware of dogs, beware
of evil workmen, beware of the concision. Philip. 3.

Why did. S. Paul this, but moved with the danger which the Churches were in
by them? Men have not now the consideration what it is to condemn the whole
worship and the Ministry as Antichristian, and so utterly to take away the
credit and power of the Ministry and preaching Gods word. Will they esteem
it to be less than that which the false Apostles did? Again, I see men are
ignorant what the power of Donatisme was, how it prevailed and spread not
only among the common sort, but had hundreths of preachers to publish and set
it forth. Neither do men know the foulenes of Donatisme, nor the points of
it, and that makes them offended, that I term the Brownists Donatists, and
hold it as a schism and heresy. Cresconius the Donatist writing against
Augustine, does reprehend him for calling them heretics; because they held the
same doctrine, as he says, and if they offended, it could be but as in a
schism. Augustine replieth, that Schisma inueteratum est haeresis, Inueterate
schism is heresy. And shows that some things they held were heretical.
The Churches have condemned it not only as a schism, but also as an heresy. I
have out of large discourses of the controversies between* the Churches and
the Donatists, drawn forth briefly all the chief heads of Donatisme, and
how they did stand to maintain them, and with what scriptures. I compare the
Brownists and them together in all points generally held, and will stand to
justify that they be full Donatists, even in the rankest Donatisme. If I have
not set down the Donatisme aright, and if the Brownisme be not the same, let me
have the shame for ever, that I have given them the title, and can not justify
that they are worthy of it. Let the Brownists choose which part they will,
either to affirm that the Donatists had the truth, or else to clear
themselves from Donatisme, I will join with them, or rather against them in
either. And in the mean time I do exhort al other to be sober minded and
discreet, and not to thrust the simpler sort headlong into it, by exclaiming
that they be over hardly dealt withal. For what say some? If these that are
called Brownists be godly men, and but ouerseene in some matters, we will
choose to join with the^, rather tha^ with the public assemblies of our
Church. These men are they in compassion of who^ I write. Now, the chief heads
in which I compare them are these: The Donatists did falselie accuse and
condemn the Churches and all the Ministers to be utterly polluted, and al
their worship, and separated themselves without all order of discipline: So
have the Brownists done. The Donatists took beginning by occasion of one man,
whom they held to be no Minister of Christ, but after they made their defense
that all were polluted, and all the Ministers the generatio^s of Traitors,
Iudasses, and persecutors of the just: that the Churches in the beginning after
the times of persecution were not well ordered by separation of the faithful
from the wicked. For because there were many both Ministers and people which in
time of persecution to save their lives had denied the faith and sacrificed to
Idols, and delivered the holy Scriptures to the persecutors: and when
Constantine gave peace, being become Christian, returned and were not cast
forth. Hereupon the Donatists said all were utterly polluted: and that
because some such did ordain Ministers, at least as they reported, they
accused all the Ministers to be the sons of traitors which ordained them, and
so were no ministers of Christ, had no true prayer, nor Sacraments. The
Brownists affirm that all our assemblies which openly committed Idolatry,
were at the sound of a Trumpet, at the coronation of the Queen called to be
Churches: that the bad were not separated from the good: that our ordainers
were Idolaters, and that we are their children; no Ministers of Christ, but
Baals priests and persecutors: and so have no word of God, nor no Sacraments,
nor true church, all being polluted with the open sins committed. Thus both
make the holy things of the Lord, which indeed are unchangeable, or else we
could have no comfort: as namely, the word of God, the prayers, the Sacraments,
and the ordination of Ministers, to be polluted and destroyed by the wickedness
of men. The Donatists held that Princes were not to compel unto religion, and
so cried out of persecution, and gloried of their sufferings and multitude of
martyrs. And what do the Brownists? These things with the rest will better
appear in the several comparisons, as they follow in my book. I now
entreat the reader not to judge of any one thing until he have read the
whole. I also desire that the sayings of the ancient writers which I allege
may be well waied, for proof of that for which I cite them. If any shall say,
what shall we ground upon men? I answer, I allege them but to show what the
controversy was and how it was disputed on both sides: and for this they are
sufficient witnesses. Believe their reasons as ye find they be confirmed by the
holy Scriptures: I have set down the Latin, least any should think I have
not dealt plainly. And touching the last part of this my book which is an
answer to Master Greenwood, concerning read prayer, peruse it thoroughly and
then judge whether I have charged him wrongfullie in any matter. I do lament
that many of our people which have been hearers of the Gospel, should be so
ignorant, as to suck in such dregs as he offers. Now to conclude, there are
two things which deceive many, which I desire the^ to consider: one is that
they are carried away with many true and notable sentences of Scripture and
worthy principles which the Brownists set down, not considering or not espying
how they from them do draw out false assumptions, and thereupon conclude that
which is untrue. The other is that they look not upon that which follows
upon their words by consequence, but stand upon this, O they hold no such
thing, they have wrong. Master Greenwood cries out that he does not conde^neal
Churches, he denies not that the psalms are to be sung to God, he says not
that the regenerate do not sin, he has no such meaning, he has wrong. But
mark if I have done him any wrong at all: look upon his sayings, and upon that
which must needs follow upon them. The other Brownists cry out of the like
wro^gs. Judge not until both ye hear wherein they have wrong, and see mine
answer. If I have charged them with matter which either their words do not
express, or that follows not from them by necessary consequence, let me
then be judged rash and uncharitable.

FINIS.
That the Brownists are full Donatists.
NO Apostle, no Prophet, no Evangelist, no true pastor or teacher can have his
own name put upon the Disciples which he gathers: but as they be all
gathered only by Christ's doctrine and unto Christ alone, according as it is
written, one is your Doctor, even Christ: Matthew. 23. so are they only by his
title called Christians. But it has been the manner of old, and even from the
time of the Apostles, in Gods Church, when any wicked schism or heresy has
sprung up, to call the scholars and followers by the names of the first masters
of the same, and chief leaders. As of Montanus, the Montanists; of Nouatius,
the Nouatians; of Arrius, the Arrians; of Pelagius, the Pelagians; of Donatus,
the Donatists; of the Pope, the Papists, etc. And who shall reprehend this as
vain, or condemn it as a thing unjust, seeing we follow his example, who
says to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 2. Thou have them which
hold the doctrine of the Nicholaitanes? Now, there is a sect in England
commonly called Brownists, not because Brown was the first original of it,
but for that he has written and published books in maintenance and
enlargement thereof, and with more skill and learning than others which either
as yet have followed, or gone before him. Many men think that they be sprung
up but of late, whereas in very deed it is well known there was a Church of
them in London 20. years past, and one Bolton a principal doer therein, whose
fearful end is not forgotten. I have termed them the Donatists of England.
How justly, and how charitablie, and with what due consideration, it stands
me now upon to show; least the ignoranter sort of such as somewhat favor
them, should imagine, that I have injuriously and falselie given them this
odious title, to work their unjust discredit. For Donatisme in old time,
about twelve hundred years past, was condemned as a detestable proud Schism
and heresy, that began at Carthage in Aphrica, and was vehemently withstood
by the faithful Pastors, and cut down by the holy Scriptures, as no learned
godly man will deny. The holy Father Augustine was the chief that did
overthrow them, as his writings which are extant, answering to their writings
at large do declare. Now, my purpose at this time is to compare them together,
the Donatists and the Brownists, from point to point out of the writings of
Augustine. If it fall out clear and manifest that they agree together, as even
as two pieces of cloth that are of the same wool, the same thread, color,
working and breadth: and that an Egg is no liker to an Egg, than they be each
to other: I hope all that be sober minded will not blame me for giving them the
same title. Their original, first, (of the Donatists I mean, and how they cut
off themselves) is to be noted and set forth; which was this. From the birth
of our Savior Christ, for the space of three hundred years and more, there
were ever anon great and grievous persecutions raised up against the Church, by
the Roman Emperors, until the Emperor Constantine the great embraced the
holy Gospel, and gave peace to the Christians. In those days of persecution,
such as through fear, or otherwise, did deliver to the cruel persecutors,
either the books of the holy Scriptures, that they might burn and deface
them, or the vessels appointed for holy use in the public assemblies, that
they might carry them away; or the names of the brethren, that they might
find them out: such (I say) were called traditores, that is, deliuerers or
traitors. There was a rumor that such offense had been by some committed, as
no doubt it was by many. Now, as Augustine reports in his Psalm against the
Donatists, there came certain Bishops from Numidia unto Carthage, a famous
City in Aphrica, to ordeine a Bishop, and found Caecilianus already ordained
and placed in the Seat: then were they wroth that they could not ordeine. They
joined together, and laid a crime upon Caecilianus. They say his ordeiner
delivered the holy books and was a traitor: whereupon they will have him
reputed no Minister of Christ, but the son of a traitor. There was no
assembly of the learned Pastors for to judge in this case according to
Christ's ordinance and discipline: the accused and the accuser did not stand
forth for trial. There were no witnesses produced to prove the crime:
neither were matters scanned by the Scriptures. But furor, dolus, and tumultus,
that is, fury, deceit, and tumult, did bear the sway, as Augustine shows
in the same his Psalm. They assembled which were the accusers, and Caecilianus
is condemned being absent, by Tigisitanus Secundus, as he shows in his first
book against Parmenian Chap. 3. and in his third book against Cresconius
Chap. 40. Now was there great stir and division begun: Donatus, he steppeth
forth and requires of the Emperor Constantine to have Judges (not of
Aphrica, out beyond the seas) to hear the crime which was to be objected
against Caecilianus. The Emperor appointed that the matter should be heard at
Rome, where Caecilianus was cleared, and Donatus and his part receiving repulse
appealed, accusing Meltiades then Bishop of Rome, that he was also traditor, as
Augustine reports in his first book against Parmenian, Chapt. 5. and so they
require to have the cause heard by the Emperor, unto whom they had appealed:
where having also the repulse, as false accusers, they say ye Emperor was
corrupted through favor. They made a separation from Caecilianus and those
that claue to him. The division grew greater and greater, they had assemblies
and Bishops on Donatus part in process of time in great number. They condemned
not only the Church at Carthage, and the neighbor Churches in Aphrica, as
guilty therewith, but all Churches through the world as wrapped together in
the guiltines of those Churches of Aphrica. They pronounced them all polluted,
unclean, abominable and utterly fallen from the Covenant of God, through the
pollution of such as had committed sacrilege, and were not separated. They said
there were no Ministers of Christ, no Sacraments, and so no true Church among
them, but heaps of wicked polluted sacrilegious persons, whose teachers were
all generations of traitors, Iudasses, and persecutors of Gods Saints, and that
as many as would be saved must separate themselves, and join with the pure
selected company of Donatus. And for these respects they baptized again all
such as fell unto them, as not being baptized before, but polluted with a
profane washing. Now, through the show of burning zeal, and stiff rigorous
severity in condemning sin, and by the vehement outcries which they made
that the discipline was not duly executed, in as much as the profane were
mingled together in the assemblies with ye pure, and no separation made: many
of the people not well settled and grounded in the truth, were terrified and
turned unto them, taking them to be most zealous holy men, and the only true
Church in earth: and with exceeding bitterness condemned all other as
abominable Idolaters and cursed traitors, whose worship God abhorred. It was
before the days of Augustine that this sect began, and in his time was
greatly spread. And when he wrote that it was against all equity to condemn
(as they did at the first) the whole world for the sin of Caecilianus,
because if he were guilty, yet the Churches far off knew not so much, but
might rather judge him clear, being cleared in judgment. They maintained the
matter to prove that there were no true flocks, nor pastors after another
sort: and did affirm, that as the Church of Carthage, and the Churches
elsewhere in Aphrica, were fallen from God by the pollution of the sacrilege of
Caecilianus and other: so all other Churches in the world were destroyed by the
like sacrileges committed in the days of persecution by wicked men among them,
whose sins were open and known and no separation made. For thus speaks
Parmenian a Donatist Bishop, as Augustine does set it down in his first book
against him, and third Chapter. Dicit etiam Parmenianus; hinc probari
consceleratum fuisse orbem terrarum criminibus traditionis, and aliorum
sacrilegiorum: quia cum multa talia fuerint tempore persecutionis admissa,
nulla propterea facta est in ipsis prouincijs separatio populorum. That is,
Parmenian also says, that from hence it is proved, that the world has been
together made wicked, or hainouslie polluted with the crimes of treason and of
other sacrileges: because, when many such things were done in the time of
persecution, there was no separation of the people made for the same in the
Provinces. Mark well this saying of Parmenian the Donatist, for it does
expressie set down the ground of Donatisme. The words of Petilian another
Donatist Bishop, to prove all the Ministers of the Churches to be but
successors of traitors (as Augustine does report them in his second book
against him Chapt. 8.) are many, I will only recite the chief of them. This
Petilian having before said, that he which is baptized by one that is dead,
his washing does profit him nothing: then proceeds to show how far (as he
says) an unfaithful traitor may be accounted dead while he lives. And for
this be frames a comparison between Judas and the Pastors of the Church,
condemning them as the worse. For after he has set forth that Judas was an
Apostle when he betrayed Christ, and spirituallie dead when he had lost the
honor of an Apostle: and as it was foretold by David that another should have
his place, so Matthias succeeded him in the Apostleship. He would have no fool
here dispute that Matthias dare away triumph and not injury, which by the
victory of Christ, had the spoil of the traitor. Then he demands, how can
thou by this deed challenge to thy self the office of a Bishop, being the
heir of a more wicked traitor? Judas Christum carnalem tradidit, tu
spiritualem; furens Euangelium sanctum flammis sacrilegis tradidisti. Judas
betrayed Christ carnal, thou spiritual; being in fury thou have delivered the
holy Gospel to the fire. Judas legislatorem tradidit perfidis: tu quasi eius
reliquias legem dei perdenda^ hominibus tradidisti. Judas betrayed the lawgiuer
to the wicked: thou have betrayed as it were his relics the law of God unto
me^ to be destroyed. Si hominis mortui testamentu^ flammis incenderes, nonne
falsarius punireris? quid de te ergo futurum est, qui sanctissimam legem dei
iudicis incendisti? If thou should burn the will of a dead man, should
thou not be punished as a falsifier? what then shall become of thee, which
have burnt the most holy law of GOD the Judge? Iudam facti vel in morte
poenituit: te non modo non poenitet, verumetiam nequissimus traditor nobis
legem seruantibus, persecutor and carnifex existis. Judas repented him of his
deed, at least in death: but thou do not only not repent, but also being a
most wicked traitor, remainest a persecutor and a tormentor of us that keep
the law. Cresconius a Grammarian (one as it seems that taught some Grammar
school) took upon him to write against Augustine in the defense of Petilian,
or rather of the whole Donatisme, and he lays to the charge of Caecilianus
the unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, in betraying the scriptures to
the persecutors, using this argument: Holy men of God delivered them as they
were led by the holy Ghost, ( Augustine in the 4. book against Cresconius,
Chapt. 8.) Petilian (though otherwise full of great bragging) being very
unwilling to have open disputation in any open assembly of learned men, used
this arrogant speech: Indignum est vt in vnum conueniant filij martyrum, and
progenies traditorum. It is an unworthy thing that the sons of the Martyrs
and the generations of traitors should be assembled together. Thus much may
suffice for this point. Where we see that the Donatists departed disorderly
out of the Church, condemning it not for any point of doctrine (for therein
they did not disagree) but for that many, which in the time of persecution
dissembled, many which revolted, and to save their lives did sacrifice to the
Idols: many which delivered the books of holy Scripture to be burned, and
betrayed the names of the brethren; when the storm was over, and there was a
sudden calm, the Emperor Constantine being become Christian, such joy in all
Christian lands, Christianity magnified with such honor: for that (I say)
many such returned to profess the Gospel again as members of the Church, and
were received. For, said the Donatists, the Church is holy, consisting of
such as be called forth and separated from the vnpure and wicked world: and
therefore no separation being made, but such villainous traitors, so vile
Idolaters, and their children being communicated withal, all your assemblies
through this mixture are none other before GOD, but heaps of abominable
unclean persons. Your teachers are the sons of Apostates and traitors, and
no Ministers of Christ. Now look upon the Donatists of England: Antichrist
has been exalted according to the prophecy of S. Paul, he has sat in the
Temple of God, boasting himself as God, persecuting and murdering Gods true
worshippers. He is disclosed by the glorious light of the Gospel: his damnable
doctrine, cursed Idolatry, and usurped tyranny are cast forth of this land
by the holy sacred power of our dread Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, whom
God has placed and settled upon the Throne of this noble Kingdom. The true
doctrine of faith is published, and penalties are by laws appointed for such
as shall stubbernlie despise the same. Our Donatists cry out, that our
assemblies, (as ye may see in their printed books) and that the people were
all by constraint received immediately from Idolatry into our Church without
preaching of the Gospel, by the sound of a Trumpet at the Coronation of the
Queen, that they be confused assemblies, without any separation of the good
from the bad. They affirm also that our Ministers have their descent and
ordination, and power, from Antichrist, and so are his marked servants.
Hereupon, not understanding the manifest Scripture, that the Apostasy having
invaded the Church, it continued still even then the Temple of God in which
Antichrist did sit, and that the very Idolaters were within the Church, were
sealed with the sign of baptism, professed Christ in some points rightly,
their children from ancient descent being within the covenant of God, and of
right to be baptized, the Ministry of Christ so far remaining, as that it
was the authentic seal which was delivered by the same; in a mad fury, like
blind hypocrites they condemn the reformation by civil power, and purging
Gods Temple by the authority of Princes, because the Church of Christ is
founded and built by the doctrine of the Gospel. Herein they are deceived,
that they imagine the Princes take upon them to compel those to be a Church
which were none before: whereas indeed they do but compel those within their
kingdom over whom the Lord has set them, which have received the sign of
the covenant, and profess themselves to be members of the Church,
accordingly to renounce and forsake all false worship, and to embrace the
doctrine of salvation. What other thing did Josias and other holy Kings of
Judah, when they compelled the multitude of Idolaters which were the seed of
Abraham, and circumcised, to forsake their Idolatry and to worship the Lord?
It is most clear also, that where the reformation of the Kings was not
perfect, (as appears in the books of the Kings and Chronicles) yet all the
foulest things being abolished, and the substance of truth brought in, they
were reputed godly Churches, where many were false brethren and open
offenders. The Brownists blinded with their swelling pride, and not seeing the
evident matters of the Scriptures, without all order of that holy discipline
of Christ, accuse, condemn and forsake our Churches, under the appearance of
fervent zeal, and rigorous severity against all sin, not inferior to the
Donatists; as if they were the only men that stood for Christ and his
kingdom, they cry out aloude and proclaim all the Ministers of our Churches
to be Antichristian, the sons of the Pope, false Prophets, Baals Priests,
that prophecy in Baal, and plead for Baal, persecutors of the just, bearing
the mark, the power and life of the beast, because they say our ordeiners be
such. They say we have no word of God, no Sacraments nor true Church, but that
all is utterly polluted and become abominable: our assemblies they call the
very Synagogs of Antichrist, utterly fallen from the covenant of God, and all
that join with them, through the pollution of open sinners which are not cast
forth: and therefore they have separated themselves, and cry aloude unto
others to do the same if they will be saved. What rule of discipline have they
observed in this? Have these things been brought forth, scanned, discussed,
and judged in the Synods of the learned Pastors and teachers of the Churches?
Nay, but even as Augustine says of the other, furor, dolus, and tumultus,
fury, deceit and tumult, do bear the sway. Then I conclude, that in this
point of accusing, condemning, and manner of separating themselves from the
Church, the Donatists and the Brownists do agree and are alike. Some man will
here reply, that I build upon a weak ground, or rather upon the sand, in
proving the Brownists and the Donatists to be all one, because they are alike
in accusing and condemning the Churches, and separating themselves from the
same. For the matter rests not simply upon the actions; but whether there
were just cause. The question will be whether the Brownists do that justly,
which the Donatists did ungodly. For the Donatists did accuse the Churches and
Ministers falsely, condemned them most wickedly, and therefore their separation
could not be good, because it was from the true Churches of Christ: but now if
the Brownists object open and manifest crimes, such as cannot be denied, their
case does differ far. May not a man separate himself from those assemblies,
where he sees open sinners suffered on heaps to remain in the bosom of the
Church, and where idolatries, blasphemies and abominations are committed, where
the Ministers and government be Antichristian, but he must be a Donatist?
Moreover, it is certain the Donatists did condemn all Churches in the world;
the Brownists do condemn only the assemblies as they generally stand in
England, which is a very great difference. The Donatists hold that the
Sacraments or the efficacy of them does depend upon the worthiness of the
Minister: the Brownists are not of that mind. The Donatists did rebaptize; the
Brownists do urge no such thing. It may be also they are unlike in some other
things: if it be so, why should they be termed Donatists? Indeed if there be
such differences, the Brownists have great wrong to be called Donatists, and
to be condemned with so wicked a sect? But what if it fall out otherwise, and
that it be showed and proved manifestly that they be all one in these things?
Shall we not then say they be even brethren? shall they not stand or fall with
the Donatists? shall they be ungodly Schismatickes, and not these? I will
proceed from point to point, to compare them together, that it may appear
whether there be difference. Touching the first, it is most true that the
Donatists did accuse and condemn the Churches and the Ministers of the
Churches most falselie: and I say the Brownists are as false accusers as they,
and condemn as iniustlie in all crimes which they object, and shall in no wise
be found unlike in this point. Yea, will it be said, how shall that appear?
All men do know that the Brownists may without any false accusing lay
grievous faults to the Church of England. I grant they may: and I say
likewise, the Donatists might lay as great faults to the charge of many
Churches then, and in some points greater, and yet be no liers. This is to be
proved by comparing the Churches of those times with ours: for so shall we
see how far both have justly accused, or might accuse, and where they meet
together as false accusers. The Brownists may stand forth and accuse the
church of England in this manner: That there be heaps of open sinners not
separated from among the good, but suffered and admitted to the Lords table, at
least wise in many, or in the most assemblies: There be profane ignorant
persons that despise the holy religion: There be swearers and cursers: There
be those that are puffed up and swell in pride and vain glory: There be
swarms of drunkards, gluttons and unchaste persons: There be covetous
worldlings, and greedy usurers, extortioners, oppressors, bribers and
defrauders: There be liers, backbiters, and slanderers: There be envious,
hateful and contentious persons: yea, what sins almost are wanting? Where
shall a man go but he is ready to fall into companies of wicked men? This is
not alone among the common people; but very many of those that should be
guiders, lights, and patterns of godliness unto others, are nothing less.
Who is able to deny these things? heaven and earth will witness against him.
We may lift up our voices and say: we have sinned with our fathers, we have
done wickedlie. We may confess that our iniquities are heaped up and reach
above the clouds, and that shame and confusion of face is due unto us. We may
cry, save Lord for the godly cease, the faithful are diminished from the
children of men. The complaints that the Prophets do make every where against
the Church of Israel, may very well be applied against us. Where is love,
where is fidelity, where is mercy, where is truth? But now shall we think
that the Donatists had no such things to accuse the Churches of in those days?
Could they not say your assemblies are full of covetous men, proud persons both
men and women? Had they not just cause to complain that many walked in hatred
and discord? Do ye imagine that there were no ungodly Ministers? or will ye
suppose that Augustine and other holy men stood to clear and justify the
Churches that way against the Donatists and other Heretics? Nay, let their
words be heard what they testify in this behalf. Cresconius alleged this
saying of the Lord, I will give ye shepherds according to my heart, which shall
feed ye with knowledge and understanding. Jeremy. 3. This he cited to prove
that the Pastors ought to be faithful. Augustine makes answer thus: Scio,
completum est, tales Apostoli fuerunt, tales etiam nunc, etsi pro ecclesiae
latitudine perpauci, non tamen desunt. That is, I know it is fulfilled, such
were the Apostles, such also there be now, though very few in respect of the
largenes of the Church, yet they are not wanting. This is a plain testimony
that in the time of Augustine the faithful sincere godly Pastors were very
few in comparison. Many testimonies may be brought out of diverse ancient
writers for this matter: but I will bring but some few, and first out of
Cyprian, which alone are sufficient being both large and clear. Cyprian was in
the time of persecution before the Donatists sprung up; and after one
persecution was over, he wrote an Epistle de lapsis, of those that fell and
denied Christ: In which first he triumphantly rejoices over them which stood;
then he mourns dolefullie for those that fell: and after that he shows why
God sent that persecution. Si cladis causa cognoscitur, and medela vulneris
inuenitur, Deus probare familiam suam voluit. If (says he) the cause of the
slaughter be known, the cure of the wound is found also, God would prove his
family. Et quia traditam nobis diuinitus disciplinam pax longa corruperat,
iace^tem fidem, and poene dixerim dormientem, censura coelestis erexit. That
is, and because long peace had corrupted the discipline delivered us of God,
the heavenly censure has raised up the faith lying along, I may say almost
sleeping. Then showing that God did not punish them so much as they deserved,
he sets forth the grievous open sins committed in the Church. Studebant
augendo patrimonio singuli, and obliti quid credentes, aut sub Apostolis ante
fecissent, aut postmodum facere deberent, insatiabili cupiditatis ardore
ampliandis facultatibus incubabant. That is, They studied every one to
increase their patrimony, and having forgotten either what the believers had
done before in the time of the Apostles, or what they ought to do afterward,
they all did apply themselves to increase their riches with an insatiable
burning heat of covetous desire. Here is one sin that ouerspread: then he
adds further. Non in Sacerdotibus religio deuota, non in ministris fides
integra, non in operibus misericordia, non in moribus disciplina. There was not
devout religion in the Priests, there was not the sound faith in the Ministers,
there was not mercy in works, there was not discipline in manners. And what
more? Corrupta barba in viris, in foeminis forma fucata. Adulterati post dei
manus oculi, capilli mendacio colora^i. Ad decipienda corda simplicium callidae
frauds, circumueniendis fratribus subdolae voluptates. Iungere cum infidelibus
vinculum matrimonij, prostituere cum gentilibus membra Christi. Non iurare
tantum temere, sed adhuc etiam peierare. Prapositos superbo tumore contemnere,
venenato ore sibi maledicere. Odijs pertinacibus inuicem dissidere. The beard
was corrupted, or disguised, in men: the beauty was counterfeit or painted in
women. The eyes corrupted from the form in which Gods hands had made them, the
hairs were set out with a false color: subtle frauds to deceive the hearts
of the simple; deceiptfull pleasures to circumuent the brethren. They coupled
themselves in marriage with infidels; they prostituted the members of Christ
with the heathen: they did not only swear rashly, but also forswear. They
contemned their governors with swelling pride, and cursed themselves with
venymed mouth, being at discord among themselves with stiff hatreds. Are not
these horrible sins which ouerflowed in the church? Is there no more? Yes, he
says, Episcopi plurimi, quos and ornamento esse oportet ceteris, and exemplo,
diuina procuratione contempta, procuratores rerum secularium fieri, derelicta
cathedra, plebe deserta, per alienas prouincias oberrantes negociationis
quaestuosae nundinas aucupari. Esurientibus in ecclesia fratribus habere
argentum largiter velle, fundos insidiosis fraudibus rapere, vsuris
multiplicantibus foenus augere. That is, very many Bishops, which ought to be
an ornament and an example unto other men, despising the divine cure, became
factors in worldly matters, leaving the chair, forsaking the people, wandering
through other Provinces, did hunt after faires or markets of gainefull
traffic. The brethren hungring in the Church they had silver in great
plenty: they would in ravening manner get lands by subtle fraud, increase
their gain with usury. What shall we say, did this holy Cyprian falselie
accuse the Churches of his time, in laying these grievous crimes to the charge
both of the Pastors and the people? Doubtless he spoke the truth. It will be
demanded whether Cyprian and the rest of the godly did worship together with
those open sinners, joining with them in prayer and receiving the Sacraments.
We see it is manifest they did: for he describes not the heathen, or such as
had been cast forth of the Church, but such as God sent chasticement upon to
raise up the faith which was almost, as he says, a sleep. He does also
testify in plain words, that the godly could not separate themselves from
the Church, because of such open sinners, without proud obstinacy and
sacrilegious presumption. He speaks upon this occasion: there were certain
which had suffered imprisonment for the Gospel; among whom was one Maximus an
Elder, and certain brethren, which when they came out of prison, separated
themselves from the Church, taking offense at the open sinners which were not
cast forth, as it appears by the words of Cyprian. For having testified his
gladness yt they had forsaken their schism, and did return again into the
Church: he adds, Nam etsi videntur in ecclesia esse zizania, non tamen
impediri debet aut fides, aut charit as nostra, vt quoniam zizania esse in
ecclesia semper cernimus, ipsi de ecclesia recedamus. Nobis tantummodo
laborandum est, vt frumentum esse possimus, vt cum caperit frumentum dominicis
horreis condi, fructum pro opere nostro and labor capiamus. That is, Although
there be tares seen to be in the Church, yet neither our faith nor our
charity ought to be hindered, that because we always perceive tares to be in
the Church, we our selves should go out of the Church: we must only labor
that we may be corn, that when the corn shall begin to belayd up in the
Lords barnes, we may receive fruit for our work and labor. Then further he
adds: Apostolus in Epistola sua dicit, in domo autem magna, non solu^ vasa
sunt aurea, and argentea, sed and lignea, and fictilia, et quaeda^ quide^
honorata, quaeda^ vero inhonorata: nos opera^ demus, and quantum possumus
laboremus vt vas aureu^, vel argenteu^ simus. The Apostle his Epistle says,
but in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also
of wood and earth, and some unto honor, and some unto dishonor: let us do
our endeavor, and labor what we can, that we may be vessels of gold, or at
least of silver. Finally he says: Caeterum fictilia vasa confringere domino
soli concessum est, cui and virga ferrea data est. Esse non potest mayor domino
suo seruus: nec quisquam sibi quod soli filio pater tribuit vendicarit, vt se
putet vniuersa posse zizania, humano iudicio segregare: superba est ista
obstinatio, and sacrilega presumptio, quam sibi furor prauus adsumit, and dum
sibi semper quidam plus quam mitis iusticia deposcit, assumunt, de ecclesia
pereunt: and dum se insolenter extollunt, ipso suo tumore caecati, veritatis
lumen amittunt. But it is granted only to the Lord to break the earthen
vessels, to whom also the iron mace is given. The servant cannot be greater
than his Lord, neither shall any challenge that to himself, which the father
has given to the son alone, that he should think he can by humane judgment
sever all the tares. That is a proud obstinacy and sacrilegious presumption,
which wicked fury does take to it self. And while some do always take more
upon them, than meek justice does require, they perish out of the Church: and
while they insolentlie extol themselves, being blinded with that very swelling
of theirs, they lose the light of the truth. What can be more manifest than
these testimonies, which show that there were grievous open sins committed
by multitudes in the Church, not only of the common sort, but even of the
teachers? We see they did communicate together, as in the old Church under the
law, heaps of notorious wicked men did flock unto the Temple and worship at
the same Altar and Sacrifices with the godly. Hierom in his Epistle to
Paulinus shows, there were many of all sorts, both men and women, which did
presumptuouslie, ignorantly, and with baine glory prattle of the scriptures,
and so abuse the bolie word of God. And in the Ministry there were that had
stepped from seculer learning to deal with the Scriptures, which being able to
roll out words, thought they made goodly sermons. Therefore if the Donatists
had but complained that there were multitudes of open sinners in the Church, as
proud, covetous, hateful persons, irreligious and profane abusers of the
Scriptures, and not only of the common sort, but also of the teachers: their
complaint had been true. But when they proceeded thus; That all that did
communicate with any such open sinners, were polluted by them, and fell from
God: and so termed all the Pastors wicked traitors and Iudasses, wretches,
whose worship and prayers were abominable, and all the people that joined with
them profane and heathen: therein they became false accusers and wicked
coudemners: they did with most intolerable pride and sacrilegious treachery
publish a divorce between Christ and his spouse. The Brownists offend in the
same degree in accusing, condemning, and casting forth the Churches of Christ,
affirming that by open sinners admitted to the Lords table, all are fallen from
the covenant of grace, have no true Sacraments, nor Church, but are as an heap
of polluted heathen, whose worship and prayers are abominable.

Now that it may appear unto every one that will not shut his eyes, that in
this point our Brownists, (I speak of the Capitaines) are full Donatists, I
wilenter into the particular discourses, and show upon what Scriptures they
stood, and with what arguments they maintained this their wicked heretical
opinion. And what answer they received from the holieseruants of God, the
pastors of the Churches. Wherein I desire the reader to observe whether there
may be found one hair breadth of difference between them: talk with the
Brownists about this point which they hold, that where open sinners are
admitted to the participation of the Sacraments, all which communicate with
them are polluted, and cast away: or read the books and writings of theirs
which are spread, mark well the sentences and places of Scripture which they
allege and quote, and what reasons they draw out of them, and then look upon
these. For I will note the chief Testimonies of holy Scripture that the
Donatists did allege, to prove that all Churches were polluted by the mixture
of open sinners, and that a separation was commanded by God from such
assemblies, which are these. Come out from among them (says the Lord) and
touch no unclean thing, and I will receive ye, and I will be your Father, and
you shall be my Sons and my Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. 2. Cor.
6. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but rather
reprove them. Ephesians. 5. Be not partakers of other men's sins. 1. Tim. 5. A
little leaven does leaven the whole lump; and take away the evil from among
ye. 1. Cor. 5. Ifanie which is called a Brother be a Fornicator, an I dolater,
or covetous, etc. with such see that ye eat not. 1. Cor. 5. What has the
Chafe to do with the Corn? Ierem. 23. Also depart, depart, come out from
thence, and touch no unclean thing, come out from the midst thereof and
separate your selves, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. I say. 52. All
these and some other did Parmenian the Donatist Bishop allege in his Epistle.
We may not think that these Scriptures were alleged only by some one
Donatist: for Augustine in his book De vnico Baptismo against Petilian Chapter
14. says, Magis enim solent in ore habere, quando peccatis aliorum alios
criminantur, ad excusandum nefas separationis suae, videbas furem and
concurrebas cum eo, etc. For they are wont rather to have in their mouth, when
they accuse some to be guilty or polluted by the sins of other, to excuse
their wicked separation? Thou saw a thief and did run with him. Psalm.
50. And be not partakers of other men's sins, depart and come out from thence,
touch no unclean thing, and he that shall touch that which is unclean shall be
poluted, and a little leaven does leaven the whole lump, and other such like.
Now what the estate of the question was, (and how they held men polluted, if
they did not separate themselves) the disputation between the Catholic
Bishops and the Donatists which were assembled at the commandment of the
Emperor does show. Where the names of the Donatist Bishops that had
subscribed their consent to that conference, were two hundredth seauentie and
nine, but some of them were not there. Thus Augustine reports their words in
the conference of the third day. Chapter 4. Quia and in eo quod dicebant, and
diuinis testimonijs velut astruebant, non esse malos in ecclesia tolerandos,
sed ab eis recedendum propter contagium peccatorum: Itase dicere demonstrabant,
vt tamen ignoratis peccatis alienis neminem maculari posse faterentur. Because
even in that which they said, and which they did as it were confirm by the
Scriptures, that the evil are not to be tolerate in the Church, but we must
depart from them for fear of the contagion of their sins: they showed that
they spoke it to be understood thus, that nevertheless they confessed, that
no man could be spotted with other men's sins which are secret. In this
conference the Donatist Bishops stood upon this, that the Lord says of the
Church Esaias. 52. There shall no uncircumcised or unclean pass through thee
any more. And upon that which is written by the Prophet Hag chap. 2. Ask the
Preests concerning the Law. If a man carry holy flesh in the lap of his
garment, and the lap of his garment shall touch the bread, etc. Shall he be
sanctified? The Priests answered, no. Then if a man that is unclean touch any
of those things, shall it not be unclean? The Priests answer, it shall be
unclean. So is this people, and so is this Nation before me says the Lord,
and so is the whole work of their hands, yea that which they have offered
there, has been unclean. Stay now and see whether the very same Scriptures
be not in the mouths of the common sort of the Brownists, and whether the
writings of the chief Brownists be not every where spatred with the
quotations of them. And to prove the same thing which the Donatists held, and
maintained by them; namely that such as communicate with open sinners are
polluted by their sins, and therefore they separate themselves? But that this
agreement between them may yet more fully appear, I will proceed further and
show how these matters were discussed. For otherwise it may be, some man
will imagine that the ancient Fathers might defend the Churches against those
allegations of the Donatists after such a sort as we can not truly defend
ours at this day. Whereas therefore it was by the Donatists urged; depart,
depart, come out from among them, separate your selves, touch no unclean
thing, etc. the answer was by the Pastors of the Churches, that this
separation was not to be made in body when the Church is pestered with open
sinners, but in heart, and not consenting in mind unto the sins openly
committed by those with whom they did communicate in the Church. These be the
words of Augustine against Parmenian, in the second book Chapt. 18. Qua verba
isti carnaliter sentientes, per tot diuisiones seipsos minutatim in ipsa vna
Aphrica conciderunt. Non enim intelligunt neminem coniungi cum infidelibus,
nisi qui facit peccata Paganorum, vel talia facientibus fauet: Nec quenquam
fieri participem iniquitatis, nisi qui iniqua vel agit vel approbat. Quis autem
communicate tenebris, nisi qui per tenebras consentionis suae, dimisso Christo
sequitur Belial? quis ponit cum infidelibus partem suam, nisi qui eius
infidelitatis fit particeps? Ita enim templum dei esse desinit, nec se aliter
simulachris adiungit. Qui autem sunt templum dei viui, and in medio nationis
tortuosae ac peruersae apparent sicut luminaria in mundo verbum vitae habentes,
nihil eos quod pro vnitate tolerant inficit, nec angustiantur. quia in illis
habitat and deambulat deus; and exeunt de medio malorum, atque separa^tur
interim cord, ne forte cum id facere per seditionem Schismatis volu^t, prius a
bonis spiritualiter, quam a malis corporaliter separentur. That is to say,
which words they vndetstanding carnally; (for he had before repeated their
allegation, Come out from among them and touch no unclean thing) they have cut
themselves by morsels into so many diuisio^s in that one Aphrica: for they do
not understand that no man is joined with Infidels, but he that does commit the
sins of the Pagans, or else does favor those that do such things: neither
that any man can be made partaker of the iniquity, but he that either does the
wicked things, or else does approve them. And who has fellowship with darkness,
but he that by the darkness of his consent forsaking Christ does follow Belial?
who puts his part with infidels, but he which is partarker of that
infidelity? for that way he cease to be the temple of God, neither otherwise
does he join himself to idols. And they which are the temple of the living
God, and in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation appear as lights
in the world, having the word of life; nothing does infecte them which they
tolerate for unities sake, neither are they pent up in any straight, because
God does dwell in them and walk in them And they depart out of the midst of
the evil, and in the mean while are separate, at leastwise in heart, least
perhaps while they would do that by sedition of Schism, they should rather be
spirituallie separated from the good, than corporally from the bad Thus far
Augustine, for separation in heart when it cannot be in body. Again he says,
answering Parmenian to this sentence, be not partaker of other men's sins,
chap. 20. Nos dicimus, quod qui non facit malum, nec facienti consentit; and
facientem arguit, firmus atque integer inter iniquos tanquam frumentum inter
paleas, conuersatur. We say that he which does not commit evil, nor consent
to him that does, and rebukes him that does, he is conversant firm and
sound among the wicked, as the corn among the chafe. Now whereas the
Donatists did reply that the separation from the open sinners which God
commands could not be meant of a separation only in heart and mind, for so
we ought to be separate from the heathen: with whom yet it was lawful to eat,
for S. Paul wills If an infidel bid thee to a feast go, but if any that is
called a brother be a fornicator an idolater or covetous, with such see that
ye eat not: this must needs be understood of a bodelie separation, the
Brownists pressing this Argument, also as the Donatists did, say we might eat
common bread with infidels, yea at the same common table with such ungodly
Christians as Paul forbids to eat with, and therefore the commandment of
the Apostle they say is plain, which all men ought to obey, that if open
sinners come to the holy table of the Lord, we ought not there to eat with
them. But let us see the answer of Augustine in the third book against
Parmenian Chap. 3. His words in deed are many, but I will set them down,
because they be so full and pregnant to declare, wherein the controversy lay
between the Donatists and the Churches, and why the Donatists made separation.
In hac velut angustia quaestionis, non aliquid nouum aut insolitum dicam, sed
quod sanitas obseruat ecclesiae, vt cum quisque fratrum, id est Christianorum
intus in ecclesiae societate constitutorum, in aliquo tali peccato fuerit
deprehensus, vt anathemate dignus habeatur, fiat hoc vbi periculum Schismatis
nullum est, atque id cum ea dilectione, de qua ipse alibi praecipit dicens, vt
inimicum eum non existimetis, sed corripite vt fratrem, non enim estis ad
eradicandum, sed ad corrigendu^: quod si se non agnouerit, neque poenitendo
correxerit, ipse for as exiet, and per propriam voluntatem ab ecclesiae vnitate
dirimetur. Nam and ipse dominus cum seruis volentibus ZiZania colligere dixit,
sinete vtraque crescere vsque ad messem: praemisit causam dicens, ne forte cum
vultis colligere Zizanea eradicetis simul and triticum. Vbi satis ostendit, cum
metus iste non subest, sed omnino de frumentorum certa stabilitate, certa
securitas manet: id est quando ita cuiusque crimen notum est omnibus, and
omnibus execrabile apparet, vt vel nullos prorsus, vel non tales habeat
definsores, per quos possit schisma contingere: non dormiat seueritas
disciplinae, in qua tanto est efficacior emendatio prauitatis, quanto
diligentior confirmatio charitatis, tum autem hoc sine labe pacis and vnitatis,
and sine laesione frumentorum fieri potest, cum congregationis ecclesiae
multitudo ab eo crimine quod anathematizatur aliena est. Tunc enim adiuuat
praepositum potius corripientem, quam criminosum resistentem: tunc se ab eius
coniunctione salubriter continet, vt nec cibum cum eo quisquam sumat, non rabie
inimica, sed coertione fraterna. Tunc etiam ille and timore percutitur and
pudore sanatur, cum ab vniuersa ecclesiasc anathematizatum videns, sociam
turbam cum qua in delicto suo gaudeat, and bonis insultet non potest inuenire.
That is to say, As it were in this straight of the question. I will not speak
any thing that is new or unwonted, but that which the soundnes of the Church
does observe: that when any of the Brethren, that is of the Christians, which
have place within in the unity of the Church, be taken in some such sin,
that he may be accounted worthy to be excommunicate; let it be done where
there is no danger of a Schism, and the same with that love, of which he
commands elsewhere, saying, esteem him not as an enemy, but admonish him
as a Brother, for ye are not to root up, but to amend. If that he shall not
acknowledge himself, neither reform himself by repentance, he shall depart
out, and by his own will shall be cut from the unity of the Church. For the
Lord himself, when he said to the servants, which would gather the tares,
suffer both to grow together, showed a cause, saying, least peradventure while
ye go about to root up the tares, ye pluck up also with them the wheat.
Where he does plainly show, that when there is no such fear, but there
remains a full security of the undoubted stabilitie of the corn; that is
when the crime of any one is so known to all, and appears execrable unto
all, that either it can have no defenders at all, or else not such by whom
there may a Schism fall out: let not the severity of discipline sleep, in
which the curing of the disease is so much more effectual, as the confirmation
of love is more diligent. Then also this may be done without any blot of peace
and unity, and without hurting the corn, when the multitude of the assembly
of the Church is free from that crime, for which the excommunication is
denounced. For then they rather help the pastor that does chastise, than the
guilty offender which resists, then every man does healthfullie abstain
from his fellowship, and not so much as eat meat with him, not of an enemy
like mad rage, but of a brotherly reprehension. Then he also is stricken with
fear, and healed through shame, when seeing himself excommunicate of the whole
Church, cannot find a multitude to be of his fellowship with which he may
rejoice in his sin, and insult over the good. Thus far Augustine, which ye
see expounds that place of Paul, with such eat not, of those that be
excommunicate justly by the Church, showing that this excommunication cannot
be executed when such a multitude do sin that it would breed a Schism, if
they should be all cast forth and so pluck up the wheat: seeing as he shows
this censure is ordained as a remedy to heal, and not to pluck up and
destroy. This point peradventure will seem strange unto many, that the
severity of the discipline should cease as it were when it is a multitude that
does offend: and least it may be thought not to be his meaning and as he
speaks, that which the soundnes of the Church did observe, I will show how he
proceeds further in his answer. Neque enim potest esse salubris a multis
correptio, nisi cum ille corripitur, qui non habet sociam multitudinem, cum
vero idem morbus plurimos occupauerit nihil aliud bonis restat quam dolor and
gemitus, vt perillud signum quod Ezechieli sancto reuelatur illae si euadere ab
illor^m vastatione mereantur. For neither can that reprehension by many (says
he) be for health, but when he is reprehended, which has not the multitude
his companion. But when the same sickness has taken hold of very many, there
remains nothing else to the good, but sorrow and bewailing, that through
that sign which is revealed unto holy Ezechiel, they may deserve to escape
unhurt and free from the destruction of those wicked.

When Augustine has uttered this, a little after he brings in Paul himself
for example in his practice: for he willed them to excommunicate the incestuous
person, and he that had willed not to eat bread with a brother so called that
were a fornicator, does not will them to cast them forth, and not to eat
bread with them whom he complains of: 2. Epistle 12. that had not repented
for the uncleanness, and fornication and wantonness which they had committed: for
these he says were many: and therefore that S. Paul does not threaten that
when he came he would cast them forth, but he would, as he says, bewail
them. The like we see in those that denied the resurrection, he willed them not
to cast these forth, least a schism might grow thereupon. After this he
adds, Et re vera si contagio peccandi multitudinem inuaserit, diuina
disciplinae seuera misericordia necessaria est: nam consilia separationis, and
inania sunt and perniciosa atque sacrilega, quia and impia and superbafiunt,
and plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quam corrigant animosos malos. That is: And
in very deed if the contagion of sinning has invaded the multitude, the
severe mercy of divine discipline is necessary: for the counsel or
enterprises of separation are both vain and pernicious, yea sacrilegious,
because they become both wicked and proud, and do more trouble the good which
are weak, than chastise the sturdie ones which are evil. What can be more
vehemently thundered out against the Donatists than this? and yet the Brownists
which are the same in their schism, may not be spoken sharply unto. Then a
little after Augustine does as it were conclude in this point: Misericorditer
igitur corripiat homo quod potest: quod autem non potest patienter ferat, and
cum dilectione gemat atque lugeat, donec aut ille desuper emendet and corrigat,
aut vsque ad messem differat eradicare zizania, and paleam ventilare. Let a man
therefore with mercy correct that which he can: and that which he cannot, let
him bear with patience, and with love let him mourn and lament, until he
from above do either redress and amend, or else differ until the harvest
to root out the tares, and to winnowe out the chafe. Here he alleges the
example of that holy Martyr Cyprian which had been Bishop of Carthage, who
describing the multitude to be so full of gross sins, yea very many of his
fellow Bishops spotted with very foul crimes, yet he communicated with them,
though not in their sins, which he did evermore reprehend, but in the
Sacraments and holy worship of God. Furthermore, answering to the sentence
alleged by the Donatist out of Jeremy, what has the chafe to do with the
corn? He says among all things the Donatists in this did bewray their
sacrilegious swelling pride. For though being demanded they would confess
themselves to be sinners; yet in this they did not only challenge to be the
true Church alone, but also such as the holy Church shall be after the last
winnowing. Cui sacrilegae praesumptioni and nephandae elationi, quid addi
possit ignoro. That is, To which sacrilegious presumption and cursed abominable
swelling, I know not what can be added. Read the books of Brown and the
writings of other Brownists, and ye shall ever and anon find great outcries,
as they charge us, against our wicked tollerating. If it were swelling pride in
the Donatists that caused them to deny any tollerating, what is it in the
Brownists? But to proceed yet further, in the third book against Cresconius,
Chapter 50. he says: Haec omnia displicent bonis, and ea prohibent, and
cohibent qua^tum possunt, quantum autem non possunt ferunt, and sicut dixi, pro
pace laudabiliter tolerant, non ea laudabilia, sed damnabilia iudicantes: nec
propter zizania segitem Christi, nec propter paleas aream Christi, nec propter
vasa inhonorata domum magnam Christi, nec propter pisces malos retia Christi
derelinquunt. That is to say, Al these things displease the good, and they
forbid them and restrain them as much as they can, and as much as they cannot
restrain, they bear: and as I have said, they tolerate laudablie for peace
sake, not judging the things laudable but damnable: neither do they forsake
the corn of Christ for the tares, nor the fl^aer Matthew. 13 Matthew. 3. 1. Timo.
5 Matthew. 14
of Christ because of the chafe, nor the great house of Christ because of the
vessels for dishonor, nor the nets of Christ for the evil fishes. I have
showed already, that the Donatist Bishops when they were by the commandment
of the Emperor assembled in great number at Carthage, that there might be a
conference; declared this to be their mind: when they affirm that the good
are polluted and cast away by communicating with the bad, that it is when the
sins are manifest. Now I think it is not amiss to show somewhat of their
disputation, that the things which I allege touching their opinions, may not
seem to be from some few, which peradventure might differ from others. Look
in the conference of the third day, Chapt. 4. The Bishops of the true Church to
prove that there should be open wicked sinners in the Church mingled together
with the good unto the end of the world, alleged first that the Church is
called Christ's flower where the corn and the chafe are mixed together, but
he has his fan, and will purge his flower, and gather the corn into his
barn, and burn the chafe with unquenchable fire. Matthew. 3. The Donatists at
the first rashly reply, that there was not the word flower expressed in the
Scripture: but when they were convinced manifestly in that, then they say the
chafe did signify the hypocrites and close sinners: as though the chafe did
so resemble the corn, that it could not be discerned. Then next was alleged
the parable of the good seed and the bad, and that the servants were forbidden
to pluck up the tares, least they should in plucking up the tares, pluck up
also together with them the wheat, but they are willed to let them grow
together unto the harvest. Matthew. 13. Now because it is expressly said that the
Tares appeared or showed themselves and that the servants did discern them, so
ye it cannot be taken alone of close sinners: The Donatists did fly unto ye
Cauil, that the field is not ye church, because he says, the field is this
world. And so they stood upon this, that ye godly and open sinners are together
in ye world, but not in the Church: For they did allege many testimonies to
show that the world is taken for the wicked. It was replied by the Catholic
Bishops, yt the world was sometimes put in good part, as when it is said, God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself: And indeed, if it were not
taken to be the Church, and that the gdooseede and the bad in the field, were
together in the Church, how should the servants have a desire to pluck them
up? what had they to do to meddle with such as were without* or why should
there be danger in rooting them up, least they should together root up the
wheat? Then further when it was said that our savior compares the kingdom of
heaven unto a Net cast into the sea, which gathers together of all sorts both
good bad and, which when it is full men draw to land, and gather the good into
vessels, and cast the bad away. Math. 13. The Donatists to this said that the
evil fishes did signify close hypocrites, and such sinners as could not be
espied. Victi euidentia veritatis malos in ecclesia vsque ad finem seculi
permixtos esse, confessi sunt: sed occultos eos esse dixerunt, quoniam sic a
sacerdotibus ignorantur, quemadmodum pisces intraretiacum adhuc in mari sunt a
piscatoribus non videntur. That is, Being overcome with evidence of truth, they
confessed that the evil are mixed in the Church eue^ to the end of the world,
but they said they are secret because they are unknown of the Pastors, even as
the fishes within the nets, while they are yet in the Sea are not scene of
the fishers. But if the Donatists had been asked whether the fishes together
in the Net do not see one another, what would they say? How then are they
secret, and not seen of the Pastors, who are also together with the^ in the
Net* For they did err in taking the Pastors to be the fishers that shall draw
the Not to the shore. For expounding it, ou Savior says: The Angels shall
go forth, and separate the evil from among the just. The Angels then are
they that draw the Net to the shore. Were those ungodly sinners secret as
fishes under the water which the Prophets complained of in old time, and yet
did not in body separate themselves from them in the Temple* The like may be
demanded touching the Pharisees and Saduces, and the multitude of common people
in the Church, from whom our Savior did not separate himself in body. But
the Donatists were impudent in denying that the Prophets and the other godly
did worship together in the temple, and at the same Altar with the wicked
multitude whom they so sharply reprehended.

Now may the reader see what the Donatists maintained, and wherefore they
separated themselves: which I will express in the words of Augustine in his
third book against Cresconius Chapt. 81. Ibi enim tota defensi^ vestra
consistit, quia propterea vos separastis, ne aliorum peccatorum contagione
periretis: vndenouum genus areae vos secisse gloriamini, aut quae solum
triticum habeat, aut in qua solum triticum appareat, cui non sit necessarius
ventilator, sed perscrutator. That is For therein does your whole defense
consist, that therefore ye have separate your selves, that ye might not perish
by the contagion of other men's sins: whereupon ye glory that ye have made a
new kind of floare, which either has in it only wheat, or else in which there
appears wheat alone which needs not a winnower, but a searcher. The
Donatists alleging against the Churches for the open sinners mixed among them
ye saying of Esaias, woe be to the^ that call evil good and good evil, light
darkness, and darkness light, etc. Augustine answers, Quisques ergo vel quod
potest arguendo corrigit, vel quod corrigere non potest, saluo pacis vinculo
excludit, vel quod saluo pacis vinculo excludere non potest, aequitate
improbat, firmitate supportat, hic est pacificus and abisto maledicto immunis
quod scriptura dicit, va his qui dicunt quod nequam est bonu, etc, Whosoever
therefore does either amend that which he can by reproving, or that which he
cannot amend, he casts forth, the band of peace being kept safe, or that
which he cannot cast out with the safety of the band of peace, by equity he
disaloweth, and bears it with constancy: this man is the peacemaker, and is
free from that curse which the Scripture pronounces, Woe be to them which call
evil good, etc. Against Parmenian book 2. chap. 1. The Donatists alleging
the sentences of the Prophets to prove that all ought to separate themselves
from those, among whom the open notorious wicked men were suffered, and not
cast forth: he answers that they cited the testimonies of Scripture, and did
not look upon the deeds of the Prophets, and so to know how the words of the
Prophets were to be understand. Then he demands, Dixit Ieremias quid paleis
ad triticum? Vt ipse recederet a paleis upopli sui, in quas illa tanta and vera
dicebat? Did Jeremy say what has the chafe to do with the corn, for this
end, that he himself should depart from the chafe of his people, against
which he did utter those so great things, and the same most true? Dixit
Iesaias, Recedite, recedite, exite inde, and immundum nolite tangere. Sed cur
ipse in illo populo immunditiam quam grauiter arguebat, in vna cum eis
congregatione tangebat? Legant quanta in malos populi sui, and quam vehementer
ac veraciter dixerit, a quibus se tamen nulla corporali diremptione
separauerit. That is, Esaias said, Depart, depart, come out from thence, and
touch not that which is unclean. But why did he himself in one congregation
with them, touch that uncleanness which he reproved in that people? They may
read how great things he uttered against the wicked of his people, how
vehemently and truly, from whom notwithstanding he did separate himself
with no bodelie separation. After he has shwed the like in the holy Prophet
David who professed he had not sit in the counsel of vain men, and yet was
not separate in body from the ungodly in his days: He adds Nonne, si eorum
verba factis eorum obijceremus responderent nobis, nos plane cum talibus nullum
habuimus in cord consortium, nec tangebamus immundum vbi potest coinquinari
contactus: id est consensione at que placito conscientiae recedebamus, and
exibamus ab eis, qui non solum talia non faciebamus, sed nec facientibus
tacebamus. If we should object their words against their deeds, would they not
answer us, we have had utterly no fellowship in heart with such wicked men,
neither did we touch that which is unclean, where the touching may be defiled:
That is to say, we did depart and come out from them in consent and likening
of conscience, which our selves, not only, did not do such things, but also
kept not silence to them that did such wickedness. Against Parmenian book 3.
chap. 4. Again, in the same place he adds. Postremo si Prophetae posteros
monuerunt vt se ante tempus vltimae ventilationis a paleis corporaliter
separarent, and tali separatione cauerent tangere immundum, and cum facinorosis
non introirent, cur hoc non fecit Apostolus Paulus? An palea no^ erant, qui non
ex veritate, sed ex inuidia Christum annunciabant? An immundi non erant, qui
non cast euangelium praedicarunt? Hos in illis temporibus ecclesia fuisse
testatur, cuius excellentissimam charitatem omnia tolerantem, etiam posteriores
imitati sunt. That is, Lastly if the Prophets gave warning to the posterity
that they should before the time of the last winnowing separate themselves from
the chafe in body, and by such separation take heed of touching any unclean
thing, and that way not to enter with the wicked dooers, why did not the
Apostle Paul do so? Were not they chafe which preached Christ of envy, and
not for the truth? Were not they unclean, which preached the Gospel not
purelie? That there were such in the Church at those times he does testify
Philip* 1. Whose most excellent charity enduring or tolerating all things,
those that suceeded have also imitated. Having thus affirmed, that this most
excellent love of Paul tolerating open wicked men in the church where they
could not without danger of schism be cast forth was imitated of the godly
pastors that succeeded: he alleges for example holy Cyprian: who testifying
that not only the people, but also many of his fellow Bishops were
horribly wicked, yet lived in peace with them, and did not separate himself
in body. Thus he demands, An immunditia, an etiam auaritia, quam Cyprianus
cord non tetigit, and tamen inter auaros collegas pacatisssime vixit? Was it
not uncleanness, was it not also covetousness, which Cyprian touched not in
heart, and yet lived most peaceably among his covetous fellow Bishops? He
knew right well what God commands in the Psalm, that he should not sit in
the counsel of vain men, nor enter with the wicked dooers. An non erat
conuenticulum vanitatis in eis, qui esurientibus in ecclesia fratribus,
largissimo argento nitere cupiebant? An non erant facinorosi qui fuundos
insidiose fratribus rapiebant? An nequissimi and impij non erant qui vsuris
multiplicantibus foenus augebant? Ille vero, lauabat manus suas cum
innocentibus and circundabat altar domini. Ideo quippe tolerabat nocentes, ne
deser^ret innocents cum quibus manus lauabat, quia diligebat speci^m domus
domini, quae species in vasis honorabilibus fuit. That is, Was not the
conuenticle of vanity among them, which while their brethren endured hunger or
penury in the Church, did covet to shine gorgeously with most abundant
wealth? Were not they wicked dooers, which by deceiptfull means in such
ravening sort took from their brethren possessions of Lands? Were they not
most ungodly and wicked, which with multiplying usury did increase their
gain? But Cyprian did wash his hands with innocents, and compassed the Altar
of the Lord. He tolerated the wicked, least he should forsake those innocent,
with whom he washed his hands, because he loved the beauty of the Lords
house, which beauty was in the vessels for honor. Now where the Donatists
might object, shall the discipline then be neglected, and wicked men suffered
to live at their pleasure in the Church? Augustine answers both them and all
others touching this objection, first in his third book against Parmenian
chap. 1. Quapropter quisquis etiam contempserit ecclesiae Dei disciplinam vt
malos cum quibus non peccat, and quibus non fauet, desistat monere, corrigere,
arguere: si etiam talem gerit personam, and pax ecclesiae patitur, vt etiam a
sacramentorum participatione quem piam possit separare, non alieno malo peccat
sed suo, ipsa quippe in tanta re negligentia grave malum est, and ideo sicut
Apostolus admonet, si auferet malu^ a seipso, non solum aufirre^ audaciam
committendi, aut pestilentiam consentiendi, sed etiam pigritiam corrigendi, and
negligentiam vindicandi adhibita prudentia and obedientia in eo quod praecepit
dominus, ne frumenta laedantur. That is to say, Wherefore, whosoever also shall
despise the discipline of Gods Church, so that he give over admonishing,
correcting, and reproving the evil men with whom he does not sin, and
whom he does not favor, yea if he bear such office, and the peace of the
Church permit, that he may also separate any from the participation of the
Sacraments, and does not, he sins by his own falt and not by the falt of
another. For the very negligence it self in so great a matter is a grievous
sin, and therefore as the Apostle does warn. If he will take away evil from
himself, he must not only take away the boldness of committing it, or the
pestilence of consenting thereto, but also the slouthfulnes of correcting and
negligence of revenging the same, prudentlie obeying in that which the Lord
has commanded, that the wheat may not be hurt.

In his third book against Petilian, Chapt. 4. having before showed that there
is a worthy patience in suffering the false brethren for the unities sake: he
adds, Neque hoc ideo dixerim vt negligatur ecclesiastica disciplina, and
permittatur quisque facere quod velit sine vlla correptione and quadam
medicinali vindicta* and terribili lenitate, and charitatis seueritate. That
is, Neither have I therefore said this, that the ecclesiastical discipline
should be neglected, and that every one should be suffered to do what he will
without rebuke, and without a certain medicinable revenge, terrible lenittie,
and severity of love. In the 37. Chap. of the same book, having spoken of the
corn and the chafe mixed together, the wheat and the tares growing together,
the good fishes and the had in the same net together unto the end of the
world, he then infers: Nec propterea tamen ecclesiastica disciplina
negligitur a constantibus, and diligentibus, and prudentibus dispensatoribus
Christi, vbi crimina ita manifest antur, vt nulla possint probabili ratione
defendi. That is, Notwithstanding the ecclesiastical discipline is not
therefore neglected of the constant, diligent and wise dispensers of Christ,
where the crimes are manifested in such sort that they can in no probable manner
be defended. In the fourth Chapter of his book after the conference with the
Donatists, taking advantage of a saying which they uttered, which was this: Nec
causae causa praeiudicat, nec personae persona. That is, neither does cause
preiudicate cause, neither one person another. He says that the cause and
person of the tares does not preiudicate the cause and person of the wheat
growing together in the same field until the harvest come: The cause and
person of the chafe does not preiudicate the cause and person of the corn,
being together in the same floare until the last winnowing: The cause and
person of the goats, does not preiudicate the cause and person of the sheep,
kept together in the same pastures, until the great shepherd shall separate
them to the right hand and to the left in the last day: The cause and person of
the evil fishes does not preiudicate the cause and person of the good fishes,
though they be held in the same net to be separated in the last shore. Then
he adds, Quibus parabolis, and figuris ecclesia praenunciata est vsque in
finem seculi bonos and malos simul habitura, ita vt nec mali bonis obesse
possint, cum velignorantur, vel pro pace and tranquillitate ecclesiae
tolerantur, si eos prodi aut a^cusari non oportuerit, aut alijs bonis non
potuerit demonstrari: ita sane vt nec emendationis vigilantia quiescat,
corripiendo, degradando, excommunicando, caeterisque coertionibus licitis atque
concessis, quae salua vnitatis pace in ecclesia quotidie fiunt secundum
praeceptum Apostolicum charitate seruata qui dixit, si quis autem non obaudit
verbo nostro, per epistolam hunc notate, and nolite commisceri cum eo, vt
erubescat, and non vt inimicum existimetis, sed corripite vt fratrem. Sic enim
and disciplina seruat patientiam, and patientia temperat disciplinam, and
vtrumque refertur ad charitatem, ne forte aut indisciplinata patientia foueat
iniquitatem, aut impatiens disciplina dissipet vnitatem. That is to say, By
which parables and figures, the Church is foreshewed that it shall have the
good and the bad together unto the end of the world, so as the evil cannot
hurt the good, when either they are not known, or else are tolerated for the
peace and tranquillity of the Church, if it be not behoueful that they shall be
manifested or accused, or that it cannot be showed to others that be good: even
so verelie as yet the watchfulness of redressing may in no wise rest, in
rebuking, degrading, excommunicating, and in other lawful and allowable
restraints, which, the peace of unity receiving no damage, are daily
practiced in the Church without any hindrance or breach of love, according to
the Apostles precept, which said: If any obey not our word, note him by an
Epistle, and have no fellowship with him, that he may be ashamed, and esteem
him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. For in so doing, the
discipline does keep patience, and patience does temper the discipline, and
both are referred unto charity, least either undisciplined patience should
foster iniquity, or impatient discipline, might dissolve and scatter the
unity.

Thus far Augustine: by which words he shows, that albeit the good and the
bad shall always even to the end of the world be mixed together on heaps in
the Church, so that oftentimes open sinners cannot be all cast forth without
danger of schism, and therefore are to be tolerated for the peace of the
Church: yet the discipline is not to sleep, but sinners are to be rebuked:
such as bear public office, if they deserve, are to be degraded and deprived.
The notorious wicked are to be excommunicated, where the multitude is not
guilty with them, but that they may be forsaken of all and so made ashamed:
but love, according to the rule of Saint Paul, is to sit at the stearne and to
order the whole matter, least the severity of chasticing discipline, if it
were not mixed and tempered, or as I may say, delaied with patience, might
breed tumults and schisms, and separations: or least on the other side, if
tollerating patience were not sharpened by the severity of discipline, it
might nourish all manner of wickedness.

We see then what was the practice of the ancient Churches, and that touching
the Ecclesiastical censures, the mixture of patience and severity, wholly
referred unto love, do make a sovereign plaster and medicine, to salve and
cure the sores of the Church. Where these be not tempered together there is
great decay: for as the rigorous severity of Donatisme, without any aswaging
the heat of severity with the mixture of love and patient tolleration, does
rend up and furiously tear all in pieces: so does overmuch or a loose
sufferance (for it deserves not the name of patience, not regarding Gods honor
nor men's salvation) suffer the Lords field to ouergrowe with tares, and fill
the Lords Courts with Goats and Swine: whereby holy things are greatly
profaned, the weak are made to stumble, and many are cast down. Touching
this first point then in controversy between the Donatists and the Churches,
I will conclude it with that which Augustine writes in his treatise De vnitate
Ecclesiae, Chapt. 16. where having showed in the former parts of the same book
that the controversy was not about the head, which is Christ, but about the
body, which is his Church. For touching the head they agreed, and touching the
books of holy Scripture and their authority, there was no dissent at all
between the Donatists and them.

Then further he comes to this point, that as Christ the head is to be
sought for and known only in the Canonical Scriptures: so the Church, which
is his body, is likewise to be sought for, found out, and judged only by the
same books of Scripture. Then he calls for trial not by those dark places
of the Bible which are spoken in figures and may be expounded diverse ways in
probable sense; but from the manifest clear testimonies, which also he
alleges out of many books both of the old and new Testament, to prove that
the Church should be spread over all the kingdoms and nations of the world.
He answers the places of Scriptures which they alleged to prove that the
world at sundry times had so fallen away from God, that a very few true
worshippers remained, and why might not they be now as those few? He shows
that there be innumerable testimonies to prove, that the open bad did
communicate together with the good in the Sacraments, and that the good were
few in comparison of the bad so mixed with them, of which (after he has cited
many) he comes at the last as it were to a conclusion, that al other things
removed, he would have them show their Church out of the holy Scriptures,
and from the places which are not dark. And then it follows, Quisquis ergo
huic epistolae responderese praeparat, ante denunciationem mihi dicat, illi
codices dominicos ignibus tradiderunt, illi simulacris gentium sacrificaueru^t,
illi nobis iniquissimam persecutionem fecerunt, et vos eis in omnibus
consensistis. Breuiter enim respondeo quod saepe respondi, aut falsa dicitis,
aut si vera sunt, non ad frumenta Christi, sed ad eorum paleam pertinent ista
quae dicitis, non inde perit ecclesia, quae optimo iudicio ventilata, istorum
omnium separatione purgabitur. That is to say, Whosoever therefore prepares
himself to answer this Epistle, let him before the denouncing, say unto me;
such delivered the Lords books to the fire, such sacrificed to the Idols of
the Gentiles, such have persecuted us most unjustly, and you have consented
unto them in all things. For I answer briefly, which I have often answered,
either ye speak things which are false, or else if they be true, that which
ye speak pertains not to the corn of Christ but to the chafe thereof, the
Church does not perish thereby, which winnowed with most perfect judgment,
shall be purged by the separation of that same chafe. He adds: Ego ipsam
ecclesia^ requiro vbi sit, quae audiendo verba Christi and faciendo aedificat
super petram, and audiendo and faciendo tolerat eos, qui audiendo and non
faciendo aedificant super arenam. Vbi sit triticum quod inter zizania crescit
vsque ad messem, non quid fecerint vel faciant ipsa zizania. Vbi sit proxima
Christi in medio filiarum malarum, sicut lilium in medio spinarum non quid
fecerint, vel faciunt ipsae spinae. Vbi sunt pisces boni qui donec ad littus
perueniant, tolerant pisces malos pariter irretitos, non fecerint aut faciant
ipsi pisces mali. That is to say, I seek the Church, where she is, which in
hearing the words of Christ and doing them does build upon a rock, and which
hearing and doing does tolerate those, which hearing and not doing do build
upon the sand. Where that wheat is which grows up among the tares until
the harvest come, not what the tares have done, or what they do. Where that
spouse of Christ is in the midst of the evil daughters, as the lilly among
the thorns, not what the thorns have done, or what they do. Where the good
fishes be, which until they come unto the shore do tolerate the evil fishes
held in the same net together, not what the evil fishes have done, or what
they do.

Thus have I laid open, that the Church in old time was full of open wicked
men both of ministers and people: That the Donatists under the color of zeal
and severity against sin did separate themselves, affirming that all were
polluted and fallen from the covenant, which did communicate in the worship of
god and Sacraments with such notorious evil men. All men may see by that which
I have noted, that the Donatists did maintain this their opinion with the same
Scriptures and arguments that the Brownists do maintain it withal now: And
received the same answers to confute them, which we make now to confute the
Brownists. This was the maine point of Donatisme, and as it were the pith and
substance thereof: and it is one of the four chief pillars of Brownisme, Yea
but now the Brownists do separate themselves from a worship which is
Idolatrous, full of blasphemies and abominations: The Donatists did rend
themselves from an holy and true worship. Indeed where the worship is
Idolatrous and blasphemous, a man is to separate himself. But there are many
and great corruptions before it come to that: for it is the true worship of God
where the foundation is laid and stands sure. If there be timber, Hay, and
stubble built upon the foundation, the fault is great, such things are not to
be approved: But yet there is Gods true worship. And now to come to the very
point of the matter: I do affirm and will stand to justify, that there were
greater corruptions in the worship of God, even in those Churches from which
the Donatists did separate themselves, than be at this day in the worship of
the Church of England. So that if Brownisme be any thing to be excused in that,
the Donatisme may as justly therein be defended. For if we consider matters
which concern doctrine, what can any man show so corrupt in this our Church,
as in the public worship to pray for the souls of the dead, and to offer
oblations for the dead? This corruption was general in the Church then, yea
long before the days of Augustine, as it appears in Cyprian and by
Tertullian which was before him, and nerer to the time of the Apostles; who in
his book De Monogamia reasoning against second marriage (for he was fallen
into that error) would persuade any woman that had buried her husband not to
marie again, because, he being separated from her in peace and not divorced,
she was to pray for his soul, and yearly to offer oblation for him: thus he
writes, Et pro anima eius oret, and refrigerium interim ad postulet ei, and in
prima resurrectione consortium: and offerat annuis diebus dormitionis eius.
That is, And let her pray for his soul, and crave refreshing for him now in
the mean time, and his fellowship in the first resurrection, and let her offer
yearly upon the day of his departure. It will be said by some ignorant man,
that this was but the mind and practice of some few, which were corrupt and
superstitious. I answer it was the practice of the Church in general, and the
corruption so ancient, that the same Tertullian in his book De corona
militis, speaking of it and certain other things says they were observed by
tradition from the Apostles, they were observed so generally in the Churches
and no scripture to warrant them. These be his words, Oblationes pro
defunctis, annua die facimus. We make oblations for the dead in the yearly
day. The doctrine of Purgatory, and the doctrine of Free will were crept in
also, besides diverse other gross errors which sundry of the chief teachers
held, some in one point some in an other. Touching Ceremonies not for order and
comlynes, but with signification, the liberty was exceeding which men took,
and the corruption grievous, which was not espied but of few. Tertullian for
his time names these, which he says were received by tradition and had no
scripture to warrant them. first in baptism having showed what they professed,
and the three times dipping into the water, he adds, Inde suscepti lactis
and mellis concordiam pragustamus. Exque ea die lauacro quotidiano per totam
hebdomadam abstinemus. That is Taken from thence (he means from the water
we first taste the concord of milk and honey, and from that day we abstain
from the daily washing a whole week. Die dominico ieiunium nefas ducimus, vel
de geniculis adorare: Eadem immunitate a die paschae in Penticostem vsque
gaudemus. That is, We account it an heinous matter to fast on the Lords day, or
to worship upon the knees: by the same freedom, from Easter unto Penticost we
rejoice. And by and by after he says, Ad omnem progressum atque promotum, ad
omnem aditum, and exitu^, ad vestitu^, ad calciamentu^, ad lauacra, ad me^sas,
ad lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quacunque nos conuersatio exercet, frontem
crucis signaculo terimus. That is, At every setting forward and moving, at
every coming to, or going forth, at our appareling, and putting on our
shoes, at washing at table, at lighting the candle, at bed, at sitting,
whatsoever we are busied about, we wear our forehead with the sign of the
Cross. These superstitious observations were crept into the Church, and in the
days of Tertullian who lived not much more than two hundredth years after our
Savior Christ, received so generally, that he says they were by tradition
from the Apostles. Augustine unto Ianuarius complains that there was such a
multitude of rites or ceremonies in the Church. But what should I labor in
this point? If the Brownists will affirm that there be as great corruptions in
the worship of the Church of England, if we respect either doctrine or
ceremonies, as were in the Churches from which the Donatists did separate
themselves, they shall be convinced of gross ignorance. And if they stand in
it, they shall show themselves shameless: let the reader in the mean time but
look upon the Epistle of Master Beza before the new Testament, and see what he
affirms in this matter, how corrupt the Churches were. Then I conclude that
the Donatists separating themselves from Churches more corrupt than the Church
of England in the worship of God, as I dare stand to maintain against them: if
they deny it, may as well be excused as the Brownists, and so hitherto they
be even brethren with them, or their natural Children, no difference to be
found at all. And now touching the third and fourth pillars of Brownisme; the
Donatists cried out that the Churches had no true Ministers, but that they were
all false Prophets, Iudasses, persecutors of the just, generations of Traitors,
because as they said they had their ordination from those that were such. The
Brownists with all their might lift up their voices, and call us Baals Priests,
the marked servants of Antichrist, false Prophets, seducers and such like,
because, as they say, we are ordained by Antichristian Bishops, which exercise
a Discipline contrary to the Discipline of Christ. Here we have to consider
of two things at once the Ministers and the Discipline: let us first see what
the Donatists held against the Ministers. This was the common voice among the
Donatists, O that matters might be disputed, discussed, and scanned. But when
by the commandment of the Emperor, the conference should be holden what
miserable shifts and delays did they find out? And in the conference of the
third day, Chapt. 2. It is showed that the Donatists did accuse them as
Traitors and persecutors: and that this saying had been uttered. Indignum est
vt in vnum conueniant filij Martyrum and progenies traditorum. It is an
unworthy thing, that the sons of Martyrs, and the generations of traitors
should come together. When Augustine had said he was no traitor, Cresconius
the Donatist replieth. Sed ille qui tradidit te, creauit. Font deducitur
riuus, and caput membra sequuntur, sano capite omne sanum est corpus, and si
quid in hoc morbi vel vitij est, omnia membra debilitat, or iginem suam
respicit quicquid in stirpe processit. Non potest innocens esse qui sectam non
sequitur innocentis. But he that created thee played the Traitor, the river or
stream is derived from the Fountain, and the members follow the head. The
head being sound, the whole body is sound, and if there be any disease in
it, it weakeneth all the members. It respects it own original, whatsoever
grows out of the stock: he cannot be innocent, which follows not the sect
of the innocent. These be the words of Cresconius the Donatist, by which he
takes upon him to prove that Augustine, and all the Pastors of the Churches
had no true ordination, were not true Ministers of Christ, but the generations
of traitors: He uses as we see three similitudes. The first is to this effect,
as the river is derived from the Fountain, and must needs be such as it is,
so those that be ordained Ministers are like the stream derived from the
fountain, the ordeinors being trators, Iudasses, false prophets, persecutors;
ye ordained must needs be such also. The second is that the members do
follow the head: He that ordeineth is the head, the Ministers ordained are the
members. If the head be infected, the poison of it goes into the members, Thy
ordeinor, even thy head was a traitor, thou art then a traitor also. The third
similitude is from the stock and the branches that grow out of it: such as the
stock is, such are the branches that grow out of it. But he that ordained
thee or created thee a Minister, was a false Prophet: therefore thou art a
false prophet: for he is the stock out of which thou do grow, how can
thou but be such as the root, out of which thou do spring. The Brownists
handling this point, to prove that we be no Ministers of Christ set forth the
matter thus: your descent and pedigree is in few degrees derived from the Pope,
you being the Children of your Antichristian Bishops, which are the creatures
of the Pope, who is the eldest son of Satan, and his vicar general in
earth, whose image, mark, power, and life you bear, and together with him
grow, live, reign, stand, and fall as the branches with the Tree. This is the
eloquence of the Brownists, which differing in words, contains the same
reasons that the Donatists did use: for in stead of the Fountain and the
stream, the head and the members, they put the Fathers and the Children: for
the stock and the branches they put the Tree and the boughs which is all one:
And from the root, as it were from the Fountain and head, they derive the
life, the power and the Image, etc. Thus they agree then, that the one part
said those which ordained ye were such as sacrificed to Idols, and Traitors,
very Iudasses, you are their children and like them. The other part says,
those that ordained ye be the creatures of Antichrist, ye receive the very
life and power of your Ministry from them, ye are their Children, and so the
Children of the Pope. Now let us see the answer which Augustine makes, which
is this, In his omnibus verbis tuis creatorem meum caput meum, non fecisti nisi
traditorem, quem quidem accusare tantum, non conuincere potuisti. Ego autem nec
eius innocentiam mihi creatricem vel fontem caputue constituo. Sed tu ad illud
redis in quo Petilianus errauit, cum cuiusque in sanctificatione baptismatis
Christu^ sit orig^ caputque nascentis: and nos vis venire in maledictu^, de quo
scriptum est: maledictus omnis qui spem suam ponit in homine. That is to say,
In all these thy words thou have made my ordainer, my head, none other than a
traitor, whom thou could only accuse, but not convince. But I do not hold
his innocence to be that which has ordained me a Minister, or to be fountain
or head: but thou do return to that in which Petilian erred, when as Christ
in the sanctification of baptism is the original and the head of every one
that is borne again: and wilt have us come into the curse, of which it is
written: Cursed is every one that puts his trust in man.

Thus far Augustine, whose answer has two parts. The first is, that the
Donatists did accuse, but could not prove that the ordainers were such as in
time of persecution had yielded to sacrifice to Idols, or delivered the holy
book to the fire. The other part is, that whether he that ordained him were a
godly man or a wicked man: the matter is all one touching his ordination and
Ministry. The ordination not being man's, the innocence of man cannot be the
ordainer, it cannot be the head or fountain: neither can it make his
ordination the better. Then likewise, the wickedness of the man that
ordains, cannot be the root nor the fountain, nor the head. The men which
ordain, are not the fathers of the Ministry, because it is not theirs which
they deliver, but Christ's. That this is Augustines meaning it is clear by that
he tells Cresconius he returned to that in which Petilian erred. Petilian
denying that it was baptism that had been ministered by an ungodly man:
rendereth this reason, that every thing must have an original and an head, or
else it is nothing. Augustine repl^eth, that Christ only is the original and
the head of him that is baptized: and that the baptism being Christ's, and not
theirs that did deliver it: the goodness of the Minister made it not one jot the
better, nor the wickedness of the Minister any whit the worse. Adding moreover,
that such as take the baptism ministered by a godly man to be better in it
self, than that which is ministered by a naughty man: fall into the curse, of
which it is written, Cursed is every one that puts his trust in man. He
that hangs the matters which are Christ's upon men, puts his trust in men.
The same answer that he has made to those his Donatists of Aphrica, do we
make unto our Donatists of England. First they accuse in most bitter and
heinous manner, but shall never be able to prove their accusation: for there
is no Ministry in England ordained by the Pope or for the Pope. The Ministry
of publishing the Gospel and delivering the Sacraments is not the device of
man, but Christ's ordinance: and therefore we receive it not as theirs that
deliver it, neither does their godliness or ungodliness make it better or worse
unto us. The Ministry was not utterly destroyed in the Popery, for there
remained the Sacrament of baptism, howsoever the Catabaptists deny the same.
How much is the Ministry of Christ to be acknowledged when it is only to
that end for which he ordained it, though the men that ordain should be most
ungodly? This thing will more fully appear when we come to handle the
agreement of the Brownists with the Donatists in that rank Donatisme,
affirming it to be no Sacrament which is ministered by an open wicked man.

Thus much may suffice to show, that in denying the ministry to be Christ's,
they hold the same ground and arguments, and receive the self same answer.
And for their railing terms, as generations of traitors, seducers, false
Prophets, Iudasses, persecutors, and such like; I need not mention the
comparison of our men with them, seeing they do in this, as in one of the
chief veins of their eloquence, apparantlie excel. Their basest disciples
can cry out Antichrists, Baals Priests, false Prophets, seducers, and what
not? But it will be said, that in the matter of discipline the Donatists and
Brownists are unlike. I grant the Donatists, that ever I have read, did take
no exception that way. That is not alone in question, but whether there were
any fault, so that exception might betaken. And for this, men are to consider,
that as corruption in doctrine and ceremonies did enter betimes into the
Church, and grow a pace: so also the discipline or external government was of
many neglected, abused and corrupted. Sundry of the Pastors being proud and
ambitious, the steps were made for Antichrist to climb up, who challenged
not only an external power over all other, but also a Lordship over the
conscience. Thus much touching the first objection.

The second difference objected is, That the Donatists did condemn all
Churches in the world: The Brownists condemn but the Churches of England.
Indeed the Brownists do affirm that they be far from condemning all
churches: and so here is an apparent difference, and a great, at the first
sight, if men do not narrowly way and consider all matters. They know it is
a great prejudice unto them, if it be found that they condemn all Churches:
but we may not look upon their words of denial, but upon the consequence of
their matters. For he that shoots an arrowe at one thing and together
therewith strikes another, cannot be said not to have stricken it because he
had no such intent. So must we consider whether the dart of condemnation which
they have shot at the Church of England, do not together with the same run
through the sides of all Churches. I stand to prove it does, and so that they
are in this also full Donatists. But if they did not, yet they shall be found
thus far in Donatisme, as to condemn some Churches of Christ. My first
reason shall be from hence, that the Church of England is esteemed and
reverenced among the Churches as a sister, and communicated withal: and yet
they all know what her faults be, in her assemblies, in her worship, in her
ministry and government, in as much as they are open and apparent to them,
even as to our selves. Now, that they justify her as a true Church, we have
their own words: for the harmony of confessions of the Churches, collected and
set forth by the Churches of France and of the Low Countries, does receive
and approve the confession of the Church of England, and call it one of the
reformed Churches. Whereupon I argue thus: If the Church of England be
Antichristian, and idolatrous, and worship the beast, bow down unto him and
receive his mark, because of the government by Bishops: then the Churches
which do perfectly know the same, and yet do acknowledge her as a sister,
and communicate with her, are partakers of her sin, and so to be condemned
with her. Therefore the Brownists condemning it, condemn those that justify
it, knowing the estate. The Brownists condemn all those as persecutors of the
just, enemies of Christ, and of his kingdom, that shall hold them to be
Heretics and Schismatickes for condemning the Church of England and
separating themselves. I argue thus: All the Churches which know the Church of
England* and her form of government, and yet do love and reverence her as a
true Church of Christ, condemn those as heretical Schismatickes which call it
Antichristian and separate themselves from it. For how can the Churches as they
do esteem the Church of England as a true sister, and yet not condemn the
Brownists as wicked Schismatickes, which call it the Synagog of Satan? Then
let the Brownists show that the Churches have revoked this their former
judgment of the Church of England: or else let them answer whether they
condemn not all those as no true Christians, which shall affirm them to be
wicked Schismatickes for separating themselves from the assemblies of England:
If they will deny that the churches esteem our Church as a sister, and
therefore condemn them as ungodly Schismatickes, the matter is so clear that
all men shall see them then to be impudent. It may be some Brownist will reply,
that it cannot be extended unto all Churches a far off which is verified in
some that be nigh. Well, let us see then for the Churches a far off. Do not
the Brownists condemn the Church of Geneua? They will say no. But I say they
do. For as I said before, will they not condemn all such as do reject them
as wicked Schismatickes? This does the Church of Geneua. Which I prove thus:
In that the Church of Geneua does approve the doctrine of those that have been
and are her most learned and godly Pastors: as Master Calvin, with whom the
rest consent in doctrine. Now, touching the doctrine of Master Calvin
published, whereby he condemns the Brownists as Schismatickes, ye may read
it in fourth book of his Institutions, and the first Chapter. It is too large
to recite the whole, I will allege but some parts. Look upon the seventh
section where he says: that in the visible Church in earth, there are very
many hypocrites mingled; very many that be ambicious, covetous, envious,
cursed speakers, some of more impure life, which tolerated for a time, either
because they cannot in lawful judgment be convinced, or else because that
severity of discipline which ought to be, is not always in force. In the
ninth section he affirms, that the reason is somewhat diverse in esteeming
private men and in esteeming the churches: for it may come to pass (as he
says) that we ought to handle them as brethren, and account instead of
believers, such as we shall think utterly unworthy the fellowship of the
godly, even for the common consent of the church, by which they are tolerated
in the body of Christ. We do not approve such by our voice to be members of
the Church; but we leave unto them that place which they hold among the people
of God* until it be taken from them by lawful judgment. Then he adds, but
we must think otherwise of the multitude: which if it have the Ministry of
the Word, and give honor, if it have the Administration of the Sacraments, no
doubt it deserves to be accounted a Church: because it is certain, those
things are not without fruit: so we both keep for the Uniuersall Church her
unity, which devilish Spirits have always endeavored to cut in sunder:
neither do we defraude of their authority, the lawful assemblies which are
severed according to the fitnes of places. In the tenth section he utters
that the Lord makes so great account of the communion of his Church, that he
esteems him as a runnagate, and forsaker of religion, whosoever he be that
frowardlie shall separate himself from any Christian society, which imbraseth
but the true Ministry of the word and Sacraments. And a little after he
infers upon some ground of reason, that the departure from the Church is the
denial of God and of Christ: affirming moreover that no crime can be devised
more horrible than with sacrilegious treachery, to violate the marriage which
the Son of God has vouchsafed to contract with us. In the twelft section he
does expound what is his meaning when he requires a pure Ministry of the
word, and pure order of administering the Sacraments, as notes infallible of the
true Church. For he says there may somewhat that is faltie creep in, either
in the administration of the word, or of the Sacraments, which ought not to
separate us from the Communion of that Ministry. Because there be principles
of Religion, without which we cannot be saved, and there be points in which men
dissent, and the one part erreth, and yet the unity of faith and brotherly
love is kept: not that we are to approve the least error in doctrine, or the
sialest corruption in the administration of the Sacraments. In the thirteenth
section he says, that in tolerating the imperfection of life, we ought to be
much more favorable: for here we are upon slipperie ground where we may easily
fall. And the evil does here lie in wait, and assalt us with special
engines; for there have been always some, which being carried with a false
persuasion of an absolute perfection, as if they were now become certain ayrie
spirits despised the fellowship of all men, in whom they saw any thing that
is human or corrupt remaining. Such were of old time the Cathari, and the
Donatists which fell into the same fury: such are at this day some of the
Anabaptists which would seem to have profited more than others: There be other
some that offend rather of an inconsiderate zeal of righteousness than of that
mad pride: for while they see the life is not answerable to the holy doctrine
in bringing forth good fruit among such as have the Gospel preached, they
judge by and by that there is no Church. Then he shows further that the
offense is just, and God must needs punish that there is such wounding of weak
consciences: but in this they offend, as he says, that they know not how to
keep any measure in being offended; or omitting that clemency which the Lord
requires, they give themselves wholly unto immoderate severity. And because
they think there is no Church, where there is not sound purity and integrity
of life, through the hatred of wickedness they depart away from the lawful
Church, while they think they turn a side from the faction of the wicked.
Then he proceeds in answering their objections, they allege that the Church
of Christ is holy; he wills them also to understand by the parables in the
Gospel, that the good and the bad are mixed together. They erie out that it is
a thing intolerable that the contagious pestilence of vices does in such
violent raging sort ouerspread all, he sets before them the vices that were
in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia. They object that Paul does will we
eat not with any called a brother which is of an ungodly life. Yea here they
cry out that if it be not lawful to eat common bread with such, how should
it be lawful to eat with them the bread of the Lord? He answers that it is
a great reproach in deed, if dogs and swine be admitted to have place among
the children of God: yea it is also much greater, if the sacred body of Christ
be prostituted unto them. And where the Churches are well ordered, they do not
keep in their bosom the notorious wicked, nor admit all without difference to
that holy banquet: but the pastors are not always diligent, sometime they
favor more than they ought or be more remiss. And sometime they cannot but
are let from exercising that severity which they would. Now when the Church
cease to do her duty herein, it is not for every private man (says he) to
separate himself: every godly man is indeed to keep himself from the
fellowship of sin; but it is one thing to eschew the fellowship of sin,
and another for hatred thereof to renounce the Communion of the Church. Then
he answers further, that Saint Paul wills every one to examine himself
when he comes to eat of that bread; and if it were a wicked thing to
communicate with the unworthy, Paul would certainly have willed us to look
about least there should be some in the multitude, by whose uncleanness we
might be defiled. These things he has in the fourteenth and fifteenth
sections: in the sixteenth section having showed that the chief ringleaders in
such separation are led with pride, he wills the godly to consider that in a
great multitude there are many which are truly, holy and innocent before
the eyes of the Lord, which are hid from their sight; that of those which seem
diseased or infected, there are many which do not please or flatter
themselves in their vices, but being eftsoon awakened with an earnest fear of
God labor to amend. That they must not judge of a man for one fact: when the
holiest men do sometime fall most grieuouslie: That the Ministry of the word,
and the participation of the Sacraments, have more force to gather a Church,
than that by the fault of certain wicked men, that whole power may vanish or
come to none effect. Finally let them consider that in esteeming a Church, the
judgment of God, is of more weight and certainty, than the judgment of man.
In the eighteenth section, he sets forth how the holy Prophets of God did
not separate themselves, in those horrible and lamentable desolations which
they describe: when most of the people and the Priests themselves were openly
wicked.

Thus may we see that Master Calvin condemning the Brownists so severely by
the Scriptures, they must either revoke Brownisme in this point, that the bad
pollute the good, and therefore separation to be made, which he terms
sacrilegious treachery; or else condemn him not only with the Church of
Geneua which he taught, but also all other Churches that embrace his writings,
and acknowledge him for a noble instrument of God. Furthermore let the
Brownists show any one assembly at this day in the World, in which there be
not open sinners admitted to the Lords table, and which sin in great sins,
as either in pride, self love, ambition, covetousness, idleness, hatred, envy,
contention, backbiting, lying and in such like. They say all are polluted and
fallen away from the covenant, where any that openly sins is admitted to
the holy Communion. How can they say then that they do not condemn all
Churches under heaven? Finally when in their writings they affirm that
prescript form of prayer imposed is Idolatry, a bondage breaking christian
liberty, a thing most detestable, they do so far condemn all Churches, in
as much as there is no one which has not prescript form of Prayer imposed.
And the Brownist which has published in Print, a defense of the same,
alleges the extreme curse against those that add to Gods word Revel. 22.
and says they add which make Laws in the Church, in matters of circumstance,
or things indifferent. Which in deed all the Churches do; and therefore he
lays that extreme curse upon all the reformed Churches: let no man therefore
be so simple, as to imagine that the Brownists do condemn but the English
Churches, when their extreme severity in condemning reaches over all.

Now to the third thing objected wherein they may seem to differ from the
Donatists: namely that the Donatists did hold that the Sacraments, or the
efficacy of them does depend upon the worthiness of the minister: but the
Brownists are not of that mind. I answer that in this great and rank point
of Donatisme I can find no difference at all between them and the Brownists:
and let the words and meaning of both be scanned, and it shall appear
manifestly that they hold the self same thing, neither more nor less like
even brethren.

The Brownists affirm that we have neither word of God nor Sacraments in our
Church. But demand of them, does the Sacrament or the efficacy thereof depend
upon the worthiness of the minister? They will answer, it does not, but yet it
can be no Sacrament of Christ unless he be a minister of Christ that does
deliver it. If it be said unto them Judas was a most wicked man, and our
Savior calls him a devil yet was he a minister of Christ for the time, and
the baptism he administered as effectual as the baptism of any other. They
will reply and say, that was so because the sin of Judas was secret, they
were not polluted by his uncleanness, because they did not know it: But he that
is an open sinner cannot be a minister of Christ; and such as receive the
Sacrament at his hand, knowing his wickedness cannot but be partakers of his
sin and polluted by the same. This will they say is not to make either the
being of a Sacrament, or the efficacy thereof to depend upon a man, but upon
Gods ordinance that he be a minster that deliver it. I will not deny that he
must be a minister that does deliver it: And I say withal that although the
Donatists may seem by some of their speeches to hold a further thing touching
this matter, yet lay al their sayings together, and it is manifest they held,
that where the sin was secret in him that did administer, the Sacrament
delivered by him was effectual, notwithstanding he were never so wicked
inwardly: but if his sin were open, he was no minister, and so no Sacrament,
but the party that communicates with him is polluted by him.

Potilian the Donatist Bishop in the beginning of his epistle denying that they
did rebaptize, but that such as were baptized in the Churches were not baptized
at all, before they baptized them, for confirmation uses this saying,
Conscie^tia namque dantis attenditur, quae abluat accipientis. For the
conscience of him that gives is attended, which may wash the conscience of him
that receives. Further he says, Qui fidem a perfido sumpserit, non fidem
percipit sed reatum. He that will take faith of the faithless, receives not
faith but guiltines. And rendering a reason for confirmation he says, Omnis
enim res origin et radice consistit: and si caput non habet aliquid, nihil
est. For every thing does consist of an original and root: and if any thing
have not a head; it is nothing. Augustine answers to these sayings of
Petilian, demanding first, what if the conscience of him that gives be secret,
and perhaps unclean, how can it wash the conscience of him that receives? For
if the Donatist shall say it apperteineth not to the receiver, whatsoever evil
lie hid in the conscience of the giver, that ignorance perhaps shall be of this
force, that unwittingly he cannot be defiled by the conscience of him that
baptizeth him: let it suffice therefore that the defiled conscience of an other
while it is not known does not pollute, yet will they say it shall also wash?
From whence is he washed then that receives baptism of one that has a
polluted conscience, and he does not know so much? Seeing he says, he that
will take faith of him that is faithles, does not receive faith, but guiltines.
Behold a faithles man does stand to baptize, but he that is to be baptized does
not know his unfaithfulness, what do thou think he shall receive, faith or
guiltines? If the Donatist say, he receives faith, then he infers, that it
is granted it may come to pass, that a man may receive faith and not
guiltines from an unfaithful man, and so the former saying is false. But if the
Donatist should answer, he receives guiltines: then he says the Donatists
should baptize those again which were baptized among themselves by wicked men,
whose wickedness was secret at such time as they did baptize, but afterward
they were be^raied, convict, and condemned. I say then it is manifest by the
practice of the Donatists, in not baptizing again any of those which had been
among them baptized by their own Ministers whom they esteemed godly, but
afterward were disclosed to be rank hypocrites, and so they condemned and cast
them forth, that their judgment was, that he was a Minister of Christ, though
a reprobate touching his own person, and the Sacrament delivered by him a true
Sacrament, so long as his wickedness say hid from the knowledge of men:
howsoever the reasons of Petilian which he uttered in the rash heat of his
fury, may seem to stretch further. And where as Augustine answering to ye
rest of the words says: Quapropter sieve a fideli, sieve a perfido dispensatore
Sacramentum baptismi quisque percipiat, spes ei omnis in Christo sit, ne sit
maledictus qui spem suam ponit in homine. Alioquin si talis quisque in gratia
spirituali renascitur, qualis est ille a quo baptizatur, and cum manifestus est
qui baptizat homo bonus, ipse dat fidem, ipse origo and radix, caputque
nascentis est: cum autem latet perfidus baptizator, tunc quisque a Christo
percipit fidem, tunc a Christo ducit originem, tunc in Christoradicatur, tunc
Christo capite gloriatur: laborandum est omnibus qui baptizantur vt
baptizatores perfidos habeant, and ignorent eos. That is to say: Wherefore
whosoever receives the Sacrament of baptism, whether it be of a faithful,
or whether it be of an unfaithful dispensor, let all his hope be in Christ,
least he be accursed as one that puts his trust in man. Otherwise if every
one that is borne in spiritual grace be such an one, as he is by whom he is
baptized: and when he that baptizeth is manifest a good man, he gives faith,
he is the original, the root and the head of him that is new borne: but when
he that baptizeth is unfaithful being not known so to be, then every one
receives faith of Christ, takes original from Christ, is rooted in Christ
and glories in Christ his head: then all men are to endeavor which are
baptized, that they may have unfaithful baptizers, so they know them not to
be such. His reason is, that when the man that baptizeth is secretly wicked,
it is most absurd to say his conscience baptizeth, or that he is the root or
head of him that is regenerate, and therefore the Donatists confessing such to
be truly baptized, he says it must needs then be Christ that does baptize.
And thereupon infers, that this absurdity must needs follow, which is
most foolish to believe, that it is better to be baptized of a secret wicked
man, than of the best manifest godly man, because Christ is incomparably
better than the best men. Wherefore he wishes them to confess whether the
Minister be good or bad, it is Christ alone that does baptize, that gives
faith, that is the root and the head. It will now be said, that by this it
appears the Donatists did ascribe all to the man, if he were godly. Let us
see therefore what they answer. Cresconius taking upon him to defend the
saying of Petilian, in this that the conscience of the giver does wash the
conscience of the receiver: and Augustine demanded, what if the giver be of a
defiled conscience, and secret? Cresconius answers: Conscientia dantis
attenditur, non secundum eius synceritatem, quae in illa videri non potest, sed
secundum famam quae de illa seu vera, seu falsa est: quia videlicet eius est
hominis, qui and si sceleratus occultus sit, sufficit accipienti, quod bonae
sit existimationis nondum cognitus, nondum iudicatus, nondum ab ecclesia
separatus. That is, The conscience of the giver is attended, not according to
the synceritie thereof, which in it cannot be seen, but according to the fame
which is of it whether true or false: that is to say, because it is of that
man, who though he be secretly wicked, it is sufficient for the receiver, that
he is of good estimation, not yet known, not yet judged, not yet separate from
the Church. Book. 2. Chapt. 17. This blind shift had Cresconius alleged to
avoid those former absurdities, and fell into as great that false fame does
baptize. By which it appears that the whole matter of the Donatists opinion
rested in this, that an open wicked man only did not, or could not baptize.
Cresconius calls upon Augustine thus: Responde quomodo baptizent quos
damnauit ecclesia? Answer how they can baptize whom the Church has condemned?
Augustine does answer: Sic eos baptizare, quomodo baptizant quos damnanit
Deus, antequam de illis quicquam iudicaret ecclesia. That they baptize as those
do whom GOD has condemned, before the Church has judged any thing of them.
And seeing the secret wicked man is condemned already by Christ, and the
Church is subject to Christ: he infers, Non igitur debet ecclesia se
Christo praeponere, vt putet baptizare posse ab illo iudicatos, a se autem
iudicatos baptizare non posse, cum ille semper veraciter iudicet, ecclesiastici
autem Iudices sicut homines plerunque falluntur. Therefore the Church ought not
to prefer her self before Christ, as to think that such as are condemned by
him can baptize, but such as are condemned by her cannot baptize, when he
always judges truly, where the ecclesiastical Judges as men are oftentimes
deceived. Hereupon he concludes, Baptizant ergo quantum attinet ad visibile
ministerium, and boni, and mali, inuisibiliter autem per eos baptizat, cuius
est and visibile baptisma, and inuisibilis gratia. Tingere ergo possunt and
boni and mali, abluere autem conscientiam non nisi ille, qui semper est bonus.
Therefore both the good and the bad do baptize in as much as appertains to
the visible ministry, but invisibly by them does he baptize whose is both
the visible baptism, and also the invisible grace. Both the good then and the
bad may dippe them in the water, but to wash the conscience, there can none but
he which is always good. Book. 2. Chapt. 21. Cresconius proceeds,
demanding what can be uttered more wicked than this, Vt purificet aliu^
maculosus, abluat sordidus, emundet immundus, det infidelis fidem, criminosus
faciat innocentem. That he which is spotted should purify another, he that is
foul should wash, he that is unclean should cleanse, that an Infidel should
give faith, that he which is criminous should make another innocent? Book. 3.
Chapt. 5. Augustine answers: Nec maculosus, nec sordidus, nec immundus, nec
infidelis, nec criminosus est Christus, qui dilexit ecclesiam and seipsum
tradidit pro ea, mundans eam lauacro aquae in verbo, faciens nos certos de
bonis suis, ne malis viciaremur alienis. Christ is not spotted, nor foul, nor
unclean, nor an infidel, nor criminous which has loved his Church and given
himself for it cleansing it by the lauer of water through the word, making us
sure of his good things, that we cannot be defiled with the evil of other men.

But now to come to a more clear opening of this matter, whereas Petilian had
said that every thing consists of an original and root, and if any thing
have not an head it is nothing: and the answer was made, that Christ is the
original, the root and the head of him that is baptized: and that he is
accursed which puts his trust in man. Cresconius does reply, as Augustine
reports his words, Hoc and nos suademus and volumus, vt semper Christus det
fidem, Christus sit origo Christiani, in Christo radicem Christianus infigat,
Christus Christiani sit caput. Non quaerimus hominem in quo spem constituat
accepturus, sed quaerimus per quem hoc melius fiat? Et quia sine ministro nec
vos dicitis hominem posse baptizari, quaerimus vtrumne melius iniustus sit
minister, an iustus? This also (says the Donatists) we will and persuade,
that Christ always gives faith, Christ is the original of a Christian, in
Christ the Christian must fix his root, that Christ is the head of the
Christian, we seek not a man in whom he that is to be baptized may set his
hope, but we seek by whom this may better be done. And because you also say a
man cannot be baptized without a minister, we demand whether is the better,
that the minister be unjust, or that he be just. Book 3. chapt. 6, 7, and 8.
Augustine replieth. Vbi respondeo, ad hoc esse melius, vt sit iustus minister,
quod infirmitas hominis, cui sine exemplo laboriosum est and difficile quod
imperat Deus, imitatione boni ministri ad vitam bonam facilius erigatur. Vnde
dicit Apostolus Paulus, imitatores mei estote, sicut and ego Christi. ad
hominem vero baptizandum, and sanctificandum, si tantoest melius quod
accipitur, quanto est melior per quem traditur: tanta est in accipientibus
baptismorum varietas, quanta in ministris diuersitas meritorum. Si enim, quod
sine controuersia creditur, melior erat Paulus quam Apollo, meliorem baptismum
profecto dedit, secundum istam vestram vanam peruersamque sententiam. Et si
meliorem baptismum dedit, profecto eis quos a se non baptizatos gratulatur
inuidit. Porro si interbonos ministros, cum sit alius alio melior, non est
melior baptismus qui per meliorem datur, nullo modo est malus qui etiam per
malum datur, quando idem baptismus datur, and ideo per ministros dispares, Dei
munus aequale est, quia non illorum, sed eius est. Where I answer (says
Augustine) That in this respect it is better, that the minister be godly,
because the infirmity of man, to whom without an example it is labor some
and difficult to do that which God commands, may more easily by the
imitation of a good minister be raised up and supported unto good life.
Whereupon the Apostle Paul says, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.
But for the Baptizing, and sanctifying a man, If it be so much better which is
received, as he is better, by whom it is delivered: then there is as great
variety of Baptismes in the receivers, as there is diversity of worthiness in
the ministers. For if Paul were better than Apollo, which is believed without
controversy, then he verelie, according to that your vain and perverse
sentence, gave a better baptism. And if he delivered a better baptism,
doubtless he envied those for whom he is glad that they were not baptized by
him. Moreover if it be so, that among the good Ministers, when one is better
than another, the baptism is not better which is delivered by the better, it
is by no mean evil when it is given by a naughty man, seeing the same
baptism is delivered. And therefore by unequal Ministers, the gift of God is
equal, because it is his, and not theirs. Thus far Augustine. It is apparent
enough by that which I have already cited, what the Donatists meant in denying
it to be Baptism which was administered by an open wicked man: and requiring
for the truth and efficacy of Baptism, that it should be administered by a
godly man, or at the least by a man godly in show: but yet I will add
somewhat more. Petilian replying upon Augustine with great railing, said also
that those absurdities which he gathered were his own. book 3. chap. 45. And
whereas Augustine had demanded, what if the conscience of him that delivers
be unclean and secret, what does wash (if any thing be to be that way
regarded in man)? he answers it is as to say, Quid si nunc coelum ruat? What
if the sky should now fall? Moreover he says that two words of his were omitted
by Augustine, in his two sayings: the one is, the conscience of him that
gives, where he says his words were sancte dantis, of him that gives
holilie: The other, he that will take faith of an unfaithful man, he
receives not faith but guiltines: where he says this word sciens, was
omitted: which is knowing. So that howsoever Petilian seemed in his heat to
utter otherwise, he will have this to be his meaning, that he which receives
Baptism of a Minister whom he knows to be a wicked man, because his sins
are open, he receives not Baptism, but pollution and guiltines, by
Communicating with him. book 3. Chapter 31. Again, where Petilian and the
rest affirmed, that he which is Baptized of one that is dead, his washing
does not profit him, he means by one that is dead, not the secret wicked,
nor yet the open sinner, until the Church have condemned him Book 1. Chap.
10. Parmenian that Donatist Bishop, to prove that it was no Baptism which was
ministered by an open wicked man, alleges that the wicked which sacrifices a
sheep, is as he that cutteth off the head of a dog; and the sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord. Esaias. 66. And that the man which had any
blemish, or spot in him should not come to offer as a Priest to the Lord Leuit.
21. And that God hears not sinners. John. 9. As Augustine reports against
Parmenian Book 2. Chapt. 6, 7, 8. Where Augustine answers, Vnicuique
retribuit Deus secundum cor suum. Nam si primis temporibus non obfuerunt mali
sacerdotes, vel collegis bonis, sicut fuit Zacharias: vel popularibus, sicut
fuit Nathaniel in quo dolus non erat, quanto magis nihil obest in Christiana
vnitate Episcopus malus, vel coepiscopis vel lucis bonis, cum iam ille sacerdos
in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech and pontifex noster sedens ad dextram
patris, interpellat pro nobis, etc. God renders unto every one according to
his heart. For if in the first times, the naughty Priests did not hurt either
their fellows which were good, such as was Zachary: or any of the people,
such as was Nathaniel, in whom was no guile. How much more does an evil Bishop
in the Christian unity, nothing hurt, either his fellow Bishops being good,
or any of the laietie? when now that Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, even our high Priest, sitting at the right hand of the Father,
makes intercession for us, etc. Dicant ergo mihi, cui sancto secundum salutem
spiritualem obfuerit vel in sacerdotibus, vel inter populum constituto, malus
aut maculatus sacerdos? Let them show unto me therefore which holy one either
of the Priests or among the people, an evil and spotted Priest did hurt
touching spiritual salvation. Where was Moses and Aaron, there were the wicked
murmurers: where was Caiphas and other such like, there were Zachary, Symeon
and other godly ones: where Saul was, there was David; where Esaias, Jeremy,
Ezechiel, and Daniel were, there were the wicked Priests, and naughty people.
Sed sarcinam suam vnusquisque portabat. But every one did bear his own
burden. And having showed that the words of Balaam a wicked man were heard of
God for the people, he adds, Vnde non mirum est, verba bona quae propopulo
dicu^tur in precibus, etiam si a malis dicantur episcopis, exaudiri tamen, non
pro peruersitate praepositorum, sed pro deuotione populorum. From whence it is
no marvel, that good words which are uttered in prayer for the people are
heard, though they be uttered by naughty Bishops, not for the peruersenes of
the guides, but for the devotion of the people. No man can take any thing unless
it be given him from above; Petilian says thereupon: Doce igitur traditor
simulandi mysteria quando acceperis potestatem, Show therefore thou Traitor,
when thou did receive the power of counterfaiting the mysteries. Book 2.
Chapter. 31. He terms it a counterfaiting, or faining of the sacraments when
they be ministered by one that is openly wicked, because he holds, that God
never authorized any such to deliver them. And what is the whole pith of
Brownists touching this point, when they cry out that we have no word of God,
nor Sacraments, but even the very same that the Donatists held, namely that
if he be openly wicked, because God commands there should be no such in the
Ministry, he has no authority to Baptize, and so it is no Sacrament which
is delivered by them? The Brownists affirm that the efficacy is of God, the
faith is of God, the grace is of God alone, but God bestows these by such
only as be his true Ministers, and those are none that be openly wicked. The
Donatists did affirm nothing but the very same: For Augustine thus rehearses
the words of Cresconius, Ideo magis te dicis iustum and fidelem, per quem hoc
sacramentum celebretur inquirere, quia spem and fiduciam Dei non hominis habes:
Dei esse autem fidem atque iustitiam, quam semper in ministris eius attendis.
Thou say that because thy hope and confidence is in God and not in man, thou
do so much the rather seek for one that is just and faithful by whom this
Sacrament may be celebrated: and that the faith and righteousness is of God,
which thou do attend in his Ministers. Book 3. Chap. 9. I hold him
therefore a very sharp discerner, which waying thoroughly all the sayings of
the Donatists, shall be able in this point of hanging the being and efficacy
of the Sacraments, upon the worthiness of the Ministers, to show any small
difference between the Brownists and them. Yea but herein they may seem to
differ very much, that the Donatists did rebaptize, but the Brownists do not.
In deed herein I confess they differ, but yet so that in this difference the
Brownists are the grosser, if we may reason from that which they hold: for if
this were true, which the Brownists affirm most stiffelie to be true, as the
Donatists did before them, that where an open wicked man does administer the
Sacraments they be no Sacraments at all. And if this also were as true, which
they both have taken upon them to justify, the Donatists of old saying, they
had no true Sacraments in the Churches, and the Brownists that we have none
now: It must needs be granted that the Donatists did the better of both, in
baptising those which were not before baptized: for he that is not baptized
ought to be baptized. And as no uncircumcised might eat of the Passover, but
was to be cut off from the people of GOD: so no unbaptized is to eat at the
table of the Lord. How gross are the Brownists which take it as a thing
undoubted that we have no Sacraments, and must needs thereupon be assured that
they themselves were never baptized, and so can be but as an heap of
uncircumcised, and yet seek not to have the Sacrament? I would have them
answer this question, whether a man that knows he was never baptized, can be
saved, if he seek not to be baptized, when he may come by it? Let no man
imagine that I speak this as though the Brownists should do well in
rebaptizing, for their former ground is false, wicked and heretical, when they
say it is no Sacrament that has been administered by open offenders: and that
we have no Sacraments. But if that were true which they hold, they should do
much better, I will not say to rebaptize, but to baptize such as were not
before baptized.

Now, where it is generally objected, that the Donatists perhaps held diverse
things which the Brownists do not. I answer, that the Donatists indeed held
somewhat which the Brownists do not, and the Brownists hold something which
they did not. For some of the Donatists did cast themselves down from high
places, and into the fire, accounting them holy Martyrs that so died, and
others defended their doing. For thus says Gaudentius a Donatist Bishop in his
Epistle, An ista persecutio est, quae tot milliq innocentum martyrum arctauit
ad mortem? Christiani enim secundum euangelium spiritu prompti, sed carne
infirmi a sacrilega contaminatione caminorum reperto compendio suas animas
rapuerunt, imitati presbyteri Raziae in Machabaeorum libris exemplum, nec
frustra timentes: quisquis enim eorum manus inciderit, non euasit: sed quantum
velint faciant, quod certum est, dei esse non possunt qui faciunt contra Deum.
Whether is that a persecution (says he) which has pent up in a straight so
many thousands of innocent martyrs even unto death? For Christians according
to the Gospel, being ready in spirit, but weak in the flesh, finding out a
compendious way of their chimneyes, have delivered their souls from the
sacrilegious pollution, imitating the example of old Razia in the books of
the Machabees, not fearing without cause: for whosoever falls into their
hands, does not escape: but let them do as much as they will, that which is
certain, they cannot be of God, which do against God. book 2. against
Gaudent. Chapt. 20. Augustine shows, that Gaudentius meaning was not that
they burnt themselves in their chimneys for fear of persecution unto death,
for the civil Magistrate did not so persecute them, having made a law against
them for banishment, but not for death: as Augustine shows book 2. against
Gaudentius chap. 11. Mitiora in vos constituit Imperator propter mansuetudinem
Christianam: exilium vobis voluit infer, non mortem. The Emperor has
decreed more gentle things against ye through Christian mildnes: he would lay
banishment upon ye and not death. But his meaning is that such as fell into
their hands were drawn to join with them in worship, which he calls the
sacriligious defilement. And therefore does abuse that place of the Gospel, to
color such horrible murdering of themselves, the spirit is ready but the
flesh is weak: for fearing least through weakness they should yield to join
with the Churches, they rather chose to kill themselves. This the Brownists do
not: but they condemn read prayer, or praying after any prescript form of
words which the Donatists did not, as may be gathered by these words of
Petilian: Si p^ecem domino facitis, aut funditis orationem, nihil vobis penitus
prodest. Vestras enim debiles preces cruenta vestra conscientia vacuat, quia
dominus deus puram magis conscientiam quam preces exaudit, domino Christ
dicente, non omnis qui dicit mihi domine, domine, intrabit in regnum coelorum,
sed is qui facit voluntatem patris mei qui est in coelis. Voluntas dei vtique
bona est, nam ideo in sacra oratione sic petimus, fiat voluntas tua sicut in
coelo, and in terra. If ye make prayer to the Lord (says the Donatist) or
power forth supplication, it does profit ye nothing at al, for your bloody
conscience does make your weak prayers of none effect, because the Lord God
does rather hear a pure conscience than prayers, the Lord Jesus saying, that
not every one that says unto me Lord Lord shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. The will of
God is good, for therefore in the holy prayer we pray thus, thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven. Thus we see that the Donatist denying that any
prayed but they, shows with all that praying they used the Lords prayer.

But what do I stand to seek differences between them, which can hardly be
found: whereas indeed whole books do set forth at large their agreement. I
will therefore proceed further to declare in particulars touching the power of
Christian Princes, in reforming the Church, in establishing religion, and in
punishing heretics, schismatickes, and disturbers, and in compelling their
subjects to the obedience of the truth, or to embrace the true worship, how
injuriously Brown has dealt in his book, and the Brownists that have
written since, I have laid open in my former book, let their sayings be
thoroughly perused, and now shall ye seee a little whether they be not the
very natural children of the Donatists in this point also. Thus writes
Gaudentius a Donatist Bishop: Per opificem rerum omnium dominum Christum
omnipotens deus frabricatum hominem vt deo similem, libero demisit arbitrio.
Scriptum est enim, fecit deus hominem and dimisit eum in manu arbitrij sui.
Quid mihi nunc humano imperio eripitur quod largitus est deus? Aduerte vir
sum quanta in deum sacrilegia perpetrentur, vt quod ille tribuit auferat
humana praesumptio, and pro deo se inaniter iactet magna iniuria dei, si ab
hominibus defendatur. Quid de deo aestimat qui eum violentia vult defendere,
nisiquia non valet suas ipse iniurias vindicare? God almighty (says this
Donatist) by the maker of all things the Lord Christ, left man to his own
free will being created as in the likeness of GOD. For it is written, God made
man and left him in the power of his own will. Why should that be plucked
from me by humane authority, which GOD has bestowed upon me? Mark most
worthy man, how great sacrileges are committed against God, that humane
presumption should take that away which he has given, and vainly boast it
self for God with great injury to God, if he must be defended by men. What
does he esteem of God, which will defend him with violence, but that he is not
able to revenge the injuries done unto him? In what sense this Donatist spoke
thus, may best appear by the answer of Augustine. Secundum illas vestras
fallacissimas vanissimasque rations, babenis laxatis atque dimissis, humanae
licentiae impunita peccata omnia relinquentur nullis oppositis repagulis legum,
nocendi audacia, and lasciuiendi libido bacchetur, non rex suum regnum, non dux
militem, non prouincialem iudex, non dominus seruum, nec pater filium a
liberate and suauitate peccandi minis vllis paenisue compescat. Auferte quod
sana doctrina pro sanitate orbis terrarum sapienter per Apostolorum dicit, and
vt confirmetis in arbitrio tanto peiore quanto liberiore filios perditionis,
delete quod ait vas electionis, omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus, subdita
sit: non est enim potestas nisi a deo. Quae autem a deo sunt, ordinata sunt.
Quapropter qui resistit potestati, dei ordinationi resistit. Qui autem
resistunt, ipsi sibi iudicium acquirunt. Principes enim non sunt timori boni
operis, sed mali. Vis autem non timere potestatem? Fac bonum, and habebis
laude^ ex illa. Dei enim minister est, vindex in iram ei qui male agit. Delete
ista si potestis, aut ista, sicut facitis, si non potestis delere, co^temnite.
Habete de his omnibus pessimum arbitriu^, ne perdatis liberu^ arbitriu^, aut
certe quia sicut homines hominibus erubescitis, clamate si audetis, punia^tur
homicidia, puniantur adulteria, puniantur caetera qua^talibet sceleris, sieve
libidinis facinora seu flagitia. sola sacrilegia volumus a regnantiu^ legibus
impunita. An vero aliud dicitis, cu^ dicitis, magna dei iniuria si ab hominibus
defendatur. Quid de deo aestimat qui eu^ viole^tia vult defendere, nisi quia
no^ valet suas ipse iniurias vindicare? Haec dicentes, quid aliud dicitis, nisi
nulla hominis potestas co^tradicat atque obstrepat nostro libero arbitrio,
quando iniuriam facimus deo. That is, According to these your most deceiuable
and most vain reasons, the raines being let loose to humane licentiousnes, all
sins shall be let go unpunished, no bars of laws opposed, the boldness to
hurt, and lust of rioting shall rage every where, the King shall not with any
threatenings or penalties restrain his kingdom, nor the Captain the soldier,
nor the Judge any of his circuit, nor the master his servant, nor the father
his son from the liberty and sweetness of sinning. Take away that which sound
doctrine, for the health of the world says wisely by the Apostle, and that ye
may confirm the children of perdition in a will, by how much the more free, by
so much the worse, blot out that which the elect vessel says; Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God. The
powers that be are ordained of God. Wherefore he that resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. For Princes are not a terror for well doing but for
evil. Will thou not fear the power? Do well and thou shall have praise of
it: for he is the minister of God for wrath to take vengeance upon the evil
doer. Blot out these things if ye can, or else as ye do, despise these
things, because ye cannot blot them out. Have a will concerning al these
things most evil, that ye may not lose your free will. Or verily, because as
men ye are ashamed before men, cry out if ye dare, let murderers be punished,
let adulteries be punished, let other whatsoever enormities and heinous deeds
of wickedness and lust be punished, we will that only sacrilegies go unpunished
by the laws of princes. Do ye say any other thing, when ye say, it is great
injury to God, that he should be defended by men? What does he esteem of God
which will defend him with violence, but that he is not able to revenge the
injuries done to him? saying these things, what other thing say ye* but that
no power of man must gainsay or mutter against our free will when we do
injury to God? Thus far Augustine? But let us see further what Gaudentius
says, Sed belliferae pacis cruentaeque vnitatis se incolas iactant, audiant
Dominum dicentem, pacem meam do vobis, pacem relinquo vobis: non sicut seculum
dat, ego do vobis. Seculi enim pax inter animos gentium dissidentes armis and
belli exitu foederatur: domini Christi pax, salubri lenitate tranquilla,
volentes inuitat non cogit inuitos. But they boast themselves (says the
Donatist) as inhabitants of warring peace, and bloody unity. Let them hear
the Lord, saying, My peace I give unto ye, my peace I leave unto ye: not as
the world gives, do I give. For the peace of the world, when the minds of the
Nations are at discord, is couenanted or established with armor and event of
war: The peace of the Lord Christ being calm with healthful lenity
inuiteth the willing, compels not the unwilling. This Donatist adds, Ad
docendum populum Israel omnipotens Deus prophetis praeconium dedit, non regibus
imper auit. Saluator animarum Dominus Christus, ad insinuandam fidem,
piscatores, non milites misit. To teach the people of Israel almighty God gave
prophets to preach, he enjoined not Kings. The savior of Souls the Lord
Christ, to insinuate faith sent fishers and not Soldiers. Book 2. against
Gaudentius chapt. 11. 16. 26.

Let us see also what Petillian that other Donatist Bishop says, book 2.
against him Chapter 78. Charitas non persequitur non aduersus caeteras animas
Imperatores inflammat. Charity does not persecute it does not inflame or kindle
the wrath of rulers against others. This was the out-crie of the Donatists
against the godly teachers of the churches when the Emperors made any laws to
drive them from their madness, that they had inflamed the rulers to persecute
them. Jesus Christus it a sidem vener at facere, non vt cogeret homines, sed
potius inuitaret. Jesus Christ came so to work faith, not that he might
compel men, but rather inuit them. Quodsi cogi per legem aliquem vel ad bona
licuisser, vosipsi miseri a nobis ad sidem purissimam cogi debuistis. Sed
absit, absit a nostra conscientia, vt ad nostram sidem aliquem compellamus. If
it were lawful (says this Donatist) that any should by the Law be
compelled, yea even unto good things, you wretches ought to be compelled by
us, to the most pure faith: but far be it, far be it, from our conscience,
that we should compel any unto our faith. chapt. 83. Quid vobis est cum
regibus seculi quos nunquam Christianit as nisi inuidos sensit? What have you
to do with the Kings of the World which the Christianity has never felt but
envious against it? Chapter. 92. Compare now the doctrine of our Brownists and
their sayings with these former of the Donatists, and see if there be any
difference? They say Princes are not to make Laws for Church matters, Princes
are not to reform the Church by their authority: Princes are not to compel
their subjects to the true worship of God by penalties: If Princes pleasures
are to be attended, where is the persecution we speak of? None of the godly
Kings of Judea durit compel any to the covenant. The people of Christ's
Kingdom are spontanes, such as come of their own free accord, etc. It were
too long and tedious, to set forth all the outcries of the Donatists, their
glorying in suffering persecutions for the truth, their accusations against
the pastors of Christ's Church and the Princes while they sought to restrain
their fury, the one by Gods word, the other by laws; that they persecuted,
and therefore could not be the true Church which as they say is persecuted, but
never persecuteth: read the epistle of Parmenian, of Petilian, and of
Cresconius. The Brownists are not behind them an intch in this matter, but
cry out as fast of Antichristian persecutors, boasting of their patience and
sufferings, calling themselves the persecuted remnant, the poor afflicted,
etc. Aug. answers those Donatists at large, I will recite but a little. Cum
phreneticus medicum vexet, and medicus phreneticum liget, aut ambo inuicem
persequuntur, aut si persecutio quae malo sit, non est, non vtiq, persequitur
medicus phreneticum, sed phreneticus medicum. When the man that is in frenzy
does vex the physician, and the physician does bind him that is in frenzy,
either both do persecute each other, or else if that be not a persecution
which is done to the evil, then verelie the physician does not persecute the
phrantick or mad man, but the phrantick or mad man does persecute the
physician. Against Cresconius Book 4. Chapter. 51. his application is that the
penal Laws of the Princes were as the bands of the Physician to bind the
Frenzy and furious outrage of the Donatists. And whereas they boasted of
patience, and would compel none. He answers, that because they be not able
to resist so many nations which were Catholic, they gloried of patience, that
they compelled none to their part. He then adds, Isto modo and miluus cum
pullos rapere territus non potuerit, co lu^bum se nominet. After the same sort
the Puttocke when he is fraid and can not snatch away the chickens, may name
himself a Dove. For he does demand of them what they have not done which they
were able? When Julian the Apostata being Emperor, and envying the peace of
Christ, showed them favor, and granted to them Churches, what slaughters they
committed? Likewise he shows in many places what revel their circumcellions
made, which in companies walking with clubbes and staves did spoil, and beat
such as light into their hands, using moreover a savage cruelty in putting
vinegar and lime into men's eyes when they had beaten them. And verily what is
it which men of exceeding intemperate heat will not do, if it be once in
their power against such as they shall judge to be but as vile Idolaters and
persecutors of Christ's truth.

The impatient heat of most Brownistes is not unknown, but when the Kites for
fear can not snatch up the Chickens, must profess the mekenes of Doves; as to
say wear Christ's poor afflicted servants, we be meek and patient, we bear
the cross. Where it is taught that private men are authorized to deal, and
fury abounds, which things are among the Brownistes: who is able to express
the tragedies that would ensue, if power were not wanting in the^: the Princes
may not stop their course, and who shall then resist? The Donatists abusing
the scriptures in their plentiful allegations, and finding that their
grosenesse was detected much by the skill of arts, found fault that any thing
should be scanned by the rules of Logike. The Brownistes are even with them, if
not beyond. In his first book against Cresconius Chap. 14: Augustine reports
the words of that Donatist thus: Vestros Episcopos laudas quod nobiscum velut
dialecticis nolint habere sermonem. Thou do commend your Bishops, that
they refuse to have speech or conference with us as being Logicians. He
answers at large in showing what Logic is, and the worthy and necessary
use thereof in discussing matters of religion. Brown in the preface of his
book which (he says) shows the life and manners of Christians, calls
them sophistical divines which deal by the rules of Logic. The Brownistes
with whom I deal, charge the students of the Universities, as trained up in
vain and curious Arts. And what other cause shall ever be showed of so
barbarous an error, but that they would not have their matters tried by the
rules which make manifest which is truth, and which is falsehoode. Thus have I
briefly laid open that the whole Donatisme is maintained by the Brownistes,
and therefore I have rightly termed them the Donatistes of England.

An answer to Master Greenewood, touching read prayer.
MAster Greenewood in the preface of his book, does show, that the reasons
spread abroad in writing against read prayer were his, which I did not know
before now, and therefore be takes upon him the defense of them. He would
seem to have found out such a deapth of spiritual wisdom touching the holy
exercise of prayer, and so reprooueth the grosenes of this age, that we must
esteem him for the abundance of spirit, as an other Montanus. For whereas he
seems to charge this age only as gross in this point, in very deed he
accuses all ages, all Churches, and all the learned teachers that have been
since the Apostles; so that in the gifts of the spirit he excels all. He
says he could yet never see it set down, which is the true prayer that
only pleases God. It is a strange thing he has never heard, that whosoever
asks in faith, whether it be with prescript form, or otherwise it is the
only true prayer that pleases God. He says I have flien upon him with
bitterness of spirit and carnal wisdom, loding him and the faithful with
opprobrious titles. It is to no purpose that I should answer again with words,
but when men shall once see thoroughly into the fowlnes and dangers of
Brow^isme, and what filthy gear they spread abroad, they will th^nke it
requisite and necessary to call a spade, a spade: Donatisme must be called
Donatisme, schism must be called schism, and heresies and fantasies must
have their due titles. And now touching the defense he makes, it is nothing
but certain rags which he peeceth together to cover his nakedness, which also
must be plucked from him. It seems he does trust to the ignorance, or rashness
of some, which either cannot, or will not examine things aright.

God is a spirit, and to be worshipped in spirit. I did and do confess, yt
this scripture does cut down all carnal worship, as disagreeing from the
nature of God: and therefore may most fitly be alleged against such as shall
maintain that the very bodily action in reading is the worship of God. But
it is frivolous to apply it against praying after a prescript form: seeing a
man may upon a book pray reading or after a prescript form with sighs and
groans which proceed of faith. Master Greenewood terms this a bodily
distinction. Doubtless if it be a bodily distinction to affirm that the very
bodily action of reading a prayer is not the worship of God (which we
maintain against the Papists in their lip labor) I know not what Master
Greenwood will allow to be spiritual. What manner of spirit is his? But now
that he will put away all my distinctions by his affirming still (for those be
his words) and what? Even the whole matter in question between us: who cannot
see what a valiant champion he is, for how falselie he says he has proved,
shall appear? Then having stoutly affirmed that which is in question, he
says, and yet say you to apply this scripture thus against read prayer is
frivolous. How comes in this word (yet)? Does it follow that I do not well in
saying so, notwithstanding you affirm the contrary: but you have a reason of
great force, which is in these words, I appeal to all men's consciences for the
weight thereof. Shall the consciences of all men be made judge whether that
scripture be rightly applied? Nay, I appeal from the consciences of the
Brownists. Now in the next words where I affirmed that a man may pray by the
Spirit of GOD, with sighs and groans upon a book, or when he prays after
a prescript form, and therefore the application of that scripture is
frivolous, his shifts are as slender. For touching this clause, that I say,
(or after a prescript form) he says, I go about to alter the question at the
first step. For as much as all our prayers ought to be uttered after a
prescript form, even that perfect rule and form our Savior gave to his
disciples and all posterities. A great piece of work. By uttering after a
prescript form, I mean when a man has learned a prayer either of the
scripture, or framed from thence, and can utter it without the book, as it is
written.

And whereas it can not be denied, but that many do pray fervently with sighs
and groans and tears, which read the prayer upon the book, or have it as we
use to say, by heart: He answers that I beg the question. If a man do prove
the cause by the effects, which I do here, it is no begging of the question,
but a firm proof. Where any thing is burnt, there has been fire. Where
there be sighs and groans in prayer with inward comfort, there is faith, there
is Gods spirit, but these are in some that read their prayers upon the book,
or use prescript form.

Master Greenewood thinks he has disputed subtillie, and covered himself,
when he can say, ye alter the question, ye beg the question, ye assume the
question. Now touching the defense of his reasons he brought. If those sighs
and groans (says he) were of faith, that would minister matter of prayer
without a book. This reason (as I said) is by connection drawn from the force
and effect of faith, and to make it strong and good, I said these two things
must be added, yt faith needs no outward help to minister matter of prayer,
and that it can not stand or be joined with any outward helps, which I said
are both heretical. He says he will lay the words again before me, if
peradventure I may have grace to call my self back. I look upon them again,
and although I did not two years (as you vainly imagine) nor yet two days,
consider of that one saying, yet can I not call my self back, unless I be
convinced with the light of truth: and that ye say I shall be, and will so
confirm your sayings by scriptures, that no perverted spirit shall be able to
gainesay or resist. If the sighs and groans were of faith, that would minister
matter without a book, for the scripture (ye affirm) teaches every where
that in praying, the spirit only helps our infirmities, no other helps
mentioned, or can be collected in the present action of prayer through the
scripture. He has sent into our hearts the spirit of his son crying Abba
father, we believe, therefore we speak. From hence now Master Greenewood
concludes that I have erred, and from an idle brain, and godles heart have
coined those heresies, because I constrain the proposition of the present
action, in praying unto a general sentence of all times and actions. This is
the sum of your answer, that before prayer there need helps and outward
means, but in the present action of prayer, only the spirit does help, let
us see how true this is, and how it does excuse ye from those heretical
opinions, which ye go about to wipe away with this distinction.

First whereas ye say that in the very time and action of prayer, it is the
spirit alone without any outward means, because the scripture says, God has
sent into our hearts the spirit of his son crying abba Father. I answer,
that howsoever the scripture does extol or magnify outward helps, and
means, yet when they are compared with God which works all in all by them,
or when the scripture will set forth the efficacy and work to be his alone,
they are either not mentioned, or else if they be mentioned, so cast down as if
they were nothing. God builds his Church by the ministry of men: yet he
says Paul planteth, Appollo waters, but God gives ye increase: So that
neither he which pla^teth is any thing, nor he that watreth, but God that
gives the increase. 1. Co. 3. And therefore to gather from those sentences of
scripture where the spirit of God is only mentioned to work prayer, because the
work is his alone, yt there need or there may be no outward helps or means in
the very instant and action of praying, is far awrie. For I would have
master Greenwood answer whether the voice of an other that prays, whether
fasting, listing up the eyes and hands (which he mentioned) or whether
prosirating the body and kneeling be prayer it self, or outward means to
make the prayer more fervent? Every simple man will laugh at him, if he say
they be prayer it self, whereupon he must be forced to confess they be but
outward helps and means. Then ask master Greenwood again, whether a man be
to fast, to kneel down, to prostrate his body, to lift up his eyes and
hands only before the action of prayer, or in praying? If he answer, what a
question is that, what fool will say before? those things are to be done in
the very instant and action of prayer. Then all men may see that master
Greenwood has brought this, I will not say from an idle brain, for I should
not say true; but from an unsound brain: that he may confirm by many
testimonies of scripture, that the spirit only helps our infirmities in the
present action of prayer, that no perverted spirit shall be able to gayn-say or
resist. Ye see the spirit of truth can resist it, and prove that not only
before prayer, but even in the very action of prayer, outward helps and means
especially for the ignorant and dull are needful and good, and therefore the
Brownists spirit is a false spirit, which says, The scripture teaches every
where that in praying the spirit only helps our infirmities, no other helps
mentioned or can be collected in the present action of prayer. In the next
place, where he had said, A troubled heart is the pen of a ready writer, and
therefore needs not a book. I said here can be no good argument without an
absolute perfection in knowledge, cheerefulnes, direction, memory and
utterance, and that many are so perplexed in their troubles of heart, that they
cannot pray, which through help of outward means do power forth tears and
supplications: He will not allow this for any answer; but does distinguish of
troubled minds. The troubled mind he speaks of, which is the pen of a
ready writer, is (when the mind is presently moved with the sight of some sin
or urged by other occasion,) a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart.
Psalm. 51. and not the mind which in despair or doubt is perplexed. Then I
answer that he must allow these latter the helps and outward means, that
they may be rid of their doubt and perplexity. Moreover, there is no man so
perfect in faith, but he has great remnants in him of despair and doubting.
Why else did David cry out, Correct me not in thy wrath, my bones are
troubled. Psalm. 6. Cast me not out from thy face Psalm. 51 While I kept silence
my bones did wear away, my moisture was turned into the drought in Summer.
psalm. 32. Has God forgotten to be merciful, has he shut up his compassio^s in
wrath, psalm. 77. Whereupon it does follow, that there is no man but may be fore
troubled and perplexed with doubts, when the hand of God is heavy upon him,
and the sight of his sins does terrify him. It is not the glory of faith to
be where there are us doubts of despair or no perplexities* but to get the
victory over them when they do assail it. Therefore the ignoranter sort in
perplexity need outward helps. The next part of mine answer, that such as be
troubled and perplexed and cannot pray, are helped by a book, and by other
means, he does allow and agree unto, So that we make reading one thing and
praying another. Who doubts that they be two things? did not I set down at
the first that the bodily action of reading is not the worship of God? Then
master Greenwood has his desire (seeing as he says) we cannot do both at
once, he that prays speaks to God, My God why do thou hide thy face from
me? But the Priest may say, My book why art thou so evil printed? For when
they read, the heart cannot reason and talk with God. If the matter written
in the book be a speech directed unto God, as In thee O Lord have I put my
trust, let me never be confounded, let master Greenewood or all the Brownists
in the world, bring any color of reason to prove, that a man cannot at the
same instant both utter it with his mouth in reading, and pray it with his
heart. Master Greenwood must deny this again. For alas what stuff is this?
or else how did they sing psalms to GOD and read them upon the book? how can a
man hear and pray both at one instant? Then in the next where he says, I did
but assume the question, in affirming that a man may pray by the spirit upon a
book, etc. his argument being thus, That none worship God but they which from
the inward faith of the heart bring forth true invocation. This do not they
that read upon the book while they pray. I said he brings nothing to prove
the assumption, but that which is frivolous. For that it is said, we would
have men instead of pouring forth their hearts, to help themselves upon a
book. I answer, that we wish men to use the help of a book that they may
the better power forth their hearts to GOD, being such as are not otherwise
thoroughly able. And that we would have men to fetch the cause of their sighing
and sorrowing from another man's writing, even in the time of their begging at
Gods hand. I answered, how fondly do ye make that to be the cause, which
does but manifest the cause? For that which we read or hear does but show
unto us the misery which is within, and how it shall be cured. Now let the
reader observe how simple shifts he finds here. The first is the difference
between reading and praying, the one being a pouring forth of supplications,
the other a receiving into the soul such things as we read. I pray ye tell
me but this, when one hears a prayer pronounced by another with whom he
prays, does not his hearing receive it into his soul, and at the very same
instant also he does power it forth as a prayer to GOD? Are not the receiving
in and the pouring forth done both at once? How will he avoid the folly that
I charged him withal, when receiving in, and pouring forth, go together at
the same instant? But it is beyond all the rest, that he says, I grant the
whole question, by granting that reading the prayers is not the prayer, but an
help. Is it all one to ask whether a man may be helped to prayer by reading,
and whether the reading it self be prayer? Hereupon he also infers, that
all our assemblies have had none other invocation of Gods name, but an help to
teach them to power forth their hearts. Then belike it follows that
wheresoever the help is, there is, or there can be no more: because such as
read upon a book when they pray have a good help to further them, therefore
they do not pray. Because I said it is an help to such as be not otherwise
thoroughly able: I must confess that our whole Ministry is unable; a reason
worthy a Brownist. There be other causes why all Churches use prescript
form, yea whereas all Ministers be able to pray without a book.

Where I said ye speak fondly to call that the cause which does but
manifest the cause: ye reply that I have forgotten mine atts, because there
be mo causes than one, there be isntrumental causes. I grant there be more
causes than one. And it is certain that the efficient cause is manifold, if
you mean by fetching the cause of their sorrowing from the book in the time
of their begging at Gods hand, the efficient cause isntrumental: I would have
ye but answer whether the instrumental cause cannot go with the action, but
the action is overthrown or disgraced? I would also demand whether it follow
which ye collect, there is an isntrumental cause which is an help: therefore
there is nothing else? Are these things other than trifles? I said ye did
answer nothing to that saying of our Savior, When ye pray, say our Father
which art in Heaven, etc. Luke 11. Ye seem, that ye will not answer unless I
conclude from this place by Syllogism: but yet afterward ye do^. And indeed
what needs a Syllogism where the words are of themselves sufficient, without
any further consequence or collection. If our Savior command to say those
words praying, then is it most clear, that to use a prescript form of words
in praying is not idolatry, nor a thing most detestable. But ye say ye
manifested in your first writing, that our Savior did not command to use
those words when we pray: but to pray according to that form. Saint Matthew
say you and Saint Luke, keep not the same words, nor that number of words: he
said not read these words, or say th^se words by roate when ye pray. These
reasons I have slilie passed over, as you accuse me. What reasons? If it be a
reason there is but one: for Christ's speech is plain, when ye pray say thus:
therefore we may use those words. But must we use them of necessity and never
none other? Not so, but we may use, and it is necessary for us to use
particulars, which are contained in those generals which are the ground and
direction of all prayers. Your one reason or that which has show of reason is
in this, that Saint Luke does omit for thine is the Kingdom, etc. And that
in the fourth and fifth petitions they express the same matter with some
difference of words. As though the question were about such a precisenes in
words, that we might not express the same petition in another phrase, but it
cease to be the same? Now where I conclude that it is therefore lawful to
use a prescript form of prayer, which is framed according to the Scriptures,
in the assemblies. To this ye reply that because no man's writings are without
error, it is pernicious and blasphemous doctrine which I collect. This ye
affirm stoutly, and for proof bring nothing but those stale cauills which I
have sundry times answered: and now ye will answer to the two places
alleged, Numb. 6. and Luke. 11. The priests ye say were not commanded to use
those very words of the blessing, when they blessed the people, the reason ye
bring is from the Hebrew words which are as you say, Coh teborcu, thus shall
ye bless, Where the word Coh is an aduerb of similitude, as we say after
this manner: which cannot be to say the same, but according to the same
instructions. This word Coh is used throughout the Bible in this manner, in all
the prophets, when they say, thus says the Lord. To this I answer, first let
all men of any mean learning, in the Hebrew be witness, how unfit Master
Greenewood is to reason from that tongue, when he can not so much as read two
words of it aright. For he says Coh teborcu, and it is Coh tebaracu. Then for
the matter it self, this learned Hebrucian says, that Coh being an aduerb of
similitude, as we say after the same manner, it cannot be to say the same, but
according to the same instructions. Where ignorance and boldness are met
together, what children they bring forth? We must believe that the Lord when
he says, thus shall thou bless, and prescribes the words, wills the
Priests not to speak the same words, but the like. And when our Savior says,
When ye pray, say thus, Our father etc. It is as much as if he should say, in
any wise say not these words at any time, but the like. For, thus, is not the
same, but the like. God said to Moses, I will send thee to Pharao, that thou
may bring the children of Israel out of Egypt. Moses draws back, saying,
when I shall come to the children of Israel and shall say unto them, the God of
your fathers has sent me unto ye: If they shall say unto me, what is his name?
what shall I say unto them? The Lord said. Thus shall thou say to the children
of Israel, Eheie has sent me unto ye. Moreover, God said to Moses, Thus shall
thou say unto them, The God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaak, the God of Iaacob has sent me unto ye. Exodus 3. verse. 13, 14, 15.

Now, according to Master Greenwoods exposition of Coh, Moses is not commanded
to say those words but the like. If they should demand what is his name that
has sent thee? he may not say Eheie has sent me, because God said Coh, that
is thus, which is not the same words but the like. He might not say the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaak, the God of Iaacob has sent me unto ye, which GOD
says is his name and memorial for ever, because God said Coh, that is, thus
shall thou say, but he must say the like words. He says further, that Coh is
so used in all the Prophets, when it is said, thus says the Lord. That is, GOD
has not spoken these very words, which we bring, might the Prophets say, but
the like. It is a like thing that Master Greenwood, or some other Hebrucian
among the Brownists, has read over all the Prophets in the Hebrew tongue, to
find how Coh is every where used, when he could not read two words right.
And now what shall we say of the Scriptures? the words, if we shall believe
the Brownists, are not Gods words, but the words of the Prophets. Is this
wholesome doctrine? Did the Prophets bring any one word which GOD did not put
into their mouth? I pray ye Master Greenwood, or any other Brownist, tell me,
did not God speak in the Prophets all the words that they uttered, even at the
very instant when they say, thus says the Lord? How can it then so wickedly
be said, they were not the very same words which God spoke, but the like,
because the aduerb thus does signify the like, and not the same? But he
renders a reason, which is, that we have but the sum of their prophesies
recorded unto us by the holy Ghost, and not all the words. Because we have not
all the words, therefore have we not the same in those that are set down? Did
the holy Ghost use this word Coh, to give us to understand that there is
written but an abridgement or sum of matters, and not the same words, that
they were uttered in, but some such like? Again, did the holy Ghost record
them, and are they not all his words which are written in the sum of the
prophesies set down? Shall we believe this man? I do believe him in this that
he says the holy Ghost did record them: for therein he speaks the truth.
But when he says, that thus says the Lord, is not these same words says the
Lord, but the like, because thus is an aduerb of likeness, it is a vile saying.
Is not the holy Ghost the Lord? If he had spoken those things before in more
words, and now records them in fewer, saying, thus says the Lord, does not
he speak these fewer words which are written, as well as those more words
which were uttered? Are they not then, thus says the Lord, even the very same
words which the Lord speaks, and not like? If ye make many such expositions
of words ye may lead me whether ye will. There is then another reason rendered
to prove that the Priests were not tied unto those words in blessing the
people, namely, that in prayer they are blessed in the Psalms and in the
Chronicles with many other words. And Eli blessed Hanna in other words. It is
not the question whether at any time the people might be blessed in other
words, in fewer, or in more: but whether the Priests had not that form
prescribed to utter in blessing the whole assembly, and whether it were
Idolatry to use those prescript phrases of words? As likewise it is not
maintained that when our Savior says, say thus, that we may not pray in
other words, or express our petitions more particularly: but that we may use
those words and sentences as most excellent petitions. Against this Master
Greenwood brings nothing in his words that follow. For Master Calvin never
held it unlawful to pray in that form of words, though he teach truly, that
men are not so tied unto it, that they may use none other. And therefore it
stands firm and sure that the form of words in the Lords Prayer is to be
lawfully used praying.

In the next part Master Greenwood is in a great heat, and makes an outcrie
to call men to the beholding of an injury, which I, as he says, as a godles
man have done him. Here (says he) I must call all men that read this fruitles
discourse, to be witness, etc. Indeed ye may well call it a fruitles
discourse, which ye call men that read to bear witness with ye: and let the
reader judge by your exposition of Coh, whether it be not worse than fruitless
which ye spread among the ignorant sort, which are ready to suck in such
filthy dregs. The abuse of my tongue to the defacing of Gods truth, is that
I said, he calls all men Idolaters. And to make the matter clear that he
spoke not the words, but I my self, he makes a brief repetition how we fell
into that matter. But before we proceed any further, I pray ye tell me what is
the reason, that I having set down your whole discourse touching this point,
so that you cannot deny but that I have also set it down truly, you forsake
that and set down by piece meal but some of your words, and reason from them:
If I had meant in a godles manner wilfully to pervert your words, would I have
delivered them whole and together in print? It seems ye have some hope that
some men will read your book, which will not compare it with mine, or which
being carried with blind heat, cannot. Now I crave no more of the reader but
to mark the whole speech which you delivered, and mine answer to it, and to
judge indifferently. If Master Greenwoods words be not such as must needs
include that which I have collected, let me bear the blame for that matter,
which is one of the least. He says I have an evasion to avoid this foil,
because I said I took it we reasoned about such gross Idolatry, as a Church
is to be condemned and forsaken for which is defiled therewith. He says he
never reasoned to that end in this whole discourse. And I say then he must go
from his own words, which affirm that read prayer offered up to GOD as a
sacrifice is Idolatry: that to read the prayer while one prays, is a
changing the work of the spirit into an Idol, a bondage and breaking of
Christian liberty, a thing most detestable, a device of Antichrist. Let all
men judge by these speeches what manner of Idolatry was in question between
us. Master Greenwood as if he had won the field, will needs put me to my
ransom, and asks what mends I will make him for this slandering? I answer,
that as your victory is but in a dream, so my ransom must be thereafter. If
I could see I had done ye wrong, I would be sorry. Ye will have no man free
from such foul Idolatry, but yet no Idolaters. No Church is free ye confess
from all spot upon earth. Hereupon ye grow again into a new heat, and
charge me out of one mouth to give contrary sentence, because I call ye
Donatists. Why man, are ye ignorant of this, that the Donatists did confess
all men to be sinners, and yet the arguments by which they would maintain
their schism could not be strong, unless they would maintain a perfection,
and some of their reasons though they meant not so reached so far. And so is
it with you Brownists. If one should follow ye in all the gross absurdities
which will follow from your exposition of Coh, thus says the Lord, could you
have any way but to protest ye did mean no such thing* We may not look what
men protest they hold, but what does follow of their reasons, and then ye
shall see that such as be in schism and heresy are with the blasts of their
swelling pride tossed and hurled upon contrary Rocks. Now, whereas I said the
confession of the Brownists, that there is no Church in earth without spots
of Idolatry, does overthrow the reasons which they bring to condemn the
Church of England. Because they cannot argue thus, this is a fault, it is
Idolatry: therefore this or that assembly which is spotted is no true Church.
But they must prove the Idolatry to be such as destroys the faith, etc.
Master Greenwood would bear men in hand, that I reason as simply, as to say,
if there be no true Church in earth without spots, then the Church of Rome is
the true Church, for that has many spots. I answer, that we do not take it
that the spots do make it a true Church, but because there be only spots
and not fundamental errors? The foolish cavil here is that I assume that
which I should prove. Do I not prove it by answering the vile and shameless
slanders of yours, when ye affirm every spot in our Churches to be
blasphemies and heresies and abominations, and Egyptian sores? You must prove
these your slanders true, and I will cease.

Now we come to the arguments which were set down at the first. No Apocrypha is
to be brought into the public assemblies, all read prayer is Apocripha. Here
you say I have nothing to utter, and yet oppose against both proposicions, to
royle the doctrine with my feet least others should drink of it. I said your
proposition is false because the exposition of the scriptures by the preacher,
and the prayers of the preacher are not canonical, which your proposition does
exclude. Your reply is, that the Sermons and prayers of of the Preacher be the
lively voice of Gods own graces which ye mention in your proposition, and so
neither Canonical, nor Apocripha: and so not excluded. Touching the Paraphrase
upon the Psalms in meeter, I hold not Canonical in some respects: If you
banish all writings that be not Canonical, then ye banish then. Your answer
is, that it I will affirm them to be Apocrypha, as ye say I cannot but do;
you will prove they are not to be brought into the public assemblies. Your
proofs do follow: First no man's writings are given by the testimony of Gods
spirit, whom alone we are to hear. No man's writings are without errors and
imperfections: The Church is builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets: If we might bring in men's writings, then al men's writings which are
agreeable to Gods word. No man's writings carry that majesty that the pen of
the holy ghost. No man's writings are authentike confirmed by signs and
wonders. The scripture is all sufficient; al men must walk by that one rule: To
think there were not rules enough prescribed by the Lord for his house, is
blasphemous and papisticall. Then ye say, the gifts to prophecy, are not
Apocryphal, and so ye conclude your proposition: that only Gods word and the
lively graces of his holy spirit are to be offered up unto him in the public
assemblies. Then touching your assumption: I said I see not how our speech to
God should be called Apocrypha. Ye reply yt it answers not you, which do not
hold an other man's writing to be our speech unto God. Finally because I said
that Apocrypha is that which is not Gods undoubted word unto us: ye say I
have overthrown my self and cast out all read prayer, in as much as I deny
them to be Canonical. And so affirming that I have not in both writings made
one direct answer to this most firm proposition: Only the Canonical
scriptures and lively voice of Gods own graces are to be brought into the
public assemblies for doctrine and prayers: But men's writings are neither
Canonical, nor the lively voice of Gods own graces. Now master Greenwood
having thus played the man in erecting (as he supposes) so mighty a pillar,
that cannot be shaken, could content himself to go no further. I might end here
says he with this vain man, considering the whole matter is proved against
him: And all that solloweth but repetitions of the same cauills: but that I
must clear my self of his vnconcionable slanders. He ^^^^mphing thus fully,
what shall I do now? I answer, first that he is much deceived and would
deceive others: as it is written, The deceivers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being* deceived. For like as one that among many Apples does hide
and sell one Crab, so he among many true principles does bring in one false
conclusion which deceives his Scholars. For if he did reason thus, we must
hear only the voice of Gods spirit, therefore all things in the Church are
to be tried by the voice of the spirit. No man's writings are without errors and
imperfections: therefore me^ cannot ground upon them any further than they be
consonant to the Canonical scriptures. The Church is builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, therefore our faith is to rest no
further upon the sayings and writings of men, than they be proved by the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets; he should conclude a truth which is
unanswerable. But now where master Greenwoods conclusion is after this sort,
therefore nothing but the Canonical scriptures, and the lively voice of Gods
graces is to be brought into the public assemblies; he concludes falsely, as
shall appear. For if nothing but the perfect rule it self is to be brought
into the Church: If nothing done by man which has errors in it, is to have
place in the assemblies: If nothing but either such or that which is the lively
voice of Gods own graces is to be uttered in the congregation; then must be
taste forth not only al written prayers: but also ye whole bible, unless it be
in ye Hebrew and Greek, with the Sermons and prayers of the Pastors. For there
is no translation of the Bible without errors, and the books are thus far
man's writing respecting only the translation. And furthermore we decide not
controversies by any translation of the Bible, but by the authentike copies of
the Hebrew and Greek, in one of which the old testament is set down by the
Prophets, in the other the new testament by the Apostles. So that your
conclusion does not shut out only the Psalms in meeter, but the whole
scriptures; unless you will be so bold as to say that translations be without
errors, and so the perfect rule.

And now touching the second part, will Master Greenwood be so unwise as to
affirm that the errors in the Sermons and in the prayers of the Pastors, be
the lively voice of Gods own graces? He will assuredly deny it: for the
graces of GOD (all simple men know) bring not forth errors. Then let him mark
his conclusion, no men's writings are without errors and imperfections,
therefore no men's writings are to be brought into the public assembly: is not
this conclusion as strong, no translations of the Bible, no Psalms in meeter,
no Sermons, nor Prayers of the Pastors, are without errors and imperfections,
therefore none of these are to be brought into the public assemblies? Is there
any so void of sense, that can not taste how sower this Crabbe is, which
Master Greenewood conueieth in among so many sweet Apples? But he replieth
further to confirm his matter by argument thus, if any men's writings may be
brought into the public assemblies, then al men's writings which are thought to
be agreeable to Gods word, may be brought in. To prove the consequence of this
proposition, he says; If God command any to be brought in as being agreeable
to the Scriptures, then by that commandment all are to be brought in that be
agreeable: If there be no commandment, then none are to be brought in. I
answer that God has commanded that in the Church all things be done for
edification, now the prayers being the same, being holy and good, are of like
majesty and dignity in themselves vttred by him that conceaueth them, or from
a prescript form, the matter rests not in that, but in the faith and
feruencie of those that pray, there be errors and imperfections, as well in
the one as in the other, but to avoid inconvenience, and for the benefit of
the simpler sort, a prescript form is needful, and so far commanded. Then
see how frivolous this conclusion is, that so all men's writings which are
thought to be agreeable to the word, are to be brought in, seeing that which
is convenient in some, is not convenient in all. His reasons which follow are
in effect all one with the former, and prove not that conclusion of his, to
shut forth the prescript form of prayer. Let the Brownist now set the word
Apocripha aside, which is but a word, and not of the Scriptures, and go to the
matter it self, drawing by firm conclusion* that nothing is to be allowed any
place in the Church which is not the perfect rule it self, in writing, or
without errors vttred in speech, and I will yield. But this shall all the
Brownistes in the world be never able to do, as I have sufficiently showed
before. What then, or where is his glory and victory which he boasts off,
to be such that he needs to proceed no further? But now I would have the
reader to understand my meaning aright, and how I argue: least any should
think I compare the having the Bible in a translation, and the prayers and
Sermons of the Pastors, with the prescribed form of prayer, to be of but
equal or like necessity. The sum of that I set down is to this effect,
that it is false which Master Greenewood stands to prove, namely that
nothing with error in it is to be brought into the public assemblies,
seeing there is a necessity of having the scriptures in a translation: there
is also a necessity of having the sermons and Prayers of the Ministers, and
yet errors in both, that which is of necessity to be had, may not be cast
forth, because of imperfections and errors: then also prescript form of
prayers, though not of necessity, yet for conueniencie unto edification, is
not to be cast forth, because of imperfections, being not to increase, but to
diminish the errors in praying.

The next argument is this, We must do nothing in the worship of God, without
warrant of his word. Read prayers have no warrant of his word.

How false this assumption is, namely, That to read a prayer when one does
pray, or to follow a prescript form, has no warrant in Gods word, I have
showed by sundry scriptures and reasons, and answered all the shifts brought
against them, for which I refer the Reader to my former book.

Master Greenewood pressed with the weight of truth, and finding he had vttred
gross matter, could be content (but that as he says to answer unconscionable
slanders) to stay in the first argument: as having won the field, but yet he
goes on, and by vain shifts will do as well as he can to cover his fault.
First he accuses me that not having answered one reason, I have with much
evil conscience (as the handling shows) perverted them, saying he will
leave them to be judged of them that shall see his writing: and seeing I would
not Print it, he will answer my chief objections. Touching this I answer,
that your words are many, and I esteemed it a weariesome matter to write them
all, accounting it sufficient to note your reasons, but look whatsoever ye
complain off, that I have perverted and done ye wrong in, ye shall have them
in those points fully and wholly delivered, that all the world may see and
judge between us, whether I have wilfully, and unconscionably, and as a
godless man (as ye accuse me) charged ye with any one thing which your words
do not contain.

Now to proceed to your reply: First, ye say that I grant your Argument is
sound, if ye put difference between reading upon the book, and that which
one has learned out of the book. For by your own confession (say you) God
has not given any commandment to read prayer, and so it has no warrant.
Hereupon ye charge me, that as an unconstant man, I call back again that
which I had granted: I said I did not remember that ever I did read in the
holy Scriptures that God commands the prayer shall be read upon the Book,
If I have called now to remembrance, where it is read, It were no inconstancy
to say now, there is commandment. But in deed I do not remember I have ever
read any such commandment. But now you boast of your gains by this
confession, saying that I grant then there is no warrant. Lay all my words
together, and ye may put your gain in your eye, and see never the worse. I
set down first of all that it is great audatitie, to affirm that there is no
warrant of the word, for read prayer, seeing there be sundry testimonies to
warrant the same, as I have showed: for the Lord prescribed a form of
blessing, and commanded the Priests so to bless Number. 6. He prescribed a form
of prayer for the people at the offering the first fruits, and commanded the^
to use it Deutr. 26 The Psalm for the sabbath was commanded to be song, the
Psalm 22. was to be song every morning, and these they were tied unto by
express commandment, though not to the book, because it is more commendable
to have them by heart. And the Lord does not tie a man to that which is less
commendable. This is the sum of that reason which I used, from whence there
is warrant to follow a prescript form. Master Greenewood urges this, if
there be no commandment, then there is no warrant: and affirms it to be
inconstancy to say there is no commandment to read praying, and yet some
warrant for it by the word. I have answered, that God tied the Priests and
people unto some prescript forms, though not preciselie to the book. And
though that were legal, and no such commandment to tie men of necessity: now
yet it shows the thing to be holy and lawful. Further I add, if we
respect the matter as we say in the These, or for a generalty there is no
commandment: for then it should be of necessity and not for conueniencie.
But if we regard it in the Hypothese for circumstances in particularitie,
there is commandment: as thus, God has commanded those things too be done
which serve as helps for edification, or be most conueuient. Then where the
state of any man, or the state of the assemblies is such, as that prescript
form of prayer is convenient and needful for edification, there it is
commanded. Now let the reader observe again your words, which are that al our
ministers must leave reading their stincted prayers upon the book, or else
stand under Gods wrath, and all that so pray with them. Master Greenewood
complains of great injury, when I gather from his words, that he condemns
all Churches, because he knows that is a matter sufficient alone to bewray
the wickedness of Brownisme. Now if all our Ministers which pray upon the book,
and the people, that pray with them stand under the wrath of God for this
thing, then cannot they be the Church of God: for GOD loves his Church; and
all Churches have prescript forms of prayer which their Ministers use:
therefore they all stand under Gods wrath. But they do it ignorantly, will he
say; and so (say I) did all our Churches, until his papers came abroad, and
many have not as yet seen them: and some that have seen them are not
persuaded, and so are ignorant still. The next thing ye deal with, is the
Argument which I draw from the singing Psalms upon the book: it is so clear
they did sing them upon the book, that the Brownist himself cannot deny it.
It is also most manifest they did sing them (as he also now confesses) to
God, for so are we commanded in many places, sing praises to God. Then further
he that offers up praise to God reading, it cannot be gainsaide, but that he
offers up a spiritual sacrifice to God reading. Yea praise is one part of
prayer: and it is as hard a thing to speak praises to God upon the book, as
to crave by petitions upon the book, and as spiritual a work; and I may say
a more high service: where is then that gross fantasy of Master Greenewood,
which because reading is one thing; and speaking to God is another, says a man
cannot both read and speak to God at once. He cannot say O my God when he
reads, but O my book why art thou so evil printed? I argue if the people of
God in old time, did both read the Psalms upon the book, and speak unto
the Lord at the same instant: how should it not now be both possible and
lawful, for to speak unto God in prayers while one reads? He says, I
deny your Argument. I say that is not sufficient to deny the Argument: let us
therefore see the reasons of the denial. Admit that singing were a part of
prayer (says he) yet does it not follow that all prayer may be read upon
the book: we must take this upon your bare word, at least such as will, may
believe ye. I stand to affirm that one part of prayer is as spiritual a
work as another; thereupon I also affirm, that if one part may be read upon
the book, and no turning the work of the spirit into an Idol, no st^nting
the spirit, no quenching the spirit, no Idolatry. no hindrance, but that he
which reads may speak unto God: it may be so in any other part. And let us
see what he will be able to disprooue this withal? But he says I speak
like an ignorant man, to say that singing is prayer, because they be two diverse
actions and exercises of our faith. The one never read for the other, nor said
to be a part of the other, throughout the Scriptures, but are plainly
distinguished, As I will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with
understanding, I will sing with the spirit, I will sing with understanding,
says Saint Paul. I answer you could no where more untimely accuse me of
ignorance, then where your own speech in this and that which follows next,
is patched up with errors, almost as thick as the patches upon a beggars
cloak. And for answer I say, first, that Saint Paul does distinguish them
there is great reason, not only because the very singing it self is not
prayer, no more then reading or speaking: but also that there be many prayers
which are not song, and many Psalms and songs, which are no forms of prayer;
nor the speech directed to God: a prayer that is no psalm is never called a
psalm, nor any reason why it should: but a Psalm that is a prayer, is called
both a Psalm and a prayer. The Psalm 86. is called Tephillah a prayer, and
consists of sundry petitions. The Psalm 90. is so called, being the prayer
of Moses. Psalm 102. is called Tephillah leaaui, the prayer for the poor,
when he is in perplexity, and powers forth his meditation before the Lord.
The people praying for Christ's Kingdom did use to say, Hosanna, Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord. Psalm. 118. The Psalm 50. and 119. with
many other conta ne petitions, almost in every verse, which if a man did pray
or desire them earnestly singing, it was no Idolatry: singing I grant is not
called prayer, but men might sing Psalms to God, and were commanded, which
contained praises and petitions: but they were given to the Church, to be song
or read in ye form of prayer (says he) but denies yt this was to be done
praying. He not only confesses they were to sing the^ unto God, but also says
the Lord keep me from such an error, as to deny that: and yet eue^ in this
confession falls into as gross a matter. for what can be more absurd, than
that a man should utter and speak even unto God that which is a prayer and yet
might not pray* as when out of the Psalm. 118. praying for the kingdom of
Christ, they cried Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord:
or when for some special benefit the whole Church was to sing praise to God,
and had a prescript form delivered unto them: were they to mock with God, and
not to speak praises unto him indeed from the heart and with chearefulnes* or
did God command them to do two things which cannot be done at once* or will
any deny that many in singing, (though the singing it self be not praying) do
give hearty thanks to God where thanksgiving is expressed, and crave earnestly
when they utter petitions* Master Greenewood does grievously complain of me
for doing him foul wrong in saying he denies that the Psalms are to be sung
to God. And what other thing in effect does he utter here, when he says they
were not to utter the words of a Psalm to God praying? But I willset down
his first words which are these. The same may be said for the hundredth and
second Psalm: for although some have taken it as a prayer of the Prophet when
he was in affliction, yet may I grant with you to be taken in the future
tense, and avoid that superstition you would fall into, for if it had been
given unto the Church to have been read as a prayer unto God, it should have
been said, O Lord hear our prayer, and let our cry come unto thee. And
therefore it is manifest that this Psalm was given to the Isralites in time of
their captivity at Babylon, or some other such calamity, to comfort and
instruct them how to settle themselves, and power forth their prayers before
the Lord. But how will you prove that the people were to say over these
words unto God* for we may see the like by Habbacuc, prescribing the people a
form of prayers to comfort themselves, and delivered it to be sung in the
assemblies. Moreover after many other words master Greenwood says thus: And
that singing of Psalms is no part of prayer we may see by the exhortation
which the Apostle uses to the Ephesians, saying Speak unto your selves in
Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs: And to the Collos. where it is said
Let the word of God dwell in ye plenteously in all wisdom teaching and
admonishing your selves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs. And further
we read that Christ our Savior did give thanks and then sing a Psalm after
the institution of the Lords Supper: for that singing is a rejoicing our
selves, and instructing our selves.

Now let the reader judge, by comparing that which I have written in my former
book with these words of his, whether I or he be the godles man which deals
by unconscionable slanders, and with much evil conscience. Master Greenwood
denying the use of prescript form when we speak unto God, and I alleging
the Psalms, demands how I will prove that the people were to say over those
words unto God* And after as you see to prove that the words were not to be
uttered or said over to God praying* he alleges the sayings of Paul,
Speaking to your selves and instructing your seluesin Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual songs, leaving out in both places the latter end of the sentence of
singing to the Lord. Now when I have proved that the very words of some
Psalms were to be said over to God, because the scripture is clear in many
places, Sing Psalms to God, sing praises to God, etc. and charged him with
denying that the Psalms are to be sung to God contrary to such express
commandment, and blamed him for leaving out the part of the sentence which
makes against him, he cries shame upon me. But master Greenwood it is the
light of Gods word, and the weight thereof which does press ye, and cutteth
down all ungodly fantasies, and not I. You confess now, because the scripture
is plain, that the Psalms were to be sung to God, and yet ye did ask how I
would prove the people were to say over the words. Then it follows that the
very prescript forms of words were to be said over to God by your
confession, which is the whole matter that I have stood to prove. And now
choose whether you will deny that Psalms were to be sung to God, or confess
that those very words of the Psalms and the prescript forms were to be said
over unto him in singing.

What will he say now? This he will say, that they were in those words to be
song unto God, but not praying: for he says I must prove the Church did use to
read the psalms. for praying, I wonder how a man can speak to God the
sentences which are prayers, and not praying. Again I would have any Brownist
show me what speech we can have to God which is not prayer: if he say a man
does speak to God in giving him thanks and praise, in acknowleging his
benefits, in ascribing unto him all wisdom, power, glory, goodness,
bountifulnes, faithfulness, and mercy. A man does speak to God, when he
confesses his sins, when he complains of the injuries and wrongs of
others: I confess, and I say withal, that they be all of them parts of
prayer. Why does a man give thanks and praise, and mention Gods benefits; but
to support his faith, and hope that he shall receive further, and to move the
Lord to continue still good unto him, or such like? Why do we speak unto him
of his glorious power, wisdom, mercy and truth, but that our faith and
prayer does rest upon those pillars? Why do we confess our sins, but as
entreating for pardon; and what do we rehearse the unjust outrage of our
adversaries, but to procure his just defense and protection: But he demands
what this makes for reading prayers framed by men: I answer to the same effect
which I have ever done, that this is one of the poorest cauilles that may be
among a thousand. We reason not about the matter of prayers, but about the
reading: for if the matter be corrupt and naught, the pronouncing or the
reading cannot make it better. If the matter be erroneous, it is no more
authentic pronounced, then read: if it be pure and good pronounced, the
reading cannot hurt it, or make it vnpure. The reading it self is not vnpure
when we speak to God: for then should not the Psalms have been song upon the
book unto him. Who is so senceles then as not to see this conclusion to
follow, to utter a prescript form of words, in a Psalm when one speaks to
God is no sin. Therefore to follow a prescript form of words in any godly
prayer, when one prays is not sin; for where shall we find the sin? If
it be in following a prescript form, it should have been unlawful to follow
it in the Psalms. If it be in the matter, because there be errors in all men's
writings; and therefore to be cast forth: then I say the errors, and not the
reading is in the fault, and for which only there must be the casting forth,
and so we must cast forth the prayers of the preachers. To his next words, I
answer that it is not the repeating over the same godly petitions again every
day, that makes it the sacrifice of fools, but when men do it of custom
without faith and fervent affection: for if a man with faith and zeal pray
every day the same prayer to God, it is acceptable. The rest of his words are
not worth the repeating, and yet he concludes most falsely that read prayer
has no warrant in Gods word.

The next Argumentis this, We may not in the worship of God receive any
tradition, which bringerh our liberty into bondage: read prayer upon
commandment is a tradition that does bring our liberty into bondage.

Against this I opposed that Moses, the Prophets, and our Savior gave
prescript forms of prayers, and if the very following a prescript form
imposed by commandment, be so detestable a thing, how are not they charged
with this heinous sin? He answers that here is a great storm, and yet
nothing but wind; do ye not know the wind may be so great, as to blow down
the house upon your head, especially when the blast of truth comes against
your building, which stands upon the rotten pillars of errors. The
counterfaite zeal of Cayphas against the truth, ought not to stay any man
from being earnest for the truth. But now to the matter, your woonted song was
heretofore when such prescript forms were alleged, prove that those words
were to be said over to God: but now being convinced, and confessing that some
Psalms were song to God, and for fear least bidding me prove again that
the prescript form was followed, when they spoke to GOD, I should again
charge ye openly to deny the singing of Psalms to God, which I have showed
ye do covertly, ye seek another shift, and say your Minor proposition (which
is that I stand to disprooue) speaks of the reading for praying, and not of
the form of prayer. This is poor stuff, seeing we reason about prescript
form and reading the same, praying. I do not say that the reading it self is
praying: but I have proved, that they went together, and whether there were
commandment to follow the prescript forms or not, in the blessing, for the
Priests to use. In the prayer prescribed for the people to say at the offering
the first fruits, and in some of the Psalms, whether it be not also lawful to
say the Lords prayer praying, let wise men judge. Now where as I said the
Brownistes do condemn all Churches by these three arguments against read
prayers, Master Greenewood at this is in no small heat as his speech does
show: for if he could dippe his words ten times deeper in gall, it
appears he would not spare. I trust (says he) your madness will appear
unto all men, the poison of Aspes is under your tongue. But Master Greenewood,
If I have said the truth which is justifiable by your own speeches, your
sober mind is not to be boasted off. And if your sentence include all
Churches, what milk and honey does flow from under your lips? Here is much
a do, this man lays about him as if he were half mad: but that he is
blindfolde, I could not escape some sound blows. Here he has up the beggar
with his clappe dish, and the Priest with his Mass book, canuesing over the
Paternoster for their belly. Here he says I breath out my accustomed lies,
slanders, and raylings, calling them Brownists and Donatists, here he
detesteth Donatus his heresies: Brown, and the Brownists, he says are ours,
he wills me to remember who is the Father of such untruths, when I say
they condemn al reformed Churches, but because my conscience (as he says)
did witness I had wrongfullie charged him, and for him all true Christians, I
bring it in by necessary consequence. Now if the heat be any thing past hear
a little what I say, show that I have any way slaundred ye, or rayled upon
ye, in that I have termed you Brownists and Donatists: and let me have open
shame among all men. I have affirmed that the very pith of all your matter is
from Master Brownes books, convince me therein if ye can, I have now
published that Brownisme and Donatisme are all one: let any Brownist in the
land confute me. The thief will not abide to be so called, but will say I
defy all thieves: does that clear him when he lives by theeuerie? what are
you the better to say I detest the heresies of Donatus, and yet hold all that
he held, and know not what ye say, nor what the heresies of Donatus were, more
then does a post: show openly that ye renounce those things I have noted to
be the furies of the Donatists, and then ye may cry out that ye are
slaundred.

And now for condemning al Churches, will ye deny that which is concluded by
necessary consequence from your words? Is that against conscience which is
brought in by necessary consequence? Ye would seem to make light of it in
this respect, that a multitude is not to be followed to do evil, when ye
condemn all Churches: but yet it does sting ye so near, that by no means ye
can abide to hear of it. Thus I did reason, and thus I reason still without
any witness of conscience against me. You affirm prescript forms of prayer
brought into the public assemblies, to be the changing the work of the
spirit into an Idol, a tradition breaking Christian liberty, and therefore a
thing most detestable, a dead letter which does quench the spirit; but all
reformed Churches have prescript form of prayer imposed: therefore ye
condemn all Churches. I am glad your book may be seen of all men, that they
may judge the soundnes of that answer by which ye would clear your self. Ye
cannot go from your first words, they be spread in the hands of so many, but
ye should shame your self. Ye reply therefore again, that the true Churches
might err in this, and yet remain Churches of God. This is strange that
ignorance should excuse men that worship an Idol in stead of God, that take
away the Christian liberty from the consciences of men, and do that which is
most detestable. What do the Papists more than these? or what can they be
charged withal which is worse than that which is most detestable? And have ye
not set down now in this your book in replying upon the second Argument, that
all our Ministers must leave reading their stinted prayers, or else stand under
Gods wrath and all that pray with them? How are the Ministers and people of
other Churches privileged from standing under Gods wrath, having read prayers,
imposed leiturgies, and as you term them stinted prayers? or tell me, are they
the Churches of God that stand under his wrath? Now remember who is the father
of lies. Well, your meaning was not to condemn the Churches, nor to meddle
with them. Why then do ye give such sentence of condemnation which reaches
unto them? Tell me but this, is there any Brownist which is a disciple, and
gives credit unto ye in this matter, that read prayer is most detestable, and
that such as join in it stand under Gods wrath, which yet durst join himself
or might join himself unto any assembly in the world, even the most
reformed? Tell me either you or any other chief Brownist, will say they may
pray with any assembly where they follow a prescript form? If ye dare not say
this (I mean that ye would counsel men to join with a Church that has read
prayer) but say they must reprove and condemn it, and if it were not
redressed forsake them: then be also ashamed so furiously to cry out upon
me, which speak nothing herein, that I say ye condemn all churches, but that
which all indifferent men must needs see your own words and doctrine do
uphold. As for your bitter accusations upon no show I leave them: and whereas
ye require that if I have any sparkle of grace, I would procure that ye might
decide the truth with other Churches. I answer, that if ye had any spark of
sober wisdom, ye could not with such condition lay that upon me, which ye
know not how unable I am to perform. You say you might justly be called an
Anabaptist, if you should reason thus, Imposing of men's writings to be read
for praying, is an heinous sin, therefore they that use it are no Church.
Have ye said no more, but that it is an heinous sin? Have you forgotten all
your former sayings of Idolatry, bondage breaking Christian liberty, most
detestable, standing under Gods wrath? I hold him no Anabaptist nor Donatist,
which from such speeches concludes no true Church. For I never heard that the
true Church does stand under Gods wrath. The next words are sore; Abaddon is
the father of such Prophets, says Master Greenewood, because I say the
Brownists maintain such a freedom as that will have nothing imposed by
commandment. I pray ye tell me whether you be one of those which set out the
brief sum of the profession? And when I had written against it, I would know
if ye were one that made the defense, or approved the same? Did ye not
approve of the answers that go under the name of Henry Barrow? Imposed is
put for an argument by it self in those writings, and so noted with a figure.
Could the very word imposed be an argument by it self, if any imposing by
commandment be lawful in Gods worship? If the civil Magistrates have power
but to reuiew the laws of Christ, and to move men or stir them up to the
more diligent keeping of the same, may they then impose by commandment? And
as you speak here of that which is not only received, but also by
commandment, as though there were great weight in the words, by
commandment. I pray ye tell me then what force ye repose in the words
imposed, and by commandment, when ye oppose them against Christian freedom?
Tell me also whether ye deny not that any Canons and constitutions made in
Synods, in matters variable, are to be imposed by commandment? If they be,
what is the reason that you Brownists when ye cry out against Church
government as it is in England, speak in general against Canons? And a little
after in this your book, ye deny all power of making laws in things
indifferent, terming it an adding to Gods word, and alleging against it the
extreme curse of God. I grant the Churches power is limited by the word in
making such laws: and so is the power of Princes. There has been much said
already touching the Lords Prayer and other prescript forms in the
Scriptures: but yet here come in new reasons (if I may so call them) which are
void of reason. Houtos is the same that the Hebrew Coh, after this manner. I
answer that this has been dealt in before, where ye must unsay somewhat
again, or else the words of the Scripture now written are not the words of the
Lord, but the like. Further, because Christ says, when ye pray, if he willed
we should say over ye words, then should we ever when we pray, say them. To
this I answer, that respecting the rules for matters, when ye pray, when is as
much as to say whenever ye pray, because we may not depart from those matters
contained in the general petitions. But if we respect withal the prescript
form of words, there is a double consideration to be had: for in them selves
they be most excellent, perfect and full, and so briefly do contain the
whole sum and substance of all things which we ought to crave of God, as
that nothing is wanting. But our mind is not able so largely or unto such
depth at one instant to spread or extend it self in desire, as to be mindful
of every particular therein contained. And also we are more moved, as several
matters of need do press us to crave them particularly. Hereupon it does
follow, that as on the one part, it were agreat injury and hindrance that any
man should bind us, when any particular need urges, to beg relief only
in the general form which includes many things, and not suffer us to
express the very particulars and singulars: so on the other part, to bind us
always in such sort to the several particulars, that we may not at all use
the generals, is very absurd, and a disgrace to those most excellent petitions.
For by this it must needs follow, that I may not say, Let thy Kingdom come:
or forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them, that trespass against us:
until the Brownists disprooue this, he is fully convict. For if I may use one
petition of the general heads when I pray, I may use any one; if any one,
then all.

The next argument which is brought, is to this effect, that if we be
commanded to say those words, then should we sin in using any other form, for
those being in ye best form, we are bound always to bring the best sacrifice
we have, or else we are accursed. This reason I have fully answered in that
which went before, for I have showed in what respect, it is the most excellent
and absolute form, and the best, and can by no means, without great
absurdity, yea wicked impiety, be rejected: and withal what is necessary
and fit for us.

Now for conclusion, let the Reader judge, whether I have more need to leave
of, as he says, my popish dreams, or he his spiritual fantasies, I am far
from maintaining, that our Savior, or his Apostles did stint, or bind men
unto certain words which of necessity they must use, and none other: but
this is the thing which the Brownistes must join issue in with me, whether I
may not pray saying, let thy kingdom come, or if I may so use the prescript
form of words in one petition, whether I may not in any, and so in all? And
here let the Reader observe that Master Greenewood crying out for freedom,
complaining of a tradition that brings our liberty into bondage, he does
him self take away freedom, and would lay a bondage upon men, and upon the
Churches. For it is to lay a yoke of bondage when men will restrain that
which God has left free to be used, as shall be most convenient and profitable
for edification, as to follow a prescript form, or to read praying. Among the
Jews in the time of the Law, God tied them to the Temple, and unto certain
set hours for the Evening and Morning sacrifice, but in this we are set free
in the Gospel. For I may lawfully go to the Temple to hear the word and to
be partaker of the Sacraments with the assembly: and I may lawfully frequent
other places, where the public worship is. The Churches may appoint the same
hours for there meetings that were under the law, if it be convenient, and
they may appoint other if it shall be more fit he that in these shall take
away the freedom which is given to the Churches, does lay a yoke of bondage.
In like case prescript form of prayer to use praying, being an help to the
weak, and a thing sanctified of God, and left free to the Church as need
shall require, he that denies that free use, does lay a yoke of bondage. And
so I charge Master Greenewood here to do.

In the next place there were three Arguments of Master Greenewoods which I
answered at once by denying the assumptions, and showing the reasons that
moves me, for in deed, he sets down some propositions: and out of them
affirms that which is false, and so concludes from thence another falsehood.
It is his whole manner of reasoning; if I set down this proposition, God is a
spirit, it is most true: if I will now make such an assumption as this, a
bodelie substance cannot worship a spirit, this being most false: there will
follow a false conclusion, which is that no man can worship God in body; he
is now therefore to prove his assumptions, and before he comes to it, he
cries out, stay and wonder, they are blind and make blind. Who be blind and
make blind the Brownists? This man has some great thing in his mind, which
he sees and does wonder, and now calls upon all other to stay, until he
has uttered it, and so to wonder with him. Is there any doctrine more
spiritual (says he) any more inculcated by the holy Ghost, then this
access to God in the mediation of Christ, etc. I answer who does doubt of
this* You confess I will say the propositions be true and weighty matters:
which I do in deed, and thereby do acknowledge that prayer is a spiritual
and Heavenly thing, far from the power of man to perform of himself. Now
Master Greenewood confessing I do this, like as a great wave of the Sea
comes rolling and does in show, threaten to ouerwhelme all, but suddenly
falls of it self: So he swelling with the wind of his vanity, cries out
stay and wonder, as if I should be over whelmed with the stream of his words,
and by and by falls of himself, confessing that I allow the propositions:
which in deed include the excellency of prayer, and there is an end of his
wonder. The first assumption, he must prove is that to read upon the book
when one prays is a quenching the spirit; for this he alleges the saying
of Saint Paul, Quench not the Spirit, when he has set down this, he adds
that to suppress and leave vnuttered the passions of our own heart, by the
work of the Spirit, giving us cause of prayer, and in steed thereof to read
another man's writing, he does not doubt will be found and judged of all that
have spiritual eyes to see a quenching of that grace. I answer to this, that
the speeches of the Scripture are most fit to utter our passions by. And what
have ye brought, but the matter in question? If we respect such as be not
able so well to utter: the spiritual eyes to see and judge that to be a
quenching of the Spirit, are but the eyes of Brownists. Therefore all his
beggarlie cauils which follow, and which have been answered before, are to be
let pass as they come.

The second assumption to be proved is that it is presumptuous ignorance to
come with a book. This is a lame sacrifice, because a man does know how to
do better and does not; still he would have that granted which is denied. For
I say the book is to help men to do the better, which are in themselves
dull, and full of wants, and without help should rather offer a lame
sacrifice. The third is for striving in prayer, for which when he has spoken
much of this striving which is not denied, for continuance and importunacie; he
imagines that the whole matter is proved, for this as he would make us
believe, cannot be effected unless the Priest read till he sweat again, with
vain repetitions. I might follow with many words in these and the rest: but
seeing he has confessed, that the Psalms were to be sung unto God, let him
show how the very reading then can be so grievous a thing; for this the
reader must consider, that our question is not about the matter of prayer, nor
any corruption by vain repetitions or otherwise, nor about the hypocrisy and
vain babbling of such as pray but of fashion, but simply of the reading, when
one prays: which until he can prove that diverse Psalms either were not
uttered to God as prayer, or that they did not read them when they did sing,
he proves nothing, but deceives the simple with the sight of true things
which he spreads, and from which he draws forth such false conclusions. I
leave to the reader but to compare his answers he makes to the rest touching
these arguments, and see if they make any thing for uim, and not rather against
him.

The next Argument is that, We must pray as necessity ^rgu. 7.
requires: but stinted prayers cannot be as necessity requires.

Whereas I affirmed that there be things necessary to be prayed for at all
times and of all men: which indeed are the most things which we are to beg
of the Lord. Of these there may be prescript forms for all times: and for
other things that fall out sildome the prayer is to be applied to the time, and
necessity. Here are large discourses and such as this Replier does much
please himself in, as a most spiritual man. This I take to be the drift of the
whole that in praying to GOD, we must come with feeling our wants, that so we
may pray earnestly, which I do yield unto as an undoubted truth. He holds
it as a great absurdity that we should want the same thing to morrow which we
do to day, or that all congregations should need the same one day which they
do another. He is most foolish in this and such like objections: for if I
should stand to follow particulars, there be few things which we may not
either for our selves or for our brethren at all assemblies beg of the Lord.
If there be special necessities, they are to be supplied. The matter is
clear, I will not spend time about it, more than I have in my former book.

But whereas the Brownist does object, that a prescript form does show that
men take upon them to know men's secrets, which God alone does know, it is
most vain and frivolous. The Scriptures do show that we all stand in need
of the same things and evermore, being sick of one disease, though there may
be some particular cases wherein some have their several need. And let him
answer me now unto this point: There be five or six hundred in one flock,
which come together to pray; if it be as you would bear us in hand, that there
is such a variablenes in our needs, that to day our necessity requires one
thing, to morrow another: then every particular man and woman has several
wants, and is to pray for no more than they come with present feeling off, how
then shall the Minister frame his prayer to fit them all? One shall say, this
pertains not to me, how shall I pray? Another shall say, this or that
touches not my estate. Many shall complain that their several wants are not
touched. Tell me Ma. Greenwood, or any Brownist, does ye Minister know what is
in every man? does he know every man and woman's particular wants? He is to
make the prayer in which they are al to join with him, in every request that he
makes. Or is your meaning yt every man and woman shall come unto him before
every assembly, and make their state known what their several need is? Or
can the Minister bear in mind when he has heard? Ye may see into what
absurdities blind fantasy does cast men. Men are to pray for nothing but that
which they feel the want of, and are prepared to ask, and are fit to receive.
For these (says the Brownists) there can be no set form. And I demand
whether the preacher does know every man's feeling, how they are prepared, and
how fit to receive* Will ye affirm this* or will ye confess that these gross
fantasies which yet you will father upon Gods spirit, do quite overthrow all
public prayer? For if it be sin for any to pray for more than he comes
with the present feeling off, if in the multitude the desires are several, if
it be impossible for the Minister to know them, and how the hearts be
prepared and affected, how shall he make prayer for them all? how shall they
all join with him in every request? How much better is it to confess that
the most things which all are to pray for, and at all times are inuariable: and
that men come not only to pray for that which they feel their need in; but
also to be stirred up to pray for such things as either they think not of, or
be dull in. I must needs here lament the state of our people which profess
the Gospel, and cannot epsy the grossness of these things. When the
assemblies do meet, and holy petitions are made which men have heard at every
meeting, they ought to be as fervent in praying as the first time they heard
them. For it is a gross wickedness in men not to be moved with matter because
they have often heard it, but account it stale: as we see man's mind coueteth
still that which is new. If men have not feeling it is their fault.

Touching the faults in any Leiturgie, the question is not between us, which
reason what should be. That which I spoke of the preachers not limited in
their prayers, I mean the prayers before and after their Sermons which they
conceive. That our Savior prescribed no form, I showed the reason, that it is
not a thing of necessity, but to avoid inconvenience: neither are men tied to
one form in all churches. Against this the Brownist replying, bids me stand
to this, and says I will go from it in the next argument. I say, all the
Brownists under heaven shall never be able with force of reason to drive me
from it. He first opposes, that if I say it be at all times necessary, then
the Testament is not perfect. How can I say it is at all times necessary, when
I say it is not of necessity? Christ's Testament is most absolutely perfect:
but yet all things touching comelines, order, and conueniencie, which are
variable and may be changed, are not expresselie mentioned. And that is one
chief thing whereby the Brownists do seduce many a simple man. For this
Brownist does confess that there be things contained in the general rules of
the Scripture, which are not expressed, but he will not have any of those
things variable, that is, such as may be for good cause altered. For thus he
reasons, I* it be a part of Gods worship, and all times convenient, then is
it necessary: and if it be not necessary, put (says he) such conueniencie in
your cornered cappe, or surplesse. And a little after, but you grant (says
he) it is not of necessity, therefore it is not commanded in particular, nor
contained in any general rule. Thus may we see, that he holds there is
nothing in matters of conuenience or circumstance in Gods worship, which is not
of necessity. The ground of his reason is this: If it be either expressed in
particular, or contained in any general rule, it is commanded of GOD, and man
has not authority to alter Gods commandment, therefore it is necessary. I
grant that matters of conueniencie are commanded of GOD by the general rules,
and that men may not take authority over Gods commandment. I say therefore
the Church does sin either of ignorance or of negligence, when it fails in
matters of circumstance which should serve for edification. But herein the
Brownist shows himself most absurdly ignorant, that he will have that which
is commanded to be of necessity at all times. For that he may not wind out
here with shift, as his manner is when any gross thing uttered by him is
detected. Let the reader observe his words, and he shall see plainly he
reasons for a necessity at all times. For he says, If it be a part of Gods
worship, and at all times convenient, then is it necessary. And to manifest
that he holds it all times convenient: saying, if it be not necessary, put
such conueniencie into your cornered cappe. And again he joins commanded in
Gods word and necessary at all times together. And a little after he says,
Whatsoever is commanded either in particular or in necessary collection from
the general rules, are of necessity to be obeyed, and not to be altered. This
I note to stop his evasion: for many matters of circumstance serving for
conueniencie and order, are fit at some times in some places, and for some
persons, and so by the commandment of GOD then to be used, who wills that
all things be done comely, in order, and to edification. Now, as the times do
vary with the circumstances of place, of persons, and of other occasions, the
same things which were convenient may become inconvenient, and so not
necessary at all times, as the blind Brownist does bear in hand, but to be
altered. As for example, in the time of peace it is most convenient that the
assemblies should meet in some Temple or Church built for the purpose: the
Church is then to ordeine that it may be so. In the times of war and cruel
persecution when the enemies raunge about and rage: it may be far more safe
for fear of intrapping, to meet in the woods, or secret places. Kneeling is
the fittest gesture of the body when men in earnest prayer are to worship the
Lord: the Church is to command it where it may fitly be done: but if the
assemblies be driven to meet in such places as the ground being wet, and
through the trampling of their feet does become myrie, it is inconvenient that
the multitude should be compelled to kneel in the mire: and therefore the
former ordinance is now changed. I might run through a number of particulars,
but these are sufficient to declare what a learned Divine master Greenwood is,
and how perfect a spirit does guide his pen. He demands also full wisely,
whether we do not hold it of necessity, seeing men are excommunicate, and
deposed for not observing it: or as some very ignorantly use to say, if it be
a thing indifferent, why is it not left indifferent for men to use or not to
use? I answer, that which is a thing indifferent, God commands it shall be
done when it is convenient and for edification, and therefore when the Church
does appoint or ordeine it, rightly he that breaks it, wilfully breaks the
commandment of God. And so on the other side, when it falls out not to be
convenient, and the Church does alter it, he that will now observe it with a
resisting mind does like wise offend against the rule of Gods word. I never
doubted but that by ne^essary consequence it is to be drawn from the doctrine
of the scriptures, that prayer is to be made before and after the word
preached, but I speak of a commandment in express words: therefore the
places are cited here by the Brownist to no purpose. And all the rest of his
words that follow are either in matters wherein we agree, or such as he
collectetth from his own ignorance, and which are answered before.

The next argument is, Read prayers were devised by Antichrist and maintain
superstition and Idol ministry, etc.

Here the Brownist, if he would at all speak to the purpose should prove that
the very reading a prayer when one prays is the devise of Antichrist,
maintains superstition and an Idol ministry. But he flies and deals
about the matter of leiturgies, saying: he has heard, the Pope would have
approved ours, if it might be received in his name. If master Greenwoods news
from Rome were true which he heard, the matter were not great, for the Pope
will approve the Lords prayer, the commandments and articles of the faith,
but he will expound them as it pleases him. The Pope also to wind in himself,
will approve in show many things which he misliketh, so they be not directly
against his crown and dignity. And it is to be considered that the
controversies between us and the Papists are not about the matters which we
are to beg in prayer. There is no likelihood that the Pope made such offer,
because he knows we hold in the substance and grounds of the faith, that
which quite overthrows him: but if he did, men may see by these things which
I have noted, that master Greenwood does but shift and trifle. He confesses
leiturgies were before Antichrist, and yet says he was the deviser. See the
gravity of this man: he is sore afraid that he should here again be said to
condemn all Churches because they have read prayer: and therefore he says his
arguments are falsely wrested. Answer your self then, and tell us what ye
hold them which receive the devise of Antichrist. Why cry ye not out of the
mark of the beast? It is a pitiful thing to see in what a case the Brownist
is: For he will not condemn the Churches; and yet after he has set forth what
leiturgie is, and affirmed that the new Testament is Christ's leiturgie: he
alleges that they be accursed that add thereto; and holds prescript form
of prayer an adding. Let him now be asked: is the curse laid upon the true
Churches? he will say no. Then prescript form is either no adding to Christ's
Testament, or else they be under the curse that use it. He says leiturgies are
another gospel. Then all Churches have received another gosepl. The words that
follow have bin answered before. Where I said there would sundry
inconveniences grow for want of prescript form of public prayer. After he
has set down that Christ is a perfect law giver, and that the word of God is
sufficient, he terms it blasphemy to say there would be inconveniences
without leiturgies: then all the Churches commit blasphemy, whether do ye
yet condemn them or not? This is from his grosenes which does not se that
Christ's Testament is perfect, and yet there are things commanded in general
rules which are variable, as I have before showed for circumstances of time,
place, persons, sitting, kneeling, etc. He says there can be no particular
laws made without breaking the law of God, as though the Church were not to
see what in these is fit and convenient upon every occasion and time, and for
that time to establish the same: But every man to do as he shall like, or
shall take the general rule of order and decency, for men will not agree: this
is from rules of order to draw confusion. Now this great divine says I have
made a fair hand in affirming leiturgies to be but a matter of order, or
conueniencie for edification. Seeing as he says, it is all the worship we
have: this comes from him that has the beauty of Sion, as he boasts:
which the inchaunters of Egypt cannot judge of. This comes from him that with
his fellows has the cloud between them and us, and the pillar of fire
before them as he speaks in the next words. Because I say the prescript
form and the reading are but for order, he concludes that I confess the
prayer is but a matter of order or conueniencie: ye say I have made a fair
hand. But I tell ye master Greenwood, if ye should go into the Schools and
reason so in earnest, the young boys would be ready to hiss ye forth as a
non proficiens, and how fair hand should you make then? they will not believe
ye have it from your pillar of fire, but out of that dark cloud of your
ignorance which is between your self and the light of the truth. Now whereas
I said, ye Church has power to ordain according to the word of God, and to
appoint such orders in matters of circumstance, about public prayer, preaching
of the word, and administering of the Sacraments, as shall most fitly serve for
edification: and then these orders being established by public authority the
discipline and censures of the Church are to drive men to the observation of
the same that stubbornely break them. Here the poor Brownist lays open
himself again to be as blind as a beetle: he will needs have it to be
papisticall mudde, and that I am in an Apostacy. Because there can as (he
says) no other laws be made in matters of circumstance, than Christ himself
has made: that to ordain laws in the Church is to plead for unwritten
verities: and to make the law of God vnsufficie^t. It is an adding to the word
of God, which is execrable pride. All the Popes trinkets might be brought in
by the same ground. This is the foundation of Popery, and Anabaptistrie, to
give liberty to make laws in the worship of God. And by your judgment which
would have men driven to observe them, our Savior Christ was an
Anabaptisticall Schismatike that would not himself nor his disciples obey the
traditions of the Elders. Thus speaks this Brownist. But what beastly
ignorance does he bewray and that in sundry points? and with what horrible
things in his blind fury, does he charge all Churches withal? For first when
he says that for matters of order and circumstance, there can be no other
laws made of them, tha^ Christ has made: he sees not the difference between
the giving general rules of charity, of come lives, and order, which serve
for edification that are to be followed in making laws touching matters in
themselves merely indifferent, and the very particular laws themselves that
are so to be made. The^ if it be true which he says the matters of order and
circumstance are not variable, but stand fixed as inviolable laws of Christ in
the particulars to be observed, which is false, seeing these circumstances are
no part of Gods worship: As Paul says, The Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, etc. but as handmaids, to attend upon it, and to adorn it; and so are
used and not used, as occasion serves. I have showed this before in some
particulars, as that the assemblies are in time of peace gathered in temples,
and fixed places and open, in time of persecution and tumult in the fields, in
woods, and secret places which they change, and at the commandment of the
pastors and governors: the wise reader may consider the like not only for
kneeling and such like, but in many other. And we see that the Apostles
themselves did decree some things for the time, which afterward were to be
altered, when the occasion was taken away, as namely to avoid giving offense
to ye weak Jews which stuck in the ceremonies of the law: they made this
decree Act. 15. That the gentiles should abstain from blood and from
strangled. We do not now observe this decree of the Apostles, neither are we
to observe it, seeing the occasion is removed for which it was made.

Furthermore, if there be no laws to be made in matters of circumstance, how
shall the flocks know what to follow or to observe where the pastors shall
dissent and vary in judgment? Sall not some be rent into one part, and some
into another? Now when he says this is to plead for unwritten verities, to
make the Law of God insufficient, to add to the word, alleging those
Scriptures, which show how cursed a thing that is: he does but ignorantly
abuse those Scriptures, and wickedlie seduce the simple sort of men. For those
Scriptures are against the adding of human precepts and laws to be kept as
parts of Gods worship, to bind the conscience, to seek righteousness, and the
forgiveness of sins, or the merit of eternal life in them, or against such
rules of government, as God has set to be perpetual. This is against the
perfection of the word, against Christian liberty, and in the chief things
which concern Gods worship, against the ground and foundation of our faith:
and so a thing most detestable and accursed, which our savior also and his
Apostles refused justly to observe with the blind Pharisees. But now where
the Brownist has his eyes so daseled with that pillar of fire which he says
they have before them, that he cannot perceive that to make and constitute
laws in matters of circumstance for comelines, and order according to the
general rules of the Scripture and not to bind the conscience, is no adding
to the word, nor mixing Gods worship with man's inventions, he is much to be
pitied. And doubtless before this pillar of fire be removed, which is not the
heavenly light of Gods spirit, but a frantic presumption, by which the
devil does delude men and blind them with their swelling, he shall never see
well. Some will say if these constitutions be not to bind the conscience of
men, why are men forced to keep them? Why should the discipline and censures
of the Church drive men thereunto? In deed this is that which the freedom of
the Brownists can at no hand endure. To answer this, the reader must consider
what is the binding of the conscience. It is not to say simply ye must for
conscience sake do it, or ye are bound for conscience sake to do it; for
then all the human constitutions and laws of princes may be said to bind
the conscience, because Saint Paul wills to obey them for conscience Romans 13.
But by binding the conscience is meant, that such laws are laid upon the
conscience to be observed as part of the worship of God: when men are punished
for not keeping them as contemning Gods worship, then is the Christian liberty
withstoode. But when ye discipline and censures of the Church, do compel men
to observe the laws, which in matters of comlines and order are made according
to the rules of the Apostle: they are not punished for doing or not doing the
things themselves, but that by doing that which is forbidden, or refusing to
do that which is commanded, they disturb the peace, breed divisions and
offense, disobey where they are commanded obedience: these be sins, and for
these, men are to be punished. This is where the orders be, not against the
word of God, but fit for edification.

And now to conclude about this matter, all the Churches of God under heaven
do make such laws, such Canons, and constitutions in matters of circumstance,
and by their discipline compel both Ministers and people to obey the same. The
Brownist alleges against this, not only the sentences. Proverbs. 30. verse. 5.
6* and Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 12. 32. but also, Reuela. 22. verse. 18. 19. Where the
Lord threatens, that he that shall add to the words of that Prophecy, he
will put upon him the Plagues written in that book.

Tell me now Master Greenewood, do ye yet condemn all Churches? Ye do
affirm that they which make any laws, do add to the word of God, and
allege against them, that God will put upon them the plagues written in that
book: which is a denouncing of the extreme wrath of God, for there is the
lake of fire set forth? If ye were not quite beside your self, how could you
thus hurl your darts of extreme condemnation, and strike all churches, and
yet when I tell ye of it, cry out, that I am a liing Prophet, and will me to
remember who is the father of untruths? But least I may seem to father that
upon the Churches, which is far from them, I will note somewhat out of the
harmony of confessions Section. 17. The latter Heluetian confession says,
Quod in Ecclesijs dispares inueniuntur ritus, nemo Ecclesias existimet ex eo
esse dissidentes. That there are unlike rites or ceremonies found in the
Churches, let no man judge hereby, that the Churches dissent. And the
confession of Bohemia has. Quare illi tantum ritus, illaeque ceremoniae bonae
seruari debent, quae in populo Christiano vnicam and veram fidem, sincerumque
cultum Dei, concordium, charitatem, and veram atque Christianam se^ religiosam
pacem aedificant. Sieve igitur, ab episcopis, sieve a consilijs Ecclesiasticis,
aut a quibuscumque aucthoribus alijs extiterint, aut introductae sint, de eo
simpliciores laborare non debent, neque hoc mou^ri, aut perturbari: sed quia
bonae sunt ijs ad bonum vti. Wherefore those rites and those good ceremonies
ought only to be kept, which among the people of Christ do edify the
only and true faith, and the sincere worship of God, concord, charity, and
the true and Christian or religious peace. Therefore whether they be exstant,
or brought in by the Bishops, or by the Counsels Ecclesiastical, or by other
authors whatsoever, the simpler sort are not to trouble themselves about that,
neither with this to be moved or disquieted, but because they be good, to
use them unto that which is good. And a little after, Et quanquam nostri, non
omnes ritus aeque servant cum alijs Ecclesijs, id quod and fieri non potest,
and non est necesse fieri, vt omnibus in locis Christianorum conuentuum, vnae
and eadem ceremoniae vsurpentur: non tamen vlli bonae and piae constitutioni
repugnant, seseue opponunt, neque ita animati sunt vt ceremoniarum causa
dissidia vlla commouere velint, etiamsi aliquae non admodum necessariae esse
iudicarentur, modo Deo and cultui atque gloriae huius non reperiantur
contrariae, and quae veram in Iesum Christum fidem quae sola iustitiam
conciliat, non diminuant. That is to say, And although our men do not equally
observe all rites with other Churches, a thing which both cannot be done, and
is not necessary to be done, that in all places of the christian assemblies,
one and the same ceremonies should be used: yet they do not repugne any good
constitution, or oppose themselves, neither are they so minded as that for the
cause of ceremonies they will move any dissentions, although some might be
judged to be not altogether necessary, so that they be not found contrary to
God, to his worship and glory, and which diminish not the true faith in Jesus
Christ, which only does justify. Again a little after, Docentur and hoc
agnoscere homines, traditiones humanas non complecti legem perpetuam and
immutabilem, sed quemadmodum justice de causis ab ^^minibus instituuntur, ita
etiam justice and grauibus de causis, and re ita postulante, violari, abrogari,
atque mutari sine vllo peccato posse. That is, Men are taught also to
acknowledge this, that humane traditions do not contain a perpetual law and
unchangeable, but as for just causes, they are ordained by me^, so also for
just and weighty causes, and the matter so requiring, they may be violated,
abrogated and changed without offending. The Augustine confession, Quaerat
igitur aliquis an vitam hanc hominu^, sine ordine, sine ritibus esse velimus?
nequaqua^, sed docemus pastores veros Ecclesiarum posse in Ecclesijs suis
publicos ritus instituere: That is, Some man the^ may demand whether we would
have this life of men to be without order, without ceremonies? In no wise. But
we teach that the true pastors of the churches may in their churches ordeine
public rites or ceremonies.

I might set down to the same effect out of the confessions of the other
reformed Churches, but I will omit it as not necessary, and only note a few
things out of Master Beza his Epistles. After he has set down Epist. 24. that
things indifferent are so called, not that men may without exception do or
leave undone as often as they lust and as it shall please them and not sin:
but that they are so called, because a man may use and not use them well, and
he may use them and not use them evil. And moreover, that things indifferent
by themselves or otherwise, do after a sort change their nature, when by some
lawful commandment they are either commanded or forbidden. And further,
that the use of them is generally restrained by the law of charity, and
specially or more particularly by constitution either politic or
ecclesiastical. He adds, Etsi enim conscientias proprie solus deus ligat,
tamen quatenus vel Magistratus, qui dei minister est, iudicat interesse
reipublicae, vt quippiam alioqui per se licitum non fiat: vel ecclesia ordinis
and decori adeoque aedificationis rationem habens, leges aliquas de rebus
medijs rite condit: eiusmodi leges pijs omnino sunt obseruande, and eatenus
conscientias ligant vt nemo sciens and prudens rebellandi animo possit absque
peccato vel facere quae ita prohibentur, vel ^mittere quae sic pr^cipiuntur.
That is to say, For although properly God alone does bind the consciences, yet
so far as either the Magistrate which is the minister of God, does judge it
profitable for the Commonwealth that something should not be done, which
otherwise of it self is lawful: or the Church having regard of order and
comelines, and so of edification, does rightly make some laws in matters
indifferent: such laws are many wise to be observed of the godly, and do so
far bind the conscience that no man wittinglie and willingly with a mind to
rebel can without sin, either do the things which are so forbidden, or leave
undone things so commanded.

What have I said more than the Churches do hold, master Beza and all the most
noble Instruments of GOD in these last days, if I should stand to show it.
Then ye may see when Master Greenwood does so raginglie take on, and strike he
knows not whom, such fury is not fit for disputation in the Church. Let not
the reader here suppose that I go about to maintain that the prayer of any is
pleasing to God, which come with customarie words of course without feeling
their wants: or that I should hold, that a set form of prayer is of men to be
uttered without meditation and preparation, as many do of an idle custom, as
if the very saying were a great service to God. Nor yet do I hold that all
men alike stand in need of prescript form in their private prayers, or that
the feruencie of prayer is not often times more vehement in uttering any
request in private prayer without prescript form than with it, if a man be
able. I say further; A man is to call upon God not only as his need in any
particular shall urge him, even at al times: but he is also to stir up himself
and to prepare himself to beg more things than be in his present feeling and
memory, which prescript forms are an help to direct him unto. And when a man
comes to the public assemblies to pray, the case is somewhat differing from
making his private requests: for there he comes not to crave those things
alone which he feels present need of, or which he is moved withal, but
to make common requests with the whole congregation, in all things that they
are to crave. To this he must now frame himself: Among five or six hundred,
the particular wants or desires are sundry, one moved more in one thing:
another in another thing: some come more fitter to pray, for this, and some for
that. It is most certain, that neither the prescipt form, nor the preacher
can see into these several estates of men's minds and consciences, or to the
desires which they are most fit and prepared to express: neither is that so
much to be regarded, seeing that which should be fittest for one part, should
not be so fit for another: but they must every one frame himself to pray for all things which the assembly does pray for, which are necessary to be prayed
for at al times and of all persons. Shall any man say, I am not prepared to
beg these things, therefore they be not fit for me? Let him not be so wicked,
but stir up himself rather to beg them with the congregation. Shall any be
so foolish as to say, we know these things before, I am not moved with them,
men for the most part do but repeat them of custom? Nay rather let him strive
against such impiety, and say the things are not any thing the less precious
which we crave, because we hear them often or know them before, or that
many abuse them: and therefore we endeavor to beg them earnestly with all
faithful ones in the assembly, seeing they be such as are needful to be
prayed for. In the rest I leave the reader to compare his book with my former.

The last Argument. The prayers of such Ministers and people as stand under a
false government are not acceptable. Those Ministers which stand subject to the
Bishops and their Courts, are subject to a false government and to Antichrist.

I did refer the answer of these to the third and fourth accusation: but yet
I did take some exception, as my book shows. The Brownist in replying here
is in great distemper: I will let all his words pass, and come to the matter.
I alleged out of the Epistle to the Romans Chapt. 7. that S. Paul was held
in some bondage, and therefore that Jerusalem from above is not in this world
so free, but that she and all her children are in some spiritual bondage. At
this he did cry out of Atheism and carnal Libertinisme, affirming that S.
Paul never continued captive unto sin after regeneration, neither gave place
unto evil thoughts. Where I have justly charged him with very foul matter,
which now laboring to wash away, he does bemire himself. First he cries out
of wrong in diverse things without any cause. Such as do touch the question of
government and the blasts he blows that way, I do here omit, because his
fellows do make reply as he mentions unto those things, and I must then
answer. Only I deal with him now touching the place to the Romans. He
wills if I have any common honesty, to let his former answer be seen. I
promise ye it will be small to your credit and honesty let whosoever see it,
seeing ye do in shameless manner cry out of wresting and I know not what.
Against my reason out of the words of Saint Paul, deny if ye have the
forehead, these to be your words. And now (say you) that Scripture which the
Apostle has set down in the anguish of his soul, concerning the inward
strife of the flesh and the spirit, you shamefully pervert to your own
condemnation except you repent: for Paul never continued captive unto sin
after his regeneration, neither gave place unto evil thoughts. Paul speaks
there of the imperfectness of his own righteousness, which makes the law
deadly unto him. I will think you a fleshly Libertine, if you reca^t not
this doctrine. What Atheist would thus have defended his own gross sins?
Thus far go your words, and now let such as have knowledge judge what wrong
I have done ye. Let them look upon that which I have published, and see
whether I have wrested your words, or set down any unsound point of doctrine
as you would yet accuse me, and do importunatelie cry out: but now your words
are in the light, and your answer also which ye cannot use such shifts to
excuse. You lay open the disagreement between you and me. First you cannot
agree to this, that the regenerate may be said to stand in any bondage to
sin. You cannot conclude against it, but bring in another saying and so draw
a conclusion: And that is, how I also affirm that one standing in bondage to
open known sin, may in that estate be accepted and communicated with as the
servant of Christ by outward profession both at one instant: which is as to
say, we may be to man's sight the servant of the devil, and the servant of
Christ both at one time by outward profession. So none should be
excommunicate, none without, the world and the Church, light and darkness,
Christ and Belial, should be mingled together. Well, then I ask this question
both of your self and of your fellows, whether there be any one of ye that
can stand forth and say, I see no sin in my self; but so soon as I have
espied I overcome and am not at all led by it. Tell me further, whether ye have
not this, that ye may say there is evil always in ye which you cannot be rid
of; and that does hold ye fast and press ye? Do ye not leave the good undone
and commit evil, and such evil as is always present in ye? Do not ye find
great sins that ye stand under as not able to come out of? If any Brownist
shall deny he is such, or in this estate, he can be but a proud hypocrite. If
ye confess it, what do you but confess some bondage? Let me ask ye
further, is there any of ye which dare stand forth and say I am not a sinner
in the sight of men? I stand not holden under any outward sin: the Brownist
must answer these questions, for he holds that men can not outwardly
appear sinners and be the servants of Christ at one instant. What beastly
gear is this? There is sin that appears in the best men at al times, in
gesture, in words, in deeds, in negligence, in wants, yea a thousand ways:
who is able to endure ye trial of Gods law even in that which outwardly does
appear in him for an hour? And will ye cast forth all in whom there
appears sin that he does abide in? The gross open sinners I confess,
which contemn and give offense are to be cast forth, but are those which
abide within at any time free from open sin? covetousness is a foul sin,
so is pride, self love, and wrath. Do all Brownists so fully shine in
brightness before men that in none of these nor any other they can be discerned
to be sinners? Does all virtue shine forth in them? And touching that which I
charged you withal, look better now upon your own speech: If there be any
modesty in ye, it will be hard for ye to deny, but that I have laid no more
to your charge than your own plain words. For are not these words plain,
Paul never continued captive unto sin after his regeneration, neither gave
place unto evil thoughts? But now you make a protestation that you have ever
been free from such an heresy, and your last writing did testify much.
Touching your writing it was both last and first, except your bare argument:
and there is no heed to take what ye say, for your matter comes forth as
the stream does turn the wheel, even unto contrary motions. When before the
rage of the stream turned the wheel to utter the freedom of the Church, then
it must be in such perfection that the regenerate is not partly held captive
unto sin, nor gives place unto evil thoughts.

Now when the wheel must have a contrary motion to purge your self, there
comes as violent a stream that way. For here ye say, the children of God
after regeneration may commit any sin, except the sin against the holy ghost.
And you also affirm that they may commit sin of presumption and obstinate
sin: In my judgment you had need of some favorable exposition of your
speech. The regenerate doubtless, as we have examples in the scriptures may fall
into grievous sins, and do through frailty: but that it may be of
presumption and obstinacy, you must declare how filthy incest is not the
sin against the holy ghost, nor if a man kill his Father, Mother, or
Children. No more is witchcraft, and familiarity with devils. Is it your
meaning, that the regenerate may of presumption and obstinacy commit these?
If not, why do you utter such words and not make them plain. I spoke upon
the place to the Romans, that the freedom of the Church in this world is but
in part and not perfect: he cried out, a fleshly liberty. If I should have
spoken as he speaks here, what would he have said? But he now he is afraid
least while he has washed himself over clean from Anabaptisme, he should
overthrow Brownisme, as indeed he does. And that is the cause why he
tempereth his speech in the words following: that although in Gods fight
obstinat sinners may be regenerate and so his children, yet not to men by
outward profession: but are to be cast forth which I do not deny; and then
for the least bowing down to a false government, they are to be cast forth.
This I omite as not the question between him and me, and leave his words to be
considered of the reader. But where he proceeds in reasoning against me as if
I held that obstinate gross sinners are not teo be cast forth by
excommunication: I marvel from whence he can gather that. But let us come to
S. Paul again, and see how master Greenwood excuses his own speech, and
condemns mine. It is out of doubt that as God is immortal and does begette by
immortal seed, as S. Peter speaks: so all which are borne of GOD and have
therefore received the spirit of regeneration, can never loose that spirit.
Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin because his seed abides in
him: neither can he sin because he is borne of God. 1. John. 3. v. 9. From
hence master Greenwood holds himself cleared, and may well say that S. Paul
after regeneration stood not in any bondage to sin, nor gave place unto
evil thoughts: because he ever repented, and the spirit of God in him did not,
nor could not consent or give place unto sin. His meaning then is this, that
the regeneration which is from the spirit cannot be in bondage to sin, and
the graces of the spirit cannot consent or give place unto evil thoughts.
This is most true, unless a man will be so wicked as to hold that the grace
of God may be in bondage and consent to the work of the devil. If this had
been the matter in question between us, and he had said no more, it could not
be reproved. But he proceeds further and charge me with error, that when
S. Paul reasons of the old man, or corruption in him, I will needs
conclude it of the new man, or inner man, or of the whole man. My words are
extant in print, let all the Brownists sconne them, and see whether they can
without falsehood and lying gather from them that I conclude that the new man
or inner man which is ye grace of regeneration is in bondage to sin, or does
consent unto evil thoughts: the whole course of my words does lay open the
contrary. For I show how Paul touching the inner man consented to the law of
God: And that in his mind, that is in the regeneration, he did serve the law
of God. What is it then which makes master Greenwood so boldly to accuse, and
so falsely? Even the mother of headdy boldness, and much falsehood, palpable
ignorance. For where I stand to affirm, that paul a regenerate man stood yet
in some captivity and bondage unto sin. He does imagine it will follow,
that I affirm the regeneration to be in bondage unto sin: because Paul is
the whole man, and he that concludes upon the whole, concludes upon every
part. In deed this is it which has deceived the Brownist, and by which he
thus labors to seduce others: that where the Scripture calls the
regeneration, or the graces of the spirit, the new man and the inner man, (as
it calls the corruption of nature the old man, and the body of sin) he
understands it, as though the person himself, who is regenerate were called
the new man, or the inner man, which is far wide: for the graces of the
spirit, the work of the spirit, the regeneration called the inner man, are
one thing, and the man himself which is regenerat, another. The body and
soul are Paul, the regeneration called the inner man, or the graces of the
Spirit, are not Paul himself, but in Paul. The soul and body are Paul, the
corruption through concupiscence called the old man, is not Paul himself but
is in Paul? because the regeneration shall never be extinguished the regenerate
are reckoned and esteemed after it, not that the regeneration itself is,
either the man or a part of the man. David was a man regenerate, he committed
adultery, and murder, the soul and body of David sinned, whole David does
acknowledge himself a sinner, that is, he was a sinner both in body and
soul: and yet the regeneration, the seed of God in him, the graces of the
Spirit, which were as coals of fire for the time covered in the ashes, did not
sin, nor consent unto evil thought. Paul a regenerate man, when he says
Autos ego, I my self in the mind serve the law of God, but in the flesh the
law of sin, calls not the regeneration, I my self, but his soul and
body which were Paul: then the body and soul of Paul in the mind, that is
so far as they were regenerate, did serve the law of God. The same body and
soul of Paul in the flesh, that is in the corruption of nature remaining,
because regeneration is not full and perfect, did serve the law of sin: for
he says I my self for both. The flesh in this place is not Paul, nor no part
of Paul, but the corruption of sin spread over the body and soul of Paul.
Even so, the mind is not Paul, nor any part of Paul, but the work of Grace
remaining, the soul and body of Paul.

Now the Brownist, not understanding, but as the Apopostle says, They would be
Doctors of the law, not knowing what they speak, nor whereof they affirm. 1.
Timo* 1. would have us believe him, that Paul after regeneration was not in
any respect held captive unto sin, nor gave place unto evil thoughts:
because the grace of God in Paul was not in bondage unto sin nor consented.

Saint Paul says, I my self in the flesh serve the law of sin: which as I
expounded in my former book, does not prove that sin did reign, or that it
is to be accounted such a service to sin as is done on the other part to God,
because this is by violent tyranny against the will, so far as the grace of
regeneration has reformed it; and the service to the law of God is with
delight and willingness. This is the reason why he says, It is no longer I,
but the sin that dwells in me. It is not reckened his sin before God,
because he does hate it: but yet it sticks fast both in his soul and body.
It is no longer I that sin: The Brownistes exposition is to this effect, It
is no longer I that is the inner man, or the graces of the spirit that do it,
but sin that dwells in me. Did the grates of regeneration ever commit
sin, or the inner man* If not, how can it be said it is no longer I, for
nothing can be said to do no longer, that has not don before? And when he
says, but sin that dwells in me, this in me, is not in the regeneration, for
though sin dwell in man together with the works of grace, yet is it no fit
speech to say sin dwells in the regeneration* Therefore this I, when he
says, it is no longer I that do it, is not the inner man, but the person of
Paul consisting of soul and body. How fondly then does Master Greenewood
affirm, that S. Paul in that place touching his bondage to sin, speaks but
of that which is called the old man? The old man is the concupiscence and
corruption of sin. Where I alleged that Paul says, he saw a law in his
members that did lead him captive to the law of sin, he says I falsefie
the text: because it is leading me captive, and not did lead me captive. Paul
speaks in the time present, least he might seem to speak of a former estate
which he was not in then. And it was more effctuall to lay open the bondage to
sin, which in some respect the regenerate are in, though sin have not
dominion over them, for him to say, at that instant holding me captive, then to
say did leave me captive. The cause why I put it in the time past is, that Paul
is delivered long since. The disciples saw Jesus walking on the water, do I
falsefie the text, if I say they saw Jesus did walk upon the water* But this
is not all, for this Brownist says, holding him captive, but it did not hold
him. What can be a more flat contradiction than this* his reason is because
there was a stronger, that suffered not the law in his members to reign. The
matter is not about a full dominion of sin, but whether the body and soul
were not so yoaked still with it, as to be forced to commit sin. Now let me
have an answer to this, either from Master Greenewood, or any other Brownist
whether the regeneration be perfect in any. He will say I do him great wrong to
ask him such a question, because he professes the contrary. Well then,
answer also whether the freedom of Gods children from sin, while they live
here be perfect, or but in part, as the regeneration is? If ye will say the
freedom is perfect, show how there can be a perfect freedom from sin, by a
sanctification which is but a part. If ye say the freemdome is but in part and
imperfect, as ye must needs say, (unless ye will be right Annabaptists
indeed) then tell me how it is possible, that where the freedom is but in
part, that should be no bondage? For what is the imperfection of freedom, but
that it takes not away all bondage? look how far the freedom comes short
of perfection, so far bondage does remain, choose whether part ye will to
affirm, either the freedom of Gods children from sin while they live here
to be perfect, or else to be imperfect. For if ye shall say the freedom is
already perfect, (as ye have hitherto, by affirming that the regenerate are in
no bondage to sin) then shall ye continue in Annabaptistrie. If ye deny the
freedom of the regenerate to be perfect as yet, (which in deed is the sound
truth) then consider that how much is wanting of perfect freedom, so much
remains of that bondage to sin, which as yet al stand under that line, and
acknowledge your madness in affirming so directly contrary to the Scriptures,
that Paul never continued captive unto sin after regeneration, nor gave place
unto evil thoughts.

FINIS.

