THE Honorable Actions of that most Famous and valiant Englishman, Edward
Glemham, Esquire. Lately obtained against the Spaniards, and the holy Leauge,
in four sundry fightes.

With his landing on S. Georges I Will, belonging to our enemy, which he kept
with four score and six men, the space of 48. hours.

With his like succes against 6. Gallegoes, of which he fired two: And notable
victory in his fight with four Gallyes, bound for Marceellus: to the eternal
honor of our country, and no less worthy commendations of the valiant and
brave minded Gentleman and his followers, having but one ship of burden 240.
tons, or thereabout, whereof himself is owner.

Published for an encouragement to our English adventurers, (Gentlemen,
Sailars, and Souldiars,) that serve against the enemies of God and our Country.

LONDON Printed by A. J. for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Newgate Market. 1591.

Honorable actions of Edward Glemham, Esquire.
ABout August last past, 1590, that most famous and venterous Gentleman, Edward
Glemhall of Benhall in Suffolk, Esquire, set sail from Tilberry-hope near
Grauesend, only accompanied with one good ship, viz. The Edward and Constance,
of the burden of 240. Tons or upward, and one Pinnis called the Fawlcon,
which Ship and Pinnis he alone equiped, furnished and victualed, in such sort
and with such plenty, as sildome has there been so much provision made for
the like Voyage, all at his own proper costs. This famous Gentleman, being
owner and sole aduenturer: not only hassarded his goods to the fortune of the
Seas, but scorning the Idle life which many desires, adventured also his body
in this voyage, showing his worthy undaunted mind, which holds honor in
greater regard, then ease at home, preferring countries benefit, and his
reputation far beyond life, (albeit) his worship in his Country, and livings
were such, as might have drawn the coward minds of many, to have lived
amongst their friends, free from those dangers imminent to trauailers, yea,
such were the bountiful blessings of God, enduing him with those worldly
favors, as might have woone him to have left his determined voyage, having so
abundantly the love generally of his neighbors, Gentlemen, and commons,
amongst whom he kept good hospitality, feasting his friends, and releeuing the
poor plentifully, such was the good mind both of the gentleman and his
virtuous wife, whose worshipful auncestrie, has been, and is, most famous,
both in Court and Country, being daughter and sole heir of a right
worshipful Knight, famous in his life, and of great possessions. But neither
the desire of living which he enjoyed, the sorrow of his right worshipful
Wife, nor the pitteous moan of his sweet children, might remove his settled
determination from his intended voyage, which he undertook this last year,
for the Islands of the Suryes and Canaryes, whether at his departure he framed
his course, giving the like directions to his Pinnis, who he was enforced to
leave behind him at Dover, to repair some wants, but he never saw her since,
by the negligence of the Master and Captain which he left in her, to no
little grief of the Gentleman, and no small discomfort to all his company.

All things furnished for his voyage, the great commander of the heavens and
seas, favoring his enterprise, he set sail from Dover road, having the wind
large at North East, which continued so eight days, so that it freed him from
our coast. Thus happily he recovered the Cape, and from thence to the Islands,
there spending his time, doing small good, until November, abiding many
sharp storms of wind and weather, which they continued, when many were
enforsed to forsake the Islands, and return home, keeping the Spanish coast,
without doing any thing answerable to his valiant mind, loathing to return
without doing some honorable exploite, as well for honor of his Country, as
his reputation, his men, healthful and in good liking, for whom was his
cheifest care, for that he would profit them, whose living is thereby
maintained, their wives and families, exteeming their good, more then his own
loss, which was likely to be of no small importe.

Houering between the Islands, commanded by the harshnes of the winds, to
seek his best safety, having little chase or none, and desirous to relieve
his companies with such fresh vittels as the Islands affords, he most
valiantlye accounted, to land on Saint Georges Island. And having counseled
with his company thereof, they were all willing, as men that love him, both for
his valor and courtesy, to follow him, in what service so ever, all
condiscending to his will, he causes speedy preparation to be made for the
same. And having a small Caruill, which he had taken before at his starne, for
that she drew little water, was the fitter for the landing his companies: All
things provided, they attend but the tide for their best advantage, and near
upon a full sea, he halled up his long Boat and the Caruell, into which
entered four score and six men, 60 Shot, the rest Pikes, black Bills, and
other warlike abilliments, and in Gods name commit themselves to their good
fortunes.

The watch of the Island, perceiving their coming near the shore, with their
Ship, more then commonly any stranger does, had before given warnings, that
the most force of the Island was there, ready to receive them: which our men
perceived, yet could not be daunted with the sight of them, but valiantly put
forwards, attempting to land where they were most sharply encountered by the
enemy. But the Gunner taking advantage, with a Sacare from the Ship, charged
with a Chain, made so good a shoot, that he flew and dismembered ten or
twelve, who seeing his success aunswerable to his desire, he playde still
upon them with his Ordnance from the Ship, which made them the sooner to
retire, so that the whole conflict at the first landing, continued not past two
hours, when the Spaniards hearts began to quail, and his men to be of more
courage, which the Spaniards perceauing, sounded a retreat, and with all
speed, fled into the hie Countries, so thanks be to God, they ended only
with the loss of two men, besides some hurt, yet did they great spoil amongst
the Spaniards.

Being landed, and night at hand, they had no policy, to pursue them,
wherefore marching into the land a Mile or something less, they encamped
themselves, dispearsing sundry Sentenels, for watch, far from the Camp,
diverse ways, keeping a strong watch in camp. That if the enemy should have
come upon them in the night, they might have been ready to receive them.

But the Spaniards, having so bad a banquetiat their first meetings, had no
have to come again. Day being come, General Glemham commanded certain
espials to be sent out, to see if they could descrie the enemy, but they
returned with little news, saving they saw many armed in no array, and diverse
women and children, carrying goods to hide.

Upon this news, that worthy Gentleman, and brave Captain, Master Edward
Horecourt his associate in those his Voyages, willed the General to divide the
company, and he would lead the one of them: and so with Ensigns displayed, to
march in warlike order farther up, to see what they would do: which counsel
the General accepted, and with easy paces marched on, largely distanted one
from the other, to make them seem far more in number then they were, with
Drums, Trumpets, and two Ensigns displaid, yeeling such terrible cries as they
marched, as might terrify a great company.

The General governed by Captain Horecourt, whose experience in land service
is much, having had charge of credit in the Low Countries, Ireland, and
Portingall, and therefore wholly directed by him, the two Companies marched in
sort like two wings, with intent and full resolution, if there came ten men for
one, to encounter them, and valiantly to die together, or gain honor for ever
with the enemy.

They had not marched half a league, when making a stand for some parley, the
espyals brought word they saw one come, mounted as if he came to speak with
them, wherefore the General sent a Guarde of Musketeares to meet him, and to
stay him, if he had any thing to say, for that he should not take view of
their forces. When he came to this Court of Guarde appointed to meet him:
they demanded what he was? Who answered, he had to say to their General and
Captains, and desired to be brought to their presence, they staide him there,
and sent word to the General what he was, who came accompanied with four
other Gentlemen, and his whole noise of Trumpets, most bravely to speak with
him.

After entertainment given him in the best manner, for that he seemed some
Cauelere, he advertised the General that he came from the Governor, to know
what they were, and what they required.

The General using him kindly, gave him mild speeches, but willed him to
return his answer thus. That he was a Gentleman of England, and what he
pretended, he would not impart to any private man: but if the Governor would
come himself, he promised on the honor of an English Gentleman, he should
pass and repasse in safety: if he gave not credit to his word, hostage of
reputation, Gentlemen of his country, no whit inferior to the best Spaniard
in the I Will, should be delivered for him.

With this answer, the Messenger hastneth to the Governor: Who calling his
Counsel, required their opinions, whose aduises given, he came toward the
Camp, accompanied with twelve others, well mounted, about some half mile from
the Court of Guarde, they made stay, and sent unto the General for his
hostages, who ss he promised, sent a Gentleman, that sometimes attended the
Earl of Warwike, Master Hammon, one Master Gore, and Master Hunnings,
Guarded with twenty Musketeares, who delivered the Gentlemen, and received the
Governor, conducting him to a place where the General made his stay, distant
from his Camp.

Being met, and having a while conferred, the General demanded to have the
Island delivered him, unto the Queen of Englands use, which if they would, they
should have liberty to depart with what they had there in possession, if not,
to commit it to the hassard of the sword, for what aduantuge he had, he would
keep, or die for it: and what spoil he could make they should be assured of.

This demand the Governor flatlye denied, alleging he was a Gentleman, and
sworn to the King his Master, as the General for the Queen of England, and
that before his allegiance therein should quail, he would die with honor like
a Gentleman. Yet quoth he, as ye are a Gentleman, and will favor me
hereafter, what there is in the I Will will do you pleasure, command it,
condicionally that your companies spoil not the Kings subjects, nor their
goods, which rather then I may endure, I will hazard all to my good Fortunes.

The General for that he understood not the Spanish, was compelled to use an
enterpretor, wherefore that he might speak his own mind, he demanded of
the Governor if he spoke Lattin, which he did excellent well, so in lattin,
which the General speaks as perfect as English, he confermed what he had
before spoken and no more.

The General craved some respect to answer him, leaving captain Horecourt and
the Master which was newly come ashore, to accompany him, he called the
cheifest of all his company, aduertising what offers were made, and wild them
to look into the matter with advise, before they determined, for as he had
brought them thither, he would in part be governed by the^, who adventured as
he did, though his charge was more, yet told them, that in his opinion, better
some good end be made, then to adventure farther, for that they were strangers,
not knowing their forces, neither the vantage or disuantage of the place, and
to what perrils they were subject unto, being of no more power, he referred to
their directions to consider. I speak not this quoth the General of cowardis,
for if I have but twenty of you to stand by me, Saint George for all: I will
end my life before I distaine the reputation of an English Gentleman.

The company hearing his resolute mind, which they ever found, such as he
seemed, with a general voice, put it to his discretion, vowing (what he did)
to ratify, either to peace, or fight it out, to take part with him so far as
their lives would go. The General gave them thanks for their loves, and
protested that he would want whatsoever he had or should have in his
possession, before they should lack. Thus grieved, to deliver that advantage
which he had in his enemies country, he wished but one hundred men more, to
have tried h^s fortune with them, but he thought it small policy, to refuse
those offers, to hassard their lives and all, considering his small power, the
enemy being in his own country, likely to be relieved every day with more
supply, and they to have nothing, but what by force they obtained, waying all
things with equality as well his own dangers as his companies, he returned
the Governor this answer.

That considering he was a Gentleman, which held his reputation in some
account with his Master the King, and that it might greatly blemish his
credit, if they should bid the^ battle and overthrow them, of which by Gods
help he was assured, he had with earnest request persuaded the company to give
over their advantage, on those conditions presently to be performed, viz. That
they should have of victuals of al sorts the Island affords, sufficient for
the vitteling the ship, and 1000 Crowns amongst them, to be divided in
recompense of the loss of their men slain at their landing.

To those conditions the Governor condiscended, and on his credit to deliver
it in one days respect this matter ended. The General enuited the Governor to
such viands as they had, and so spent the time a while with freendship,
carrewsing to the health of the English Queen, and making good cheer, when
night approaching, the Governor took leave to depart, earnestly entreating
the General, and Captain Horecourt, to accompany him to his house, where to
such entertainment as the Island affordes, they should be welcome, and so
assured from any evil to be offered to him, or his company, as if he were in
his best friends house in England. But the General knowing what it is to trust
a reconsiled foe, gave him as hearty thanks as his offers were kind, yet would
trust him but as a Spaniard, so he departed, and the Gentlemen returned which
was delivered for him, unto whom the Spaniards had given many gifts.

The Governor being departed, order was taken for the watch, which was set in
diverse places, for fear of treachery in the night. About two hours in the
night, a Trumpet sounded a parley near the Camp, which so amazed them, that
they were greatly in doubt of the Spaniards treachery, and betook them all to
arms presently. The General, according to law of arms, summoned him again
with one other Trumpet, then after with his whole noise, and sent Captain
Horecourt with a guarde of Musketteares, to hear the cause of his coming, who
found none but three men sent from the Governor, with such vyands dressed as
was puruayed for his own supper, and one But of Canary Wine, which the
General thankefully accepted, and rewarding the trumpet largely with Crowns,
sent him away.

The next day about two of the clock after noone, the Governor came again
to the General, accompanied with a troop of Gentlemen, where they passed the
time in banqueting, attending the coming of the cariages which brought the
victuals, viz. Beef, Kids, 30 Buts of Sack and Canary wines, Ruske, Meal,
Flower, Salt, pumpions, and other provision, sufficient for nine months
victuals. The Spaniard having kept his word, the General was loath his
courtesies should go altogether unrequited, wherefore he enuited the Governor
and his company to dinner aborde his ship the next day, which the rest were
loath to consent unto, which the general perceauing, told them flatly and half
in choler, that they did distrust him, but (quoth he) you shall not need, for
the worst Englishman does hold his word of honor in as much regard as their
king, and that if his boy for him had promised any thing he would maintain it
as his life. But Gentlemen (quoth he) seeing you suspect my word, and that ye
may accept my offer without distrust, for that I would willingly have your
company, my warrant shall be those pledges which I will not leave for the
kingdom of Spain.

The governor being of mild nature, was sorry to see him so disquiet:
wherefore with gentle words, he first pacified the General, then entreated his
friends to accompany him, which they easily granted, and accordingly came the
next day, where the General feasted them in brave manner, to the honor of his
country, and his own worthy commendations.

The day following, he that ordained wind and tide to serve the purposes of men,
sent the^ a fair and pleasing gale, which caused him the rather to set sail
from thence, and so ranged along the Islands again, seeking his good fortune.
The 5 day after he put from S. Georges, he discried two tall ships, to who^ he
gave chase, with a scant gale, all night, until the next day at noone, when
bearing with the^, the general hailed them, and commanded the^ to strike for
the Queen of England. Those villains in despite showed the Leagers flags and
refused to strike, whereupon the Gunner shot one of them being Admiral, through,
between wind and water, so that she was feign to lie by the Lee, to stop her
leake. Then bare the Vizeadmirall up to rescue her consart, who^ the General
commanded to strike, but they answered dispitefully they would not, but ere
they did yield, or strike, they would sink in the seas: so ye company demanded
whence they were, they said of S. Mallows, and their names the Dolphins, the
one the great Dolphin, the other the little Dolphin, stout ships and well
appointed, the least of the^ having 22 cast pieces: well quoth the General,
strike your flag, for never shall so base vi^ains as you carry your flag, where an
English gentleman is: they said they would not, the^ bare the General with
them, and gave the^ their whole broad side, and shered close with the^,
entending to have borded the^, but by ye negligence of ye helms man, they fell
off, to the Generals great discontent. By this time the Admiral had reasonable
well stopped her leake, and seeing the General bare with him, made ready to
fight, and first gave them their whole side, but hit not the ship at all, so
began a hot and mortal fight on their parts, for our men entering, the
Admiral saw 7 or 8 men slain, and hauled into their forecastell, yet by e^d
h^p they were put off again. But the Gunner whose name is Henry Green, a
brave and valiant man, so behaved himself, that it was marvelous to report.
And every man in his place so bestirred themselves, that they deserve
commendations. The Master, a man of no small courage, grieved at their putting
off, cried still, aborde, aborde: and at the third encounter the General
himself with twenty others to rescue him, borded the Admiral, who being
grapled, could not fall off again suddenly. The Vizeadmirall seeing her
consort in danger, laid her aborde also on the other side, entering her men,
so that our company was enforsed to retire, with little hurt, and great damage
to the enemy. Five hours continued they this whot conflict; when parting by
reason of the night coming on, they went away and were never seen after. This
conflict ended, the General calling his company, first gave God thanks for
preserving the^, then caroused he to them, binding them all by their faiths, to
fight it out with them the next day, and either to take them, or die for it, to
which they willingly consented.

Long seemed that night, to those which earnestly looked for better success.
The day no sooner gave light, but happy was he might first look out to
descrie them, but in vain, for their market was marde, and the Frenchmens
entertanement so bad ouernight, they durst not stay to take a breakefast the
next morning. When the General and his company perceived that they were quite
gone, and no hope remained to meet them any more, the wind serving them so
well, to bear with their own coast, it grieved them not a little, so hulling
there some time, to splice such ropes as were perished with shot, and to amend
such hurtes as were done with shot likewise, which finished, and all things in
good sort ordered, they went for the Northern Cape, to see if any better
fortune would be fall them: where lying sometime at Hull, sometime bearing small
sail, houering too and again, thereabouts, they were chased with six
Galligoes of Spain, who fearsly pursued them, but our General being becalmed,
and seeing no hope to escape them, provided to fight it out.

The Admiral of this Fleet, seeming a brave man, was the first that came up,
never offering to shoot, until he laid them aborde, but by the good industry
of the General, and careful working of the Master, M. James Bears of
Grauesend, a man no less pollitike then valiant, they were put off again, and
their foremast with a demie Couluering shot, borne by the board. Then the
Vizeadmirall and Rear admiral, upon whom their Gunner had plaide and done
much harm unto, laid them also aborde, one of the one side, and the other on
the other, where they were so sharply assailed, that they lost many of their
men. The Captain of the Vizeadmirall was slain by Captain Horecourt in his
own Galligo, in fight most bravely. The other Galigoes would come up, and
shoot often, and away again, but did little harm, thanks be to God. Three
hours and more by estemation endured this fight, when a strong gale at
Northeast began to blow, and the seas to grow, so that perforced to put from
them, our General caused his Gunner to bestow diverse Arrows and pickes of
fireworkes among them, so that he left them burning, and knows not how they
did avoid it. But diverse Englishmen being in sight of this fight, that durst
not come near them for fear, to rescue them, has reported at their home
coming, that General Glemham his Ship and man were all burnt, whose reports
are not of truth thanks be to God.

The General freed from those bad companions, sustained great harms, and
having done small good for himself and his companyes, was loath to go for
England, but determined to go for the straightes, whether they framed their
course, having the wind fair to serve their turn, yet with very foul and
blustering weather, in which storm he spent his Maine Mast, which had been
before fysht: but by reason of two shot therein received, which weakened it
the more, he could not save it: and having few Harboures within the straights
to friend, went for Argere, where he was most roially entertained, in such
sort, that no Gentleman of any nation has received the like at any time.
There he set a Maine Mast, and puruayed himself of all other necessaries he
wanted, trimming his Ship at pleasure, wanting nothing that he could or would
desire. Two months very near, he remained at Arger, or thereabouts, for that
he would have had the company of the English Fleet, which could not be ready
so suddenly, wherefore loath to stay any longer, he gave the attempt to go
alone, only accompaned with a Ship of Deep in France, called The Flower de
Luce, whose aid he promised to be. Coming near unto the mouth of the
straightes, without offer to be disturbed of any. There were four of the king
of Spaines galleys bound for Marceelles, who espying those two Ships, bare with
them, as much as might be: and coming within shot, discharged four Cannons
against the General, which hit him not. The Generals company being now fresh
and lusty, like me^ of singular good courage, cheered one the other, affying
one God which had bin still their comforts, in whose name they gave a most
brave and sharp onset upon them: the Gunner playing so well his part, that
within less then two hours, he had almost sunk two of them, which compeld
them to lie upon the carine, to stop their leakes, yet all they could do, could
not help one of them: but they were feign to save their men and slaves, and
let her sink. All this dismaide them not, but the other three continued the
fight whotly, until they saw the French ship come up, who seeing the Galleys,
was loath to put her self in danger, nor never offered Shot, yet provoked by
the earnest means of certain English Sailars they had a board, they bare with
them, which the Galies perceuing, doubting how to withstand both, that had so
bad success with one alone, made to the shore with all the have they could,
which they recovered, and so escaped. But our general having endured many
shot, was so spoiled of his rigings, and other (...), as he was enforced to put
lack again to Argere, but the Flower de Luce, the French ship of Deep came
(...) way, thanks be to God (...) by his means.

Other news there is of his good succes, which I may God prove true, for the
Gentlemen's (...), and his company, as there is no doubt made the (...) and his
home coming daily expected, which God grant may be sh^rt^y and in safety.

Thus freendly Reader have I breefely turned the fortunate success of this
worthy minded Gentleman, in this his first voyage to the seas, whose troubles
have been such, by Fortunes crosses, as might cause many a man to cease his
travails, and to live at home in content, yet this I assure you cannot dismay
him at all, so brave and resolute is his unconquered mind, rather desiring
honor and his countries good, then life with great possessions, whose worthy
mind God increase in all Gentlemen of his calling, so shall our Prince be most
honorably served, and her subjects gain fame, through the whole world by their
prowis, to Englands eternal honor.

H.R. in commendation of the right worshipful and valiant General, Edward
Glemham, Esquire.
Brave men at Arms, Englands Cheueleers,
Let Glemhams honors, among you be of name,
Whose conquests gainde, against Spanish Caualiers,
With goulden Trumpe eternisd is by fame:
Turkey, Spain, and France, reports the same.
To Englands honor Glemham gains renown,
In spite of those which at his weal does frown.
Sweet man of worth, Mars new adopted son,
Let winds and seas, subject themselves for thee,
To Albion I Will, thou safety may return,
Fraughted with Gold, and Pearl of Indee,
To joy of friends, thy presence wish to see,
Whose honors gaind, with danger on the flood,
Does glad their hearts, that wish our countries good.
FINIS.

