The Copies of two Speeches in Parliament.

The one by JOHN GLANVILL Esquire.

The other by Sir HENRY MARTIN Knight.

At a general Committee of both Houses, the 22. of May. 1628.

The Reasons of the Commons-House delivered by Mr. Glanvill, why they cannot
admit of the Propositions tendered unto them by the Lords.
May it please your Lordships:
I Am Commanded by the House of Commons to deliver unto your Lordships their
reasons why they cannot admit of the Proposition tendered unto them by you, but
for an introduction to the business; please you to remember, that a Petition
of right was showed to your Lordships, wherein we desired you would join with
us; a Petition my Lords fitting for these times, grounded upon Law, and seeking
no more then the Subjects just liberty.

The Petition consists of four parts: The first, touching Loanes, Aids and
Taxes; The second, touching Imprisonment of men's persons; The third, touching
Billetting of Soldiers; The fourth, touching Commissions issued for Martial
law and put in execution upon several persons; groaning under the Burden of
these we desire remedy, and wish your Lordships would join with us, which you
having taken into consideration, we must confess have dealt nobly and freely
with us, not to conclude any thing till you hear our just Reasons, for which
we thank your Lordships, and hope your Lordships will value those reasons
which we shall now offer unto your Lordships.

The work of this day will make a happy issue, if your Lordships please to
relinquish this, as we formerly upon Conference with your Lordships have done
some other things; For the Proposition my Lords, we have debated it thoroughly
in our House, and I am commanded to deliver unto you the Reasons, why we
cannot insert this Clause, neither your Lordships nor we desire to debate
Liberty beyond the due bounds, nor to incroach upon the Kings prerogative and
lessen the bounds thereof.

The first reason I am to lay down, is touching Sovereign power, which I
beseech you not to accept as mine own, being but a weak member of that strong
body, but as the reasons of the whole House upon great and grave Considerations.

First my Lords, the words (Sovereign Power) has either reference or no
reference to the Petition; If no reference, then superfluous; if a reference,
dangerous, and operative upon the petition: And we think your Lordships
purpose is not to offer unto us any thing that may be vain, or to the
hinderance of any thing wherein you have already joined with us. The Petition
declares the right of the Subject, which yet may be broken by the word,
(Sovereign power,) and so the virtue of the Petition taken away, the end of
the petition is not to enlarge the bounds of Law but their Liberties, being
infringed to reduce them to their ancient bounds, and shall we by admitting
of these words (Sovereign power,) in stead of Curing the wound, launch it, and
Cut it the deeper.

The next point is the word, Trust; a word of large latitude and deep sense.
We know that there is a trust in the Crown and King, but regulated by Law,
we acknowledge in penal Statutes, the King may grant another power to
Dispense with the Law, But Magna Charta inflicting no penalty leaves no
trust, but claims his own right; therefore the word, Trust, would confound
this distinction.

Our next reason is, We think it absolutely repugnant to any course of
Parliament, to put Saving to the Petition: in former times the course of
petitioning the King was this; The Lords and the Speaker either by words or
writing preferred their Petition to the King, this then was called the Bill of
the Commons, which being received by the King, part he received and part he
put out, part he ratified; for as it came from him it was drawn into a Law,
but this Course in the second of Hen. 5. was found prejudicial to the Subject,
and since in such Cases have petitioned by Petition of right as we now do,
who come to declare what we Demand of the King; for if we should tell him
what we should not demand, we should then, not proceed in a Parliamentory
course. Now for that, which is alleged by your Lordships, De articulis super
cartis, That my Lords is not like this, That is saving upon particulers, but
this Petition consisting upon particulers would be destroyed by a general
saving, the saving de articulis super Cartis, are of three aids; for ransomming
the Kings person for Knighting the Kings eldest Son, and once for marrying
the Kings eldest Daughter. These by the form of the Petition show, that they
came not in, upon the Kings answer but upon the petition; first then followed
the savings, which (under favor) we think are no reasons, to make us accept
of this saving, being not pertinent to the Petition.

These 23. Stat. made 34. Ed. 1. were made to confirm Magna Carta: so that
there is in all 30. Acts, to set Magna Carta in his purity, and if some
subsequent Statute, have laid some blemish upon it, shall we now then make the
Subject in worse case by laying more weight upon it (God forbid.) In the next
place, your Lordships reason thus, that this which you wish we would admit of
is no more, then what we formerly did profess by the Speaker, when we sent
the King word, we had no purpose at all, to trench upon his Prerogatives; It
is true my Lords, we did so, but this was not anexed to any Petition, for in
that manner we should never have done it, And here I am Commanded (with your
favors) to deliver unto you what a Learned member of the house delivered unto
our House, touching this point. The King (says he) and the Subject has two
Liberties, two Manors joining one upon another; The King is informed the
Subject has intruded upon him, but upon trial it appears not to be so;
were it fitting think you, that the Subject should give security, that he
should not encroach or intrude of that Manor of his, because the King had
been informed he did so, I think you will be of another mind; Wherefore I
am Commanded (seeing we cannot admit of this addition) to desire your
Lordships, to join with us in the Petition, which being granted, and the
hearts of the King and people knit together, I doubt not, but his Majesty will
be safe at home, and feared abroad.

In Sr. H. Martins Speech, page 9. lin. 25. for higher read lighter.

MY Lords, the work of this day, wherein the House of Commons has employed
the Gentleman that spoke last, and my self, was to reply to the answer, which
it had pleased the Lord Keeper to make to those reasons which We had offered to
your Lordships consideration, in justification of Our refusal, not to admit
into Our Petition the addition commended by your Lordships: which reasons of
Ours, since they had not given such satisfaction as We desired and well hoped
(as by the Lord Keepers answer appeared) it was thought fit for Our better
order and method in replying, to divide the Lord Keepers answer into two parts,
a Legal and a Rational. The reply to the Legal your Lordships have heard; my
self come entrusted to reply to the Rational, which also consisted of two
branches. The first deduced from the whole context of the additionall clause;
the second enforced out of some part.

In the first were these reasons, That the same deserved Our acceptance. First,
as satisfactory to the to what Our selves had often protested and professed
expressly by the mouth of Our Speaker.

I must confess these motives were weighty and of great force; and therefore to
avoid misunderstanding and mis-conceit, which otherwise might be taken
against the House of Commons upon refusal of the propounded addition, it is
necessary to state the question rightly, and to set down the true difference
between your Lordships and Us. Now indeed there is no question or difference
between your Lordships and Us, concerning this additionall clause in the nature
and quality of a proposition. For so considered, We say it is most true, and
to be received and embraced by Us, in toto, and qualibet part, and qualibet
syllaba: yea, and were that the question, We should add to this addition, and
in stead of due regard, say, We have had, and have, and ever will have, a
special and singular regard, Whereto? To leave entire Sovereign power? No,
That were to intimate, as if we had first cropped it, and then left it: but Our
regard was to acknowledge and confess it sincerely, and to maintain it
constantly, even to the hazard of Our goods and lives, if need be.

To which purpose, your Lordships may be pleased to remember what strict oath
every member of Our House has taken, this very Session, in these words.

I (A. B.) do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the Supreme or Sovereign Governor of this Realm in all causes,
etc. and to my uttermost power will assist and defend all jurisdictions,
privileges, preheminences, and authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, or united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

So that your Lordships need not to borrow from Our protestations, any
exhortations to Us, to entertain a writing in assistance of the Kings
Sovereign power, since We stand obliged by the most sacred bond of a solemn
oath, to assist and defend the same, if cause or occasion so required. So that
the only question between your Lordships and Us, is, Whether this clause
should be added to our Petition, and received into it as part thereof; which to
do, your Lordships reasons have not persuaded Us: Because so to admit it, were
to overthrow the fabric and substance of Our Petition of right, and to
annihilate the right pretended by Us and the Petition it self, in effect. For
these words being added to Our Petition, viz. We humbly present this Petition,
etc. with due regard to leave entire your Sovereign power, etc. do inure
manifestly an exception to Our Petition. And an exception being of the nature
of the thing whereunto it is an exception (Exceptio est de regula) must of
necessity destroy the Rule or Petition, so far as to the case excepted;
Exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non exceptis, in casibus exceptis destruit
regulam. Then this construction follows upon Our Petition thus enlarged, that
after We have petitioned, That no Freeman should be compelled by imprisonment,
to lend or contribute money to his Majesty, without his assent in Parliament,
nor receive against his will soldiers into his house, or undergo a Commission
of Martial Law for life and member in time of peace: We should add, Except
his Majesty be pleased to require Our moneys, and imprison Us for not lending,
and send Soldiers into Our houses, and execute Us by Martial Law in time of
peace, by virtue of his Sovereign power. Which construction, as it follows
necessarily upon this enlargement; so it concludes against Our right in the
premises, and utterly frustrateth all Our Petition. Neither may it seem
strange if this clause additionall, (which of it self in quality of a
proposition, We confess to be most certain and true) being added to Our
Petition (which also is true) should overthrow the very frame and fabric of
it, seeing the Logicians take knowledge of such a fallacy, called by them
fallacia a been divisis ad male coniuncta. Horace the Poet gives an instance
to this purpose in a Painter, who when he had painted the head of a man
according to art, would then join to it the neck of a horse, and so mar
both the one and the other; whereas each by it self might have been a piece of
right good workmanship.

The second branch of my Lord Keepers Rational part, was enforced out of the
last words of this addition, by which his Lordship said, that They did not
leave entire all Sovereign power, but that, wherewith his Majesty is trusted
for the protection, safety, and happiness of the people. As if his Lordship
would infer, that Sovereign power wherewith, etc. in this place to be
terminum diminuentem, a term of diminution or qualification, and in that
consideration might induce Us to accept it. But under his Lordships correction
We cannot so interpret it: For first We are assured, that there is no
Sovereign power wherewith his Majesty is trusted either by God or Man, but
only that, which is for the protection, safety, and happiness of his people.
And therefore that limitation can make no impression upon Us; but We conceive
it rather in this place to have the force termini adaugentis, to be a term of
important advantage against Our Petition, a term of astriction, as that
whenever his Majesty's Sovereign power should be exercised upon Us, in all
or any the particulars mentioned in the Petition, We should without further
inquiry submit thereunto, as assuming and taking it pro concesso, it induced
to our safety and happiness, etc.

Since therefore (as this Petition is now conceived) it carries the form and
face of a picture, which represents to the life, the pressures and grievances
of the people, with the easy remedies: (And therefore We hope that His
Majesty, casting upon it a gracious eye, will compassionate His poor loyal
Subjects, and afford a comfortable answer:) I do humbly pray your Lordships
not to mar nor blemhsi the grace and face of this picture, with this
unnecessarie addition: And unnecessarie I prove it to be, according to that
rule, Expressio ejus quod tacit inest nihil operatur; And Sovereign power in
cases where it has place, and ought to be used, is always necessarily
understood, and though not expressed, yet supplied by reasonable intendment in
the opinion of all learned men. And therefore as it neither is, nor can be by
Us expressly excluded, so not necessarily by your Lordships to be expressly
included; especially in this Petition, where the addition thereof would make
such a confusion of the whole sense and substance.

The Kings Sovereign Power and Prerogative is always able to save it self:
and if it were not, We must, without this additament, save it to Our uttermost
powers, if We will save Our Oaths, and save Our Souls. The true state of the
cause thus standing between your Lordships and Us, the House of Commons does
not a little marvel, upon what grounds your Lordships are so earnest, to urge
upon them this addition to be inserted into their Petition. They nothing doubt
but that the same proceeds out of a solicitude and fear which your
Lordships have, lest otherwise the simple and absolute passage of this Petition
might be construed hereafter in prejudice of his Majesty's Sovereign Power.
And this your Lordships solicitude and fear proceeds from your love (as the
Poet says)

Res est soliciti plena timoris amor.
But I humbly pray your Lordships to examine with Us the grounds of this your
solicitude and fear: which grounds needs must be laid either upon the words
of the Petition, or the intention of the Petitioners.

Upon the words there is no possibility to lay them; for therein is no
mention of the Sovereign power. And were the words doubtful, as thus, We pray
the like things be not done hereafter under pretext of your Majesty's
Sovereign power; yet in respect of the protestations preceding concomitant and
subsequent to the Petition, such doubtful words ought reasonably to be
interpreted, only of such Sovereign power as was not appliable to the cases
wherein it was exercised, not of such Sovereign power that should be justly
practiced. But there are no such doubtful words, and therefore it follows,
that your Lordships fear and solicitude must be grounded upon the intention
of the Petitioners. Now your Lordships well know, and the House of Commons is
not ignorant, that in a Session of Parliament, though it continue as many
weeks as this has done days, yet there is nothing prius and posterius, but
all things are held and taken, as done at one time. If so, what a strange
collection were this, that at the same time the House of Commons should oblige
themselves by a fearful adjuration, to assist and defend all privileges and
prerogatives belonging to the King, and at the same time by a Petition
(cautelously conveyed) endeavor or intend to divest and deprive the King of
some prerogatives belonging to his Crown. If therefore such fear and
solicitude of your Lordships can neither be grounded upon the words nor
intention of the Petitioners, I humbly pray your Lordships to lay them aside,
and as We do believe that the proposition of this addition from your
Lordships, was not only excusable, but commendable, as proceeding from your
love; so now having heard Our reasons, your Lordships would rest satisfied,
that Our refusal to admit them into Our Petition, proceeds from the
conscience of the integrity and uprightness of Our own hearts, that We in all
this Petition, have no such end to abate or minish the Kings just Prerogative.
And so much in reply to that Rational part, whereby my Lord Keeper labored to
persuade the entertainment of this addition.

This being done, it pleased the House of Commons to instruct and furnish me
with certain reasons which I should use to your Lordships, to procure your
absolute conjunction with Us in presenting this Petition; which albeit I cannot
set forth according to their worth and the instructions given me by the House,
yet I hope their own weight will so press down into your Lordships
consciences and judgments, that without further scruple, you will cheerfully
vouchsafe to accompany this Petition with your right noble presence.

The first argument wherewith I was commanded to move your Lordships, was
drawn from the consideration of the persons which are Petitioners, the House
of Commons; a House whose 1. a personis petentium.
temper, mildness, and moderation, this Parliament has been such, as We
should be unthankful and injurious to Almighty God, if We should not
acknowledge his good hand upon Us, upon Our tongues, upon Our hearts: procured
(no doubt) by Our late solemn and public humiliation and prayers. This
moderation will the better appear, if in the first place it may be remembered
in what passion and distemper many members of the House arrived thither, what
bosoms, what pockets full of complaints and lamentable grievances, the most
part brought thither, and those every day renewed by letters and packets from
all parts and quarters. You know the old Proverb, ubi dolor, ibi digitus, ubi
amor, ibi oculus: It is hard to keep our fingers from often handling the parts
ill affected; but yet Our moderation overcame Our passion, Our discretion
overruled Our affection. This moderation also will the better appear, if in
the second place it be not forgotten, how Our Ancestors and Predecessors
carried themselves in Parliaments upon higher provocations; less could not
serve their turns, but new severe Commissions to hear and determine offenses
against their liberties; public Ecclesiastical curses or excommunications
against the authors or actors of such violations, accusations, condemnations,
executions, banishments. But what have We said all this Parliament: We only
look forward not backward, We desire amendment hereafter, no man's punishment
for ought done heretofore: nothing written by Us in blood, nay, no one word
spoken against any man's person in displeasure. The conclusion of Our Petition
is, that We may be better entreated in time to come. And does not this
moderate Petition deserve your Lordships cheerful conjunction ex congruo and
condigno? If a worm being trodden upon could speak, a worm would say, Tread
upon me no more I pray you. Higher We rise not, lower We cannot descend. And
thus much We think in modesty may well be spoken in Our own commendation;
Thence to move your Lordships to vouchsafe Us your noble company in this
Petition, without surcharging it by this addition.

Our next argument is drawn a Tempore, from 2. a circumstantia temporis.
the unseasonablenesse of the time. The wise man says, There is a time for all
things under the sun, Tempus suum. And if in the wise man's judgment, a word
spoken in its due time be as precious as gold and silver, then an unseasonable
time detracts as much from the thing or word then done and spoken. We hold
(under Your favors) that the time is not seasonable now for this addition. It
is true, that of it self Sovereign power is a thing always so sacred, that
to handle it otherwise than tenderly, is a kind of sacrilege; and to speak
of it otherwise than reverently, is a kind of blasphemy, but every vulgar
capacity is not so affected: the most part of men, nay, almost all men judge
and esteem all things not according to their own intrinsicke virtue and
quality, but according to their immediate effects and operations, which the
same things have upon them. Hence is it that Religion it self receives more
or less credit and approbation, as the teachers and professors are worse or
better. Yea, if God himself send a very wette harvest or seed time, men are
apt enough to censure divine power. The Sovereign power has not now for the
present the ancient amiable aspect, in respect of some late sad influences, but
by Gods grace it will soon recover. To intermixe with this Petition any
mention of Sovereign power (rebus sic stantibus) when angry men say,
Sovereign power has been abused, and the most moderate wish it had not been
so used, We hold not seasonable under your Lordships correction.

Our next argument is drawn a Loco, We think the place where your Lordships
would have this 3. a Loco.
addition inserted, viz. in the Petition, no convenient or seasonable place.
Your Lordships will easily believe that this Petition will run through many
hands, every man will be desirous to see and to read what their Knights and
their Burgesses have done in Parliament upon their complaints, what they have
brought home for their five Subsidies. If in perusing this Petition they fall
upon the mention of Sovereign power, they presently fall to arguing, and
reasoning, and (...) what Sovereign power is; what is the latitude, whence the
original, where the bounds, etc. with many such curious and captious
questions; by which course Sovereign power is little advanced or advantaged.
For I have ever been of opinion, that it is then best with Sovereign power,
when it is had in tacit veneration, not when it is profaned by public
harangues or examinations.

Our last argument is drawn from Our duty 4.
and loyalty to his Majesty, in consideration whereof We are fearful at this
time to take this addition into Our Petition, lest We should do his Majesty
herein some dis-service. With your Lordships, We make the great Council of
the King and Kingdom: and though your Lordships having the happiness to be
nearer his Majesty, know other things better, yet certainly the state and
condition of the several parts for which We serve, their dispositions and
inclinations, their apprehensions, their fears and jealousies are best known
unto Us. And here I pray your Lordships to give me leave to use the Figure
called Reticentia, that is, to infinuate and intimate more than I meant to
speak. Our chief and principal end this Parliament, is to make up all rents
or breaches between the King and his Subjects, to draw them and knit them
together from that distance, whereof the world abroad takes too much notice, to
work a perfect union and reconciliation. How improper and unapt at this time
this addition would be in respect of this end, We cannot but foresee, and
therefore shun it; and do resolve, that it is neither agreeable to the
persons of such Counselors whom We act, nor answerable to that love and duty
which We owe to his Majesty, to hazard an end of such unspeakeable
consequence, upon the admittance of this addition into Our Petition, whereof (as
We have showed) the omission at this time, can by no means harm the Kings
Prerogative, the expression may produce manifold inconveniences. And therefore
since the admittance of your Lordships addition into Our Petition, is
incoherent and incompatible with the body of the same, since there is no
necessary use of it for the saving of the Kings Prerogative, since the
moderation of Our Petition deserves your Lordships cheerful conjunction with
Us, since this addition is unseasonable for the time, and inconvenient in
respect of the place where your Lordships would have it inserted: and lastly,
may prove a dis-service to his Majesty:

I conclude with a most affectionate prayer to your Lordships, to join with
the House of Commons in presenting this Petition unto his sacred Majesty, as it
is, without this addition.

FINIS.

