Four Sermons upon the seven chief virtues or principal effects of faith,
and the doctrine of election: wherein every man may learn, whether he be Gods
child or no.

Preached at Malden in Essex by Master George Gifford, penned from his mouth,
and corrected and given to the Countess of Sussex, for a Newyeeres gift.

James 2. 18. Show me thy faith by thy works.

Jmprinted at Lon don for Tobie Cook at the Tigers head in Paul's Churchyard.
1582.

To the right honorable and my very good Lady, the Lady Frauncis, Countess of
Sussex, R. I. her most humble and faithful servant in Christ, wishes all
health and godliness, long to continue with increase of virtue and zeal in
religion.
I Have long time wished (Right Honorable) that I might in some sort be able,
if not to recompense which in deed I shall never, yet at the least to show some
token of a grateful mind, for all the ancient kindness, and loving favor,
which I have found at your hands: this has caused me to foreslip no occasion,
whereby I might have somewhat to present you withal, which might tend to your
souls health: for concerning the things which pertain to the body, as
honors, dignities and riches, the high Lord of Lords has giuenyou so much,
that though I would never so feign, yet I cannot benefit you in them: having
therefore of late a kinsman at home with me, who being, somewhat of a ready
hand, has taken from the mouth of our Preacher, certain of the Sermons which
he has preached, which being again ouerseene and corrected, I thought it
my duty, to offer them unto your honor, as a taste of those fruits wherewith
the Lord does feed us in the Country. Being a great deal the more bold to
do it, because I know they be such as ye have long time showed a love to
taste of: and I trust these shall also come unto you as ripe and timely fruits
of pleasant and delightsome taste, although they be set before you in no golden
or silver plate, but as it were in a wooden platter: for the holy Apostle
Saint Paul says, that this treasure is brought in earthen vessels. I beseech
your honor therefore to accept of my poor good will, and to take this my
small gift in good part: which nothing doubting of, I pray God to multiply
his blessings and gracesvpon you, to his glory, and your everlasting comfort.

Amen.
Your honors in Christ, Richard Joshua Senior.

To the godly Reader.
COnsidering that for a Christian, being sick in soul, and desiring to be
made sound, sorrowful in spirit, and craving comfort, unquiet in mind, and
seeking to be at rest, wounded in conscience, and would be in safety,
tormented in thought, and longs for releife, having offended God, and
therefore is punished, visited with affliction, and feign would be delivered,
there is no other salve but the word of God: And knowing also, that it is the
duty of every good christian in his calling to seek, and thirst after the
advancement, and increase of the kingdom of Christ, and the overthrow and
utter confusion of blindness, error, popery, superstition, and to be short,
of all the power of Antichrist: I have thought it my duty the rather (Gentle
Reader) to request here unto, by sundry godly men my friends, the Preacher
hereof to publish this book containing sundry points of doctrine tending to
the comfort of the godly, and the assurance of their salvation: as also diverse
confutations of sects and heresies, which to him that reads it with a well
disposed mind, shall be no less profitable, then it is brief. Marvel not at
the shortness of it: the cause thereof is this, that the repetition in the
beginning of every sermon, to avoid tediousness, is omitted. Look not for (I
pray thee) finesse of speech, or eloquence in the reading hereof: but way the
matter deeply, and apply it to thy self effectually, that thou may reap
profit hereout, to thy souls health, and comfort, the which God grant thee,
for his Son Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
Thine in Christ, Richard Joshua Junior.

The first Sermon upon the first Chapter of the second Epistle of Saint Peter.
1 Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to you which have
obtained like precious faith with us by the righteousness of our God and Savior
Jesus Christ.

2 Grace and peace be multiplied to you, through the acknowledging of god and
of our Lord Jesus.

3 According as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain
unto life and Godliness, through the acknowledging of him, that has called us
unto glory and virtue.

4 Whereby most great and precious promises are given unto us, that by them ye
should be partakers of the divine nature, in that ye flee the corruption
which is in the world through lust.


BEfore we begin to handle or entreat of the words of this text, it shall not
be amiss to note to whom and when this Epistle was written. Concerning the
first of these, it appears by the third chap. and 1. ver. that it was written
unto the same that the former Epistle was. For thus he speaks. This second
Epistle I write unto you, beloved, in which I stir up your sincere mind, by
putting you in remembrance: now these were the Jews which were scattered
abroad in the dispersio^ through diverse countries, as it is expressed in the
first chap. of the former Epistle: for the Jews were specially his charge, as
the care of the Gentiles was committed unto Paul. Galathians the 2. chapter, 7.
and 8. verses. The words are these: when they saw that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospel over the circumcision was
unto Peter: for he was mighty by Peter in the Apostlship, over the
circumcision, was also mighty by me toward the Gentiles. For the 2. this
Epistle was written by Peter in his extreme age, when he had even finished his
course, and was ready to lay down his tabernacle, as he speaks here in the
14. verse. As for the occasions which moved him to write, they shall appear in
the particular handling of the matters.

1 Now let us come to the words of the text, the 1. verse has two members: In
the former he sets forth his own dignity, that he is not only a servant of
God, but a principal servant, and one which comes unto them as the
Ambassador of god, to the end they might know that they had to do with God,
and not with men, and so submit themselves to the doctrine and message which he
brought: for whatsoever God spoke by the Apostles, he so guided their tongue and
pen by his spirit, that nothing which they spoke or wrote, was their own, but
altogether his. In the second member, he sets forth the dignity which those
to whom he writ had with himself: in these words, To those which have
obtained the like precious faith with us: as if he should say, although I be
above you in the Apostolik dignity and function, yet you are equal with me and
with the rest of the Apostles in the chief and principal dignity, and in
that wherein all happiness does consist, eue^ our precious faith. Here it may
be demanded, how Saint Peter can ascribe unto them a faith equal or like
precious with his own, seeing he did so far excel them in gifts and
graces, as in knowledge, and strength of faith. The answer is easy enough,
namely, that this comparison is not made in the measure and quantity of faith,
for therein some have excelled others far, because God does not give his gifts
to all alike: but in the effect, which is the apprehending of Christ with all
his merits, which the weak faith does as well as the strong, and therefore in
this respect is equally precious. This I speak, not to make any slothful,
when as the Scriptures do prick us forward so much to seek increase of
faith, but for the comfort and hartening of the weak, which feeling their
infirmity and weakness of faith, if it were not for this which the Apostle
speaks, might doubt whether they were partakers of the same happiness with
them; now hearing this, they may be well assured, al though their faith should
be but as a grain of mustard seed, yet if it be true faith, it coupleth them
to Christ, and makes them partakers of redemption, to have their sins
washed away in his blood of righteousness, to be covered with his obedience of
life, to be heirs of the kingdom of glory, as well as the faith of Peter, or
any other. Unto this is also joined that wherein the stablenes of this their
faith does stand, as upon a sure foundation, eue^ the righteousness of God
and of our Savior Jesus Christ. And indeed the building of faith is so
weighty, and the frame so heavy, that it can stand upon no other foundation
but this, that is to say, the righteousness, faithfulness, or truth of God
which cannot lie. For if we would persuade a man to believe by this reason,
that the thing which we speak, is that which has been taught by diverse men
of great learning and singular godliness: yet because we know that al men are
liars, except we be sure that the things which they speak, be those which God
has spoken, we shall still waver, and our faith shall be no faith, which alone
can rest in the authority of God, and not of men.

2 The second verse contains his salutation, even that which is common to
him with Paul and the other Apostles: wishing grace and peace, to those unto
whom they write. And this they do, because it is the chief scope and principal
end of their ministry, to bring men again into Gods favor, and to be
reconciled unto him. Of this thing speaks S. Paul, 2. Cor. 5. chap. ver. 18.
saying. All things are of God which has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ. And has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation, for God was in
Christ and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto
them: and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. Now the are we
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us, we pray you
in Christ his steed, that you be reconciled to God. This being the chief
end of their travel, causes them so earnestly to wish it for the people: and
to be so serious, not only in teaching them this generally, but also pointing
out as it were with the finger, the way to the same: and that not only in
their doctrine, but also in their lives. Whosoever digresseth or casts his
eyes aside from this mark and end of his ministry, cease to be the
Minister of Christ. As for example, If he preach the Gospel to purchase
renown, estimation, wealth of case, to himself, and not to seek this
reconciliation between God and men, and to have grace and peace multiplied
upon them, he may well sometimes preach the truth, but not truly.

Likewise, those parents which set forth their children to learning, with
this mind: My son shall live an easy and merry life, he shall get some
livings, promotions, and dignities in the Church: do lay a corrupt and rotten
foundation, and have not learned this doctrine of the Apostle, and therefore
the building folowes agreeably for the most, when they come to have learning,
not forgetting this lesson which they learned of their fathers, do become
greedy cathers of benefices and promotions, rather then careful feeders of
the flock of Christ. But here it may be objected, how the Apostle can wish
that grace which is the free favor of God, should be multiplied upon them,
seeing that Gods love and favor does not increase nor diminishe, but he loves
and favors always alike, being subject to no alteration or change. This may
well be answered, that Saint Peter does not speak here of grace, as it is in
it self in God toward me^: but of their feeling the same, which grows by
degrees from less to greater, and because it is a thing so precious, the
Apostle wishes that it may be multiplied upon them. He expresses the mean
to be the knowledge and acknowledging of God, and of Jesus Christ our Lord.

3 According as his divine power has given unto us al things that perteine
unto life and godliness, through the acknowledging of him that has called us
unto glory and virtue.

This is fitly joined to the former verse, to show that the abundance of
grace and peace is not without cause required at our hands, as if the Apostle
should say, You are not to content nor to satisfy your selves with a scant
measure of Gods gifts and graces, seeing that there is offered unto you, and
set forth in Christ, unto whom you may resort as to a storehouse fully
furnished with all treasures, all things which partain to life and godliness.

Secondly, we have to observe in this verse, when he says that all things
are given unto us by his divine power, that here is nothing left in the work
of our salvation unto our selves: so that it must needs follow, that these
which defend free will, do not speak with the same spirit which the Apostle
does here. For setting forth a contrary doctrine to this it must needs proceed
from a contrary spirit. The Apostle does not say here, that all those things
which we want, through the weakness of our nature, shall be supplied, but to
show that there is nothing in us at all, but that we are quite stripped of all
things which pertain to life and godliness, He speaks not of repairing or
helping in some part, but of a whole and free gift in every part: when he
says whithout exception that all things are given unto us by the divine
power, which pertain unto life, and godliness: and so this doctrine does
challenge all the praise and glory of our salvation to God alone.

Thirdly, it may be demanded why the Apostle should say that all things are
given unto us by the divine power or Godhead of our Savior Christ, when it is
manifest that we ferche all things from his manhood: and therefore he says
in the 6. chap. of S. John, verse 46. I am the bread of life: and again in the
54. verse of that same chapter, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood
I will raise him up in the last day: For my flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed: by this it is manifest, that life is given unto the
world, by the manhood of Christ. The answer is easy, that Christ in his
manhood is a creature, and therefore has nothing of his own, but whatsoever
is in him, as to be the life of the world, and the light of men, and to have
in him all the treasures of wisdom: This comes from the divine nature, which
dwells in him bodily, as Saint Paul speaks. Now the cause why all these
are put into the manhood of Christ, is that from thence we may be
partakers of them: for solong as they have residence only in God, we are so
far removed from him that by no means we can approach or come near unto
him to draw out of him any drop of the same. Therefore though all things be
given us by this means, that GOD has put them into the flesh of Christ, and
so is come down near unto us, that we may lay fast hold of him: yet
nevertheless because the propriety of them remains still in the divine
nature, the gift of them is here ascribed unto the power thereof.

Fourthly, we are to note in this verse, that the Apostle does briefly set
down the end and sum of religion, and of all these gifts, when he says,
which pertain to life and godliness: for in these two words, unto which the
other two do answer, which are set down in the latter end of the verse,
glory and virtue, all those gifts are contained. For that which he expressed
first by life, here by glory, that which before he called godliness, here he
calls virtue: they are as much as to say, eternal felicity, and life with
glory, and the way which we must pass through to the same, which is godliness
and virtue. Here we are to take great heed, that we do not sever or sunder
those things which the Lord himself has so nearly coupled and linked
together. And this admonition is so much the more necessary, because there are
very many carnal professors and beastly abusers of christianity, which do
seem very willingly and gladly to embrace the promises of the Gospel,
concerning redemption and eternal life purchased in Christ Jesus: and they
make great boast that they look for their part in the same as well as any
other, and yet they look nothing at al to this godliness and virtue, through
which we must pass un to it, for God has not called us, but as he says
here, to glory and virtue, so that whom soever the Lord has called to know
him aright, and so to be made heirs of eternal glory, he has also garnished
them with virtues and graces of the spirit of sanctification. Until such time
therefore, as there shall rise up a new Peter, which with contrary pen shall
write a new and contrary gospel, these men shall never assure them selves,
nor yet persuade others that they shall ever come to the kingdom of God,
seeing they go a quite contrary way.

4 Whereby most great and precious promises are given unto us, etc. Now he
shows by what means or by what instruments the divine power does bestow
those gifts upon us, and the same are as he calls them, most great and
precious promises which are given unto us, whereby we are called to glory and
virtue, as he speaks in the former verse: these are called most great and
precious, because the things which are offered unto us in the gospel of Christ,
for greatness and dignity are incomparable. For what ca^ we seek out to match
with this that here is offered unto us: namely the remission of our sins in the
blood of his son, deliverance and freedom from the thraldom of Satan and
power of darkness, that of damned creatutes and children of his wrath, he has
given us this high dignity to be his sons and daughters: and as S. John
says, Reave. I. Christ has washed us in his blood, and made us kings and
priests to god his father: what a change is this, from the lowest misery, eue^
in the gulf of hell, to be lifted up, to the highest dignity, to be glorified
with God in the kingdom of heaven? Because therefore these things are the
greatest and most honorable, S. Peter calls the promises of the gospel, most
great and precious. But wherefore does the apostle ascribe all to the doctrine
of the gospel? for when he says, that by these we are made partakers of the
divine nature, he includes all, because it is by the gospel that we are
called home to the Lord: for although he utter his will unto us in his law,
yet therein he shows himself none otherwise unto us, but as a severe judge,
we can see nothing there, but the dreadful curse, and vengeance of eternal
fire: his brightness appears therein, but we be not able to behold the same,
but are daseled with the sight thereof, amazed and confounded so that we cannot
but run from him, because there is nothing but that which is terrible.
Contrariwise, in the Gospel, he has revealed himself in the face of his
son, where he shows an exceeding glory, but with such fatherly love, and
pity, such abundance of mercy, and sweet allurements, by which he calls us
and draws us to himself: that here we are able to look upon him with open
face, and here his countenance is so cheereful, that the soul which has
once, with the eye of faith seen but a glimse thereof, is so inflamed and
ravished with desire of a nearer and fuller sight* that it can never be
satisfied. For this cause Saint Paul making comparison between the ministry
of the Law and the ministry of the Gospel. 2. Corinthians, 3. Terms that
the ministration of death, and the letter which kills: and this the
ministration of the spirit which gives life. Which by the way also is to be
observed, because there be among us at this day many fra^tike brains: namely
those of the Family of love, which call the true and sound interpreting of the
word, the literal sense, or the letter which kills, and their own gross and
foolish allegories the spirit: not knowing that S. Peter speaks of the
difference between the Law, and the Gospel. Here also appears of what price
and dignity the gospel is: for who can set forth the worthiness of this,
when he says, that by these promises we are made partakers of the divine
nature we were indeed at the first created after the Image of God, and so
partakers of his nature: but we lost all this with our first parents, and in
steed thereof we were made partakers of the devilish nature, bearing his Image
and fulfilling: his lusts. Now by faith in the Gospel, this image is restored
and built up in us again, whilst we receive the spirit of sanctification
joined with the same. If men did know this first, that all happiness in men is
to be made partakers of the nature of God, and to communicate with him: and
then that this is wrought only by the Gospel: men would not so lothsomely
despise it, and prefer every light commodity, and trifling pleasure before
it: men would not seek to disgrace and slander it: men would not be so soon
weary in hearing of it, nor think every hour ten while they be at it.
Finally men, unless they were mad men, would not as they do now almost every
where, think them selves best at ease when it is furthest from them: for who
would willingly throw himself headlong to destruction; who would so play the
mad beasts, as to thrust God from them, and refuse to be made partakers of
his heavenly nature? which al they do, that have as yet felt no sweetness in
the Gospel, or at least have so little tasted it that it can scarce obtain
cold lone at their hands. But there needs somewhat to be said upon the phrase
of spech which S. Peter uses, for it is somewhat hard to some, and as it was
in old time foully abused by heretics, so is it wickedly at this day perverted
by the lovely Family, which holding this doctrine that men are deified, and
God is hominified, as their language is, meaning that the very essence and
substance of God, is transsused into men, and his substance and theirs mingled
together, take great hold of this, that the Apostle says, we are made
partakers of the divine nature. But you shall see that every simple man may
easily confute the^: if we ask what the nature of an horse is, will a man
answer that he is made of the earth: then a horse and a man are both of one
nature, for man is also made of the earth: it is manifest the^, that none is so
foolish but he will confess, that when we speak of the nature of any thing,
we mean not the substance, but the qualities and properties: even so in this
place we must needs grant, that by the divine nature in this place is nothing
else meant, but that there should be such a nature and such qualities in men, as
may carrye a resemblance of the divine nature: as for example, god is holy, we
must be holy, he is pure, good, just, gracious, bountiful, loving, and
merciful, all these and such like must be also in us: we shall also come to be
partakers of life, of glory, of joy, of happiness, and eternity, and so in a
nearer sort to be partakers of the divine nature. What are all those now the
better, which have so received the precious promises, that their qualities are
even as agreeable to the nature of GOD, as light is with darkness, or Heaven
with Hell, or Christ with Beliall: Since so many shameful and beastly sins,
flow and reign in them, which are so many partakinges of the Diuelishe
nature, let them for shame deny that they have ought wherein they communicate
with GOD, in any thing saving a bare profession. Then what is it which makes
a good man; The promises of the Gospel. What is it which brings life and
salvation? The Gospel. Who are they which have embraced the promises, and have
the true and lively faith: The holy. Who are they whom God has called to life
eternal, to be those whom he loves as children, bearing his Image; The
pure and undefiled. in the last clause of this verse he shows his meaning
very plainly, In that, says he ye fly the corruptions which are in the
world through lust, this is the way to be made partakers of the divine nature,
for as corruptions and filthy defilinges the more they cleave unto us, the
more they separate us from the Lord, so contrariwise the more a man does fly
and eschew them, so much the nearer he does approach unto God, who is the
fountain of all purity. We are here to note that S. Peter makes al
corruption and naughtiness in the world to spring out of concupiscence, or as
it is usually translated, lust: where we must learn first, what this
concupiscence or lust is, which is here said to be as it were the seat of
sin, and indeed it is the root and fountain, out of which grows and
flows al evil that is committed in the world, either in thought, word, or
deed: to be short, this is that which is forbidden in the tenth co^ma^deme^t,
when he says, Thou shall not cover: at least so much of it is forbidden there,
as pertains to the second table, that is the root and fountain of all evil
against men, for there is nothing recited in the same last commandment, but
toward men: and when our Savior Christ sets forth the sum of the first
table, he says it is to love the Lord with all the heart, with all the soul,
etc. Now where the whole heart is required, there concupiscence must needs be
forbidden: but ye will say, what is it; wherein does it consist? It is not in
deeds, words, nor thoughts, but a more close and inward sickness, bred as they
say, in the bones, the natural blot and spot of original sin, which we have
by inheritance, from our first parents, and bring with us out of our mothers
wo^b, out of which al evil thoughts and desires do arise in us. S. James in the
first chap. of his Epistle makes it the womb and mother which conceiueth and
brings forth sin: Let no man (says he) when he is tempted, say, I am
tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither te^pteth he any
man, but every one is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is entised: the^ lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin, and
sin when it is finished brings forth death. The first thing we have here to
note in this doctrine is this: that all corruption is of our selves, not
coming from any outward cause: it is true that Satan is an instrument, and as
it were the bellows to stir and kindle in us the lusts of sin, and
bears a very great stroke in the matter: but if it were not for this
concupiscence that is in us, he could not bring his matters to pass, the
prouocations and alurementes of wicked men, are so many means to drive us and
draw us into sin, but yet the cause is in our selves. A chief point to be
observed that we may learn to condemn our selves when we have done amiss,
and not after the manner of men, which look when they have faulted how they
may disburthen themselves, and be discharged of the blame, and therefore they
will either cry out of the Devil, as though he, as they say, ought them a
shame, or else they will say, woe worth such or such that ever I knew them, if
it had not been for them, I should not have done thus. The Prophet David when
he had committed murder and adultery, being reproved by Nathan, although he
knew rightwel that the Devil was a great furtherer in the matter: likewise he
might have thought upon the fond dealing of the woman, which so indiscretly
washed her self in such a place as others might see her: yet he lets these
go, and to the end he may wholly and fully condemn himself, he looks home
to the welspring of all this foul and beastly sin, and says, Behold I was
borne in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me: as if he
should say, O Lord, I cannot seek any way to be excused, for all this
rebellion against thee, is conceived and bred in mine own corrupt breast, I
brought the root of it from my mothers womb. This is a good lession for us to
learn: for so long as we do not know it, but like partial and corrupt
Judges go about to excuse our selves, and to rid our hands of that we have
committed, we shall never come to any sincere repe^ta^ce. Further, wear here to
observe in this place that al corruption coming from this lust, if we will
repent indeed, we must begin here. For if they be changed only in their
outward deeds and words, and this inward sickness not healed, they have
gained nothing, no more the^ a man which would destroy a tree, and does no more
then loppe and shred of certain boughs and twigges, leaving the stumpe and
root behind: for so long as this does live in them, they may well seem in
the eyes of men, to be very great conuerts, if they be ignorant idiots, are
become such as have gotten some skill and knowledge: from drunkardes,
ruffians, adulterers, and such like, they become sober and modest, and of good
behavior: as this may be done before men, and yet the heart nothing altered
before God: for there be many causes which may move men to seem outwardlye
to be godly, when the heart within is fraught with loathsome lusts, and full
of rotten corruptions, which make men still altogether abominable before God.
To be short therefore a man shall neuet rightly judge of him self whether he
have repented, unless he look to the bottom of this sore, that it may be
healed. The greatest multitude of men, being as blind as beetles in this point,
imagine that repentance, is a very light and easy thing, which they can have
when they list: when a man of wisdom says this, that here lies so deep a
matter, that here be roots which are hard to be pulled up, he is moved to
be the more careful, least he deceive himself. Look therefore every man to
his thoughts, for by them is the trial made: if the thoughts be changed, and
the inward desires altered, so that of profane and worldly, they are become
holy and heavenly: then he may boldly say, I have a new heart, and there is
a right spirit renewed in me, I have repented, I have not plaide the
hypocrite, I feel an upright heart toward God, I feel the corrupt fountain
stopped, so that the filthy matter, and stinking mudde does not boil forth
as it did. It may also be demanded here, whether this just be not a sin
or a corruption of it self, because S. Peter says, that corruption rests in
it. The place which I alleged out of the 51. Psalm, does prove it to be a
sin: also it may be proved out of the fifth to the Romans, Where Saint Paul
proves that infants have sin, because they are subject to death, which is
the reward of sin, although as he says, they sin not after the similitude
of the transgression of Adam. Therefore if we had none other but this, it were
enough to condemn us, and utterly to cast us away. Let us never cease
therefore, until we feel a change in our selves, even in this secret
infection, for otherwise we shall never be able to fly the corruptions
which are in the world, or as Saint James speaks in the first Chapter of his
Epistle, to keep our selves unspotted of the world, so long as we carry the
corrupt world in our own breast: neither shall our religion be pure, for thus it
is said, if any man among you seems religious and refraineth not his tongue,
but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Pure religion and
undefiled before God, even the father is this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their distress, and to keep himself unspotted of the world.

The second Sermon upon the 5. 6. and 7. verses.
5 Therefore give even al diligence thereunto, join moreover virtue with your
faith: and with virtue knowledge:

6 And with knowledge, temperaunce: and with temperaunce, patience: and with
patience, godliness:

7 And with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with brotherly kindness, love.


ANd hereunto give al diligence, etc. He has declared in the former verses,
among other chief matters: this one especiallv, to how great holiness and
pureness through sanctification, we be called: which was chiefly expressed in
these words, that by them ye may be made partakers of the divine nature, in
that ye fly the corruption which is in the world through lust: unto this now
he joins an exhortation, requiring at their hands not only to put to their
diligence, but also, as he says, even all diligence, For as it is the
greatest and chiefest thing which we are to look after, so there is required
at our hands, to give our principal care and study thereunto: this equity
must easily be granted, that if we cannot obtain or get the things of this
life, which are small in comparison, unless we put to our diligence, for God
will have it to be so, that then of good right* look how much heavenly
things exceed in dignity, the earthly, so much must the care and diligence
bestowed upon them exceed. How far almost are all men from this doctrine both
in practice and judgment: first, when we see the exceeding travel and pains
which they stick not willingly to bestow, in getting the beggarly trash of
this world, either riches or honors: they will ride and run, early and late by
night and by day, by sea and by land, winter and sommen, wearing out their
bodies, almost pine and sterue themselves with hunger and bearing their brains
with as great diligence as can be possible: but when it comes to these things
which S. Peter speaks, as things of no price, they pass by them, in such
wise, that they are here even as slothful and careless, as they are diligent
in the other. For judgment in this behalf, if a man talk with these worldly
men, they will show their mind and opinion, ask them why they be so careful
for these worldly things, their an swear is ready, we shall otherwise come
short of them, and go without them: and why do ye not seek as fast for
heavenly things, they be the greatest: they be in deed the greatest, but we
commit that to God, we will not meddle with that. Thus they shift off the care
of godliness, as though god did not require it at their hands: never hearing of
this which S. Peter requires: we must take heed of this, giving ear to god,
who teaches us this lesson by the holy Apostle: for if we let this pass, we
are most miserable: here also when we are warned to give al diligence,
appears plainly how hard a thing it is to fly from corrupt lusts: for if
it were an easy thing to be done less diligence might serve: but sin
cleaves near and sticks fast in us, and is not easily shaken of: it is
deeply rooted, so that unless we dig very deep, we are sure to leave the
roots still behind, which will grow and spring again as fast as before, yea
oftentimes seeming to be dead, they sodeinly revive: so that we are set a
work while we live here without any intermission, to be still toyling to pull
up these weeds, the ground is so rank, that in a very short time it will be
wholly ouergrowne. Therefore such as despise the means which God has
appointed, or use them over negligently, must needs have their heart over
grown with these stinking weeds of lust and concupiscence: and so if ever
there be any good seed in them, as good motions or inclinations to fear God,
they are by and by choked, so that they can bring forth no fruit, or at least
no ripe and timely fruit.

But here may be objected, that this agrees not with the former saying, that
the divine power has given us al things which pertain to life and
godliness, there he ascribes all to God, and takes all from us, here he
seems to give somewhat unto our diligence, and so to establishe freewill in
us. We must answer here that God works al in all, and alone strikes the
stroke, yet he does not work in us, as the carpenter or Mason works upon
the log and the stone, which have no feeling of that which is done upon them,
and therefore nothing of them is required: but we have a will in us and reason,
which of them selves being corrupt, do nothing but hinder this work, until
such time as god has fashioned them anew; we have appetites and affections in
us, but of them selves mere rebels: these he ^eth and subdueth. So that this
work of God in us, is not without a feeling of it, for he moves us to will,
to desire, to sorrow, to rejoice, and such like, so that our diligence is
required, because he works in none but he does make them diligent; here is
still then that which God does bestow upon us* and not that which we have of
ourselves. By this place al those are answered, which cloak and defend
themselves in then naughtiness and sloth in the service of God, after this
manner: we have that which God has given us, all men are not alike godly,
every man cannot do as you do: when their own heart and conscience does
tell every of them the contrary, saying, thou art careless, and negligent,
thou have as much as thou desire: for God does increase all gifts and graces
in those which use al diligence in seeking after him. Let us learn therefore,
brethren, to put in practice al those things which are here taught, to give
greater diligence, and so beat our brain more earnestly about heavenly
things, then about these earthly, to labor and travel more for godliness,
then for treasures and riches. Which if we do, we shall feel increase of
strength to cast out corrupt lusts, although not so much as feign we would, yet
God being true we shall have so much that we cannot fail nor miss of our
desire. It follows, join moreover virtue with your faith, etc. Saint Peter
knows what babes we be, how unable to guide our steps in the paths of
godliness, and that makes him not only to move and persuade to godliness, but
even as it were taking us by the hand, and teaching us how to tread every
step, he rehearses particulerlye the things wherein we are to travel,
when he says, Join moreover with your faith, virtue, with virtue knowledge,
with knowledge, te^peraunce, with temperaunce, patience, with patience,
godliness, and with godliness, brotherly kindness, and with brotherly
kindness love.

Faith here is set in the first place, unto which all the other must
beeioyned, because without it we cannot by any means please God, it does
justify us be fore god alone, but yet it does not go alone, neither is it dead
and fruitless, for these things do accompany the same. In the next place
therefore, he coupleth unto this, virtue, which is generally put for all the
fruits of faith, and all the duties of a godly life. These cannot be wanting,
but by and by it must needs follow, that the faith is a dead faith, not able to
justify us before God, nor to give life: it cannot indeed be rightly termed
any other then a shadow or dumb picture of faith, which may carry some show
and color of that which it resembles. Even as we see some painter so
skilful, that he can cast such colors in painting fire, that at the first
blush it might make a man judge it to be fire in deed: but if a man hold his
hand to it, to feel for some heat, and to make trial by the effects, a
child will be able to judge easily, that it is but a dead image, because the
effects are wanting. Even so there be very many men, as cunning as any
painter, to make a show of faith, through great bragges and vaunts, that God is
their God, and that they al put their whole trust in him, that they look to be
saved as well as the best, yea though but a few, yet they hope to be of the
number of those. Let us look therefore that we be not deceived here, let not
the outward appearaunce beguile us, but let us come to the true trial, if
there be as much virtue in their life, as there was heat in the foresaid
fire, then know that it is even as good a faith, as that is a fire. For ye
may as well separate fire from the heat thereof, as faith from good and godly
virtues, which are the fruits therof-What shall then be said of all those from
whom do flow so many filthy sins, that scarce at any time does appear in
them, so much as a shadow of virtue? they cannot deceive any wise man, much
less shall they be able to deceive God, Let every one therefore take heed
that he deceive not himself, to think that he is richly endued with faith,
when he is so poor in virtue, for if the latter abound, we are sure the
former does also abound. For we must try our faith by our virtues. Next he
wills to join knowledge unto virtue. These three are general, faith, virtue,
and knowledge, and are so lincked together, that they cannot be sundered. For
faith is not a blind fantasy which man does imagine of his own brain, but
it is begun in the right knowledge of Gods will, and increases and grows by
the same: it is also the rule and square to measure and guide al virtue by: for
we must not think, that that is good which seems so unto our reason, but
that which God in his revealed will has called good: unless therefore virtue
did grow in us, we cannot have it, before we become skillful, and have
learned it out of the word of God. For this cause the Apostle moving these
excellent men to increase in godliness, shows them the way, when he wills
them to increase in knoweledge.

Now if we mark well, what manner of men they were to whom he wrote,
namelye, no babes nor youngelinges in the Gospel, for he said they had
obtained like precious faith with him, and after ward in this Chapter he
says, they did know and were stablished in the present truth: we shall
easily perceive how this may stop the mouths of many, which hold blind
errors. First of al of those, which affirm that ignorance is the mother of
devotion, if godliness and virtue be the true devotion, then it must needs
follow, that their doctrine is false and diuelishe, seeing we are charged to
join unto our virtue knowledge: it is true if they mean Popish devotion, for
they could never have kept men in awe, to be zealous of their religion, and to
seek for that at the hands of men, which God alone does give, unless they
had kept them in blindness and ignorance: and therefore they took a wise way,
to keep the people from knowing the word, which so soon as it brake forth
again, disclosed all their falsehood and treacherye, in so much that neither
good nor bad almost, have any devotion unto them. Secondly of those, which
although they be not rank Papists, yet have in them still a smacke and
savor of Popish principles: and therefore like fools, are also enemies unto
knowledge. For thus they speak, it were no matter if there were less
preaching, I think the people be the worse for it, there is knowledge even
enough, what should lay men be troubled to learn, or to seek for the
knoweledge of the Scriptures let them tend their work, and look to their
occupations, and learn to be quiet, and to deal honestlye: against these
poor blind beasts, (for I may use no gentle speech) we are to reason out
of this place: first that all men, know they never so much, are here
commanded to increase in knowledge, to the end they may increase in faith and
godliness. Secondly, let them consider to what manner of men Saint Peter
wrote, namelye, to poor and rich men, women and children, to al sorts, and
to be short, to as many as would have Faith and virtue, and so come to life
and glory, and therefore as well the poor ploughman, as the great Clarke is
commanded to increase his knowledge out of Gods book: Thirdlye, they much
ouershoote them selves, when they would bear them in hand, that knowledge,
which is the guider of virtue, should be the cause of vice: Nay, if we
wipe our eyes, and look better to the matter, we shall see, that there is a
sloodde of ignorance, which has almost over whelmed all, and in many which
seem to know very much, if they were sounded to the bottom, there should be
found in them gross ignorance, and palpable darkness: and so in deed the true
cause of al foul sins, which abound at this day among us, and flow even as
a swelling Sea, is the want of true knowledge. This ignorance has taken such
root, that all they which have made proof, will confess with me, that our
time is like the time of the prophet Esaie, 28. who having labored himself
as it were out of breathe in teaching, and seeing so small profiting, being
commanded of the Lord still to go to his business, bursteth forth into these
speeches: whom shall I teach knowledge? whom shall I make for to understand?
them that are wained from the milk, and drawn from the breasts? for precept
must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line unto line, line unto line,
a little here, and a little there. And in an other place, he says, the word
of the Lord was like a sealed book, if he come to o^e, saying, Read this I
pray you, he make^h answer, I cannot read, to another that can read, he
answers, I cannot, for it is sealed.

Furthermore, let these seely creatures learn of this place to be ashamed of
that, wherein they seem after a sort to glory, when they use to say, as
they think in defense of themselves, we be without skill, we have no
knowledge, we be poor honest men, we have no learning: it is as much as to
say, we have no faith, we have no virtue, we have no godliness: for we be
plainly taught here that faith, virtue, and knowledge, must increase and
grow up together. Let us al print this lesson deeply in our minds, that it
may drive us to make haste to come out of our ignorance, and to seek apace
after knowledge. Let us take heed of flattering our selves as some other do,
which having gotten some skill, or at least think that they have set very
light by the public teaching of the word, they do excuse them sel^es after
this sort, I thank God, I am not of the ignorant sort, nor of the meanest
judgment, I know somewhat, let them hunte after preaching that need, it is
very good for them, as for me, I am sufficiently acquainted with the matter
already: this kind of men are hard too deal withal, because they be wise
in their own conceit, and not in the Lord, for if they had once but even a
little tasted of true knowledge, of the sweetness and power thereof, they would
never have enough of the first sponeful, if they had an healthful stomach,
they could never be brought so soon to loath, and as it were to vomit up
again, so wholesome sustenaunce. But let us learn here, that when our
knowledge is grown to be never so great, because we know but in part, and we
know nothing as we ought to know, as Saint Paul says, even then we are to
give all diligence, to join to our virtue, knowledge, unless when we have
begun and proceeded so far, we mind to fall back again. This place does
plainly set forth the woeful and miserable state of those which b^e without
teaching, or have it in so scanty a measure, that they come almost to no
understanding: they are meerie and think all is well, and think themselves
best, when they are least dealt withal, but judge righteous judgment, which
the Lord by his Apostle teaches us to judge, and we shall see, that their
mirth is nothing else, but a mad laughter, even in the midst of fearful and
horrible destruction. Unto knowledge join temperaunce, etc. Or continence, for
so the word which Saint Peter uses, may be translated. But what does he
mean, having bidden us to join virtue, to faith; Again as though he had
forgotten himself, to express certain several kinds of virtues, which he will
have us to join to the former, when as indeed, the word Virtue contains
them al. We may not think but that he is very well advised, and that he
knows with whom he has to do, what babes and children we are which must
not have meat set before us in gross to be our own Caruers, but it must be
mynced too our hands, we must also be fed as it were by spoonfuls. For
this cause he did not content himself to exhort in general unto virtue, but
also to name and point us out certain chief branches, which we must
especially labor about, for unless God should deal with us in this wise, so
vain are we, that we should wander and roue, as it were in a wide field, and
never come nigh the mark or at least in looking after some one virtue or other,
forget and let go, the chief and principal. For we see many that can roll
in their mouth the name of virtue and godliness, and nothing almost but
virtue, virtue, as though they would persuade men, that their garden did grow
full of such herbs, but when we come to this particular examination, to look
for this virtue and that, in steed of these sweet herbs, we shall find
nothing but stinking weeds. Here is a great part of our diligence and
wisdom, therefore, that when we study for virtue and godliness, and when
we call upon the Lord for gifts, we search out every part, and branche, least
we be ouerseene in some special point, and least while we seek to increase
one virtue, another decay in us, for that shall come to pass, if we cast not
our eyes diligently on every side, and so oftentimes we rather loose then
gain, rather go backwarde then forward. Out of the negligence in this point
of doctrine, or for want of knowledge in it, men grow into security, and a
very little contenteth them, yea though it be but even some show of virtue, and
slouthfully they shuffle of the matter: a thing greatly to be taken heed unto.
Because, out of al question, it is that which has caused diverse forward men,
in continuance of time as it were gathering rust, to become slack: if we have
desire therefore to continue, let us learn to put this lesson in practice. But
why does he will us to join temperance or continence with knowledge, it should
seem that he had no regard of any affinity in matching these things
together, for temperance is conversant about pleasures and delights: Yes
verily, we shall plainly see, that there is great cause for which he joins
eve, ry one of these virtues together. And first to begin with this, ye are
to note that co^tinencie is not conversant alone, about the delights of the
body, but also of the mind: so that in seeking knowledge, which we must do
very eagerly, we are to take heed of these extreemes which are contrary to a
contine^t mind, either to be so wavering, that every puff do drive us from
the manifest truth, or else on the other side to be so stiff, and so wilfully
wedded to our own judgment, that we will stand in defense of that which we
have once liked, and not admit any reason to the contrary: both these are
contrary to a continent mind: and both of them enemies to true knowledge.
Therefore we are warned here in our diligent search for knowledge, to take
heed that when we have learned the truth, we continue steadfast and
immovable in it, not to be tossed to and fro, as some unstable minds are,
who when they have been taught the truth, the least doubt that is raised
against it, causes them by and by to shake, and to fear whether they be in
the right way or no, also we must take heed of that stiffenesse, which
causes some to speak when it were better for them too hear: and to be heard
aloft, when a lower voice might serve them better: far from the counsel of S.
James who wills us to be swift to hear, and slow to speak. Let us be sure
our knowledge be well grounded, before we setle our selves to continewe in it:
least in steed of heaping up gold, we fill our chests with nothing but
dross. Also we must beware, that we bend our study for the knowledge of
these points which serve to increase godliness, and true edifying. For many
seek for knowledge, but their vain brain, does carry them to seek after
curious questions, and too let pass those things, which should do them most
good: and this is a sore and grievous sickness in men, as the questions they
commonly move, do show. He adds, To temperance join patience. This also
may seem to be somewhat strange, but if we look well unto it, we then shall
perceive the meaning more plainly: patience is not only requisite in those
which have received the profession of the Gospel, to bear and endure al
persecutions and afflictions, which oftentimes are so raging, that (except we
have our hearts well stayed, and seasoned with patience) we shall be driven to
forsake, and to forswere our knoweledge: but also it is very requisite to be
well armed and fenced with it, when we shall have to do with those which are
absurd and gross, and therefore it is as a dagger to a man's heart, to hear
al their blockish reasons against the word, to see how senseless they are,
when the plain truth is laid before them: Likewise their spiteful raylinges,
and fleeting mockes, which they will use: their bold abusing of Gods word,
their arrogant presumption, which causes them to prattle very fast, even they
know not what: or eles we shall be hurled hither and thither upon rocks, and
make shipwreck of our mildness: and so mar and disgrace the good cause,
which we have in hand. For wicked men will judge al to proceed of rancour and
anger, and ascribe all to choler, and so by this means there is procured some
dishonor to God: who should greatly be honored if we could meekely (as the
Apostle wills) instruct those which are contrary minded, proouing if God at
any time will give them repentance, to come out of the snare of the Devil of
whom they be holden captive, to do his will: and so to stop their mouths, that
they cannot be able to answer. The want of this virtue oftentimes brings
great inconvenience, to the conference of brethren, which should bring
together (as it were into one heap) whatsoever every one has gleaned by
himself, that so the one might supply the want of the other: but the impatience
of some is such, that great inconvenience does grow thereby. To conclude this
matter, seeing troubles are allotted unto us, and sufferings for the truth, and
that we are subject to so many reproaches, railings, taunts, and mocks, at the
hands of absurd and evil men: who soever looks to walk in the way of
knowledge, he must seek to possess his soul in patience. It folowith, with
patience godliness, etc. A man may demand what manner of order is here used, in
willing us to join godliness to patience, and then to godliness, brotherly
kindness: is not godliness the whole or the general, and these branches, are
members of it? True it is that this word is often used, generally to
comprehend al goodness, but in this place, it comprehends but the first
table of the law, wherein we are willed to be devout or zealous: a very
necessary caveat to beware that we do not become so patient, that we forget
to be zealous in the Lords quarrel: it is as if Saint Peter should have said: I
would not have you so meek, as to bear and put up al, I would have you
withal to be hot in Gods quarrel, forget not that. For many under a color
of a meek patience, do cover the want of religion, for if God be dishonored,
his truth defaced, his servants slaundered, they can hear and see, and yet
be as meek as a Lamb: but if themselves be touched ye shall see them play
the Lions, and of luke warm to become fire hot, this therefore is no patience
which wants godliness. We must learn then, both with patience, and
meeknes, to deal in the Lords matters, and also with fervent zeal: least in
steed of this excellent virtue of patience, which was commended unto us, there
be nothing but a profane ungodliness and an irreligious mildness, in which at
this day more do offend, then through impatience: for these Athiests have this
as an excuse very readily. Are we not commanded to be gentle and soft? Is it
not our duty to maintain love, and charity with our neighbors? Indeed
they be great swearers, and sometime they use to speak against gods word, if
they be awry, I think they shall answer for themselves, if we should gainesay,
or seem to reprove them, they would not take it well, therefore I think good
not to disquiet them. Here is now wonderful patience, these are very godly
and charitable persons, yea even a treachery toward GOD and men. For is
there any of them, which being slaundered with some foul crime, whereby they
should receive great injury, or be spitefully rayled upon, if some of their
near friends sit by and hold their tongues, when they know they be
iniuried, that cannot by and by feel and say, this was cold friendship, that
they could not have dealt so vnlouingly toward their friends, by whom
soever they should have heard them so abused, they could not have held their
tongues? The^ belike God nor his truth are none of their dear friends, that
they can put up such injury done toward him. There is plenty of this
patience in all places, but godliness cannot be suffered to come near, for
he is a break peace and a very unpleasant fellow, he is over rough and
precise, and over captious, there was good neighborhood and friendship
before he came, they could be merry together, and be in unity, without any
jar: had it not been better to use gentleness and patience, then to have
this broyle? for there is nothing better then love, and where that is not,
there is nothing good. O miserable days! this is the good love now among me^,
that they cannot love one another, but they must hate God, to have peace and
concord with men to be at ods with God, for men's sake, to put up the
dishonoring of his name, not to continue in patience, unless godliness be
wanting. The ungodly world, and lewd nature that is in men, takes occasion to
accuse godly zeal, under this pretense: and to find fault with the preaching
of the word, because, say they, it sets men at strife. But we must learn
in this place to join godliness with our patience, for otherwise we shall be
found to be nothing else but irreligious and profane dogs: although we
pretend love never so much. The time will not suffer to handle the rest, which
remains in this text. Let us remember that which has been said, and give
all diligence to pursue these excellent virtues, that so we may approve our
selves to be right Christians, and look for the blessed hope promised in Jesus
Christ.

The third Sermon.
7 And with godliness, brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness, love.

8 For if these things be with you and abound, they will make you that ye shall
not be idle, nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

9 For he that has not these things it blind and sees not a far of, and
has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.


ANd with godliness brotherly kindness, etc. We have heard already, that with
our faith must be joined virtue or godly deeds, which it cannot be without, if
it be a true faith: with virtue we are commanded to join knowledge, which
may be a guide thereunto, our knowledge must go with temperance, with this
must come patience, and thereunto must be joined godliness. There remain yet
two branches of these special virtues, about which we are to travel: the
first of these is brotherly love or kindness, which must be yoked with
godliness: as I said, that this godliness he speaks of, is referred to the
first table of the law, respecting God and his religion, that we be sound and
zealous in the same, and not as those which are for all times, and al religions,
and therefore care not what be said against religion, being very belliegods
and Atheists: so this is referred to the second table, showing what we owe
unto men. This is very fitly, and necessarily added, for as there be many,
which regarding men only, how to please, and not to grieve or offend them,
altogether forgetting their duty toward the Lord God, and wholly shutting him
out, as though their chief care should be of men, let pas godliness: so there be
some that offend on the other side, which looking always so high, as to have
respect to the Lord, and his truth, to be earnest and fiery in that,
ouerlooke men, forgetting the duties which they owe unto them: the holy
Apostle meets with this mischief, and tells us that we must so love God,
that we also love men: join, says he, to your godliness, brotherly
kindness: for unless this be joined, and go with our zeal of Gods word, it
is no true godliness, although we be never so sound in judgment and seem
to be as hot as Moses or Elias, yea even to be swallowed up with burning
zeal: for it does not proceed from Gods spirit, who does also work the
love toward men wheresoever he goes: but it does proceed of some corrupt
cause, as of vaineglorie, or self love, and such like, and deserves not
indeed tobee called godly devotion, no more then the true faith can be without
virtue, or deserves to be called ought, save a shadow, or Image of faith, if
it be without good works: but it is a bitterness, which resembles the true
zeal, which does evermore carry with it, a love, and care toward men. True
it is that to be zealous in spirit, is a singular and special gift of God,
and they which be without it are but brutish, and senseless creatures, not
knowing God, nor how precious his glory is: yet this must be lo^ed unto in
every one of us, whether we bear a lo^ing affection toward our brethren or
no: for if we love God, we must needs love men, which bear his Image. If we
delight in the word of God, this is one chief point of doctrine which is
taught in it, that we be loving and kind unto men. Therefore as Saint Paul 1.
Cor. 13. shows, that very excellent gifts do not profit without love, so
likewise in this place we be taught, that if we would seem to be godly,
and have not love, it is nothing worth. Let every man therefore lay this
doctrine to his heart: that he must be earnest in the causes of the Lord,
zealous in religion, preferring God and his truth, before all men, whosoever,
and whatsoever they be: but yet withal that he must look down unto men,
rendering unto them their due also, this doing he may behold he is in the
right way. Unto this brotherly love we be charged to join love. It may be
here demanded again, what manner of speech this is, which the Apostle does
use, for is not brotherly kindness or brotherly love, as the word does
signify, and love al one; We must be far from thinking Saint Peter to deal
with so little heed, as to will us to join the very same thing to the same:
we must therefore seek a difference between these two. We may take this
difference, either that the first of these does express what we owe toward
the Godly, who be chiefly called the brethren, and the latter what we owe unto
all, both good and bad: or else the former, does signify the inward affection
of love, and the latter, the outward practice of the same: for the doctrine in
both these, is needful to be opened. If we take then the former sense, we be
willed to join with our love toward the godly and faithful brethren (whom we
ought chiefly, and more dearly to favor,) a love also which may reach even
over al, good and bad, friend and foe, This Saint Paul teaches when he
wills us to do good to all men, but especially to the^ which are of the
householde of faith. So that we must acknowledge our selves bound, in some
sort, even to the wicked: according as our Savior does teach, Math. 5. Bless
them which curse you, pray for them which hate and persecute you: and Saint
Paul says, Romans 12. If thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him
drink. Well then, although this be very hard to man's nature, yet the Lord
does straightly require it at our hands: and so that if this be wanting, we
do but deceive our selves. If we take it in the latter sense, the first word
to signify the inward affection of love, the other, the outward practice: then
we have here a notable point to be observed, not to ouershoote our selves in
our love, in judging it to be right, and sincere, when it is halting, and lame:
for many when they hear, that we are so straightly charged, for to love our
neighbors, and that with out the same, there is nothing good in us, or which
God accepts: look no further but thus, whether they bear any grudge or evil
will in their minds, and if they ca^ say I hurt no man, nor I mean no hurt to
any, they persuade themselves that this is an excellent love. And so a stone
meaning no hurt may be said to love: other somewhat wiser, do not only look
to that one thing, whether they bear evil will, but also whether they have any
kind of affection in them, and here they stay, when they should goeyet this
step further, to see that this kindness in them, breaks forth into good and
charitable deeds: for there may be some loving affection in a man, and yet
bring forth but sle^der fruits, because there is a great sloth in nature,
which hinders men from putting their love in ure, for love is laboursome and
paineful as Saint Paul sets it forth 1. These. 1. when he says, Your
laboring love. If then we will love the brethren, here is the touchstone, by
which we may prove our love, that we spare not for any labor or cost, nor yet
wax weery: because love is not like one that is lazy and luskish, loytring at
home within a man's breast, but steppeth abrod and is very diligent: neither
does it prefer every light commodity and vain pleasure, before the benefit
of the brethren. Then by this it is manifest, how that al those which would
seem to be godly, and yet have cast away the care over their brethren, at the
least thus far, that they will neither travel, nor be at any charge, for other
men's sake: whose wealth they should procure, especially of the soul, for
therein lies the chief trial of love: because it is a preposterous thing, to
be very tender over the body, a rotten carcass, and to pity the misery
thereof so much, and in the mean while, not to care for that, that is more
precious, namely the soul, the relieuing and healing of which, shall be the
happiness of the whole man for ever. This I speak because we see many, that
will bestow somewhat upon the relief of the bodily misery, which have no
pity upon me, which wander in blindness and ignorance, whose souls are
famished and pined, for want of food, full of deadly wounds and sores, which
are not salued, bound in the bands, and chains of sin, holden under
captivity by Satan, even ready to be swallowed up, of the bottomless gulf
of hell: the cause in deed is, that they have not yet learned to pity their
own souls, and therefore cannot pity the souls of their brethren: for if
they did know the spiritual misery, they would neither spare night nor day in
traveling to have it eased: whereas now contrariwise they can pull back men,
from godliness, and discourage them from seeking after salvation: they can
laugh and sport themselves in their own sins, and in the sins of their
neighbors, as though there were no misery therein, finally, being cruel
murderers of souls, would nevertheless, gladly be deemed charitable: But their
bountiful alms, does want seasoning. Let us learn therefore to pity, and to
show kindness to the bodily necessity of men, and not to forget especially,
and above al, to procure with all diligence, as much as lies in us, the
salvation of their souls: otherwise we can never be said to join love, and
godliness together.

In that which follows in the four next verses, there is showed partly the
great, and singular commodities, which we shall reap, if we be garnished
with these foresaid virtues: and partly the discommodities, which we shall
find, in the want of the same. And this S. Peter sets forth, not staying in
the bare declaration of the virtues, which indeed of themselves, being so
precious and excellent should move us, but deals with us, as with those
which are lumpish, and dull, needing many spurs, to be pricked forward
withal, and all little enough: let us be careful therefore to take heed to
that he says. If these things be with you, and abound, they will make, etc.
In this 8. verse, he begins to show the commodities which shall redounde
unto us, if we so give our diligence, that we may be richly decked with
these graces: they will make you, says the Apostle, that ye shall not be idle,
nor unfruitful, in the acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is a
shameful thing, when GOD has showed himself unto us in his Son, has called
us into his service, out of miserable bondage, for us to be idle, and
unfruitful: If the Lord have planted us, if he have dressed us, then, as it
is also said by our savior Christ, John 15. Herein is my father glorified,
that ye go and bring forth much fruit. Then it is by this place very
apparent, that a man may draw out a sure and an infallible argument, against
all those which are idle, and slouthful in the profession of religion, and as
they say key cold, or slack in the worship, and service of god, or unfruitful
in good works: namely, that they are graceles, void of faith and those
virtues which do ever accompany the same: for when Saint Peter says, if these
things be with you, they will make that ye shall not be idle, nor unfruitful, it
follows necessarily, that such as be idle, which arises for want of zeal,
or be unfruitful, continuing in their sins, it is, because they did never
yet come to the true knowledge of Christ; they may well bost themselves, of
their strong faith, make a brave show of their skill, and sine wit, so that men
might think there were some deep thing in them, and that they should be able
eue^ to judge, and give aright verdit, in all matters: but a man reading but
even this place, finding them idle, and unfruitful, (yea even a simple man)
shall easily sound them to the bottom, and say of them, that they have not as
yet known or learned Christ: because they want those former things. We must
note this also, when he says, If these things abound in you: this is, that
we should not content our selves, with a scant and bare measure of faith, of
virtue, of knowledge, and of the rest, as he sets them down: but we must
labor to have a daily increase, for that must be gathered by this, that he
pricketh forward these ripe, and grounded men. A doctrine most necessary to be
urged, because if men have gone two, or three steps, or have once a little
begun, to labor about these things, so that they can look back, and see
some come behind them, or can say I thank God, I know somewhat. I hope that
I am not without faith, somewhat there is which I have done, that I would be
loath to do again: they by and by persuade themselves, that they are
sufficiently furnished; so that they will not stick to say, I trust I have that
which shall serve the turn. Nay, the Apostle tells us an other thing here
from the Lord, and that is, that we must ouerflow in these, and abound: and
truth it is, that these men which think they be well fraught, and so seek
for no further increase of store, have as yet nothing, for if they had once
found the sweet of these things, and seen withal that they are far
behind, and in beggarly need, they would never content themselves with so
little: for who is he, which feels increase in worldly treasure, that will
cry hoe, and say, I have enough? Is there less in the heavenly treasures to
draw men to like them, than in the earthy? Or is it because men do not know
them? We must learn to take heed of such therefore, as would bear men in
hand, that it is sufficient, yea, that it is the best of al, for men to
content themselves with some civil honesty, and not to seek and weerie their
minds to gain knowledge. But these were never as yet the men, which might be
right called the scholars of Christ, much less we are to deem them worthy
masters, or teachers of others, when they go flat contrary to the holy Apostle
of Christ, who wills to seek for so great abundance: when as they would
content themselves and persuade others to be contented, with scant a shadow
of these things, which should be so plentifully found in them:
Notwithstanding some are so blind, that having no shadow or show at al of
goodness, yet think they be gone far enough. In the next verse where he
says, He that has not these things, is blind, and sees not a far of,
and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins: he sets forth
the discommodities which follow the want of these virtues. And this he does,
because some man will be little moved to hear that commodity which he spoke
of, and will say, what care I though I be idle? What care I though I be
unfruitful? I will not go about to be better the^ other men, what should I
labor to excel those which are wiser then I; If then they will not regard this,
that these virtues will make them excellent servants of God, yet let them
consider what the Apostle makes them without the same, where he affirms
them first to be blind, (a very miserable thing in the bodily sight, much
more in the spiritual, which he here means:) when God has so clearly
revealed himself in the face of his son, in the knowledge which brings
salvation, that the God of this world, as Saint Paul speaks. 2. Cor. 4.
should so blind their minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which is the image of God, should not shine unto them. Secondly he says, they
cannot see a far of, or that they be poreblinde, for such as have the beams
of sight scattering or spreading a sunder, so soon as they be out of the eye,
ca^ see well enough just by them, but not a far of, to these S. Peter does
compare those men. But it may be asked what he means: first to say they be
stark blind, and afterward to attribute some sight unto them. It may seem by
this word, that he makes their cause not so evil, as before he had said it
was: yes even as evil, for he says as much in this word, as he did in the
other: for when he says, They cannot see a far of, he takes from them al
sight of heavenly things, which are removed from us, and seen only by faith:
he does not deny them the sight of those things which are at hand, because
they have a good and a sharp sight in the things of this world, for the most
part, better then they which can see a far of. But what are these quick wits
the better, when they are but for this world, and their condition no better
then that of the poor beast, (yea much worse) when we respect the misery in
the world to come? Let not this therefore cause the^ to set up their bristles,
that they can see so well and pearcingly at hand, (that is, in earthly things)
when as they are as blind as beetles in things a far of, that is to say, in
heavenly things. Here we must seek to have eyes given us of god, with which
we may be able to see beyond this world: for before such time as the Lord
has given us some glimmering of heavenly things, we shall never covet to
obtain them. And this is the cause that these poreblinde men never pass
greatly to know the Gospel of Christ. Thirdly he says, they have forgotten
that they were purged from their old sins: as he said they were blind, so
now he says, they are forgetful: and this forgetfulness is so much the more
shameful, as it is in a chief and principal point of true religion. But where
shall we find the man, which if he be examined will confess that he has
forgotten this point? It seems none do forget it, because the very wicked
will seem to set al upon this score, that their sins are purged, and that
makes them sin so franckly. But if we understand the Apostle well, we shall
find very many which have forgotten this point. Now here we must first note
that our sins are said to be purged, when there is satisfaction made for
them by redemption in the blood of Christ.

Secondly that they are said to be purged by grace of sanctification, when by
the power of Gods spirit, sin, or all sinful affections are suppressed and
killed in us: so then there is a purging in redemption, and there is also a
purging by sanctification: Now if they have not forgotten so much, but that
they can prattle of the purging of their sins, by redemption, yet they have
forgotten this, that they were redeemed to the end they should no longer
serve sin but purge away the old leaven: But being without those former
graces, he says they have forgotten this, not meaning thereby that they had
ever learned it, for if they had, yet at the least they had not well learned it:
we may see by this how many there be, which are stark blind, and have
forgotten that Christians are called to live in righteousness and holiness of
life. If we look upon the small number of those which have a care to seek
after the Lord, and how small a part of them do come (I will not say to
abound,) but to have a competent measure of those forenamed virtues. Let us
come always to this true measure, and not be deceived neither in our selves,
nor in other. Let us be ashamed if we be carnal, to take upon us the name of
the true professors: let us deny unto them the honorable name of Christians,
which are but filthy swine, and profane dogs, as our Savior Christ
calls them: to conclude this matter, none are allowed to be true receivers
of the Gospel, but such as join virtue with their faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and so temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindenes, and
love, and such as also do seek to abound in them: the rest which care not for
these, or content themselves with the bare show of them, although they would
seem to be worshippers of God, and devout persons, yet they are by this
doctrine of the Lord wholly shut forth, until they have learned a new lesson.
Remember that this is the doctrine of God, and not of man. Remember that we
must stand and dwell upon it, not for a day, or two, while we have heard it,
but all our life long to bring it to the practice, it is plain and clear,
none can be excused if they know it not and so through simplicity stand upon
the common faith, thinking to shroude themselves well under the shadow of the
multitude: but when God has warned them, who will pity them, when they will not
be warned; if this were not told us, and that by God him self, we might
think, as men do commonly, that a very little does content the Lord, that no
great things are required at the hands of Christians, and other such foolish,
and vain opinions, as to say, they must hope well when God tells them, there
is no hope, unless they walk this way, also that it is not good to be over
precise, when as in goodness a man cannot proceed too far, nor offer too much
obedience to the Lord. To make an end, let none of al these things blind
us, because they blind some, which stand in reputation of their own wisdom.

The fourth Sermon.
10 Wherefore brethren, give rather diligence to make your calling and election
sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall.

11 For by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly, in to
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.


IT has been told unto you already, upon the verses which go next before,
how that Saint Peter regarding how dull we are and backward in godliness,
contented not himself with his exhortation which he makes, but sets down
what we shall gain if we follow his advise, and also what hurt we shall
sustain by the contrary: and this has partly been handeled in the two other
verses, and partly in these two which we have now in hand: where indeed he
does propounde so great a commodity which we shall gain, if we give all
diligence to pursue the former things, as is almost incomparable: even this,
that we shall come to the assurance, that we are called and chosen of God: a
thing so necessary for us to know, that without it, there is no right faith,
no frank and willing obedience, no sound joy. For although without this, men
seem to believe, yet is it but a wavering fantasy, to do many good things,
yet they proceed but from a servile mind, to laugh and rejoice, yet is it but
in a desperate madness which in very deed is greatly to be wondered at, how men
should be able to sport themselves, and yet to speak in their consciences
after this manner, there is hell, and eternal flames of vengeance prepared for
sinners, and I am not sure whether I shall escape or not: this desperate and
brutish security shall be apparent to be the more mad, if we compare it, and
set it forth by an outward comparison. Let it be thus, a man is taken in a
robbery or murder, imprisoned, brought before the Judge, and comdemned, by
suit of friends repriued until such time as they may sue for to get him a
pardon: in the mean time some of his acquaintance come to this murderer, and
will him to be of good cheer, and merry, he will answer, unless he be some
mad and desperate ruffian, I am condemned to the Gallows, the Judge has
pronounced the sentence of death upon me, I know not how hard a thing it will
be to obtain a pardon, I stand in great doubt, and for this cause I cannot
be merry, unless I might know for certainty that I should escape, if I did
once know that, I could be as merry as any man that lives, before that time I
may seem to laughe, but my heart is full of fear and sorrow. And is it not
thus with us all, are we not all of us guilty, and already condemned by the
sentence of the highest Judge; not to some torment of one day, or short
continuance, but to the fire that shall never be quenched? When men can be merry
therefore and laugh even in those things which cause this destruction, and yet
do feel that they are not sure to escape this dreadful vengeance, is it not
a mad mirth and a desperate laughter, in which if they were not become very
sensles blocks, they should feel many gripings at the heart, which would
mar al their mirth, yea a worm that gnaweth in such wise, that they can
have no quiet rest, nor as I said before no sound joy. If we were not therefore
more then desperate and mad fools, the thought of hell would dampe al our mirth
until such time as we be sure that we have escaped it. This then which the
Apostle says here is a princely commodity, that walking the way which he
has prescribed, we shall come to the assurance, that we are the called and
chosen of the Lord. But it may be demanded how this can agree with other
sayings in the holy scriptures, which do plainly teach that God choseth whom
he will of his own free grace, for which S. Paul alleges out of Moses,
that God will have mercy on whomsoever he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens: adding there upon that it is neither of him that wills nor yet of
him that runs, but of god which shows mercy: again the doctrine of Popery
is, that God does make choice, co^ditionally respecting the good deeds which he
did foresee in the^: and so the election should depend upon the worthiness of the
me^: we are to answer that this place has nothing in it which is contrary to
that free choice which God makes without respect of any thing that is in us,
for he could find nothing in us that might any way move him, neither does it
serve at al for to prove that election is conditional: because S. Peter does
not handle in this place, whereupon election is founded, or what moved god to
make choice, nor to show wherein the certainty and stablenesse of election does
stand: but his meaning is, to teach us how we shall attain to this incomparable
treasure, to be out of doubt, and surely resolved in our selves, not by
fantasied opinions, but by sure and substa^tial proof, that we be chosen of
God, and therefore cannot perish. If we respect the unchangeable counsel of God,
therein does rest alone the sure foundation of election, because God which
cannot be deceived, nor cannot repent, or change, has made the choice,
therefore those whom he has chosen, can never perished but if we regard the way
and means, by which we may come to know this favor of God to be toward us, the
Lord by his apostle tells us, that this is the way, even to give al diligence
and study, to be richly decked with his graces, or those forenamed virtues, for
by these we shall undoubtedly know, because if we have the^, if they abound in
us, if we walk in them, we shall, as he says, never fall. Let us learn therefore
first this, that election in it self rests upon the unchangeable purpose and
counsel of God. Then secondly that we are not to fetch the certentie of it in
our selves, from some revelation, neither are we to clime up into heaven, to
search in the counsels of god, whether our names be in the book of life. But we
are to fetch our warrant from within our selves, and that from the fruits of
the spirit, which indeed although it be out of our selves, yet because it is
not of our selves, is certain and infallible. If ye will understand this more
plainly, first I say, it is out of our selves, or from within our selves
because we must take the trial, whether those things be in us, which are
given to al those whom God does choose, then I say it is not of our selves,
for if it were, it should be altogether uncertain. But of the seal of God
wherewith he has sealed us, which is the spirit of sanctification: now mark
well I pray you, If you do, (says S. Peter) these things, you shall never fall:
and why, is it because our doings are so perfect and sure, or that we are so
constant of our selves; no not so, but by these virtues we know that we are
sealed with Gods spirit, whose work we feel in us: we know also that as
many as are led by the spirit of God are the sons of God. Romans 8. From hence
it comes, that look how much more a man feels in him self the increase
of knowledge, the increase of virtues and heavenly desires, so much more sure
he is, that he is the child of God, and as the one increases, so increases
also the other. Contrariwise when a man feels within him self an evil
conscience, feels that he is darkened in his understanding, led by the
lusts of sin: he shall in spite of his teeth within himself, sing this
doleful song, I know not whether I shall be saved or not: and look how the
other may say I know I shall be saved, because God has sealed me with his
spirit: so may this say, I am sure to be damned continuing in this case,
because I have not faith, but only a wavering and doubtful opinion. We may
see by this how beneficial they are, and merciful to their own souls, which
with all their power day and night give up themselves to seek after the
knowledge and obedience of the Lords will: for not giving over, nor waxing
weary, they shall in continuance of time, if they ply it hard, find such a
blessing from the Lord, in the increase of faith and virtue, that will cause
them to say, we have not lost our labor. On the other side we may see how
unkind and cruel they are to themselves, which through idleness, and sloth, in
seeking after God, with their daily and continual sins, do even as it were
cut the throat of their faith, seeing they cannot have trust in him, whom
they do so much disobey. This place is as a mighty engine to overthrow the
vanity of sundry opinions which do reign in men. As first of al in those
which cry out against this doctrine, as a thing which will make men careless
and idle in the service of God, and stop the course of good works, I
beseech you mark how well these great wise men have profited in Gods school,
see how they agree with the holy Apostle, he says we are to give al our
study and diligence in good works to come to the sure and undoubted
knowledge, that we be chosen unto life: they say quite contrary, if ye will have
men careful of well doing, away with the doctrine of election, for it will mar
al: thus the wisdom of flesh does proudly lift up it self even against God
(but how foolishly, a very child may see:) Does that thing which we cannot
come to the knowledge of, without exceeding care of godliness, abundance of
virtue, and plenty of all good works, destroy in men the study and care of
good works? But proud flesh is worthily blind. Some other, although not thus
bruitishly blinded, yet greatly ouerseene, when they think on this doctrine,
which is set up unto us as the mark for us to aim at in all our doings, and the
trial whether we have done well or not: I mean the trial in this respect, and
when a man has done many good deeds, he shall know he has not done them well,
if he yet doubt, whether he be one of Gods chosen, for howsoever he passes
it over, yet his conscience (which does in some sort know, that he has not
dealt but for vain glory, or some other sinister respect) will not suffer him
to have this faith: For God does not work so darkely by his spirit in men,
but that they may learn to know whether it be of him, if they would make a
due trial: because we must not rest in the outward doing of good things,
but in the right doing. Let him therefore which gives him self to do good
works, (and yet feels not this, which Saint Peter says, we shall) suspect
that his doings are misshapen, and be careful to fashion them after the rules
of the word. A third sort of men there be, which with might and maine will
defend this doctrine, that men ought to be sure of salvation, that we cannot
more honor God, then to give full credit to his promises, and because the
plain testimony of the scripture compels them, they affirm it constantly,
and condemn the contrary as a foul error, that God has chosen men, and men
come to feel and to know this: And therefore because it is a true doctrine,
they say also that they themselves are sure, that God has chosen them, but
when they take not the way to become sure, which S. Peter here has set down,
but go in a contrary path, and are spotted with filthy crimes, we may boldly
say, they be liars: for although they brag with their tongues of that that
they should be, yet there is a bird in their breast, which does sing in a
contrary note, and tells them plainly what they be. Another kind of men
there be, which in no case can be persuaded, that any man may be sure of his
salvation, and therefore with scoffs they ask of them which profess the word,
when God told them so? If it were a thing which were not to be, or could
not be known, then the Apostle has greatly ouershot himself, in telling us
how we shall come to be sure. But ask a question of them, whether they do
not believe in God, every one will answer, I put al my whole trust in him:
reason then a little further and tell the^, that the Scripture which cannot lie,
says, That al which trust in God shall be saved: how then will they join these
together, that they trust in GOD, and yet doubt whether they shall be saved;
Can God deceive; or say they, they know not what; Undoubtedly if they did know
that they have trust, they should also know they cannot perish. But let us
learn by this the misery of our time: in which men do still think this
doctrine to be strange. Now let us come to the particular application of this
doctrine, in which every one must come home to himself, remembering first, that
such as God has called home to himself, and chosen to be his children, he
does also give unto them true faith and feeling that they be his elect: and
such as perceive no such thing in themselves: are in a very miserable case,
and as yet we may say forlorn creatures: therefore every man in him self must
ask this question, of his own soul, how goes the matter with thee? Art
thou sure GOD has chosen thee; Do thou feel any assurance of eternal life?
The conscience will answer vprightlie if we be not negligent to make inquiry:
then if we find this within. I am not sure, for I doubt and stagger: we must
inquire without selves thus, what is the cause, God is faithful which has
promised eternal life unto all which believe: our heart will make answer, thou
regardest not the fear of God, thou art full of foul sins, evil lusts do
reign in thee, thou do not study for the knowledge of Gods word, thou art
vnfruiful and barren in good works, therefore thon can not say, I am led by
the spirit of God, and therefore sure I shall be saved: if he be wise he will
not stay here, as the manner of fools is, saying I am not sure indeed,
neither do I think any man can be, I commit it to God, let him do with me
what he will: these speeches may seem to have some wit and godliness in them,
but they are in deed devilish and mad, because God has taught us a contrary
lesson in this place: but go this step further, may I come to this
assurance? and which is the way? The Lord does answer by his Apostle, thou
may come to this assurance, and points him out the way: even that which
you have hard, wherein he must painefully travel and go forward, not for a
gird or a braide, and wax idle again, but still labor, for these men had
gone a great way and yet they are willed to proceed still, if the Lord give
not this assurance, we are to labor so much the more, and to be so much the
more importunate, to suspect our judgment, and to seek for knowledge, to call
our selves to a more strait account, to set a watch over our affections too
see with what mind we do things, to foster no sin willingly in us, nor to
be slack to any good work which God has appointed, to call and cry unto God
for faith, and his spirit to guide us, to use the means diligently which God
has appointed, as the hearing, searching, and meditating in the word: thus in
time (for it is wrought in men by degrees, and they never come to the full) God
will let them see that he is their God. That neither life nor death, height or
depth, things present or things to come, Angels, Principalities, nor powers,
nor any creature shall separate us from his love in Christ. It follows in
the next verse, For by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is a
confirmation of the last clause of the former sentence, where he says, If you
do these things, you shall never fall: and why? because you shall have a great
entrance into the eternal kingdom of Christ: as that is a confirmation of the
other, where he says, Make your calling and election sure, as the reason
follows there, Ye shall come to be sure: how? because he which proceeds so
far that he knows he shall never fall away from God to destruction, he is, (as
it must needs be,) sure also that he is chosen: for he speaks not here of
every particular fall into sin, which is the most godly: but says Saint
Peter, I tell you if you do these things, ye shall never fall, not because
there is any such stablenes in our selves, or in our own works, but we know
they be the fruits of Gods spirit in us, which is his seal, set upon none
but those whom he does mark up to life eternal, and he is unchangeable: so it
follows here, ye shall not fall, for they that have a rich entrance into the
kingdom of Christ, which is everlasting, so that Christ does reign in them,
as he does in all the faithful by his spirit, can not fall, until the power of
Christ fail, and his kingdom come to an end. For we must note, that the
force of the reason, rests in the difference which is between the kingdom
of Christ and the kingdoms of this world: in which though they be never so
mighty, and full of policy and wisdom, yet they should come to and end: and
therefore a man cannot rightly say unto the subjects, you have a mighty
Prince, who is bountiful and gracious, your peace therefore and happy estate
shall endure for ever: nay, the mighty may be overcome, if not by men, at
leastwise by death, and so they may be to day in peace and good estate, to
morrow al in an uproar, to day under a loving and gracious Prince, to morrow
under a fierce tyrant: so uncertain is the state of the kingdom of this
world: but in the kingdom of Christ, whose power is above al, and can never
come to an end, but is as he says here, eternal, it is far otherwise,
because his state is unchangeable, so is theirs that be once entered thereinto,
and therefore are sure they can never fall. Whosoever does but eue^ straightly
look over these words of the apostle, if he have any sight at al, he must
needs confess all this, the matter is so clear, that we can but marvel how it
should come to pass that this doctrine of the Lord, set forth by his apostle,
should find so few friends, and so many extreme enemies: but indeed men
which are liars, do in this thing confess the truth, that they feel not any
such matter, and therefore cannot abide to hear that al true godly men, and
faithful Christians have this knowledge in themselves: but let us give ear to
the Apostle, who tells us how we shall com to have Christ to be our king, and
to reign over us, namely if we yield up our selves to the governance of his
spirit, which works al goodness in our hearts, subduing and va^quishing all the
rebels which we bear about in us. Contrariwise it must needs be granted, the
such as are beastly Epicures, following their own fleshly mind, letting lose the
raines, and giving the swing unto the raging lusts of the flesh, despising
the knowledge of Gods will, and therefore regard not his word: though with full
mouth they call Christ their king and their lord: yet when god says here by his
apostle, that the entrance into his kingdom is by this means, that me^ follow
after virtue, knowledge and godliness: they show that they be none of his
subjects, being altogether void of his spirit, but the bo^d slaves of sin and
Satan, whose kingdom they uphold, with tooth and nail: and that makes them,
even as those which are of another Corporatio^ to fight against the truth, and
those which profess it: devising all the colors and shifts they can to
maintain sin, inuenting all the slanders that may be to discredit the godly
conversation of such as follow the way here prescribed: condemning them as over
precise and curious, if they do but look this way which God wills al his
servants to walk: if God do open their eyes, to see but eue^ in a glimmering,
that which he does teach in this place, they would be ashamed of their master
and blush at that, which now they boaste and brag of: they would also confess
that like blind buzzards and mad beasts, they have fought against God, and
not men: finally it would make them change their ways, and seek diligently to
have the witness within themselves, that they be the servants of God. We must
mark well one other thing which is here spoken, to wit that he says an
entrance shall be ministered unto you, abundantly or richly: as if he should say,
when ye have labored and traveled, to be as it were well soked and seasoned in
godliness, and plentifully decked with all graces and gifts of the spirit, ye
shall by degrees proceed so far, and gain so much, that your entrance into the
kingdom of Christ shall be very great: whereupon it does follow, that they shall be
past danger, and may well warrant themselves, of sure standing in as much as
Christ has not only begun to reign in them, and to be their king, but also
in great measure and mightily. But does he not add this one word more then
needs; Is it not enough to have an entrance, unless we have a rich
entrance into his kingdom; does Christ once begin to reign in a man, and to
drive out the power of Satan, and afterward cast him of again to destruction;
I answer that this word is not added in vain, for we be taught thereby to
take heed that we content not our selves with some little taste and small
entrance: for his purpose is to make a difference between such on the one
part as make some beginning, and have some good desires and motions in them,
and do taste of the good word of God, and are in some sort lightened, but
overcome with sinful lusts, and vain delights of the flesh, they slide back
again suddenly, they were but for a brunt, it brings forth no ripe fruit in
them, neither to speak properly, did Christ ever reign in them: and such on
the other part as proceed unto the deep rooting out of sin, and sure and
fast planting the truth in their hearts, going forward daily from grace to
grace, and from strength to strength, until Christ have set up his throne in
them, and bear sway, to the overthrow of the power of darkness, and bereuing
the Devil of the interest he had, and thrusting him from the possession which
he held: a doctrine which must needs do us much good if we bleeue it: and
very needful to be urged instantly, considering the nature and disposition of
men at this day: they are afraid of going too far in virtue and knowledge,
they count it a needless thing to be admonished or taught diligently, they
take great scorn to be counted such as may be amended, yea and that which is
more, when as they have not learned the first point of a Christian scholar,
they will seem perfect: so far are they from having this abundant entering
into the kingome of Christ.

Learn here therefore, dearly beloved, and learn it well, lay sure hold
thereof that it do not slip from you, for God teaches us here the only way to
life and happiness: let go the vain dreams and doltish opinions of people
sotted in their ignorance, which are so far blinded by the malice of Satan,
that which way soever they go, still they are in hope of eternal glory, as
though the way to heaven were so broad that a man could not go out of it, and
the entrance so easy, that he may enter when he will: for this is the divinity
of our time: howsoever a man spend his time in ignorance, not caring for, nor
seeking after the true knowledge of god, howsoever he be defiled with foul and
beastly sins, that in deed there be nothing in him but pride, self love,
vain glory, envy, gluttony, the lusts of adultery, and such like, yea, so
far, that the scripture does liken him to a swine or a dog: yet if as they
say, he have God in his mind, and can say, Lord have mercy upon me, they
think this is all that can be required of men, they will not stick to acquit
al such: being nothing at al acquainted with that, which God tells in this
place by his Apostle, how far men must proceed in his fear before they can
well warrant themselves to be in good case. For ye may as well join heaven and
hell together, fire and water will as soon agree, light and darkness, are as
like one another, as the common faith is to that which we are taught in this
place. But I will return to apply this doctrine to the godly, for whom it is
written: how they may, as we use to say, make this thing dead sure: for there
is many a godly man, which after long travel, and much care to please God, is
yet so matched with stubborn nature so deeply infected and poisoned with
sin, that he is compelled, although he have gained much and does feel the
power of Gods spirit in him, sometimes to be in doubt, and to think his labor
but lost, because he cannot get so great a victory as he would feign: let not
this man be dismayed, but let him go forward, remembering what is here
promised: the more he wants, the more let him strive, and he shall plainly
perceive, that God regards his care and travel, considers his sighs and
groans, and will perform all his desires: let him remember that these men
whom S. Peter wrote unto, had obtained the precious faith, did know and were
established in the present truth, and yet they were not so far but that they
may be moved to make their election sure, to seek a further entrance into the
kingdom of Christ: and so to continue that which was but begun. We ought the
more to be moved hereunto, because the world is ever full of fearful examples,
which if they were well considered, would make a man's hair to stand upright,
when he shall see that for want of this doctrine, or at the least the not
practicing of it, there be many which seem not only to have had some good
liking of the truth, but also a great zeal, even to suffer some what for the
same, which are become even as cold as yse, and scarce any point of god lines
left in the^: yea though they would bear me^ in hand that they have, like good
scholars proceeded to the highest form, yet when our great master shall pose
them, they shall not be allowed to sit in the lowest: so dangerous a thing it is
once to relent or slacken our care, until we have gotten this full assurance,
and made this rich entrance into the kingdom of Christ, that we feel our
selves to be led by the spirit of God, and feel it, not by any vain conceit
of our own foolish brain, nor by sensles security, but by the working and
fruits of the same spirit. If this were well weighed, men would not content
themselves with so little, or nothing: they would not make so light account of
teaching: they would leave of their slanderous and reprochful raylinges: they
would not like filthy swine wallow themselves still in the filthy mire of
their sins: they would not prattle so much of this, that al are sinners, and
therefore think al are alike, shuffeling together one with another: nay God
will sunder them, for he has taught here who be godly and faithful, such as he
takes and accepts for his children: and who be un godly Infidels, children
of the devil, and heirs of hell. For in very deed, though al be sinners, yet
they greatly differ, for some continue in their sins, seducing and deceiving
themselves with vain hope of Gods mercy: some do repent after the manner here
prescribed the^, which stands in this, that they cleanse themselves more and
more from al filthiness of the flesh, and grow in all virtues and graces, until
they be decked in their souls, with heavenly ornaments, and have yielded up
them selves too have Christ reign in them. As for the common repentance, to
cry only with words for mercy, in some light measure to be grieved, to fear
the judgments of God, and yet the soul within nothing changed, nor the
spirit renewed, nor Christ reigning in the heart: it does but deceive all
which trust to it. Most true it is, that what time soever a sinner does repent,
he is forgiven: but this is as like to that repentance, which is here by S,
Peter described, as we say, an Apple is to an Oyster: forif we look well unto
them both, we shall find them to agree in very few things, and those even the
least. Let us I say once again fasten our steps in this way, let us go
forward, and not so much as look back, until such time as we have by our own
experience, proved that to be true which is taught by Saint Peter. For it is
not enough to believe that this is true (although that be somewhat) unless we
try it to be so by our selves. He is now a stark fool which sees this to
be the only way to happiness, and for sloth will not walk in it: as though the
kingdom of heaven were not worth the traveling for. We may gather also in this
place, if we be not sensles* how great enemies they be to the salvation of
men: which would utterly debar them of the word, that is appointed to be the
instrument by which god works al these good things in his servants: for
without the (as it may be easily gathered here) we ca^ do nothing. It does also
appear, that those are in a miserable case, whose office and duty is, not
only to show men some part of Gods will, but to bring them thus far as S.
Peter does require, if they be not well furnished, and have walked first this
way themselves: for how shall they bring other men, to that, which themselves
have not, nor know not; It does appear also that God has showed a sore
judgment against that people, which have such a guide as cannot show them
this way: which is the only way to heaven: for doubtless it is more then if
he should thunder upon them from heaven, or fire their houses over their
heads: especially when they are so blind, that they see not the plague, but
think themselves in better case then those whom God does over rule by his
word. But woe, and woe again be to those blind guides, and shepherds, which
do not feed: and wretched is that people which are as sheep with, out a
shepherd. For how shall they ever hear of these things; We can but pity
their misery, and desire the Lord to send redress, in so lamentable and
desperate a case: which is thought to be nothing. because indeed the most men
know nothing: for had they but known what god requires in that man whom he
will save, though they were not partakers of it themselves, yet they would
consent and agree to the doctrine: and confess that there is no way to attain
eternal life, but by so sound teaching as may bring people to the things here
required. But I will here make an end.

O Lord grant, that this doctrine which thou have taught us in this thy holy
word, may enter into us, and dwell in us for ever: that so we may be sure of thy
favor and of eternal life, through Jesus Christ thy dear son our Lord and
only savior.

Amen.

