A glass for householders, wherein they may se, both how to rule them selfs
and order their household very Godly and fruytfull.

LONDINI. In officina Richardi Graftoni.

1542.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the reader.
IN this small treatise is set forth most wholesome council, first being a
young man and unmarried how that ye should behave your self, after that being
a married manne and an householder, how ye should both rule your self and
order your houstolde, with also an exhortacio^ and council what trade and
sort your occupyeng should be, y^ is to say, y^ it may be specially for y^
co^me^ wealth of the realm that ye are of, and also beneficial and profitable
to your self, with many other good and wholesome lessone and counselles, which
whosoever follow, shall not only live here a life profitable both for him self
and all other men, but also after this life shall be rewarded with that croune
and bliss, that God the father for Christ his sons sake has promised to
them that are his. *

A glass for householders.
MY entierly beloved the beginning of wysedom is ye love and fear God, for it
causes a man to withdraw him self from dooyng eiuill and makes him to do
good, it is not enough (my friend) for to forbear evil dooinges, but you and I
and every Christyan ought to do good, that is to say perfightly to believe in
God, to commit our selfs wholly unto him, and to think verily then that he
will not forsake us but tenderly will provide for us all things necessary for
this life, and will defend us in all adversities, he will give us strength to
resist his adversaries and ours in his cause, and besides this he will
doubtless make us ryghteouse, good, and blessed he will remitte and forgive our
sins, he will make us the heirs of his kingdom and give us the life
everlasting. And all these he will do of his mere goodness, of his mere
grace and mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord our redemer and savior, by y^
work of the holy ghost. And that for because we believe in him, because we be
delighted in his laws and love his word. And because we do confess our
selves to be vnpure and of a corrupt nature, infyrme, feeble and weak, and of
our selves apt to do nothing which is good in his sight, but always ready to
fall into eternal dampnacion, full of vain glory and ypocrisie, vile,
wretched, ignorant and inconstaunte. And acknoweledgyng so his goodness, yt
without him we could not somuche as to think one good thought, wherefore,
whatsoever good thought comes into our minds, and thereafter we speak or
work it comes of him, wherefore we are churlishe and unkind if we give not
always thanks and praises therefore to him, which thing of duty we ought to
do sith that all our good works come of him, and except they came of him,
they were not good. Let us then of, and upon faith in him, and only to
glorify him, do good deeds with such goods and riches as he has given us,
whether they be inward riches or outward, that is, ghostely deeds of mercy
or bodily. And because you ought to make a great reconyng to God, for these
worldly things shall be when the same shall receive you again when ye shall die.
And think that y^ time thereof might be as well this day as to morrow or the
next day. Remember that it is hard for a rich man to be a good man,
because y^ truth says that it is more easyer for a Camel to crepe through the
eye of a nedle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
plainly, without excepcion true it is, y^ saint Iherome says which says,
that a richeman is either unjust himself, or ye heir of an unjust man.
Great riches can neither be either gotten or else kept without sin. Ye must
remember and think, of how much better riches they do rob you. For they
pull away from you the love of God. Therefore covetousness is called ydolatrye of
Paul. And Christ says you cannot serve God and Mammon. Mammon is y^ deuel,
which te^pteth and styreth to coueteousnesse. Therefore if you have worldly
goods, serve them not, let not them have your mind under their subieccio^.
But be you a master over them. And remember y^ you ought to be the servant
of God, yt is as a servant to use these riches to y^ glory and praise of God
the geuer, least you be condemned of him as an euel servant, not regardyng
his masters will and pleasure. Think that whosoever be ta^geled much with
this world or worldly riches hates the veraye smell and taste of virtue. And
whosoever sets his mind upon gold, and has his affeccion and desire
thereunto hates all honest sciences, his heart shall never be quieted with it,
but always in trouble, upon hope to get, or fear to lose. A couetouse person
cannot be satisfied with gold. The heart of man is so excellent a thing, that
all the treasures in the world cannot fulfill it. (I mean the desires of y^
heart) he only that made it, may fulfill and satisfye it and none other thing
And he desires nothing else of man, but that he may dwell in his heart. And
where as Mammon is, there will not he dwell.

Therefore if you will receive this gift, expel Mammon, and thrust him out of
doors. For Christ has with no vice less acquayntaunce (though he love none
at all) then with couetise, wherefore if you study to please Christ, and come
into his favor, you must give up Mammon, and banishe him out of the coasts
of your breast. For Christ and Mammon dwells not in one and the same place.
Bewise therefore how you set your heart to richesse, certainly if you set your
heart to them, you shall ever be poor and void of true richesse. He that
coueteth nothing, is rich and has enough. If you have worldly goods, know
of whom you have received them. And to the geuer be not unkind, but have y^
gooddes to do good, and to be good with them. Let not them make you worse by
i^ordinate love. Though you had them not, yet moughte you do good. For doing
good consists in ye affeccion of y^ mind. As if you had nothing to help your
christen brother, but a cup of cold water. Or if you have not yt, yet having a
piteful and a mercyful mind, with a good will to give if you had it, it shall be
acceptable before God. If it be moved of christen love, upon ye necessitee,
pouerte infirmytee, calamitee, and wretchedness, and the aduersyte of my
neighbor. And in these things, according to my power I do help him as I
would that he should help me if I were in like condicyon, (as says saint
Paul.) Let us Gala. vi.
work good to all persons, but specially unto them that be of the household
of faith. And likewise, saint Paul to Timothe. 1. Timo. vi.
Charge the rich men of this world to do good works, that they may be
rich in goodness, that they may gladly reparte their goods, that they be
curteouse and lyberall.

Now then doing good consysteth Dooyng good, consists in ii. things.
in two things. The one yt with living well and verteously you do good to
your self. And the other to the poor, with repartyng your substance with a
good will unto them. Also yt they lack not your good counsayl when you may
help them therewith. This first manner of doing good, every man may have and
exercise. For every man that will desire, seek or ask the grace of God may
live well and virtuously. The second only use they, to whom is given by God a
charytable mind to gather worldelye substance. And these persons incessantely
or contynually with this mind uses this doing good as long as god sends
them where with, thinking that they have the goods of him therefore, that is,
that they them selves should take thereof to satisfye their necessite or need,
and the rest to imparte to the poor and nedy. And by this they do trewely
worship God, and the Images of God, and the likeness of God is signed upon
them that thus do. For the person that has a full desire to follow goodly
counsels in y^ scripture, has not only the Image of God printed in his
soul, but also the likeness of God, other deed Images has nothing commune
with these Images but only the shadow, wherefore they might be called better
tokens or signs of remembrance.

If we do thus upon lively faith we do not only quicken the Images of God: but
we our selves, through this godly desire, do represent the similytude or
likeness of God. To help other for Christ's love in their needs, infirmytees,
wretchedness, or to have a prompte will and desire to help are good deeds and
godly.

Wherefore the doers of such, can not but be godly and holy, and to be
short, like unto Christ, which is God.

This my beloved, I pray you bear in mind that you do good unto other with
your worldely substance, and counsel. And not only that, but have a will
and a feruente desire to profit, many moo then you be able, with word and
deed.

This above al things I exhort you to follow, that you first profit your
self, with the first manner of doing good, that is to live well and
virtuously, as it becomes every christen manne. And God se^dyng wherewith, you
should use the second manner of doing good, and that you put it in daily
experience. And so doing, you your self shall not only be sure to have of God
everlasting life for your reward: but in this life also you may be assured
(if you steadfastly believe) not to lack such things as are necessary for this
present life. And besides this, with this your good conuersacyon, you shall
purchase a sure inherytaunce for your children. For God never suffers the
sede of the just person, for lack to seek his bread.

For because this transitory or temporal goods are corruptible and may
decay, it is to be thought that fear does possess those persons which
have such in moderate love toward them, that they cannot well use them.
Wherefore to avoid this peril, if God send you riches, never set your mind
or affection on them. But by and by, with the same liberalite that God sends
them, begin, begin I say and fear not of lack, adventure upon it to
dispose and to use them well. Be not like the toade, which has nothing else
under him but earth, and yet he frayeth to spend of it, least the earth would
fail him. Thus I say, not to dissuade you from labor to get goods by
good ways and all honest diligence, and by all lawful means, for the vice of
coueteousnesse stands not in a measurable and honest desire to get and
procure for worldly things, for if a man have this desire without
inordinate love toward him self, or vniustelye to provoke his kynsfolkes or
friends, but desires to use them well to the glory of God as is above said,
it is not reprouable. But the root and croppe of coueteousnesse stands in
the hard retencion or keeping of worldly goods, and possessynge them, not
to reparte with others, nor to take the good use of them, thoroughe a
disordinate love toward them. Wherefore, not setting your affectionate love
or delight upon riches, ye may labor to get riches and have them. But see
that they have not you. Procure to get them with the love and fear ot God.
And then I doubt not, but ye will so use them (having a love to God a boue
riches,) that when pitee or godly love shall move you, ye will not stycke,
doubt nor, fear to use of your goods to honor God. Such as labor to
get goods after this manner awyse, will not spend them evil. To desire to
get and have goods, may not be evil, if so be you desire, more fervently
the virtue of lyberalytee or contempt of them (as touching your synguler
commodytee) to desire any thing to profit many without carnal affection is
good. He that desires for riches purelye, follows not them with love: But
who is he, and we will praise him? Ye must ever have Christ's word in
remembrance: It is hard for him that has riches to enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Wherefore ye cannot well possess riches (except ye be so strong and
stable in faith, that you esteem them of a small value,) that ye would
always for Christ be content to leave them. Fynallye, if you can possess
them, and not be possessed of them: desire and labor to have them.
Wherefore in all things that you do as concerning your conversation and
occupyenge, let this be a general rule for you, that is to say: The
commandment of the law natural, which is, to do as you would be dooen
to.

If then you occupy buiynge and selling, I desire you to remember this law,
that whenever any person for necessitee or need sells to you any thing, or
also for his great need would buy any thing of you, incontynentlye I would
your self to think in mind to be the same person which with great need
or necessitee buyeth or sells with you, and to consydre how you would be
entreated in the same cause, so entreat him as well in ye pryces as choice of
the ware, as well in the paymente as in any other thing thereunto belonging. I
would you would considre the gaynes or losses of him that you bargayne with,
as your own, all though parauenture some, yea a great many would judge, vsyng
byeng and sellyng after this manner of wise, your gaynes would be little or
far less, then it might be.

If you used to buy for the least and sell for the most ye can, as the commen
use is, though it were so (which in deed is not) yet a little well gotten to a
Christyan should be rekened more the^ a great deal otherwise, It abides beeter
with his owner. And makes him to live the more merelyer, his conscience being
clean and void of pryckes, which these thorny riches are wont to fasten in
a man's breast. And besides this, the gaynes shall be the greater, whatsoever
the world thinks. For buiynge and selling with some lyberalytee, ye shall
sell and buy much more, and oftener then other that be extreme or hard, and
will have the vttermooste of their wares. The often gain then, though at
every time were but little, may mount anon to greater gaynes then otherwise.

Also by this manner of dealyng ye shall avoid evil debtes and shrewde
paymentes, for they that buy with gain do seldom pay evil. For evil
debtores and froward paymentes comes most commenly either of eu^ll wares
sold for good, other of over great price charged in the ware.

Also by this manner of dealing, you shall alwayse treat with love and
pleasure, of all that you have to do with, and live without variaunce,
debates or plees. Which, of all things ought to be excheiued and avoided.
Wherefore my loving friend, I pray you to follow this order in buiyng and
selling, for then that, which you get shall be well gotten, and without
charge of conscience, and doubtless your gaynes shall be the more, and all with
pleasure, love and quietness.

To commen farther of buiyng and selling of marchaundise, you shall perceive
that the right office of a true merchant, is to provide and bring to land or
place where he is, all such wares, as are scarce and vnplentytyfull in ye
said place, and necessary for the wealth of the land And also to carye and
send out all such wares as are superfluouse and do habounde in the places
where he is, into places where is scarceness or lack of them. As here in
England, because clothe, tynne and lead, be plenteouse, these wares ye may
send hence, and not corn, or things pertaini^g to vitailes, though here were
great haboundaunce. It can not be but hurtful to lade any out of the land.
And the return of these warys ^ether, should be in iron, stele, and other
metallis, which we have need of Also in Woade, Alam, Madder, and such other
like things necessary for our clothe making. And as for apples, cheries,
garlike and onions, with other fruits, wynes, spicis, sylke, clothe of gold
and other like, might be left very well. For we might live without these
marchaundizes, for they do rather provoke men to vices then to temporate
living, and good and honest, sobre and chaste behauoure. And with these
marchaundize, I might couple furs of great prices, and very fine clothe,
for these are even so superfluouse as the other, of mean prices are necessary,
and behouable. These may be named for example, for to name all kinds of
marchau^dizes necessary and not necessary, profitable, and unprofitable, were
to much.

This ought to be taken head of, that it is the office of a good marchaunte to
send out of the country, the things which are most superfluouse, and to
bring thither things most necessary. And so shall his gaynes be the more,
and better gotten, because he does it to help the necessyte of his
neighbors.

How ye ought to be conuersaunte with your elders.
AS touching your conversation with your elders, have the^ (I pray you) in
much reverence be gentle and loving to your equalles. And in no wise, despice
your inferiors. Also reverence all devout persons, in the choice of them
have none affection to the cloak or crown nor other such outward tokens only.
But where you perceive example of virtuous living, pure, chaste, and clean in
word and deed. Such a person have in honor and reverence, be he man or
woman. And think that then you do honor the Image and very likeness of God,
yea God in his image, what garment soever he wareth. Also se (I pray you) that
you be not full of words, remembering this saying of the wise manne.

* That I have spoken, I repent then among.

But I never repented, that I held my tongue.

If the heart be ready to move the tongue to speak y^ you would not Say to
your tongue. Tongue whyther go thou? Fle from men full of words, and
meddle not much with them, because sin will be where much babbling is. Fle
also the company of whisperers and liars, if your presence can not refourme
them. For they must needs engender anger, and the indignacio^ of God. And such
as be the lovers of God, love the truth in all things, so y^ in sport nor in
earneste it appear that you delight to say nor hear any lies or things
sounding thereunto. Also in doing benefytes or good deeds to other, love
promptness, quickenesse and haste. For it is twice given, the which is gladly
and redely given. Be not hastye or roughe in denieng any honest thing that is
asked of you, if ye can do it. For it is convenient that whom you can not
help in deeds, at leest with your good word you so dyspatche him, y^ he may
perceive, your will to be good

Fraud and deceit you should not only avoid and not do, but not once
consent that any other should deceytie or defraude any manne or woman or
child if you may let it. Also have no envy at any man's prosperytee,
neither yet be glad of any man's aduersytee. Ponder the gaynes and losses of
your neighbors, to be glad and sorye for them, like as you would of your
own that they may way youres in y^ same balaunce. Moreover, see that you
do nothing in your house, that you would not to be known in the market
place.

Think that the worste part of your servants is the tongue. And though
you your self (as always should) fear to do any viciouse thing alone, be
not yet witness to other of such deeds. For he that holds his tongue, and
fears to rebuke sin for Gods sake, he fears more manne then he loves
God, and loves neither of both, as he ought to do.

Besides this, if your goods increase, you should not only increase in
goodness and good deeds to the poor and nedeful persons but let your
servants also feel the advantage of your gains Good reason it is, that
they that are parteners of the labors, enjoy part of the profit. But if
fortune look sowerlye upon you and withdraw prosperouse succession from you,
let them see your sails borne after the blowynge of the wind. Also flee
plees and debates, all contencyon and strife, though your cause seem never so
good. If it be a money matter, that think very gaynes, what soever of strife
you lose with money. For loss of brawling and strife with money, may well be
rekened gaynes to them that love God, peace, and charytee, and contempne money
for Christ's cause, leave strife to them yt love more money then peace or
charity. For in the law, besides yt you shall stand in dought to have justice
though your matter be just yet the tediousness or werinesse, y^ anger and
business to follow it, the labor, vexacion, the daunsyng attendaunce, the
disdain and heavy minds of the contrary parties, and all other such
inconveniences engendered by plees should be exchewed what soever it cost. And
to avoid this, have you always (if you do by me) a respect and a good
judgment of the persons with whom you entermedle. And where you may
perceive one that delights and uses plees, varyau^ce or wrangelynges, beware
that ye contracte not with him in any wise, what gaynes soueuer ye might
suppose to follow of his contraction.

Increase diligently the noumbre of your fre^des, and keep their frendshippe.
And for a just cause you may divide a symuled friend from your conversation
or intermedlyng. But see that ye appear not suddenly to be his contrary let
him learn by euidente words or tokens that you leave only his evil
behaueoure or vice, And because y^ he him self will not leave it, you may not
chose but leave him. And also better it is, y^ by a little and a little you leave
your friendship, then suddenly to break it. So shall he learn that you for sake
his symuled friendship, and his noughtye conditions rather then him, for a
symuled friend is worse then an open enemy. Amongeste your lovers chose some of
the best and most faythfullest, who^ your right judgment perceyueth to be
trewest, most faithful and steadfast, to who^ ye may show your counsel and
secrets. As for to find many to who^ a man may entierly and undoubtedly
trust, is very hard. I would wys^he you to have no secrets, which should be
dangerous or perylous to you though they were openly known to all men. Yet
if you find one or two of such clear and pure faith that ye may trust as well
as your self, yt will take every thing well and in the best part, though it
should seem to many otherwise, love him as your soul. Furthermore, though the
opinion of the common people is seldom approved to be good, yet it is no
wisdom always to say against it. But it shall do well to go the high
way as other do, though yt path be many times better. The pathe and rightwaye
of the Gospel or word of God, in no condition being left or forsaken. Also
flee all flaterers, vain boasters and praysers of your goodness or virtues
let them see such flaterye and symulacion to be little pleasure to you, even
at the first hearing, that they show the countenance of it. Esteem not
your deeds by other men's sayenges: but enter into your self, and betwixt
the truth and your conscience, seek the existimacion of your self. Care not
what this or that man does say: but what the truth says to your conscience,
no man but God and you (except ye show any manne) knows what your entente
or meanynges are. Wherefore, the truth in your knowledge ought to make you
free, merry, restfull, and quiet, against all quarrel pykers or false fynders of
faults. Wherefore in all blames or praises, flee to conscience, if amongeste
these she speak well Happy are you, mighty and wise. For it is as pereleouse
a thing to be falsely praised, as falsely blamed.

The governance of your servants and inferiors.
PROCVRE always to subdue them that are under you, rather by love then with
fear for he that is feared of many, must fear many. And be not with unkind
words and roughe, light to provoke them to wrath. If you your self be
styred to anger, I would then that ye would cease to say or do any thing,
until your wrath be a laid or slaked, for there is nothing well said or
done which is said or done in a furye. Wrath is an evil maistres to govern
things. Put away also with speed all ca^kered thoughts which without a good
remembrance of Christ's promise, may lyghtlye corrupt your mind with
inordynate thoughts, (I mean in gettyng or keeping your goods) having your
mind fastened to Christ's promise with dilligent following, ye cannot lack,
wherefore beware of to stayte keeping. And remember that though ye might get all the worldly goods that be in the world in a short space, yet by death ye
might loose them in a shorter. Think that there is no thing comparable to a
quyete mind and a restefull. That is a contented mind, which fears no
losses, nor greatly or gredelye coueteth gaynes. Nothing is so much to be
abhorred as the affliccion of the spirit, but as I do counsel you to avoid
these pha^tastical and despayryng minds: So I do advise you to avoid
negligence and slothe in your busynes, or overmuch slackenes or dissolucion in
not saving ye which is gotten. For as great fault it is to lose negligently y^
which is gotten, as to procure inordinately to get that which of right and
conscience ought not to be gotten. With honest gaynes, be you always contented
in all your buiyng and sellyng so that ye having gaynes y^ other party receive
no loss, as is before said, for so your gaynes we him, and his we yours may
long continue, for he that softely mylketh ye cow brings forth milk, and
he that herdelye and straytely wryngeth the tettes brings forth blood.

Also my dear beloved friend whether you be married, as yet I can not tell
redelye, but considering your age, compleccion or bodily state and worldly
substance, I perceive that ye may well maynteyne a wise, wherefore I do advise
you (if your ghostely strength be not greatere then ye infyrme and nyce desire
of fleshly appetites) to take a wife: but ^ choice of her be not over hedlyng
hasty, or rash. But with good deliberacion endeavor your self to marye. God
is well pleased with chaste marriage and sobre, which is an acceptable and holy
thing with him, and sore displeased with whoredo^ and adulterye: yea and with
deeds of marriage ungodly, abhomynably and beastely used. Marriage is a deed
which you owe to nature, and to your country and to God, if your infyrmyte be
such ye ye may not live chaste out of matrimony, and if also your fruit of
matrymony^ be godly and verteouslye ducated and brought forth in the love and
fear of God. (...) chose a (...)
In the choice of your wife, have only respect to her virtue and honestye,
which forbicause peradventure it cannot be, by and by, or sone seen in her.
Look to the stock of the young branch, I mean her father: But specially
look upon the manners of her mother, for commonly the daughter is manered much
after ye mother, if she be brought up at home with her parents, if in an other
place, join her mothers condicyons with her masters and maistresse, and way
them in a just pair of balaunce. You may here ye report of discrete per
sons of ye use of her governors and her. If she have been any space of time
from her mothers company I would you did count more upon the use, and good
behauioure of her governors then her parents, for good or euel edutacion or
bringing up, changes nature. Consider also her age, that she be younger then
you. And of her bewtye y^ she be in a mean favor or bewtifulnesse. For as it
is hard to keep a fair and a bewtifull woman chaste, whom all men be most
ready to desire: So it is truly tediouse and loath some to possess an evil
favored woman or vnfruytefull, whom all men do abhor. Yet mary you a wife
for your own self, and not for other men. Other men ought not to be
delighted in your wives outward beawtie, nor you in theirs. But thus that you
laud God in his creatures, which no man does by concupiscence against his
commandment. So that she be of a good name and fame. For it is not enough,
that a woman be void of any evil deed or deeds, but I would her to be void
of all evil suspicion. And though I make no difference of maid or widow by
Gods law, yet I would counsel you to take a virgyn or maid whom you may
form and instruct after your own manners And she will sooner apply to your
mind, and more entierly love you then a wydowe. I make no mencyon of the
dowrye. If she bring any substance, it is not to be refused, if not, she
shall be ye eslier governed or ruled in exspences, and lowlier or more obedience
to serve you. And when you mary, I will exhort you to think that you enter
into religion, and that you and your wife should prepare your selves there
after. Not to think, as many lightly do, that marriage is a license to live
voluptuouslye, and under the title of marriage or matrimony, to fulfill all their
carnal desires. But think you afterward to live more soberlye and
temparatelye, more vertuouslye, and honestly, and to give mo exsamples of good
living, then you did before, remembering that matrimonye is one of the holiest
sacraments that God has ordained. And that therefore it should be used with
all honestye, devotion, and reverence. And in the preuy duitie of matrimony, I
would you and your wife, so to dispose you, that in your bodies were al
temparatenesse and soberness, and your minds and spirytes listed up to God,
desiring him not only of fruit, but of such fruit, yt may be apt to his
service. And if you in this act be coupled with this mind and desire, no
doubt but God will send you such manner of fruit as you desire. It is a
great beastliness, seeing that all men desire to have children of good
disposicion and helthfull in their bodies, also with good inclinacion, and
mind to virtue and goodness: that at the generation of them they have no
consideracion to prepare them after their desire. Believe me christen brother,
that if they that engender, and conceive be temperate and sober in that act,
and have their health the child shall be of a good temperature in body and of a
good compleccyon. And if also their minds be lifted up to God as is
aforesaid, the child shall also have inclinacyon to virtue and goodness. As
the children represent their fathers likeness or mothers in the form of
their bodies: Even so their inclinacion of goodness and virtue shall represent
the fathers and mothers disposicyon, which they had when the children were
begoten or engendered, which if it were not good or godly, so shall the
children be dysposed to be all ye days of their life. All vices then redounde
unto the children from the father and mother specially, then might the father
and mother to be well dysposed in body and soul, in the act of generation,
or else afterward it shall turn them to great displeasure, in the
frowardness of their children.

Wherefore I pray you mark well this admonicion, and put it well in
remembrance, specially, when you be about such business where unto be you not
drawn, as often as Venus would. But when you perceive health, sobrenesse, and
temperatnesse both in you and in your wife, the love of God and his honor had
in your remembrance as is abouesaid to dispose of your fruit without
beastliness, which is only to accomplish your own fleshly pleasure. To
conclude I would both of you should bear chaste Christ conceived in your
brestys by ye hearing or redyng of his holy word. And follow Mary and Iosephes
matrimony in acts. And if you would (as I trust you will) that your wife
should be clean always of her living from other men. And though she follow
not Mary's virginite, yet I would she endeavored to follow her shame fastness in
matrimonye.

This will your mind be I trust that she always say and do that thing which
becomes a laudable woman or wife to do. That she may thus do it, must be
your diligence to enduce her specially in the begi^ning to love and fear God.
But to bring this about, no words are sufficient, no council or exhortacion,
except you your self so live, that she may perforce follow your good
exsample, and do the same. And therefore as I said before, that when you mary
you should reken that you enter into religion. Specially in the beginning,
for where as hitherto any negligence of virtue and of good living or service
of God y^ was dooe^, was dooen only to your own hurt: From hence forth the
evil example shall hurt your wife, your children, and your servants, that is
to say: all the whole household. In the beginning therefore, specially ye
must induce your wife with your good example, in the love and fear of God,
which ones graffed or printed in her mind, shall cause that she shall say, ne
do any thing that afterward she shall greatly repent. Also I doubt not,
but ye would gladly that your wife should love you, the mean is to cause her
so to do, that she perceive plainly yt she is entierly beloved of you. For
which it suffyseth not, only to wythdrawe your mind from al other wem^. But
that ye must also, avoid any occasyon, of which might be engendered evil
suspycion of inco^tinencye. For if gelousye enter ones into wome^s breasts, ye
root is so unsavory and bitter that it cannot choose but bring forth y^
weryshe and loathsome fruit of discord, then the which there is none so
great a poison, that corrupts so much Christen folks but specially the man
and yt wife. Besides this, in your co^uersacio^ with your wife, be ye famylyer
and loving, guydyng her therewith to althynges of your mind by fair means, and
not by rygorousnes cruelty or tyranny. If she be honest and verteous, your
word shall suffice, if otherwise (which God forbid, lest ye might be
ouersene in things aforesaid) it may be done by force moderatly, yet gentle
entreaty is better the^ cruelty, boy steorusnes or stripes, except there be
such obstinacy in her which ca^ not be helped without enforcement and
correccio^, never correct with shameful rebuke. If there be any such
obstinacy, reason you so with her, that she may perceive her fault and
conde^pne her self which shall be a good correccion. Men and women are of
nature gentle to be led and not to be drawn, for nature has made them
without all wepon to use crueltee or tyranny, al other beasts, nature has
armed with some defense, but it brings forth man without any weapon, wherefore
nature would mankind to be gentle and peaceable above al other creatures. I
would have your loving conversation and famyliaritee with your wife so myxte with
honesty and shame fastenes, that she in no wise perceive or see in you any
example by which y^ virginal shame fastenesse which she had before your
marriage be lessed after it. And this as well secretlye when you are together in
your chaumbre and bed, as openly. For where men with shameful handlynges and
unchaste words, with vnclenlye gestoures, signs or looks, provoke their wives
to fleshly lust, whom may they justly blame, if their wives live vnchastelye
but theimselues, as the chief causers, for with such behaueoure they make
their wives void of all shamefastnes, and yt being banyshed and gone, chastity
makes have after. Wherefore now if you will have your wife chaste she must have
y^ example of you, and not only that, but ye must use her with all
clenlynesse, honestye and shamefastness. And to allure her to love kyndnes,
honesty and chastenes, you shall apparel or clothe her by mine advise so that
whersoeuer she besene, she might be judged to be your wife, having not so
rich apparel or clothing to be judged some merchants wife of hier
dignitee or some great man's wife of the court: nor so poorly, that you be
yng of some worldly substance she might be judged to be some poor
labouryng man's wife, let her go after the same sort, condition or estate that
ye are of or shall be of. For the which equalitee it shall be good that ye both
be clothed of one piece of cloth. Let your garments be of the most honest
facion, leaving iagges and new inuencio^s without profit or ease to the
body, to therein that think only gaye things to be good, and pleasure better
then profit. Also herein avoid all occasyons to be enuighed as nigh as ye
may, or any occasion where thorough anger or discord might rise, and not
only in this thing, but in all other with your wife. But specially in the
beginning of your co^uersacion, for if before one know well the conditions or
manners of the other, and also before that any perfyght love be well rooted
betwyxte you, any dyscension or wrangelyng arise, it wylbe hard afterward to
be turned into a co^formyte or an unity of living quyetlye together.
Specially, if in such anger, pass any myscheuous words or styngyng or
prickynge words or strypes, love afterward is to be despayred almost for
ever, which dissencion or wrangelyng, though it happen afterward that y^
love betwi^te you be well rooted and established ye one knows well the other,
(...)gre or discord can be so gre^^e, but that sone you should return
again into grace and favor, into peace and concord.

The gouernynge of a household
ALSO, the charge of the governance of y^ house, ye may in manner give wholly
to your wife, and as ye would y^ she should not much entermedle in your
marchau^dise or busynes which is done out of y^ house or out of her room: So
it is not semyng that you greatly busye your self in things ol the house
longyng to her charge as many woma^ly men do, which wyllynglye without
comelynes come under the subieccio^ of their wives. And join to this forsaid
charge of the house, some other business and labor mete for her, so that she
may always be occupied and never ydell. Many other things might be said as
concerning the conuersacyon betwixe the husband and the wife, which now of
purpose I leave to speak of, lest I should be tediouse to you in reading my
simple councelles. Experience has and may instruct you far better then my
wit can express, yet somewhat I will say more as concerning your children.

As concerning children.
FIrst, God sending you It is again nature, tha women shall not (...) their own
children.
children. Se that none other woman nurse the^ than your own wife. It is a
great vncomlynesse and inconvenience, yea I say cruelnesse that comenly is
used among men and women, I do not say beastliness, for that they put
forth their young children to nursing, yea and some men and women will cast
their children out of doors within a. iii. or fouredaies after that it is
borne, to a stranger to norishe it. It is to be wondered verily what
confydence the mother of the children has, specially forasmuch as she
thynkety that a strange woman will suffer the labor which is requisite in
the nurssing of the child, when she that is natural mother refuses it. They
will anon say, that for money a stranger will do it well and conveniently, so
ye their child shall be well noryshed and brought home fair and fat. I say
though it be fair and fat, yet it is not so naturallye fair and fat, as
though his own mother had norished him. And that it is fair and fat, it is
no more thank to the mother the^ to a Jew, willing a christian child to be
noryshed, for his fantastical love, and therefore gives money haboundauntly to
some woman, that would not be seen to receive his money in vain, but for his
money she gives her diligent labor. And ye the child is fair and fat, it
comes more of the love of the norse that she has to the child within litell
time after that she has given it her milk, which causes her to set less
of the labor, or passes more upon ye child then upon the money. But who will
doubt but the child should be more helthful a more te^perat in body if it had
sucked, his natural lyquore, where we he was norished i^ his mothers womb. Who
may think yt nature not do much more to the health and good disposicyon of
the childs body then money can do, or ever shall be able to do? Verily it is
not like, but the child should be the helthyer not only in his in fancye, but
all days of his life afterward, if the mother would play the mother in
norishing the child. Once in the beginning, they put the child in ieopardy
of his life, in taking him from his natural milk wherewith he was norished in
his mothers womb. And besides that, y^ mother has never so perfyghte love to
y^ child which an other woman noryssheth, as if she norished it her self for
whilst she norisheth it not, she remains but half a mother, for the office
of an whole and parfyght mother is, to bear children and norishe them or bring
them forth. Now she reparteth the one part with y^ norse. And so also in
love she remains but half a mother. They will say that their love can not be
diminished toward their children though other women no rishe them, but it is
not so. For though norishing of children be laborious and peynfull, yet it
engenders much love betwixt the nurse and the child. This love then which
is wont to be engen dered by norishing the child, is lost of the natural
mother toward the child, and is added to the noryshe, wherefore the mother
has lost half her love toward the child, and the norse has and shall
find it. Likewise will the child divide his love into. ii. parts. The one
part to his mother bearing him, y^ other to his nurse or half mother feadyng
and bringing him forth. And besides this if the mother that bare the child had
noryshed it also, the love of ye father would had been much more to the child,
because of the noryshing of it in his presence. And of this springs the little
love or unnatural love that men have to their children, specially in this
realm. Afterward when ye child is a. xii. months or two years of age, it
is brought home from norishing, and is brought up in the house until it be.
xii. or. xiii. years old, with litell difference as concerning his profit
between him and the servant. And being of yt age rude and unlearned, because
they them selves would not take pains to induce him to virtue and learning
or craft, they thruste him out of doors again to masters to serve without
any great consideracyon, whether the persons be of good and honest disposicyon
which shall receive him, yea or whyther they will profit greatly the child
to virtue and honestye, out of doors they cast him as before at norishyng. If
his fortune be to meet with a good master, to whom he might rest more bound
then to his father or mother, happy is he, by his good master he learneth to
help him self, which he did not of his father and mother, many fathers and
mothers are not studiouse to help their children to virtue or learning,
because they love money more then their children.

And because they so do, they depart nothing of it to their children in
their life. But if his chance be not to meet with a good master, he is tangled
and corrupted with such vices, which in youth commonly have domynyon and
rule, and gooe not forward to virtue and honestye: where as a good father
should then receive his child, and by fair means and fatherly council amend
him and comfort him in goodness, and give him some of his gooddes to socoure
him. But the use is clean contrary, for then he denies him y^ entering into
his house then he will not name him, nor know him for his son or child
denies him all favor to cause him despair, and cast away the whole purpose
to live honestly and trewely. And so desperate and abiecte absenteth him self
from his father and mother, and coupleth him self with light wanton, vycious
and naughtye company, and is made one of them, where ye vices, which in the
beginning might easily have be amended are increased and grown vncorrygyble,
and that, because the father and mother do not gracyously love their child.
If they did love their children to God wards, that is to say, to bring them
forth in the laws of God, and would that they should love and dread God. The^
would they, being of power thereto put them to learning in their tender age,
co^syderyng this commen proverb:

He that in youth no virtue will use,
In age all honor shall him refuse.
*Also the saiynge of Solomon: Look what way a young man or woman takes in
his tender age, from that he will not depart when he is old. Also experience
show eth that youth will lightly follow y^ instruccio^s of their elders. The
young cock croweth like as he hears the old. And look how a young twygge
of an orcheyarde is bowed so he grows forth, if he be stayed to grow up
right, so it grows, and is both profitable and pleasant. If it grow
otherwise I cannot tell whereto it is profitable, but to ye fire. Like wise
may be said of young children, but the fault is not in the children, but in
the elders or fathers and mothers. The child Jesus did grow and was comforted
in spirit full of wisdom and the grace of God was with him, that is to say:
he was a notable good child, and so from a young man, he grew to an
exceadynge wise and verteous man. It is mete that such as be Christen children
should be brought up after thexample of Christ. He did grow ^ was comforted
by the spyrite and in the spirit. Many men suffer their children to use riot
and be lost in fleshely pleasures, nor do cause them to be induced to faith
and honest living, by the word of God, Christ did grow and increase in
wisdom, many suffer their children to increase in folishnes. And the grace of
God was in Christ, but thoroughe the fault of their fathers and mothers it
taryeth not with some children called christen children, yet nothing following
Christ, or smell of him, because yt Christ did grow in the sight of men and
did appear whole perfyghte and wonderful by and by preaching signs and
miracles. It is convenient or sitting that like manner of wise our children
be induced and instructed to devotion, to virtue, and good living A man will
not think lyghtlye how much good lies in y^ bryngyng up of children. And if
there were not great virtue and goodness in it, who might think that God would
so straytly command the Jews yt their children should be induced, instructed
and brought up, in the fear of God: verelye he does know best of al, that
that thing will not lyghtely be left in ryper or ferther age, which children
have accustomed in their tender age. The which thing the Latyne Poet
expresses and says: So great a thing it is to accustom a thing from
tender age. Wherefore God in Deuteronomy the.vi. chapter says: Thou shall
roll in thy mind with thy self such things as I give ye charge upon this
day, and thou shalt whette them upon thy children, speaking thereof to them
when y^ taryeste at home in thy house, or walk on thy iourneye, when y^
go to bed and rysest their from. If thou leave these things in their
youth, thou shalt have much ado to make them obey and follow when they be
of a full age and old. But now ye will say, I am no preacher. Thereunto with
saint Augustyne I answer the, Look what a preacher is in the pulpet, such
every householder is in his house at home. And likewise as it belongs for ye
curate to make rekenyng and accou^pt for his whole flock: So the householder in
the general day of judgment shall reken and make accoumpte for his wife, for
his children and for his household.

Give ye therefore diligent head that in this be half ye be not found
negligent, love your children after this manner. And when they be of some
discrecio^, let them perceive your love in word and work. And be not so
unkind as some fathers, which for the love of this worldly riches and
folyshe pleasure (whylest they live) can not find in their hearts to depart
with them, though they have received it of the hand of God even for the same
purpose. Whereof proceeds that many times for a very little anger or
displeasure the father does wholly disheryte his son, or at least takes
away from him a great part of his inherytau^ce, whereof also proceeds that men
can find in their hertes many times y^ their servants should be made
disposers of their goods or their friends, rather then their children. All this
(as I suppose) proceeds of none other thing, but of the little love yt they
have to their children: And this little love comes of this that the natural
mother norished not her own child in the presence of the father.

Wherefore my dear friend and Christen brother let your own wife noryshe your
child, even though it should seame a new thing and not used. Forsooth God and
nature has not wrought breasts and teates in your wife, yea and milk,
health and habylytee in vain, if these should not serve for her own
children. And besides this she may not ryghtly be called a mother fullye and
perfyghtly afterward, of her own children, being but half a mother. And
hereof proceeds also the could love and small reverence yt some children have
in their age afterward, to their fathers and mothers. For when the soonne or
daughter being of age, consydereth how the father and mother refused labor
with him or her ^ put them out to nurse from them regards them thereafter.
And when they be in necessite or lack, they think they yt may serve them
like manner. That is to say, to thruste them out of doors, and send them to
some hospytall to findyng, as they did them. Besides this, if the mother were
of a good disposicion of body and of a verteouse inclinacyon, there is cause
given to ye child to grudge against the mother and father, thinkyng that by
ye vice of them he drank or sucked malicyousenesse, with the milk of his
nurse being of a far worse disposicion then the mother was. So now if the
natural mother norished ye child, you se what commodityes should follow. The
father should be sure that in his life time and after his death the mother
should be good to his children and loving. like a true and a natural mother,
and also both the father and mother should be sure in their age, and always
y^ the children should have them in much love fear and reverence, as true
children. Also the mother being nurse to your child of a good desposicion and
temperauncie of body and in mind constaunt, devout and of a good inclinacion
such as I trust your good judgment and dyscrecion would chose, you may be
sure, y^ your child shall have both virtue and good temperaunce of body,
which he may lightely lack being norished of a strange woman. So for all
these causes and other that may be considered, I beseech you follow that which
by these reasons you may perceive to be best.

When your children can speak and understand, forthwith without any delay
put them under some virtuous person to learn to read and write togethers,
but specially to learn virtuous manners and to serve God. And that he may so
do from the time that he can speak, teach him every day some short prayer
according to the capacite of his wit or memory. And as he does increase in
strength, feed him with longer prayers, and other fruitful lessons most
worthy memory. And thus do with as fair means as you may. As for great
chastising and over much fear in teaching young children is not best after my
judgment, for by that the spirytes and wits of children be dulled and being
induced by overmuch fear in youth, are never afterward bold, nor may
lift up their minds and hertes to things of honor, that is to say,
things of ghostely strength and virtue, but are always deiecte, pe^ishe, with
out courage or stomach to good and honest things. They do rather apply them
selves afterward, when they have lybertee, to evil then to goodness, which
bringig up is natural and proper to them that be borne in bondage and to
captives, and not of fre men's children, wherefore both you and your childrens
master should entice and allure your children with love and good words. Yea,
and then among with small gifts to virtue and learning, rather the^ with
fear and force, you should boste and favor them very much for any little
thing that they do well and conveniently, that by it, they may have courage
and heart to do more so, yet I do not utterly dissuade, but that fear and
correccion is necessary, so it be moderate in convenient time and for a notable
cause. I would there were showed to the child both ye apple and the rod,
but more oftener ye apple, and more exhorted to deserve the reward and praise
then the correccyon. And all the time that your child is in your house from
schole, keep him always with you in your presence as nygh as you can. And let
him take his meat at your table, and lie in your chau^ber. For of your manners
and behaueoure at the table and chaumber, he shall see and hear better
communicacyon and learn mo vertuose manners, here more wisdom, and take heed
of more ciuilytee or nurture then in the kechin or stable amongst your
servants.

Have the presence of your child in such veneracyon that before God and him be
spoken no viciouse words, no swearing, no lies no backbiting or slaundering,
no cursing, mocki^g, or ribauldry, no words of fraud or disceite. For the
child can speak but such la^gage as he hears, and because he is most,
ye always lightely in your conversation he will utter your manners to other
folks. Let him therefore be ware of hearing such manner of speches. But beware
you much more, for to you it shall be rekened double syn, your own and your
chyldes, you know that of a natural inclinacyon, such words as are,
soundynge unto evil, are more promptely fixed in their minds then other. And
this same exhortacion or monicyon should be given unto your chyldes master,
(if he be honest, he will thankefully receive it) that your child hear
nothing, but that which sounds to virtue and goodness.

And to cause that your child refuse not your company or his masters,
both you and he must some time find your child some points and
instruments to play and suffer him to use honest games or plays then among,
for the recreacio^ of his spirytes, that he may be the gladder with you, and
love you and him with reverent dread the better.

And so shall he with a better will apply his learning without trembeling,
fear, or enforce. And after this manner, he shall learn more and sooner. The
women children would be brought up in all fear and dread, with little favor
showed them until they be of a perfyte age and understanding. For as in men
is nothing more reprouable then to be cowardes, fearful, pekyshe, and of no
stomach or courage: So in women is the contrary, in whom there is nothing more
laudable then fearfulness and gentylnesse of stomach. To the mother your
wife, give charge to do her duty in bringing up your women children
verteously and in the law and fear of God as you do the men children.

In the choice of a master for your child, if you may have one both well
learned and good and verteous in living for money sake or cost: forsake him
not except ye love money better then virtue and learning, every thing is as
it is loved and esteemed. The wise man sets much by learning and honest
manners, the rude ignoraunte and folyshe person sets little by them, because
he is not acquaynted with them. If he should lack either of these two
things learning or virtue, better it were y^ he lacked part of the learning
then of virtue. Virtue is more of price then learning, for learning is but a
mean thing whereby men come to virtue thorough the grace of God. Learning is
for virtue and not virtue for learning. It is better to be good and verteous,
then learned and worldly wise. Therefore rather choice goodness and virtue for
your child and you, then learning, if both may not be had together:

Also with letters, let your child learn music. Also let him without hurtyng
him self learn the use of weapons or arms, as buckler plaiynge or such
other. The one for recreacio^ of his spirits, the other for the strength of
his body It shall make him hable and bold so that in peace and war (if he
should be enforced thereto) with counsel and strength he may prevail. And jointly
with this he should not be ignoraunte of things necessary to his living,
wherefore even from his young age, he should have y^ knowledge of the money
that is used and of the valewe of it. And for this it shall be good to put some
in his power, and to make him buy al things necessary for his own weryng,
from cappe to shoe, at the first and second time with help of other, and
afterward by him self. And after to put him in business of greater charge,
with greater sums of money, and let him use of part after his own
discrecion, making (when you shall call him) account to you of the bestowyng.
The commen use as me seems may not be commended, which is, y^ men for the
most part will not trust their children with any of their substance, nor
let them know nor sca^tely under stand y^ valewe of money, which thing
causes yt afterward when they enheryte their fathers gooddes, they spend
all vndiscreatlye as they that know not, what it is, nor the valewe of that
they enherite. The cause is that the father will leave all to his son after
his death and in his life time nothing. But if after the manner above rehearsed
ye use your child he shall not only for lack of knowlage myspende his
enherytau^ce, but shall be more able whersoeuer he become to give a rekenyng for
him self, and as it is comenly said, shall be able to company with men and to
help him self having knowlage of y^ things necessary for his living. If he
should myspende any thing it were beter he did it in your presence, where by
good admonicion and council he may be amended and corrected, then after your
death when the most part of folks (to have part of his exspences) will
praise him in his lewd spe^dyng rather then with counsel monyshe him, amend or
correct him, now ye may with a little porcyon of your goods know the proof
of your child in your life, and in manner be sure that he shall well maynteyne and
dispose that you leave him afterward when you begone. And seeing I speak of
disposynge or distrybutyng of goods by your child, ye ought to entyce him
from his chyldhode or infancye (if it might be) to have compassion upon y^
poor and to use to give some alms, yea for to instruct him, whatsoever alms
you or your wife do give, let it be given by his hands or your other
children if they be in the way or present with you at y^ time. This do you
oftetimes not only to instruct your children, but because God so instructs
you that by your example and use of it he may learn from his ten dre age ever
to help the nedye and poor, if he be of habylitee, if no, yet he may learn
to be devout merciful, and pytiefull. But remember y^ in this thing, and in all other goodness. Likewise y^ princypall example of virtue profytyng your
child must come of your good example, which he sees you to do and show.
For nothing yt his master or other persons shall do or show him, can stycke
or be so fyxed in his mind as your words and deeds. Now then if you bring
up your child after this manner as is here laid before your eyes, there is no
doubt, but he shall be a good manne. Upon which ground or foundation, whether
he be enclyned to be of the clergy or of the other sort of men, called lay
men, whether he would be a preast, always a bacheler or a married manne, he
shall be an honest manne. But if he be dysposed to be of the clergy, one thing I
would you counceled him, that in no wise, he make any manner vow, nor
professyon until he be thyrtye or nyghe to thyrtye years of age. For before
that time or nyghe about that time, none does well know him self. Happy is
he that does then. To say truth, it is hard for me here to appoynte him any
time, his own faith and love which he has received of God must bind him
hereto, remembrynge that when Peter promised upon his own strength he could
not perform his promise but afterward when he promised upon God, yt he
loved his master Christ, saying: Lord you know that I love the, he was
strong So in what ripe age soever your child be, and would make vows or
promyses to take other religion then he received at Christendom (an higher or
perfyghter vow he can not make.) But if he would promise the vow of
chastytee, the which vow all Christen men and women have professed, because
they have professed Christ, whatsoever order of living any person christened
does profess, he professes chastitee even though he enter into matrymonye as
is above said. But if he be disposed to live sole and chaste, it may not come
of him self, for it passes man's infyrmite. But doubtless if he mistrust
his own strength, and think and believe verily, that by the power and might
of Christ, and confydence in him, so that he may say with a strong believe.
All things are possible unto the beleuer, and think verily that by Christ he
has and shall overcome y^ world thinkig on Christ's word, which says,
trust ye, or have you confydence, for I have overcome the world, let him
think yt he may do all things through him that comfort. In him then and
for him, let your child make his vow, if he be so disposed, and doubt
less having such, and the same staff to lean to, he shall not fail We hear
of too many, which for their belies sakes, or for their friends pleasures
only, which are men, have made their vows, and be had in derisyon of y^
world for the breaking of them no wonder that they slide which build upon
manne.

Let your child build upon God, and he shall stand. For God is able to
make him stand And he will do all thing unto them that believe in him. Warn
him thanne that what soever he doothe, he do it in the name of God with
believe, that God will do for him unto his own glory.

If ye mistrust him not, when your child is about.xxx. years of age, he shall
have a good judgment of him self. No man knows pertyghtelye his own
strength, yet at that age, by your good enducing, he shall know and perceive
what Christ wylleth him in the Gospel, and so thoroughe the word of God and
good reason, which he is like to have at that age, may be bold after Gods
word to judge of him self, but chyefely and princypally exhort him to keep
the vow and promise which he made at the font of Baptysme, that he renounced
and utterly did forsake the deuel and all his works and all his pompes, if he
tarry only upon these vows, he shall be suer to be a good christyan manne.

If he believe in God, the father, in Christ the son, and in the holy
ghooste, three in parsones, yet one God in essence.

To believe in God, is to commit all our whole heart unto him, our thoughts,
words, and works. If he thus believe, doubtelesse he shall be saved from sin,
from the devil and from hell and the everlasting death thoroughe Christ's
death, by whom he is deed to the world and lives to God, and by whom he
shall be defended against the deuell and the uncleanness of his own flesh and
all wickedness. He now having this love and charytee to God thoroughe
Christ, is suer a good christyan man. What profession can make a man better?
I would to God that other professyons had not made men wourse. This vow of
Baptism exhort your soonne to keep, which he has made all redye, and has
bound him self to the obseruaunce thereof by sureties, at which also were
bound with him his godfathers and godmothers. It might be thought to be lytl^
discrecion or no good counsel to bind him self (as he might be persuaded to
vows of great perfeccion) not diligently studieng to accomplish the vow
that he has made all redye. What a wise man is he, that will seek an heuyer
burden, when he perceyueth that he is to weak to bear a lighter? Induce him,
that he earnestly and heartily desire God of his grace, to do that which
Christ wills him, and to have him in his remembrance, with unfeigned love
and reverent dread where soever he be going, standing, riding, or resting. And
let him believe that Christ is of such gentilnesse and goodness, that he may
have him to dwell with him even in the inward chaumber of his breast, if he
would do so much for his sake, as to expel Satan with his fellows. God the
father of his plenteous goodness and Christ his son natural of his mere
pitee and mercy thoroughe the work of the holy ghoost proceeding from them
both which three: The father, the son and holy ghost is one God, will be at
one with your son, if he will seek his favor by learning keeping and following
his holy word. I would you would say often times to him, that he should be a
good, a just and a perfyte christen man. If he could believe certainly yt
Christ were given unto him for his sins, but this can he not believe with a
corrupt conscience.

If your son be not disposed to be of the clergy, but of the other sort
(called lay men) he may not be of the world and a good christian manne
togethers. Favor him with continual counsel and reparte of such goods as
God has sent you, as is aforesaid, y^ in your days you may see him
profete, and be an honest manne, unto your great comfort: which comfort
they lacks that will not reparte of their goods unto their children until
they dye.

Wherefore their children might think that they were the less bound unto
them by a great deal. Consydering that perforce they must leave it behind
them If they might keep it still, they would. It is a small benefit then of
y^ father, which perforce should leave it to other, leaves it to his child.
Seeing that if he did the contrary, he should put his soul in great ieopardy,
for the defraudyng of his child of these things which Gods law and nature
would to be his. Wherefore my loving friend, though you had some certain
presumpcions that your child would sp^nde his porcyon of substance evil,
take not his right from him. Better it shall be for your soul y^ he spend it
evil, then peradventure an other would spend it well. This may now suffyse,
as touching your children.

The governance or orderyng of exspences in the house.
IN the rest, to speak of exspences in the house, see that your daily
exspe^ces be so moderated, y^ ye may egually and justly continue with out
riot, or so great welfare that it might not endure, or without puttyng your
self in necessyte or need or grudge of mind for the largenes of the
exspences, or that your household should grudge for your straytnes or
nygardshpppe. Therefore the order that you begin keep constantelye, for any
little excess daily used, in process of time grows to great sums. The
vitayles for your table should be such as ye find most convenient for your
health, of the which beware of great dyuersities, for the dyuersytee of
meats engendereth diuersytiees of sykenesses. As for the quantitee, as I would
not that you did defraude nature with taking to little, so I would you to
think that superfluytee of meat and drink, is the utter destruction of
nature, love simple or syngle meats, they be simple that be not mengeled with
many diverse things or compou^ded with many diverse kinds of fleshes, and
with them. And with diverse fruytes and diverse kinds of spyces, and all
these in one dyshe. And likewise some use diverse kinds of drynkes, which all
without doubt decays health, though it be not by and by felt or perceived,
but in process of time they will utter the selves, and bring forth death or
deaths brother. For of this it comes that together in ma^ne reigns the
fevers, the head ache, the tothe ache, the gout, y^ belly ache, the
stranguyllia^ and other diseases out of noumbre, which I can not rehearse. Where
though of one manner of meat surfeit were used, or of one manner of drink, a man
should have but one manner of these sickness or diseases or none at al if the
excess were not great, where through if you need the use of medecynes, I
would with the counsel of some learned and good physician, you used simple
medycines as nighe as were possible, fleyng y^ composicio^ of many drogeries,
and not only simple but to take of such medecynes as are of herb roots or
fruytes of this same land being proved for good, rather then of such
drogeryes that are brought out of the land I think not, but if our physycyons
were so diligente and laboryous to seek the same things that God and nature
has given for remedies as the phisycions were y^ wrote, whom they follow
partly which because they were expert in natural things, wrote of these
drogeryes that grows in Africa, Syrya and Grecia, they would not much use
of these drogeryes which are in other countries, but such as God sends for
remedies in every land, whereby they should find more natural remedies for
man's health.

As concerning the other part of your household or governance thereof (I mean
your servants) I would you had no mo servants in your house, the^ ye may
keep occupied, and y^ none eat their bread in ydelnes, but that they have
labor with meat, and meat with labor. For as it is crueltye to cause
servants to labor with out meat, so it is veraye noyfull or hurtefull to
give servants meat without labor. For it makes them lumpyshe, luskyshe
drowsye and slothful, vycyous, lecherous and glotons. One idle servant will
lyghtlye corrupt all the household. If ye have a true servant and a faithful,
love him as your son, let him know your favor, that he may be an example
to his fellows. In their clothyng and feeding, let them use a mean without
any excess, that is, that the clothing be not fine nor curyouslye made, but
course and sufficient to keep them from cold. And the meat in no wise
delycate, but gross, such as will suffice to keep them in health and from
houngre. Pay them truly their wages without dilacion or brydgyng, let them
find your will more prone and redyer to pay them, the^ you find them to
labor for it: ye if it be so pay them with the same quyppe or note. But in the
mean time provoke them with many fair speeches, to do their duty, yet not
always so, remembryng that an easy and a gentle medycyne heals not al sores,
nor y^ flaterynge instygacio^, makes not the horse go still: sometimes the
spore must be used except the courage be very lustye, lyuelye and quycke. To
make an end, let God and reason rule you and after them rule your wife and
household.

These counselles I would you used for your own wealth and honestee, thynkyng
that there is nothing better then good counsel. See therefore yt by the evil
counsel of the devil, ye suffer no evil cogitacions to engendre and increase
in your heart, for they will bring forth death, not temporal or bodily
death, but death everlasting. From which Jesus our sauyoure save you in whom
live and reign by pureness of conscience, world without end.

This treatise following, I have written out of a great clerk S. Barnarde, in
some places leauyng his order because of shortness.
Now my dear beloved friend, these fore said lessons well marked, I trust ye
will first above all things order your self to our Lord, seakyng above and
before all things the kingdom of heau^, in guydyng your household and
ordering your gooddes, which always think to have received of God to
honor him in his poor and nedy persons. And for his honor se that peace
be in your house, and yt al yours agree together with you or else all your
goods may and will sone come to naught. A rechelesse person may sone set on
fire, waste and destroy great goods Have therefore a good sight or eye unto
the labors of your servants, for under them your substance may soon be
wasted before you know of it, if your gooddes begin to waste or diminishe
forthwith diminyshe your charges. For who that spends beyond his facultye,
no wonder, with need though he grieved be. It is good prouydence often times to
compte and compare your gooddes and gains with your erspences. Often times to
ouerse your goods shall be very good, remembering, that the eye of the master
makes a fat horse, and the step of the husband a fat dungehil, that is
the masters presence profits much, bie peace with suffering and you shall be
sure of it. Think cost made upon riotouse persons to be utterly lost, not
so upon kin and friends and poor persons Se y^ you charge your sons
daughters and servants to flee glotonie. For y^ servant once made a gloton,
will never amend his manners Glotony is filthy, reprouable and stinking, and
will make the users of it soon rotten, and short lived. Mean feading with
scarsytie, or without full belie that is risyng from meat with an appetyte
to eat, profits much both to the soul and body. Think that the use of
delycate food, will soon mar a good servant, as of riot and wastfulnesse.
Beware of nygardie, for as riot is a folishe and indiscreet waste of the gifts
of god, so nigardie is a foolish and a nedelesse fear, the mystruste of God,
and a living ever in pouertee an heapi^g up of goods, for who^ none ca^ tell.
Be therefore a master over your goods, have them for your self and other,
not for your heirs only. Fear and love god and fear him duly, and think
that fishes, fowls, beasts and worms be fed of his liberalytee, and shall
you then perish for lack If you wish for derth, you wish for y^ derth of y^
poor. Sell better cheap at home the^ in the common market, better cheap to
your enemy then to other strangers, for by a kind deed, he will be better
ouerco^med then by ye sweard. Be never at debate with your neighbors study to
bring them at one ye so be The love of your neighbors is a surer ward,
then a castle three double walled. A gentle mind and a noble heart will not
greatly be troubeled with wemens bablyng speech or thretenyng: smilyng, or
laughyng, will sooner correct a shrewe, then sharp strokes and y^ staff.
Women may be kept good with gentle entreatye, they may not know that they be
suspecte, but ever must be cou^sayled with loving manner. An old woman
unclean of living, were worthy to be buried quick. For she is not only dead
before God, but kills other. A woman that has a sufficient apparel, to
desire change, is a token of little wit or sadness. A costely vesture above
the state or degree of the person is a sign of lightness. Trust him rather
for your friend that does somewhat for you, then him that says I am youres,
in all that I can and may do. In words you shall find great plentye of
friends, a true friend loves at all times and never fails at need. Riches
may not be compared to a faithful friend, when you give council say, thus
seems to me best, not thus you must needs do, lest you might rather get
blame for your council then thank, if it speed not well. If gesters
Iouglers, or minstrelles come to your house, say that you have no lodging for
them, or for such gestoures. If you be once delighted in their uncomely
pastymes, they will appoint you anon to be married to an other wife, whose name
is pouertee or beggere, chose you whether, if it chance you to be where as
they be, I advise you to make wise yt you herd them not, nor set by their
vnchristenlyke pastymes: For if they perceive you but once to laughe, they will
take it for an earnest to cry largess, and to have reward, wherefore have not
much to do with the galow clappers. God is not well pleased with that
occupacion whilst they be ministers to sin, and use sinful words. If you
have a servant of an high proud mind and stoborne stomach (lest he do you
and youres harm) put him away, so do him y^ does always (specialli to your
face) praise your manners. Think yt flaterers and liers be to true men
enemies, as they be to y^ treweth which is god Ever suspect the flaterer, and
think that he speaks to deceive both him self and you. Make your
buildinges rather for need then pleasure, lest for your pleasures sake God
will not long suffer you to take profit of them. The desire of building for
pleasure will never have end, until pouertee teach wit somewhat to late. If
you be compelled to sell your lands, sell them not to great persons, but
rather for less, to men of lower estate. Better it is to sell, then to borowe
by usury, for usury may cause you to use this world gloryously. It will
shitte you clean from the glory of God. If you bye a bargayne, be not check
fellow with great states. Dew te^peraunce in an household is a thig of an high
praise, let your wine rather then ale or bear be wholesome and temperate. Strong
drinks makes weak brains, and feeble to be known. Sobre drink is helthfull
both to body and soul And the sober will be content with little drink small and
quick, who that among much strong drink is sobre and not troubled in brain,
may be called a God upon earth Wrestle not with it if you do by my council,
lest you catch a fall If it should happen to trouble your brain, get you
out of company to sadness and sorrow if you will not be utterly ashamed
before men. Before God how your conscience shall judge you it is not in me
to judge, who that by words would excuse his drunkenness, declares his own
disease. The use of wine belongs not to young persons. Beware of dronken
surgynes or phisycions lewd and ignorant, let him not learn in you to heal
other.

Hawks and hou^des do spend more then they do get. I dell persons may have
them to set them selves a work to lose time, fools and neglygent persons
and careless have many misfortunes, and therefore they accuse and blame
fortune, which is not to be blamed, for it is her nature to deceive whom
wisdom, discrecion, forlight and learning does not lyghtlye blame, dilygent
warenes and a good foresyght be no companyons to mysfortune, but mysfortune,
negligence and slothe be lightly never aso^der, they be cater cousyns. The
sluggarde says, God will help. Yet will not he begin to help him self. I
may say to him, that God gives all things, but yet gives he not to the,
the bull by the horn. Set thy hand to the carte, and God will it up pull.
The wise man sends the sludgarde for example unto y^ pysmyer or aunte to
learn to labor. For a man is borne to labor, and the bird to fly. He y^
labors not, is not worthy to eat. Let few or none ydell persons therefore be
in your house, and take good head to every one of them, specially that they
can say, our Christen believe, called the Creed, and our Lords prayer called
the Pater noster, with the Aue Maria, and the commandments of God. And at
every dinner and supper let one of your household either say by heart or upon
book the same, that other may learn and that they that have learned may keep
them in memory. If there be any obstinate person or other, that has openly
offended, let him be openly punished to the example of other, if ye person be
of a tender age with a sherpe rod. If he be of further age, let him eat
courser meat then his fellows and that in the myddel of y^ hall upon a stole
by him self, or other such like rebuke or shame let him suffer, and fear not
to correct vice, lest Gods punishemente will correct you, but correct for
love and not vengeance. Then shall your servants love you, and blame
theimselues and learn to hate sins and offenses.

Spend as you get, it is no good husbandrye to borowe when you wax old, and
at al times trust God better then children or friends, That you send before
you, you must needs find. Heaven is a surer keeper of treasures then any
cofer, castle or tower. Think then when y^ poor profereth forth his hand,
that God apposeth you what you would do for him, and of the goods that you
leave behind you, appoynte every person his part. It were better to leave
nothing, then that strife and Gods dyspleasure: should be left among
youres, for your goods. Trust them best, that best love their own sowles.

Not them that will say that they will do for your soul.

Make your Testamente every year, or else as occasyon shall be given alter it,
and lay it, where when need is, it may be found. No man is sure how to end
his life or when, but well to end his life, or to dye well, is well to live,
which he grant you and me, and other believing people that boughte us, our
Lord Jesus Christ our savior redemer, feder, and defender, in whom live
you and reygne world without end thorough his grace and mercy.

Amen.



