A short Reply unto the last printed books of Henry Barrow and John Greenwood,
the chief ringleaders of our Donatists in England: Wherein is laid open their
gross ignorance, and foul errors: upon which their whole building is founded.

By George Gyfford, Minister of Gods holy word, in Maldon.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Tobie Cook: and are to be sold at
the Tigers head, in Paul's Churchyard. 1591

To the Reader.
THere were (good Christian Reader) four heinous accusatio^s laid against the
Church of England, for which the accusers have condemned her, and all her
public assemblies, as most wicked Antichristian Idolatrons synagogues of
Satan. I showed how falsely they do accuse, and how presumptuously against
God they do condemn: And that indeed they are the very same with the
ancient Donatists. They have replied and published in print their defense, but
their books are intercepted: yet some few have escaped, and are dispersed
among their fellows. Wherefore I hold it needful to publish some answer, not
dealing with every error and absurdity, (for that would ask the travail of
some years) but only with the chief grounds of their Schism. In this, I
trust every simple man that has a Christian heart, shall see the effectual
power of Satan, when he turns himself into the likeness of an Angel of
light, to seduce ignorant men, which are lifted up in their minds, with
opinion of their knowledge: For being men unlearned (only some little froth
excepted, I speak thus because they pervert that little which they have read
in other means writings, in sundry points) yet as if they were sent from heaven
with revelations, or as great Apostles, they take upon them to confute, and
control, and condemn all Churches, and all the most worthy Instruments which
GOD has raised up in these last times. For know this (good Reader) that the
four accusations which they have brought against the Church of England, to
condemn her, ^^^ also (though with some differences) brought against all
Churches in Europe, and that in express words in these their last books. For
the prescript forms of prayers, which all the Reformed Churches do use, they
condemn as most horrible and (...) blasphemy. The people (they say) are
profane multitudes. They say, that in all Europe, and in all these known
parts of the world there is no minister of Christ. The government by
Elderships, they condemn as a most proud thing, as being without any warrant
of Gods word. Do but readeouer these few things which I have noted out of
their booke^ and judge how fit they be for such a work as they have taken in
hand, and whether it be like that GOD has sent them, even as it were Moses and
Aaron, to conduct his people out of Aegipt, from under the bondage of Pharaoh,
for so they take it; as appears by their own words, speaking of those which
cleave unto them. Many they see by Gods mighty hand (say they) escaped, and
marching with the banner of the Gospel displayed, before all the inchaunters
of Aegipt, and Pharaoh his troops, page 5. of the Epistle. And if it seem
lost time to stand upon such gross things: yet take this profit, as to see how
needful it is not to be high minded* and presumptuously bold in Gods matters,
but to fear and tremble with Humility.

To Master Barrow, and Master Greenwood.
YE complain much of hard dealing offered you, and say ye are blasphemed with
odious terms. And if ye do err, your desire is to be reduced by a Christian
manner. It is certain when men are clean aw^ye in simplicity, and the matter
touches but themselves, they are to be dealt withal without seeking their
disgrace: But when they be public and notorious seducers, defacing Christ's
Ministers, and many poor sheep of Christ are in hazard to be spoiled. They
that take it to be uncharitable dealing, to disclose, and to paynt out such
seducers in their colors, and to disgrace them utterly, to the end that the
simple may not be spoiled by the^ as a pray, do want some judgment. For as
it is Christian charity in the Shepherds to deal meekely with the sheep, so
is it high treachery and unfaithful dealing to Christ and his Church, when the
Wolf does come in sheep clothing, not to pluck it off, and to let the
sheep see that he is a Wolf. Why else did our Savior call the Pharisees,
hypocrites, Serpents and generations of Vipers? Why said S. Paul of the false
Apostles, beware of dogs? Ye have drawn many into an outrageous presumption
against God and his people, flat contrary to the rules of his holy word, as
shall appear in the discourse. Ye hauerent out of the hearts of many, all
reverence and love toward the preachers of the Gospel, and led them into such
a presumptuous opinion of their own understanding, that if they become not
heretics, yet experience does teach, that many of them grow into irreligious
prophanenes. Master Barrow and Master Greenwood, I do not know your persons,
and I protest unto ye, there is no private thing has moved me to seek your
disgrace, but indeed the care of Christ's sheep. And let it appear by the
things which follow whether I have done ye any wrong.

A short Reply unto the last printed Books of Henry Barrow and John
Greenwood, the chief ringleaders of our Donatistes in England.
I Did lay to your charge (M Barrow and Master Greenwood) a matter very heinous
and detestable; yea, most odious in the sight of every good man, as namely
intolerable pride, presumption, and wicked intrusion into Gods office, for
that ye utterly condemn and abandon, all our assemblies, as haynousty, faulty,
and so wilfully obstinate, in such principal transgressions, as that they have
forfayted the covenant and are separated from the faith and communion of
Christ. I set down reasons from Gods word to convince ye in this, that if it
pleased God ye might repent for this savage cruelty, by which ye endeavor to
rend and tear up all the Lords tender plants: If not, yet that others might
see, and tremble at your inordinate and outrageous boldenes.

Unto this ye have replied; stiffly affirming, and laboring to maintain, that
ye have rightly condemned and cast forth our assemblies as most wicked
Antichristian Synagogues. Adding moreover, that ye lie in prison as Christ's
poor afflicted servants, the Lords witnesses against us, that your bonds and
sufferings are glorious, and that I as a wicked false Prophet, and as a marked
servant of Antichrist, have uncharitably, reviled ye, both for those former
words, as also that I that term you Donatistes; Schismatikes, etc.

If ye be Christ's servants, and have justly accused, condemned, and cast forth,
doing no more that Christ has sent ye for, and authorized ye to do, then have
I unchristianly and as a false Prophet indeed, reviled ye and your glorious
sufferinges. But then take this withal by the way, that the Donatists in old
time, and the Annabaptists of late days, were Christ's poor afflicted
servants, and Gods witnesses, and that the Churches and their ministers did
unchristianly revile them and their glorious sufferings. For I have given ye
none other terms then the Churches gave them: And if in the chief points of
Donatisme ye be not full Donatists, and so hold sundry points of
Annabaptisme, being fallen into their tents and as outragiously fighting
against all Churches, and with the same weapons that they did, and with as
blind fury condemning them, as those other, let me be accounted for no better
indeed than a lying Prophet.

Your words are many, and great are your outcries, but let us see how well ye
defend and clear your selves by them, from this most wicked intrusion into
Gods office. I set down first against ye, that he does wickedly and proudly
thrust himself into Gods office, which takes upon him to judge and condemn
any one man to be no true Christian, which holding the place and dignity of a
brother in Gods Church and professing the faith soundly, studieth to please
God, for the common errors and frailties unto which even the most perfect are
subject, because the holy scriptures speaking of the regenerate, have these
sayings: We know but in part, 1. Cor. 13. who understands his errors. Psalm.
19. And in many things we sin all. I am. 3. Then how much more intolerable
is their wicked presumption and intrusion into Gods office, which take upon
them utterly to condemn as quite separate from Christ all the assemblies in a
kingdom, which professing the Gospel, have many particular members in them,
that earnestly endeavor to please God, and are not spotted with any gross
errors or notorious offenses?

Then further do I allege, that as a brother has his place and dignity in
a Christian assembly, so our Church of England has her place and dignity
among all the godly Churches: which for the faith that she does together with
them publicly profess, and sincerely in all the principles and grounds of
the holy Christian religion, do not only allow her the place, but also do
regard and love her, giving unto her the dignity of a sister, yea even of a
mother in Israel, because she has not been barren, but has brought forth
many dear children to God, and not a few of them crowned with martyrdom. Ye
have not (Master Barrow) answered one word unto all this, but have with deep
silence slipped past it.

But ye say, He that is in his conscience convinced of errors and does persist
in them, is wilfully obstinate, and so evidently declares that he has no
faith. And in this case ye say is the Church of England, it holds errors and
is convinced in them, and yet persisteth to defend and teach the same, and
therefore it is quite separated from Christ.

Against this I set down, that a brother offending, is not to be judged so
wilfully obstinate, as that he is to be cast forth and condemned to be but as
an heathen, because he is convinced of his sin and error by private
admonitions, and does persist, but when the admonition and censure of the
Church is despised. For our Savior says not, If he will not hear thee count
him as an heathen, or if thou take one or two with thee, and ^e will not hear
them: But if he will not hear the Church, then let him be unto thee as an
heathen. Math. 18. This ye have not answered, for ye can show no place in Gods
word, where this power is given to private men, but only to the Church. And
yet persist in this most horrible intrusion, forgetting the precept, Judge not
that ye be not judged, Math 7. and he that condemns his brother, condemns
the law: and thou condemnest the law, thou art not an obseruer of the law, but
a Judge. Iam. 4. verse. 11. And therefore we must hear enter into a larger
discourse about it. I will first s^t down that which ye bring to maintain
your doing.

We doubt not (say you) neither ever thought, but the best Church, that
consists of mortal men may fall, either of negligence or ignorance into
grievous offenses and dangerous errors: yea we doubt not but that some famous
Churches and Christians may fall into such errors, as he te^meth fundamental:
the holding whereof should utterly subvert the faith. As in the Church of
Corinth, Galatia, and Asia, there were etc. But this we hold withal, that no
true Church or Christian will maintain any sin or error, when it is
evidently showed and convinced unto them by the word of God, etc. To your
second charge we answer, that we have learned to put difference, betwixt error
and heresy. All good men (as is said) do and may err, but no good man will
defend or persist in his error, when it is showed and convinced unto him.
Obstinacy joined unto error after it is duly convinced, makes heresy.
Further, we say that any error, being obstinatly holden and taught, after it is
duly reproved and convinced unto him makes an heretic, and heresy in that
party, or in that congregation that so holds and teaches it, does separate
from the faith and communion of Christ. Wherefore we can but wonder at your
ignorance who stand for a teacher in your Church, and yet hold some errors
obstinatly held and taught against the truth of GOD, not to be heresies, or
(at the least) not to be fundamental. etc.

In these words (Master Barrow) which I doubt not, ye will acknowledge, lies
the whole defense and clearing of your selves from that wicked and presumptuous
intrusion into Gods office, which I have laid to your charge. I am sure (that
in your imagination) ye utter in them most divine and undoubted principles, or
else how could ye bring in your conclusion of such wonder at mine ignorance,
standing for a Teacher in our Church? Then must we stand and wonder each at
other: for I do indeed greatly wonder to see how strong the illusions of Satan
be, when he is turned into the likeness of an Angel of light, that such men as
you (taking upon ye, not to stand as teachers in some particular Churches, but
to control all Churches, and all the learned teachers that have been since
the Apostles, as if ye were sent from heaven with special knowledge above all
others) should in so few words bewray so much confused palpable ignorance, and
absurd errors. In very deed under this stream of words lies one of the
chief rocks upon which ye are run, and against which ye cause many a simple
soul to dash with great hazard, leading them into the same wicked presumption
against God, which your selves are fallen into. The reader shall see plainly,
that here is no clearing your selves from that foul intrusion into Gods
office, unless the heaping up of errors may be deemed clearing. I will begin
first with the difference which (ye say) ye have learned to put betwixt error
and heresy. The only difference which ye make is the obstinate persisting in
it, and teaching it, after it is convinced unto him that erreth. Which is
nothing else indeed but confusedly in stead of putting difference betwixt error
and beresie, to note the difference betwixt a man that erreth in simplicity,
and an heretic. In deed because S. Paul says, That an heretic is
perverted and sins condemned of himself. Tit. 3. And that such cause
offenses and divisions contrary to the wholesome doctrine which we have
learned. Romans 16. We hold them not heretics unless they be convinced, and
obstinatly despise the judgment of God, and the judgment of the Church,
conuincing them by the light of the word, and seek to pervert others and to
draw them into their faction. But will it hereupon follow that no error is of
it self an heresy, unless it light into such a man as obstinatly will hold
and teach it? Or that every error (even the least) by obstinacy of man joined
with it, becomes heresy? Then you say thus in effect, every error is an
heresy, no error is an heresy. This (Master Barrow) is your deep skill which
ye boast of that ye have learned: for if the man put the difference by his
obstinacy, it must needs be so. Then let me ask ye where ye have learned y^
to deny the unity of the Godhead, is not an heresy, or y^ trinity of persons
in the same, or to deny that Christ is God, or that he is man, unless the man
that erreth in them be convinced and found obstinate? Are not these and such
like, heresies in themselves, although the men that err in them be not
conuin^^^ ^^t hold them ignorantly? Again, show us where ye have ^^^rned, that
every error, even to the least, being in an heretic becomes an heresy.
Thus may the reader see how confusedly ye have put that to distinguish errors,
which does but distinguish between the men that do err.

In the next place, where you say, that the error must be duly convinced unto
the conscience of the man that erreth, before he can be so wilfully obstinate,
as does separate him from the faith and from the communion of Christ: ye speak
some truth, but ye speak ye know not what. For it ye could see, it is so
far from clearing ye, from presumptuous intrusion into Gods office, that it
utterly overthrows ye; and your former words and somewhat which ye write
elsewhere in this book being laid with it, becomes a very snare for to hold
ye. Ye have accused the Church of England, condemned, and cast her forth for
wilful obstinacy, as quite separated from Christ; now let us see how duly ye
have convinced out whole Church all the assemblies, and all the particular
members in the same, and found them heretics. First remember your own words
in this place; that ye doubt not, neither ever thought, but that the best
Church which consists of mortal men, may fall either of negligence or
ignorance, into grievous offenses and dangerous errors, and that some famous
Churches and Christians may fall into such errors, as I term fundamental etc.

Touching the faults which you charge the Church of England withal in our
worship, in our people, in our Ministry and government Ecclesiastical, albeit
in the whole course of your writings your speeches be merueilous excessive, yet
in the 180, 181, 182. pages of this your book against me, ye plainly confess
them to be such as right excellent Christians have ignorantly erred and dyed
in. For speaking of those which suffered death for religion in our Church, ye
call them godly Martyrs, saying; that ye doubt not of their happy and blessed
estate, all their sins, and these false offices and ministry which they
executed in their ignorance among the rest, being forgiven them. These be your
own words (Master Barrow) which I have set down. You acknowledge them to be
godly blessed Martyrs, they erred (you say) in these things, but of simplicity
through ignorance. If those principal men were ignorant in these matters, then
is it no marvel if all the rest in the land were ignorant in them, which
embraced the Gospel. Upon this it follows, that the Church of England was or
might be a true Church, until such time as she was duly convinced of ^er
errors and found obstinate. And if she has not been duly convinced, and found
in such wilful obstinacy, as does quite separate from the faith, and from the
communion of Christ, then is she still or may be the true Church having (it
may be for ought that you know, and there is no likelihood to the contrary)
many thousands in her, which are ready to shed their blood for the holy
Gospel of Christ. And then how wicked, and how accursed is your presumption in
condemning her utterly?

Nay (say you) but she is convinced and all your assemblies, and found so
wilfully obstinate in maintayning her errors even against her knowledge, that
she has forfaited the covenant, and is separated from the communion of Christ.

This is your bare accusation, you may not carry away the matter so (for then
indeed ye may easily clear your selves from wicked intrusion into Gods
office) but we must examine ((...) ye grant there must be a due conuincing)
first what it (...) be duly convinced, then, when, and by whom she has been
^^ such sort, or so duly convinced as ye charge her, and yet found obstinate.
This is the rule, that one brother offending is not to loose the dignity and
place of a Christian, and to be reputed as an heathen, until such time as he
be convinced by the Church, and found so obstinate that he does despise her
judgment and authority. This is the only due conuincing, and here is the
only power to east fo^rth as heathen, a man in some offense convinced. And
shall not a Church have as great privilege as a man? Is it not more then
absurd, to say, one man cannot be cast forth as an heathen for obstinacy in
some offense against private admonitions, but whole Churches may? All the true
Churches have convinced the Church of Rome, and condemned her as obstinate, not
in some light offenses, in which true Christians may err, but as most
blasphemous and Idolatrous against the principles of faith and grounds of
Religion, teaching that no Christian man ought to join with her. But what
Churches are they which have convinced the Church of England of such errors,
and found her so obstinate, that they have condemned her and willed all men to
forsake her? O* M. Barrow, you shall find that all the godly Churches are so
far from this, that contrariwise they acknowledge her for a sister. Look
then again upon your horrible presumption, and see who has given you such
power above and against all Churches? If ye mind obstinately to persist in
your evil without warrant, and even against this manifest word of God, (being
much better ye should fall down and bewail your ungodly ways, and seek for
pardon) ye have no way to shift or to color your wickedness but this, that men
may be convinced of error by particular persons, and that so has the Church
of England been duly convinced. It is out of all doubt that men which err may
^e convinced by any particular persons whatsoever, for it is the power and
light of Gods word only which conuinceth: but that which makes men to be cast
forth as heathen for obstinacy when they are convinced, is not (as I have
showed) obstinacy against pryuate admonitions, but the despising the judgment
and power of the Church when she has convinced and reproved. So that your
passage is here again stopped, and ye are cut off: but yet I will follow ye in
this, yielding this scope, to see when or who they be of particular persons
which have duly convinced the Church of England and al her assemblies of such
errors. First for the martyrs in our Church, ye have set them upon the shore
safely landed, out of all danger of wilful obstinacy: for page 181. thus ye
write.

These godly martyrs, so lately escaped out of the smoakie furnace of the
popish Church, could not so clearly discern, and suddenly enter into the
heavenly, and beautiful order of a true established Church. And those godly
men being so inexpert, and unexercised in his heavenly work, never having long
lived in, seen or heard of any orderly communion of Saints, any true
established Church upon the earth of so many hundredth years, never since the
general defection of Antichrist, no marvel, (I say) if they erred in setting
up the frame. But what then should we persist in their errors? especially
should we reject the true pattern of Christ's Testament, etc.

Thus far be your words Master Barrow, in which the reader may see, that ye
have (as I say) landed those godly men out of all dangers, which set up the
frame of our Church, because they did (as you say) nay they could see no
better: But our Church now can not be excused, because she has rejected the
heavenly pattern being brought. Indeed I am of this mind (to answer your
words as they lie) that right excellent men come short in some things about
the ordering of Gods Church, and especially at the beginning, because time is a
teacher: But those men were not so blind as you make them, or so inexpert in
the heavenly work. Many of them lived long after they came out of popery. They
did read the scriptures, both for other points of doctrine and for the
government, and all the ancient histories of the Church, and (in my
judgment) might have been able in those days, after twenty years separation
from popery, to see as much as some in these days that have been but four or
fine years from the Bowling Alleyes. Again, I am of this mind, that when any
error in the Church appears, it ought (if it can be brought to pass) to be
reformed: And that they do grievously sin which reject the truth against
their knowledge and conscience to the damage of Gods people, but there lies
the matter how you can prove that our Church is convinced. We must see who
they be that have laid this pattern which ye speak of before her, which was
not laid before those blessed martyrs, and convinced here let us come to the
matter. In some Ceremonies, and* in the manner of government, our Church does
differ from other Churches: Those Churches (indeed) have showed their reasons,
why they use not such ceremonies and government: but yet they condemn not our
Church, for not being persuaded by them: for they do know that in some matters
of controversy, it falls out often, that men may think they have truth and
be deceived, also that the truth may be showed, and yet men that err not
convinced in their conscience unto whom it is showed. This is your great
ignorance (Master Barrow) which imagine that so soon as a truth is showed in
any matter, the party that erreth is by and by convinced in his conscience.
There were thousands in the Church of Jerusalem, Act. 21. which erred groslie
about the retayning the ceremonial law, and the holy Apostles were driven to
bear with them, when they could not persuade them from it, and that many
years. And who can convince errors like the blessed Apostles? And you must
consider here further, that even those marryrs in our Church whom you so fully
clear, had the same pattern laid before them then, which our Church has had
laid before her since: for they did know that there was another form of
government used at Geneua, and in some other places, and they did not only
read their writings which showed the reasons for the same, but also some of
them, as Bishop Hooper, and Archdeacon Philpot, were trauailers even to that
end and purpose, and lived in some and did see, if not al, ye some number of
the reformed Churches beyond the seas. Moreover, the rest of the martyrs had
here among them out of diverse reformed Churches, as Peter Martyr, Bucer,
Fagius, Alasco, and others. How ignorantly then, and how falsely Master
Barrow, do ye affirm that those godly martyrs, had never lived in, seen, nor
heard, of any orderly communion of Saints, any true established Church? If
those martyrs, had the very same pattern laid before them which has been
laid since before our Church, and were not convinced? Peradunture you will say,
it was nothing so fully and so clearly brought and laid it before the martyrs
as it has been laid before our Church. Then if I demand here, who they be
that have more fully and more clearly laid this pattern before our Church,
and thus convinced her; whether your selves alone, or partly your selves and
partly others. I suppose, ye will take it but in part unto your selves: let
us then begin with these other, and then come to you. The Church of England at
the first (as you confess) set up the frame as they were persuaded in
conscience to be very right and agreeable to Gods word. Since that there has
risen controversy at home about some Ceremonies and observations, and about
the government. Reasons and allegations have been brought, to show that there
be hurtful things amiss in both: and many are persuaded. But now the visible
Church of England, the prince and all those which exercise the chief power
therein have stood and do stand resolute, that the ceremonies and observations
are agreeable to Gods word, or at the least not contrary, but tolerable; and
that government is such as is by Gods word most fit and profitable for our
Church. They stand upon their reasons and allegations for this: And many
thousands in the land. both men and women which profess the Gospel and faith
of Christ; either know not what the things in controversy, or, if they do
know them, yet are persuaded that our worship and government are right. Tell
me then M. Barrow (seeing ye confess the martyrs were not convinced) how you
know for certainetie that all these are convinced in their conscience (because
matters have been more fully opened) and so continue wilfully obstinate against
the known truth? Has God given you some special revelation, or do ye know
the secrets of all men's hearts? You see by the Church in Jerusalem that men may
ignorantly remain still in error, if the blessed Apostles themselves should
lay down matter against the same unto them. But to convince you, I may reason
from your own words, for Master Barrow, if that be true which you hold,
touching government ecclesiastical (which is the chief matter in question)
the Church of England cannot be convinced by that which either our own or men
of other Churches have set forth. We have been persuaded that the government
ecclesiastical ought to be by one of these two, that is to say, either by
Bishops or by presbyteries, and you condemn both. The government by Bishops
ye term Antichristian: And of those which stand for a government by
Presbyteries thus you write page 189. of your other book.

These men would bring in a new adulterate forged government in show, or
rather in despite of Christ's blessed government, which they in their pride,
rashness, ignorance and sensuallity of their fleshly hearts, most miserably
innon^ate corrupt and pervert. Also in the page 166. you term it a deuilish
forgerie. In this book against me you call it a presumptuous (...), ye say
it has no ground in the word of God but utterly subuerteth the whole order and
communion of the Church, etc. page 79.

Is it so Master Barrow, then how has our Church been convinced in conscience,
by those which bring no warrant of Gods word for that which they would set up?
being undoubtedly persuaded (as I have said) that one of the two ought to be,
(a third as yet not having been showed) how have they (I say by your speech)
been so duly convinced? And further it may be said, which is of great force
against ye, that if all the learned men in other Churches, and those in our
Church which stand for the government by presbyteries, have erre^ so grofely as
you accuse them, why may not they that maintain the other government err also
of ignorance? Master Barrow, these poor shifts will not defend ye before God,
but that ye have intruded into his seat, unless you have surer ground that
all be convinced. For what if some should be convinced in some matters, yet
when they protest the contrary, who can judge them but God? And now seeing it
has not been done by these, therefore it rests only upon your selves, let
us come to see what you have done. It cannot be but you have convinced all,
you have opened so many matters. Yea but before your matters came to the sight
and knowledge of the thousand man, (I might say almost to the sight of any) ye
had abandoned and condemned all without any order. What a conuincing is this?
And when they be come abroad (I mean your writings) though not unto the hands
of all, nor yet of the greater part, we must upon your bare word, contrary to
our own knowledge, admit many foul and false accusations, we must upon your
warrant allow many fantastical opinions, we must condemn all the Churches,
and justify the Donatists and Annabaptists, or else we cannot he by you
convinced. Your outrageous dealing being such, as almost has not been seen,
(which shall appear by laying open somewhat of your books) and your gross
errors with palpable ignorance to be wondered at even of the unlearned, how
shall we think that God has sent ye as it were great Apostles, to convince
and to refor me all? You say Christ has sent ye, but in very deed Satan in
the likeness of an Angel of light has most miserably seduced ye. Ye say often
that many in our Church have been and are persuaded that there be many faults;
and ^or not these then sin against their conscience in as much as they join
still with it? Master Barrow it is a foul heretical opinion to hold that a
man may not join with that Church which holds and maintains some faults
and errors. Did the holy Apostles refuse to join with the multitude in
Jerusalem, which held the Ceremonies? Does not S. Paul labor in diverse places
to join them together in peace, which in some matters held and continued in
diverse judgment? Read the Romans 14. and 15. for this point. Thus much might
suffice to show your horrible and inexcusable presumption, contrary to the
rules of Gods word, in condemning as quite separated from Christ, the whole
Church in the land, all particular assemblies, and all several persons both
young and old, men and women in the same, whom yet ye have never seen, much
less admonished and convinced, but that your words which yet remain untouched
(I mean of those which I set down) do draw me further.

There be three things yet remaining in your former words, in which ye err
foully, whereby all men shall see, how far off ye are from making any just
defense of your ungodly presumption. And your selves shall know (if the Lord
open your hearts) that it is but a thick covering of darkness and ignorance
under which ye lie shrouded, and (as ye imagine) shielded from the sin, and
from the danger of intrusion into Gods office, when ye condemn as heathen and
infidels all our assemblies. The first of the three and the second also are in
these words, when ye say; and heresy in that man, or in that congregation
thatso holds and teaches it does separate from the faith. etc. Thus ye
reason. If a man be in an error, and be duly convinced, and found obstinate,
so that he obstinately persist in and teach his error, even against his
conscience, we may safely judge that man to have no faith, nor communion with
Christ. The same is to be said of a congregation, and so of the whole Church of
England, and of all the assemblies therein, and of al particular members of the
same being all in one estate, and condition, that is to say, duly convinced,
and found obstinate. How far we may proceed in iudgeing a man void of faith,
for obstinacy, we shall see in the* next place^ here I begin with, and note
how blindly and how absurdly in your consequence of being convinced, ye compare
a Church and one man together. For a man erring, and his error reproved, either
the whole man is convinced, and is obstinate, or else the whole man erreth still
in iguorance. But it is far otherwise in a visible Church, because in it,
there be sundry sorts of members, which may not be all foulded up together
(...) one sentence. For look upon the visible Church of Israel at such time as
our Savior was borne and lived upon the earth, and we shall see there were in
it excellent godly ones, as the blessed Virgin, the Father and mother of John
the Baptist, Anna the Prophetisse, old Symeon, and many others. There were
heaps of ignorant people called the lost sheep of the house of Israel: Math.
10. And there were the Scribes and Pharisees, which held and taught
obstinately, very wicked errors. It is hereby manifest, that sometime it
comes to pass, that in a visible Church there be which maintain some
errors, and it may be some of the^ convinced in their conscience (which yet is
known for the most part but to God) there be that err of ignorance and
simplicity, and there be that difallow the errors. Now what warrant is there
to wrap up all ^hefe together under the same condemnation, and to say they be
all separated from the faith and from the Communion of Christ?

The second error of the three is to be observed in this, that you say,
obstinacy joined with error in a man convinced thereof in his conscience, does
separate from the faith, and from the comunion of Christ. Which, to serve your
turn against all our assemblies, must stand as I have before set it down. I
take it for an undoubted truth, that there is no sound faith in that man which
proudly and with a full contempt of God and his truth does obstinatly even
convinced in his conscience, hold and teach an error. But yet (Master Barrow)
if you will stand to maintain that your speech, you must shake hands with
Nouatus: for there be, as of other sins, the remnants yea foul remnants, of
obstinacy and contempt of God and his truth, in all the regenerate and
sanctified. Whereupon it comes to pass, that as godly men do fall into
sundry known sins, and willingly according to the flesh, yea sometime into
the grosser, and do continue in them: which cannot be but with some wilful
obstinacy and contempt against God. As for examples, we have Samson that lived
in fornication, David that did commit adultery and murder, Solomon that fell
into Idolatry. These did know they sinned, and Nathan told David, Thou have
despised the Lord, Thou have despised the word of the Lord. And also as it
falls out in some that have faith, that they fall into foul actions, and the
remnants of obstinacy and wilful contempt are so strong in them, and the
work of grace lies in them as it were so buried, that they not only despise
private admonitions, but also for a time the judgment and public censure of
the Church. As for example, the man which took his mother in law to be his
wife, in the Church of Corinth. He did know even by the light of nature that
it was a foul sin. And though the Church neglected to cast him forth, yet
many no doubt did blame him. Notwithstanding, he continued so obstinate, that
when Saint Paul had decreed his excommunication, he was cast forth. This man
in the time of his obstinacy had faith and was in Christ: as it appears by
his repentance in the second Epistle, where Saint Paul wills to receive him
in again. Even so it comes to pass in men regenerate, who erring in some
opinions, which being reproved by the word of God, yet the remnants of
obstinacy and froward contempt do make them either unwilling to see any thing
against that which they have once holden and maintained, or if they do see,
yet they will not yield. Now, as it is an hard thing for us to find and know
certainly that a man is convinced of an error in his conscience, (especially
when it falls out in lighter matters which are not se clearly disenssed by
the word) though another man see it (as he thinks) plainly: so also is it
most ungodly and without any warrant of Gods word, to say (when one indeed is
convinced and does not yield) this man is separated from the faith and from the
communion of Christ. For if great ^e^^nants of wilful obstinacy, cannot be
in him that has faith, then he that wittingly and willingly (according to the
flesh) falls into a gross sin, is by and by separated from the communion
of Christ. For if such contempt and wilful rebellion against God may stand one
month, or one year with faith, what reason is there but that a man regenerate
may lie in such security sundry years, until the Lord drive him out of it:
For God, as a father, does chastise his children for their wilful obstinacy,
contempt, and rebellion, and brings them to repentance in his good time. Ye
will say, if they repent, then ye acknowledge them to be in Christ, but while
they repent not, how can a man be blamed for saying they have no faith? You
must know (Master Barrow) that a man is not in Christ because he does repent,
but he repents because he is in Christ. For the beginning and proceeding of
repentance is all from Christ crucified, and only unto those that be in him.
Romans 6. 1. Pet. 4. 1, 2. Again, do not you know that he which is once
hightened and has embraced the faith, if he sin such a sin as does
separate him from the faith, and from the communion of Christ, he can never be
restored again by repentance? Then seeing there is no man but sins
willingly, and continues with some obstinacy in sundry things, how can you
maintain this* that every wilful obstinacy in error does separate from the
faith, and from the communion of Christ, but that you must with Nouatus, cut
all the regenerate from the hope of repentance, seeing all do transgress of
knowledge?

Your third error is in denying the distinction of errors fundamental and not
fundamental, where ye call it a papisticall destinction, and gather many
absurdities, most foolishly in very deed, and not so much as to be repeated,
because they arise from your ignorance: for tell me Master* Barrow, Christ
being the foundation, upon which all the faithful as living stones are built,
and grow together into a holy Temple: are there not errors, which if a man hold
never so ignorantly he is not in Christ, he holds not the foundation so
long as he erreth in them, he is not coupled with the living stones to make
one building? And on the contrary, b^ there not errors which the faithful do
err in, and be in Christ? This you cannot deny, (unless you will maintain
the heresy of perfection in the regenerate, but you say that with wilful
obstinacy, the least error ca^^eth a man out of Christ. Alas poor man, may
not a child see your folly? When ye confess there be errors, that a man may
err and dye in, and yet hold Christ the foundation, and so be saved: is it not
as much as to say there be errors that are not fundamental? If a man be
convinced in them, and hold them so obstinately, that he be thereby separated
from Christ; It is not any of those errors which have separated him (which ye
confess he may err in, and yet have faith) but his wicked obstinacy and
contempt, in holding and teaching them against his conscience. Now therefore
Master Barrow, and Master Greenewod, l^^ all those things together which I have
noted touching your confused ignorance, errors, and absurdities, and see
whether ye have brought any thing to clear your selves from the fearful and
odious, yea most accursed presumption, by which ye take upon ye to abandon and
forsake, as utterly separated from the faith, and from the Communion of Christ,
all the assemblies of the Church of England, and all the particular members of
the same, the^ a thick covering of darkness, which the bright countenance of
the great Judge will pearce through and scatter. Ye lie in prison, not as
Christ's poor afflicted servants, but for this grievous and outrageous sin,
which no flesh is able to defend or mitigate, and for sundry other abuses, as
shall appear by your books. I said that the fearful end of one Boltom,
about twenty years past, would not be forgotten. You have heard (as you say,
page 208) that he revolted and became a conformable member of our Church, and
so fell into that fearful estate. Seek better information Master Barrow,
seeing the example may touch ye, for the truth is, he did for the same causes
that you do, utterly coudemne the whole Church of England, and was with sundry
other separated from it. And (as it is constantly affirmed) he was an elder in
their secret Church, and ofterward falling into deep despair, he could not be
recovered, but did hang himself. The mat^er which pressed him so sore was
this, that be had judged and condemned men better then himself. Look ye
therefore unto it in time, and seek repentance before the terror of God break
forth upon ye, and that it be to late, for it is evident unto all that have any
true light in them, that your offense herein can have no excuse or color:
bear not your selves upon other things in your books, for it shall^ppeare,
that where ye think your selves most divine, there Satan has most deeply
deluded ye, glory not of any sufferings* unless ye will have those also to
glory which are bound in bedli^^.

Having thus finished about wilful obstinacy, we come now to the four
principal accusations, which ye bring against our Church.

The first is that we worship God after a false manner: our worship being made
of the invention of man, even of that man of sin, erroneous, and imposed upon
us. And here came the book of common prayer into question. I did draw your
accusation into a Sillogisme: and you accuse me to be so full of legiet d^
main, that ye had need to look to my fingers, for ye say I have left out
certain of your words, as namely these (wilfully obstinate, and imposed.)
Touthing these words, wilfully obstinate, look Master Barrow in the fourth and
fifth pages of my book, and see whether I did not answer them where you have
expressly set them down; look also upon your own book now printed* and you
shall find, that both in the accusation you have omitted these words (wilfully
abstinate) and also passed by mine answer unto them. Now when these two, that
is, the omitting the words, and passing by the answer unto them do concur,
here is a great show of legier du maine on your part, and yet you would lay it
upon me, that have not given the least suspision thereof. And for the word
imposed* you say I leave it out, and put etc. in the place thereof. I do
indeed setdowne etc, for these words, erroneous and imposed upon them, but do
I leave them out in handling the matter? Look in the tenth page, and see
whether I do not charge ye with an Annabaptisticall freedom (which ye are not
able to avoid) for this word imposed? Master Barrow look upon them, learn
modesty, and blush, if not for conscience, yet that these things must now lie
open to the view of the world.

And for the book of common Prayer, although the question between us, was not
whether there be faults in it, but whether it ^e (as you term it) a great
pregnant Idol, full of heresies, blasphemies and a bominations? whether there
be any heresies in it? And whether the best part of it be none other but a
piece of swines flesh, an abomination to the Lord? Yet you charge me as flying
the trial by the word of God: when I stand to justify by the word of God, that
in deed there is neither Idolatry, heresy, nor blasphemy in it, much less
that it is full of them, or the best part an abomination. For in mine answers
and defense, I do not undertake* to clear it of all faults (having no
occasion to meddle in that controversy) but to show that there are no such
faults, but that both the faithful people of God have and mayerre in, and
also even christian governors and teachers, which are to reform the church,
and that if any do see and be persuaded that they be corruptions and faults,
yet not of that quality or degree, as that they may for the same separate
themselves from the fellowship of those which art otherwise minded: this is the
thing which I have taken upon me to defend. And if you (Master Barrow) will not
become a rank heretic, (as if it please God you shall not) to maintain this
opinion, that we may not join in that worship, where we find any
imperfections and errors holden, and not reformed: why do you with wonderment
cry out, that this so large an exception of imperfections, is the odd and
only exception that ever you heard of. And do you in very deed Master Barrow
think that no such exception is to be made, but that where any error does
appear in the worship, a man is to separate himself? Nay you will say when it
is reproved and continued in, and not reformed, then a man is to forsake that
Church as utterly fallen from the covenant of God. For they be obstinate and
deny reformation.

Tell me then, what if those that be to reform, be persuaded it is no error?
What if a great part of the multitude be so persuaded, that it is no fault, and
so be of diverse minds? Will you deem that you have more skill to convince
them, then the Apostles had? Or will you refuse to join, as the Apostles did
join with the Church in Jerusalem, that held and continued in a gross error?
Do you not see how by this your doctrine, you open the door as wide unto all
Schismatics, as ever did the Donatists or the Annabaptists, seeing there will
ever be errors, and some that cannot be made to see them? Will you not see how
you contrary Saint Paul directly, who in whole chapters almost (as I have
noted before) does labor nothing else but to persuade the Christians that
held diverse opinions touching some things in Gods worship, yet to join
together? Romans 14. and 15. what a multitude of words, with your accustomed
reuilings and slanders have you here heaped up? But I will deal only with
that which is not answered already.

You charged our Church with Romish fasts. I charged you with fal^e accusing:
because the Church of Rome, most wickedly against the Cross of Christ, places
the worship of God, and the merit of eternal life in fasting, which doctrine
our Church utterly condemns. You labor to show faults in our fasts, what is
that now to the purpose? And so in diverse other things, is this the question
between us?

You charge us with idol feasts, as if we worshipped Saints and Angels. I
told you it is a stark lie, and so I must affirm, our Church utterly
condemning all that most blasphemous doctrine of popery, touching the
meditation of Saints or Angels: here again you deal but even as in the
former, you must not still so boldly slander, but prove that the days are kept
in honor of the Saints and Angels. And so for the naming of the Churches. I
know Saint Luke did not in any respect honor Mars: and so did not contrary
to that which David professes, saying he would not take the names in his
mouth: you may see by his example, how David is to be understood, not of the
very naming, but of the naming with some honor, for a man may name them either
in detestation, or as Saint Luke does only to make destinction.

Then come tithes and oblations: here in deed Master Barrow you bid me look
whether this error be not fundamental, being obstinately held, and bring for
your reason, that they which revive any part of the ceremonial law are bound
to the whole law, and so are (as Paul says to the Galathians) abolished from
Christ. Truly Master Barrow, the more I read of your writings, the more I
pity your blindness.

I could not have been persuaded, that you were so exceeding ignorant, taking
upon you to control all Churches, and far to excel all the most learned
deuines: neither could it enter into my thought, that any would so boldly abuse
the holy Scriptures, to seduce and subvert the minds of simple men. I do here
also entreat the reader to be atte^tiue a little* and to see upon what
foundation you do build a great part of your doings. For here to prove the
paying of tithes an error fundamental, and utterly to separate from Christ
being obstinately held: you allege the words of Saint Paul, Galath. 5. I
testify again unto every man which is circumcised, that he is deptor to keep
the whole law: ye are abolished from Christ, etc. Let me first ask ye then,
were the fathers which were circumcised in the time of y^ law, abolished from
Christ, and fa^^en from grace? You will say no, for circumcision was a seal of
the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. Then it must needs be granted that Saint
Paul does not speak here of circumcision in the right use, for which God did
ordeine it, for so it was not contrary unto Christ, albeit the retaining of it
after Christ come, was an error. Also let me ask ye further, do you think
that Saint Paul was contrary to himself, when he circumcised Timothy, Acts
16. ver. 3. Or after that, when he would with those which had a vow be
purified, and offer an oblation according to the law? Act. 21. 26. will you
say that Saint Paul and Timothy became deptors to keep the whole law? Or
that they were abolished from Christ? It is horror to admit any thought that
way, or once to make doubt of such a matter* Neither would James and the other
Apostles have suffered or tolerated the Church in Jerusalem, in that which
does abolish from Christ. Whereupon it follows of necessity, that Saint
Paul here to the Galathians, does not speak simply of the ceremony of
circumcision: but as it was urged with the doctrine of the false Apostles,
which was this, that circumcision was a necessary part of Gods worship, and
that men could not be saved unless they were circumcised: for so did the false
Apostles urge it, as ye may see, Act. 15. 1. placing righteousness and the
merit of eternalllife in it, for against that Saint Paul speaks here to the
Galathians, saying, as many as are justified by the law, are abolished from
Christ, and fallenfrom grace. Here is the thing then, that the false Apostles
did join the law and Christ together for justification: and Saint Paul
testifies and denounces, that he which is circumcised with such a mind, as
to be justified in part thereby, he is debtor to keep the whole law, which is
not possible for any flesh, and therefore he shall stand under the curse.
Moreover he is abolished from Christ, and fallen from grace, because the
justification by grace, and the justification by the law, are so contrary,
that they cannot be joined together: he that will hold any thing of the one,
must forgo the other. This being the thing which Saint Paul speaks of the
Galathians, and not the very ceremonies which both he and Timothy did sometime
observe, nor yet the error of the Church of Jerusalem, which was not to place
the worship of God and righteousness in them (which the holy Apostles would
never have borne withal, seeing it overthrows the faith of Christ) mark
well Master Barrowe (or if you will be wilful let others mark) how foolishly,
and yet with what furious terror, ye thunder out the abolishing from Chrst, for
paying tithes, and for the observation of some ceremonies, in which, if there
be a fault, it is so far from that which the falfe Apostles went about to
seduce the Galathians in, that it comes short of the error of the Church of
Jerusalem. For the Church of England (as all men may see) does condemn fully
and absolutely, not only that doctrine of the false Apostles, and of the
Church of Rome, touching justification or merit of words, but also teaches
the whole law of ceremonies was to cease, now Christ being come. Cease
therefore Master Barrow this foolish rage, and labor not to seduce the people,
deceiving, and being deceived, as the blessed Apostle speaks. Ye observe
days and times, months, and years (says Saint Paul to the Galathians) I am
afraid of ye, least I have labored among ye in vain. If ye be circumcised,
Christ shall profit ye nothing.

The Church of England (say you) observes days and times, as Easter,
Whitsonday, etc. and payethtithes, and observes other ceremonies, therefore
Christ can profit ye nothing, ye are abolished from Christ, ye are fallen from
the covenant of grace, in as much as ye obstinately hold and continue in them.

Is it not much to be lamented, that after so many years preaching of the
Gospel, much people should lie open to be fpoyled by such poor seely stuff
as this, and be led away by such more then sottish ignorance? Cannot men see
that the who^e matter lies in the diverse ends of observation? The false
Apostls, the Church in Jerusalem, Paul and Timothy, do observe the self same
things, that is Circumcision and other ceremonies of the law: The false
Apostles are abolished from Christ, as they urge and observe them: The Church
of Jerusalem is not abolished from Christ, but yet erreth grosely, Saint Paul
and Timothy sin not at all thereby. What is the reason of this difference,
but that as ye may see, the false Apostles observed and urged the ceremonies as
meritorious for justification, and therefore the Epistle to the Galathians is
spent in declaring the righteousness by faith, and overthrowing the righteousness
by the law. The Church in Jerusalem observed the ceremonies not placing
righteousness in them, but to the end that God had ordained them, to shadow out
heavenly things, being ignorant in this that they were ordained but unto the
time of correction, as the holy Ghost speaks, Hebr. 9. And therefore in that
Epistle to the Hebrews there is no charging or blaming of them, touching the
matter of justification, but only a reducing of them from that fore said error
in which they did stick ^^ long. When Saint Paul speaks of observing the
ceremonies, which was but at sometimes, as occasion fell out, (...) so far
from deeming it a fault, that he reckons it among his virtues: and says, to
those that are under the law, I became as if I were under the law, that I
might win those that are under the law. 1. Cor. 9. The Synagogue of Antichrist
in more heinous and detestable manner then the false Apostles, against the
Cross of Christ, even against the righteousness by faith in his blood, observe
days and times, and a number of ceremonies of their own invention, by which
they seek remission of (...) and the merit of eternalllife. Our Church does
renounce and accurse all such doctrine, neither do we maintain any Iudaisme.
And touching the paying of tithes, (that I may conclude this point) if I say
there might be somewhat moral in it, though it were annexed to the L^uiticall
Priesthood, I do not see how you shall be able to disprooue the same.

In the visitation of the sick, there is a form of absolution set down. Thus
you (Master Barrow) write against it: Let the Reader understand, that nothing
can be more popish and blasphemousthen it is: wherein a sacrilegious priest
takes upon him, by the authority committed unto him, to absolve the sick from
all his sins. Has any mortal man power to forgive sins? Or is it not the
office of God alone? Has the priest power to forgive all sins, such as are
not made unto him? what horrible blasphemy is this? to him that has power to
forgive all sins, to him we may make our prayers and supplications, him only
may we worship. Has the greatest minister of the Church any more power to
retain or loose the sin of the least member, then the said member has to
bind or loose his sin? Does not this rule of our Savior Christ, as well
extend unto him as unto the least in the Church, If thy brother sin against
thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him? Luke. 17. 3. Has not the
Church* power to reprove and cast out their Pastor if he deserve? Is not all
this binding and loosing done by the word of God, and not by any power or
excellency of man? Has not the word of God the like power and effect against
sin in the mouth of the least of Gods servants, as in the mouth of the
greatest? Let this collect then (whereby the priest in their leiturgie by the
power committed to him absolueth the sick of all his sins) remain one witness
(among many other) of their popery, and until more come of most high
blasphemy.

Thus far be your words Master Barrow. Then this absolution (you say)
nothing can be more popish or blasphemous, you cry out at it as horrible
blasphemy: And will have this collect remain as one witness of most high
blasphemy. If it be so, I have done you great wrong by charging you as false
accusers: But in very deed while you go about to make ye Reader vndersta^o
that nothing can be more popish or blasphemous, yea, that it is horrible and
most high blaspe^ie, you bewray so dark ignorance and confusion, as I think
we may term deep and horrible, as shall appear by the reasons you bring.
But now for this absolution, take this by the way, that I do not undertake to
dispute upon, or to justify every circumstance thereof, as namely the
vndis^reet and unskillful dealing of some that may practice it; but only deal
about the substance of the matter it self, against which your reasons are
brought, to prove it to be popery and blasphemy.

You ask first, Has any mortal man power to forgive sins? or whether it be
not Gods office alone? Why Master Barrow, will you deny that mortal men have
power to forgive sins? does not our Savior Christ say unto his Apostles,
Whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins ye shall
retain, they are retained? Ioh. 20. ver. 23. Dare you contradict the flat
testimony of the scripture? And for your other question, it is most certain,
and the contrary cannot be held without blasphemy and sacrilege, that God
only has power and authority to forgive sins, if we respect the author of
forgiveness: And men do but in his name, and from him as ministers, bring the
same unto us. If we respect the thing i^ self, it is peculiar unto the most
high God: but the ministry is his hand, by which he reaches it forth unto
us, and therefore they bringing the message and word of reconciliation, are
adorned with this title, that they forgive, and retain sins: yet ^ is but
isntrumental. It is most undoubted that God alone does begethis Children by
the immortal seed of his word: And yet Saint Paul says to the Corinthians,
that he was their Father, and that he begat them. All this is but ministerial,
God is robbed of no honor.

You demand, whether the priest has power to forgive all sins, such as are
not made unto him? I answer that the minister of the Gospel, is the minister
of reconciliation, (I mean to bring it) and has power to forgive all sins
annexed to his ministry, or rather it is the fruit and effect and power of
his ministry, in delivering the promises. You seem to speak of forgiving of
trespasses which are done against our selves, which declares also your want of
skill: as namely that you know not what this is, whose sins ye shall forgive,
they that are forgiven. We may make our prayers unto him, and worship him only,
that has power to forgive all sins. This is true, if we look to the author
of this grace, which is God alone: But not when we look to those which are but
ministers, and the earthen vessels in which this treasure is brought.

You ask, whether the greatest minister in the Church, hathanie more power to
retain or loose the sin of the least member, then the said member has to
bind or loose his sins? And then you bring certain reasons to prove that
he has not any more power then the least member. Is it not a strange thing
(Master Barrow) that such gear should come from you? will you take away the
whole efficacy and power of the ministry which Christ has ordained? By the
ministers of the Gospel (as I said before) God sends the word of
reconciliation, they be his hand, by which he does reach it forth unto us:
when they preach the glad tidings, or deliver the promise of free pardon unto
all that shall believe in Christ crucified, and deliver the seals of the
doctrine, even Baptism and the holy Supper: God does accompany the
ministration of these things, by his spirit, and so does ratify the same. For
which cause the ministry of the Gospel is called the ministry of the spirit.
2. Cor. 3. The spirit of the Lord gives us our freedom by loosing the bonds
of our sins, when through faith we lay hold of the promise. And he that
believes not is still bound. Then when Christ says, Whose sins ye shall
forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins ye shall retain, they are
retained. This is the sense, that to those whom God does send (publishing the
Gospel, and setting to the seals in those which embrace it, and so bringing
free pardon of sins) he does communicate this honor which belongs to
himself, that they are said to forgive sins.

As I said before, he gives away nothing herein from himself, because it is
not given unto them as to the authors of the pardon, but as to the instruments
and ministers, by whom he does reach it forth, as by his hand, and by whose
ministry he does ratify y^ same unto us. Likewise when they denounce
judgment against the impenitent, he does confirm it. What do you tell us then
of that rule of admonishing and pardoning? Luke 17. These be things differing.
It is also very true that the power of binding and loosing is wholly from the
word, not depending upon the excellency of any man: and that the dignity and
power of the word (if we respect it in it self) is all one, out of whose
mouth so ever. But yet (Master Barrow) you should know^, that it is Gods
ordinance and good pleasure, to give a special operation and power unto it by
the ministry. Baptism does seal up the forgiveness of our sins, and has he
not ordained, that this seal shall be set to by ye ministry? I would you saw how
^old your ignorance has made you, even against Gods ordinance, as to give no
more efficacy unto the word in the mouth of the most excellent minister, then
in the mouth of any true Christian.

Your other demand is to no purpose, seeing nothing do^th bind or loose, but
only the word, and the binding or loosing by men, is no more, but when men by
authority from God, in a ministry which he does ratify, pronounce
remission of sins or judgment, rightly according to the word, as the word
pronounces. Shall we then believe, that every true Christian has the same and
equal power of binding and loosing that Paul or Peter had? You say so, and
would prove it, and not only have here set down your blind reasons, but in
your other book (which you entitle a brief discovery of the false Church)
and in the page 124. You say that by the place John 20. we cannot prove this
power of binding and loosing to be given only to the Apostles, there being
many disciples both men and women in the place when Christ gave it. This
appearing indeed of our Savior was the same day at night in which he rose
from the dead, as the Evangelists do expressly declare. It is plain also by
S. Luke 24. 33. that there were some other with the Apostles when he appeared
unto them. But yet (Master Barrow) consider the place well, and if there be any
forehead remaining, it will make you blush a little at your own bold speech,
when you say that to challenge the power of binding and loosing, as given or
annexed to the ministry, by these words, whose sins ye remit, etc. is by an
old worthles title. For was the Commission of the Apostleship given unto all
that were there, both men and women? Because you say; There were both men and
women there besides the Apostles, and that he gave the power of binding and
loosing unto them all alike: and said unto them all, whose sins ye shall
remit, they are remitted* etc.

Mark all his words together. Again, Peace be with ye, as the father has
sent me, so I send you. And when he had said this, he breathed upon them, and
said, receive the holy Ghost. Whose sins ye shall remit, they are remitted,
and whose sins ye shall retain, they are retained. Did he say to all there
present, yea even to the women, as the father has sent me, so I send you? I
pray ye whether sent he the women upon that message upon which he was sent by
the father? These former words are only to the Apostles upon whom he lays
the charge, or the embassage which his father had committed unto him. As Paul
2. Cor. 5. declares that the Apostles were Ambassadors from GOD in Christ's
stead. If you will shame then to say that Christ laid the charge which the
father committed to him upon the women (as you say there were some women there,
and it is not unlike) or if you dare not affirm that the women are sent upon
this embassage to be Apostles, which is in these former words, as the father
sent me, so I send you, how dare you say the latter words are spoken unto all?
For to those only he says, receive the holy Ghost: whose sins ye shall
remit, they are remitted. To whom he had said, As the father has sent me so I
send you. And tell me Master Barrow, is there not some part of this power of
loosing or remitting sins by the Sacraments? I mean, do^ not the Sacraments
effectually seal unto us the remission of sins? And is that power committed
to any but Ministers? Has God given a power to the Ministers above other to
set to the seals, and no power above others in delivering the word of the
covenant which is sealed? It is no marvel that you dare go about to
overthrow all the power of the Ministry of the Gospel (which Saint Paul
sets forth to be so glorious, 2. Cor. 3.) in affirming that the greatest
Minister has no more power to bind the least member, then the said member
has to bind him: when you are thus grossly ignorant, as to affirm that our
Savior spoke those words unto women, Whose sins ye shall forgive. etc. Ioh.
20. and see not that God has ratified a power of delivering the word and
Sacraments by a ministry, which he uses as his hand reached forth unto us.
They that will further and more fully see into this wicked error of yours, must
look upon that which the learned have written against the Swinckfeldians,
about the same.

And now (Master Barrow) to come to the very point indeed that is in
controversy between you and me. I wished that you were as weary of lying and
slandering, as you should be in seeking until you should find one blasphemy
or heresy in all the Collects of the book: and therefore you have here
gathered together a whole pack. You tell me first, that I have in remembrance
the Collect wherein the Priest by the authority committed unto him, does
absolve the sick of all his sins. Indeed you told us that this is most high
blasphemy, and that nothing can be more popish. But learn you Master Barrow,
by the Scripture, and remember that God has given a power to the ministry of
the Gospel to forgive sins. The power indeed is but ministerial, and so
the book it self declares, where it says: He has given power and
commandment to his ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people being
penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins. Other power in the
minister to forgive sins then this, the book allows none. How the Pope
does challenge this power to himself as head, and how from him it must be
derived unto all Ministers, how far also he has extended it, and how
horribly and blasphemously he has abused it, I will not stand to show.

Then next, you say, I must not forget the two Collects said over our dead
brother. The one in which we say that God of his mercy has taken away the
soul of our brother, etc. This is not meant but where the party dies in the
profession of the faith and repentance, nor yet absolutely to pronounce him
saved, but in a charitable manner of speech to judge of him as he professed. I
do not take it the meaning of the book, that it should be uttered of such as
make no profession of the holy faith, (for why then should he be called a
brother?) or upon whom God does show his fearful judgment, if it be
otherwise, it may be a fault, but not blasphemy.

The other is, that we pray for the soul of our brother departed: where we
say, that we with this our brother and all other departed in the true faith,
may have our perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul. Prayer for
the dead is a gross error, but yet not simply in it self an heresy, or
blasphemy, and our Church does utterly condemn it as a gross error. And
therefore Master Barrow, you do still but belie the book, which directs
herein to pray only for our selves living, and not for the dead. For if the
mention of receiving bliss with that brother departed, were to pray for him,
then should it be meant that we would also pray for the souls of Abraham,
Isaac and Iaakob, of the Prophets and Apostles, because they are included, in
these words, with all other departed in the true faith.

In the third place you are so kind, that as you say, to help my memory a
little further, you will me to consider better of that glorious Anthem which
we say at our Communion, that we with Angels and Archangels and all the
company of heaven lawd and magnify. etc. Here you will not demand how we
remaining in the flesh, can have such familiar conversation with those heavenly
Soldiers, that together with them we can praise God. You will not demand,
(that is, you do in a fine retoricall sort demand it) but the finenes of this
retoricke will not cover the sottishnes of your ignorance. For albeit men in
earth have not familiar conversation with Angels, yet they praise God together
with them, in as much as both men and Angels do lawd and magnify him. And
therefore the Prophet Psalm. 103. calling upon all things to praise the Lord,
joins the Angels, saying: Praise the Lord ye Angels which are strong in
power. Read also for this, the first chapter of the Revel verl. 12, 13, 14.
Then you will not press us with papisticall speculations of making degrees of
Angels and Archangels. etc. In very deed you cannot but with falsehood press
our Church with that. But you demand how many Archangels we read of and find
in the Scriptures, and whether we know of any more heads of Angels then
Christ himself?

We know and constantly profess that there is but one head of Angels which is
Christ. And we condemn the popish curiosity in searching into the degrees and
orders of Angels, which is not learned out of the holy Scriptures, but from
that counterfeit Dionisius Areopagita. And if that Michael the Archangel which
strove with the devil about the body of Moses, and durst not give railing
sentence were Christ: yet S. Paul speaks of an Archangell besides Christ,
when he says: The Lord himself shall come down from heaven with the voice of
the Archangell, and with the trumpe of God. 1 Thessalonians. 4. verse. 16. What
blasphemy then (Master Barrow) is there in the book, which speaks but as
the Scripture, and you may see plainly that, to be a chief Angel, or an
Archangell, is not to be the head of Angels? The sainctifying the flood
Iordain, and all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin, is none
other way to be taken, then to say that bread and wine are sainctified to
represent the body and blood of Christ. All the creatures of God are
sainctified to our use, as the blessed Apostle speaks.

Touching Michael and all Angels, we do not worship Angels, nor yet make Christ
a creature. You say that in the Letanie, there is prayer for all that travail
by sea or by land, for all that be sick, for all sick persons: therefore we
pray for Gods enemies, for the breach of all order, and destruction both of
Church and common wealth. This is but a vain collection, when prayer is
intended for such as are prayed for, that they may be turned from their evil.
Also when this word all is used, it goes with this restraint, all that belong
unto God, for so is Saint Paul to be also restrayued unto all sorts of men
which belong unto God, when he wills to pray for all men. 1. Tim. 2.

You demand where we learn to pray against lightning and thunder, tempest,
plague, famine, battle, etc. when there is no present fear or danger
thereof?

Then it seems by your words that we may entreat the Lord to turn away
none of his grievous and fearful plagues, but when they be upon us? We see
there are ever anon some which are stricken with thunder: and when the clap is
past, it is too late to pray for them. Again, the prayers of the Church are
for all the true members thereof wheresoever: and if we our selves be not in
this present need, yet others are, and we may be, if God turn not a way his
displeasure: these prayers are not to restrain the Lord the use of his
creatures, or that he should not by them destroy his enemies, these be no
sound collections. Unles you will argue thus, the Lord afflicts his Church by
persecutions, by famine and pestilence, etc. for their good, and for the glory
of his own name: therefore the church ought not to pray to be delivered from
those things. We are willed to be always ready for death, and sudden death
cannot prevent any one of the faithful I do confess. But yet we esteem it
a great comfort and a great blessing for sundry respects to be warned before,
when we shall depart out of this world, and a thing which we covet, and I see
no reason why we may not, for such respects crave it of the Lord. You would
make men believe that we conjure Christ by his incarnation, by his nativity,
baptism, fasting and temptation, by his agony and bloody sweat, by his Cross
and passion, etc. When we pray to be delivered by them, has not our Savior
dotte these things for our deliverance? And did he not deliver us by them? What
blasphemy, heresy, or coniuration is there then in this prayer, as to say
deliver us by thy precious death and passion? You ask where we learned to pray
for our forefathers offenses? I answer that we read that the Lord will visit
the sins of the Fathers upon the Children: and therefore we desire the Lord
not to remember the sins of the forefathers, to bring punishment upon us. It
is a blind collection when any gather herby that we pray for the dead, that
their sins may be forgiven them. These then be the blasphemies and heresies
which you Master Barrow do accuse the book of, to show that you did not lie
and slander: but how well you have acquit your self, let all those judge which
have any sobriety. And now touching this that you did affirm the best part of
the book to be but as a piece of swines flesh, and abomination to the Lord:
you go about to defend your wicked speech by the abuse, which I told you
before could be none answer: for the things are holy in themselves, although
coniurers and Papists abuse them never so much. Touching the Lords Prayer, we
deal about it in the question of read prayer. For the articles of the faith,
you would know what proof by Scripture we can make for that blasphemous Article,
that Christ descended into hell? Also in your other book page 76. these be
your words: Their forged patcherie, commonly called the Apostles Creed or
Symbol, Athanasius Creed, the Nycen Creed. Let the world judge what cause
you have to glory in your sufferings: and whether ye be not liker Rabsaka, (who
boasted also that God sent him against Jerusalem) then any of the holy Martyrs
of Christ. Is there any Christian ear but will abhor this beastly speech,
when you term the Articles of our faith, a forged patchery? And do you not I
say, even as a very Rabsaka most wickedly reproach all Churches, both of old
and in these days. Athanasius Creed, which is the Nycen Creed is drawn from
the word? It is the sum of the most glorious faith, concerning the blessed
Trinity, and some other Articles, which all true Churches and Christians have
ever professed, and do profess. And for the Apostles Creed, if it were not
in the time of the Apostles, yet was it presently after, that confession or
prosession of the faith, which every one of years made, which was admitted to
receive the holy baptism.

It is every part drawn expressly but of the sacred writings of the Prophets
and Apostles. And for that one article of Christ's descending into hell, it is
not blasphemous, nor yet has in it any error, unless it be misunderstoote.
The Papists are very gross in it, and fabulous, touching his descending to
fetch out the souies of the pacriarches. Others do hold that our Savior in
soul after his passion descended into hell, though to no such purpose: this is
not blasphemy nor heresy. The place of Scripture which seems to warrant
that his soul descended into hell, is in Psalm 16. Thou shall not leave my
soul in hell, neither shall thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
Scheol does signify both hell and the grave, and in this place (say they which
hold that his soul descended) it must needs be taken for hell, because the
soul goes not into the grave. Yet because Nephesh may be diuersely taken, as
it is used sundry times in Moses for the dead body, as also that it does
signify the vital spirit, and so it is no absurdity to say after a manner of
speech, that the life is shut up in the grave so long as the body remains
there: hereupon some do expound these words, he descended into hell, to be no
more but thus, he went down into the grave. And whereas the order of the
articles seems to overthrow this exposition, because it is said, he was
dead, buried, and descended into hell: they expound this clause, (he was
buried) he was inbaulmed, as it is said when the woman powered the precious
ointment upon him, that she did it to bury him, Matthew. 26. Nicodemus brought
Mirre and Aloes: this dressing of the dead body, say they, was of the Jews
called burial: and the putting into the grave, descending into hell. Others
do take it, that descending into hell is meant, that he remained in the state
of the dead. Others that in his soul while he was upon the Cross, he suffered
the torments of hell, as it is most certain he did. Now Master Barrow, seeing
the words be in the Scripture (thou shall not leave my soul in hell) and the
matter rests only upon the exposition, what immodest and intemporate heat,
or rather furiouse outrage is this, to cry out of a blasphemous article, and
to term the articles of our faith, our forged patcherie?

Also for singing of Psalms, I will note here unto the reader, your foul
profane speeches: in page 180. thus you write. Here would not be forgotten
also the sweet Psalmodicall harmony of the Vultures, Crows, Gleads, Owls,
Geese, of the Leopards, Bears, Wolves, Dogs, Foxes, Swine, Goats, (pardon
me, for thus the holy Ghost terms and likeneth the profane multitudes
assembled in the false Church) all these together with one accord simphonie and
harmony, sing some pleasant Ballad, or else unto David's melodious harp some
Psalm in rhyme (I say not rithme now or meeter) well concinnate to the ear
(though never a whit to the sense, purpose, or true use of the Psalm) before
the sermon, to stir up the spirit of their worthy priest or preachers: who
being rapt and ravished with this harmony goes to his geere, inform above
said, where his mouth distilles, and his lips drop such old parables, such
premeditat and well studied and chosen sentences, as shall displease no party,
unless he be of too suspicious a nature.

Your own words Master Barrow, which I have set down, do show themselves so
ungodly and profane unto every Christian mind, yea unto every one which has
but a spark of humane ^^uility and modesty left in hun, that I need not to
say much: for albeit our Savior called the Scribes and Pharisees, which were
sworn enemies unto the Gospel, and sought by their counterfeit holiness to
seduce others, generations of vipers and serpents Herod that fox, and Saint
Paul, called the false Apostles dogs: yet is it no excuse or color, for your
profane impiety, against all degrees and sorts, both of men and women, which
are no such enemies, but love and embrace the Gospel, when you give them the
names of those vile beasts and birds: and especially when as this your most
vile reproach, reaches not alone unto all the assemblies in England, but also
unto all the holy Churches which have embraced and profess the glorious
Gospel. For all the Churches have the Psalms in meeter, which they sing in
their public assemblies, and their prescribed leiturgies, which ye make so
horrible. Moreover, y^ people in other Churches, you make to be but profane
multitudes, as in the assemblies of England, as we shall afterward see where
you charge master Calvin at Geneua, that with ignorance and rashness, and
disorderly proceedings, he at the first ^ash made no scruple to receive all
the whole state, even all the profane ignorant people, into the bosom of the
church, which you term a confuse route, etc. A pernicious example unto all
Europe: whom then have you called Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, Owls, etc? Your tongs
are your own, who is Lord over ye? Psalm. 12. Your sufferings are for Christ,
so are theirs which lie bound in bedlem. I do not doubt but that in sundry
places the Psalms in M^tremisse of the strict sense, and so no doubt do their
Psalms in any Church, but yet there is nothing in them unholy, or disagreeing
from the truth. All the knowledge which you have is wholly from the writings,
expositions, and translations of those whom you cerine Owls, Vultures, Dogs,
Foxes, etc. For take away the translations of the Bible, and what could you
haues^n: And where had you the direction unto the sight of those things which
you hold in truth, but from the writings of others: Would you make us believe
that you had found them out of your selves? In deed your unsound and crased
principles, upon which you ground are your own, and nothing else. And yet as if
you had all knowledge in the fountains of the holy Scriptures, and knew a
right sense and scope in them, which none besides your selves have attained
unto, you reprehend the Psalms as well concinnate to the ear, but nothing to
the sense, and also the preachers, as not rightly deu^^ing the word. If you had
showed some one Psalm for in example, first in laying open the native sense
(wherein yet for all your great brags, you must trust Tremellius, because some
one word wrong translated may carry the sense another way) and then how the
meeter has wholly swarued from the same, it had been somewhat. If you have any
true grammar sense of the Psalms (for that is it which we esteem as the
ground of truth) or of the rest of the Scriptures, which you have not from such
Owls and Foxes, as Master Tremellious, Beza, and other translators, we would
be glad to know it. But remember what is said of some, that they are swelling
waves of the sea, foming out their own shame: what greater shame and discredit
can there be then for men to fall into such insolency and swelling, that being
grossly ignorant, and having no knowledge but through the helps ministered by
others, yet take upon them as if they weresent from heaven, as the only men
that have see^e the true light? This is no excessive speech, seeing y^ ^^^er^^
in many things condemn all Churches and their learned reachers* ^e^ the
reader considet of the prophanenes and falsehoode of your other speeches, of
the preacher going to his geere and not offending any, and such like. I do not
know Master Barrow, what your former conversation has bee^: but by your
speeches ^ man would judge that you had spent your time* rather in the
societies of ^arding and dicing, then in the ^c^^^l^ of Christ, here therefore
I conclude that with ignorance, falsehood and profane impiety, ye accuse our
worship to be blasphemous and Idolatrous. Thus much for the first
transgression, now to the second.

The second is that the profane ungodly multitudes without exception of any
one person, are with us received into, and retained in the bosom and body of
our Church.

In your preamble Master Barrow you do but babble, and that upon your own
surmises, contrary to my plain words, and whether against your conscience
look you; for I do not allow evil ministers, nor their admitting of open
notorious sinners unto the table of the Lord. And when I said the Church of
Englang does not allow the same, I speak of the established public order by
the consent of the whole land, which is both for the godliness of the ministers,
and repelling the notorious offenders from the Sacrament.

Moreover, we do not at any hand allow your arguments, which are drawn from
the principles of Donatisine, as namely that we must separate our selves where
we see any swerve from their duty, and offend.

The reason which you brought to prove this second transgression (as you said)
at once, I reduced into form of Sylogisme thus: where all are received in by
baptism, and no power to cast forth any by excommunication, there all the
profane multitudes are without exception of any one person received into, and
retained in the bosom and body of the Church. But in the Church of England
all are received in by Baptism, and no power to cast forth any by
excommunication. Therefore in the Church of England all the profane multitudes
without the exception of any one person, are received into and retained in the
bosom and body of the Church.

Here you complain and that grieuonsly, that I did frame this argument after
mine own conceit, as I might best deal withal, and then did proceed to
confute you. The falsification which you charge me so sore withal is, that I
have put in a new minor proposition: as namely the whole body of the Church
of England, for the particular asseblies. It is a strange case to see the wit
of some man, what great (...) ^hee can contriue, if men will give credit. He
that is (...) whether it be bysome one assembly which (...) ^ower, or by the
whole body of a Church in a kingdom, is ^^e not cast forth? Did not Esra with
the Princes and Elders of Israel, publish a Proclamation, that he that should
not come up to Jerusalem within three days, should be separated from the
congregation of the multitude that came out of captivity? Esra. 10. ver. 8.
this was excommunication. Moreover, where you said, that the Parson and his
parish has not the power to cast forth any by excommunication. I did not let
this pass, but told you, that it is not meet that the Parson and his parish
should have this power to excommunicate, unless it be such a parish as has
the consistory of Pastors and Elders. I gave you the example of the Church of
Geneua, where every several flock has a Pastor: but yet these Pastors and
their flocks have not the power to excommunicate. Why do not you then, (if you
will answer) prove by the word of God, that every particular flock in a
kingdom or region, is of necessity for the being of a Church to have this
power whole and several by it self. I take it you shall never be able to
prove that it ought to be, much less shall you be able to prove them to be
no true Churches, which have not in every several congregation established the
power of excommunication. For touching excommunication, there be Churches which
are true Churches of Christ, which have it not, nor judge it needful. Master
Beza in his book against Erastus page 2. says: that he was charged by some,
to esteem them to be no Churches which wanted excommunication, or such a
Presbytery: which was unjustly laid to his charge, as he says, the perpetual
conviction of him and those Churches; did sufficiently witness. You have more
work in hand here Master Barrow, then you be wate of: For if you had proved
that the Church of England has no power to excommunicate, yet there remains
a further thing which is not so easy as you take it to be convinced, namely
that it is no true Church of Christ which has no excommunication. All Churches
are against you in this point, and the light of the truth will be as strong
against you, as it has been against the Annabaptists.

Here you make the challenge anewe, and say: If I would vouchsafe to take mine
adversaries with me into the field, and give them leave to bring and to use
their own weapons. I answer, that for all your outcries, yet there has been
no one weapon taken from ye, nor yet cut shorter. That special weapon which
you now have drawn and burnished, wherein you repose your trust, is this.

Where all the profane and ungodly are received into, and retained in the
Church as members thereof, there cannot be said the true established Church of
Christ. But in the Church of England all the profane multitudes and ungodly of
the land were received into, and are retained in their Church as members
thereof. Therefore the Church of England in this estate cannot be said the true
established Church of Christ.

You do here conclude a new question, for there may be a true Church of
Christ, and yet not in all things rightly or truly established. Again, there
be four terminie in this your Sylogisme: because this clause (all the profane
and ungodly) is taken more largely in the mayor, then it is in the minor, or
else your mayor is false also, and the scriptures which you quote falsely
applied. It is certain that God did separate his Church from the Heathen
Nations that did not call upon his name. Such were not compelled to enter. But
if you look upon the Church of Israel, the Nation of the Jews, which had the
covenant, when they fell into Idolatry and horrible impietyes, you shall see
that all the godly Kings of Judah that reformed and restored the true worship of
God, compelled all to the same. Do you read that the Idolaters or their
seed, (which still after a sort professed the God of Abraham, and had the
seal of the covenant upon them) were cast forth? You may see in the Prophet
Sophonie, that in the days of the godly King Josias, many of those Idolaters
did turn, but feynedly for fear of punishment, and secretly worshipped
Idols. The nation of England did profess Jesus Christ, and were all sealed
with the seal of the covenant, but yet overwhelmed generally in Idolatry and
many horrible sins: Our Noble Queen Elizabeth placed by God upon the Regal
throne, compels them all being her subjects, according to their vow in
Baptism to renounce Idolatry, and to embrace the holy faith and Religion of
Christ, appoynting sharp penaltyes for such as shall obstinately persist
either in Idolatry or other horrible sins. Now tell me Master Barrow, what
does she herein other then the godly kings of Judah did? She receives not in
nor compels Turks, Jews, or heathen, but only such as are Christians by
profession. And therefore you may see that if you will have your mayor
proposition agree with the Scriptures, it must needs be taken more largely
than your minor. And thus you are come forth into the field with your choice
weapon which deceiuethye utterly. But yet here to make some face of true zeal,
you reckon up a number of horrible sins. Indeed God requires that al his
servants should utterly abhor and condemn such vices and speak against them,
but he allows not any to take occasion thereby to condemn his Church. Such
vices abound, but yet there are many thousands which cannot ^e charged with any
one foul vice, whose conversation in the profession of the true faith, is and
has been with much more sobriety and modesty then yours, (Master Barrow)
unless your time past have been better spent then the present. And when God
shall open your eyes, and his terror shall be vponye, ye shall know that I have
not by the devil blasphemed ye, but showed by Gods word, that you have with
horrible presumption and intrusion into Gods judgment seat, and with most
savage cruelty sought to rend up and to tear the Lords tender plants.

In the next place comes the Baptizing the Children of profane men which
profess Christ, and remain in the Church. Here Master Barrow you are in a
wonderful displeasure, and can not satisfy your self with all the variety
of odious terms which you do even foam out. The heresy which I have uttered
about this matter is so foul (as you take it) that after many extreme words,
you say you may by the direct warrant of Gods word hold me and mine ordinary
most heinous falsefiers, and corrupters of the whole law and word of God, most
blasphemous and peruitions false Prophets. A man would think at the reading of
these words, that the whole Church were on fire, especially if I should repeat
but the one half of your speeches, but that we know Master Barrow it is but
your fashion: If it please God he may give you some spark of modesty. But
touching the matter it self, I did affirm that the children of profane men
which remayn in the Church professing Christ, whether they be close hypoerites
or openly wicked in conversation, do belong to the couenannt and are to be
baptized, so that the Church take care for their instruction and education in
the true faith. Your cauills here about verbal confession (which God alone can
judge) about parish assemblies (which are members of a Church, though every one
by it self severally has not the full power, and so to becalled a Church)
about express contrariety, error and sacrilege (in my proposition as you say)
are not worth the mention. Touching the Scriptures which I allege to prove
that the interest in the covenant does not depend upon the sincere faith or
godliness of the next parents, youcrie out of so many errors, mischines, and
blasphemies, that you doubt not (as you say) to pronounce and reject these
doctrines of this false Prophet most blasphemous and deuilish.

But now if it be true which I say and prove, against whom have you powered
forth your poison? And what bring you to disprove it; But that then all the
world is within the Church holy, all being sprung within far less then a
thousand generations of many faithful, and lineally come from the Patriarch
Noah? And that then ought the Israelites under the law to have circumcised all
their captive Cananites and heathen that came into their power. Then ought the
Church now to baptize all the seed even of the most wicked and ungodly, whether
Turks, Papists, Idolaters, etc.

You are out of the way Master Barrow, and the faster you run, the further:
for you should remember that I spoke of the seed of such profane men as
remain in the Church and profess Christ, and are sealed with the seal of the
Covenant. Will you make no difference between those which were or are without
the Church ^ncircumcised, or unbaptized, not professing the God of Abraham, or
the faith of Christ, and those which were or be in the Church, circumcised or
baptized, professing the the God of Abraham and the faith of Christ? The
Cananites and other heathen, if they forsook false Gods, and embraced the
religion of the true God, were circumcised: and so may the Turks and heathen be
baptized at this day. But while they are without and blaspheme and renounce
Christ, what has the Church to do with their children, which are not under her
government and power to bring up? The Church is to take care that al those
children may be instructed in the faith, and guided in the way of godliness,
which she admits unto baptism. For the places of Scripture, where I said
that the covenant with Abraham was made thus, I will be thy God, and the God
of thy seed, and that to a thousand generations, Exodus 20. And that because of
this S. Peter calls all the Jews in general, the children of the Prophets
and of the covenant. Act. 3. 25. and Paul, Romans 9. 4 For which respect they
are called holy, Romans 11. And the children of Idolaters among them are called
Gods children, Ezech. 16. The whole nation of the Jews, a very few men
excepted, did at sundry times very grievously sin against the Lord, and the
greater part of those never returned by true repentance, but yet remained in
the profession of the God of Abraham, and were circumcised. If the covenant had
been disanulled to their seed, how could Saint Peter say, they were the
children of the Covenant? Or how could Saint Paul say, that theirs was the
adoption and the Covenant? If none were outwardly to stand under the Covenant
but the elect, how should this have been spoken? Or if the Covenant had been
disanulled by their fathers sins? Unto this (Master Barrow) you have made
none answer at all. But you take occasion at that which I allege out of Exodus
20. to make some color or show of matter, and say that I wittingly suppress
the next words of the sentence, which are these; of them that love me and keep
my commandments, which show to whom this covenant is made and belongs, and
the condition on our part. And you require that I should ^he^ one plate through
the whole Scripture, where the Lords Covenant is made unto us without this
condition, and then you say I may peradventure clear my self, and mine
ordinary for publishing this wicked and devilish heresy, so directly
contrary to the whole Scriptures in more then a thousand places. Thus it is
your pleasure (Master Barrow) even in your deep ignorance, and that in the
grounds of Religion, to impugn the stablenes of Gods covenant made unto his
people. It is a thing indeed which any godly mind may with horror tremble at,
when with such fury you term it a devilish heresy, which is indeed that
doctrine of grace delivered in the Scriptures, whereby the glory of the Lord
is most highly magnified. It is certain that the Covenant or promise of God
does not profit any, unless they receive it, as the holy Ghost speaks,
mixed with faith. Heb. 4. 2. Then where true faith is, there is sanctification,
there is obedience according to the measure of that faith greater or less.

Hereupon it follows, that as God is become their God, so they are become his
people, and this is required on our part. But now to infer upon this, that
the stablenes of Gods covenant depends upon this condition, if we keep his
commandments, and that a man, yea a whole Church does forfeit the covenant (as
your phrase is) if they show rebellion, is most wicked. For what is more
manifest then this, that if it had been so, the covenant had been forfeited
almost unto all Israel, and that very often, for they oftentimes rebelled
against God most grievously, and brake promise on their part. The complaints of
the Prophets are many: sundry Psalms do set it forth: the book of the
Judges declares how often they rebelled and fell unto foul Idolatry, and how
often he plagued them, and humbled them by delivering them into the hands of
heathen Kings. You will say they rebelled, but repented. And in the days of
every godly Judge, and godly King were the visible Church. But in the times of
their defection when they committed Idolatry, you say they were not the
visible Church. Yea you allege testimonies of Scripture, to prove that in
their defection they were not the Lords people: as Deuteronom. 32. 19. Micha.
2. 7, 8, 9, Amos. 8. 2. Ezech. 16. Alas Master Barrow, would any man look for
such matter at their hands that had but even read over the Bible? It is
declared by Moses, that God chose them to be his people not for their own
righteousness, but of free mercy, and made his covenant with them. Likewise it
is most certain that he continued his faith toward them, not for that they
kept covenant with him, (for they often rebelled) but for his own names sake.

To say that they forfeited the Covenant by transgressing his commandments,
and recovered it again by repentance, and so to be now out now in, is (that I
may say no worse) most foolishly spoken. For they did not enter again into a
covenant which was lost because they repented, but contrariwise they repented
because they were in the covenant. That is, because he had sworn unto them to
be their God, he not only brought them down by afflictions, chastising them
as a father, but gave them the graces of repentance. This is showed Psalm. 106.
where the Prophet having set forth their manifold rebellions, and the plagues
wherewith he plagued them, he says: When they were brought down by
affliction, he looked to their distress and heard their cry. And remembered for
them his covenant: and repented for the multitude of his mercies. The Lord
says also, He foreknewe them to be an hard people: that their neck was as a
bar of iron, and their forehead of brass, and that they would deal
unfaithfully. Esaias. 48. verse. 4. 8. Yet he says, I will be long suffering for
my names sake, and for my praise, I will refrain mine anger toward thee, that
I may not cut thee off. verse. 9. It were too long to repeat all the Scriptures
where the Lord pronounces that he chose them for his own names sake, that
they dealt unfaithfully, and yet he kept them as his people, and forgave their
iniquities even for himself. You will say, that Gods covenant was to the elect
among them, but the rest were not under the covenant, nor the visible Church.
This is your grievous blindness, that you cannot see that many stand outwardly
under the covenant, and are the visible Church, which yet receive no benefit
thereby, being wicked even void of faith. And for this cause although the great
swarm of the Israelites were wicked reprobates, and (as the Prophet says) but
a remnant saved, yet for their outward profession the whole Nation was ever
said to stand under the covenant. Otherwise how could it be said, That Christ
came among his own, and his own received him not? Ioh. 1. How could these
wicked infidels be called his own, in any other respect, but that they stood
outwardly under the covenant, and were the visible Church? And therefore when
the body of that people should stand no longer under the covenant, to be the
visible Church, but (as our Savior says) the kingdom of God should be taken
from them. Math. 21. The Lord (to show that he had still kept his covenant with
them, even until that time in which they now break off themselves, and that
he had given their mother no bill of divorce) asks, where the bill of
divorce of their mother is, by which he had put her away? Esaias. 50. verse. 1.
The ten Tribes which fell from the house of David, and worshipped Idols, were
yet in some sort even the whole body of them under the Covenant, and were so
far the visible Church: for otherwise how should the Lord be called their
God? For when Benhadab made war against Achab, and took the foil, and his
servants counseled him to enterprise the war again, and to fight with them
in the valleys, saying: That the God of Israel was the God of the mountains,
the Lord took it against himself, and gave them the overthrow the second
time. 1. King. 20. Achazias K. of Israel being sick upon a fall he had taken,
sent his messengers to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron. Elias the Prophet
is sent to meet them, and to say, Is it not because there is no God in Israel,
that you go to enquire of Baalzebub, the God of Ekron? 2. King. 1.

Now, for the places which you allege that they became not his people, you do
but pervert them. For the song Deuteron. 32. verse. 5. If you will understand it
so as you here apply it, how should they after be called his people and his
servants in the same song? verse. 36. The brevity and the placing of the words
in that sentence do make it dark. This is the sense, That the perverse
generation corrupt themselves by their own vice, which is not of his children.
For the holiness of Gods children is from him; but when they transgress and
corrupt themselves, it is from their own vice. And he calls all the whole
people his sons and daughters, not in respect of some former estate, (as you
vainly imagine; seeing that very few of them were his sons and daughters
indeed in their best estate) but in respect that they stood outwardly under
his covenant, and professed his name. And that the Lord says, Yesterday which
was my people, is risen as an enemy. Mich. 2. verse. 8. is not to show that
they were now quite removed and cast off by the Lord from being under his
covenant, though the multitude were the Church but in name; but their
hostility among themselves, both in Judah and Israel. The end which God said
was come to his people Amos. 8. is meant of their subversion and captivity.
Will you say that they were never after nor no longer Gods people? If you dare
not say this, why do you allege that place? You would have me show some
place in the Scriptures where God makes his couenaut without this condition,
that they shall be his people and obey him.

That is not the question Master Barrow, but this, whether, when men break
covenant and promise with God by disobeying him, whose covenant yet they
challenge, his covenant be broken and abrogated toward them? And for this I
showed you the plain Scripture, Psalm. 89. where the Lord says: If they
should for sake his law, he would visit their offenses or defections with the
rod* but he will not disanull his mercy toward them, nor falsify his faith.
That he will not profane his covenant, nor alter the thing which is gone out
of his lips. Master Barrow, what can be more express then this, to show the
stablenes of Gods souenant depends not upon our obedience, or upon that
condition which you speak of, and say the covenant stands no longer then
they stand obedient? Why did you not answer this place, but require still to
have that showed which is plainly showed you before? Solomon on his part brake
covenant with God, will you say he did forfeyte the covenant? I conclude
therefore with the saying of Saint Paul, where he speaks of the Jews what
preferment they had above other. What if some of them were unfaithful, shall
their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? God for bid. Yea let God
be true, and every man a liar. Romans 4. Cease therefore Master Barrow to hang
the stablenes of Gods covenant upon the obedience of man, and do not so
peruersly reason against the truth in affirming that the covenant of God was
disanulled toward the Jews, not to stand as the visible Church, before such
time as they had rejected Christ.

The next thing is that I say either we are within the covenant from our
Aucestors, and have the seal thereof, even Baptism, or else your selves are
without Baptism, and so must either with the Catabaptists rebaptize, or else
hold the covenant without a seal. Neither of these you will do, and yet
stand in it that we have no true Church nor true Sacraments. This therefore is
your answer.

The Israelites in their Schism, and the Jews in their Apostasy, still had
and used Circumcision. This Circumcision was no true Sacrament unto them,
neither sealed the Lords covenant unto them in that estate. Yet was this
circumcision true Circumcision, concerning the outward cutting; and was upon
their repentance and return, neither defaced nor reiterate, but they were
restored to the Temple, and received to the pasouer. In like manner in this
general Apostasy and defection from the Gospel, the Baptism continued in
these Apostaticall and false Churches, cannot in this estate thus administered,
be said a true Sacrament or seal of Gods covenant unto them. Yet concerning
the outward washing, it is true Baptism, the outward action need not, and
ought not to be again repeated, after the abuse thereof in the false Church
is purged away by true repentance.

Thus far be your words Master Barrow. Alas poor creatures, how much is
your siely blindness to be pitied, that can set down things so directly
contrary at the same instant, and yet espieit not? for you say that
Circumcision in their Apostasy was no true Sacrament unto them, neither sealed
the Lords covenant unto them in that estate. And yet (you say) it was true
Circumcision concerning the outward cutting. Likewise you say that Baptism in
the popery cannot be said a true Sacrament or seal of Gods covenant unto
them. And yet concerning the outward washing ye confess it true Baptism. Is
not this all one, as if a man should say, it is the true sacrament and seal of
Gods covenant; it is no true Sacrament nor seal of Gods covenant? I pray you
M. Barrow, is not the outward washing the whole Baptism, and the whole seal
of Gods covenant? Was not the outward cutting the whole circumcision, and the
whole seal of Gods covenant? And if the outward washing be the whole
Sacrament, and the whole seal of Gods covenant, as indeed with the word it
is: (for the inward grace is no part of the Sacrament, but we may say that this
inward grace is the thing represented and sealed by the Sacrament) Then when
you say, concerning the outward washing it is true Baptism: do you not
affirm the whole Sacrament and so the whole seal of Gods covenant to be true?
But you say, it is no true seal unto them in their Apostasy, or it does not
seal Gods Covenant unto them in that estate, but when the abuse thereof is
purged away by true repentance. What absurd speeches be these* can a man
deuife more gross folly? the outward true Sacrament, is the true seal of Gods
covenant, even unto those which be hypocrites, and utterly void of faith,
which have it. For if we shall say it is no true Sacrament, or no seal of Gods
covenant, or that it does not seal Gods covenant, but unto those which have
the inward grace, the efficacy and fruit thereof: then was it sometimes no
true Sacrament which the Apostles themselves did administer, because there were
some unto whom they did administer both the holy Baptism and the Lords
Supper, which had not the inward grace. And if the Sacraments be not the true
seals of Gods Covenant, even unto those which have no fruit thereby; how
should the receivers which are utterly unworthy, be guilty of the body and
blood of our Lord? Also when a man does receive Baptism which is always the
seal of Gods covenant, and is void of faith, and receives it at their hands
which do mix it with sundry additions and corruptions, and after comes unto
true faith, he himself is purged by his faith, and has the use of that seal
which he had before, but without fruit, we cannot say as you do, but with
most wicked and foul absurdity, that the Sacrament it self was a false
Sacrament, and now through says is purged and became a true Sacrament. That
which is the Lords does stand in it self pure and vnde^iled, even when
corruptions be added. The Wheat in it self is as pure lying among the Chafe,
as when it is purged from the Chafe. The gold and silver in themselves be as
pure when the rust is upon them, as when it is scowred off. If a thing in the
mixture of corruptions have not a true being, ye cannot by purging bring it to
have a true being. And when you say that concerning the outward washing it is
true Baptism ministered in popery, which is as much as I have showed, as to say
it is a true sacrament concerning the whole (because the outward washing is the
whole, and therefore all that John the Baptist takes to himself is this, I
baptize ye with water). Do you not acknowledge a ministry in popery? Will you
say it is concerning the outward washing true Baptism, by whomesoeuer it be
done? Nay, you say where there is no true ministry there is no true Sacrament.
Then where there is no part of a true ministry, there is no part of a true
Sacrament.

In your other book Master Barrow, which you term a brief discovery of the
false Church, from the 102. page, unto 121. you make a large discourse about
this point, taking upon you to be a stickeler, between Master Doctor Some,
and the Scholar of Oxenford, writing against him in defense of Master Penrie.
There you lay about you with your woodknife upon both parties. Master Doctor
Some holding the Baptism administered in the popery to be true Baptism,
alleging that Master Calvin held so, as in deed all the Churches, and all
the most excellent and worthy lights, which God has raised up in these last
times do hold the same with sound reasons from the Scripture, you scoffingly
term him a great Clarke, and say, that in certain marginal notes added to
his book, this inconvenience was moved unto his further consideration, how he
would avoid the blow of flat Schism? Also you say he was friendly advised to
spare this deep divinity, derived from Master Calvin and others of this
time, leaft h^e should open such a gappe to the Papists, as neither the Church
of England nor Geneua, nor any other that hold this opinion shall ever be able
to shut, for if it be true Baptism delivered in the Church of Rome, then will
it follow that the Popish priests be true ministers. And then may the seal of
the covenant be given to open Idolaters, then does Gods covenant of peace
belong to the babilonish harlot, then has Christ many bodies, or else cannot
three so diverse Churches, as the Church of Rome, the Church of England, the
Church of Geneua, all or any two of them (I will not say any one) be true
Churches. The^ he may be an husband where his wives rule. Infinite other
absurdities would then prove lawful. And let me add yet this unto the rest: if
the Baptism of the Church of Rome be a true Sacrament, then have they one true
Sacrament, and another false. Thus you wound the one party, that is Master
Doctor Some. Then touching the Scholar of Oxenford, he is blamed for that he
alleges for his patron Master Doctor Fulke, to prove that the Baptism
administered in popery, is no true Baptism. And he is set to counteruaile
Master Calvin, as his equal in all learning. Grievous absurdities you show in
deed, which must needs follow from the opinion of the foresaid Scholar.
Touching the comparison between Master Fulke and Master Calvin, for my part I
am not so learned, as that I can bring a full measure to measure them justly
withal. I know not what might slip from Doctor Fulke, in any part of his
writings, upon some occasion which may seem as though he favored that opinion:
but this I know, that sundry times craving his judgment in that matter, he
held it to be true Baptism which has been administered in the popery. And what
a thing is this Master Barrow, that when you have a long time taken on, you
yield the whole matter unto Master Doctor Some. For what has he said more,
then that it was and is true Baptism touching the outward washing? Does he
ever say that all which had the true s^ale, had also the inward grace? And for
warding the blow of flat schism: it is a very weak blow. The Romish
Antichrist usurped an unjust power and tyranny, and brought in many most
wicked abominations, cannot the Churches cast him forth, with his inuentious,
but they commit Schism? Can any thing be more frivolous? Are all several
kingdoms tied unto Rome, or shall we be tied to join where there be some
remnants of a Church, with Idolatry? And concerning the rest, your self do in
effect now confess, that some part of Christ's ministry remains in the
popery, when you say that their Baptism concerning the outward washing, is
true Baptism. And moreover what should be, we dispute not, but this proves
that the true seal of Gods covenant is given to open Idolaters. For the seal
is the same in it self, but the Idolater has not the fruit of it, until he
come to true faith. And so your next absurdities fall off themselves, seeing
the having of the true seal (that is the outward washing in Baptism) does
not make the papists true Christians, nor prove that Gods covenant of peace and
love, does belong to the Romish harlot: so many among them as come to true
faith, receive that use of the seal. All this I say does follow upon your
own confession, who build with the one hand, and break down with the other.
But it passes all the rest, that then Christ must needs have diverse several
bodies, or else he cannot stand an head to three so diverse Churches, as the
Church of Rome, the Church of England, and the Church of Geneua. Why Master
Barrow, you will not deny but that to the elect in the Church of Rome Christ is
the head. And this is further to be noted, that when we speak of a visible
Church, we speak not of men alone, but of Gods ordinances. And so touching the
holy Sacrament of Baptism in the Church of Rome, and so much of the truth as
remains, Christ is the Author of them, and so stands the head of his own,
he is not the head of the Apostasy, or to the wicked inventions. So then in
all Churches Christ is the Author and head of that which is his ordinance, and
of those which belong unto him. What blasphemies are then hereby allowed? And
if the Papists have quite ouerthown the one Sacrament, by turning it from a
Sacrament, into a Sacrifice propitiatory, what reason is it therefore to say
Baptism is overthrown? We must yet a little further deal about the Church of
Rome, because you make all our people to be but as heathen without the
covenant, and not rightly entered to become a visible Church: but all received
in at the sound of her Majesty's trumpet. I say our people stood under the
covenant before, as a part of the visible Church; and that our sovereign
Queen did not compel those which before were not under the covenant, to
become the church, but by her regal power given unto her of God, banished the
usurped power of Antichrist, abolished Idolatry, and compelled her people,
having received the seal of the covenant and professing Christ, to receive
also the true doctrine. This was not to begin a Church, but to reform a
Church: hereupon it falls out in question, whether the Church of Rome were
the visible Church of Christ in time of Idolatry. It is usually said, that the
Church is in the papacy, but the papacy is not the Church: I said we may rather
say (to speak more plainly) the papacy was in the Church, because Antichrist
who brought in all the papacy, erected his throne in the Church. You begin with
this Master Barrow, and say that I hold it not enough to affirm with the
learned deuines, that the invisible Church of God is in the papacy, as in all
other places of the world, because God has his elect there, and in all other
places: but to be singular, I have inuerted the proposition, and say that the
papacy is in the Church. O Master Barrow, it is your bold ignorance as in all
other matters? Who be those learned divines, that when they say the Church is
in the papacy, but the papacy is not the Church, do mean no more but that
there be Gods Elect, as in other places of the world? If you have any modesty,
bring forth some one learned divine which is of that judgment. I did like
rather to say the papacy is in the Church, then to say the Church is in the
papacy, because I see diverse do mistake it, as though it were only meant,
that in the papacy there are Gods Elect and no further, that is no outward
visible Church in any respect. I do not differ any jot in the speech from the
sense which Master Calvin and others do give: for when I say the papacy is in
the church, but the papacy is not the church: by the papacy we must needs
understand that usurped tyranny of the Pope and his Clergy, with all their
abominable inventions. By the Church we may not understand only Gods Elect, but
also so much of Gods ordinances as remain, not only in the points of doctrine,
and public profession of the name of Christ, but also in the holy Baptism,
the seal of the covenant which all have, and may so far be called the
visible Church. That the papacy should invade the visible Church, remain in
it, and not utterly or quite destroy it, I did allege that Saint Paul says,
Antichrist should sit in Gods Temple.

Now let us see whether this be not the meaning of the most learned divines,
when they say the Church is in the papacy. Master Calvin handles this point
in the fourth book of his Institutions, Chap. 2. section 11. 12. Which book
though it be in our language, yet is it little read and studied of our people,
as the weakness and readiness of many to be seduced by heretics and
Schismatics does evidently declare. I will set down his words for such as
have not the book. But yet as of old time (says Master Calvin) among the
Jews there remained certain peculiar prerogatives of the Church, so do we
not at this day take from the papists, those steps of the Church which God
would have to remain among them notwithstanding the dissipation. God had once
made his covenant with those Jews, that same covenant did continue vpholden by
the stablenes of it self, as it were wrestling against their impiety, rather
then kept of them. Such therefore is the certainty and constancy of Gods
goodness, that there remained the covenant of the Lord, neither could his faith
given, be made void by their unfaithfulness, neither could circumcision be so
profaned by their impure hands, but that it was still the true sign and
Sacrament of his covenant. Whereupon the Lord called the Children which were
borne unto them, his sons, Ezech. 16. which nothing at all perteined unto
him, but by a special blessing. So when he has left his covenant in France,
Italy, Germany, Spain, England: since these Provinces have been oppressed
with the tyranny of Antichrist, yet that his Covenant might remain
inviolable, he first there preserved Baptism, the testimony of his covenant,
which being consecrate with his own mouth, retains her own force,
notwithstanding the ungodliness of man: then furthermore he has by his
providence brought to pass, that there should other remnants also remain,
least the Church should utterly perish. And as oftentimes buildings are so
pulled down, that the foundations and ruins remain, so he has not suffered
his Church to be subverted by Antichrist, even from the foundation, or to be
laid even with the ground (howsoever to punish men's ingratitude, which had
despised his word, he has suffered horrible shaking and dissipation to chance)
but even after the laying wast, he would have the building remain, half
pulled down. Whereas therefore we will not simply grant to the Papists the
title of the Church, we do not therefore deny that there be Churches among
them: but only we contend about the true and lawful ordering of the Church,
which is required both in the Communion of the holy things, which are the
signs of the profession, and also of doctrine most chiefelie. Daniel and Paul
foretold that Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God: among us we account
the Bishop of Rome the Captain and standerd bearer of that wicked and
abominable Kingdom. That his seat is placed in the Temple of God, thereby is
meant that his Kingdom shall be such, as may abolish neither the name of
Christ nor of the Church. Hereby therefore it is manifest, that we deny not
but that there remain Churches also under his tyranny: but yet such as he
has profaned with sacrilegious impiety: such as he has afflicted with
outrageous dominion: such as he has corrupted and almost killed with evil and
deadly doctrines, as it were with poisoned drinks: in which Christ lies half
buried, the Gospel overwhelmed, godliness expelled, the worship of God almost
abolished: furthermore in which all things are so confused and out of order,
that there appears the face of Babylon, rather then of the holy city of God.
Briefly, I say they be Churches, in as much as the Lord does there
marvelously preserve the remnants of his people, howsoever miserably
dispersed and scatred: and in as much as there remain some badges or seals of
the Church, and these especially, whose efficacy neither the craft of the
devil, nor the wickedness of men can destroy: but on the other side, because
those notes or marks are blotted out, which we ought chiefly to respect in
this controversy, I say that every one of their assemblies, and the whole
body wants the lawful form of a Church,

Thus far be Master Caluines words: tell me now Master Barrow, is Master
Calvin to be accounted among the learned Divines? Does he say the Church is
in the papacy, that is no more but that the Elect are among them, as in other
places of the World? Look also what I have said touching this whole matter
which he does not here say, yea even from that which is in Ezechiel 16. Where
you ask, who but this perverse fellow (speaking of me) could thus stumble and
cavil at those words, my sons and my daughters, etc? But if it be not
plain enough which Master Calvin says in this which I have recited, to prove
that you would bear the simple in hand, that the learned Divines are of
another mind, and yet understand not their mind: I will add a little more
out of the same Author. In his Epistle 404. thus he writes, Quod ecclesiae
reliquias manner in papatu dico, no^ restringo ad electos qui illic dispersi
sunt: sed ruinas dissipatae ecclesiae illic extare intelligo. Ac ne mihilongis
rationibus disputandum sit, nos pauli autoritate contentos esse decet, qui
Antichristum in temple deisessurum pronuntiat, quamquam and hoc rationibus
satis validis me probasse puto, ecelesiam, licet semiruptam, imo silubet,
diruptam, ac deformem, aliquam tamen manner in papatu. In that I say the
remnants of the Church remain in the papacy, I do not restrain it to the
Elect which are dispersed there: but I mean that the ruins of a dispersed
Church are extant among them. And that I may not dispute the matter with
reasons at large, it becomes us to be content and satisfied with the
authority of Paul, which pronounces that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple
of God. Albeit I suppose I have proved this with reasons strong enough, that
there remains nevertheless some Church in the papacy, although half broken
down, or if you will, broken down, and deformed. Also Master Beza, Epistle
81. page 356. For the remnants of the Church in the papacy is of the same
mind, affirming that there remain not only Gods Elect, but also the
Sacrament of Baptism, and sundry points of sound doctrine.

Now let us see what horrible blasphemies you say will follow of this that I
say, Antichrist should sit in the Church, and yet the same remain still the
visible Church, so far forth as Master Caluines words and Master Bezaes do
import. For when you will needs have it that God has given me up into a
reprobate sense, the matter touches not me so much, as Master Calvin and Beza
and many other most worthy men which so expound it. Nay, if God open your eyes
you shall see whether you do not like Rabsaka reproach the Lord God who has
uttered it by his Apostle. The first is this: If Antichrist may be said to sit,
reign and remain in the Church of God, then Christ is not made heir and Lord
of all, and set as King upon Mount Sion. A worthy collection is it not?
because God in righteous judgment for the punishment of those that received
not the love of the truth, gives power unto: Satan and Antichrist to seduce
the multitude in the visible Church, Christ is not heir of all things, nor
reigns as K. upon Mount Sion. Will you say, if the devil have a kingdom in
the world, Christ is not Lord of the whole world? Mount Sion may be used for
the visible Church, but most properly for the invisible which is the Communion
of Saints, of which are none but the elect. Satan and Antichrist are not able
to pluck one of these out of his hand, he reigns over them and in them.
Moreover, he reigns over the whole visible Church and over the whole world
(for he is ascended, and fills all things) so that Satan, Antichrist and all
Tyrants, can proceed no further then his will.

The next is: If Antichrist sit in the Church, then Christ is either cast out
of his house made subject unto Antichrist, or else deuideth with him. Christ is
not cast out of his house nor made subject, (these be most frivolous and
fantastical imaginations) but in his most high and sovereign power he uses
Antichrist and Satan as the instruments of his wrath, not utterly to raze and
destroy his Temple, but miserably to afflict the chosen, and so seduce the
reprobate, even all wicked hypocrites which are in the visible Church. I know
not what you will understand by dividing, but the devil may in some sense be
said to divide with God, in that he receives one part unto damnation.

The third is: If Antichrist sit in the church, then the church of Christ may
remain subject unto and be governed by Antichrist. Here we must distinguish.
First, the visible Church consiseth of men, and of Gods ordinances. The men are
of two sorts, the elect and the reprobate. He exercises a savage tyranny, and
oppresses the elect whom yet he cannot bring into his subjection, to make
them hang their faith upon him, or his laws. For God did miraculously preserve
a remnant in the popery, which were not utterly poisoned. He corrupts the
laws and ordinances of Christ, but yet had not power given him to destroy all.
His full dominion is over the reprobate, which receive his mark and worship
him.

The fourth is: If Antichrist sit in the Church, then the Church is subject
unto two heads, and Christ then is not the only head. This is fully answered
in the former: for his tyranny and usurpation does not make him head, but
unto those whose head Christ is not, more then by hypocritical profession of
his name.

The fifth is: If Antichrist in the Church, then Antichrists ministers and
marked servants may be brought into and set over the Church of God, and then is
not Christ's ministry which he has ordained in his Gospel and his Church,
permanent unto the worlds end, but variable at the will of man, and then may
the Church of God cast out Christ's ministry, and receive Antichrists.

This is also most frivolous: for as Antichrist did almost destroy all, but yet
not all, in other things, so in the ministry: for the ministry of Christ was
not utterly destroyed. Again, the Church if you understand Gods true people,
did not this: but Antichrist did it.

The sixth is: That if Antichrists laws may be brought and set up, and remain
in the Church, then Christ is not the only Prophet and law giver, and then may
the Church be built upon another foundation then upon Gods word. Christ is the
only true Prophet, whose laws only are wholesome. Antichrist has usurped a
power to make laws and to set them up in the Church. The elect, though some of
them for a time have gone a stray and followed Antichrist, until it pleased
GOD to open their eyes: and many of them holding Christ have been infected and
stained with sundry errors of Antichrist, yet their salvation being only
through faith, it cannot be said that they were built upon any other foundation
then that which the Prophets and Apostles have laid. The reprobate which have
worshipped the beast, though in respect that having been borne under the
Christian profession, and had the true seal of the Covenant, and professed the
name of Christ, they might be the visible Church, or of the visible Church,
yet they were not built upon Christ unto salvation, but upon the laws of
Antichrist unto destruction.

The seventh is, That if all Antichrists abominations, heresies and Idolatries
may be brought into and remain in the Church of God, then no blasphemy,
heresy, Apostasy, or any thing that man can commit or devise, can break the
covenant. If the faith of God might be made of none effect by the unfaithfulness
of men, it were a woeful case. The covenant of God is founded upon free grace.
The Lord would not (even because of his Covenant) suffer the devil and
Antichrist utterly to deface his Temple: but preserved the holy seed,
preserved some of his ordinances, yea so far, that in some sort the Covenant
was not disanulled to the very reprobate, but that outwardly they stood under
it in their Apostasy: and it might be said of them (though indeed they were
no true Children) as Saint Paul says of the rebellious Jews, theirs is the
Covenant and the Adoption.

The eight is, That if those that worship the beast and his Image may be said
to be in the Church, and their seed outwardly within the Covenant, then the
most abominable and execrable in this estate may be said members of Christ,
washed and purged with his blood, sainctified and led by his spirit in
assurance of salvation, for none can be said to be within the Church but the
members of the Church. And whosoever we may affirm to be within the Church,
those (so long as they continue in that estate) we are also to judge assuredly
saved, for any thing to us revealed or known to the contrary. These ^re things
easily spoken by such as are bold to utter whatsoever they imagine. The
Prophets complained that the great multitude both of Judah, and the ten Tribes
were rebels, and that the Lord had but a remnant among them: show when that
multitude of open wicked ones, and their seed were cast out from being the
visible Church, and then show when they were received in again. For both these
you must do, because the whole nation when Christ came were the children of the
Covenant, and it is said that Christ came among his own, and his own received
him not. You must prove that the Scribes and Pharisees, the high Priests and
all the Capital enemies of our Savior Christ were deemed undoubtedly saved
even when they showed their enmity against him. For they were then in the
Church. They could not sit in Moses chair and not be in the Church. The
Uineyard was not taken from those wicked husbandmen which had slain the
servants, until they had slain the son and heir himself. These things are
so manifest by the Scriptures Master Barrow, that if it shall not please God to
open your eyes to see your palpable gross ignorauce, and bold presumption,
yet others may see and tremble least God give them over also, for the pride of
their hearts.

Whereas I said that the Apostasy is in the Church but not the Church: you
think it strange repugnancie. Yet indeed there is none, as may appear by that
which I have set down before, and should appear unto you, if your mind were
not so deeply infected with the principles of Donatisme. You run still upon
this Rock, that because none ought to be in the Church, but such as appear
godly, therefore no open Idolaters can be said to be in the visible Church, to
stand outwardly, and their seed in any respect, under the covenant. I have
plainly proved the contrary. What ought to be, is one thing: and what has
been or what is, is another. To your other question I answer, that it is no
Schism to depart from the Church of Rome, although in some respects they were
the visible Church. This matter Master Barrow, has been as thoroughly pursued
by the Papists as ever you or any Donatist shall be able, and such answer they
have received from the Churches that have made separation from them, as that
they have no cause to glory. The ten Tribes remained still in some sort the
visible Church, and under the Covenant, as I have proved before, but yet they
were not such a true Church as men might join withal in their worship: and
therefore when Jeroboam had set up the golden Calves, the Levites departed from
them and went to Jerusalem, 2. Chron, 11. 23. 14. Then you come to expound how
this may be taken that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God. And first as
you take it his sitting in the Temple of God, may be understood as in regard
that he took his original before he was revealed. Let any simple man look
upon the words of Saint Paul, and see whether he speak of any such close
sitting. Then that he should sit where sometimes the true Churches have been,
which he should so destroy and waste, as there should be no shape or steps of
any of them left upon the earth: as it was foretold, Matthew. 24, 29. Revel. 6.
14. See what two places Master Barrow has found to prove Antichrist should
utterly destroy the visible Church. These be the words: And immediately after
the oppression of those days the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall
not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of
heaven shall be shaken. This is* spoken of Christ's coming to judgment, and is
meant indeed of the Sun, the Moon and stars themselves: and therefore most
foolishly concluded, that Antichrist shall utterly destroy the visible Church.
And for the place in the Revelation, The heaven departed away as a book that
is roled up, you may even as well conclude, that the whole Church in the world
utterly failed, as to say therefore Antichrist utterly defaced the visible
Church. And if you will have the matter tried by so dark a place, your light
had need to be great. But your pretiest reasons of all are yet behind.
Antichrist shall be lifted up above all that is called God, this can not be
done by any Minister in the Church, seeing every soul must be subject. They
say it will weary an old body to follow a Child up and down all day that can
new go. I am sure it will weary any man to follow you Master Barrow in all
your trifles. God commands every soul shall submit it self unto the higher
powers: does it here upon follow that if a king vsurp that which belongs to
God, they must therein ^^ay him so long as he remains their king? Also when
it is said, that he is God, you say what blasphemy will not ensue, if this
should be literally taken? It may as well be enforced (say you) by this place,
that Antichrist is God, as that the place where he reigns is the Temple of
God. You will not have this place expounded literally, and then what shall we
make of it, or how shall we find Antichrist: May he not be the Turk or some
other: If the Papists could prove y^ which you speak, but with some little
show, how much would they glory? For grant the^ a mystical sense of these
words, and they will carry it whither they list. To exalt himself above all
that is called God, is literally spoken, and literally fulfilled, when the Pope
exalts himself above all Kings and Emperors which are called Gods. So that
he shall sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. What
blasphemy is it which will ensue if these words be all construed literally
after the Grammatical sense? The words do not import that he shall be God
indeed, but that he shall take that to himself which belongs to the most
high God. The thing which deceives you Master Barrow, is in the word, showing,
for every thing that a show is made of, is not so in truth. There is a true
show and there is a false show, when one does arrogate that to himself, and
b^ast of it, which belongs not unto him. As Antichrist usurping not only an
earthly dignity, but even the high power and authority of God, is therefore
said to show himself to be God.

And now whereas I stand upon this, that the Church of England was a true Church
of God before popery, and that in popery it stood a member or part of the
universal visible Church (fo far as the remnants of Christ's Church remained
not utterly defaced by Antichrist) and that the casting out of Antichrist and
his laws, and usurped power is not the beginning, but the restoring and
repayring, or recovering a Church from miserable desolation. And as Josias and
other godly kings of Judah by terror of punishment drove Idolaters which
outwardly stood under the Covenant being cyrcumcised, from false worship unto
the laws of God: so Queen Elizabeth has done with her subjects being
baptized, and thereby bound to renounce false worship, and to embrace the holy
doctrine of the Covenant.

Here you say that to make my conclusion follow, I must prove, and make evident
demonstration by Scripture that the Church of England was rightly gathered
unto, and established in that holy faith and order which Christ has left unto
his Church in universal and particular, according to the rules and examples in
his Testament. Next, that they fell not away from this holy faith in the time
of popery, and that now they continue and faithfully walk in the same faith
and order. If I had done this, you say I had powerfully convinced and stopped
the mouths of all Schismatikes for ever. I see you can make your match wisely
Master Barrow. I must make evident demonstration by the Scriptures: of what? of
that which was not mentioned by the Scriptures. For there is no particular
mention of planting the faith of Christ in England. If we show it out of
ancient records, then do I not sa^ilfie your desire at all. Again it must be
showed by the Scriptures, that the Church of England received orderly the faith
and order of Christ, not only in general, but in every particular. This is a
surer knot than the former. And me thinks you should be a little more kind,
for the honor of your country: not that any honor is to be rendered against
truth, but whereas you confess that a true Church may err in diverse things,
so that it be not convinced and sin obstinately. If the planters of the faith
and discipline of Christ in England did err it some things (which yet you know
not) how can you tell but that they did it in simplicity? we see that in
ancient times, and of late days GOD has had many Children in England which
have been begotten and nourished up in the land, and have acknowledged her
their mother. And we are sure hereupon that God has put his covenant of mercy
in England, and planted a true Church: And therefore if you deal rightly, you
must prove against us. I have showed that popery did not utterly destroy the
visible Church. And there be at this day multitudes that so walk in the holy
faith, that no man is able to accuse them. And therefore if either all, or the
most part of Schismatikes were not obstinate cauillers, their mouths might be
stopped for ever. Thus much might fuffice against that you affirm our people
never had any entrance to be under the covenant, and so to stand the visible
Church, but to be as heaps of profane heathen: but that your matter reaches
further then against the assemblies in England, condemning other Churches which
profess the holy Gospel. And least some may think that in this point I charge
ye but by some hard collection in so horrible presumption, as to condemn all
Christian Churches, I will recite the words which you have set down in your
other book, page 33. where after long discourse against the reasons which
Master Calvin uses both out of the old and new Testament, to prove that
neither the worship it self, nor the faithful are defiled by the company of
the open wicked, you speak thus.

This and such like detestable stuff, has Master Calvin in his ignorance,
partly to confute that damnable sect of Annabaptists, which fantastically
dream unto themselves a Church without spot in this life, and for every
transgression that arises are ready to leave and forsake the fellowship of the
Church, without due and orderly reproof. Partly also is this stuff brought to
defend his own rash and disorderly proceedings at Geneua, whilst he at the
first dash made no scruple to receive all the whole state, even all the
profane ignorant people into the bosom of the Church, to administer the
Sacraments unto them: which confuse route could not fit with Christ's heavenly
government, neither could it by any means agree unto them in this estate. But
that monstrous disorders and heinous enormityes daily ensued thereof, whereby
this their Church became a just reproach unto all men, even to those wicked
Heretics, yea that which is worse, and more to be lamented, it became a
miserable president, and pernicious example even unto all Europe, to fall into
the like transgression: as the confused estate of all those regions (where the
Gospel is thus disorderly taught) declares.

Let the Reader here consider (Master Barrow) what a worthy Champion you ^re
become for the Papists, for Heretics and Schismatics, against all the
Churches which profess the Gospel, and against all their teachers. What was
Master Calvin to be regarded, if he were so ignorant, so rash, and so
disorderly in his doings? How miserable was his case, that he must be so
pernicious an example to the ruin of many? What is or what has the Church of
Geneua been, and together with the assemblies of England, all Churches in
Europe, but heaps of profane multitudes, no better then heathen or dogs, if
your words be true? True Christ they have none, for they fit not his
government, nor his government them (as you say). But Master Barrow, as the
Churches and their ministers have been able and have justly defended themselves
(though not from all faults, because there is no Church so pure) against the
wisest and learned reuiling Rabsakaes, the Heretics and Schisinaticks: so
must you think that they shall be able to withstand two or three which are so
ignorant in some grounds of religion, as that their books are a bundle, or
rather a dunghill of absurdities. Whom shall you ever persuade that has any
true light, that your knowledge so far passes the learned of all Churches?
Were it not honor enough for ye to triumph over the ministers of the Church of
England, whom so often in disdain you term learned Priests, but ye must be
general conquetors, like Alexander the great? Feign you would seem to be
far from the Annabaptists, but how near you are unto them, even in their
tents, all that have skill do see. Well then to conclude this point, he that
will find a true Church with which he may join himself, he must not seek it
in the public assemblies either in England, Scotland, Geneua, or any region of
Europe, (for by your judgment they be all profane heaps) but he must seek
the fellowship, and join with the Donatists of England.

Now to the second part of the assumption, where you say, that the Church of
England has power to cast forth none by excommunication. I am of the mind
that Christ has given such a power to his Church, and also do take it that
the Church of England is not boyd thereof. But you condemn all excommunication
which is not executed by an Eldership, and the people of every particular
assembly. If excommunication be only to be so executed; then how could Esra
with the Elders and Princes of Israel publish an excommunication general
against every one that should not within three days come up to Jerusalem?
Esra. 10. verse. 8. And where do you prove that excommunication is to be
executed upon any, but for contumacie and contempt of the Church? Do you hold
that a man which does repent him for his adultery, these, heresy, or such
like, and is cast down in sorrow, is yet to be delivered up to Satan? If not,
why do you upbraid, that there is none cast forth among us, but for
contumacie?

In the next place you take upon you to confute and cut down four false
expositions, as you say, of Math. 18. verse. 17. Tell the Church. The first sort
take the word Church, for the Pope: the second for the Archbishops and Bishops,
which exercise this power for the whole Church: the third for the company of
the Elders apart from the people, which they call the Consistory: the fourth
are they which would have the people excommunicate without the Elders.

The two first sorts (that is the Pope and the Bishops) do depend (you say)
upon one line, and build their pre-eminence upon the promise made to the
Apostle Peter, Math. 16. verse. 18. 19. where the keys of the kindome of heaven
are given him. And upon the Apostle Paul his example, who delivered Hymeneus
and Alexander unto Satan, Timoth. 5. 10. You are so learned and skillful
(Master Barrow) yea so trusty and true, that we must hold them for Oracles
that do proceed out of your mouth, although indeed they be never so false, as
shall appear. Touching the place in Mat. 16. for the keys given unto Peter,
it is agreed upon by all parts yt there is a power given to be exercised in the
Church. The disagreement is chiefly about this, to whom it is given. The Pope
with his adherents says, it was given only unto Peter and his successors. He
says further, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, that there is his chair, and
that this power is annexed to that chair, and so the Pope alone is to have it,
and from him all other are to participate which shall exercise any part of it
in the Church. The Bishops of the church of England, and they that maintain
the government by presbyteries do both alike condemn that challenge of the
Pope, as an usurpation. Both parts affirming, that although our Savior do
speak only to Peter, saying; to thee I give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven: yet he gives him nothing but that which he gave unto the other
Apostles. This they prove by Ioh. 20. where he breathed upon them, and said
jointly to them all; As the father sent me, so I send you, and whose sins ye
shall forgive they are forgiven, etc. With what face can you say then (Master
Barrow) that the Bishops and the Pope depend upon one line, and build their
pre-eminence upon that promise made unto Peter? You might truelier have said,
that the Bishops and presbyteries depend upon one line for their pre-eminence,
not only for that they expound those places, Math. 16. and Ioh. 20. alike, but
also that the Bishops challenge none other power then the presbyteries do. For
the controversy between the Bishops and the presbyteries, is whether of them
by Gods word, and for the benefit of the Church are to exercise that power
which Christ has left unto her. The one side does affirm that by Gods word
the execution of this her power does belong to the Bishops, as being most
properly the Apostles successors: and therefore do hold that the Church of
England has done right in reserving this power unto them. The Churches which
hold the other government, do affirm, that when our Savior says, tell the
Church, it is not meant, tell the Bishop or those which are joined with them:
but tell the Church, is tell the Consistory, which consists of Pastors,
Teachers, and Elders chosen from among the people. This Consistory (say they)
is to have and to exercise that power and jurisdiction which the Bishops do
hold. Now (Master Barrow) as you say, the government thus by the Bishops is
popish, so you grievously condemn the Consistory: affirming that it is
irregular, that it has no ground or warrant in Gods word, but utterly
subuerteth all order, and opens a wide gap unto all licentiousnes. etc.

Then come the fourth sort which expound these words (tell the church) wrong.
And those are they which say tell the church, is tell the congregation of people
without the Elders. Here you show some skill also to confute: which is but to
fight with your own shadow, for this fourth sort (I think) have never been
heard of, but among your selves. And in deed your heavenly pattern
(whatsoever ye speak of pastors, teachers, and Elders) is nothing else but an
heap of people, without any of these officers. For was it ever heard of among
men, that there be offices, in which there is no power or authority at all
annexed unto the officers which execute them, not even in the things wherein
their offices consist, above those which have not the same offices? For if it
be true which you say, that the greatest minister has no more power to bind or
loose the sins of the least member, then the said member has to bind or
loose his. Or if Christ speak to all, even to the women, John 20. whose sins
ye forgive, they are forgiven, etc. If the word have no more efficacy to work
faith delivered by the ministry, or the Sacrament to seal the promises have
no more power delivered by a minister, then when the same word is uttered, and
those Sacraments delivered by any man or by any woman, or if every young man,
yea every maid (which is of the assembly) have equal power with any to
excommunicate, we would see wherein the power of any of your officers
consists: where all or every one have equal power, there all are officers:
where all are officers, we may say that in deed none are public officers. This
is Master Barrowes heavenly pattern, by which he has convinced all our
Churches, and found them so obstinate for rejecting it, that they be quite
separate from Christ. Master Barrow will say he spoke not of the Sacraments,
for he faith a minister only is to deliver them. And I say one part of the
power of loosing is by the Sacraments, in as much as they seal our faith.

The power of discipline exercised by the presbytory, as it is in the Churches
of France, Scotland, Geneua, the Low Countries, etc. you most grievously
condemn: the reader shall see your own words, in your other book page 189.
and 190. thus you speak. These men in stead of this gross Antichristian
government, etc. would bring in a new adulterate forged government in show,
or rather in despite of Christ's blessed government, which they in their pride,
rashness, ignorance, and ensualitie of their fleshly hearts, most miserably,
iunouate, corrupt and pervert, etc. Also page 166. you term Classical and
Provincial synods and counsels, a devilish forgery. Here you say the fault and
pride of the Elders is intolerable. Also (you say) that many were the reasons,
and more the inconveniences that might be alleged against this presumptuous
irregular consistory, which has no ground in the word of God but utterly
subuerteth, destroys and corrupts the whole order and Communion of the
Churches, opens a wide gap unto all licenciousnes, and prophannes of manners,
etc. Thus the Church of England is no Church of Christ, because of their
government by Bishops. In other places where the government is by
presbytreies, not only the people (by your sentence) are profane multitudes,
but their ministers proud, rash, ignorant, and in the sensuality of their
fleshly hearts, have corrupted Christ's government, and in despite thereof
have set up a devilish forgery, and open the gap unto all profaneness, etc. O
Master Barrow, what reproaches are these against all churches and their
ministers? I must needs tell you again, that there is not any which has any
spark of Christian modesty, but will say God has not sent ye, your sufferings
are not to be gloried in, you are but Rabasaka, that thus reproach the church
of Christ. What Schismatics have gone beyond ye? Now follows the suspension
from the Sacraments. You must understand, that al your frivolous cauils about
this, and all your reproaches reach not alone unto the Church of England, but
unto all the re^ormed Churches which practice a suspention. Master Beza in his
book against Erastus, page 10. shows the use and practice of it, not only
in their Church, but in the ancient Churches. Also page 124. he proves it by
the example of Moses sister, and of those which were restrained a whole month
from eating the passover: these ceased not in the mean time to be accounted
members of the congregation. When the repentance is not thoroughly testified, or
the rest stand in need of some terror, as well as the party that has offended,
then is there use of suspention.

To prove that neither the worship of God, nor yet the godly are polluted by
the open wicked that communicate with them in the same, and that the covenant
of God is in no wise thereby disanulled, I alleged first the ancient Church
for example, under the conduct of Moses in the wilderness, in which there were
heaps of wicked rebels, and so in the time of Iesay, Jeremy, and other of the
Prophets, whose complaints are grievous: for it is manifest that few godly ones
among swarms of wicked did worship together in the Temple. Here Master Barrow
your cauiles are more then slender: first that our Churches were never true
Churches, and therefore no comparison between ours and them. Touching this I
have spoken before. Then next you say that in y^ times of wicked Kings, when
Idolatry was set up in Judah, the godly did not communicate with the wicked,
which is most true, but the wicked did Communicate with the godly in Gods true
worship, in the days of godly Kings. And for the time of Moses, you say those
wicked rebels were of the common wealth, but not of the Church, and would have
me prove that they were admitted to the Tabernacle or public worship. If they
were not of the Church still in outward account, how were their children all
received? Or where read you of any family among them, which was of the common
wealth, and not of the Church? There is no show of such a matter. Again Saint
Paul 1. Cor. 10. shows that they did all communicate in the Sacraments. They
did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drunke^ the same spiritual drunk.
What can be more clear then this? If men would not wickedly cauile against the
holy Ghost.

Then next for the time that our Savior lived upon the earth, in what
miserable estate was the Church? The most of the teachers very corrupt, both in
doctrine and manners Very few of the people did in deed fear God, and yet came
all on heaps to the Temple together with the godly. Unto this you answer that
at the birth of our Savior, and unto such time as they opposed themselves
against him, things were in meetly good case. Would any man that were not past
all care what he says, make such an answer? Did those grievous sects of the
Scribes and Pharisees rise of a sudden? Or did the high Priest by due course
come to the office? Or were the open wicked separated, where such wicked men
bare sway? And if they had not of some long time before, brought in their own
traditions, how could they have called the^ the traditions of their Fathers.
Math. 15? Mark 7. And when the Pharisees, and Saduces, the Priests and Elders
rejected and withstood our Savior, they, (you say) then ceased to be the
visible Church, and that our Savior did separate himself and his Disciples
from them.

What should one say unto you Master Barrow, are you even bent to gainsay the
manifest word of Christ? The Scribes and Pharisees did sit in Moses chair,
Matthew. 23. Was Moses Chair out of the visible Church? And what can be more
plain then that our Savior wills the people to hear them? For otherwise
how should he command them to observe and do all things which they should
say: but after their works he would not have them do? At this you set up
your throat and cry out; What execrable blasphemy and horrible heresies does
this wretched man run into. etc.? Does he not hereby make our Savior Christ
guilty of the open breach of Gods laws, and the destruction of all the
people? Indeed that were most horrible and damnable blasphemy, and he should
be a most vile and wretched man, that should make our Savior guilty of the
breach of any law of God. And if you had but the true knowledge of some godly
child of fourteen years of age, you should plainly see that our Savior did
command them indeed to hear the Scribes and Pharisees expounding the law and
the Prophets, and that therein he is not guilty at all of the open breach of
Gods laws: but indeed if he therein committed any offense, it was but against
the principles of Donatisme and Annabaptisme, which Satan under the show of an
Angel of light, has bewitched men withal, and which you have settled in your
mind in stead of Gods laws. For would you make us believe that the Pharisees
and Doctors of the law were even of a sudden become naught? Christ himself
when he was twelve years old sat among them in the Temple, and did hear them
and propound questions unto them, Luke 2. And when he preached, his custom
was to go into the Synagog upon the Sabbath, and to read and expound the
Scriptures. Luke 4, But let us see what you allege to prove that he did not
mean that men should hear them.

You demand, if God do not in all places where he commands to hear true
Prophets, forbid to hear false Prophets? What then Master Barrow, how blind
are you? Do you not know that our Savior by mentioning their sitting in Moses
Chair, does bind the auditors to receive their doctrine so far as it was the
true doctrine of Moses and the Prophets? He does hear the false Prophet which
hears and receives false doctrine. So far as the Pharisees set forth the
truth, so far they were to be heard, and their Doctrine as our Savior
wills, was to be followed. But men were to take heed of their Leuine, that
is of their false doctrine and humane traditions. Our Savior does not at all
approve their open wickedness, when he wills them to follow that true
Doctrine which they should deliver out of Moses, and not to follow their
works. The Priests and teachers ought indeed to be holy, but it has fallen
out far otherwise, and that many times in Gods Church. And now if it were an
abuse that some of these Scribes and Pharisees which did teach, were not
Levites, but of some other Tribe, as Paul was of Benjamin: yet there were
greater abuses about the high Priest, and the rest and begun long before that
time: and yet the whole Church and our savior himself so long as he did live
as a private man, frequented the Temple and public, worship and heard them
expound the Scriptures. Therefore Master Barrow, albeit you exclaim in this
sort, these blasphemies does this wicked man publish, his ordinary and all
the Clergy in England suffer them to pass in print: yet neither you nor all
the Donatists and Annabaptists under heaven, shall ever be able with all your
shifts to wring this place from us, which indeed ouerturneth all the chief
grounds and principles of your sect. Be ashamed therefore to oppose your selves
so wickedly against the clear doctrine of Christ, and cease to imagine
absurdities, which are but from your blind mistaking. Again we see that our
Savior healing a man that had the Leprosy, commanded him, saying, go show
thy self unto the Priest, and offer that gift which Moses has commanded for
a testimony unto them, Math. 8. 4. Also he sends ten Leapers at once to show
themselves to the Priests, Luke 17. 14. which were also to offer according to
the law. And this was not long before he suffered. You do very fondly imagine,
ye if the Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees and Saduces, and the multitude
which claue unto them were the visible Church, then were there two Churches,
unless we will deny that our Savior and his Disciples were the Church. For at
y^ time they were all in the same visible Church even those open wicked and the
good. Our Savior does reprehend them and lays open their wickedness, to the
end that men might beware and not be seduced and kept from truth by them. But
why are they not cast forth? The Prophets in old time did sharply reprehend
the wicked of all sorts in the Church, but they had not the ordinary power to
execute the censure of excommunication, no more had our Savior himself.

There be diverse testimonies and examples of the holy scriptures which I
alleged to prove this thing which you knitte up short, but in your other book
you deal in them at large. And because Master Calvin has written strongly
and plentifully in these matters against the Annabaptists, and such as most
wickedly did condemn the Churches in his time, you take upon you to confute
him, as if he were the author of these things, and you term us his wretched
disciples. Whereas in very deed M. Calvin follows but the steps of the
ancient writers, Augustine and the rest against the Catharists and Donatists.
And you lighting into their Tents, set very freshly upon the work even as a
chief Captain, to repair and fortify the ruins of that ancient Catharisme
and Donatisme, and yet can bring nothing which they brought not.

Touching the reformation by Princes, which compel their subjects that
profess Christ, and have the seal of the covenant, to forsake Idolatry, and
to embrace the holy word and Sacraments, I have spoken before: and therefore I
come to the 17. page of your book, where you write after this sort: The next
shifts these Balaamities have for the aministring unto, and Communicating
with, and retaining the profane in the bosom of their church: are certain
arguments drawn by Master Calvin, from Matthew. 13. against the Annabaptists,
comparing the church to a corn field, where the good seed, and the bad grow
together, to a net, and in Matthew. 3. To a floar where the corn and the
chaffelye together.

In deed Master Barrow these were special places which the ancient Fathers
stood upon against the Donatists, and Master Calvin against the Annabaptists,
and which we in as great right urge against you and your sect. If we be
Balaamites, then what was Master Calvin, what was Augustine and all the rest?
Against whom have you powered forth your railings? Take heed it be not
against our Lord Jesus himself, being against his express word: for let us
see how you can avoid these places. Touching the parable of the seed, you
oppose (as you say) against Master Calvin and his Disciples, first the
interpretation of our Savior himself: who says not that the field is the
Church, but the field is the world. And so the good seed and the bad are
together in the world, but not in the Church. And then you show an absurdity
of flat contradiction of the holy Scriptures which would follow, if we take it
that the good seed and the bad should grow together in the Church. The
contradiction is this, there is power and commandment given to the Church to
cast forth the open wicked, and here he bids let them alone. Therefore this let
them alone, let them grow together until the harvest, must needs be expounded
let them alone, and let them grow together in the world, but not in the Church.

In deed your exposition Master Barrow, is the very same which the Donatists
made, and obstinately stood upon. The field is the world, our Savior has
said it, the truth has said it, accursed be he that shall gainesay it: but to
gather from hence, that the good seed and the bad shall not be together in the
church but in the world, is directly to overthrow the whole parable. For first,
what is it which is resembled or likened? The words are plain, it is the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven says he is like, etc. What is it
which is here called the Kingdom of Heaven, is the world so called? Who dare
say so? It is the Church, in which there is the Gospel of the Kingdom, and in
which Christ does reign. If our Savior had meant to sec forth, and to
resemble the state of the world by the good seed and the bad mingled together
(as he says) the enemy did sow the tares, ana mes^ tou sitou, in the midst
or among the wheat, and that they grew up together, or to say look how in a
field good seed and bad grow together, so in the world good men and bad: it
could not then be said, the Kingdom of Heaven is like, but the state of the
world is like. Was it ever heard of, that a man would expound a parable, that
is a similitude, and exclude that which is resembled by the similitude? For if
the good seed and the bad, sown and growing together in the field, do not
resemble and set forth the state of the visible church, while it is also in the
field, that is to say in this world, mingled of good and bad men, show what
there is in the whole parable, whereunto the Kingdom of Heaven is likened.
Moreover in the exposition of the parable our Savior says, as the tares are
gathered and burned, so shall it be in the end of this world, the son of man
shall send his Angels, which shall gather out of his Kingdom all offenses, and
those which work iniquity, etc. If they shall be gathered out of his
Kingdom, which is his Church (peculiarly so called, though he be Lord of
Heaven and earth) then are they until the end of the world in his Church. I
doubt not Master Barrow, but that simple men, yea poor Children (looking upon
this parable, and considering what it is likened, and how Christ does expound
it) shall be able to see what a spirit of giddines God has in judgment cast
upon ye, for the loftines of your minds. And now for that absurdity of flat
contradiction in the Scriptures, which you imagine, if we expound it that the
good and the bad shall be mingled in the church, so long as it is in the
field. There is no such thing, as I will show by as great an absurdity which
will follow of yt sense which you give, for speaking of the wicked in the
Church, if he should say let them alone, it would overthrow the censures
Ecclesiastical which are expressly commanded: then speaking of the wicked in
the world, and saying let them alone, let them grow together, least ye pluck up
the wheat, it should overthrow the power of Kings and rulers, in putting evil
dooers to death, which is expressly commanded: for I trust Master Barrow ye
will not deny Christian Kings to be one part of the servants of the master of
the house. Then whereas you reason thus, the power of excommunication which is
given to the Church, and which the Church is commanded to execute, may not be
overthrown: but if Christ will to let the tares grow in the Church, he
forbids to execute that power, and so^t is overthrown, therefore he does
not speak of open wickedness in the Church, but in the world.

I will reason against your exposition thus. The power which God has given
unto the civil Magistrates to put murderers and other wicked malefactors to
death, is not to be overthrown: but if Christ will men to let the wicked ones
in the world alone, and will have the^ grow to the harvest, least in plucking
them up they destroy the wheat, he takes away that power from the
Magistrates. Therefore this parable must not be taken of the good and the bad
together in the world. And mark how he says not, let them alone, because it
belongs not unto ye, but let them alone least ye pluck up the wheat. What
then? shall we neither take it of the Church nor of the world, because of an
absurdity which seems to follow on either side? Of the world indeed it
cannot be taken, as I have showed before, because he says, not the world is
like, but the kingdom of heaven is like, but of the Church it is said, that as
the good seed and the bad are sown and grow together until harvest in the
man's field, so the good and bad men are mixed in the Church so long as it
remains in the world. How then for these words, let them alone, let them
grow unto the harvest? It is plain (if we will avoid absurdities on both
sides) that our Savior does not here meddle either with the Civil or
Ecclesiastical power, but as it is the manner in parables to utter some
sayings which are only to show some point of doctrine, and not to be taken
stricktly according to the letter. As for example, when our Savior would show
in that place Luke 16. which is partly a parable, that such as cannot be
brought to repentance by hearing Moses and the Prophets, will not repent if one
should rise from the dead: to bring in this doctrine, the damned soul is said
to entreat Abraham that he would send Lazarus unto his fathers house to warn
his brethren, least they should come into that place. Shall we think that
damned souls have such a care that others may repent and be saved? Nay, as I
said, it is only to bring in a doctrine. What is the doctrine then which our
Savior does bring in by these words, let them alone, let them grow together
unto the harvest? This it is, that when the Christian Princes have done what
they can in reforming the Church, and put the wicked malefactors to death: and
when the censures ecclesiastical be most diligently and wisely executed, yet
will there be heaps of ungodly ones in the Church, and that seeing it cannot
be avoided, men are not to make Schisms, and so to rend up the wheat, but
meekly to expect the harvest when the full separation shall be made. Be not
therefore (Master Barrow) so absurd, as by an imagined absurdity, to
overthrow the doctrine of a parable so clearly expressed.

The next place to prove that the open wicked shall always be mixed with the
good in the Church is the parable of the draw ^et out of the same chapter. You
say this is granted to be understood of the planted Church. Who are they which
granted this? Indeed the Donatists granted this, and it is some gentleness that
you will grant so much. For if in this parable the kingdom of heaven be the
visible Church, which is compared to the net which draws together good and
bad: why is not the kingdom of heaven in the former parable, also the Church,
and so the estate thereof likened while it is in the field, unto the wheat and
the tares growing together? You say the evil fishes are not open sinners but
hypocrites, and so said the Donatists. And I marvel you show no reason for
it, seeing the devil did suggest this frivolous show of reason unto the
Donatists, that hypocrites are very fitly resembled by fishes in the net under
the water, which the fisher men cannot see until the net be drawn to land.
This I have answered in my former book. There is no doubt but that close
hypocrites which outwardly appear holy, are one great part of those evil
fishes which the net of the Gospel draws together: but to exclude all the
rest, there is no reason.

The place in Math. 3. He shall purge his floar and gather the wheat into his
barn, but he will burn the chafe with unquenchable fire, does manifestly
show, that as the corn and chafe for a time lie upon the floar, so the good
and the bad lie mingled together in the visible Church. Here you make an
exposition of your own, and then take on grievously that Christ's Church should
be compared to such a floar as the chafe and the corn lie together. And ask
what the Church then differs from the world? It is certain that both the
civil and ecclesiastical power ought to be employed with all diligence and
care that may be to purge the Church: that albeit the floar cannot be clean
rid of the chafe, yet it may be rid so far as men are able. That is not the
question: but when these duties of men have been neglected, and that there he
heaps of chafe in which the graynes of corn do lie covered, whether it be
not still the visible Church? It is a most clear case that in the Church of
Israel, which at that time was the visible Church, there were very great heaps
of chafe, and very few graynes of good corn in comparison of the whole
multitude. John Baptist threatens eternal judgment unto those hypocrites,
wicked and faithless people, showing that the place they held in the Church
for a time should nothing help, seeing the Lord will fan them out like
chafe, which for a time lies with the corn, but defiles not the corn, nor
cannot turn it into chafe. You think you have great hold that he speaks
of separating the chafe from the corn: but answer this one question, was it
not his floar, that is his visible Church out of which he would purge the
chafe? Does he make it his floar by purging it, or was it his floar before it
was purged? The words are clear, he shall purge his floar, etc. whether the
open wicked pollute the holy things of God, or the conscience of the faithful
which do communicate with them, I refer the reader to those things which I
have noted between the ancient Churches and the Donatists, where every thing
has been as strongly urged by those Donatists, as you are able, or any of your
sect. Seeing then in your second accusation your grounds and reasons are flat
Donatisme, and that in your blind fury you condemn all Churches both of
ancient time, and in these days, most deeply reuiling and railing at all the
most excellent instruments which God has raised up unto his Church, what
remains, but to warn simple men to take heed they be not seduced by you?
Thus much for the second, now to the third accusation.

The third accusation is, that we have a false Antichristian ministry imposed,
etc.

IN your former writings, where ye came to deal about our ministry, ye were
in a great displeasure (having made so great a challenge) for that I did
intercept this business from the hands of the learned, unto whom (ye say) it
did by many rights more nearly appertain then unto me. I made answer to
this, that in very deed it is no reason, that such as you should be encountered
by men of great learning: because in all your doings, ye are so full of false
accusations, so rash, so presumptuously bold in pouring forth without any
discretion, whatsoever lights into your brayn: ye are so miserably ignorant,
so full of foul errors, being altogether unlearned (this only excepted, that
ye have scraped some things out of other men's writings, which yet ye pervert)
that all wise men, both of learned and unlearned, do plainly see, it is but
mad frenzy, by which ye are led. For let the things which I have noted out of
these your last books witness unto all, I will not say the learned (for what
should they spend time about them) but to all the Artificers and husbandmen
which have any sound knowledge, whether I have in this charged ye with more
then is true.

Ye would bear the Reader in hand, that the learned men do abstain from
dealing with ye, because they know our cause is bad, and that it is better
therefore it should be raked up, then appear the worse by the handling.

Ye said moreover, that if I have consulted with my learned Brethren, they
would have given me counsel not to write, but to deal in the pulpit, where it
may be without controulment: least the fowlenes of things should appear.

To one part of this I made answer, that whereas ye do imagine that all the
learned are afraid ye would be too hard for them, if they should deal with
ye, and therefore they do not nor dare not meddle, it is nothing so. But as
one among the beasts (ye know of whom it is said) had gotten a Lions skin
upon him, and went about and frayed all the simpler beasts: until one more
subtle, whether he espied the long ears, or whether he heard him bray (which
is nothing like the roaring of a Lion) made answer, that otherwise indeed,
he should have been scared as well as the rest. For you coming with a most
terrible outcrie against our Church, ye will needs have us think the Lion
roareth. Let not the Reader suppose that I speak this upon mine own conceit:
for in the fourth page of the Epistle of your other book, which ye call A
brief discovery of the false Church, ye have set it down so your selves. Ye
would not have those dreadful things which ye denounce less feared, because
they are pronounced by a frail man: but would have us all know that the Lion
roareth, and that the Lion roareth not in the Forest if no pray be present.
Doubtless your voice has been terrible, and especially at the first you scared
many of the simpler sort, which took it to be the roaring of a Lion: But ye
must understand that the learned even at the first did discern the voice not
to be the roaring of a Lion, but the braying of him that put on the Lions
skin. Therefore ye are much deceived in thinking they all fear and tremble at
it. They see plainly that it is but mad frenzy, and so they disdain to deal
with it. And for mine own part, if I did not see what hauock the Donatists
made, how many the Annabaptists seduced, and how weak much of our people are,
I should count it great folly to give you any answer.

And now, whereas I did require if there be any spark of modesty left in ye,
to make some colorable show, that the learned would council not to deal in
these matters, which they know can not be defended, but by the discussing
will become more odious: thus ye make answer. That these preachers had taken
this course (say you) among themselves, we know certaynely, by a letter that
two of the chief of them sent unto us, denying that conference which they had
before promised, because we denied their Church and ministry. After that, two
of them being procured to our prison, denied to deal with us concerning those
exceptions we made against their church and ministry, alleging that they
were forbidden by their brethren to deal with us in those matters. To be
short, what else can with any probability be coniectured to be the hindrance
of the first company of preachers, that at the first sent unto us to know the
causes of our dislike, promising to assent, or to show unto us the causes why
they could not, that they upon the sight of that little paper, (wherein we set
down unto them the causes of our separation from these parish assemblies, as
also what we purposed in our own assemblies) never as yet could be drawn to
make any answer in writing or conference, if not that they perceived, that
they were neither able to defend their estate, neither yet had faith to leave
it for fear of persecution and danger.

Who can now doubt but that Master Barrow and Master Greenewood be honest
simple dealing men? Who can say they have slaundred the learned, or that they
have uttered any thing rashly, when they now affirm that they did for
certainty know that the preachers had taken such a course among themselves, and
allege such proof for the certainty hereof, as no man needs to doubt of
ye matter. For will any man be so impudent as to lie, and to publish it to
those which do know he does Iye? I have heard Master Barrow, by such as have
dealt with ye, that ye make no conscience of lying, and now it falls out so
here: for one of those which came to the prison, coming to the fight of your
book, has set down in the margent that ye make a most shameless lie. It may
be in this ye will stand upon your Pantoffles, it is but your yea, and his nay.
But for the letter you speak of which the other two whom ye name, sent unto
ye: I have talked with them both, to know why they denied conference, and what
they had written. They say they denied conference with ye, only because ye
denied them to be Christians, to pray with them, and that ye denied all the
preachers in the land to be Christians and all those which join with them:
not hoping that ye could take any fruit by their writings which would not yield
to receive any fruit or comfort by their prayers. I take it Master Barrow you
have the letter. If you have it, show it unto some honest man that may speak
for you and defend ye, not to be past shame in forging such a sense. If ye have
it not, I can let ye have the perfect copy of it, and will let any friend ye
have see it. They are so far off in the letter from giving the least suspicion
that they doubt of our Church and ministry, as that they pronounce it your
heathenish opinion, whereby ye deny us to be Christians. What preachers sent
unto ye I know not, but that they refrayned to have conference with ye,
perceiving upon the sight of your little paper (as ye say) that they could not
defend their estate, do ye indeed think still, that they took it to be the
roaring of a Lion? could they not discern (think ye) between rudere and
rugire?

Your multitudes, and armies of words (being but vain ^anglings) I will pass
by, and come directly to the substance of the matter. And because our ministry
is ordained by Bishops (which is by one part of their government) your third
and fourth accusation, shall be handled jointly, as it were under one.

In page 104. Ye wonder (as ye say) that in this flourishing estate of our
Church, which ouerfloweth with so great learning, abounds with so many
writers, that not one of them should undertake to prove the ministry of their
Church directly by the rules of Gods word, in their office, entrance,
administration, and maintenance.

These may very well be some of those swelling words of banitie, which Saint
Peter speaks of, for who (if he know not before the vain insolency of
Master Barrow and his fellow) reading this wonder, would not judge them to be
men very deeply read? Have they not read over (think ye) all the learned
writers of this age, wondering that there is not one among them all, that has
undertaken to prove our ministry directly by the rules of Gods word? Is it not
pity that there be no more learned writers, that these men might search them
also, to have this point handled? If you have now done wondering Master Barrow,
give us leave a little to wonder. The Papists denying that the churches which
have rejected popery have any ministry, and requiring proof thereof, many
learned writers, both of other Churches, and of our own nation, have
undertaken this matter, and have so directly proved our ministry by the rules
of Gods word, as that the Papists have no cause to glory. Now there be two
things here which we may wonder at: the one how it should be possible, that
such swelling insolency could be found in the hearts of men grosely ignorant,
as that having read almost nothing, and understanding less by sundry degrees,
yet openly vaunt, as if they had read all, and could find no such matter. The
other how men of so contrary disposition, should use the very same weapon
against the Church, for this is one weapon of the Papists, and now in your
hands, Ye have no ministry of Christ.

If the reader shall here think that I grate too hard upon Master Barrow, who
directs his speech but against the ministry of our Church: the matter is
far otherwise, as I will make it appear: for first he denies the ministry
of all Churches in express words: affirming that there is no ministry in all
Europe, nor in all these known parts of the world. Secondly, we are to note,
that although the reformed Churches do differ, sundry of them each from
others, in the manner of the calling and ordination of ministers, yet the
defense which the learned writers do make, is generally for the ministry of
all those Churches (as well for the ministry of the Church of England, as of
others) which have forsaken Antichrist, and preach the Gospel. Therefore
Master Barrow, read all the learned writers which have stood to maintain
against the Papists, that Master Luther, Master Calvin, Master Bucer, Martyr
and the rest, were ministers of Christ, and seeing ye will needs fight against
God and his truth, try your strength, and see how ye can gratefie the Church of
Rome, in overthrowing that which all her learnedest patrons are not able to
shake more then they be able to shake or remove a mountain.

The ministry of our Church is not (you say) the ministry of the Gospel, or
the ministry of Christ, but the ministry of Antichrist, coming in the life and
power of the beast. Your reason is that we are the children of the Bishops, and
the Bishops are the creatures of the Pope.

Against this I did allege, that the popish Bishops have their consecration
and power from the Pope, they swear obedience unto him, to maintain his
dignity, religion, laws, and ceremonies. And also with him do exercise a
power over the faith and conscience of men. But the Bishops of the Church of
England, have not their ordination, consecration, or power from the Pope, but
from our Church which has renounced Antichrist. The Bishops of England,
acknowledge no subjection to the Pope, but by anoath, have renounced his
usurped power and tyranny. The Bishops of England are not ordained to uphold
and maintain the religion or laws of Antichrist, but quite contrary they
promise and profess, to advance the Gospel of Jesus Christ, etc. They usurp
not a Lordship over the faith and conscience of men.

Let us see now what ye bring against this, It helps not our Bishops (ye say)
any thing, that they have broken their faith and Schismed from the Pope, and
renounced his yoke, even his usurped power and tyranny, seeing they usurp
and retain (if not the same) yet as Antichristian and enormous a power as the
Pope, exercising their authority and commandments contrary unto, and above
all laws, both of God and of their prince, page 113.

If it be thus our case is hard: but Master Barrow remember the old Proverb, a
lier needs to have a good memory, for in page 181. and 182, you have quite
forgotten what ye had set down here, for there ye do affirm, that the
Bishops which died for the Gospel were godly blessed Martyrs, of whose happy
and blessed estate ye do not doubt. Your reason is, for that they were not
convinced, but did exercise that power ignorantly.

I pray ye tell me Master Barrowe, could they be godly and had but broken
their faith and Schismed from the Pope? Could they be godly men, exercising as
Antichristian and enormous a power as the Pope? Yea could they be true
thristians, exercising their commandments and power, contrary unto, and
above all laws both of God and man? Or could ignorance excuse them in these
matters? Then tell us why the Pope might not be a good Christian also, before
he was convinced? Which way does the wheel turn now Master Barrow? Ye can
never be able to bring both ends together in these, ye must either condemn
those Martyrs, or else make the government by Bishops, not such as you set it
forth: well let us proceed. Here now we must lay open what power the Pope
does exercise, and what power the Bishops in our Church do exercise, to see
if it be the same, or the like. Also whether the Bishops do exercise any
power, but that which Christ has given to his Church, to be exercised by men,
that is either by Bishops, or Presbyteries. Touching the Pope, he has usurped
power over the whole word of God, affirming that the holy scriptures have no
authority (as they say unto us) no certainty for the sense, no life, but as he
does give unto them. And for this cause he does take upon him to expound them
as he will, contrary to the grammar sense. He does take upon him to dispense
with all, and to abrogate express laws of God. And further he takes upon him
to make laws of his own, to bind the faith and conscience of all men, even as
the articles of our faith do bind, or the express doctrine of the sacred
Scriptures. He does vsurp in sundry things of so high nature, apperteming
peculiarly to God, as that he shows himself as God.

The power which the Bishops of our Church do exercise, is first, in examining,
appro^uing and ordaining ministers and authorizing them to preach the Gospel.
Secondly, it is in this, that they are to see the orders of the Church, for the
public administration duly observed, and so they have power to excommunicate,
suspend and deprive, etc. such as shall transgress either against doctrine,
order, or in manners. Touching laws, they have not power to make any one, not
even in things meet indiff rent, neither have they power to abrogate, or to
take away any one that is made, and by the public authority of our Church
established: they can give no commandments of their own. That Christ has
given power to ordain ministers, and to execute the censures Ecclesiastical,
you do not call into question: the controversy is but, by whom this power
should be executed, whether by Bishops or by Presbyters. If there be an error
in the execution of it by Bishops, or if there be a fault in the execution by
Elders, this fault or error does not destroy the power it self, nor yet
makes it Antichristian, as ruling over the faith and conscience.

I know Master Barrow, that ye will here take great exception, and say that
the chief thing is yet behind. For as ye charge the presbyteries most
heynously, in that they take upon them to decree and ordain Canons and
constitutions, unto which they inioyne obedience in the people: so the Bishops
execute the laws and Canons which have been ordained by men (though not by
themselves) the matter is all one. Is not this to exercise Lordship and
dominion over men's faith and conscience? About this then must be our special
question, whether Christ has given such a power unto the Church, as to make
laws or Cannons in external matters, which we call things indifferent? And
whether the urging men to keep them, be not to take away Christian liberty,
and so to rule over the faith and conscience? I know this question is hard to
be discussed, to make every simple man understand the matter. You (Master
Barrow and Master Greenwood) are most blind in it. I wish the reader to
observe, because it is one maine rock upon which ye are run. And cry out
what ye can, that I like a marked servant of Antichrist, like a graceles man,
that has his conscience seared with a hot Iron, do change ye wrongfully: yet
it shall be evident, that by seeking an Annabaptisticall freedom, ye do
abridge the power of the Christian Magistrate, and of the Church.

To come therefore unto the matter: that which S. James says must first stand
sure, namely, That there is one lawgiuer which is able to save and to destroy.
Iam. 4. verse. 12. Hereupon it is most sure that God alone has Lordship over
the conscience of man to bind the faith and conscience. For look what God
has by his law commanded to be done, it is good, it is holy: no King, nor
the whole Church can make any part of it evil, or command it not to be done.
Look what God has forbidden to be done, that same is evil and unholy; no
King, nor yet the whole Church can make it good and holy, or command it to be
done. I say further, that the law of God is so absolutely perfect, that there
is no righteousness for men, but it is therein contained: neither is there any
unrighteousness, but it is therein forbidden. Wherefore they which take upon
them to make laws to bind the conscience either by abrogating or by adding,
commit most high and blasphemous sacrilege, of which the whole popery is to
be condemued. But now there are certain middle actions, and things, which we
call indifferent, because if we simply respect them in themselves, or in their
own nature, they be neither good nor evil. In these consists one part of
Christian liberty to use or not to use with knowledge and discretion. Now if
we respect ye very nature of these things, no Prince or church can change it,
as to make them to become necessarily good, or necessarily evil in themselves
to the conscience. And therefore, touch not, taste not, handle not, Coloss. 2.
verse. 21. making the outward indifferent things unclean to the conscience, is
to usurp an Antichristian power over the conscience even against God. Also to
make those external things to be of necessity to the conscience, is to lay a
yoke of bondage: and against this we are willed to stand fast in the freedom
wherewith Christ has made us free. Gal 5. verse. 1. Hitherto (Master Barrow) I
think ye will agree with me. But now touching the external use of these
things, either for Princes to make politic laws to command the use or to
restrain the use of them, or for the Church to make Cannons and constitutions
to command or restrain the use as shall serve for order and comelines,
therein lies our disagreement, and therein ye plead for your Annabaptisticall
freedom, and confusion, I mean that ataxia, or overthrow of all order.

First, ye call it a subtle distinction which Master Calvin uses, of the
external or civil Court, and the Court of conscience, in your discovery page
88. And you say Master Calvin having very truly set down, that it is heinous
presumption in any mortal man to restrain or make laws of such things as the
Lord has left in liberty: he straight way (least he should keep back
civil Magistrates from receiving the Gospel) inuenteth a politic
distinction, betwixt the civil court, and the court of conscience: saying,
that this outward court respects men only, and binds not the conscience of
the doer, the other concerns matters belonging unto God, and therefore
binds the conscience. Thus has he both lost and entangled himself, and
utterly overthrown all his former doctrine. page 93. In page 247. of this
book against me, Master Greenwood says, that Master Calvin would but divide
the soul and the body in civil causes, but I would go a note further.

Thus far be your words. How shall Master Calvin do that is thus set upon
by such great divines, which have so pursued him that he has lost himself,
and they have snared him in his own words? Alas poor souls, I cannot but
lament with pity to see your blindenes, for I know this is of mere
ignorance, that ye cannot understand Master Calvin in a doctrine which yet is
clear by the Scriptures. Ye say he invented this politic distinction of the
civil court and the court of conscience, least he should keep Princes back
from the Gospel. Then by your own words it does follow, that if it be proved
that Princes have power in such matters to make laws, ye do foully abridge
their sacred power by denying it. And for that Master Greenwood says I go a
note further then M. Calvin, it is his ignorance: for let him read well the
fourth book of his institutions, and he shall find he holds this
distinction not only in civil causes, but in ecclesiastical canons. And now
to the matter. I would I were able though in never so rude speech, to lay it so
open as that a child might understand. I will do the best I can: and I will
come unto it by degrees. Ye cannot see how there should be such a distinction
of an external action to respect men, and not to bind the conscience before
God: Mark well and see. There be sundry sorts of cloth of sundry colors,
and there be sundry fashions of garments. I am a minister of the Gospel, I
have by me a yelow gown, a green hat, white hose, a tawny coat, I do for
some need secretly where no man sees me, use them: my conscience is not
polluted by them, I sin not. But now I come with these garments into the
public assembly, I sin grievously. What is the reason of this? It is
because the garments themselves, the colors or fashions which were before God
to the conscieuce of man indifferent, are now altered and become not
indifferent to the conscience before God? In no wise. For between God and the
conscience, they remain as they did. But now the whole matter lies in this:
it is uncomely and offensive before men. Who cannot here see the distinction
between the civil court, that is for the action before men: and the court of
conscience before God? Will ye say because it is evil for a man to do thus
before men, therefore it is evil to his conscience before God, even for the
very doing, not respecting men? Might I not allege a thousand things of this
nature, which I may do and no sin between God and my conscience, but the
sin comes by the sight and view of men? Now when the sight and view of men
does restrain me from doing them openly, the freedom of my conscience in
them is not taken away before God, or my conscience is not bound by them before
God: but I am restrained in the external use of them before men, because they
be not expedient; they be lawful, but not comely. We see how Saint Paul
speaks about this matter, 1, Cor. 10 ver. 23. 24. All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful, but all things
do not edify. This is meant only of things indifferent, for all which are in
their own nature evil, be unlawful, and all things simply good are expedient:
and do edify. Then we see by this there are things which are lawful unto our
conscience before God, and in which our concsience retayneth still her freedom
before God, even when we are restrained the outward use before men. This we may
see further in the same Chapter, eat what is set before ye, asking no question
for conscience. But if any say this was offered to Idols, eat not of it for
conscience. Conscience I say, not thine, but of that other. When he says not
thine, does he not show his conscieuce remains free before God, even when he
is restrained before men? And when he says, All things are lawful, but I will
not be brought under the power of any thing: 1. Cor. 6. verse. 12. does he not
show it is some bondage, if a man have not freedom to refrain the use of a
thing lawful? This is one step toward our matter: But what is this for
making laws either politic or ecclesiastical to inioyne men to do that
which God has left free, or to restrayn the use of the creatures which he
has granted liberty to use? This is your main reason Master Barrow. I have
already showed that he which shall enjoin or restrain, to lay it upon the
conscience before God, commits high sacrilege: But the use of things may be
enjoined or restrained in respect of men, as shall be profitable or
unprofitable, comely, or uncomely, etc. A good part of a kingdom does consist
of Cappers. The people are given all to wear Hats, and by this means those
subjects do fall into poverty. The Prince makes a law, that all his subjects
shall at certain times not wear Hats, but Capps. If the subject shall now
stand up and say, to wear an Hat or a Cappe is free before God, and seeing God
has given me freedom of conscience to use or not to use, no mortal creature
has power to bind my conscience. Will not the Prince make answer, thou
foolish man, I do not bind thy conscience in the thing before God, but I
enjoin it as a thing expedient and profitable to my common wealth? It is free
for a man to eat any kind of meat. The Prince does see it profitable that
some kinds of meat should be spared, and therefore does make a law that at
some times men shall abstain from the same. The Subjects shall make answer,
GOD has given us freedom of conscience to eat, no power can bind our
conscience from it, GOD has made it lawful and free. Will not the Prince make
answer and say: ye Annabaptists do ye not know that there be many things
lawful and free to the conscience before God, which yet are not expedient
among men? I do not restrain ye to take away the freedom of your conscience
in it before God: but it is profitable to my kingdom. It is free for a man
that has grounds to sow or to graze: but if men be given wholly to grazing,
and corn wax dear, and the Prince makes a law that whosoever occupies such
a quantity of ground, shall plow thus many acres, does he now bind the
conscience, or only seek the public profit?

There he thousands of such like matters Master Barrow: and therefore consider
how foully ye do abridge the power of Princes, to the overthrow of Common
wealths, in denying them authority to make permanent laws, in things
indifferent. But ye make one objection more which is of some show: and that is
that princes laws are to be obeyed for conscience: out of which a man may
reason thus: seeing none can make laws to bind the conscience but God: and no
law but in things good or evil can bind the conscience, and not in things
indifferent, for that were to bind where God has left free: therefore Princes
have no power to make laws in things indifferent. To answer this in such sort
as a simple man may see the falsehood of it, is somewhat hard: but I will do
the best I can. I say therefore I am bound for conscience to obey the Princes
laws, and yet the Princes laws of themselves, do not bind my conscience. It
is an honest, a good, and profitable thing, when the Prince makes a law and
restrayneth the use of some things outwardly, which the conscience has
freedom in inwardly before God, when it is for a public good. Now I am bound
to further a public good, it is a great sin to show contempt against the
Prince whom God commands me to obey: in these respects then I am bound even
for couscience to keep the laws. The nature of the things indifferent is not
altered before God unto my conscience by that restraint of law: neither yet
the use is taken from me, when and where it may be without contempt of my
Prince, without offense to men, and without hindering a public good or
commodity. They that speak in words of Art, do say that Princes laws do
not bind the conscience haplos, but cata ti: not simply by themselves, but for
some respect, or by somewhat which comes as a medium: which is as I have
before showed. Take an example, put case some dying of clothes should be
harmefull to the Common wealth, as to dye in blewe: I am a Dyer, this restraynt
does not make the very dying in blew it self unclean to my conscience before
God, and so bind my conscience: but if I dye in blew contemning the power, and
so give a public offense, and hinder a common profit, I do sin, God does
forbid these things, and they do bind the conscience.

Now to come to the laws Ecclesiastical, which M. Greenwood says is to go a
note further. The Church (as in our Country the Prince, the Nobility, and
Commons assembled in Parliament) do agree upon some laws in things
indifferent for comelines and order, and edification in Gods worship: as in
some other places the Presbyteries, with the consent of the christian
Magistrates. This (say you) is to bind the conscience. Well, let us see your
reasons. If (say you) they bind not the conscience, why should men be
excommunicate and delivered up to Satan, for violating such ceremonies and
orders as bind not the conscience? This seems unto you a thing most absurd:
but mark a little. The Princes laws (as I have showed) do not bind the
conscience, but yet he that with contempt of the Prince, to a public evil
example, and harm of the Common wealth does break the laws, is guilty of
great sin, and if he stand in it worthy to be excommunicate. Even so he
that violateth a lawful rule or ceremony of the Church in matters
indifferent, which are not laid upon him to bind his conscience before God, but
for order and comelines before men, though his conscience touching the things
themselves is not bound before God, yet in showing any contempt against ye
public authority of ye church, and in giving an offense, by bringing in
vncomelines or disorder, he sins, and if he persist obstinatly is to be
excommunicate. Tell me M. Greenwood, is it not a thing between God and a man's
conscience free to wear a gown of green cloth, were it not in regard of
comelines among men? The Church then takes order that no Minister shall come
into the public assembly to preach in a green gown, and he does it; is he not
to be reproved as for a great sin, and if he stand obstinatly in it to be
cast forth? But you say all these things must be left to the discretion of the
Minister. So ye may also take away the power of making laws in matters simply
evil: for every man has not love or care. And now whereas I have showed by y^
example of the holy Apostles Act. 15. who decreed that the Gentiles should
abstain from blood and from strangled, that the Church has power to decree in
things indifferent, orders for edification: let us see what a learned answer
you (M. Greenwood) have found out. First, you say I have overthrown my self
by setting down that the holy Ghost and the Apostles did this, because these
were the master builders, and were to make laws, etc. Alas poor man, does the
holy Ghost ever make law or the Apostles in things indifferent, as eating blood
or strangled, to change the nature of the things, or to bind a man's conscience
before God, so that he might not secretly where it might never be known to the
weak Jews? Then ye see there may be laws made (the holy Ghost by the rules
of the Scriptures guiding the Pastors) in things indifferent, which bind not
the conscience. But (say you) they do not inioyne it as a law, but tell them
they shall do well if they observe these things, by no necessity enforced,
page 251. Then it seems they might have eat blood and strangled and given
offense to the weak Jews and not have done evil. That which seems good to
the holy Ghost for them to observe, they may if it seem not good to them, not
observe. How absurd is this? And if ye mark well what S. James says, Act. 21.
verse. 25. you shall see it was not left arbytrarie, so long as there might
offense grow thereby. Well, if the Church then have power to make such decrees
to avoid public offense and disorder; what if the Church err and appoint some
orders and Ceremonies which are hurtful? This error and fault of the Church is
not in that high offense of binding the conscience, which indeed is
Antichristian, but in missing what is most comely, most without offense, and
fittest for edification. The Church of Christ is so precious a thing, and the
souls of men to be regarded with such sender compassion, that all Christian
governors and guides ought to be careful, not only, not to lay any yoke
upon the conscience, but even to redress the least error that may breed or
work any harm touching comelines and order. To end this point, Master
Barrow, until you can show wherein any power is usurped and exercised over
the faith and conscience, we must needs take all that ye have here set down,
to be but your lavish speech.

Now touching those reasons which I brought to prove the ministry of our
Churches, to be ye ministry of Christ. The first is this, they have the calling
of the Church. What sound stuff ye have brought to warrant your most ungodly
presumption, in condemning the Church of England, as also al Churches in
Europe, let the reader judge. Also that the Churches do in some things differ
about the manner of calling and ordaining ministers, how you or any other by
this can prove all to be void, would be seen.

Then next the ministry of the Church of England is the ministry of
reconsiliation: bringing no doctrine, but the doctrine of the holy Scriptures.
Here ye cavil foolishly, that although they exercise an office, yet they
having no true calling, do it but as private men. Luther and Calvin and all
the rest which have preached the Gospel in these times, ye confess in some
small measure, according to that little which they did see (nothing comparable
to that you have attained) have uttered the truth: but yet as private men. Here
besides your wicked barking against the ministry of all Churches, which God
has ratified: your ignorance is to be noted in this, that you do not know,
that if a man enter not rightly into a public office, yet the office it self
is not destroyed: as if a King have but usurped the crown, yet he is a King
while he be deposed. It is more then foolish that ye say, we have a leiturgy or
prescript form of prayer, therefore we bring other doctrine besides the
Scriptures.

Thirdly, the ministry of the Church of England does bring men to faith, there
being joined with it the effectual power and blessing of the holy Ghost, etc.
In answering this Master Barrow, ye fall into your former stinking puddle,
into which ye draw many a rash ignorant man. I mean ye utterly deny with the
ungodly Swinckfeldians, all the whole efficacy, power and blessing, which God
has annexed unto the ministry of the Gospel. Here is a great patch set on to
help the Papists, how by this also ye say, they may reason to prove their
ministry and Church to be such, as they that separate themselves must needs be
Schismatikes. Why Master Barrow, do you not know that as God made a promise to
his Church to the end of the world, and has given gifts and a ministry, to
continue even to the worlds end, to build it, for Saint Paul says, this
ministry is given, until we all meet together in the unity of faith, which
cannot be, until the last day, that the whole number be accomplished. Ephesians.
4. 13. So he has always reserved not only some ministry in the popery, but
also in all times some godly ministers? How little help this brings to the
Papists, or all those sound points or doctrine that remained and do remain
among them to prove that the Churches which have forsaken them are but
Schismatikes, or that the Churches should not cast forth the usurped power of
Antichrist, I think children might be made to see and understand, for although
they hold sundry points of the faith, yet they quite subvert the holy faith.
And whereas the Apostleship and ministry of Saint Paul being called into
question, he uses this reason unto those which had received the faith and
power of the holy Ghost by his ministry, If I be not an Apostle unto others,
yet am I unto you: I said the same is to be made the defense of the ministry of
the Churches at this day, unto all such as by the public preaching of the
word, and administration of the Sacraments are called unto an assured faith and
comfort in God, and unto unfeigned repentance. For let all these judge whether
there be no efficacy and power, in the public administration of the word and
Sacraments, more then from the mouth of any private person. Unto this you answer
is too foul and beastly: for ye say it w^l fit the Papists against us: and
then I say it might fit the false Apostles against S. Paul. For if the Papists
can or may as well say, though we be no ministers of Christ unto other, yet
unto you that feel the comfort and power of our doctrine and joy in it, we are
ministers of Christ. Then might the false Apostles in like manner have risen up
against S. Paul, and spoken the same unto those which delighted to hear them.
Is there no difference between that power of the Gospel, that assurance of
faith, of peace and joy in the holy Ghost, and of unfeigned fear of God, and
repentance which it works: and that blind zeal, and comfort which heretics
and Papists have in false doctrine and superstition? Will ye confound all? When
ye pronounce that there is no such faith nor repentance, nor joy in the holy
Ghost, nor peace of conscience wrought in the hearts of any by the ministry of
our Church: how far above the clouds does your swelling blind pride, lift up
her hands? Let al such as have felt the effectual calling of God, bear witness
in this matter.

In the fourth, I alleged that the Martyrs which suffered in the days of
Queen Marie, were moved and brought to faith and repentance, at the preaching
of Master Latimer, Tailor, Hoper, Bradford, and others. Your reply is, that
this reason stands upon popish and Annabaptisticall grounds. For popis^^^ don
allege, (...) as* many martyrs his predecessors Let me then ask this
question? when it is confessed that they were holy martyrs, and died for the
true faith, will it not follow, if the Pope could prove that the Church of
Rome had held still that holy faith, that it should be the true Church? We
hold the same faith with the holy Martyrs. The motions ye say at our preachings
are but the illusio^s of Satan, and this is the cause that you account the
reason to be Annabaptisticall. God is highly to be blessed, who has so
ratified the effectual power of the ministry of his word in the hearts of many
thousands, both: in this land and in other countries with such assurance and
constancy of faith, that the whole power of Satan out of the mouths of
papists, Annabaptists, Schismatiks, and frantic persons, is not able to bring
it into doubt. Lastly, I did advise men to be somewhat moved with the judgment
of other Churches. This (you say) is an old popish reason. M. Barrow it is not
popish at all unto such as shall consider that ye Churches with these principal
instruments which God rayseth up as lights, do discuss matters by the
Scriptures: men are to seek for the truth at their hands. But I must tell ye
it is the trick of all rank heretics and schismatics to despise the
judgment of the Churches. Shall we think that a few ignorant rash men have
received such light from God, as all the most noble instruments raised up, have
not? Thus ye have answered no one reason which I brought, but only with vain,
yea more then vain cauills.

The foul reproachful speeches, which ye use to deface all the ministers of
Christ's Gospel, both of other Churches, and of the Church of England, are so
many, and that in sundry places of your books, but specially in your
Discovery, from page 140. unto page 187. that he that will search all that is
written of the Catharists, the Donatists and Annabaptists, and sundry
heretics, shall not be able to find the like, for the slanderous presumption,
and proud contempt. The preaching of the Gospel it selle, in our church ye do
most profanely blaspheme, in saying, that there with, as with a goodly
embrodered couerlet and fine sheets of Egypt, we cover Iesabels bed, and hide
al our fornicatio^s. When ye say it as a sweet whistle and as a charm, yea
when ye term it the whores scarfes to cover her shame, page 141* Also where as
in many places of this land, but chiefly when the Spaniards came to invade,
there were fasts, and the word of God preached in some places by two, in some
by 3. ministers: this ye call a stage play. page 97. Ye say ye are no Donatists
nor Schismatics, and out of that which I have written to show that ye are
full Donatists, ye gather sundry dissimilitudes betwixt your selves and them.
Ye might perhaps by diligence find out some other things in which ye are not
like them: as it may be they did wear blew caps, or green cloaks, which ye
do not. The truth is you do agree with the^ in the sum and substance of all yt
fowlest things, which ye cannot deny: at least if ye come behind them in any
one point, ye are before them in two other for it. To follow ye in all points
where in ye err tither with the^, or with some other as wicked, would be over
tedious: only I note these and set them down together.

1 First that ye do most presumptuously against the express rules of Gods
word, intrude your selves into the Lords office, in taking upon ye to condemn
the whole Church of England, as separated from Christ, refut page 23.

2 That ye condemn all the Churches in Europe which profess the Gospel, that
their people are but heaps of profane men. dise. page 33. That their worship
is blasphemous Idolatry, in as much as they have leiturgies, which is (as ye
say) to have another Gospel, another Testament, Refut. page 244. That there is
no ministry of the Gospel in all Europ, Disc. page 104. that the government of
al Churches is false and wicked, Refut. page 74. 75. Discou. page 189. 190.

3 That ye confound errors and heresies, as to make all errors, heresies being
convinced to his conscience that erreth and held, and to make none to be
heresies, unless he be convinced that erreth, Refu. page. 24.

4 That with Nouatus the wicked heretic, ye take away all hope of salvation
from those which offend of knowledge willingly, in as much as ye make every
obstinate persisting in the least error, to separate from the faith and
Communion of Christ pa. 24.

5 That ye deny the distinction of errors fundamental and not fund amentall,
calling it popish. Refut. page 26.

6 That ye judge of the whole Church to be convinced in conscience as of one
man, page 24.

7 That ye hold it a due conuincing, not only of particular persons, but also
of whole Churches, and such as does cast them forth as heathen, so soon as any
private man does reprove the least error, and they forthwith do not reform the
same. page 24.

8 That ye condemn al without exception, both learned and unlearned, men and
women young and old, which profess the Gospel in public assemblies, upon
false accusations, without admonition, and in matters wherein if there be
errors, yet excellent godly men have erred in them finally, even by your ^wne
confession. Refut. page 180.

9 That ye say the best part of the book of common prayer is no better then a
piece of swines flesh, and abomination to the Lord. Refut page 48.

10 That ye say the greatest minister has no more power to bind or loose the
least member, then the said member has to bind or loose him: and so with the
Swinckfeldians, destroy the whole power of the ministry. page 37.

11 That ye speak so profanely of singing of Psalms, and so dishonorably of
Christian people. Discou. page 180.

12 That most offensiuely and profanely, ye term the articles of our faith,
our forged patcherie. Discou. page 76.

13 That ye deny men are to join in that worship, where any errors whatsoever
do appear, and are not reformed, and so open a most wide gap unto all
Schisms. Refut page 27.

14 That you are so grossly ignorant how the false Apostles urged circumcision,
and so from the words of S. Paul to the Galathians affirm that paying tithes,
or the observing any times as it is in our church, is an error fundame^tal.
Refut. pa. 36

15. That ye judge them to be no true Churches which have not excommunication.
page 54. 73.

16 That ye deny baptism to the children of open sinners, which yet remain
in the Church. Refut. page 58. 59.

17 That ye make the stablenes of Gods covenant toward his Church to depend
upon the works of men. Refut. page 60.

18 That ye hold circumcision among the ten tribes, or in Judah in time of
Idolatry, was no true seal of the covenant, and yet ye say that concerning
the outward cutting it was true circumcision: the like ye say of baptism
administered in popery. Ref. page 64.

19 That in your Disc. from page 16. to page 45. and Refut. page 97. ye take
upon ye to confute almost all which M Caluiue has written against the
Donatists and Annabaptists, holding that the prayers and Sacraments, and the
consciences of all that communicate together are defiled, where any open
sinners are admitted.

20 That ye deny the distinction of the external court, and the court of
conscience: and so take away the power of the civil magistrate, and the power
of the Church in making laws, in things indifferent, taking upon ye to confute
M. Call. Disc. pa 94. 95.

21 That ye condemn Logic, Rethorike and other liberal Arts. Refut. page 117.

22 That ye would have al authors (the bible only excepted) cast aside in the
study of divinity. Disc. page 146.

23 That ye wickedly blaspheme the operation and motions of Gods spirit in the
hearts of men at the preaching of the gospel, as if they were but the illusions
of the devil. Disco. pa. 141. 156

24 That ye speak so reprochfully of all the most excellent learned divines
which God has raised up in all Churches, co^demning them of pride, ignorance,
rashness, sensuality, etc. Disco. from page 140. unto page 191.

25 That ye still stand to maintain, that private men may assemble and erect a
Church with all the offices and officers. Refut. page 191.

26 That ye affirm there be no true ministers any where to be found upon
earth, nor yet any extraordinary ministers to be looked for, and therefore mere
private men are (as ye say) to erect and establish the Church Refut page 196.

27 That ye affirm these private men are not to stay for the Prince Refut.
page 196.

28 That ye maintain that no fault is to be tolerated in the church: but if
any private man do epsy a fault and reprove it, if they will not amend it he
is to forsake that church. This is your whole practice.

I will not stand to lay open every particular but upon these conclude, that
seeing ye hold so many foul errors, and with such outrage in your dealing, God
has not sent ye, nor set ye a work, more then he sent the Donatists and
Annabaptists, but Satan has seduced ye, and ye labor to seduce others. And if
it please God I beseech him for his sonns sake to open your eyes, and to give
ye some spark of wa^^ ^orepent. Amen.

FINIS.

