

A FVLL, AMPLE AND PVNCTVALL DISCOvery of the Barbarous, Bloody, and inhumane
practices of the SPANISH INQUISITION against Protestants: With the original
thereof.

Manifested in their proceedings against sundry particular persons, as well
English as others, upon whom they have executed their Diabolical TYRANNY

A Work fit for these times, serving to withdraw the affections of all good
Christians from that Religion, which cannot be maintained without those ^rop^
of (...).

First written in Latin by Reginaldus Gonsaluius Montanus, and after translated
into English.

PSALM. 74. Arise O Lord, and judge thine own cause.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at the three golden Lions
in Corne-hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1625.

The special matters contained in this Treatise, placed orderly in such wise
as the Inquisitours proceed in their Court.
Chap. 1. THe ordinary manner and form commonly used of the Inquisitours, as
well in citing as apprehending such persons as are accused in their
consistory. Fol. 1. 2. The Sequestration of their goods, commonly called the
Sequester. 9. 3. The several days of hearing. 11 4. The publication of the
witness, as they term it. 27 5. The confutation of the same. 36 6. The
judgments and condemnation to the rack, and the manner of execution thereof.
42 8. Other practices of the Inquisition, to drive the Prisoners to confess
such matters as the Inquisitors are desirous to understand. 56 9. Certain
other more secret then the rest. 59 10. How the prisoners be entreated
concerning the whole manner of their diet. 71 11. The visitations of the
prisoners. 84 12. The Act containing the Publication of the sentences. 88 13.
The Interpretation of the sentences. 110 14. Special examples, plainly
showing the treacheries and legerdemaines of the Inquisition in practice and
exercise. 117 15. A list of certain godly Martyrs, who constantly dying for
the truth; the Inquisitors notwithstanding labored to slander with apostasy
and revolting. 134
This Table is according to the chapters as they are printed; the seventh being
mistaken for the eighth, etc.

The translatour to the Reader.
THere is no good nature (gentle Reader) that beholding on a stage an old
Tragedy, wherein be represented the miseries of any one man, or the ruin and
desolation of a whole country, will not accompany the outward motions of the
players, with some inward affection, yea, sometimes with tears and vehement
compassion. Which if we do in a play, whereof the matter is many times but
invented, and howsoever it be true, yet happened in Countries far off and
long ago, the parties neither touching us in kindred, nor the matter in
example: surely the dangerous practices and most horrible executions of the
Spanish Inquisition, declared in this book, which now is brought with fire and
sword into the low Countries, the sudden imprisonment of honest men without
process of law, the pitiful wandering in exile and poverty of personages
sometime rich and wealthy, the wives hanging on their husbands shoulders, and
the poor banished infants on the mothers breasts, the monstrous racking of men
without order of law, the villainous and shameless tormenting of naked women
beyond all humanity, their miserable death without pity or mercy, the most
reproachful triumphing of the popish Synagogue over Christians, as over
Painimes and Ethnicks, the conquering of subjects as though they were enemies,
the insatiable spoiling of men's goods, to fill the side paunches of ambitious
idle shauelings, the slender quarrels picked against kingdoms and nations, and
all this only to hoise up a pild polling priest above all power and authority
that is on earth: these things ought surely much more to move us to compassion:
Being no stageplay, but a matter fit for any Poet to make a Tragedy of
hereafter, either for that it will be an argument most lamentable, or most
incredible to them which shall not have seen it; The persons which suffer
being our neighbors by their habitation and dwelling place, our acquaintance
by intercourse, our friends by long acquaintance, of the same household of
faith, and our very brethren in Christ. And if we weep when we see cruelties
set forth in plays, because the like either has happened to us heretofore, or
hereafter may betide us, then have we not ouely good cause in these calamities
of our poor brethren to bewail that which happened to them, but also to fear
what will follow upon us. For if we, that not many years since felt but a
taste of this Iron whippe, and since have enjoyed quietness and leisure to
serve God, think our selves sure and the storm passed, and that we be but
hearers and seers, and have no parts in this Tragedy, besides that we are
uncharitable in so lightly esteeming the griefs of others, we do also
foolishly and dangerously abuse our selves. For who is so ignorant of the holy
Complot and Conspiracy agreed on by the Pope and his Champions for the
execution of the Council of Trent, and the general establishing of this
Inquisition? Behold the attempts in Scotland, the proceedings in France, the
executions in Flaunders, and if we Englishmen have one of the last parts, let
us be sure, as in Tragedies the last parts and Acts be most doleful, so we
never knew yet what persecution meant in comparison, to that is meant and
threatened us now. If the Devils holiness, and his lieutenant general, the
Popes majesty, were a little moved then, they be now (doubt ye not) enraged,
and transubstantiate into furour and horn woodnesse, to see their revenues
decay, their Monasteries and Synagogues defaced, their villainies detected,
their noble champions slain. And therefore you must set before your eyes the
Devil in person, and the Pope his chaplain and Confessor, gotten up into the
top of some high mountain, and from thence showing the kingdoms of the earth
to such Princes as will themselves fall down and worship, and thereto drive
the world. Which is so far off from any figurative speech, as it is known to
be the very Platform and foundation of all these broils and troubles. Be not
deceived (good Reader) understand the world, these men seek no religion. For
how can they seek Religion, that think there is no God? They seek the honor
and wealth of the world. If the Gospel would allow ambition, pleasure,
profit, the Pope would have long since been a protestant. If Popery had
allowed preaching of the truth, reformation of life, poverty: Popery had been
esteemed (as it is) Heresy, and so persecuted. But the Pope would be thought
most holy, and be indeed most mighty; the world is fallen from him: he has
spent all: naught comes in to supply; he has a great sort to entertain, a
great sort to reward, a great pomp and state to maintain. Trow ye these
things will be raised of the spoil of poor Protestants? Nay, be thou sure of
it, Papist or Protestant, if thou be rich, and have any fleece, it will be all
one. Thy land will undo thee: thy goods will condemn thee. Even as the good
Citizen of Rome, Q. Aurelius in Scyllas time, that was neither of the one side
nor the other, but lamented the spoil and misery of his country, when as he
came into the market place, and heard hi^ name read among them that were
proscribed to death, cried out, O unhappy man that I am: my house at Alba is
the cause of my death, and by and by was openly slain. If ever there were time
like to Scyllas, it is now in our days, in which hungry need, and insatiable
covetousness armed with cruelty will spare nothing. The servant will betray
his master: the friend his friend and acquaintance: the brother shall murder
his brother. As in the same time L. Catilina, he that after would have set fire
on the City, slew his own brother, and after prayed Scylla that he might be
proscribed. The which being granted him, he recompensed with killing another,
M. Marius one of the contrary faction, and bringing his head, the blood running
along his arms, presented it in the market place to Scylla, and ran to the
holy water-pot of Apollos temple which was hard by, to wash his hands, a very
fit use of such holy water. The which story I the rather recite, sparing an
infinite sort of our times, because ye may understand by the way, that Idols
and holy water be ancient things, such as were before Christ's coming, and
will be continued by his enemies till he come again, and that knowing the
Papists religion to be no better then those heathenish peoples was, their
covetousness greater, their need more, their cruelty far passing not only
all present example, but also all written history, you may daily look for
worse then Scillas time if they overcome: having on the other side no fierce or
cruel Marius to withstand them, nor to quarrel with them for the government;
but a poor flock of silly sheep behind their shepherd afraid of the
wolves, half yielding, half defending their lives: and on their sides
thousands of desperate Catilines, that to repair their decayed states, will
not spare neither to kill their own brethren, nor to fire their country: and
having at all times, but specially now such a Scilla, under whose banner they
fight, as the old Scilla may in respect of this, be both forgiven and
forgetten. Take heed, we have now to our holy Father a Friar, no secular
priest, but a regular H^lhound, who though he think it no robbery to be equal
in pomp with his predecessors, and in malice with the devil his father: yet
has he vouchsafed to take upon him the shape of a man, and goes (they say) on
foot, and makes his tenants the stews keepe-in like good huswiues, which is
no small reformation, and does good deeds at home, and works wonders
(forsooth) whiles he undoes all abroad, and opens such a gap for the great
Seigneur the Turk, as never was yet made. But what will not these fellows do
to revenge their fall? and what ought not we rather to endure, then to admit
these spiritual tyrants? who would not rather be conquered of a mighty Prince
and honorable (in comparison) then of a villain bankrupt priest? who has for
these eight or nine hundred years occupied the whole world of credit; and now
he should come to account, kills his creditours. A miserable choice, but yet
a ready choice. For the Turk contenteth himself with honor and tribute,
permitting religion. The Pope, no honor will satisfy him, no riches suffice
him, no blood assuage him: neither the death of the living, nor the souls of
the dead, will content him. Whose very name should not be spoken of without
Surreuerence and great contempt, for the baseness and vileness of his
counterfeit state, were he not so justly to be hated and abhorred as the great
abuser and very undoubted Antichrist of the world, and sworn enemy of God and
man. The cruel and tyrannical outrages of whose Inquisitours founded and
established by the Devil and this Antichrist, if we confer with the mild
proceedings and discipline of Commissioners appointed by God and his Anointed,
we shall thereby see evidently by the heavenly judgment and sentence of wise
Solomon, to which mother the live child appertains: To the Romish whore, who
(in despite that she cannot possess the poor infants that belong not to her,
to smother them sleeping with the huge and filthy body of her traditions and
ceremonies) seeks by all means possible to divide and mangle them: or to the
natural and pitiful mother the true Church of the faithful, whose fathers
and ministers (knowing of whose spirit they are) seek with all gentleness to
call home the lost ones, and watchfully to nourish them. Whose prince imitating
the peaceable reign of Solomon, has not so much as executed the false
Prophets, not killed the wolves, not destroyed the foxes. Only they are tied
up short, which though it be no such surety for the little ones as worldly
wisdom does require, and necessity long since has cried out for, yet is it
to them no small grief to see the Lambs feed before their eyes, and the
poorest shepherds least whelpe baying at them: whilst they in the midst of
their gluttony and drunkenness, houle for hunger of their brethrens flesh, and
thirstinesse of their blood, and pine for very envy of the proceeding of Gods
word. If the poor ignorant people will but compare the imprisonmen^s of the
persecuted Protestants, with the restraints of the bridled Papists, their
famine with these men's fatness, their tongues fettered with Iron torments,
with the liberty of railing, that our men have and use, seditiously against
their Prince, and blasphemously against God, their most miserable and strange
kinds of deaths, with our men's living and liking, they shall easily know the
tree and the persons by the fruit. Wherefore (good Reader) having so evident
marks of their woluish and ravening natures, and so good notice of their
bloody conspiracy, and so waying the very true cause of all these troubles and
wars that be in Christendom, and thereto conferring the present executions and
slaughters, even in our neighbors house, the fire whereof may soon embrace
our own, let us be stirred up to pray for their deliverance, and that it would
please God, to turn from us the same justly deserved plague for our
unthankfulness. Let us be strong in faith, and courageous in deed, to repel
these common enemies from our country whenever they shall offer that they
have so long determined. And if in this translation, there shall happen to be
some faults, pardon them till the next impression; for the meaning of the
translatour was only to make thee speedily understand of so great and so
imminent a peril: besides, that thou might use this book as a taste in the
mean space, whiles the book of Martyrs be reprinted, wherein there is a most
plentiful and notable History of the like matter and argument.

The Preface of the Author.
IN so great a hurly-burly of civil dissensions, wherein so many people and
nations bend force against their own companions and fellow-citizens, and
furiously rush their swords and weapons into the very bowels of their own
natural country, and for none other cause in very deed but for the
Inquisition, it would make a wise man doubt in this case whether of them were
mad: the one side, which maintain the Inquisition, as a thing most holy and
wholesome for the Commonwealth; or the other, which seek not to avoid any
godly Inquisition and reformation of religion, but to defend themselves like
men worthy of liberty wherein they were borne and bred, from a strange,
unworthy, and intolerable slavery. For though they be both alike ready armed,
yet differing as much in their opinions and judgments, as they do in their
minds and affections, it cannot be that right and equity should be on both
parts: so that, if the one have justly taken weapon in hand, the other (no
doubt) have done it unjustly. And to pass over the great number of inferior
estates, it is not likely that the chief Sovereigns of the world, who are
persuaded that they ought by all means possible to maintain the same, and
have vowed the defense thereof with great devotion and solemn o^th renewed from
year to year, should err from the truth, or do any thing against right or
conscience: specially being neither the first authors thereof, nor maintaining
it as a thing newly devised, or without any certain original, but as that,
which being received from their forefathers, and reverenced both for the
opinion of holiness and countenance of antiquity, has by a power greater
then is the power of man, been esteemed here among men as a heavenly thing.
Besides these glorious titles, there be also thereunto annexed other singular
commodities; to wit, a diligent endeavor to remove the infection that might
grow as well of the Jewish and Mahometicall heresies that daily do arise,
besides the revenues of the Exchequer increased hereby, and the sudden and
marvelous enriching of diverse private persons, which though they be great
matters in worldly respect, yet are they not so greatly to be accounted of in
this cause. But forasmuch as by Christ's own saying, and by natural reason, a
man cannot have a more easy or perfect judgment of the quality of a tree,
whether it be good or bad, then by the fruit thereof, I may without offending
of any man in the trial of this matter, which is no less profitable then hard
and difficult to do, observe the same order: since the mischief is now
already so far detected, and men grown to be so curious, that they fear not
to call into question such things, as they have hitherto by great error and
doltishnesse worshipped and held for most holy and sacred. Now if the
Inquisition be a good tree, or as they delight to term it a Holy, I doubt not
but it will be content to show the fruits openly, by the goodness or holiness
whereof, it may without fraud or envy be esteemed how good or holy the stock
it self is. For light loves the light, and he that deals truly and
uprightly is willing to come into the light, in despite of the devil and all
other darkness, that his works done in the fear of God may come to light.
But he that works the things that be evil hates the light, and having power
and authority, bridleth men's tongues, covering his faults with forced silence,
lest that the light should discover them, and show them to be repro^eable.
Wherefore let all Christendom now behold these fruits of the Holy
Inquisition: which being otherwise very plentiful, by the only means of Gods
goodness, we have here and there plucked for a say and taste of the tree, and
by these let them judge (as casily they may) whether this Holy Tree be worthy
to stand still, or to be turned vpside down. For herein rests all and some
concerning these matters; whether the reports that I shall make in this
Treatise of the Holy Inquisition, be true or no. Secondarily, how I came to the
knowledge thereof, for no man will doubt but that this tree does worthily
deserve to be hewed down, if there be sufficient proof that it buddeth forth
such pestilent blossoms, and bears like fruits as these be. Again, it were
a dangerous and inconvenient matter, if we heretics that detest the
Inquisition as a sharp and just plague of God, and therefore worthy to be
holden suspected, should have any credit given us herein. Wherefore I have
thought it a thing worthy the travail, to show the briefest and most certain
way, whereby the truth thereof might without any great trouble be understood.
That is to say, if the King whose office it is specially to see to the
administration of justice in his own dominion, would first be brought to
believe, that both he might of his absolute authority, and of duty ought to
call the holy Court of Inquisition to accounts, and that no laws or decrees of
their making, no Privileges, no Bulls, no Pardons or dispensations, finally,
no Oath ought to let or hinder him from the doing of his duty herein.
Secondarily, if after he had appointed such a special Commission to examine
the Inquisition, he would seek means to be ensormed of such matters by men of
gravity and good consciences, who calling unto them others, such as might be
thought to have the most knowledge and best experience in these matters, might
learn out a truth, as the best custom is, in all other courts and
consistories as they call them. For the which purposes those that either
presently are, or have been heretofore fettered in the Inquisitours prisons,
were first to be sent for and examined but unbridled in any case, having those
worse then Iron bittes, taken from their tongues, with the which the
Inquisition has hitherto kept her tyranny close; that is to say, their
solemn swearing of them to be silent while they live, inhibiting them the
uttering of any thing by any means, that they either knew, or saw, or had
experience of themselves touching the Holy Inquisition, or their whole manner
of proceeding against them in Court or otherwise: but that they should rather
repute themselves as dead persons for for that time concerning the knowledge or
sense of any such matters. And as though their oath (for sooth) were not a
matter of force enough, they annexe thereunto terrible threatenings. By means
where of all the tricks of the Inquisition have hitherto been secret and
hidden, and passed under covert to and fro, with a cloak and shadow of a zeal
of godliness, and yet not so obscurely or secretly, but that the whole world
(though confusedly and as it were a far off) has at the length espied and
found out their outrageous tyranny.

And this is the only cause that makes all men keep their tongues, least it
might be their happes likewise to have experience thereof in themselves. This
bridle I say must first be removed and taken away from them of whom these
questions should be asked, and liberty must be given to speak boldly and
without danger, if a man would have these secrecies come to light, that have
been kept close so long, to the great decay and hinderance of the Common
wealth, Wherefore if small credit shall be given to us in this Treatise, or
none at all, because we be as it were a party, and therefore justly to be
suspected, seeing for our own parts we desire no credit, but refer the
matter wholly to diligent and orderly trial, there is no cause why any should
think better or worse of it for us, but judge of it indifferently by it self
as it is.

Moreover it is as greatly pertinent to our purpose to show how we came to the
knowledge hereof. Wherein, albeit we take God to record and our conscience,
that all this is true, yet notwithstanding we crave no such credit to be
aided thereby: neither shall any have just cause to lay that to our charge,
that we have gone from the trial of the matter, and used this as a shift.

But to pass the Kings treasuris, and the enriching of other private persons,
howsoever they came by their wealth, because we would not be thought to envy
their prosperity of many other and so great commodities as we have before
rehearsed, (whereof the favorers and maintainers of the Inquisition do
commonly make their bragges, that there is nothing that makes for them, but
rather for the contrary part) it is easy for any man to perceive, that will
consider with us but thus much, that of so many thousands of people, either
Turks or Jews, or true Christians or heretics (as they term them) and
reuolters from the Romish faith, as have come within the Inquisitours
jurisdiction from the very first beginning of the Inquisition, till this day,
there are to be seen many thousands of Sambenites, as mounments of some that
were burned, some whom besides the perpetual and unrecoverable infamy that
has red^unded thereby both to themselves, and to their whole posterity, they
have bin deprived of all their substance. To be short, that so many spoils of
poor souls do remain to be seen as have suffered at their hands for very
trifles: but of any whom they have instructed and amended, or withdrawn from
their errors, not so much as one example ^or any one memorial.

Now as concerning the original of the Inquisition, the continuance, and the
glorious title that bleareth and bl(...)death men's eyes now adays (for what man
is he that would bow down and worship these sacred names and titles: The holy
Inquisition. The fathers of the faith: The Inquisitors of lewd heresies and
apostacy?) I will speak somewhat, to the intent men may understand by what
right they claim and hold the same.

After the wars were ended, wherein Ferdinando and Isabella of famous memory
expelled the Turks out of the territory and City of Granata, and other places
in Spain, which had usurped there by the space of 778. years, from the time
of Roderico the last king of Spain, that was of the race and line of the Goths,
having restored their country into the ancient estate that it was in before,
and gotten to themselves perpetual fame and renown, they fell from those
continual troubles and tumults of war to reforming and purging of religion.
The occasion whereof came as well by the Mores, that being conquered, had
liberty to remain in Spain, and enjoy all their goods with condition that
they should receive the christian faith: as by the Jews, that were in number
as many as the other, who were permitted to continue still under the same
condition that the Mores did, commandment being given to all that were not
content to admit this condition, that they should immediately depart Spain,
passing over the straites of Marrocke, and retire into their own country. For
the Jews (as their most ancient Chronicles do report) did inhabit Spain
from the time that Titus Emperor of Rome destroyed Ierulalem. Who caused them
to be transported thither, there to remain in misery and thraldom, being
notwithstanding in good case for one thing, in that they were not compelled by
any to alter their religion till the time of Ferdinando. Whereupon the kings of
Spain considering, that those people were but only Christians by name and for
fashion sake, submitting themselves for fear and awe, and for safeguard of
their riches, rather then any love or zeal which they bare to christianity,
devised to make provision, and to take some order for their better instruction.
A godly purpose surely, and meet for christian Princes, if evil counselors
had not maliciously perverted their good intents. For there were always about
the king certain Friars of the order of Saint Dommicke, to whom diverse well
disposed Princes gave very great care and credit, especially in matters of
religion and conscience: which being a proud and ambitious sect, that took
upon them great skill, and outwardlly professed much holiness most arrogantly
and impudently; by means thereof, had more free acc^sse to Princes privy
chambers, and thereupon growing to be of their privy counsel, and obtaining
such credit, that kings were content to be ordered and directed by them in
these and such like good purposes, whereas they should have provided godly
instructors, pastors and teachers to win and allure the counterfeit christians
(as it becommed them) by charity and gentleness, laboring with all diligence
to withdraw them from their errors, to embrace true christianity sincerely and
without dissimulation, they erected a new kind of Consistory of an
Inquisition; wherein the poor wretches, in stead of better instructions,
wherewith there was some hope to win them, should be robbed and spoiled of all
their goods, and possessions, and either put to most cruel death, or suffer
most intolerable torments by whippe or otherwise, leading the rest of their
life in perpetual obloquie and ignominy, and sustaining extreme pottertie by
loss of lands and goods. Neither was this executed only upon such as had most
shamefully blasph^med Christ, but the least and most tri(...)g ceremony of the
Jewish or Morish law, or the smallest error in christian religion, whereof they
did never teach them so much as their articles, had been matter sufficient to
condemn them. To the furtherance of this new device Sixtus the fourth of that
name, Pope of Rome, put his helping hand by adding his confirmation, so that at
the length it became of such force being ratified and established by the kings
authority and the Popes, that were it not for that the hugeness thereof is
such, that is not able to sustain it self, being a thing so burdenous to the
world and so importable, a man might very well think it to be impregnable.
See I pray you how well these godly pastors provided for the new increase of
Christ's flock, whom they ought to have had greater regard to feed than their
own bellies, and should not in milking them have drawn the very blood to
devour it, nor besides the having of their fleece, flame them also most
cruelly to cover themselves with the skins, neither ought to have killed the
fatlings, but to cherish the weakelings, to bind the broken, to seek the
stra^-sheep and bring them home to the fold, like good and careful
shepherds, without using such force and violence, or cla(...)ing any
jurisdiction or superiority over them: to whom they should rather submit
themselves and become servants, considering that they are the fold of Christ
But as for seeking, they sought indeed and daily do, inquiring with great
diligence after the wandering sheep panting and fainting but it is to slay
them, not to sa^e them. But to proceed. As the D(...)ane were the first authors
thereof, so for the authority and estimation that they were in with Princes,
they obtained the execution of this tyranny under the pre^ence of teaching the
true christian faith, whereof they had of long time bin accounted the patrons.
But afterward by means of their insatiable covetousness and ambition, (for
the whech two vices they are already discredited among the common people) as
also for their cruelty and tyranny which they practiced, being exalted to
that high estate and dignity, they became so intolerable, that the Princes
themselves who lately before had advanced them to those estates, were enforced
to displace them, pretending diverse reasonable causes and allegations, and so
committed it unto the Clergy: Whereof the ancient Churches of the Dominicans
hung round about with ancients and ensigns of victory, over such as they
conquered during the time that they were in authority, is proof sufficient.

Ne from her heart the causes old of wrath and sore disdain
Was slaked yet, but in her breast high spite did still remain: Vrig. Aeneid.

How Paris Venus beauty praised, and hers esteemed at naught,
She abhors the stock of Ganimede, who love to heaven had raught.
Howbeit they retain till this day the title and name of Inquisitours still
with tooth and nail, and will one day no doubt have a cast at the office
again, and claim their right. So that we may thank these wicked counselors
and none other for the Inquisition at this day, most diuellishly perverting the
godly purposes of Princes, which tended to the weal of the Church, and
converting them wholly to the advancement of their own commodity and
estimation. Or else whereto I beseech you appertained it, that they which would
be accounted diligent and faithful sowers of the seed of christianity, and
the zealous furtherers of the same, should erect a new kind of Consistory, so
rare and strange to the whole world, which is not set up to inform the
ignorant, or to convince the obstinate, and bring them to the knowledge of true
religion, either by persuasion of learning, or by charitable dealing, the only
means that Christ would have his ministers to work by, but to compel them by
force and might, by rigor and extremity, by commissions and authority, by
Racks and Torments, Chains, Halters, Barnacles, Sambenites, by Fire and by
Fagots: which holy Consistory of theirs, is not assisted with men of godly
conversation, or known to be learned in the mysteries of holy Scripture, such
as would labor painfully in the Lords vineyard, and set forward his harvest:
but is guarded with Sherifes, Treasurers, Notaries, Sum^ers, Iaylers, Proctors,
Promoters, or Familiars (as they call them) a foul and an insinite company.
And who would not judge think ye, that all these things were devised rather to
lay new taxes and impositions upon the people, and to increase the revenues of
the Eschequer, than for the furtherance of religion. As for the purpose, if a
man would choose out a cunning huntsman with all his furniture, having his
art^^lery about him, his (...)tres, grinnes, heyes, dogs, etc. and send him
thus arrayed to preach the Gospel, and publish Christ's religion, what man I
pray you that were well advised, and should behold such a man, having his hands
daily imbrued with the change of preyes and spoils, would not account him a
better hunter than a preacher? For (doubtless) the commission an dauthoritie
of preaching was given to good and godly Bishops and pastors (if any such
there were) both by the laws of God, and constitutions of man, that they
should teach and instruct, as well the young nouices as the elder scholars, to
tread the path of true godliness. But these men being so blind, or so
careless, or both, that either they couldnot, or wouldnot see to their office
and duty in this behalf, there was never a man of them all, either Bishop or
Divine, but he thought that a great part of his duty touching his function was
abbridged and dispensed withal, by means of erecting the court of
Inquisition; all good and godly laws concerning christianity, are so clean
raced out of the tables of their hearts.

And this Inquisition being erected in this wise at the first, and ratisied
afterward by the greatest authority in the world, that is to say, the Kings
and the Popes, though it had the opinion of holiness to countenance it, so
that it should seem to deserve the approbation of most men, yet was it never
generally receuied o^ all. For at what time king Ferdinando went about to
establish it in Arragon, which was his own inheritance descended from his
father, the Nobles of the realm did first make humble supplication that it
might not be established. Afterward, being by violence forced upon them, they
did also with force and violence withstand it, alleging that it tended rather
to the impeachment of the liberty of their country, then to the reformation
of religion. In so much that it was not received (if a man may say it were
received at all that, was forced upon them against their wills) till the
settling of it had cost many a man's life. And besides the hatred which the
Nobles and Commons of that Realm bear against this their holy Inquisition at
this day, it does well appear by the death of Seignor Aepila, who being sent
thither by the King with large commissions to execute the same, was slain of
the Noble men at Sarragoss^ in the Cathedral Church. The which caused many of
the foolish superstitious people to worship him even as a Saint. For it is very
certainly reported, that the blood issuing out of his body, being newly
slain, sprang out in such abundance, that it spirted to the Altar. By the
which miracle (say they) God declared both the innocence of the person, and
the goodness of the quarrel wherein was slain. Notwithstanding all this and
that diverse other miracles are sundry times seen upon his tomb, to confirm
the same opinion and fa^sie of the common people, such is the folly of men, and
the power of the devil (as Paul says) to deceive men which have re(...)ed the
love and zeal of the truth, he could never yet (...) to be canonized a Saint,
and called Saint Aepila: forasmuch as enterprising a just quarrel, he was not
only found to have a s^^rt of male on at the time of his death, (which thing
notwithstanding they say, he might wellenough have enjoyed the holy (...) of a
Saint) but he had also under his other garments a short hanger by his side, and
that (forsooth) only h^ndred his absolute honor.

This Inquisition you will say was not brought in, to the end that any should
thereby be instructed in the principles of true religion, but only that
heresy by means hereof might be abolished. Marry so much we yield unto them
indeed For it appears plainly by the zeal that was in those good Princes,
that they had a better meaning with them at the first, then that which through
their wicked counselors afterward was put in execution. The Inquisition being
th(...) established for the same ends and purposes which I have before
mentioned (as some affirm) before the battle at Granata, which makes nothing
against me if it be so, the charge of instructing the people in the principles
of religion, was first referred to I Tears and Curates, and from them
translated to the Wardens of the Church, and afterward to the Clerks in every
town and parish, who taught the simple abused people their Aue Maria, Pater
noster, their Credo, with Salua regina(...) in Latin shall I say, nay in a
barbarous kind of Latin, and that with sporting themselves, and mocking the
poor silly souls, without any devotion or zeal, not without reward neither,
but very dearly and at a high price; many times besides their common wages,
they were paid with the goodwi^es honesty, or the daughters virginity. For
the other five commandments of the holy Church, which they s^ad were
necessary to salvation: that is to say, the hearing of Mass on holy days and
sundays: The going to shrist and holy confession: The receiving of holy bread,
the due observing of Fasts enjoined by the Church, and the true paying of their
tithes and Church-duties, these things I warrant you were beaten into their
heads in plain words and mothertongue. By which kind of discipline, what
other thing I pray you could seem to be sought, th^n to bring men into a heap
of perpetual errors? And the court of Inquisition being erected on the other
part for reformation of errors, they might be sure like good hunters to lodge
the Dear, and take their stand, and so to obtain a continual prey. But to
proceed, let us grant them thus much, that the Inquisition was ordained to none
other end, and that they be two several and distinct offices, to teach the
faith, and to root out heresies, yet were it the part and duty of good and
discreet counselors, to provide that the authority committed to Bishops by
the holy Scriptures of God, should not thereby be taken from them: neither
should any other persuasion enter into their heads, that there were any other
fire or sword to root out heresies, but only the sword of Gods word: both the
which things the holy Apostle did most evidently teach in the Epistle to Titus;
where among other qualities required in a Bishop, he would have him embrace
the word of God fit for instruction, that he may be able to exhort by wholesome
doctrine, and to convince the gainsayers and adversaries. For surely a true and
justifying faith cannot be forced, (the nature thereof is such) no more can
heresy be destroyed by the heretics death. But the word of God is most apt
and sit for both purposes. For thereby faith is not only engendered, but
increased and multiplied meruellously, and whatsoever is not agreeable to true
faith, if it be examined and tried by the light of this word, shall soon be
bewrayed. Wherefore they ought first to have resorted to the Scriptures, and
taken counsel of them, whether they had limited any punishment for such as
should show themselves wilful and obstinate against the truth, or the most
cruel execution that can be by fire. For as concerning the confiscation of
goods, what can be thought more wretched and covetous, or more unjust and
shameless, or further from the profession of a Christian man? And to let pass
their open infamy, the stain whereof will hardly be spunged out again, who
can worthily speak enough against them, that use the same kind of punishment
even against those poor wretches, wh^^ they have persuaded to recant their
errors? Paul in the place above mentioned, appoints no penalty, for as much
as it may well be, that the party condemned may in time be reclaimed, and
therefore mercy ought rather to be practiced of every good shepherd with all
gentleness and love, then any such extremity. But let us enter further, and
see what Paul appoints for such as are obstinate persons. Avoid the company
of an heretic (says he) after one or two admonitions. First he would have
him charitably admonished of his error twice or thrice, and that by the Bishop,
not cited into the court, not put to the torments, or otherwise punished for
his erroneous opinions with such extremity, and so continually. Then if gentle
admonition will reclaim him, there is good cause why both the Bishop and the
whole congregation may rejoice of the winning of a brother, to be a member of
Christ. But if such admonitions will not prevail, he counsels us to proceed
to excommunication: that is to say, to cut him off and exclude him the company
and fellowship of the Christians: the which notwithstanding must not be
executed in way of revenge of his error, but ministered as a medicine for his
amendment. And this judgment of the Disciple agrees with the rule of his
Master: If he will not give ea^e to thee, nor other (says he) that is to say,
them that have given him admonition the second time, Let him be thence forth
accounted of as an Ethnicke or Publican. Which is as much in understanding, as
if he had never received the faith. In this degree of severity, which being
duly considered is sharp enough, Christ's discipline stays, and proceeds
no further. And this is the Court, these be the laws thereof, and the whole
manner of proceeding, wherewith a true Christian man (if there had been any
such among them) should have contented himself in proceeding against his
brother being beside the right way; or against any heresies, of what sort or
condition soever they be, because Christ has thought them to be sufficient,
and provided these remedies, which the Church has always used from time to
time to great profit, in the rooting up of all heresies that at any time grew
therein. As concerning the putting of heretics to death, it is like
altogether, as if a Phisician, to the intent to rid the patient of his disease,
should for the nonce rid him also of his life. Moreover, they that do pretend
most of all now adays the rooting up of heresies by such means, do not only
not attain thereunto, (for as yet the world is blinded, to take falsehood for
truth) but if it were so, then by taking away his life, they cut him off from
all those means and possibilities whereby he might attain his own salvation.
For it might very well come to pass in time, for as much as Gods judgments are
deep and incomprehensible, that the party continuing alive, might be brought
into some better case. But it is to be feared will some say, lest he infect
others. True it is, and for that consideration both Christ and his Apostle
commands us to ^schue him, and to cut him off from the body of the Church.
But if they would needs proceed farther, and upon other reasonable
considerations punish such obstinate persons more severely; were not the
ordinary magistrate sufficient to execute the same? Doubtless their answer
will be this, that the knowledge of heresies, can in no case appertain to the
secular magistrates, because they for the most part are ignorant in the holy
Scriptures and Ecclesiastical affairs: For this is a common saying with these
Fathers that are so far seen in Gods secrets, that neither the knowledge nor
determination of matters in religion do appertain to the Secular magistrate,
as they term him in despite and reproach But I pray you in what respect are
they themselves chosen to supply those places, and to be Inquisitours to
determine matters of faith, whereof they are termed the Fathers, or to discuss
heresies, whereof they are said to rid the world, being neither learned in
Scriptures, nor able to teach the belief? For they are thought men good enough
for that office if they be Doctors in the civil and canon laws. As for their
Divines (and yet a silly divinity God knows) truly since the time that the
Dominicans were displaced thence, (whereof I made mention before) we have not
seen any of them execute any such office. Yea, what if since that time there
has bin an order taken by the Inquisitors, and entered into their books, that
no Divine thenceforth should occupy any such place? Now as concerning the civil
law, surely the Inquisitors do not excel the secular magistrate; and as for
the canon, if a man were never so well seen in it, they cannot deny, but it
serves as little to the deciding of matters in religion as the civil. How
then is it possible to be otherwise, but that when such ignorant men be
admitted to determine matters of Religion, as have no manner of knowledge in
the holy Scriptures, save only a little poor skill in the constitutions of
man's brain, they must needs turn sweet into sour, and sour into sweet: call
light darkness, and darkness light? That is to say, in professing
themselves to be the Patrones of says, root out all faith, and maintain
monstrous errors: slay the children of God, and cherish the children of the
devil: kill the servants of Christ, foster, maintain, and increase the
servants of Antichrist.

Here they will answer us, that albeit they themselves can no more judge of
matters touching faith, than a blind man can of colors, yet they take into
counsel and commission with them, to debate such matters, diverse Divines,
whose prescript rule and order they put in execution, specially Dominicanes,
who have nothing now to do with the high authority and commission of
Inquisition, save only that they are admitted to consultations, and to the
Qualifications of doctrine, as they term it.

And here though we examine not narrowly with what quantity of Divinity they
come furnished to this office, yet we may easily guess, that being removed for
the causes aforesaid, and thought unfit for the place, they are not since
grown much more apt: specially seeing besides their old infirmities, they are
grievously sick of their ancient shame; daily renewed by beholding from a low
place, the lofty Tribunal seat from whence they are ^ismounted, and are in a
perpetual headache and madness of jealous men, to see their adversaries enjoy
the honor which they have lost. Wherein we report us to the Inquisitours
themselves, for no manknoweth better then they, what tokens the poor
Dominicanes give outwardly of the great bile within their breast full of
malicious matter, as often as they are called to those grave and weighty
deliberations: in-so-much that it has perhaps been thought on, to shut them
quite out of the Inquisitours doors. But go to, they are peradventure amended
since. Why might not then the ordinary magistrate call the same Divines to the
same consultations? Now to appoint any man judge of matters which he
understands not, whereby he must needs hang altogether of other men's opinions
and sentences whatsoever they be, what an iniquity is this? What a perverting
of all law and justice? Who therefore can marvel, if when we see the Holy
Inquisition sit in her heavenly Tribunal seat, we say with Solomon, I have
seen ungodliness sit in the seat of judgment, and iniquity in the place of
justice? And yet notwithstanding all this, what liberty and prerogative they
will allow themselves, in the very same matters which they punish in others, as
the highest points of herefie, you may behold in the example following.

It happened a few years passed, in Barchinon a very famous City in the
teritory of Cathalonia, that when they should march forward in their procession
on corpus Christi day to carry the Mass bread about, and all things were
ready, requisite to so solemn a show, even as the Priest that had danced the
Tragical high Mass, should couch the blessed host in the golden pixe, as the
Devil would have it, it was too great a compass to be put in the box. All
men were amassed: the whole show stayed: there was not a man in that great and
notable assembly that knew what to do, in a case so strange and so unlocked
for. Now surely it was a sport alone, and a jest worthy so great a company.

Some perhaps of the wiser sort, saw no way but one to help at a pinch; namely
to begin a new Mass in Gods name and with better luck, and to shape a cake
fit for the box. But that was too late: for the procession had far to go,
and it was too too much pains to defer it any longer. And besides, perchance
there was never a sir John there but had broke his fast well, the better to
take paine^ in so great a solemnity. And tho the Divines were of opinion that
he that sang the high Mass, might dispatch another in case of necessity, yet
he good soul looking for nothing less then such a chance, had already supt up
the rinsing of the Chalice, as his duty was to do. Well sir, there was one of
the Inquisitours, a man of Arragon, whose name was Molonio. This Gentleman
being as hasty by nature, as bold by authority, made no more ado, but took
a pair of cissours, and pared his maker where he was ouergrowne, and so by a
little paring, put both him in the box, and the people out of doubt. Some
perhaps will praise this man's present wit in so great a difficulty: others
will abhor and detest his godless and rash boldness: others will bewail
and lament the hard fortune of their God so to be pared and circumcised by the
cursed hands of a cruel Inquisitour. But good Lord, if any other had been so
saucie but an Inquisitor, specially if he had had any Jews blood in him, how
would they have handled him trow you? Indeed Molonio was put out of office: but
he tarried not many days ere he was sent to be Inquisitour at Siuil, for they
might not lose so stout a soldier of the Inquisition for a trifle. What should
we here talk of the Popes authority? they extol and abase him: they adore
him and contemn him: they revenge his wrong and do him wrong, even as he
serves or hinders their holy office. We purpose not to prosecute these
matters any further, meaning only to touch them in way of Preface, to declare
by what beginnings and occasions the Inquisition is grown: what antiquity and
holiness it carries: and what profit it has brought to the world under the
title of reforming religion. These things being as we have declared them, so
true in deed, and such in quality, as no honest man can either plainly deny
them, or justly excuse them, no man ought to marvel if the people, which have
otherwise hitherto been most dutifully obedient to their Magistrates, to drive
so horrible a pestilence from their country, have be taken themselves to their
weapons and defense of arms, as having none other more reasonable means to
help themselves.

They protest, that they seek not to avoid the reformation of religion, which
they heartily wish for, so that it be such a one as is worthy of so good a
name, and be directed by the prescript word of God, which ought to be the
only rule of religion, to all that love true religion. And in that behalf,
what can they hope for of the Inquisition, besides that it has already
yielded? They protest further, that they owe to their lawful governors, and
that by the express word of God, obedience, honor, and tribute, the which
they are most ready to perform with their accustomed cheerfulness and hearty
good will. Only they humbly pray and beseech, that it may be taken of them
without the dishonor of God, and the most miserable capti^itie and thraldom
of their consciences, the which ought to be more recommended, and dear to
good and godly men, then their very lives. They protest besides, that they will
not any manner of ways shake off the yoke of just obedience to their
Magistrates, but they complain, (and that not without great cause) that
besides the easy and gentle yoke which they have hitherto borne with that
meekness of heart that became them, they are scourged with the Iron whips of
the Inquisition, which seeks nothing but the slaughter of innocent Citizens,
and the confiscation and spoil of their goods. They might have in times past
with some color blamed the men of Arragon, which received not the Inquisition
without tumult and bloodshed, for it was then covered with that goodly and
fresh name, and show of holiness: neither as yet had it raged against all
indifferently, but only against the Jews and Moors, and that also for very
plausible and apparent causes. But now since it has not ceased to bring forth
such fruits, as we have rehearsed for these threescore and fifteen years: I
think they shall not seem to be mad, that seek by all means to them
possible, to drive it from their borders. Nay, they might rather be truly
judged to be mad men, if in stead of their faithful fathers, and good
shepherds and preachers of true religion they would wittingly and willingly
receive into their houses the very enemies, and most cruel destroyers of all
faith and religion. And if there be any that know them not to be such as we
term them, let them read but part of their sleights and manner of proceedings
discovered in this book, (for we could not learn them all,) and let them
well weigh and consider them, and then judge.

A DISCOVERY AND plain declaration of sundry policies practiced in the Spanish
Inquisition.
CHAP. I.
The ordinary manner and form commonly used as well in cyting, as apprehending
such persons aS are accused.

Whenever any denunciation (as they term it) or rather information is given
against any person, be it only for matters of no great importance (as nothing
comes into this court so small or simple, but the parties accused are very
greatly endamaged thereby) the Inquisitors accustomably use this kind of
practice. First, they suborne some one out of a number, such as have learned
their lessons for the nonce (commonly called Familiars) who of purpose The
Inquisitors Familiars.
shall cast himself to meet one, and being provided before hand what to say,
shall greet him on this wise. Sir, yesterday, it was my chance to be with my
Lords the Inquisitors, and as they happened to have speech of you, they said
they had to talk with you about certain of their affairs, and therefore gave
me in charge to summon you to appear before them to morrow at such an hour.
Now the party may not (being once warned) either refuse or differ to come,
but at his very great peril. Whereupon the next day he repaireth to the place
where the Commissioners sit, and requires the porter to signify unto the
Lords that he is come. Whereof as soon as they have intelligence, all three (if
they be present) or at least two of them, meet in a Counsel chamber where the
Court is commonly kept, as at Siuil; in the castle Triana, and such like places
else where in other Cities abroad, and calling the party in before them, they
demand of him what his suit is. Who answers, that yesterday he The Court and
prison of the Inquisiti^^,
was warned under their precept to come and speak with them. Then inquire they
his name; and that known, what he would: for as for us (say they) we wot not
whether you be the same man that we commanded to be here with us, yea or no.
Marry now since you are come, if you have any thing to inform us of in this
holy Court either of your self or of any other, in discharge of your
conscience (man) let us hear it. Whereunto the party either answers that he
has no such matters to inform them of (as indeed to stand upon that point to
the end with them, who seek nothing else but his undoing and such as he shall
appeach; is the wisest and safest way that may be taken) or else of mere
simplicity, not knowing how he entangleth himself, rashly and unadvisedly
utters some thing of himself or of some other. Then my Lords the Inquisitors
glad that they have caught him, to the intent the more easily to fear and amase
him that thus foolishly has made himself so fit a morsel for them to prey
upon, cast looks one at another, and rejoicing as though they had smelled the
rat, all at once fix their eyes upon him, and behold him earnestly: and
whispering together a little while (Iwot not whether they say ought or naught)
at the last either award the party to prison, if the matter that he discloseth
of himself seem any thing weighty, or if he chance to confess nothing at all,
they will him to depart, pretending that they know not, without better
information, whether he be the same party whom they commanded to come before
them or no. Whilst the party is thus in examination, provision is made that the
promoter who gave information against him, is secretly hidden behind some
tapistry, where he cannot be seen; yet so, as he may see the parties face, and
know if it be the same man, or no, if happily the Inquisitors know him not. Then
license they him to depart, being assured that it is he which shall minister
matter for this tragedy, and perhaps call him not before them of 2. or 3.
months after, specially if he be there inhabitant: for if he be a forreiner,
they lightly give him not so great respit. The next time, when their pleasure
is to send for him, they exhort him again, that if he know or have heard any
thing that concerns their holy Court, to disclose it unto them. For we know
right well (say they) that you have dealt with certain persons suspected in
religion; which if you will confess of your own accord, assure your self you
shall receive no harm: therefore we charge you take heed and look well to
your self. Our opinion is of you, that like a good Christian man, you will
call to your remembrance such things as are bypast: for indeed a man's memory
is weak (we wot well) and may fail him, and therefore it may be you have
forgotten, and feign would tell all you know if you could call it to mind. By
these and such like subtilties they abuse many silly souls, or else dismiss
them for that time: yet so, as they shall not think themselves clearly
discharged; but to keep them continually occupied and unquieted in their minds,
and to make them stand in daily fear and awe of them, tell them it may be they
shall have further matter against them, and occasion to call them again. Yet
sometime it happens that they bear with some person, and wink at him many
days, and with some whole years, ere they cause him to be apprehended,
always provided, that he shall have one or other of these jolly mates to keep
him company wheresoever he go, and wait upon him at an inch to creep into his
bosom, and grope his conscience: who under the color of friendship and
familiarity, very craftily and subtly, whilst he good man thinks no harm,
shall daily come and visit him, and have an eye to all his doings, and mark
with whom he conferreth, where he uses to resort, what he does there, and, as
nigh as may be, whereabouts he goes and what he intends: in so much that
without the special aid of Gods holy providence, it is not possible for a man
to escape their snares. Now if any of the Inquisitors chance to meet any such
persons so dismissed, they salute him very courteously, and show him a good
countenance, promising to stand his good friend. All which courteous kind of
entertainment tends to none other end but to make the man more careless of
his estate, and so to undo him ere he be aware. But what good (I pray you) can
they getby get by these detestable and abominable sleights, except perhaps they
use them for their recreation, and take like pleasure in them as does the
fouler in his pastime, when he plays and dallieth with his game: or the
fisher, who after he has stricken the fish, suffers her to play with the
line, and to sport her self for a time that will scarfely last the turning of
her tail: or as the catte that plays with the mouse, after she has given
him some privy pinch, leaving him at large, and hunting him afresh, and by and
by teareth him with her teeth, and eats up every morsel? Wherein it may be
that some secret mystery lies hid, which all the world perceiues not, nor
altogether without gain to these holy Officers. Howbeit this kind of dallying
with their prey, they use not with every body alike, in such sort as is before
declared. For they have very great respect of persons and causes in this
behalf. Which is a plain token that they deal not in this sort either with such
strangers or town-dwellers as they think are like to escape from them by this
liberty, neither yet with such as are charged with great matters, whom they
think needful to be seen unto betimes, specially if there be any hope that by
their confession they shall have intelligence of any other. But first, when
they are determined to apprehend any person that is accused, they use to send
for the Bishops deputy of that diocese or Ordinary (as they call him) and
making him privy to the depositions of the witnesses against the party accused
(which they call an Information) after a little consultation had with him of
the matter, they all subscribe to a writing, which is a warrant directed from
them to attach him: which kind of dealing seems to have a show of good
equity. Forsooth they will not be thought to touch any of another man's flock
without th'aduise and consent of his own Pastor, who being full ignorant and
unskillful (God knows) in the duty of a Pastor (as commonly all of that coat
under Papacy are) is brought to give his consent, that the sheep over whom he
has a special charge, shall first be fleeced, and afterward miserably slain,
and bereft of goods and life. For as yet there has never any breach bin heard
of about these matters betwixt the Inquisitors and the Ordinary for defending
any of his flock that has been by them sent to execution. Yet may a man see
oftentimes, yea daily almost, great numbers die in prison, some hunger-steru'd,
some extremely racked and dismembered in every joint of their bodies, some even
in the midst of their torments yielding up the Ghost betwixt the tormentors
hands (as I will not fail hereafter to declare, when I shall be occasioned to
treat thereof more conveniently) insomuch that the Inquisitors will say of some
of them, that they were as harmless men, and as innocent, and put to death as
wrongfully as any men could be. Whereby it is evident, that this sending for the
Ordinary to confer withal, about the apprehending of some under his cure, is a
very vain thing, and rather a foolish ceremony, than a matter serious or done
of any justice. And to tell the plain truth, their manner is to bid the
Ordinary to a banquet to quaffe his part of the Banquet.
blood of his own sheep, that the wolves may continue the faster friends. Our
Lord Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, come when he sees his time,
and render to each of them according to their own deserts. Yet sometimes it
happens, that they call not the Ordinary to counsel, before the party be both
accused and apprehended. For being well assured that he will not gainsay them,
nor control any of their doings, they think it enough when the party is fast
and forthcomming, then to declare to the Ordinary the occasion and manner of
their proceedings: who hearing it read unto him, likes very well thereof,
as well that they have already done, as is also content with whatsoever else they
can devise to do. Now if any that is accused do chance to make an escape,
either before he be apprehended or after, then use they all devices that may be
to find him and fetch him again. Neither is it sufficient that they give the
searchers certain common signs and tokens to know him by, as to describe his
apparel, his countenance, age, etc. but they draw his counterfaite as lively
as may be in Counterfaits
sundry patterns, and distribute them among the searchers, to know the party
the more easily by, whom perhaps they never saw in all their lives: whereof I
will report you a true tale for example.

Not long agone they apprehended a certain Italian at Siuil, who had wounded
one of the Paratours on a time being at Rome, commonly called the Inquisitors
Alguazil. And albeit the Familiars that were sent to seek him, The Alguazil is
in manner of a Sheriff.
had his counterfaite about them, as they use to have: yet notwithstanding
happening upon him at Siuil, and half in doubt whether it were he or no, because
he had altered his apparel, and of purpose changed his name, they pursued him
a good while only of a bare suspicion, which they had by his countenance that
it should be he. Therefore one day as he was walking and talking with diverse in
the Cathedral Church at Siuil, they found out this new device to attempt him
withal, seemly for such Familiars. Two or three of them came somewhat nigh
about him, and as he happened to turn in his walk; his back being toward
them, on a sudden one of them calls him by his old name. The party being in
earnest talk, and mistrusting nothing, suddenly looked behind him, and made
answer: whereupon the catchpoles forthwith laid hands on him, and were clearly
resolved that he was the self same man. This fellow lay in yrons a good
season, and after long imprisonment was whipped about the town, and condemned
to the gally perpetually. and thus was he served for hurting the Alguazil,
partly through his own folly and negligence for want of a little heed taking.
The which devices albeit they be very subtle, and such as no man's wisdom can
avoid, yet shall it not be greatly amiss to show one other special example,
how God oftentimes makes them stark fools, and guardeth his with a holy kind
of policy, that they may be able to go an ace beyond them. Not long since
there was a certain man of the Low Countries that had escaped out of the
Inquisitors prison at Valladolit, who was apprehended for the profession of the
Gospel, and had bin a long season in prison. There went out to seek him (as
the custom is) diverse of these hunting Familiars, who within a few leagues
off, ouertooke him in the high way, and stayed him. The party told them flatly
he was not the man The Fiscal.
they took him for; and yet would not these good fellows leave him, but by
force and strong hand went about to bind and bring him back again, still
contrarying him, affirming him to be the selfsame man whom they took him to
be: and thereupon demanded of him, not doubtingly, but as though the matter
were very clear; Are not you he (Sir) that escaped out of the Inquisitors
prison at Valladolit, about eight days since? Not I (Sirs) says he, setting a
good face on the matter, and therefore view me better. I am no such man, but am
newly come from Castile, where I have wrought in mine occupation a great while:
and because you shall the better credit my words, and know it to be so, here is
my testimonial which I carry for my pasport, take and read it: and forthwith
took out a certain writing which he had about him, and offered it them to
read. Which, after they had read it, they gave credit unto, and let him go
with shame enough that they had been so childishly deceived in taking one man
for another, as to their thinking they had done. And as touching the
testimonial that stood him in so good steed, this is the truth of it. After
his departure out of prison, making as much speed in his journey as possibly he
could, he chanced to meet with a country man of his by the way, one of his
old acquaintance ^tho.
newly come from Castile, and to help himself withal in this distress,
found means to obtain his pasport, which beyond both their expectations, as
God Pasport.
would have it (a thing so appointed by his secret providence) did serve this
man's turn, and saved him from so great a peril. For the other was departed
from him but two days before, and left his testimonial behind him in this
man's hand to keep: whereby he was in good time preserved, and they colted like
knaves very prettily. Yet have these Familiars another fetch beyond all this,
to retriue them that are escaped and fled away. As, some of them shall trace
him by his footing if they can find his footsteps: others shall pursue him
that way whither they think in their own judgments he is most like to be
gone: another crew of them shall lie in wait for him by night, because they
are sure he will travel by night rather than by day. For I tell you, they are
more than a good sort that are appointed for these purposes; insomuch that a
fly cannot escape the Inquisitors fingers, but there shall be enough at hand
ready to fetch her again. But God, against all their devices and narrow
searching diligence, shall arm and safeguard him, whom his good will and
pleasure is to deliver. And thus much concerning the apprehending. Now to tell
how they entreat them after they be arrested and committed to ward,

CHAP. II.
The Sequestration of their goods commonly called the Sequester.

IMmediately after every arrest done by the Alguazil, or complaint made to the
court of any person by any of the Familiars, they straightway take from about
him all the keys of his chests or locks whatsoever, if he have any, and
forthwith send a Notary and certain catchpoles with the Alguazil himself to
take an inuentory of all such goods as are in his house whatsoever they be.
Which being done very exactly, such as they find, they leave in the custody of
some rich man dwelling thereabout, who undertakes to be accomptable therefore,
and to re-deliuer them duly and truly whenever they shall be demanded. But in
this Sequester (as they term it) the owners of such goods had need to look
well about them, and always have an eye to their fingers which are at the
sequestration, and are the doers, specially when they come to rifling of money
and jewels, either gold or silver, or any other thing else that is of any price,
and light for conueiance, or will lie in a narrow room. For they are commonly
limefingred, and willightly make something stick by them, if they be not
narrowly seen unto. And indeed the greater part of this rabble of Familiars
are bauds, thieves, shifters, and the vilest sort of people that live only by
filching, which cannot, nor will not hold their hands if they should hang for
it. Besides that, they are persuaded in conscience, that they should not in
such cases forbear other men's goods, although they have no manner of right
thereto.

Now to tell you briefly whereto this sequestration tends. Forsooth, that if
it happen the party be condemned, so that his goods or any part thereof be
confiscate, this holy house I warrant you will not lose so much as a dodkin of
them. For who knows not thus much, that the prey and spoils of such silly
souls is all that they seek for? else what should these holy fathers that
respect nothing but virtue and godliness, do with their goods (I pray you)
whom they bear us in hand they would so feign bring home again to the right
way? Or who is so mad to think that misbelief can be amended by loss of lands
or goods? Yet it may very well beseem Christian men to be spoiled of all their
substance, yea, and of their clothes from their backs also, by their enemies,
seeing their head, whose members they are, and whose truth they profess, was
so served: for whose garments (likewise) not much worth, perhaps half thread
bare with wearing, after they had put him most cruelly to death, they
determined also to cast lots. And this kind of Sacrilege is now so ratified
and confirmed by the common consent of their Divines, that is to say, the
Monks and the residue of the Clergy, that they shame not to preach and teach
openly, that whosoever is not iumpe with the Pope, or dissenteth from him in
the least jot, is bound in conscience, in all have (say they) to bring in all
his goods into the Kings Eschecquer, and that he has no more right unto them
then if he had robbed the King of them before, alleging this reason, that for
so much as he is revolted from the Church of Rome, he is no longer any right
owner thereof, but the King, to whom the Pope has adjudged them. Wherefore a
man is bound (say they) to restore them unto him, although the Inquisitors
never heard so much as one word of him. And thus these subtle foxes by this
one policy are both greatly gracious with Princes, and therewithal do
inueigle the consciences, and pick the purses of the silly foolish people,
deeming them as gods. But to return to our purpose. As soon as the prisoner is
entered within the first gate of y^ prison, the keeper having with him a Notary,
asks him if he have a knife about him, or money, or rings or any other jewels.
And if it be a woman that has a sheath of small knives at her girdle, rings,
little chains, bracelets, ouches, or any other ornaments, such as women wear,
they strip them of all these, and commonly they be his fees that finds them.
This is done to this end, that the prisoners during the time of their
imprisonment shall have nothing to succor themselves withal any ways. They
search them also, le^^ they bring in privily about them any writing, or book,
or any other such like thing. But after they be once entered into prison, they
are shut up in a close cabbayne, where they have scarsely good elbow-roome, for
cleanlines and lightsomnes not much unlike to Little (...)se. And some are close
prisoners all alone for 8. or 15. days, some by the space of 2. or 3. months,
and other some all their lives long. Some again have fellows and companions
from the very first day of their imprisonment, as the Lords Inquisitors will,
and as they think most convenient to bring their matters about.

CHAP. III.
The several days of hearing.

AFter they have thus continued in prison about a week or two, the Inquisitors
privily pack with the Iaylor to be in hand with the prisoner, as though it
came from himself, and to advise him to sue that he may come to his answer,
and pray to have a day of hearing. Wherein, it is not to be thought the
contrary, but that there is some mystery meant thereby, that the prisoner must
first begin to stir in his own cause. The keeper therefore either at dinner
time, or some other most convenient to bring his matters about, resorteth to
his prisoner, and among other talk, at the last falls to question with him
how it happens that he s^^th not to come to his answer, that his matters may be
more speedily ended, and aduis^th him to labor it with as much speed as may
be, making him believe, the sooner the better, and that it will much further
his cause so to do, and at the length bring his suit to some good effect:
Adding moreover, that for the acquaintance which he has with him, in the way
of friendship he is moved to give him the best counsel he can, and such as
is meetest for his behoof, promising to do and deal for him therein to his
power, like a faithful and trusty friend. Yet surely it may be thought with
good reason, that if any thing may do the poor wretch good, being in case
ready for to be devoured by these ravenous beasts, it will fall out in the end
to be better for him if he refuse to crave a day of hearing, and tarry till the
Commissioners do call for him. But if there be none other good to be done, he
may chance to get this by his tarrying; in driving them to begin with him, to
take care for nothing but only to make answer to their objections. But since it
is so secret a mystery, I will let it go, and leave it to the judgments and
considerations of the wiser sort to scan and judge upon. The poor prisoner
knowing none of these subtilties, for the most part is ruled by his keeper,
thinking that he has given him good and wholesome advice, and prays him
therefore to be a mean for him, and in his behalf to crave a day of hearing:
whose suit is easily heard of the Inquisitor, and granted at the first I
warrant you. Whereupon the party is brought into the Consistory, where the
Inquisitor, as though he were altogether ignorant of the matter, begins to
talk with him much after this sort: Sirrah, your keeper came and told us, that
you were desirous to come to your answer. Now say on, what is your suit? The
prisoner answers, that he would be very glad to have his matter heard. And
unless he look well about him, and be circumspect in his dealing, very
lothsomnesse of his imprisonment, and fear of afterclaps, drives him to
confess somewhat whereof he suspecteth himself to be accused. The which thing
does the Fathers good at their hearts, because they are accustomed at this and
sundry other seasons, to grant the prisoners days of hearing, and to call them
often into the Court before they shall know their whole accusation, and all
that is deposed against them (which by order and common course of law should
have been the first act that should have been done against them) and all is
to this only end, to make the party utter somewhat of himself rashly and
unawares, that they as yet know not of. They advise him moreover to let it come
from himself, promising that if he will acknowledge his faults voluntarily,
he shall be forthwith sent home again to his own house, and be dispatched
with all expedition, and dealt withal as gently as may be. But if for all
these vain and flattering promises he hold them hard, and stand mute (as
indeed it is best for him) they charge him earnestly to disburden his own
conscience: and when he has bethought himself, and is disposed to confess
any thing, that then he should sue to come to his answer, saying that in the
mean time, they will consider of his case, and so they remand him to prison.
Then after 6. or 8. days or mo, as they think good, they call for him again,
and ask him if as yet he be determined to confess ought. The prisoner
answers, either that he has nothing to say, but that he is innocent, or
perhaps confesses somewhat. But whatsoever his answer be, they are sure still
harping on their old string, urging him to discharge his conscience, and
persuading him that they go about no other thing but to do him good, and to
procure his safety, of very love and mere compassion which they take upon him.
Which gentleness of theirs, and well meaning toward him, if he refuse now,
and set light by, he shall find them sharp Iusticers henceforth if the
Fiscall inform against him, and so send him again to prison. The Fiscall is
an officer which takes all such accusations as the Promoters bring unto him,
and by office is the only pleader, during the whole time that the causes be
hanging, as it were the Kings Attorney, having his name no doubt a Fisco, that
is to say, the Eschecquer: for whose advantage he is altogether, and from
whence he is answered his fee.

At the third day of audience, the party is called for again, and demanded, if
yet he be resolved what to do, with earnest request after their accustomed
manner, to confess a troth of his own accord: if not, they threaten to use
extremity toward him, and what they can do by law. And here they understand by
this word law, extreme tormenting and mangling of men, yea such as their own
own laws do prove very Innocents, saying he may well assure himself, that
no man shall sustain any injury within their holy Office, and that their
fashion is not to trouble any man but upon good and sufficient information
against him, with such like talk. Howbeit, if the party happen to disclose any
thing: nay (say they) yet are we not satisfied, we have not all you can say, we
suspect you keep something in of purpose, and so send him to prison, putting
him to further pain, and calling him coram day by day, as they perceive that
by these means they wring more and more out of him, though it be but by little
and little. But if he stand stoutely in the matter, giving them direct answer
that he has naught to say in that place, by a shift of descant (as it were)
they try him another way, exacting an oath of him: and to the intent to prove
his zeal, they hold him an Idol, representing the crucifixe, covered with a
black lawn, and certain other Idols, I wot not what. They do also lay before
him a Mass book or a Missall, and sometime the bare image of the cross. For
such devices and foolish toys as these be, they have always in a readiness to
use as occasion serves, and as they think most requisite, respecting the party
whom they are to deal withal. Here is the Christian man driven into a narrow
straight, so that he must needs utter himself, and plainly show what he is in
conscience and in belief. For if he be a faithful man indeed, and one that
from the bottom of his heart abhorres Idolatry, having before his eyes the fear
of God most mighty and jealous, which in his most holy law has reserved this
glory to himself, that we should swear by him alone, he will beware that in no
wise he give part thereof to such vile Idols of wood or metal; which being
made to resemble the highest in shape, are so much the more abominable in the
sight of God, and of his congregation. Therefore a godly man will take heed of
such a wicked and ungodly oath, yea though he were to be torn in pieces
presently, seeing they be very Idols, and not God, to whom alone that honor
belongs, as the Inquisitours themselves cannot say to the contrary. After
they have thus put him to his oath, they begin to examine him upon these
interrogat^rie^: What country man he is, and under whose allegiance. Of what
Province or Diocese. In what city, town, or village he dwells. Who were his
ancestors, and what their names were. What brethren or sisters he has. What
his father and mother were, and what were their names: how they lived, and by
what trade and occupation. If he, or any of his kindred at any time have been
conuented before the Inquisitours, and upon what occasions. Moreover, many
other things they inquire of him; as of his age, and trade of life, where and
with what manner of men he has been most conversant: and thus is he sorced to
give a straight account of his whole life, where he has passed his time
yearly, and made his most abode, answering to every point by it self
severally. For out of each of these questions they fetch no small arguments,
wherewith they charge the poor soul afterward too too pitifully. When he
has answered to all these by-questions, then fall they afresh to their old
exhortation, sometime by fair means, and sometime by foul, aduising him to
tell the truth frankely, assuring him, that they never cause any to be
arrested without just cause why, or without sufficient witnesses: so that
whether he confess or no, away he goes to prison again.

And in these three first times of hearing, a great sort are either allured
with their fair speeches and promises, that they shall be sent home to there
own houses as soon as they will confess that that is demanded of them; or
else of very awe and fear of their evil and menacing words, utter many things
whereof the Inquisitors knew not one jot before, because none had informed them
thereof, but themselves only suspected, lest they had been accused by some,
with whom they had dealt heretofore in such affairs. Thus betraying themselves
like fools, they bring other men into as evil case as themselves, which
perhaps neither feared any such matter at all, nor the Inquisitors had ever
heard any thing of them before. But most of all, when they perceive that these
most holy Fathers, who hunt after nothing so much, as daily to have change of
spoils, will take it thankefully at their hands, then labor they by all
means possible to curry favor with them, to get themselves rid out of misery,
and to be set at liberty: So that it comes oftentimes to pass, that the
parties being at the first arrested for very trifling matters, undo both
themselves and many others more, by giving overmuch credit to the fair promises
and goodly gloses of these false and faithless Inquisitors, through want of
skill how to behave themselves in their own affairs, much less able to judge
and discern what opinion they should have of these Fathers, that is to say,
not to be fathers (as they glory to be called in derision of all humanity,
piety, and fatherlinesse) but their most cruel and deadly enemies, which by
craft, subtilty, and lying, and by all kind of knaueries, privily go about to
get that they gape for, both life and goods of the guilty, and of the
guiltless. Against all which snares of theirs, there is one only way of
auoydance, to wit, that he whose destiny it is (I mean by Gods ordinance and
appointment) to fall into their hands, believe never a word they say, promise A
general Cau^a^.
they never so fairly; nor be afraid of them, threat or thunder they never so
terribly: having always before his eyes the love and dread of him, who after
he has killed the body, has power also over the soul to send it to hell
fire; and having numbered the very hairs of our head to the uttermost, will not
suffer the least of them to perish or fall to the ground without his good
pleasure and providence. The next lesson is to keep his tongue for his life,
and speak not one word till the time that he has heard his accusation, with
the depositions, whereunto he is bound by order of law to make answer.

Furthermore, at the fourth day of hearing, they tender him an oath, vehemently
exhorting him to shriue himself voluntarily: otherwise they will deal with
him as hardly as the law will permit them, if the Fiscall once commence his
suit against him. And if he do yet persevere constantly, affirming that he has
no more to say, then read they unto him a long indictment, and charge him with
many great matters, falsely forged and devised against him, such as neither the
party did ever so much as think upon, nor any had accused him of to them. For
it is a point of cunning forsooth in this their crafty faculty, for the Fathers
to make these great matters and huge offices on their fingers ends for these
special causes. First, by thus loading the poor man, and laying to his charge
many great and made matters, to bring him into such a maze, that being scarcely
his own man, he shall not well know where he is, nor which way to turn him,
nor what answer to make. Secondarily, to prove if happily he will admit any of
these misdemeanors that are laid against him, or at the least, if by argument
about any of them they can trippe him in his tale, and so catch him in their
net. Is this then their following of Gods judgments, whose cause these Fathers
of the faith brag and boast so much, and bear the silly ignorant people in
hand, that they take upon them to maintain, in the very first step of the
stage, whereon they are ready bent to do execution of a sort of innocents, thus
shamefully and mockingly to cry, Arise (O Lord) and judge thine own cause? Do
Psalm. 74.
these policies proceed of faith (trow ye) where of they term themselves
the Patrons? Did ever any true Patrons of faith either teach them to other, or
else use them themselves? Are these the most direct means to bring him into the
right way, that of mere ignorance and simplicity has gone astray from the
truth and word of God, or to teach the unlearned, or to correct and amend him,
who has erred and fallen of common infirmity? Or are they not rathermore
likely to be the snares of Satan, practiced from time to time by contentious
and devilish people, privily laid to supplant a poor man withal, and very
stumbling blocks craftily and maliciously cast for the nonce, to make him
break not only his shinnes, but his neck also, that plainly and simply shall
pass thereby, and looks not warily to his footing? And who would have thought
(I pray you) that these holy Fathers would have busied themselves in making
such mouse-traps, and setting such pitfals? But how many good Christians have
fallen into these snares, to the great peril both of their bod^es and souls
only by the detestable means of these pestilent and pernicious Tyrants,
Christ the searcher of secrets, and chief Inquisitor over all at his general
doom, sitting in his seat of Majesty, will one day make manifest.

As touching their accusations, the great and principal The Inquisitors
general objection.
matters wherewith they burden every one that comes within their
jurisdiction, be these: First, for that he being baptized, and under the
obedience of the Church of Rome, forsaking her profession and doctrine, is
become one of Luthers disciples, by admitting and harboring his heresies in
his heart; and yet not content therewithal to be an heretic himself, has
provoked and poisoned others by teaching and preaching the same heresies unto
them. And to this effect well near, they use many big words to make the simple
folk afraid withal. Next to this, they charge them also with other matters,
sometime of more importance, sometime of less: Provided always, that the
matter whereof the party is accused, be brought in, either in the beginning or
ending, or else some other thing that some man has him half in a jealousy
for. Which thing they lay to his charge, not as a matter surmised or of
likelihood, but most constantly affirmed and testified by witnesses. For in
this holy Consistory they may do what they list, and what they think expedient.
Then is the party accused put to answer to every article that is laid against
him, severally and directly, either yea or no, as he thinks good, having
always a clerk by him to record every word that he speaks. After this
examination and confession thus had and done Ex tempore, without either order
or any great aduisement, they straightway give him pen, ink, and paper to put
in his answer in writing if he will; pretending hereby, that they work for him
all the means and helps that may be to try himself an honest man. And thus is
this crafty Inquisition cloked with this goodly pretense of equity and justice,
where in very deed this is their fetch, that hearing him first make one
confession by word of mouth suddenly and without aduisement, and after that
another with more deliberation in writing, they may easily find some ods
betwixt the one and the other, having neither any copy of his former confession
to lay before him, nor being able for very fear and trouble of mind to
remember every word that has escaped him. But if there chance to be no
contrariety, yet happily shall there be somewhat either more or less in the one
than in the other. Moreover, it stands him upon to be able to chop logic
with them, and to find out such contradictions as the other look for, because
his latter confession penned with some diligence, always ministers some
matter of new cauillations. Which fetch of theirs whosoever will wisely and warily
avoid, must take heed he play mumme, and speak not one word, but premeditated
and devised upon before hand: and being mute in all other matters, crave only
this one thing at their hands, and that in as few and apt words as he can
possibly, to have a copy of his accusation, with paper, ink, and sufficient
time granted him, that he may by leisure, and with some ^ood deliberation make
answer to such matters as are laid to his charge. But forasmuch as they (no
doubt) will not hold themselves contented with one answer, but will seek to
have it both by mouth and by writing for the causes before alleged, the party
must in any case see to himself, and seek to wipe their noses by shaping them
a short answer: yea, be they never so full of their questions and flourishes,
or how froward or untoward soever they be, let them not get within him in any
wise, but hold them offaloofe, and be as brief with them as he can. For albeit
these raueners be very greedy of that answer that was suddenly made, and
without any study, yet set they most store by that that was of his own
penning, specially if it be done by one that is learned, whom by common and
daily experience they know to be of that nature for the most part, that whiles
they labor to avoid matters of no great importance by some nice construction,
they fall into diverse other absurdities, or at the least, by uttering a little
of their poor skill they minister much matter for captious fellows to
quarrel and cavil upon. By means whereof, many times such learned clerks,
who at the first fell into their fingers but only for trifles, were afterward
burdened with so many matters and so weighty, that they could never rid
themselves thence, til either they went to the stake, or else enduring some
other punishment, led the rest of their life in perpetual shame and ignominy.
Whereof I could show you sundry examples, but that I would be loath to fall from
describing the subtle practices of the Inquisition, to discourse in a manner
of a whole history. Wherefore, I hold him wise which can observe in that place,
upon a little study to make a brief and a resolute answer Christian-like, so
as he neither hurt his conscience, by suppressing or shaddowing a truth, nor by
his long process give his adversary any thing to take hold upon, or have any
advantage against him, which (doubtless) is the only makr they shoot at, in
putting him to answer it by writing. It is also very good for him, that so often
as he can, he make sure his side by some School(...) and C(...).
of their Canonists and Schoolmen (as they call them) for so shall neither the
truth be obscured, nor these so easily make a quarrel to his answer, being
ratified and confirmed with his adversaries arguments. But whenever any
either by writing, or word of mouth, confesses any thing openly before them
that is heretical, they use this order commonly; out of that one saying to
draw and derive diverse others by hook or crook, and to charge him with each
of them severally, as if he had spoken and affirmed them all precisely, though
the party never spoke them, nor then will grant them, nor greatly understands
them, or well knows what to make of them. As for example, I will report a
thing that happened at Siuil a few years ago: neither need I to coin any
examples in a case so common as this is, that is almost in experience daily in
that holy Court of theirs, to the great loss and utter undoing of many silly
and simple souls.

There was a certain man cited before the Inquisitors at Siuil, for saying in
presence of his familiar friends and acquaintance, that he knew none other
Purgatory but one, and that was the blood of Christ, which daily washes and
purges our sins. The party who said it, was but a simple man, brought up in
the country all the days of his life, having no spark of good ciuility in
him, or of any good education, and by chance hearing this on a time among
certain of his companions, liked thereof very well; but now, coming before
the Fathers for the same matter, told them plainly how he was of the same mind
once, marry since it misliketh their worships, he is very well content to
forsake it. But what did it avail (thou fool) to make so rash and so sudden a
recantation? By confessing the matter, thou set them agogge. By keeping thy
tongue, thou had grieved them to their very galls. By making thy purgation,
thou could but have lost thy labor. Yet this did not content the
commisioners, but there must needs be some other quarrel picked against him.
For the Inquisitors Organs (forsooth) went hard for want of exercise, and
therefore they must necessarily have some body to play upon them, and keep them
from rusting. Ergo, say they, and conclude of this antecedent against this poor
plough-man, the Church of Rome which in time past has determined the contrary
by law, does err, and the council erreth also, and justification comes by
faith only, wherein a man is made free and absolved a poena and culpa. To be
short, out of these they fetch a rabble of opinions and assertions, which they
call heresies, and charge the poor man with every of them, as if he had
affirmed them all in plain terms, say he nay never so stoutly that he knows
nothing of any such matters, nor so much as once ever thought upon them. Now
who sees not that this kind of proceeding in this holy office is packed full
of subtle policies, and all the devilish practices and devices that may be?
Yet herein is the mighty providence of God toward his elect specially to be had
in admiration, that these men wanting the means of calling and teaching which
other men have to induce them by, in a place so quite contrary to these means
as is fire to water, are both called and taught by God, having their eyes
opened by him, and their understanding lightened. For the Inquisitors
themselves, who seek utterly to destroy and root up all faith and truth, they
(I say) by such means as I have before declared, are ye very preachers,
teachers, and furtherers of the same, as it is evident and manifest by many
notable examples of sundry persons that have fallen into their hands only for
prating rashly and foolishly, rather then of purpose or advisedly, that there
is no purgatory, and that it is but a dream and no such thing indeed; whereas
they have been at their first coming in, ignorant in most of the points
concerning salvation, by their only questionings, collections, illations,
brought either in form or out of form, have departed thence very well
instructed: whereof this rude fellow of the country, of whom I last made
mention, may be a sufficient testimony. Moreover, if he party chance to
confess ought, they use to have another hook ready bayted, sharp and
perilous enough, I warrant you: to wit, they enquire of him whatsoever it be,
of whom he learned or heard it, or if he have happily read it in some book, or
if he have had any conference with any other about the same matter, or he
himself have been an instructor to others, or by any means have mentioned it
in the presence of any: in what place he did so, and who they were that stood
by? For whosoever was present, whether they liked his talk or no, yea though it
were his own father, or nigher him, if nigher could be, they are sure to buy
it full dearly: the Inquisitors will have a f^irt at them, because they came
not forth with, and made complaint thereof unto them. All which things it
behooues a man greatly to be cunning in, that if it be Gods will that he fall
into their hands, he may learn before hand out of his holy word and will how
to prevent them, and provide an answer to such demands, lest he undo both
himself and others through his own folly and negligence. At the last, when
his accusation is read, if the party be an infant (as we term one within age)
they provide him a Patron whom they call a Tutor. A very godly The Tutor.
way (no doubt) if such a man were appointed to that place as would play his
part stoutly, and as it becomes him in respect of his office. Howbeit he is no
such manner of man as the infant would and should have for the better bringing
of his matters about, but one of their own choce, which either is a very wolf to
ioyn with them against the simple lamb, or at the most, to stand like a cipher
in Arithmetic, and do nothing but fill up a place, and for fashion sake and
order stand in stead of a Tutor to perform the ceremonies and circumstances of
the law. For most commonly the Porter of their holy house serves that turn,
or in his absence some other of the Porters lodge, and indeed but only that
he bears the bare name and title of a Tutor, dealing in nothing that
appertains to the office, my Lords Muleter may easily be Tutor in such sort to
the whole company of the prisoners all at once. By reason whereof, the Porter
cannot always be ready to answer every body that knocks at the gate. And on
this sort do these holy Fathers fulfill the commandments of God, and the laws
of man touching poor infants and orphans, who as well by the law of God as of
nature, are commended so specially to the consideration and regard of all men,
but most chiefly to Judges.

Neither rest they here, contenting themselves to mock the law in this point
alone, but in another of more importance: whereas the law provides, that every
defendant The Advocate.
shall have his Advocate, some man expert in the law, to plead his cause, and
order it discreetly according to law and conscience, and to defend their right
if any they have, or at the least to temper the rigor of the law, lest it be
construed and ministered with extremity in this so weighty a matter, and the
only succor that these silly souls have to help themselves withal; they
deal with them in like sort as they do in the former for appointing them a
Tutor, and so shift it off with a mere shadow and a bare ceremony: only
because it is a very weighty matter, therefore they would seem full of
courtesy and humanity, and would feign cloak their wicked contempt of laws
with some goodly pretense. For they name unto the party 3. or 4. of the most
famous men toward the laws, to choose out of them some one to plead his cause,
and besides all this their gentleness (of fatherly affection I dare say) they
advise him to take such a man, who in their judgments is the best learned. And
what would a man desire more? Yet whosoever is chosen to be his Advocate, will
be sure that he tell not his Clyent any point of law that may do him ease any
way. For he knows right well, that if the Inquisitors have intelligence
thereof, he shall not escape scotfree, seeing their meaning is nothing less
then to provide him an Advocate to defend his cause, but only to bleare the
common peoples eyes withal, and make them believe that they proceed by order
of law like good conscionable Fathers, where in very deed they compass their
matters both against Gods law and man's. For the Advocate and his Clyent may
not so much as have a word together secretly of any matter, but in presence and
hearing of the Inquisitours or of some Notary. And what does the Advocate then
would a man think? Marry he receives his Clyents answer to the accusation
rude and rough hewn as it were, and that does he smooth and set together in
form of law (yet ilfauouredly framed full often, God wot) and all this while
takes upon him the name of an Advocate, only to delude the law withal. But
forward to our purpose.

Within 2. or 3. days after the party has had the copy of his accusation, he
is called into the court, where his advocate stands, like one that would
stoutly defend his Clyentes cause, and save all such matters as should seem to
make against him. Then the Inquisitour, as though he had done the party an
high pleasure, and discharged his conscience wholly for that part of the law,
points out the Clyent his Advocate with his finger, and straightway falls
into his old note, exhorting him to utter the truth, and take heed to his
conscience, and if he have any more to say, to say it at once. All which time
the Advocate sits or stands mute, and if he have ought to say, yet dare
he not let it come out before he have made the Inquisitours of his counsel.
For the Advocate all the while that he is telling his tale, so eyeth the
Inquisitours, that one of their eyes is never off from the other: the
Inquisitour is so much afraid lest the prating Advocate utter something rashly
and unawares, wherein the Clyent might espy somewhat for his advantage in law,
and so avoid the danger of their secret and hidden snares. The Advocate on the
other side is as much afraid, and quaketh every part of him, lest any word
chance to slip him suddenly that the Inquisitours happly shall not well like
of, and therefore dare say nothing for his Clyent, but only give him a few
words of comfort, and bid him be of good cheer, and tell the truth in any
case, saying, that that is the only way to prevail in this Court: and as for
me (says he) I will be ready to do for you the best that I can. Then comes
the Inquisitour in with his part, singing the same note, and so is the prisoner
sent to his prison again.

After this day of hearing, the party begins to be of better courage,
hoping that his matter draws nigh to an end: but it is far otherwise God
knows. For many of them are forgotten: some for a year, or half a year, or
perhaps for three or four years, as it pleases these good Fathers to deal
with them, and there they lie in prison, as it were a piece of leather that
lies steeping in the tanners fat. During all which time, they neither are
called any more, nor one word mentioned for their deliverance. Then, if any for
very lothsomnes and intolerable filth by reason of their long imprisonment, do
crave to come to their answer, some perhaps obtain it, and some go without it:
but in the end both their luckes are alike. For they that after long suite get
a grant thereof, are commanded into a Parler; where they have such countenances
made them, and such speech used toward them, that it is easy to be espied,
that they have no manner of regard unto them at all: and there (forsooth) they
put them a question a great deal meeter to be asked of men in a far better
case then they are in. As for the purpose: what their suit is? or what they
would have? Whereunto each answers, that he would be glad to have some end
and determination of his trouble. Marry and thereabouts we go (say they) as
carefully as we can, and assure your self we will not forget you. But if he
be earnest to have it determined, they bid him bethink himself then, and say
the truth, asking him why he no more regards his conscience? etc. At the
length, laying the fault of his long imprisonment to himself (whereas he
poor man would have been content, if he might have had his choice, to come
forth to the stake, rather then to continue there so long) they send him to
prison again. And albeit they afterward do grant him diverse other days of
hearing: yet as he continues his suit, so keep they him off with their
accustomed delays, till they think it be time to communicate unto him the
depositions made against him, which they term the publication of the witnesses.

CHAP. IIII.
The publication of the witnesses

AFter a long and loathsome time of imprisonment, in such sort as ma^s nature is
not able to endure it any longer, when the poor soul in their judgments is
brought so low, that he could be content to be delivered with all his heart,
though it cost his life, and therefore likely to tell all and more too, yea,
even as much as they themselves can demand or desire: they call him yet again
before them, and in a speech framed as it were a mean betwixt a sharp rebuking
and a gentle admonition, do ask him how it happens that he has slipped his
own matters so long, and now at the length would have him come in and tell the
truth. Upon which point they stand very long in persuading him: and then either
on this or the next day of hearing, the Fiscall enters his action against him,
praying that publication may be made of the witnesses: which being granted,
forthwith the depositions are delivered to the party, but yet without any names
subscribed. The order and penning whereof is a sufficient declaration what
great zeal this holy Court has to bring the truth to light. For all things
are so difficultly reported and so abruptly; so wrested and wrung with such
doubtful terms of double sense and understanding, that a man would judge him
sure never well in his wits that uttered them. And this is a piece of the
Legerdemaine of that holy House, purposely invented to drive the party always
into a doubt, even of those points which he knows are already deposed
against him. Secondarily, that so nigh as may be, he should have no manner of
knowledge of the witnesses, who they were that did depose against him, lest
happly he should take some exception against them. Finally, that if he have
conferred with any other then his accusers, concerning those matters whereof
he is accused, and knowing not who were his accusers, but laboring to find
them out, should perhaps reckon up all, and so by that means bring a great
sort of mo fishes to the Inquisitours holy Angle.

And here would I be glad to know of these Fathers of the Faith, seeing they
are so well learned in the laws (if they would be so good as to tell us how it
comes about) that whereas the Publication of witnesses is ordained of common
right to be used sincerely and plainly, yet in this holy Court it has no
place, neither is allowed for law, by reason that the names of the witnesses
are suppressed, and so the one half of the law, yea the better half of it, is
curtalled and quartered, and the residue neither uprightly handled, nor
faithfully, but most craftily and falsely abused, as I will make relation
hereafter. And if an exception will lie against witnesses, not only by order
of law, but in other respects upon very good and necessary considerations,
because knaves and villains should not any way trouble nor molest honest men
that are guiltless and innocent, why is there no place in this most holy Court
for such exceptions? For in civil causes but of small importance, they
Witnesses admitted in their holy Inquisition.
will not admit a man's enemy, nor a liar, nor a defamed person, nor an Idiot,
nor a Bedlam, nor a drunkard, nor a ^ew, nor a villain, nor any such kind of
people to be sworn as witnesses: and who then (I pray you) has enabled all
this route of Rakehels, in matters of religion and the weightiest causes that
can be, to be accepted and admitted for witnesses, and that their testimony
shall be received and reputed in matters touching life and death: seeing they
are disabled by all laws to condemn any man in the least trifles that may
come in question betwixt man and man? But here perchance they will say they
deny not, but the party has very good liberty of challenge against the
witnesses, if he could learn by any means or conjecture who they be that
deposed against him. Therefore if he chance at any time to guess him right
that has thus testified against him, so that the Court judge him insufficient,
and does therefore refuse him, they have done notable injury to both parts, or
to one of them at the least. First of all to the witness, by refusing him now,
if they did right before in suppressing his name, because the party should not
know him: next, to the party himself, being now at the length content to
admit his exceptions, so he can guess or by some other means learn his
name, and have sufficient matter to charge him withal, and such as may be
thought good cause of challenge: which surely in all indifferent men's
judgments that have any consciences at all, is an horrible and most detestable
kind of injury. But to return to their policies. The depositions of the
witnesses therefore is an evident proof, as well by their order and manner of
examination, as also by their kind of speech therein used, whether the
Inquisitours have kept the even street, or gone by crooked lane. For this is
most sure that they are not commonly read to the party in such sort as the
witnesses have deposed, but if any thing be uttered besides by the witnesses
that might make for the prisoner, or be construed on his side, they reject all
that as needeless and superfluous, admitting only that that makes most
against him, and clap on all that on their own biace side. For the further
proof and declaration whereof it will be worth the noting unto you, to show
what their common usage is in registring of such depositions: As for example.

N. a witness (suppressing his name) sworneand allowed, etc. says that heeth
said N. heard in such a place, and such a year, and of such a month (if he
can so precisely remember the times) such a man report, that the aforesaid,
that is to say, the party accused, said thus and thus, etc. And in their
Records (which they call their Original process) they have all those
circumstances at large, which they exact of the witnesses for a further truth
and trial of the matter: but in that exemplified copy which they deliver to
the party himself, very subtly they suppress all the circumstances of time
and persons present, whereby the party might have any inkling of his accuser or
witness, supplying those places with these or such like words: A certain
person: another man: and a third person. In which kind of depositons there be
certain privy points and nice conceits diligently to be observed, that is to
wit: Whenever they say that he heard it of a certain person whom he has
named, it is to be understood, that the witness heard the party himself
speak it; and by the crafty conueyance of the Inquisitors it is so brought
about, that in the counterfeit copy which they deliver to the parties hands, it
seems as though he had heard it of some other man's mouth, because he shall
not guess who it was that gave evidence against him: but having conferd therein
with diverse others, as well as with this man that deposed against him, should
no more know who hurt him, then he that plays at blind-man-buffe can guess
who gave him the blow. And in this behalf, if the prisoner chance to mention
any such persons as the Court has not yet been informed of, they are
incontinently outlawed, and reputed as favorers of heretics, for suffering
an heretic to sow such pestilent seeds among them, without making complaint
thereof forthwith to the Inquisitors. But if the depositions be on this wise,
That he heard it of another certain person whom he has named, etc. it is to
be understood, that the witness heard it by a mean, and therefore will not
serve to join with another witness, though he be man good enough for them,
and fit to feed their suspicious humors. The difference betwixt both these
depositions is no more but this, that in the one this word other is used, that
is not put in the former, which is only thus, that he heard it of a certain
person, etc. This geere, I tell you, is taken out of their Sancta Sanctorum.
Thus by these subtle and captious quiddities, the Inquisitours beguile many a
Christian soul that knows not their cunning dealings, but thinks himself
safe enough, because he feels his conscience free from uttering any untruth.
And truly it is greatly to be lamented, that such poor wretches being
guiltless (God knows) a great sort of them should be so hemmed in of these
crafty Catchpoles so far beyond all humanity, for want of a little skill in
these their subtle and slightfull devices. Wherein this counsel of ours
(perhaps) may do them some manner of pleasure, for the more easy espying and
avoiding of these their policies. The defendant therefore must take heed that
he speak not one word at this day of hearing, tending to the confutation of
that which the witnesses affirm, yea though it be as false as God is true, and
he himself never so well able in his own judgment to answer it presently;
lest the Inquisitours by their importunity happen to wring out somewhat from
him on a sudden, as they use to deal with diverse. Only let him this do;
that is to say, crave a Copy of the depositions, and license to answer them in
writing by leisure and with deliberation, against the next Court day, or so
soon as he can conveniently. In which answer, let him see in any case that he
observe those things, whereof in the accusation made by the Fiscall, I have
given him instructions before. Secondarily, after he has obtained the Copy,
diligently to mark of himself, who be witnesses with the witnesses, and who
not, and whether their testimony be able and sufficient to condemn him in
these matters wherein they bear witness with the other, or no. As for his
Advocate, he is but only for fashion sake, and it were as good for him to have
one of clou^s, for any help that he is like to have The number and quality of
their witnesses.
at his hand, much less (may ye think) at the Inquisitors. But as concerning
ye witnesses, two that heard it of report are in this lawless Court as good as
one that heard it of his own mouth: so that two such witnesses of heresay, and
one that heard it of the parties own mouth, are enough to condemn him. Moreover
it is to be noted, that the keeper of the Inquisit ^urs prison, whom they
commonly call Alcaidium, is as good as two of the best witnesses. And therefore
for such mattters as he has seen and observed in the prison, his only
testimony is sufficient to condemn any whom he himself accuses. Yea, and in
some cases one only witness, though he have nothing but by heresay, yet is he
sufficient to put the party in ieopardy of the rack, if he have not some just
cause of challenge against him. But if there were any respect at all, or regard
of justice in this Court so far from all conscience, it were enough in all
godly and indifferent men's judgments, either for the parties deliverance, or
at the least for his purgation, to avoid that quiddity in the depositions
which I mentioned before, by fair and flat denial of that, which the witness
said only of heresay, were this word other there or no. Wherewith the
Inquisitors seek to salve the matter, and to save themselves, being indeed but
a very false and a frivolous cavil, only, to color a lie. For so should it
fall out in the end, that he who deposed nothing but of heresay, should, as
right and reason is, be refused as insufficient: and the other that spoke of
his own precise knowledge, be likewise rejected, if there were just cause of
exception: so that both their secret practices should be avoided, and the
Inquisitours enforced to lay away all this their double dealing, and to tell
him plainly that the witness heard it of his own mouth, and so drive the
party to avoid it more substantially. But what shift should a man make in such
a case? For, having the law in their own hands like Lords, nay, like most
cruel Tyrants rather, when they know the witness had it at the first hand,
yet will they make as though they were content to admit the exception of the
party who took the witness to be none other then such as had it by report, and
will afterward order the matter as it pleases them, whiles the party supposes
that he has sufficiently avoided that witness, and thinks himself sure
enough for him. Let him therefore well and warily cast with himself aforehand,
or rather pray unto God to reveal unto him, what is to be done in this
perplexity.

Furthermore, in this holy Court every Iohn-a-Nokes may The Promoters serving
their holy Inquisition.
be a promoter, and every frantike Bedlam that is besides himself, every
varlet or villain, and so forth every one of the 24. orders, be he a person
never so much disabled in law to be a witness. For a hungry hunter, and one that
is greedy of his game, will be glad of every curtalled curre that will do him
service to bring home his prey. But if the Promoter in his information chance
to want words of weight, or to misplace them, or have forgotten the very words
which he heard the party say, so he can hit of the matter, and remember the
substance, the Inquisitors by virtue of their office instruct him, and bring it
into his remembrance again: In so much, that oftentimes the Promoter will tell
such a tale as neither he heard, nor ever meant to tell, but even as they
themselves have prompted him word by word: which a man may well think is not
all of the best sort. Yet God has sometimes so blinded their senses and
understandings, that they have quite forgotten both themselves and all their
own practices and devices. As it came to pass at Siuil, that a certain
frantike woman, in the absence of her keeper chancing to break loose, and to
undo her bolts and irons wherein she was fettered in a certain godly man's
house, came to the Inquisitours to the castle Triana, and there had almost
discovered to them the whole assembly of the congregation, which in that great
city here and there met in corners. The which (no doubt) had been a prey
alone for them, but that God meruellously defended that good flock of his,
being at that time very small in comparison, and far unable to abide the
punishments which since that time they have for the profession of Christ
endured most constantly. This woman before she fell mad was one of the chief
in the congregation: I mean for feruencie of zeal and skill in holy
scripture, far above that which a man would look for at a womans hand. By
means whrof, she was very well acquainted with all those, who in this perilous
time professed the Gospel of Christ, but in the heat of her frenzy all her
former love and zeal that she bare toward the congregation, being turned into
an extreme and a deadly hatred, she raged so vehemently against the assembly of
godly persons, that in all her madding time she had nothing else in her mouth,
but cried upon the Inquisitors on this sort: Fire and fagots, fire and burn
them; possessed (no doubt) of some evil spirit laboring quite to overthrow
that good Christian congregation by the means of that mad woman. Therefore so
soon as ever she was got loose, she went straight way with all speed to the
Castle where the Inquisitours lay, and there knocked at the gates, which were
opened unto her by and by, as commonly they are not strait kept upon any that
can inform that holy Court against a sort of poor innocents. Whereupon at her
first entrance within the gate, she required that in all haste she might come
to the speech of the Inquisitours. Who straightway assembled all together in
their Parler, as it were to consult about some weighty affares, and sent for
the woman before them to hear what she could say. Who immediately decared unto
them, that she had brought them a Bedroll of Lutherans that swarmed abroad in
the City, whiles they that should diligently see to such things, sat idle
within and ouer-slipt their matters: and so began to reckon them, and if she
had proceeded, she had appeached to the number of 300 and above, that were very
earnest professors of the Gospel: but that the Inquisitours astonished at this
sudden sight, and meruailing at the first what this should mean (for till
that time there had been little talk or none of any Lutherans): besides,
espying many mad toys which she used in the telling of her tale (which was a
truth indeed as she reported it) caused her to cease her prating in good time.
Yet because they would not be thought negligent in doing their duty, though
the matter were but of small importance, they kept the woman still, and sent
for the good man in whose house she was kept, whom she meant to have made
foreman in her bil, because he had enteated her somewhat roughly at such times
as her fittes were upon her, to the end to make her leave her rauing. The man's
name was Francisco a Cafra, the Parson of Saint Vincentes Church: who
afterward was imprisoned for religion and escaped away by a miraculous means:
notwithstanding in the very first triumph over the Lutherans, they burned his
picture. When he was fetched and brought before them, being taken for a good
honest man, they asked him what the woman meant by talking of such a number of
Lutherans, etc. but he forthwith forcing a laughter, fained himself to marvel
at them, in that they perceived her not to be besides her self; declaring unto
them, that she had bio in that plight by the space of two or three months, in
so much that he was constrained to beat her and bind her, as was to see by
her shoulders both black and blue, and by the print of the Irons on her
legs: adding moreover, that he for Gods sake and in the way of charity kept
her at his house: from whence she brake loose, causing him and his whole
household to seek her over all the city: howbeit he was now right glad that he
had once met with her again, and found her safe. As for the Lutherans whom she
prated of so much, he told them, that during the time of her fits, she had none
other song, as most commonly mad folk will be always talking of some one
special matter or other. And for the fetters wherein she was chayned at his
house, if it were their pleasures either to send any to see them, or to make
enquiry of his neighbors about him, they should find all things so as he had
reported, and therefore besought them, that some of their servants might take
and bind the woman, and bring her home again to his house. Where at the woman
fell into a great rage and exclamation, that all the castle rang withal,
saying she was not mad, but he was the greatest and starkest Lutheran in all
the City, that laded her with Irons, and scourged her daily most pitifully. At
which words they all fell in a great laughter, and thereupon commanded their
servants to take and bind her, and to carry her to her old home again, and to
her cold Irons, commending him greatly for his good work, in taking upon him
so great a charge as to deal with a mad woman, and to seek means to amend
her; aduising him henceforth to make her surer, lest she should chance to
break loose hereafter, and make as much business at some other time. Thus the
Inquisitours forgetting themselves and their own practices, lost at this time
as great a prey, as all that amounts unto which they had been scraping and
gathering together in the harvest time and increase of the Church for two or
three years before. But to return to our matter. It is furthermore to be
considered and observed in this holy Court, that the Promoter never speaks in
open Court against any person, but only the Fiscal, who is, as it were, an
Attorney general to move the Court in all the matters that are brought unto
him, and to take all the informations, and follow them accordingly, so that the
Promoter serves him for a witness. Whereof, like (as of other things) I need
not to bring any other proof or testimony then their own. Let every man
therefore judge by what right or reason they do it.

CHAP. V.
The confutation of the witnesses.

THen after 3. or 4. days, the party is commanded to come before them, and to
put in his answer to the depositions. And with him comes also his Advocate.
But here I should not forget to tell you by the way, that whereas it is the
part of every Advocate in all just causes diligently to confer with his
Client about the depositions, and to advertise him which be the chief and
principal points that require answer, and not only thus to do, but also to
draw the answer himself, and set it in such order as most may further his
Clie^ts cause (else whereto does an Advocate serve but for such purposes?) they
leave the simple man to himself, to devise and dispose it as well as he can,
having none in the world to help him, save God alone. And if you ask this
holy Court the question, why they do in this behalf break and contemn this
custom, which doubtless proceeded of the very law of nature, they can yield you
no reason for it, nor make you any other answer, but only this: Forsooth there
is a great difference betwixt this holy Court, and other common Courts. In very
deed they say truth, and so it is: for all their nice quiddities were not worth
a straw, if the parties might there frankly and freely defend themselves by
such means as are to them by all laws allowable. But when the party has
already framed his answer so well as he can, then in good time his Advocate
comes in, to play his part at the length. Who very warily (I warrant you) and
circumspectly, as he knows full well it stands him upon, dealing in, so
dangerous a case, lest he likewise, ere he be aware, fall into the Inquisitors
hands by some little oversight, declares unto his Client openly before the
Inquisitors, which depositions they be that touch him nighest, and what be the
great matters that are proved against him, who be witnesses with the
witnesses, and who not, and that there is no good to be done any way but one,
to guess if it be possible who is his accuser, and to devise exceptions
against him. And yet it is not best for the Advocate here to be over busy in
prating to the party, or to put him in mind of any further matter that might
do him good, more then he by aduisement and leisure can pick out of himself.
Only this counsel he gives him, to remember himself, and call his wits
together when he is most at leisure, with whom he has fallen out at any time,
because it may be that some of his enemies have accused him for some old
grudge. For if there be any apparent matter of some special quarrel that has
been betwixt the party and his accuser, this is all and the only cause of
challenge that this Court will admit against any witness whatsoever.
Furthermore, he declares unto him, that he may refuse peremptorily such
witnesses as have varied in their tales, or be his enemies, as is aboue-said:
or if he can bring mo witnesses, to prove that he has always been an
adversary to that whereof he is accused, and one that has rather frequented
and daily been conversant in the contrary. And here is all the help that the
poor Client has at his Advocates hands. Whereupon he is remanded to prison
again, with this Item always, that he utter the truth, with a few menacing
words now and then enterlaced, more then well do beseem them, that if he will
not be ordered in time, they will extort it out of him by extremity of law:
whereby it is given the party to understand, that he shall be henceforth more
straightly examined, and more hardly dealt withal: insomuch that after three or
four days respite given him to call his wits together, and to remember
himself, they send for him again, and ask him whether he has yet be thought
himself, and have ought to say. But whether he has, yea or no, his Advocates
question is: If he have hit on the names of any of his witnesses or accusers.
Wherein if the party can call any thing certainly to mind, he declares it unto
the Inquisitors, praying them to consider, whether such and such men be not his
accusers, betwixt whom and him there has been an old grudge, which as yet
rests betwixt them uncompounded? Howbeit if he guess not a right, besides
this, that his answer is not worth a button, both his whole three or four
days labor spent in ghessing, is quite lost, and his accusation abides still
untouched. But if he chance to guess right, his Advocate asks him what
exceptions he can take against such as he has named, but dares not for his
life directly tell him that he has ghessed aright, for it is not good for him
I wis to talk so plainly. Yet when the Advocate has heard his Clients
exceptions, and taken the names of such witnesses as he names unto him for
proof thereof, being now at more liberty then before, he takes upon him the
charge to examine those matters by interrogatories, and further domandeth of
his Client, if he be able to bring-in proof for his better purgation, that he
has been a friend to the Friars and Monks, and familiarly acquainted with
them, and diligently observed and kept all and singular the customs, rites,
and ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and used to come often to shrift, and to
receive his maker; and in passing by any image or cross, if he have done to
them their due reverence, that it may appear that he is none of Luthers sect.
Finally, if he can auerre generally, that he has been quite contrary to that
whereof he is now accused. Which things if he proffer to prove particularly,
the Inquisitors by solemn act in law do openly declare in Court, that they
are content that he make his purgation accordingly within 9. days next after.
The whole charge whereof, after that the party has given in the names of those
witnesses that deposed against him, rests wholly on the Advocate, as I have
said a little before. Howbeit every man has not thus much favor showed him to
make his purgation on this sort, but only in such cases, where the witnesses
in their depositions agreed not with their fellows, nor greatly with
themselves in their own tales. For otherwise they have but small succor or
none at all to avoid them by making their own purgation, but only are
admitted to take exception against the witnesses (as I said before) if they can
devise who they be.

And when the party is proceeded thus far, let him persuade himself, that
God has brought him thither for trial of his faith, whether it be pure and
perfect, yea or no. For if he, upon hope to avoid the present peril of the
body, determine to use such shifts for his succor in procuring his purgation
by means aforesaid, albeit he be thoroughly quit in this Court concerning his
duty and obedience to the Church of Rome and her Idolatries: yet be he well
assured, in that general day of doom which will be so terrible to all
creatures, and in the judgment of Gods true Church, it will fall out against
him far otherwise. It shall therefore stand a man upon in this case to look
well about him, and to enter into his own conscience, and secretly debate with
himself the causes of his imprisonment diligently. For if it be for the glory
of God, and the free professing of the truth, and he forswear Christ, treading
the blood of his testament under his feet, and denying the truth whereunto God
has called and raised him out of that deep dungeon of darkness, ignorance,
and sin, hoping by these cursed and damnable means to escape the tyranny of
men, perhaps he may do so for a season, and purchase the favor of men again:
but let him him be most assured, that he shall never escape the sharp and most
just judgment of God, from whose truth he is revolted: whose power is not only
over the carcass to kill the body, but afterward to throw the soul into
utter darkness. Therefore if he have any spark of grace left alive within
him, or any zeal either of Gods glory, or love of his own salvation, or that
the authority of our Redeemer may weigh with him any thing at all, saying:
Whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny Matthew. 10.
before my heavenly Father: and he that acknowledges me before men him will I
also acknowledge before my Father and his Angels in heaven etc. he will wholly
rest upon that authority, and stick to his tackling in that pinch, and utterly
renouncing with heart and mouth all these means to save this temporal life,
offered unto him by his Advocate and the Judge (whereunto he cannot give his
consent without great dishonor to his Creator, and danger of his own soul)
will yield a plain and open confession of his faith, thinking himself a
thousand times in better case, that God has preserved him to that instant, to
suffer some affliction for Christ's sake, battering in pieces this earthly
tabernacle, that is to say, a full weak and wearyish body, for so noble a
quarrel as is the honor of God and the building up of his Church. For these
cursed means to save a man's life (which that holy house, the very sink of sin
and iniquity, uses, of like courtesy and compassion as is in the Crocodile, to
grant to these poor souls) are not here reported, to the end that the godly
should learn hereby the shifts to save themselves, but rather, that by knowing
them, they should utterly avoid and abhor them, and that the world may see
that all the devices and policies of this holy Inquisition tend to no other
end, but after they have laid their cruel hands, continually stained with the
blood of some of the Saints, upon any person, if he relent and recant Gods
glorious truth, so to destroy him both body and soul* if otherwise, yet at the
least to kill his body, over which alone their power is able to extend it self
in such as live in the fear and service of God duly and truly.

Thus, after that the party has endured two or three months in prison at the
discretion of these good Fathers, they send for him forth once again to the
place of this combat: where the Inquisitor begins to declare unto him, how
that the witnesses which he brought for his purgation, have been heard what
they can say, and therefore he desires to see what he can say for himself, or
else to draw to an end. Then he, after their accustomed manner, falls to
exhortation that he tell the truth, which is always one piece of their talk,
so that I believe, a man should tell them a good long tale, ere they would be
satisfied. Whereunto the party makes them such reasonable answer as he
thinks best for his own case. Howbeit, unto diverse they use to put sundry
questions, and oppose them in their own answer exhibited up by the^ in
writing, quarrelling at every letter and syllable, like to subtle Sophisters.
When the party has spoken all that he has to say, the Fiscall concludes upon
his sayings; and lastly, the Inquisitors with the assent of their Council and
Assistants give sentence when and what they list or like themselves, the
Divines and Monks, and other of the Clergy first waighing and considering such
things as the party has uttered touching doctrine and faith, and so valuing it
after their own rate and measure, and trying it by their own touch, which they
call the qualification of doctrine. At what time if the party be able to prove
substantially, that he never dealt in Christ's Gospel, which they, by a new
name of their own coining, commonly call Luthers heresies, either they absolve
him, and give him his Quiet us est, or else most commonly use to order the
matter, and give judgment accordingly as they have him in a certain jealousy
and suspicion still either more or less: Providing always, that none pass
their hands without such marks and badges as he shall carry with him to his
grave, in token that he has bin within the Inquisitors paw^. The marks are
commonly these: Confiscation of their goods, imprisonment during life, or for a
great part of it: A white linen garment with a red cross called a Samb^^it,
and last of all, a The Inquisitours cognizance.
perpetual slander and ignominy to all his stock and posterity, such as never
will be worn out, as shall be hereafter declared. But if the party shrink not
for the matter, but constantly continue so confessing the truth, or disaffirme
the depositions that be against him, having not excepted against the witnesses,
he is sure ^o try the torments: whereof I have now to say somewhat.

CHAP. VI.
The condemnation to the rack, and the manker of the execution thereof.

THe state and condition of the godly (gentle reader) has been evermore from
the beginning hard and very miserable, in comparison of the prosperity which
the wicked and ungodly enjoy in this world. For according to Christ's own
saying in his Gospel after John, they think they do God great good service,
which slay them upon every light occasion, and study daily by new devices and
practices to circumuent them: whereof you have heard some sufficient proof
before. And albeit the injurious dealings and subtle practices which I have
declared already, be such as any good natured people, or that can be content to
be ordered by law, reason, or equity, would worthily think intolerable: yet
in respect of these that shall ensue hereafter, which I am now to show, they
will seem not only sufferable, but very reasonable and full of equity and
good conscience. For they do far exceed all barbarousnes, yea I may well
say all brutish and beastly madness, that a man cannot more aptly liken them to
any thing in the world, then to that which they do most lively resemble, and
from whence they proceed, that is to say, Satan their Sire: so that the
devil, though he should force himself thereto, is not able in matters
touching men, no nor in any thing else in the whole world, to go beyond them
in these their most monstrous and devilish examples of tyranny: neither has
he any man's heart in his belly, that can without tears read or hear these
things that hereafter ensue, which in rifling this butchery, wherein many a
good soul upon trifling occasions, yea diverse of them guiltless (God knows)
are made away, we will lay open before the face of the whole world, and pluck
off their hood of holiness, wherewith they have bleared all men's eyes, and
abused the whole world hitherto.

After the sentence be once given, except it be to the rack, the party is not
sent for again, till the great day of their glorious show; at what time he
comes out into open audience with the other prisoners that come to hear
their judgments pronounced upon them, and every man forthwith to receive his
punishment accordingly, unless he be found not guilty, and so quit by
proclamation. For then is he kept in prison still by the space of 2. or 3.
days after the triumph, that the world may think that he also departed out
with the rest. And this forsooth is one of their holy devices, because they
would not be thought to lay their hands upon any person rashly, or without good
cause why: as they are wont oftentimes to tell the parties by the way, in such
exhortations as they make unto them, to utter the truth. The holy house is so
persuaded of their own doings, that what extremity soever they show unto the
prisoners, yet they think they do unto them no injury. Howbeit diverse of them,
whom they show special favor unto for certain causes to them known, are set
at liberty, and sent away to their own houses two or three days before the
great day of their solemnities, causing it to be noysed abroad, that they were
accused by false witnesses. Yet is this their slye dealing open enough to any
man that list to mark it, even by this one thing, that a man shall never fee
any such false witnesses openly punished therefore, which in all other cases
are accustomably most sharply seen unto. But if they be determined to put any
man to the rack at such time as he least looks for it, then shall he be sure
to be brought into the Audience: where all the Inquisitors, or the greater part
of them, sit in their seats of Majesty, and besides them the Prouisor, as
they term him, or deputy Ordinary of the Diocese, like a shepherd ready to
flea one of his own flock, who of duty ought to be present, as well to hear
the sentences given, as to see execution ministered. And at this Court-day they
declare unto the prisoner, how the Inquisitours, with all the learned Council,
have deeply considered his whole case, bearing him in hand, that they have
found it out for a surety that he will not wholly declare the truth, and
therefore are resolved, that he shall ride the rack, and there be spurred
certain questions, and so by hook or by crook will wring it out of him, will
he, nill he: therefore they advise him to do it voluntarily, as he will avoyde
the pain and peril of the rack. Whereunto they join a certain exhortation,
which they intermingle with some sour speech of high and threatening words, and
set it out with great severity of countenance, rehearsing unto him all the
several torments of the rack as terribly as they can describe them, to make
him quake in every joint of him. Yet whether he confess, or not confess, all
is one, for to the rack he must go. Whereupon they send for the Officer, and
command him to have the party into that place where The place where the
prisoners are tormented.
the Rack stands, which commonly is a deep and a dark dungeon under the
ground, with many a door to pass through ere a man can come unto it, because
such as are put thereto, should not be heard to shrike or cry: In the which
place there is a scaffold reared; where the Inquisitour, the Prouisor, and the
Clerk do sit, to see the Anatomy made of him that is brought to them. Then
the linkes being lighted, and all the players entered that have parts in this
Tragedy, the Executioner, who tarrieth last to make all fast (as they say) and
to see every man in before him, comes also at the length, and of himfelfe
alone makes a show worthy the sight, more then all the rest of that rout,
being wholly arrayed all over from the top of his head to the sole of his foot
in a suit of black canuas, such as the superstitious Spaniards wear on
Maundy-thursday, when The description of the Tormentor.
they scourge and whip themselves, as the custom is in most places under
Popery, if not in all: much like that apparel that the devils in stage plays
use here with us in England. Moreover, his head is covered with a long black
hood that reaches over all his face, having two little peep holes to see
through, and all to this end, to make the poor soul the more afraid both in
body and mind, to see one torment him in the likeness of a devil. O Lord,
such are their holy guiles.

After that the Lords be set down each in their places, they begin with him
again, and exhort him afresh to speak the truth freely and voluntarily:
otherwise at his own peril be it. For if either his arm, or his leg, or
any other joint be broken in the Rack, as it happens to diverse, so that he
chance to dye thereof (for more gently than so, they mean not to deal with him)
let him blame no man but himself. For they think that after they have given
him this fair warning, they are now discharged in conscience both before God
and man, and therefore are guiltless, what harm soever come unto him by means
of the Rack, yea though he dye thereon as innocent as the child newly borne.
After this, with sharp rebukes and menacing words, they command that the party
be stripped stark naked, be it he or she, yea though it were one well known
to be the most honest and chaste maiden or matron in all the city (as they be
never lightly without sundry such in this their shambles) whose grief I dare
well say is not half so great in respect of any torments that presently they
endure, as it is to be seen naked in such a presence, and of such manner of
persons. For these wicked Villains without any regard of humanity or honesty,
(which me thinks they should somewhat respect, if it were but only for their
long beardes and side-gownes, with the name and countenance of gravity and
holiness which they pretend, seeing that neither for Gods sake, nor for the
honesty of the good and godly matrons and sober maidens they will not forbear
one jot of that barbarous impudency) cause them first to be stripped into
their shirts and smockes, and then out of them also welnigh (saving your
reverence) up to their priuities, drawing on a close linen breech, and after
that make bare their arms also to their shoulders, as tho the Wrench and Rack,
wherewith they are about to torment them, were not able to pearce their linne,
or as tho their linen breeches would more manerly cover those parts, which
they may be ashamed to discover, then could their side-shirts or smockes. And
here those rank R^mmes declare how they will not lose that devilish pleasure
which they take in that shameful and unseemly sight, though the poor wretches
that suffer this, buy it both with pain and shame enough full dearly. The
which thing surely is a good occasion, why that after this shameful and
impudent dealing of these Fathers of the faith be once noysed and bruted
abroad, they whose wives or daughters either have already, or may hereafter
fall, or presently are in this the holy Fathers foul handling, suffering this
shameful villainy, should be utterly abhorred and shunned of all the people
wheresoever they go, as well of Papists as of other, because they ought to
esteem the honesty and chastity of their daughters and wives above all other
treasures. But to return to our purpose.

When the parties are thus stripped out of all their clothes, be it he or she,
into their linen breeches, they signify unto the Tormenter by some token, in
what sort they would have the party ordered. For this is one other piece of
their art, to talk by signs and watch-words like to pedlers french, wherein
from the highest to the lowest all the pack of them in that cursed Court, as
well Jack layler, as my Lord Judge, can understand one another very readily.
As for the torments by the which these holy Fathers use to bring men to their
belief, as they be many in number, so in sorts they are sundry, yea more by a
great many than any poor soul is able to endure, or can come to the knowledge
of.

But the most usual be the Ieobit and Pullie with water, The Ieobit or Pullie.
cords, and fire: whereof I mean to speak severally. And yet have they one
other cast at him first ere he go to his punishment, persuading him afresh to
utter whatsoever he knows either by himself or by others of his
acquaintance: In the mean space, while they are thus communing with him, one
comes behind him, and binds his hands with a cord, 8. or 10. times about:
and because nothing should be thought to be done without authority and order of
law, the Inquisitour calls upon him to strain each harder than other. Being
thus bound to the Rack, they begin yet once again to persuade with him: and
besides the binding together of his hands, they also cause his thumbes to be
bound with some smaller line drawn very strait, and so fasten both the lines
that tie both his hands and thumbes to a certain Pullie which hangs on the
Ieobit. Then knock they great and heavy bolts upon his heels, if the party
have none already, or else hang betwixt both his feet upon those bolts which
he has, certain waights of Iron, at the first time but of five pound, and so
hoyse him up from the ground. Whiles the poor wretch hangs in this plight,
they fall to their persuasions once again, commanding the hangman to hoyse him
up on high to the very beam, till his head touch the Pullie. Then cries the
Inquisitor and the Clerk upon him to confess somewhat, promising to let him
down out of hand, if so be that he willbe ruled: otherwise, they tell him that
he is like to tarry there till he would be glad to declare whatsoever they
would have him. After he has hung thus a good space, and will grant nothing,
they command him to be let down, and twice so much Iron more to be laid on
his heels, and so hoysed up again one inch higher if it may be, threatening
him that he shall dye none other death, except he declare unto them the truth
in such matters as they demand of him; and therefore charge the hangman to let
him up and down, that the weight of the Iron hanging at his heels, may rent
every joint in his body from other. At which intolerable pains piercing all
the parts of his body, if the party shrike or cry out (as he has good cause to
do) they are as loud on the other side, roaring and yelling upon him to
declare the truth then, or else they tell him he shall come down with a
vengeance. Neither will they only say so, but the party shall find it so. For
if he continue in the same mind, they go on forward as fast in their mad
moodes, and bid the hang man to slip the ropes suddenly, that he may fall down
with a sway, and in the half way to stop, and give him the Strappado: which
being done with a trice, all his whole body is out of frame, both arms, The
Strappado.
shoulders, back, legs, and all the rest of his joints, by reason of the
exceeding great weight hanging at his heels, and the sudden sway tearing each
part from other. And yet here is no ho with them neither. For renewing their
exhortation and threats, if he will not yield unto them, they cause more Iron
to be added the third time: so that the poor wretch being in that pitiful
plight, half dead and more, is by their commandment heaued up once again;
and to mend the matter withal, besides the extremity of his griefs, they
begin to rail upon him, calling him Dog and Heretic that will stand so
obstinately in concealing the truth, and at the length tell him that he is very
like there to make his end. Now if the pitiful creature in the midst of his
pangs call upon Christ (as for the most part, all that are thus persecuted for
his truths sake do) that he would vouchsafe to aid and assist him, thus
miserably tormented, and almost slain for his sake, then fall they to mocking
and deriding him, saying, Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ. Let Jesus Christ alone, and
tell us the truth. What a crying out upon Christ make thou? confess what we
ask thee, and make us no more ado. In much like sort (as a man may easily
judge) were the blasphemous speeches of the Jews against our Savior himself,
saying: Behold he calls for Elias. He trusts in God, let him deliver him
now if he will: for he Math. 27. Psalm. 22.
calls himself the Son of God. Which is a true token and most evident
argument, that it is Christ against whom they kick and make all this broyle:
whose name when it is called upon by such as suffer for his sake, they do so
ill digest, that they can hardly abide to hear him named, or once spoken of.
But if the party at any time desire to be let down, promising to tell them
somewhat, and perform it indeed, that is the very ready way to make him be
worse handled than before, because they think that now he begins only to
broach his matters. For as soon as this tale is at an end, they begin afresh
to exhort, to threate, to rack him, giving charge to hale him up, and to let
him down again in such sort as is before declared. This execution for the
most part continues from nine of the clock in the morning till high noone, or
an hour after: and when they are disposed to leave him and let him down for
that time, the Inquisitours for a policy ask the layler if his other
instruments be in a readiness, to put the party in fear of further torment^,
being almost dead with these already. The layler answers that they are
ready, but that he has not brought them with him. Then see (say they) that
they be made ready against to morrow, and look that nothing be wanting. For
we will try one way or another, whether we can get the truth out of this
fellow, yea or no; and so depart, giving these and such like words of comfort
to the poor wretch that lies distracted in every limme: How now Sirrah? how
like ye this gear? have ye enough of it, or no? Well, see yet betwixt this and
to morrow, that ye call your wits to you, and bethink your self what to say,
or else look to die none other death but this: and yet we promise thee that
all this is but a fleabiting in comparison of that which thou art like to
feel; and so depart. Then begins the Iayler to play the bone-setter so well
as he can, and to put his arms and leges in their right joints again: and
putting on his clothes, brings him back to his prison, or carries him
rather, having never a leg to stand upon, yea sometime draggeth him by the arms
or legs too-too pitifully: and then forsooth for fashion sake, and to seem
somewhat merciful (minding in deed no such matter) tells him that a Surgeon
shall be sent for if need be.

But if they be determined to put the party no more to the rack, then within
two or three days they send for him forth again into the Audience, and
provide so, that in the way from the prison, as he passes by the place where
the rack-stocke stands and is commonly occupied, the hangman shall stand for
the nonce, to show himself in the self same likeness of a Devil, the which I
have before described, that the party in passing by, may have a sight of him,
and thereby be occasioned the more to remember his former torments. Who
coming into the Court, finds the Inquisitor, the Ordinary and the Clerk
ready set each man in his place; which after their manner fall in hand with
him, sometime by persuasions, and sometime by earnest entreaty, moving him to
utter somewhat. At which time if they prevail not, neither can get any thing
out of him, they cause him to be carried to prison again. But if he declare
any thing, they press him the more, and such matter it may be his hap to
disclose, that it may chance to purchase him the Rack once more, upon hope of
getting some greater matters at his hands. Marry if they were resolved before
to put the party to the Rack once again, then about 3. days after his last
being there, when the ache in his ioints is most grievous and painful unto
him, they send for him again to come before them; and what with earnest
entreatie and with terrible threats, they labor to have him shriue him self
of all his opinions and heresies, and to appeach as well such persons with whom
he has had conference in such matters, as also all other whom he knows to
be of the same mind and opinion. Otherwise, they will him to make himself
ready for the Rack: wherein if it be his chance either to be mainmed in any
part of his body, or to receive his deaths wound, let him blame no man but
himself. And if he continue still the same man that first he was, the keeper is
commanded that once again he provide the Rack, all the aforsaid parties taking
their places as before to see him stripped out of his clothes, and put to it
once again in such sort as is before declared, or somewhat worse, after this
manner.

The party having his hands bound behind him and hanging at the Pullie, they
bind both his thighs together with small, but very strong cords, and so in
like manner his legs about the calfe or mid-leg. Then put they betwixt the
cords and his legs a short piece of wood, wherewith they wrest the strings so
stiff till they be so deep sunk into his flesh, that they are past sight: a
very extreme and a terrible torment, and much worse then any that as yet he
has endured. In this plight the poor soul lies by the space of two or three
hours, abiding the Inquisitours goodwill and pleasure: who nevertheless cease
not to molest and trouble him all this while, either by questioning, or
entreating, or persuading or flouting and mocking him, or disquieting him one
way or another. Or in stead hereof, they practice, as they think best, another
kind of torture: which, albeit it be used upon offenders in other places
as well as in this, yet for one especial point of cruelty added by them, we
may justly ascribe it to their holy Court as a device of their own. The name
of it, as it is commonly called, is Burri or Aselli, and the manner of it is
this. Burri or Aselli.
There is a bench made of massy timber, wrought somewhat hollow on the upper
part like a trough, so large that a man may lie open in it on his back; and
thereabouts as his midriffe lies, there is a sharp bar going cross
overthwart, whereon a man's back rests that it cannot settle to the bottom,
because the party should find the less ease, where otherwise he might stay or
rest his back against the bottom of the trough: being also placed in such
sort, that his heels shall lie higher than his head. When the party is laid
hereon, his arms, thighs, and legs are bound with very stiff and small cords
about the midst of the maine bone, which afterward they strain with
certain stiff wresting sticks or truncheons put underneath the cords, till
the cords be settled down within the flesh, and pearce almost to the very
bone, insomuch that they be clean out of sight, and then comes in this The
Torment by water and the laund.
device of their own addition: First, they take a very fine and a close laund
or linen cloth, and ouerspread the parties mouth therewith as he lies
upright, so as it may stop his nostrils also, that when the water is poured
into his mouth, he should take in no air at his nose. Then take they a
certain quantity of water, so much as it pleases the Inquisitours to appoint,
which they pour upon the cloth, not by drops, but in the manner of a long
stream like a thread: which having somewhat a high fall, bears down with it
the fine linen cloth into the furthest part of his throat. And here, whosoever
should behold the poor wretch in this pitiful case, would think him, I dare
say, to be in as great an agony as any man is at the giving up of the ghost.
For in all other torments a man may have liberty to draw his breath: only here
he cannot, by reason that the water stops his mouth, and the cloth his
nostrils, so that when they pluck it out of the bottom of his throat (as
many times they do, to see whether he will answer to their demands, yea or
no) the cloth is so wet with water and blood together, that a man would think
the very intralles would come out of his body. And thus the party continues
in these pangs so long as pleases them, with promises of sharper sauces than
any that he has tasted as yet, and so they send him to prison again.

But if these good Fathers be disposed to deal with him further, and proceed to
other greater tortures (for their lust is law in this their lawless Court,
where right and reason can take no place) then within a month or two under or
over, as they think best, the party is once again brought to the rack, some
twice, thrice, four, five or six times, and therein entreated easily or
roughly as it pleases the Inquisitors to appoint. And some are tormented in
another sort, that is no where else used but in this holy House, the which is
termed by fire, the description whereof is shorter to show The Torment by fire.
than the rest, but the pains and cruelty, as great altogether. They take a
charcole pan of Iron full of hot coals, which they setiust over against the
soles of a man's feet before he go to the foresaid rack, and to the end that
the fire might have the more force to burn them, they baste them with lard or
bacon.

Thus after they have occupied and vnedged all their tools one after another,
and are past hope of having any thing at the parties hands, they respite him
for a season to take his rest, and after a while call him before them again,
and fall to questioning with him, inquiring and requiring many things in a
far other order than they used before, in such terms as every word may
minister matter enough to quarrel at. The questions also are framed so
cunningly and Point de vice (for this is their only shift that never fails
them) that by granting one thing, they must needs grant another, and deny the
contrary to that. For these Fathers are passing good Logicians, and marvelous
subtle Sophisters, their crafts-masters I warrant them, which notwithstanding
that they are daily in ure with such matters, will not stick to take a little
pains, and upon study to coin cases and questions for the nonce: which to
help their memory withal, lest when the time comes that they should have use
thereof, they might forget them, are written and laid open before them: so that
if the party, when any thing is demanded of him, be never so little retchlesse,
it is not possible for him to avoid them, but that one way or other they will
overtake him. The only help for a man therefore in this case is, to have a
perfect remembrance of all such things as he has delivered up into their
hands: for it is but in vain for him to crave to have them read unto him,
because either they will not grant him that; or if they do, yet will they read
much amiss. Wherefore if he do mistrust his own memory, let his answer be
this, that he wholly refers them to his former doings and sayings, and in
any case avoid reasoning with them. Or if by their subtilties of Logic, they
infer any thing thereupon, which either he knew not of, or else never
affirmed, let him take heed in any case how he answers it, lest either they
entrap him in some new matter, or else drive him to the denying of Gods truth
most wickedly. And the readiest way will be, to cut off all their questions
with a quick and a round answer, and to tell them plainly that he was never
set to school in all his life to learn these quiddities in argument, nor
exercised in any manner of disputation. For these fellows are so cunning
herein, and so full of interrogations and strange devices, besides, so
troublesome therewithal, and so importunate, that many times they will get
that out of a man by these means, when all the racking in the world will do
no good.

As at Siuil not long agone, they apprehended a certain godly Matron, whose
husband they had burned a little before, and so made her a widow. But because
her confession, while she was on the rack, and there tormented most cruelly,
was by their own decrees insufficient either to condemn her to the stake, or
to confiscate her goods such as they were, and yet, if they could but get only
thus much out of her, that she knew full well that the Church of Rome had
determined clean contrary to that which she affirmed, this should be sufficient
cause to make her to forfeit that poor remnant of her riches that she had to
keep her self withal in her widdow-hood, though poorly (God knows) they did
rather compel her by their importunity, than compass it by their Sophistry,
that she was content to say so much. For perceiving that else they would never
make an end thus to molest and trouble her, Indeed (says she) I confess that
the Church of Rome has so determined, and therefore I pray you enter in mine
answer to be so, and let me depart quietly; and afterward as you shall see
cause, determine what shall become of me or mine at your pleasure. Whereunto
they gave her never a word, but only wrote as she had said, and sought no
further* For whether it were so yea or no, what care they, so the party say so
much, that they may have the spoils whatsoever, either by hook or by crook.

CHAP. VIII.
Certain other devices to drive the prisoners to confess such matters as the
Inquisitors are desirous to understand of.

WHen the extremity of torments with the subtle practices before expressed
will do no good, but that the party constantly endures the one, and anoydeth
the other very cunningly, then fall these good Fathers to other far better
fetches to their thinking, wherein whosoever is able in a device to go beyond the
rest, is counted a chief Champion, and therefore has yielded unto him the
pre-eminence of place above other in this holy House. Being therefore past all
hope of having any thing at the parties hands by foul means, they devise to
compass him by fair, showing themselves very mild and merciful, and so
affectioned, as though the misery and affliction which they see the other in,
went to their own hearts. They weep with him, they entreat him, they comfort
him, they give him their advice, and devise for him some secret means to rid
him out of his misery, making him believe that they tell him that in secret,
which they would scarce tell to their own fathers, or brethren, or dearest
friend that they have alive, with many other like words. And this they use
commonly to do to such as be the simpler sort of people, but specially to
women, which for the most part are not so cunning to discern forced and feigned
tears. Therefore when the Inquisitors begin to use them so gently, and to
proffer them such kindness, then let the party see to himself warily, and
learn betimes to discern whereabouts they go in using such flattering
speeches, assuring himself, that they are but fair baits put upon sharp
hooks: whereof I will of a number report unto you one example.

The very first time that they began to burn for religion at Civil, (which
was diverse years since,) among certain other that were for the same cause
apprehended, there was a very godly Matrone, with two of her own Daughters and
one of her sisters children, who having passed all these aforesaid pikes with
manlike constancy, were pressed very sore to betray some of their brethren, but
especially one to appeach another. One of the Inquisitors counterfaiting a
marvelous kind of compassion toward these silly women, sent for one of the
daughters to come unto him. And when she was come, they two being alone
together, he began to make a long speech unto her in way of consolation, and
afterward sent her to prison again. This he used to do diverse times and
upon several days, always toward the evening, and there held her a great
while, declaring unto her, how great a grief it was to him to see her in these
troubles: and therewithal would interlace some other pleasant communication
more familiarly many times, than did well become him. Which tended to none
other end (as it fell out in proof) but to persuade the maiden, that he of
very good affection sorrowed to see her in such distress; that in seeing him
so fatherly advise her what the best were both for her self and her mother and
sister to do in this case, she should wholly commit her self and her cause to
his ordering. After that two or three days had been thus spent in such like
conference and familiar communication, weeping (as it were) over her for the
misery which she was in, with other many more arguments and tokens of
compassion, wherein he uttered the affections and sorrows of his heart for her
pitiful estate, with often protestation of his good will and best furtherance
to his power: after all these polices (I say) when the wily Wolf was sure
that the simple sheep was within his reach, he begins to persuade with her
to disclose unto him the truth of the matter, as well in such things as touched
her mother, sister and aunt, as any other that were not as yet apprehended,
binding himself by an oath, that if she would so do, and disclose to him
whatsoever she knew concerning these matters, he himself would stop all these
gappes well enough, and find a means that they should all depart home again
quietly to their own houses. The maiden being but simple witted, was soon
induced to credit the fair promises and allurenents of this flattering Father,
and thereupon begins to open unto him certain points of religion whereof
they were wont to confer among themselves, in manner almost, as if one should
give holy things to a dog, or cast pearls before a swine. The Inquisitour
having gotten this thread by the end, labored to unwind the whole clew, and
therefore calling in the maiden many times before him, to the end that her
depositions might be entered by order of law, made her believe that he would
take it up and end it so reasonably, that she should receive no manner of harm
thereby, and in the last day of hearing made a repetition unto her of all his
former promises, as to set her at liberty again, and such like. But when the
time came that she looked verily for the performance thereof, there was no such
matter, but contrariwise my Lord the Inquisitour and his adherents perceiving
how this device had brought somewhat to light, which al their extremities
otherwise could in no case do, to the end to make her confesse^ the residue,
determined once again to have her upon the rack, wherein she endured most
intolerable pains both upon the Pullie and the Trough, until they had, as it
were, in a press wrung out of her as well her belief, as also forced her to
accuse those persons whom they had hunted after so long. For the damsel
through very extremity of pangs and torments, was driven to betray her own
natural mother, and sisters and diverse others, that were thereupon immediately
apprehended, and afterward put to the torments, and at the length sent to the
fire.

Moreover, the self same maiden within a while after played a notable part in
testimony of her belief. For when she was brought up unto the solemn
scaffold with other ofher companions there to be seen of all the people, and
every one to hear sentence of death pronounced upon them, as she returned
thence to her place again; having heard her judgment, which was to be
burned, she came to her Aunt who had been her Schoolemistresse, and taught
her her catechism and belief (for the profession whereof she should
presently be executed) and with a bold courage without change of countenance,
bending her head downward maidenly, gave her most hearty thanks for that
exceeding great benefit in taking the pains to instruct her, and prayed pardon
at her hands if at any time she had offended her, for that she was now at the
point of taking her death, and departing this life. Whom her Aunt on the other
side comforted as stoutly, willing her to be of good cheer, and to let
nothing disquiet her, for she hoped in God that she should be with Christ ere
it were long. And this did she in the presence and hearing of all the people,
but specially of all those of the holy House and their adherents. This Aunt of
hers was the self same woman, which a year or two before being mad had
detected the whole congregation to the Inquisitours, whereof I made mention
before: who being restored to her former wits again by the goodness of God, so
well as the relics of her disease would let her, did now both confess his
truth, and for the same endured most horrible and ^othsome imprisonment and
torments: moreover, was openly whipped, and so remained in prison during the
rest of her life. But to return to their practices.

CHAP. IX.
Certain other more secret practices,

THe passing excellency of these practices which presently I entend to
discover, is such, that they rather deserve to have some special place by
themselves, then to be thrust in here confusedly among these other gross and
common devices. For they do as far pass all the other that have been spoken
of heretofore, as there is difference in dignity betwixt a Court of Pipowders
and the high Court of Parliament. The first whereof in order as it falls out,
and the most mystical (and I believe as beneficial to their box as all the
rest) is the abuse of their sacrament (as they term it) of Confession, which
by their own decretals is no small offense. But all is law in this holy House
(as I said before) whatsoever they list. Their deucie is this: Whenever any
of the prisoners begins to be but a little crazie, they ask him whether he
be disposed to go to holy shrift. The which is done for two especial
considerations. The one is, to prove whether he like well of their holy
confession, yea or no. The other, to see if perchance he will be persuaded to
say somewhat under Benedicite, either touching himself or any other, that this
holy house may be set on work. If the party be willing, at hand is Sir John
and a Clerk behind him with pen and ink left behind the prison door, and so
the ghostly father falls to his Confitetor: in process whereof he examineth
the sick man first generally, and then specially, whether he hold any of
Luthers articles, chiefly in this or that article, or have at any time
conferred with any other concerning the like causes: finally, of whom and by
what occasion he heard them, etc. willing him boldly to confess it and to
fear nothing, neither to think any such villainy to be in him as to reveal it,
saying that he has authority immediately from the high Commisioners to
absolve him of all, so that he discharge his conscienc: with other such like
talk to the same effect. Now if the party follow him so far that he begin to
confess ought, then is he surely caught. For when he has poured out al, and
said what he can say in these cases (though he do it through the earnest and
wicked persuasions of the priest) then does he charge him further to confess
the same before a Notary, otherwise he tells him that his absolution is nothing
auailable unto him. And if the party yield unto him so much, and be content so
to do, then the clerk, who lies lurking not far off, is straightway sent for,
and so* is this matter dispatched. But if he refuse, either mistrusting him
altogether, or else half in doubt to credit him, yet is he no less in
dangered by disclosing it to the Priest, than if he had confessed it before a
Notary. For this kind of confession is not right auricular, but all is done
aloud, by means that the crafty confessor repeateth the words after him, and
so drives the party to answer him almost in the self same note: who knows
not nor fears any such matter, that there lurketh any body ^o closly behind
the door to hear or, write what he speaks. Then after they have gotten thus
much, either they charge the party therewith, or else by occasion hereof examine
him further upon greater matters, and thereupon pick a new quarrel with him, to
the intent to use more extreme tortures. Neither does this good ghostly Father
either fear excommunication, or feel any trouble in his conscience, for
revealing his ghostly sons confession, both because he is persuaded, that a
little loud speaking, and in somewhat a higher note than the secrets of
confession would well allow, is not to be accounted any disclosing at all; and
for that, whatsoever he did, was done in the service and behalf of the holy
^louse.

Iulianus Apostata (as histories of very good credit do report) spoiled the
Christians of all that they had, and colored his theeuery with a false gloss
upon the Gospel; whereas Christ commanded all his Disciples to love poverty,
and to be careless for things of this world. At another time he persecuted
them most cruelly, and exhorted them to patience, saying, that Christ had given
them an example. And no doubt, these holy Fathers have borrowed one of their
devices of him. For when they see any constatly and like a good Christian man
to continue as well in his faith toward God, as charity toward his brethren,
they hedge him in with this argument: Now surely Sir, you are but a^faint
Christian belike. For you pretend the doctrine of the Apostles and Primitive
Church: and the Apostles and Martyrs in those days being brought before the
Ethnike Magistrates, and examined whether they confessed Christ or no, answered
plainly that they did: and being further demanded, what fellows and
companions they had, would tell the truth at the first. Therefore ^^th you
profess your selves to be followers of them and their examples, in like sort
should you confess of your selves and of your fellows. And this is their
goodly reason that they make. In very deed Iulianus Apostata spoke truth, that
Christians in the time of affliction should not be wavering, nor given to the
gathering of these earthly treasures. Even so (say the Inquisitors) should a
Christian man coming before a temporal Judge, and there examined of his
belief, yield a plain and evident declaration of the same. But they lie both
of them by their leave, when they say that the Christians in those days did of
like zeal betray their brethren unto the Ethnike Judges, as they did make open
confession of their faith: for that were flat against the rule of charity. And
therefore it is a plain matter, that in all other things the Inquisitours are
altogether as bad as ever Iulianus was, because they use the self same reasons
that he did, and all to one effect: that is to say, to make waste in the Church
of Christ, by cutting down the branches thereof, making but a jest of the
laws of true Religion.

As there was once an Inquisitour, and one of the chiefest of them, whom it
shall not be greatly amiss to touch by name, because if his friends hap to
read this, they may acknowledge it to be true that I will report of him. His
name was John Gonsalue, borne at Siuil, and Bishop of Tarracon. The Bishop of
Tarracon.
It was his common saying (which I believe other of his fellows learned of
him) speaking of such as were brought before him for the profession of Christ,
that it was a wonderful thing to consider, how firmly these heretics have
engraven in the tables of their hearts this commandment: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, which will never be brought to confess of their
fellows, till they be almost torn in pieces with torments, and yet can ye not
get it out of some of them by these means neither: such notable testimonies
has true religion oftentimes, even of those that are her deadly enemies. For
the law of God concerning both the Tables, is perfectly written and sealed in
the hearts of true Christians, and the print of this seal of Gods law is not
elsewhere to be found but in these only. But all the Laws of the flesh are
signed with this mark: To day mine own man, and yours to morrow. And surely,
me thinks, a Christian Bishop ought to have been very much ashamed to be so
blind and ignorant therein, and not alone so to be, but thereunto to add such
blasphemy besides.

The selfsame Bishop (seeing we have begun to talk of him) was sent from the
Kings Court to Siuil to be one of the Commissioners in the Inquisition there,
about two or three years before: at what time so great a multitude of the
faithful were first espied, of the which even till this day, at certain times
appointed there be diverse sent to the fire. For all his Predecessors were not
worth a straw in comparison of him, neither half so stout as he, nor so
cunning in bringing their matters about as was this one man, but specially such
as concerned the holy Inquisition. For until this time there was never an able
man, that was thought so provident as to prevent so great a mischief before it
happened, or otherwise able to uphold the Church of Rome drooping, as it were, by
means thereof, and in danger of ruin. But for any other good qualities that
were in him to commend him to this Office, or sufficiency to discharge it, I
report me to himself, I report me to them that chose him to this room, yeal
report me to all that ever knew him, if there were any thing in him at all that
might prefer him, specially and above his fellows, either appearance of
learning, or skill in Divinity, or knowledge in the ecclesiastical Histories,
or any great reading of the ancient Fathers or the late Writers (whose
authority the Church has worthily in great estimation) or if he were greatly
seen in matters of faith, whereof they term themselves the Inquisitors and
Judges, as it were, both of oyer and terminer, in these cases: to be short, if
there were any known and approved godliness of life and conversation in this
man: wherein the whole pack of them flatter themselves so much, that they
arrogate unto themselves a very gay and glorious title thereby, but rather
because he was more cruel and unnatural, and somewhat more sly in the
devices and practices of the Inquisition than the rest were. In respect
whereof, he obtained both a discharge from his service, and a fat Bishopric
besides in recompense of his travails, and partly in consideration that he was
an old forworne soldiour; and having now good leisure, like a wicked impe of
Rome, returned to his old occupation again. At the self-same time whiles he
remained in commission at Siuil, so many were apprehended for professing the
Gospel, that he was driven to bestow some of them in his own lodging, because
all the prisons in the town were not able to receive them, the number was so
great. Yet his Reverend Lordship wanted neither time nor leisure to take his
pleasure abroad, and to row upon the river in Barges titled with purple and
silk, with such preparation as had better beseem'd one of Sardanapalus
scholars, than any sober man or Christian Bishop: accompanied with Musicians,
but not with the Muses, having a very great train after him besides, and so
passing to his garden adjoining thereunto, all the whole people gazing upon
him, and running in heaps and throngs to see this sight. In very deed these
triumphs and iollities were not greatly out of the way for him and his mates to
delight in, their matters being in such plight as they were; and the Church of
God, whereunto he was a professed enemy, so full of troubles, vexations, and
afflictions. But to return to their practices again.

Whenever these good gentlemen are desirous to learn out a certainty of
such as live altogether in one prison, (whom they suspect to have some
conference in matters touching salvation, either by way of exhortation, or by
comforting and confirming one another in the faith, being in so great misery as
they are) they send in a Fly among them (as the prisoners use to term him)
whom the Inquisitors cast in prison craftily and for a color, to mark every
man's talk, who after two or three days that he has once crept into their
acquaintance, will begin afar off to offer some talk in matters of Religion,
making as though he would be glad either to teach others, or to learn himself,
and by these subtle devices many of the simple sort are soon beguiled.
Wherefore let every man take heed after this fair warning, that he be not
ouerlight of credit in trusting strangers too far (I mean such as are put in
prison with them,) having no manner of acquaintance with them before. And to
the intent that they may know such a Fly the better, I will give them one sure
token: to wit, he will commonly be the first that will offer talk, and pretend
a zeal toward true Religion, both beside time and without occasion: and then
shall they do well to let him preach alone till his chaps ache, giving him
never a word. For if he chance to get any thing out of any of his fellows that
he longed for, so soon as the Iayler comes to visit his prisoners at his
accustomable hours, he is straightway in hand with him to crave a day of
hearing for him, as the manner is that sometimes the prisoners will sue for.
But so soon as he is out, I warrant them, the rest that tarry behind, shall
shortly after feel the fruits of his fellowship, little to their liking. A
maruailous matter, doubtless, that men should be so diuellishly bent, to be
content for a small gain of a little money, to serve in such offices, so much
to their own hindrance, that to obtain their purpose they stick not to lie
in prison with others bound and chayned as they be, by the space of two or
three months, and then to endure all the other miseries incident thereunto, as
hunger, filth, stench, which the other prisoners can in no case away withal by
their wills, and yet can these men with all their hearts. Besides this (a more
wonderful thing to consider) they will so pass from one prison to another,
that they are no sooner out of one, but by and by they willbee in another, and
so in the second and third, etc. and be content to endure the same extreamities
twice, thrice, or four sundry and several times, yea, all their life long to
feed upon these dishes of dainties. And when this good fellow is out of
prison, and come before them to yield account of his office, he does not only
declare what he has heard the prisoners say, but also what countenance they
made him when he called these matters of Religion into question, and how they
took it, whether as liking or misliking therewithal, or what opinion he has
of them, though they never answered him one word. And this man's accusation is
of as great force as the strongest and most allowable witness that is or can be,
and is without all exception, be he never so mean a man either in calling, or
credit, or common reputation of me^: yea tho he be but a lakes-farmer, and
serve in his place for a small reward, yet is he reputed a worthy member for
that purpose, well beseeming such a head as is that holy House of theirs. It
happens also many times, that some such as are apprehended for Religion, fall
into the company of some that are laid in for special matters; who to curry
favor with the Inquisitors, will villanously accuse their fellows whom they
have heard confer together in pure and sound doctrine: and the testimony of
such persons is of the greatest credit that can be, and most highly esteemed in
their holy House. For to the state of the matter, or qualification as they
term it, a great respect is to be had of the circumstances; as the prison,
the person of the accuser, and the party accused.

Other Flies there be also which serve the holy House to do the like feat
abroad out of prisons, secretly and slily going about to compass in by like
wyles such as are among the common people suspected to be Lutherans; whereof
some have so good wings, that they will fly quite over the sea into very far
countries to take such as are content to leave Spain, and banish themselves
thence, to the end that they may live the more safely in other places
elsewhere: such is the earnest zeal which these good Fathers have both to the
glory of God, and the health of men's souls. But to keep within the bounds of
Spain, and to speak only of those that fly about the Cities there where this
holy Court is kept: there are a great sort of ghostly Fathers, both Priests and
Monks, which are not behind with their parts in playing the Flies. To whom if
a simple man, and one whom God has sent some light of his word unto, do
chance to resort, and in process of his confession open his conscience unto
them, either doubtingly, or else as only ready persuaded, praying to be further
instructed or confirmed* they labor not only to quench that light which began
to shine in his heart, but some of them are in hand with him, either by gentle
entreaty, or sometime by threatening him terribly, to the end to get him to go
to the holy House there to accuse himself, promising him in the behalf of the
Lords the Inquisitors, that he shall have all favor showed him that may be: so
that it comes to pass many times, that the poor souls like silly sheep,
will run of their own accord into the Wolves mouth to be torn in pieces and
devoured every morsel.

Another policy they have which they put in practice likewise, more dishonest by
a great deal then this, which is also borrowed out of the Inquisitours
budgets. After they have groped a man's conscience that suspecteth no such
treachery at a holy man's hand, specially under their blessed Benedicite, they
dissemble the matter for that time without contrarying him, willing him to
resort unto them the next day when they shall have better leisure to hear him
thoroughly, and to talk with him more freely in those matters, and so send him
away half shriuen, with half a confession ilfauoredly cut off. His meaning is
this, that when the party comes the next morrow, and communeth with him of
the self same matters out of shrift, he may freely, and without danger of
revealing his confession, complain of him to the Inquisitours: neither does
this their purpose want his performance. This religious rout (forsooth) can
choke with agnat, and swallow down a camel. And of such crafty dissemblers,
diverse have gotten this good by their trauail at the Inquisitours hands, that
if any thing escape them ignorantly or for want of heed taking (as it happens
many times) which had bin enough to have heaped coals enough upon another man's
head, though the same things were proved against them so manifestly that they
could not be denied, yet can the Inquisitours be content to wind up such
matters and wink at them wisely, accounting it a greater loss to forgo the
gains that comes trouling in by such fellows, than the spoil were worth
that might be gotten by taking advantage of them. Of the which sort I could,
if I were disposed, reckon up a great number by name, and sure they well deserve
it for their wicked dealings in this kind of service, to be so served. But I
mean to suppress their names in consideration of Gods great might and mercy,
who may hereafter show his favorable countenance unto them, and grant them
grace to repent (as I know he has done unto diverse) and then should I repent
me too late, that their names were made so infamous and execrable to the
Congregation by my means, though for their own demerits. For truly a great
number of these at the first knew the truth, yea some of them preached and
taught it to others. But so soon as the storm began to arise, and to try
each man's building upon what foundation it stood, on the rock or on the sands,
they thought it wisdom for them to go back with that leg betimes. And
being moreover assured that diverse had them in a great jealousy for so doing,
they imagined that they could not sponge out that stain by any other means,
then if they should become Promoters of such as had bin their fellows and
companions tofore, and so to become daily Guests and stout Seruitours to this
holy House; and thus were persuaded that they had taken a ready way to save
themselves from the Inquisitours. But what consciences they carry about within
them, and what testimonies of the terrible judgments of God provided for them,
they know best themselves. It shall be sufficient that I give this Item by the
way, to consider that it is not any zeal in the Inquisitours of the truth or
cutting down heresies, that moves them to such butcher-like slaughters as
these (the which things both they pretend to do, and the common people are
like wise persuaded of them) though we should yield unto them so far that they
be erroneous opinions which they correct so severely. For if it were so, then
should they not have favored them that that have done them so profitable
service, and procured them so great gains as is said before. Nay, all the zeal
which they have, is rather to fill the kings Treasury and their own purses.
Yet if we respect the chief cause that moves them to make so many poor
innocents to be so miserably punished and tormented, and afterward put to
death, besides their wiles, their guiles, their villainous breach of faith, and
the devilish devices, by the which they do procure their matters, it is a
sting of Satan himself, who has been a murderer of the children of God, the
Father of lies, and Patron of such practices from the very beginning. For who
is so blind but he may easily espy, that this kind of dealing can proceed of
none other spirit? or who will be so blasphemous to refer it to the spirit of
God as author thereof? Moreover, one other good lesson to the godly may be
this, that they take diligent heed, whom they deal withal or admit into their
company and familiar acquaintance, and not to trust every man. For truly the
saying of Ier^mi^ that every brother will supplant another, and every neighbor
will be guile another, may as well be verified at this time, and in ^er. 9.
these matters, as ever it might in any other age or case heretofore.

Yet have the Inquisitours one other net more: which albeit they cast not but
at adventure, yet commonly they draw a great draught whenever they use it. If
they chance at any time to apprehe^d any notable and famous fellow, whom they
know either to be a great teacher or preacher to others, or else to have great
resort made unto him for learning's sake and for their better instructions, as
some Doctor and Preacher of some name and fame, then their manner is to cause it
to be bruted abroad by their Familiars, that the same person being on the rack,
has detected diverse of his Auditors; and for the further confirmation thereof,
they suborne some of the next neighbors in the prison adioining to avouch it,
and to affirm that they heard the great shrikes which he made being upon the
the rack. The which rumors are coined out of this their holy Mint to this end,
that such as have been his scholars should come to the holy House, and there
make open confession of their faults, and crave pardon betimes before they be
sent for, or the Sergeant attach them. For they persuade the common people,
that whosoever will come uncalled and unsent for, and confess their own offenses,
shall either escape scot-free, or else very easily: and their punishment at the
uttermost shall be only the doing of a little penance (as they call it). Thus by
this means they deceive a great number, which if they had tarried till they had
been sent for, might have tarried still till this time unsent for; or if it had
so happened that they had been sent for, they should have been no worse
entreated then they were, being so doltish as to credit the Inquisitours so
far upon their fair and flattering promises, and follow their foolish advice.

CHAP. X.
How the prisoners are dealt withal concerning their diet.

THe prisoners within the Inquisition, concerning their meat and drink and
other necessaries, are used in all respects accordingly, as they are in credit
with the Inquisitours and the rest of the officers of the holy House. For the
common estimation of them is no better than as they term them, dogs,
heretics, etc. And yet they deal not with them altogether so well as most
men will do with their dogs, that do them either service or pleasure; but as
men commonly use to entreat those men, whom in derision of all humanity they
term dogs, and so esteem of them. The discourse whereof shall neither be
altogether needelesse, nor impertinent in this place, because it may do much
good to the godly in many respects. First to let them to understand the
miseries of their poor afflicted brethren, that they may depart with some
things for their relief, every man according to his ability: Secondly, to put
them in mind that the staff stands at their doors, and their turn
therefore to be the next, and that God has reserved them for a time, that
they may follow the other in this fight, and serve him in this most glorious
kind of seruce, by confessing his holy name before the world. Thirdly and
lastly, that this horrible and most barbarous tyranny of these holy Fathers may
appear to all the world among other of their cruel prankes, which we are to
report of them, and of their bloody butchery. Happy therefore and thrice happy
was that preacher of Siuil, Constantine (for so Solon accounted him happy that
had lived in honor and estimation, and died accordingly); who being imprisoned
(as I will declare hereafter) for the testimony of Christ's Gospel, tasting
their tyranny and endless torments, bewailed his own misery, crying and
lifting up his voice to God many times with these words: O my Lord God, were
there in all the wide world no S^ythians, nor cruel Cannibals, into whose
hands thou might have delivered me, and let me escape these men? Another
named Olmedo, a man singular both for virtue and learning, falling likewise
into the Inquisitours hands for the self same cause that purchased unto
Constantine his death, first upon his imprisonment fell sick, and afterward
died amids the filth and stench of the prison, and was wont to say in like
sort: O Lord God, do with me what thou will. Throw me headlong where thou will, so thou give me not over to these men, whose entertainment is such as may
more rightly be termed a perpetual Torture, then a place of Imprisonment. For
first and foremost, the place wherein each of them is shut up severally, what
with the The description of the prisons.
straightnes thereof, and the evil air, and damp of the earth, if it be
below, may more properly be likened to a grave, then called a prison: but if
it be aloft, it is at the time of the year, by means of the extreme heat,
more like a frying furnace. And in every of these Holes, for the most part
(specially if their prizes be so many that there be more several persons then
several rooms) two or three of them are thronged together, so that they have
no larger scope then to lay them down and rest them in, save only a foot in
compass perhaps, which serves for their stool of easement to stand in, and
by it a pitcher of of cold water to quench their thirst. Neither in the day
time is their light any more then may come in at a keyhole, or at a little long
rift no greater then a man's finger. Howbeit there be certain prisons that be
somewhat larger, but they are also more then somewhat costly, and do serve for
such as are not greatly suspected for religion. Again, other there be, less
in compass then the former, and worse a great deal to lie in, for that they
are not a man's length: in so much that they which enter into one of them,
lightly never go out till they be half rotten, or die of a consumption. All
which places and prisons are bestowed according to the quality of the person,
and of his or their deserts, and many times as it pleases the my Lords the
Inquisitours and master Iayler to bestow them in, according as they bear
affection to the party either good or bad. And thus much concerning the place
of their imprisonment.

The order of their diet is answerable to their lodging. The manner of their
diet, and their allowance.
The rich pay very large fees to the holy House, and every prisoner is rated at
the discretion of the Inquisitour. Out of the which there is deducted an
allowance for his daily charges 30 dipondia, commonly called Maruedis, whereof
17. make a dutch batte 8 and a half, a french souse, 10. a flemish stiuer,
which amounts in our reckning after the English rate, to 6. pence well nigh.
Howb(...)t if any of them be disposed to exceed, and have any other dainties,
he may at his pleasure, so that he pay for it on his own purse. And yet they
deal not so favorably with every sort of prisoners, but only with such, by
whom they look not to have any booty, being laid in but for trifling matters.
For if they be such prisoners, as they know by the information given in against
them, likely to lose all that ever they have, they will not suffer them to
exceed in such sort, but let the^ feed only upon a little brown-bread, and a
cruze of cold water, not suffering them in any case to have any special cates
besides their ordinary, be they never so rich, because they make this account,
that the more is spent in that sort, the less shall be their parts when it
comes to reckning and rifling. Notwithstanding, if any be so poor that they
are not able to live of their own in prison, the King allows them a certain
for their daily diet, that is to say, half a riall of Plate, which is as much
as a dutch batte, and is worth two souse french, that is, 3. pence sterling.
Out of the which poor pittance is to be defrayed their Stewards and Laundres
wages, and whatsoever other necessary charges grow besides, must be thence
also deducted. Moreover, of this allowance given them by the King, there
comes not the one half to their use, for whom it was specially limited and
appointed: for it passes through two or three men's hands that will be ready to
finger some of it. First, through the office of Receipt (for so I think they
term the Treasury) who is accountant for all the reuenew^ that come into the
Eschequer, and disburseth for such and Fees deducted out of the prisoners
allowance.
other like uses. And this is the sweetest office in all the holy House, and
therefore not granted but to special men, especially favored. Next to him the
Steward or Cater will have another piece, who will commonly for one penny
bestowed, demand two to be allowed: then the Cook that dresseth their meat:
and last of all the tithe which is the Iaylers fees, which many times allows
the same unto the poor prisoners of his own benevolence. This I have
described the more largely, because all these Officers have their certain fees
out of this small allowance of the king: which passing through such limed
fingers is so fleeced, that it comes not to the prisoners, but every of these
Officers will take not only Tole, but Tithe, ere it pass his hands. For in
this House both master and man, from head to foot, are all covetous and given
to the spoil. Now if it happen at any time by a special grace of God, that
any of these are touched with compassion to pity the poor prisoners, and of
very alms do relieve them by any means, that is counted such a (...)ainous
offense in this their holy House, that it will go near to cost him a
scourging till the blood follow, that does any way relieve them.

As it chanced within these few years, a certain man to be appointed keeper
of the Inquisitours prison in the Castle Triana at Civil, that was not very
evil disposed, for as yet he had not learned the tricks of that holy House,
nor well digested their covetous and cruel laws, being otherwise very
courteous, and a man not far stricken in years: his name was Petro a Herrera.
Who entreated the prisoners very well, and showed them such gentleness and
favor as he could, yet closely and covertly, because he knew the Inquisitours
in that point well enough, how much they were inclined to tyranny. It happened
in his time (as oftentimes it does when a number are apprehended at once) that
among other prisoners, a certain honest Matron was committed to his ward, with
two of her own daughters: which being put into several prisons, had a great
longing to see one another, and each to comfort the other in their distresses.
Whereupon they besought their keeper to suffer them to come together, if it
were but only for a quarter of an hour, or the space that each might but
embrace other. The keeper being of a good nature, was content they should so
do, and suffered them to be together by the space of half an hour: and after
they had a little showed their affections, and done their duty each to other,
the daughters to their mother, and she to them again, he brought every one to
her own prison where she was before. Within a few days after, the keeper
seeing the same persons in most terrible torments, and fearing lest the very
extremity thereof would drive them to confess that little courtesy and favor
which he showed them, in suffering them to meet and talk together but only
for half an hours space, went to the holy House, confessed his fact, and
prayed pardon therefore, supposing like a fool by his own confession to have
escaped the penalty thereof. But the Inquisitors (to whom it is incident to
abhor all kind of humanity) deemed it so heinous an offense, that they
commanded him forthwith to be haled into prison: wherein, partly by means of
the great extremity that was showed unto him, and partly of very thought and a
certain conceit that he took thereupon, being therewithal somewhat
melancholic, fell beside himself: and yet his infirmity and madness
notwithstanding, they released him no jot of his punishment. But after that
he had been kept a whole year in a vile prison, they brought him upon their
triumphing stage, having a Sambenit on his back, and a rope about his neck like
a fellon, and there gave sentence upon him: first to be whipped about the city
in the high streets, and to have two hundred stripes bestowed on him, and and
afterward to serve in a Gallie as a slave, for six years. The next day
following, as he was brought from the Castle Triana with their acucstomed
solemnity, to be scourged, one of his mad fits that was wont to take him
each other hour, came at the same time upon him very pitifully, so that in
casting himself off from the Asses back whereon he was set in despite, he fell
upon the Alguazil, and doubtless had slain him with a sword which he snatched
out of his hand, if the people that gathered about him, had not suddenly laid
hands on him, and set him upon the Ass again, binding him somewhat surer, to
the intent that he might receive the rest of his payment. And after he had
received his two hundred stripes, the Inquisitours commanded, that for his
evil usage and behauior showed toward the Alguazil, he should continue in the
gally four years more over and above the other six, to make up a just
halfescore. So well do these good and godly Fathers reward charity and good
deeds, and courtesy with cruelty and extremity, so that a mad man with them
may not play a mad touch.

Howbeit, there was one that was this man's predecessor called Gasper
Benna^idio, for covetousness and cruel dealing a monster rather then a man,
insomu^h that he was growue to such a greediness, that he would defraud the
poor prisoners of part of their small pittance and allowance, being both evil
of it self for want of good cookery, and worse a great deal by means of his
filching: of which victuals so lurched and purloined from them, he would make
good Marchandice, and sell them in Triana. Moreover, such allowance of money as
should have been paid to a Laundres for washing the prisoners clothes, he
converted wholly into his own purse, nothing regarding how sluttishly the
prisoners went for a great whil together, without any shift, and thus deceiuetd
both the Inquisitors and the Treasurer, who allowed the keeper in his accounts
for such and such money paid and received to the prisoners behoof, for whose
weekly expenses it was appointed. And herein mark, I beseech you, the notable
negligence and slippery dealing of both parties: First, the winking of the
Inquisitours at the keepers behavior: and secondly, the keepers unjust
oppression of the poor prisoners. But to say the truth, it is no very hard
matter to deceive them that will never take pains to boult out a truth. For if
any of the prisoners receiving never so much injury at the keepers hand, had
complained at any time, or grudged any thing at all, the cruel tyrant would
find the means to be even with them: for he would take and remove him from the
place that he was in before, and thrust him into some deep Dungeo^ which they
call Mazorra, and there would keep him alone for two or three days, giving him
not so much as a little straw to lie upon: and as for his diet, neither should
it be wholesome, nor yet sufficient to hold life and soul together, but like to
kill him, or at the least to breed some extreme sickness: all the which should
be done without commission or warrant from the Inquisitors, and yet would he
very craftily and maliciously bear the prisoner in hand, that he did it wholly
by the Inquisitors special commandment. Now if any that had been so
injuriously dealt withal, meaning to make complaint thereof to the
Inquisitours, should desire him to pray a day of hearing (as none may solicit
that matter save only the keeper) the crafty knave suspecting that hereby he
should make a rod for his own tail, would bear the prisoner in hand he
had so done, and therewithal tell him, it would not be granted at that time;
and thus wlth such forged answers would keep the poor prisoner in that deep
dungeon twelve or fifteen days, till he thought his anger were somewhat
assuaged, and his courage thoroughly cooled, and then at the length would remove
him thence to his old prison again, making the poor man believe, that he had
cause to thank him for it, which of mere compassion and pity that he took
upon him, trauayled to the Inquisitours, and became an earnest suter to them to
get him released. In sum, such filching he used, and such extremity he
showed toward the prisoners, that diverse men of very good credit and
estimation with the Inquisitours, did make complaints thereof. Whereupon he was
committed to prison, and being found guilty of diverse kinds of treacheries,
yet notwithstanding in giving sentence upon him, he found the Inquisitours his
very good Lords and masters, who knew full well that he had been a full sure
stake to their holy House, and a trusty seruitour: so that his judgment was
easy enough; nothing like as was given upon the other his successor, that
only suffered the mother and her daughters to meet and talk together for the
space but of one half hour. albeit for his own misdeedes well known and
proved by him, he deserved to be dealt withal in as evil sort altogether, as
the other was for his pity and mercifulness. But to proceed. His judgment
in the end was this: to stand upon the scaffold holding a wax taper in his
hand, and afterward to be banished the city for five years. And whereas they
use wholly to confiscate other men's goods, they did only put this man to his
fine of forfaiting the fee due to him by reason of his office, that should have
bin paid unto him by the holy House: and this was done rather to satisfy his
accusers, then for any great zeal of punishing such offenses done by their holy
Officers.

The very same man had a maid-seruant in his house while he was in office
there, who pitying the miserable estate that the poor prisoners were in,
pined and hungerstarued by means of that wicked Jew her Master (for she
herself favored the Gospel) did diverse times speak unto them at the grate,
comforting and exhorting them so well as she could, to arm themselves with
patience, and did sundry times put under the door some good and wholesome meats
for their weak and feeble bodies, declaring no less charity in deeds, then
she had before uttered in words. Whose zeal (no doubt) was so much the more
marvelous, that wanting of her own to part withal to Christ's afflicted
members, she would privily convey from her Master some of the meat which he
had lurched from the prisoners of their due allowance, and so restore unto them
their own. And to give us the more cause to wonder at the miraculous
providence of God, which of evil seed sends not always the worst corn,
but sometimes the best, this maiden had a little damsel her masters own
daughter to help her in these her conueiances. Moreover, by this maidens means
the prisoners came to understand one of another estate* and to know in what
case every of their afflicted brethren was: the which thing was both a singular
comfort to themselves, and a special furtherance to their affairs. At the
length, this also came to the Inquisitours ears: who, after that they had kept
her in prison a whole year, and there made her partaker of the like hardness
that the other prisoners were in, caused her to be brought out upon the day of
their triumph, and set upon the scaffold, where they gave sentence upon her, to
wear the Sambenite, and to be whipped about the town with like infamy and
extremity as had been used to other before, with two hundred stripes: the
which was wholly performed the next day following. Besides this, they did also
banish her the city and the suburbs for ten years, with this writting on
her head. A favorer and aider of heretics. Another thing also that so sore
incensed the Inquisitours against her, was this: for that it was confessed unto
them upon examination of others, that she had disclosed unto diverse citizens,
after what sort the prisoners were entreated at the Inquisitours hands, as well
in their diet as otherwise. The which example being compared with the former
concerning the fact of her master, and the punishments that each of them had
therefore, is evidence enough to show what indifferency they use in punishing
malefactors. But to my matter.

It is a thing that has never been seen nor heard of before The prisoners
restrained the liberty of song.
their time, that either the most gallie slave, or he that endured the worst
kind of bondage that ever was devised by man, should be restrained and
forbidden the solace of song, to recreate himself withal in the midst of
his sorrowful dumpes, to drive away fantasies, and to relieve his pensive and
heavy heart with some kind of lightning. But this holy House passing and
exceeding all the tyrannies that ever have been practiced by or upon any,
depriueth the poor wretches of this small solace in their greatest miseries
and extremities. For if any of the prisoners begin to sing any Psalm, to the
intent to ease his present grief somewhat, or do recite any text of scripture,
the more that the saying or singing thereof does ease the silly soul, the
greater matter do Inquisitours and their officers make of it, taking it to be a
great hinderance to their affairs if the prisoners be at any time light
hearted, because their purpose is to keep them in perpetual slavery and
thraldom, without having any one good day in all their lives. Therefore so
soon as they hear any of the prisoners to sing or say ought aloud, by and by
is there a limme or two of the Devil, that is to say, one Notary or other,
with the keeper of the prison to command them silence, and to charge them in
the Inquisitours names to make no countenauce of mirth upon pain of
Excommunication. Which if he seem to contemn and make light of, or else to
laugh at (as indeed it is no better worthy) he shall have a bit on on his
tongue, and be taught his obedience, will he nill he, and thenceforth be taken
for a rebel and a contemner of the Inquisitours authority, and shall not be
suffered to speak but in a very low note, whereof they themselves will apoint
him the tune, and Sol-fa it before him. This is done for two special
considerations. The one to bereave the poor souls of all kind of solace (as I
said before): the other, for that the crafty old Syres learn by daily
experience, that such singing of Psalms or other songs made out of the
Scripture, is a maruailous comfort unto them, and a grea(...)couraging and
hartening to others their weak brethren that lie a great distance from them in
other prisons. There is also another cause why they enioin them silence, for
that by song or loud speaking they might one know of another. Therefore it
happens many times, that a man and his friend, the father and the son, the
husband and the wife, shall be all within one prisonhouse, by the space of two
or three years together, and neither of them know of the others being there,
till the time come that they see one another at the great Doom-day upon the
scaffold. And upon this consideration especially, this is wont to be one of
their common questions in every day of hearing: Whether the prisoners of
several prisons have conferred or communed together, or the one know of the
others being there: and if they find it to be so, straight upon it, they shift
prisons, and examine them upon another interrogatory, to beat one thing out of
another, if they have had any manner of conference, or what counsel each of
them gave to the other.

And this is the whole order of the prisoners diet: so that such as go not to
the stake, for the most part perish there, either of the great filth and stench
of the prison; or if they be delivered thence, dye shortly after of the french
disease, growing upon them by reason of their corrupt and naughty diet: either
else of abundance of Melancholy, become altered in their wits, or at the least
have such quesie bodies disposed to these or to some other greater maladies,
that they consume away by little and little, leading a far more miserable
life, than were any death that they could dye. For proof whereof, out of a
number of examples, that might be brought only out of the Inquisition at Siuil,
I will choose one worthy to be reported in all Chronicles for a special example
of their barbarous dealings.

Not many years ago, there arrived a certain English ship into the port S.
Lucars, which the Familiars going aboard upon, to make search for Religion, as
their manner is to do before any man of them may be suffered to come on land,
they took and carried with them to prison diverse Englishmen that were in her,
upon suspicion which they had on them to be professors of the Gospel, by
certain tokens and likelihoods which they espied in them, and knew them by. In
the same ship there was also a little boy not passing ten or twelve years of
age, son to a very rich Merchant of England, that was owner (as they said)
both of the ship, and the most part of her lading. Among other they took also
this young child (as they pretended) for having in his hands David's Psalms in
English. But whosoever does indifferently understand of their covetousness and
naughty practices, may well think without any offense to the holy Inquisition,
that the Fathers wealth was the occasion, both of the child's imprisonment, and
of the other misery that did befall him afterward. Whereupon, they made
Sequestration of the ship and goods, and carried the child to prison with the
rest of his company, where he abode by the space of 6. or 8 months. This child
was so well brought up by his parents in virtue and good discipline, and the
same took so deep root in him, being dewed with the grace of God, that
notwithstanding his tender age and hard imprisonment, he ceased not still to
give most evident tokens of the same his good and godly education: insomuch
that many and sundry times, but specially every morning and evening, he did
accustomably use to lift up his eyes to heaven, and to call upon God, from
whence he was taught to look and hope for all help and succor. And as his
keeper espied him now and then making his prayers in that sort, whereas he
ought to have been ashamed of himself and of his paganism, to see in so
tender age such a pattern of piety and godliness before his face, in stead
thereof, so soon as he beheld him lifting up his eyes to heaven, saying some
Psalm or other prayers in English, Now surely (says he) this boy is become a
pretty heretic already. After the child had continued the foresaid space in
that dark dungeon (being tenderly brought up to fore in his fathers house) by
reason the moisture and dampe of the prison, and of his corrup(...)et, he fell
into an extreme sickness. Whereof as soon as the Inquisitors had intelligence,
they gave commandment to remove him thence, and to carry him to the Cardinals
hospital till he were recovered. This hospital is a house T(...) (...)
p(...) in the Inquisition.
that serves for such as fall extremely sick within any of the prisons
belonging to the Inquisition. Howbeit they are not dealt withal there in any
thing more gently then they were before in their prisons, saving only that
they have physic, which is allowed them very liberally by the Hospital, and
may tender their bodies somewhat more charily for their healthes sake. Neither
may any man be suffered to resort to the patient, but his physi^ian and the
servants of the Hospital. But so soon as the patient begins to be on the
mending hand, though he be not altogether sound, and perfectly whole, he is
carried thither from whence he came. Marry this child being by reason of a
great sickness which he caught in this long and painful imprisonment, removed
into this Hospital, became benumbed in his legs, neither can any man tell any
certainty what became of him afterward. Let every man weigh now with himself
and consider, whether it beseem these good fathers so rudely to deal with a
child and a stranger, or if there be found any such unreasonable kind of
dealing among the wild Sc^thians: to ouerpasse the great spoil of the ship and
her Merchandise with silence.

At the same very time welnigh there was a certain Turk taken and carried to
the same prison, who had voluntarily forsaken and abiured the Mahometical
impiety, and was newly come from Marrock, the chief City and head of the
realm of Mauritania, into that part of Spain that lies directly over against
it, divided by Midland sea. But sauouring as yet of that venomous licour,
wherewith he was poisoned in his cradle, and fed withal from his infancy (for
as yet he had not taken out any one lesson of Christianity for want of a
teacher) and finding more faults and worse enormities among the Christians, than
he had left behind him among his countrymen the Mores, supposing himself to
be in good safety there, and therefore more careless, happened to say on a
time, that the Morish law (meaning their religion) was far better than the
Christians: for the which saying he fell into the Inquisitours hands; who to
the end that they might bring him into a better mind, schooled and catechized
him in such sort, that he confessed in prison plainly, that from the first day
of his Christendom it never repented him that he was become a Christian, till
he came within the Inquisitours jurisdiction, where it grieved him to see force
and violence, wrongs, injuries, and tyranny of all sorts, executed with
extremity.

CHAP. XI.
The prisoners visitation.

IT has been a custom generally received in all places which have sought to
be renowned by sitting in the seat of Justice and equity uprightly and
indifferently, that certain times should specially be appointed for the
visitation of prisons, to the intent that the keepers should not oppress their
prisoners, but that such injuries as either they had already, or thereafter
might receive, should be redressed, and prevented, by the oversight of the
chief rulers and judges, so often as need were. A thing which both conscience
craves, and the law of nature, and all policy and good government: last of
all, God by his word commands, wherein the case and poor estate of such as
lie in bonds, is commended unto us, and given us specially in charge to be
considered. Wherefore, to resist a number of wrongs (besides other that come
not to our ears) which the report was that the holy House had done to their
prisoners, where there was no good to be done any way but one (I mean by the
visitation of prison-houses) mark I beseech you the Inquisitours, and consider
ye what hypocrites they are: which in respect of their holy house and
Consistory, with their glorious titles, and the very name of Sanctity, wherein
they seem to excel all other profane and temporal Courts, should have bin
by all reason more bountiful and gentle, more full of comfort and charity, and
in withstanding injuries, most just and upright, carefully providing for the
necessities of the poor afflicted, and duly punishing such as had wronged
them any way, either by covetous or cruel dealing: yet were they so far from
doing their duties herein, that it seems rather their visitation was devised
of purpose to a clean contrary end: in so much that the days when they keep
their visitations, may be more worthily termed days of Doom to the poor
prisoners, than be thought means of ease or relief of their miseries; as it
appears most evidently by their common manner of dealing, on such days
appointed for the visitation. Whereof we purpose here to make rehearsal.

The visitation of prisons is commonly once or twice every month kept by the
Inquisitors, a Notary, and the Keeper, and for the most part upon the Sunday or
some other festival day. The manner of it is on this wise. At the very first
entrance into the prison, the Inquisitor demands of the prisoners these
questions: How it is with them: The manner of their visitations.
what they want: whether their Keeper give them any evil language, or threaten
them, or use any words of despite or reproach toward them: if he give them
their full allowance in their diet duly and truly, or provide them shift of
shirtes, with such words. For in very deed there is no hope of one drop of
comfort at their hands for all this business: but are only words and
questions of common course, and special articles prescribed unto them to
inquire upon, whereunto they neither add any more in words, nor perform so
much in deeds. As; if the prisoner be half naked, or want a couch to rest him
on, and should pray that his necessity may be considered and provided for, they
shape him such an answer as serves the^ both for winter and su^mer. And their
answer in summer is thus, in very mild and fatherly terms: Well (say they) now
the weather is warm, you may live full well without either clothes or couch.
And for winter in this sort: True it is, it has bin a great frost of late, but
now that it thaweth, and the cold is come down and resolved into snow and
rain, so that the air is open and cleared, you shall have a more seasonable
time. Care you for the garments wherewithal you should cloth your soul, which
stands in uttering the truth, and discharging your conscience before this
holy House: for this should be your special care. And here is all the
provision which they make for them, for all their questioning at the first; and
so departing as they came, their visitation in the end turns but to a jest:
so that, if their visitations were daily, ye see all the comfort that the
prisoners should have at these holy Fathers hands. Yet notwithhanding true it
is, that some such whom they owe special favor unto, receive some courtesy at
their hands, and easy it is to judge who they be that find it, where
coueteousnes and cruelty keep their Court.

Likewise if any of the prisoners, either learned or unlearned, desire to have
some good book, or the holy bible permitted them to read, to the intent to pass
that troublesome and careful time away to some profit, they shift him off with
the like answer for a book, as they use before to him that was naked and
without garments. For the Inquisitour will answer him-like a grave counselor,
That the true book is, to speak the truth, and to discharge his conscience in
that holy Court, and that he ought to be occupied in that book, that by
recounting and recording thereof, he might lay open his wounds and soars to
their Lordships, that were most ready to give him a plaster: and this (say
the^) is the true book, etc. But if the pris(...) be(...) and importunate in
craving the same, either at (...) the next visitation; he shall be taught to
hold his peace, and to be answered with reason. For if he be so (...)ke what
likes him, they will be so good as to deny what likes not them. To be
short, they seem to be wholly bent upon his thing of purpose, diligently to
see unto it, that the prisoner have nothing to look or think up but only his
present estate in misery, that the grief thereof grating upon him, may force
him the rather to satisfy their requests as much as may be. Howbeit, if the
prisoner have any friends or kinsfolk that a^e able to relieve his misery by
any means, perhaps they will send the Inquisitour some pretty present or
other, to obtain his favor and good will, that their kinseman may be somewhat
more favorably entreated. Now, all the hardness of this matter rests on
this point, to get the Inquisitour to take it. But for any other
under-officers, it is an easy matter to bribe them, so it be done privily or
by night: for such fellows will soon be corrupted. Marry their masters make
it somewhat more dainty and strange: yea it were a thing impossible, if a man
would take their first nay. Which commonly is after this sort; that this holy
Court is a Court incorrupt, that can away with bribes in no case, etc. But since
their answers are but from the teeth outward, all this adoo in excusing
themselves, and refusing the proffer, is a plain token that they would be
content to have it with all their hearts. Therefore is the Inquisitour for the
most part never without some of his brethren or sisters children about him, or
some one servant to whom he shows special favor and good will: the which
servant must be tendered and regarded as much as himself. Then is there also
another wayter that standing by and seeing this great adoo betwixt the
Inquisitour and the other party, the one proffering, and the other refusing as
fast, when the party begins to relent, shall come unto him immediately, and
teach him a trick how to obtain his purpose, and entering talk with him without
any manner of occasion, will point him to one with his finger, and say, Sir, see
ye yonder the young gentleman that stands at my Lords elbow? He is my Lords
Nephue. Now is there none so very an Ass, that having made so much adoo in
tempting the Inquisitour, but he may easily perceive that there is one ready
to hold the poke, and to receive his proffer, though the other refused it. And
so by this means at the length the poor prisoners get somewhat released.
Whereby it is apparent, what spirit this holy House is governed by, when
covetousness is able more to preuail with them to further a deed of charity,
than charity for her own sake could ever have gotten or obtained at their
hands.

CHAP. XII.
The act containing the publication of the Sentences.

THere remains now the last Act of the Tragedy, which is the very winding up of
all that is to be done in this holy Court. Wherein both parties are pleased,
and have their desire. The Inquisitours in obtaining their prey: the prisoners
seeing the terrible and continual torments, the subtle sleights and practices
of the Inquisitours, with their extreme and cruel dealings, grow to an end.
For then do they hear their final judgments after their matters have been
tossed to and fro many years in open Court, and in so great an audience and
assembly, as there has not been seen a greater, no not at Olimpus it self.
This Act of Faith they commonly called Auto. And surely good cause why. For
then is the prisoners faith tried to the uttermost, and shows it self what
it is, either by denying and abiuring Gods truth in open and solemn audience,
or else by standing stoutly and manfully therein, in like solemnity of show and
view of all the people, thronging together purposely. Let the inquisitours
therefore derive the word, and descant of it as they please: we do construe it
thus, as in a sense most agreeable to Gods judgment.

This act has many idle devices, or to speak more aptly, this Pascall of Gods
people Pelah: that is to say, this passage out of Egypt to the land of promise,
I mean from the world to God, has his Even, his preparation. Ios. 13. For a
few days before this feast, the Inquisitours use to call into the Court
severally one after other, all such persons whose goods are confiscate:
examining them what lands or goods they have, and where they lie, charging them
earnestly that they conceal not one jot; declaring unto them further, that if
afterward it can be proved that they have kept any thing back, both fellonie
shall be laid to their charge, and they also in whose hands it is found shall
pay for it most assuredly. After they have confessed the whole truth of all
their other goods and substance, besides such as were taken and found in their
own house at the first time of their apprehension, and so sequestered, and that
all be estreited into the accomptes of the Eschecquer, they return every one
to his own prison again, being assured to lose all their goods, howsoever they
escape with their lives.

But the right Even is the day next and immediately going before the festival
day. For then toward night they cause all the men to be brought together into
a large prison house, such as are appointed to be brought forth the next
morrow to do diverse kinds of penance before all the people, according as it
is enjoined unto them in their several sentences. This word penance, is a word
borrowed and usurped by them upon the use of the old primitive Church, for
certain penalties and punishments usurped toward offenders. Into another like
prison they bring all the women together likewise. But such as are judged to
death, are put each in their several prisons again, about 9. or 10. of the
clock at night, there is sent to each of them some pelting Priest to carry them
this heavy tidings, and to be their ghostly father. And now at this last
instant, the man to whom God has given the spirit of constancy and boldness,
makes his last protestation of his faith, to the shame of his Confessor, and
confusion of all that hellish army. But on the other part, he that has not
been constant to fore, nor is at this present, has now a time to call for
grace at Gods hands (the only giver of all gifts and graces) those especial
gifts of constancy and patience. Howbeit both sorts have much to do with their
ghostly fathers: the one in maintenance of their faith now in their last hour
and most dangerous time of all: the other in hopeless entreating and praying
their pardon of life. Yet is there neither of them both but in that night they
are occupied on every side, sustaining (no doubt) a great temptation, both in
that their flesh is frail, and the devil stirring; and yet sure it is, that
the heavenly Father forgets not his children in that hour. Yea, this night
wherein his members suffer such agony, may be well resembled unto that, which
God himself the head of all, suffered, both for the anguish of the patients,
and the comfort that came from heaven.

The next morrow by day break, the Familiars and all the rest of the officers
pertaining to the Inquisition, assemble together every man to do his office
about this holy Sacrifice, and to attire such prisoners as are to be brought
out before the people every one in his array, very curiously, in such sort as
was by the sentence pronounced and prescribed. Whereof such as stood stoutly to
their tackling, and defended their profession against their detestable
falsehoods, wear the Sambenit unto the very stake, which is a linen garment of
the color of the earth, made like to a coate-armour, The description of the
Sambenit
and all to be painted with black devils, over whom the manful soldier of
Christ triumphs in token of victory. On his head he has a hat long like a
turret, whereon is pictured the image of a man burning in the fire with many
devils about him, plying him with sire and fagots. It is much after the manner
of a foughten field, as I may liken it. For there is the whole skirmish, with
the overthrow of his enemies, set for a greater glory and show of conquest and
victory. Moreover, their tongues are nipped and pinched with a cleft piece of
wood which they call Mordazas, of the Latin word Mordeo to bite, because the
prisoners should not make any protestation before the people, either of their
innocence, or of their belief; having besides this about their necks new cords
made of bentes, and their hands fast bound behind them. Whereby he declares
(in mine opinion) like a good champion (though his deserts in other respects be
somewhat) yet that he reposeth no trust or confidence in them, but in the
only and unspeakable mercies of God, for the confessing of whose holy name he
is ready to dye the most terrible death, and so will appear before the
judgment seat of God: whereas if God should deal with him straightly according
to the letter and the law, notwithstanding all those glorious works that make
him so famous among men, he should well find, there were nothing remaining for
him in the end, but the destiny and reward of a villainous thief. And on this
sort come these constant martyrs disguised, and bearing these badges: first
upon the stage, and so consequently to the stake. Likewise, they that by
reuolting and denying the truth, have brought the Fathers in some hope of their
salvation, have judgment of death nevertheless, and are arrayed in like sort,
save only that in steed of the devils pictures, there is the image of the
cross, having their hands bound in like sort; that as the other have borne the
ensigns and cognizance of true faith and manly courage, so these may carry
also the badges of dastardie and false faith. And in like sort do all the rest
come forth, arrayed as the other, and besette with like badges more or less, as
it pleases the Inquisitours to disgrace them in the sight of the people.

But at what time the prisoners are ready to pass out of the Castle Triana
where they were imprisoned, then the holy House affects of purpose to seem
full of pity and charity toward them, in the sight of the common people. For
after that they be disguised on this sort, and every man set in his order as
he shall issue forth, they are commanded to pause a while, and forth with are
certain tables spread for them as they stand, and a very plentiful breakfast
in show, of roasted hens, kidde, and such like prepared, wherewith they would
blind the common sort, and persuade them, that they had bin none otherwise used
in prison, beginning now at the last to make them amends for the evil
entertainment which they had before. Howbeit the poor souls are in that taking
at that time, that they will do the meat no great harm, and therefore those
cutthroats the Familiars, which use to guard the prisoners on each side, do
commonly snatch the meat from before them, and devour it without either check
or controlement. As for the preparation, such is their state in that triumph,
as never was The order of the Inquisitours triumph.
the like pomp in Persia, nor triumph in Rome comparable thereunto. First and
foremost go the Children of the College where the youth is brought up at
learning, who both with their apparel, and song, and array which they are kept
in by certain Clerks that walk up and down by them in surplusses, move a
pretty devotion. Their dittie is the letanies: the one part of the Quier
answering another, and the foot of their song is, Ora pro illis. After them
go such as do penance, placed as it were in certain degrees, so that such as
have the easiest punishments go next in order unto the Children, and are to
be discerned from other by these tokens: tapers in their hands vnlighted,
ropes about their necks, and Barnacles upon their tongues, with hats of paper,
bare-headed, except they put on those hats, but without clokes like slaves: and
the better or richer man comes always hindmost. Next unto these go they
that are disguised in Sambenites, that is to say, a linen garment shaped like
a coat armor with a red cross overthwart, observing the state and condition
of every person, as is said before. But such as have bin berayed with their
Orders, are preferred before others, both for estimation and place. Lastly
comes in the third rank, those that are condemned to the fire: of the which
sort, so many as have refused Gods truth, and betaken themselves in steed
thereof to lies, in hope of mercy at man's hand, do well deserve to go before
the rest that remained constant to the end, whom the Inquisitors place in the
rereward as the fittest place for them even in their own judgments, in respect
of their virtue and faith. Also on each hand of every prisoner, there goes a
Familiar all armed to guard him, and besides them two Monks or Theati^i These be
th(...) Jesuits
(as they term them) attending on every one that is ready to suffer, to
persuade them tooth and nail, not to cleave unto that doctrine now at their
departure out of this world, wherein they have bin trained and taught hitherto.
Which wicked importunity is as great a grief in my fa^cy to him that constantly
has perseuered hitherto, as any torment that he has endured. Immediately
after the prisoners, do follow in order, as the manner is in all solemnities,
first the whole state of the City, which consists upon Alguaziles,
Constables, Governors of the 24. Wards, the Judges of every Court, the Regent
or Viceroy and Assistant, and after them a great troop of noble gentlemen on
horseback: next unto them the State ecclesiastical. In the first rank the
Clerks, Vicars and Curats: in the second the whole Chapter of the Cathedral
Church commonly called Cabildum Ecclesiae maioris: In the third place the
Abbots and Priors with their Couentes: and last of all, after all these
follows the holy House, which triumphs indeed, and is in jolly state that
day. Before whom as they pass, there is a way made in respect of their
honors, and a compass kept, wherein the Fiscal, one that takes no small
pains in the holy Houses behalf toward the obtaining of this victory, having
a flagge of red damask displaied in warlick fashion (for all the world)
occupies the place of the Standard Bearer.

The flag is of turkey work, full of much good workmanship, and has on the one
side the Popes arms that first granted the charter of the Inquisition, and on
the other the image of King Ferdinando that first admitted it, all very
sumptuously embrodered with silk and purple: and in the top of the Standard is
fixed a rich cross of silver and gilt with the crucifixe, which the people
make after more superstitiously a great deal, than they do after any other
cross, only because it is the cross pertaining to the holy Inquisition. Last
of all, come the Fathers themselves a very soft set pace for gravity sake,
triumphantly as chief Emperors of that conquest. Hard at their heels follow
the Familiars and Promoters belonging to the holy House, all on horseback, as
the manner was in the triumphs at Rome for every Captain conqueror to have
his soldiers hard at his elbow. After the which, come the common people hand
over head with a wonderful press. With this pomp they pass from Triana where
the Inquisitours prison is, to a certain scaffold made of wood, and reared up a
good height in the midst of the high street and chief of all the city, for
the Penitentiaries to stand upon in view of all the people, there to hear the
sentence pronounced upon them. Being come upon the scaffold, they cause them to
sit down, every man and woman in the same order that he or she came in. Right
over against the which, there is also another stage set up of like quantity,
wherein is erected a stately kind of Consistory for the Inquisitours, where
they sit in their majesty like gods with all their train about them that
followed them thither.

Here it would not be impertine^t (as I judge) to discourse a little in
comparing the Triumph of our adversaries with the public Penance used in the
primitive Church, and set out by these godly Bishops and Pastors in those
days, The manner of the pe(...) used in the Pri(...) (...).
wherein was nothing but mere Godliness sought, with a fervent and unfeigned
zeal of the amendment and salvation of the repentants: into the which never
any entered but he departed thence to his great comfort, though with some
shame. And his shame was for his offense, but the ease of his grief; and the
plaster which the Pastors and Preachers applied to his ruptures, was the
perfect Plaster and true Sanatiue, that healed his wounded and corrupt
conscience. Neither was it their manner that prescribed the penance, to triumph
on that day, or to send for their brauest suits out of their wardrobes, to go
and show themselves abroad-in in token of joy and victory: but came themselves
in mourning weed, and so likewise did the whole congregation, declaring by
that outward show of sorrow, that their hearts were touched inwardly with the
fall and infirmities of their brethren. Insomuch that many times the Censors
themselves have been seen to shed more tears than have the Penitentiaries,
unfeignedly sorrowing the shame which the other sustained (as right and reason
was) for their misdeeds. Neither was any of them put to any kind of death one
or other, or so smartly scourged, that by means of the stripes pearcing so
deep, a man might have seen the bare bone, nor the utter shame and discredit
both of themselves and their whole posterity sought hereby: but whatsoever was
done, it was referred to this end, that they might recover the good name again
among the congregation, which they had lost before by their misdeameanor. As for
any of the Preachers or Ministers, none of them had any allowance or fees from
the Eschecquer, or any one fleece or lock of wool from the backs of any of
his flock, neither was any thing found in their houses that came by spoil of
the poor. Ezechiel 34. Esaias 3. Woe be to you shepherds, etc. Against the
which albeit there be good cause to complain and cry out presently, yet may
there perhaps be some other opportunity elsewhere to do it. My meaning in this
place is, only to make a plat without any order or fashion, that such as have
any sense at all left within them in this universal time of ignorance and
dotage, may begin to weigh and consider what difference there is betwixt
these triumphs set out with such preparation and iollitie, and the public
penance used in the Primitive Church, which the holy House braggeth so much
that they retain till this day.

Thus, when every man has taken his place in order, one begins a Sermon,
which is purposely devised much in commendation of the holy House, and the
confutatio^ of such heresies as they are presently about to prosecute. But the
greatest part of it is spent in shameful and slanderous reproaches, wherewith
they charge the good christians, adding one trouble and grief in the neck of
another. Which if they seem to take in good part, seeing themselves set there
as wondering stocks to all the world, and marks for them to shoot all their
devilish darts of shameful and reproachful slanders at, either it is because
they bear them off with the sure buckler of faith: or else by reason that they
have been acquainted therewith, and their hearts hardened with such continual
exercise, like senseless men they feel now no touch of them. When the sermon
is finished, they begin to read the sentences given upon the penitentiaries in
order as every man came, or in place as they sit, beginning with such as are to
have the easiest judgments and punishments first. This part of the Act is
somewhat long, and because it is the chiefest part, therefore it requires some
special treatise, but hereafter in more convenient place. The Sentences being
thus orderly al pronounced, the chief Commissioner for the Inquisition sings
certain short prayers for the Conuerts (as they call them) which nevertheless
must die also: the effect whereof is, that God would vouchafe to extend his
mercy and favor toward them, that they may persevere in confessing the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, and die therein. Which don, they begin to sing
Miserere the 51. Psalm for the obtaining of Gods favor and mercy toward the
Penitentiaries; and that the discipline and absolutions done and executed upon
them by the Fathers, may be effectual and auailable unto them to true
repentance. The sentences are most commonly these. Death without mercy:
Whipping with extremity, that the parties either not at all, or else very
hardly escape with their lives: Condemnation to the gally, and Forfaiture of
all their goods, with such like penalties, wherein the good mother church of
Rome extends her pity and compassion toward her children by the
Inquisitours as by her means, thinking the proof and the effect of true
repentance necessarily to consist therein. Now surely the whole world may see
and perceive (and that not only such as have drunk of her cup) the ourageous
tyranny of such Termagants as have bragged and boasted of themselves, that
they are the true Church of Christ, and be occasioned thereby to remember
themselves, and to esteem of them as they are.

The Psalm being ended, which they abuse to their purpose most impudently and
abominably, in a plain mockery (as they do commonly all other places of
Scripture) the chief Inquisitour sings a sort of Versicles: and the whole
Quier answers them with their Responses, in a high and a loud note, strayning
their cunning and pipes to the uttermost. Which done, the Inquisitour of his
absolute authority pronounces absolution in a kind of note, wherein he
absolueth all such as are come home to the church of Rome (but forsaken Christ)
from all their errors whereof they show themselves penitent, forasmuch as they
have swe^ued from the Romish church. Howbeit this absolution must have none
other construction, than has the Romish absolution a culpa tantum, but not a
poena. that is to say, from the fault only, not from the penalty. For they must
forth with, notwithstanding this their recantation, abide the penalties without
either mercy, justice, or conscience.

After the absolution, the Inquisitours have yet one other notable device to
uphold their kingdom withal as it were with anchor and chain cable, which is a
manifest proof, that they are half in doubt, lest nor they nor their kingdom
should long continue. And the device is this: That all the people gathered
together at that time, whereof some come to see the solemnity above 20. leagues
off, take a solemn oath before them, and bind themselves thereby, vowing the
performance thereof, that they will live and dye in the service and obedience
of the church of Rome, and by all means possible, to their power defend and
maintain it, hazarding both life and goods against any whosoever shall go
about to overthrow it. Moreover, they make them to forswear and curse,
whatsoever is contrary to that which the church of Rome holds and affirms
for true. Also that to their power they shall maintain and uphold the holy
House, and defend all the officers thereof, etc. In witness whereof, and for a
further surety of the matter, they take recor(...)one of another. And then may
a man see the silly common people, and those of higher estate and degree crouch
to the earth with great devotion, and through ignorance take their oaths
against God and his anointed, rashly and wickedly conspiring together, every
man to his power, to be a promoter and setter forward of the Inquisition. Now
if you talk with any man about the abolishing of this monster of all wickedness
and iniquity out of the world, though he confess of himself, and grant
indeed, that there is much cruelty and tyranny used therein: he will tell you a
tale again, of his solemn oath taken and vow vowed, in open and solemn
audience, and what can ye reply to him then? Marry (sir) thus. How that certain
of the Jews of very blind ignorance and superstition did bind themselves with
an oath, and made a solemn vow, that they would neither eat nor drink till
they had slain Paul, Act. 23. And these men (say we) sin thrice so deeply as
they, and therefore are less bound to seek to save their oath, so wickedly
taken and so ungodly. First, for that they of a blind and therefore a wicked
zeal, in defense of their law, do fight against the Gospel of Christ.
Secondly, in abusing and abhominably profaning the name of God, swearing by
his holy name, with all their might and main, to maintain an evil quarrel,
and depresse a better, which lies not in them to do. Thirdly, whereas they
should in time revoke and retract all things begun against God and his holy
word, they do still proceed and go forward in their purpose like the stubburne
and stifnecked Jews. Can any man come in now and aver the contrary? But when
it shall be most manifestly proved, that the Inquisitors have gone about busily
and of purpose to destroy the kingdom of Christ, as did the wicked Jews, then
shall it also be evident and apparent, that such as have vowed this solemn
oath, though it were of ignorance, have incurred all those three several
offenses. Wherefore, if they will take up themselves, and learn to be wise in
time, this will be one way and means for them to recover their salvation.
First, to consider diligently what kind of quarrel the Inquisitours do take in
hand to maintain. Secondly, to weigh with themselves, whether they fight under
the Inquisitours banner for Christ, or against Christ, and so let them keep or
break their oath, as they shall think good, after they have debated the
matter thoroughly. Now to our purpose again.

After all things thus done and finished, if any there be among the
Penitentiaries that deserve to be so served, they are straightway degraded:
and the Bishop that ministered the orders to the party, plaieth that part,
arraied all in his Pontificalibus. The ceremonies used about the actual
degradation (as they term it) of him that is to be executed that day, are
both strange and tragical. First, they apparel him in his massing robes, as
though he were ready to d^^ mass, and afterward dispoile him again of every
trinket one after another, using both dog-trickes, The manner of degradation.
and terms of coniuration about every of the ornaments, contrariwise to that
that they did before at the first putting on thereof, when he entered into
orders. Then are his hands, lips, and crown, scraped with a broken glass or
some sharp knife, in token that they scrape off the oil that he was greased
withal at his first initiation. All the which is done in the full view and
wonder of all the people, some pitying the poor man, and some cursing him
worse than lew or Pagane, being indeed most happy, if it be but for this one
thing, that in the latter end of his life he cries abrenuntio to that greasy
and stinking oil, scraping away that Baals mark and that Apish patch so well
as it will be, and so departing. But such as have not judgment of death, are
degraded only verbaliter (as they term it) that is to say, by word. Which is
in effect a suspending from all function and preferment, during the Popes
pleasure.

Another ceremony they have, that in no case is to be omitted, wherein the holy
House most shamefully and without any kind of color in the world, mocketh both
God and man, and all the whole company present, giving all men good cause
justly to laugh at their folly: and that is this. In the end of their sentence
pronounced upon such as have judgment to be burned (their conversion to the
church of Rome notwithstanding) they add moreover and cause there openly to be
proclaimed, that forasmuch as the holy House mistrusteth that the party is not
truly converted nor from his heart, but counterfaiteth, and do fear
therefore, lest a wolf lurk still under a sheep clothing, for all his
semblance of conversion, they do give and bequeath him to the secular power,
with this humble request unto them, to show the party so much favor as may
be, and to break neither bone, nor pearce any skin of his body. But such as
nothing was able to remove from their godly profession, whom they term
Wilful and Obstinate persons, they commend to the same power, with these
words. Forasmuch as we have labored earnestly, and taken great pains with
this man, to bring him home to our mother church of Rome, and can do no good
on him, but that still he continues obstinatly in his opinions, etc. we
therefore deliver this fellow to the secular power, to do execution on him
according to order of law: yet praying them by the way, that if he show any
tokens of true repentance, to deal as favorably with him as they may, with
other such like speech. And what impudency (I pray you) is this? They have
already given sentence upon him that he must dye, and thereupon deliver him to
the secular power to be burnt, in so much, that if they that should see
execution done, do either suffer the party to make an escape, or else keep
him and not burn him, they themselves should be assigned to supply his place:
and yet they require thus much at their hands, to use as much mercy toward
him as they may. But what kind of pity or mercy is it I pray you, that they
show unto them themselves, which bring the poor soul forth into that place
dismembered and shaken all into pieces in every lim(...)e and iointe of their
bodies, with never a whole bone in their skin, yea, the very sinews,
veins, and guts, within them broken with their most cruel tortures, wherewith
diverse have perished presently, even betwixt their hands? and yet will they sue
to the secular power, to break neither arm nor leg, nor any other member,
nor to draw one drop of blood on them. Forsooth it is because the harm that
they have done to the poor wretches already, is wholly within the flesh; and
because they have drawn no blood of them, either with knife or lance, but
only at his mouth with a fine Lawne let down his throat, they forsooth are
free from bloodshed and breaking of bones. They themselves have entreated him
tootoo pitifully, and without all mercy or good humanity, with exquisite
devices and such kind of cruelty as was above measure and more than barbarous,
and fall they now to entreat the temporal Judges to show him as much mercy a^
may be? Perhaps these flouting merchants suppose that by this only shift of
descant, in praying mercy for them, they have cleanly avoided their Canon,
which holds them accursed and excommunicate, whosoever being of the clergy
shall shed any blood, or give any maime: for they can wipe away such a foolish
penalty, in comparison of so great an offense, with as foolish and ridiculous a
shift. And these most impudent toys of mockery, both the Princes and the whole
people, but chiefly the temporal magistrate hears and suffers, without
saying any thing thereto: otherwise there is no man so void of all
understanding, but he may easily perceive, that their praying of mercy and
craving of favor for them, is but a very jest, imagined, to flout all the
whole company withal, and spoken then, when they mean it least. Lo, here is
the pity and tender compassion, and mother-like mercy of their holy
Mother Church, which this holy House shows. This also may the reader see and
mark by the way, were he never so blind, that this shift of theirs to send
such to the fire of whose conversion they stand half in doubt, that is to say,
lest they leave a wolf in a lambe^ skin, is yet one of the cunningest tricks,
that the holy House has in all her bouget.

I told you before, that the chiefest part of the Act consisted in the reading
and pronouncing of the sentences, and therefore most worthy the marking:
forasmuch, as they do not only by singular falsehood, mis-report such things as
the party upon examination has confessed, but also father those things upon
him most diuellishly, which he neither spoke nor thought in all his lifetime.
And these has the holy House devised against the party, whereof part is most
filthy, part shameful and abominable, and part blasphemous, to the intent to
disgrace his person, and to make both him and his doctrine the more abhorred of
men, and increase their own estimation and credit, as most necessary members
to scour and rid the world of such pestiferous persons, Whiles all this
gear is in rehearsing to the people. they clappe upon the parties tongue a
cleft piece of wood, in manner as it were a barnacle, to his great and
intolerable pain, so that he can answer ne gainsay, nothing in defense of
himself and his own innocence. For if he might be suffered and let alone,
he would openly give them the lie to their faces: as it has happened diverse
times. Howbeit the controversy were not like long to continue. For straightway
the fellow should be sure to have his mouth gagged, or his tongue stocked, to
teach him to be quiet, and to say nothing openly. Moreover, that which is the
parties confession in very deed, is so perverted and corrupted, with the words
so changed, and rechanged in reading, that in a manner it may be very well said
for him, that he never spoke nor thought any such thing. Whereof I will here
show some special examples, because they be matters of weight, and such as
cannot easily be contraried, forasmuch as the whole world sees and knows
them well enough.

After that all the sentences be read, and the act uall degradation wholly
finished, the temporal magistrate takes them into his hands very solemnly,
according as it is enjoined him by the holy House, and so conueyeth them to the
place of execution, with a sort of the devils own Proctors about them, calling
and crying upon them with great importunity to forsake the truth which they
have received and professed. And many times it chances, that such as
constantly persevere in confessing the truth to the end, do break their necks
against the stake with a trice, and then they noise abroad among the common
people, that such, and such repentantly recanted their heresies at their very
last hour, and came home again to the Church of Rome, and therefore felt no
force of fire at all, by reason of the Inquisitours mercy and pity extended
upon such as became converted. By these, and such like subtle practices, they
go about to bury the truth, as though God the auenger thereof were not able to
raise it up again out of darkness and dungeons. The residue, which be not
condemned to dye, are carried back to prison again: and the next day after,
are brought out and whipped, such as had like sentence pronounced upon them:
whereof diverse are afterward sent to the gally, others remanded to perpetual
prison, either to Triana the special prison for the Inquisition, or to some
place elsewhere altogether as evil as a prison, with this Item to them ere they
go: that if they happen hereafter to call anything to mind, that erst they
have not disclosed, they immediately resort to the holy House, and declare it
whatsoever it be: for if it be found otherwise, that they have craftily and
closely concealed any thing, they shall be reputed (say they) as persons
without remorce of conscience, and like-to be sharply and severely punished
therefore. But the chiefest matter that they give them in charge is, in no case
to reveal any thing that they have either heard or seen during the time of
their imprisonment, concerning the manner of their entreating in any respect,
either of punishment, or imprisonment, or otherwise, how and after what sort
they have generally proceeded in Court against them, and their fellow
prisoners; but for the time of their being there, should take and repute
themselves altogether as dead persons. For if the contrary can be proved by
them, or that it come to the Inquisitours ears that they have uttered any of
their secrets, they shall be taken for persons Relapsed (a^ they term them)
and be punished with most severity. And the judgment appointed for such, is
death without redemption, which surely is a devise above all the rest, and might
worse be spared. For by this their so strait enioyning them silence upon pain
of their lives, they cope them (as it were) with needle and thread, and so
keep in all their knavery and tyranny as sure as under lock and key, both
close and secret to themselves. They know full well, I wis, that if the king
who authorized them, should by any means understand their false play which
they use, the violence and injury that they offer, the slanderous reports
which they make the wonderful fetches, and devilish devices which they
practice to entrappe diverse and sundry poor innocents, charging them with
many matters, which neither they said, nor saw, nor heard at any time, but
specially if he understood of their covetous and cruel dealings, and (as I
may say) more than barbarous, growing of that greedy desire of theirs: he
would (no doubt of it) turn the Inquisition on their own necks, and foresee
the safety as well of his own subjects, as the commonweal of the country,
and provide for it accordingly: but chiefly he would see to the execution of
Justice, whereof he is appointed by God a lawful Protector, rather than the
enriching of his bags and coffers, won by such unlawful means. Or else, if
the King s^acked herein to do that appertains to him, the common people would
be ready to fire them, that have been so fierce with fire to others.
Furthermore, they labor so earnestly to bury the truth, and are so careful
lest their cruelty should come to light, that among other great penalies which
they enioine to diverse men of worship and good reputation, and some of honor
and in authority, after they have kept them in prison a season, and caused
them to sustain open infamy, they inhibite them the company and conference of
any, other than such as they shall appoint and allow them: neither will suffer
them to write to any friend of theirs without making them privy unto it, that
they might have the perusing thereof. Their color for this matter (forsooth)
is very pretty, lest that by conference or writing of letters, they should
publish their heretical opinions. But in very deed their drift is, lest such
men as have good friends and be well allied, should complain and make their
moan to their friends and allies, of the injuries that have bin done unto them,
and they make means to the King to enquire further of their doings, and so
bring the practices of the holy House to light. Whereof this is proof
sufficient, that they use not this kind of punishment to any of the meaner
sort, but only to them that be of good blood and parentage.

For at the very first beginning, when the manner of their Triumph first came
up, and was executed upon the Lutheranes (as they call them) they that were
present at the sight, and beheld the order and fashion well, were wont to write
unto their friends both within the Realm and abroad, of all such things as
there were done and seen, especially of such as did penance: also what
sentences were pronounced upon them, with the causes and circumstances of all
their other punishments and penalties. But the holy House (as daily practice
makes every one his crafts-maister) grew so cunning in their affairs, that
straightway they began to smell out the matter, that it might in time work
them some displeasure, and therewithal that the doctrine which they so greatly
detest and abhor, might be published and spread further than they would
wish it, so that many which otherwise would have continued in their blindness
still, if they had never heard nor seen any such reports, should be
occasioned thereby, to open their eyes and understandings, and to confess
as well the doctrine it self, and receive it, as also epsy the wickedness of
them that persecute it. Therefore for remedy of this mischief and
inconvenience, the holy House provided, by making and publishing certain
presidentes of such like reports, brief, and in such wise as were not likely
to do any great harm: that who so were disposed to certify their friends of
such matters, should follow those presidentes in any case: and therefore
appointed certain great penalties for the transgressors hereof, that should
make their reports in any other more large or ample manner, than was by their
order prescribed. The manner whereof was this: That after they had told who and
what The Presidents for letters appointed by the holy House.
manner of man he was that was punished or executed, they should add moreover,
because he held with Luther, without naming any of his opinions, (which
notwithstanding were specially recited before) was burned, or thus, or thus
punished or executed, according to the truth of the matter.

Moreover, as the holy House well may err (albeit men now adays are so
bewitched with superstition and flattery, that they dare affirm the
contrary, being ordered, and guided (say they) by the holy Ghost) so it
comes diverse times to pass, that some be causeless apprehended, some upon
very small and light complaints, very few upon any lawful and sufficient
information. And the greatest part, after they have been imprisoned in such
miserable sort as I have before declared, for a year, or two, or more, till
their causes were thoroughly examined, at the last being tried and found
guiltless, so that necessarily they are to be discharged, within a day or two
after their great day of Triumph, they bring them into the Court, and there
begin to set on them again as freshly as ever they did, willing them to
utter the truth, as they will avoid their displeasures and the extremity of
law, threatening them the Rack, and saying that there is now come in sufficient
matter by information against them. Then if any will be feared with this
facing, and be brought but to utter one word of any such matters as they are
desirous to hear of, they send him straight to ward again, and renew their
suit against him from the beginning. But if nothing can be got out of him by
this means, nor that they have any thing else to charge him withal, they
leave off threatening, and fall to flattering: saying, that they have a better
opinion of him than so, and therefore are resolved to send him home again to
his own house: for the which fatherly favor extended toward him in saving
both his life and his goods, he is to account himself much beholding and
bound to their Lordships, willing him to persuade himself, that what favor
they have showed him already, they mean to continue toward him, for the good
liking that they had of him at the very first view, but specially for the good
example of patience which he showed during the whole time of his imprisonment.
With these and such like Lenitiues the good and upright Judges think to supple
the rest of his sores that were of their own making, and to send him home to
his house at the last, with special charge that he be silent. Yet sometime
they detain him in prison a good while after, notwithstanding that he be
found not guilty, nothing regarding what any, be he never so guiltless,
suffer at their hands, and there do keep him closely and crastily till a day
or two after their great state and iollity, that being dismissed near about the
time that the other are, the common people may think he received his punishment
amongst the rest, tho in some lesser degree, and thereby be persuaded that the
holy House never vexes any man without sufficient information. And mark I
pray you one other new found guise that these ravening wolves have got to
obtain their prey and spoil withal: that such persons as among other parcels
of their punishments are condemned either to perpetual imprisonment, either
during the Inquisitors pleasure, or for a certain season, albeit they remain
no longer in Triana, that is, the Inquisitours proper and peculiar prison,
because they shall think themselves quite and clear dispatched, and to have no
more to do with the holy House: yet whersoeuer they be appointed their place
of abode as an imprisonment, there be spies also to mark diligently how they
take the matter, and whether they put it up quietly, yea or no, or what they
say unto it. For if they be cheerful, or do any ways make but a
countenance of mirth in this time of their trouble, they shall both incur the
Inquisitours displeasure therefore, and feel a greater smart besides. They also
that do remain in such appointed places, are likewise visited sometime by the
Inquisitours; but in such sort as has bin described of the other, and to the
very same end and purpose, that is to say, that the common people might see how
full of mercy and pity they are: howbeit it is to this end, to bring them
more in fear and awe of them, and of their displeasure. For then begin they
(as it were) to keep Court, and to make inquiry both of the prisoners
themselves and of the keepers; whether since their departure out of Triana they
have heard any of their fellows say any thing touching matters of religion,
who it was that did so, and what countenance others that heard it, made
thereunto. Also, whether any man do grudge or find himself grieved for any
punishment that he has endured, but especially, whether they have disclosed
any mystery or secret of theirs, or whether any man have compassed or imagined
to make an escape, with many other such like questions. And if they find no
such matters, they return as wise as they came, If otherwise there appear any
evident matter against them, then commence they their suit against him or them.
Not many years ago, it chanced at Civil in such a like visitation, that a
certain prisoner, after he had remained in prison for certain years at the
chief Inquisitours pleasure, whose name was Licentiato Gasco, made very
earnest suite unto him for his discharge and deliverance thence. This Gasco was
a man well learned in both the laws, as it seemed: who strayning himself to
speak somewhat wisely, made this grave and goodly answer unto him, passing all
wisdom or good religion. Now Sirs (says he) you must My Lord the chief
Inquisitors occasion.
take your affliction patiently, for here you suffer for the sins of the
people, and for ours as well as for your own. Howbeit I will move the rest of
my Lords in the matter, and what may be done, shall be done. But upon these and
such like foolish and blasphemous speeches, never any Commissioner made
inquiry: and thus departed he out of the Parler, wherein he had made such a
clerke-like piece of work to the poor prisoners in way of consolation; and so
like a gay-diuine, casting a word out to the keeper very solemnly, and
charging him by virtue of their Office to look to them narrowly, that none
escaped. For if there did, he should both seek them at his own charge, and be
punished besides for his negligence, in looking so slenderly to his duty.

CHAP. XIII.
The interpretation of the sentences.

THere be also certain special terms which the holy House uses for every
kind of penance severally. Wherein, seeing there lies also sorne secret
mystery, it shall not be greatly impertinent to declare them in this place,
expounding them after the Inquisitours own sense and understanding. First,
concerning the judgments, some are to be burned quick, and that is for such
as have constantly perseuered unto the end, in the confession of a pure and
perfect faith: and these men they call obstinate. Others are to be burned
also, but after they be dead, being first strangled at the stake. Such are
they, that being once won by their own frailty and weakness, have been
content to submit themselves to the Inquisitours, and to footh wahtsoeuer the
other will say, and yet have by certain evident and sufficient tokens, given
the Inquisitours good cause of suspicion, to think that they remain the same
in heart still, notwithstanding their mouth has confessed the contrary. After
the same manner are diverse also of the former sort, whom they term obstinate,
strangled ere the fire be kindled, to make the people believe, that so soon
as they were set to the stake, they abiured and renouced all their heresies,
and returned to the holy Mother Church of Rome. But of these I have made
mention before. Another sort of sentences there are that have a show of more
mercy, which they call reconciliations, because such as have renounced the
truth are as it were purged and cleansed by doing that penance in way of
satisfaction, and thereby received again into the very bosom of the Romish
Church. Such for the most part carry in their hands tapers vnlighted on the
great day of their Triumph, with ropes about their necks, and Sambenites upon
their backs above their other garments, as badges and tokens of guilt: and
these they wear either during life, or for some other certain number of
years, or else are close kept and shut up in some monastery, or some other
private places, whereof as there be sundry sorts, so are there likewise
several names. Some are Perpetual without redemption. Some only perpetual.
Some for a certain season: the which beeng expired, they must notwithstanding
remain there still, during the Inquisitours pleasures: and some be no longer
limited at the first than during the pleasure of the chief Inquisitour, the
General they call him, because he is chief Judge above all other Courts of
the holy Inquisition throughout the Realm of Spain: there be also some at the
pleasure of the inferior Judges that gave the sentence, in their own Courts
and private jurisdictions. These diversities of prisons are like the properties
of Purgatory for all the world, excepting as well certain cases in matter of
penance, as also degrees of affinity and blood in cases of marriage. For they
are devised to glean all the money out of the poor Penitentiaries purses, more
or less, according to the quality of the offense, and after the rate and
proportion of the penalty assessed on each of them therefore. And all this
(forsooth) must be understood to proceed from the Inquisitours owneclemencie
and mercy, of their own mere good will: by the only means whereof, the party
that otherwise must necessarely perish for abiuring the truth, may stand in
state of grace again, and be in possibility to recover his own salvation.

When judgment is given to wear the Habit, (for so they call the Sambenite
by a more cleanly term) and to perpetual prison without bail or maineprise,
it is to be understood, that there is no talk to be had of any remission
thereof till the party has worn that garment, and suffered imprisonment, the
space of nine or ten whole years, except the party have so good hap, as by
means of his friends to obtain his pardon at the Kings hand, who only may by
his prerogative pardon it at his pleasure. But after the expiration of those
years, unless the party have given some cause of suspicion again, the chief
Inquisitour is commonly wont to remitte the residue, howbeit with great
crouching first, and much entreatie.

When they adiudge a man to wear the Sambenite, and to suffer perpetual
imprisonment, without adding any more, it is commonly taken for 3. years. if
the chief Inquisitor do so think good: upon whose pleasure it rests either
to give the prisoner his discharge after those 3 years; or else to his
perpetual ignominy, there to detain him all his life long. But when they
say, that a man shall wear the Habit, and suffer imprisonment so many years
or months, so soon as that certain time is expired the party is set at
liberty, except it be added moreover, besides the limitation of time certain,
that it shall be further referred to the discretion and appointment of the
Inquisitours. The which clause they commonly use to put in the latter end, in
the winding up of all, to choke men therewith, to make them think themselves
much bound to them while they live, for releasing the same. But if the sentence
be to wear the Sambenite with imprisonment during the chief Inquisitours
pleasure, it is left to their discretions to pardon or punish accordingly, as
they shall think good. In sum, how or after what sort soever their sentence
be, the matter is wholly referred to them and to their ordering.

Now the means to redeem this imprisonment, and to dispense with the wearing
of these robes, is the more common and ordinary, by reason that the King has
in his Court diverse young gentlemen, to whom in respect of their service, he
uses to grant pardons for those matters. Then such as get the grant hereof,
do commonly make inquiry for such persons as are thereunto adjudged, who they
be, and where they remain, to the intent to make their market of those pardons
to their most advantage, as they can agree of price either more or less,
respecting always, both the ability of the person, and the quality of the
sentence. For such as had judgment without redemption, pay more: other for
release of perpetual imprisonment, less: other for certain time and during
the Inquisitours pleasure, less again: and least of all, that which only
rests upon the discretion and will of the Judge. Also, at some times the
King, of his like liberality and gracious goodness, uses to grant unto
diverse, such money as should be levied for pardon of the Sambenite and other
punishment, toward the redeeming of their brethren and allies, being taken
prisoners by the Turks or Moors. And yet, whosoever sueth unto the King for
any such pardon, must first in any case make the Inquisitours and the Clerks
or other Officers of that Court his friends: otherwise, both the Kings own
charter, and the payment made by the party besides notwithstanding, they will
avoid him by hook or by crook, and tell him plainly, be it the King or the
Pope himself that granted the pardon, he must be better informed how the case
stands ere he may depart so lightly. Then, if the matter be brought to that
pass, it is an easy thing for them to imagine, that the party is not so
cleared, but that there was good cause a while to make a stay.

But when any has judgment of Imprisonment during the chief Inquisitours
pleasure, who for certain secret occasions to him known will not be
entreated, and yet cannot well with honesty repulse the suitors, albeit he do
them manifest injury to detain them so long, he will convey the matter full
cunningly, saying, that he is content to refer it to the Inquisitours by whom
the judgment was given. And when the party resorteth to them, then
straightway is he posted over from them back again to the high Inquisitor,
alleging that the determination hereof belongs unto him, and so by means
that one of them understands the others meaning, they dally and prolong the
poor man's imprisonment, driving him off from day to day, so long as it pleases
them. In like manner, the punishment is limited by the inferior Inquisitours.
For when they are loath to be entreated, they pass it to the high Inquisitor,
and so one of them serves another: and therefore except the party go
cunningly to work, and bribe either the Clerk or some other Officer of the
holy House and that with no small gubbe, and there begin the ground of his
suit, all his labor and cost bestowed upon the redeeming of his imprisonment,
is quite lost. But if any of the Inquisitors or any chief Officer of the Court
do make intercession for the party, then straightway the other understand,
that it is done upon some such special occasions as they know, whereupon the
suter is moved to pity the state of the poor prisoner, specially if he use
the ordinary words known and used among themselves in cases of petition. Which
is on this sort. My very good Lords, my humble suit to your good Lordships is,
that such a prisoners cause may be favorably considered, of whose good life
and conversation, but specially of his patience in the time of his
imprisonment, I have been sufficiently and substantially informed. Here are
intermedled two or three good words in his commendation, but moderately, lest
it should be thought that he were too careful over him: The conclusion then
is, that it would please their Lordships to determine, whether the party shall
be released yea or no. And of such as escape thus hardly through the briars,
it costeth some the one half of their goods: some all: and some a piece, as it
pleases the Inquisitours to deal with them. For they are persuaded this to be
the nighest way to bring them home again, that are any thing gone astray or
become aliens from the faith. Or perhaps the holy House thinks it to be
against Gods Laws, that an heretic should have whereupon to live. Or else
belike, they have found out an Aphorism for their purpose: that as a surfetter
must use a temperate and a thin diet: so must an heretic also be kept low,
lest he swell and grow up therein; and therefore take it for a sovereign
medicine, to keep him so hungry that he must be feign to beg his bread.

Moreover, of these (as is abouesaid) some have judgment, besides the wearing
of the habit and suffering imprisonment, to be also whipped. Some both to be
whipped, and afterward set to the Gally. But these sharper kinds of punishments
they commonly use to strangers, be they never so small offenders, to be even
with them this way, because they make so light of wearing the Sambenite, for
most of them make but a jest of it. And all these proceed from the Inquisitours
own mercy.

The last and least penalty is appointed for such as in their judgments have
committed but a light offense: that is, to be brought upon the scaffold
bare-headed and without any cloak, having in his hand a wax taper: whereof
some are commanded to make Abiuration ex vehementi: Some ex levi* Abiuration de
vehementi they call, when it appeared not in the hearing and debating of any
man's cause, what is certainly to be determined, for want of sufficient
proof, and because the party himself confessed nothing that deserved any
manner of punishment. Therefore upon such a fellow, whom they may neither by
justice condemn for an heretic, nor of their consciences can absolve and set
at liberty, specially having some apparent tokens of scarce good belief, they
give sentence upon him as upon one vehemently suspected: and so according to
their suspicion, they cause him to abjure, And such a man being afterward found
guilty, be it in the least tittle of papistrie, they take for a relapse, and
condemn to the fire. Abiuration de levi, is much after the same manner, but
that it is enioined upon smaller offenses in their judgments, whether the
matter has been apparent or no. Howbeit, no such person, though he be taken
with the same manner again, shall be reputed for a relapse, or have judgment
of death therefore: albeit the qualifying of the second offense, that is to
say, the judgment and estimation thereof, be referred to the Inquisitours.
And this kind of abiuration is for the most part used in other matters, then
concerning Luthers doctrine, as for example, fornication (forsooth) betwixt
single persons, as though it were no sin: therefore it is accustomably punished
but as a trifling toy, by carrying of a wax candle, and by abiuration deleui.
Yet at some times they punish this sin with the whip, and that very extremely,
but if the party offend a thousand times after, so that he put himself upon
the Inquisitours mercy, he is sure never to dye therefore.

Lo, these be the goodly means whereby these good fathers bring into the right
way the weaklings, as Paul terms them. And thus much concerning their
devices practiced in the Inquisition, till the time come that we may see the
fall of that arc of Iniquity, with the hidden secrets and mysteries thereof
further disclosed, and all those things fulfilled and accomplished, which in
time (no doubt) must be revealed and come to pass upon this holy Inquisition,
these good Fathers, and their holy House, finally upon the whole man of sin,
which God threatens by his Prophet, shall fall upon all such wicked
hypocrites, which to the overthrowing of Christ's kingdom, and the utter
defacing of his glory, like shameless men, most wickedly do pretend the
defense, and zeal, and the earnest advancement of the same. Malach. 2. And now
to you this precept (says he) O ye Priests. If ye will not give ear, nor
purpose in your heart to give all glory to my name (says the Lord of hosts)
I will curse you, yea I will curse your blessings, nay I have cursed them
already, because you do not consider it in your heart. Behold I will destroy
your seed, and will ouerspread your own faces with the filth of your
solemnities, and it shall cleave fast upon you, and you shall know that this
commandment touches you only. Repentye.

CHAP. XIIII.
Certain special examples, wherein a man may more plainly see the
treacheries and legerdemaines of the holy Inquisition in very practice and
exercise.

HEre I have thought good to annexe certain special examples of their
practices; wherein a man may evidently see a great sort of their treacheries
heaped and shuffled together, over and above such as I have heretofore made
relation of in their special places, to the end that their cruelty in the
execution hereof, with their insatiable covetousness, and all other abominable
iniquity in the perverting of all good laws, may be lively described and (as
it were) painted in tables, and set forth to the show, that such as do behold
them may take the full view thereof. And partly I do it for their sakes, who
for the professing of the Gospel, and the abiuring of an abominable religion,
have bin overtaken by the same means, serving these holy Fathers in stead of a
booty to prey and raven upon, because I think it expedient for the Church to
continue some memory thereof. Now therefore, let all Christendom open their
eyes, that they may know and discern these ravenous Wolves, Lions, and
Dragons, the very generation of Vipers, whom (notwithstanding their tyranny)
they have till this day had in great reputation, and honored as gods, to the
great decay and undoing of all Christian commonweals: that learning to know
them, and stripping them out off their clokes of piety and godliness, whereof
they have gotten special commendation, they may banish them all Christendom
over. But as for any examples whereof I mean presently to make rehearsal, they
are taken out of one only Court of the Inquisition holden at Civil, whose
secrets alone the reporters hereof were able to disclose, having had the most
part of them practiced upon themselves, By relation whereof, a man may have a
pretty gess, what a number there would be if a man should likewise course over
all the other Courts of Inquisition throughout the whole realm of Spain.
Neither are these that hereafter ensue, or the other reported before in my
whole treatise, of any long collection: but all within the compass of 6. or 7.
years next after they began to persecute the Lutherans that grew up in Spain
in great multitudes upon a sudden, especially in Civil and Valladolit.

About which time there was apprehended for religion, and brought before the
Inquisitors of Civil, a certain Englishman whose name was Nicholas Burton, a
very godly man, whom afterward they burned for that he continued constant in
his profession and belief, detesting utterly all their wicked and abominable
religion until his lives end. Immediately after his arrest, all the goods and
Merchandise which he brought with him into Spain by way of traffic, were
according to their common usage seized and taken into the Sequester: among the
which they also rolled up much that appertained to another English Merchant,
wherewith he was credited as Factour. Whereof so soon as news was brought to
London, as well of the imprisonment of his Factour, as of the Arrest made upon
his goods, he sent his Attorney into Spain with authority from him to make
claim to his goods, and demand them. When his Attorney was landed at Civil,
and had showed all his letters and writings to the holy House, requiring them,
that such goods might be delivered into his possession, answer was made him,
that he must sue by bill, and retain an Advocate (but all was doubtless to
delay him) and they, forsooth, of courtesy assigned him one to frame his
supplication for him, and other such bills of petition as he had to exhibit
into their holy Court, demanding for each bill eight rialls, albeit they stood
him in no more stead than if he had put up none at all. And for the space of
three or four months this fellow missed not twice a day, attending every
morning and afternoon at the Inquisitors Palace, suing unto them upon his knees
for his dispatch, but specially to the Bishop of Tarracon of whom I made
mention before, who was at that very ^^me chief in the Inquisition at Civil,
that he of his absolute authority would command restitution to be made thereof:
but the booty was so good and so great, that it was the harder to come by it
again. At the length, after he had spent whole four months in suits and
requests, and all to no purpose, he received this answer from them, that he
must show better evidence, and bring more sufficient certificates out of
England for proof of his matter, than those which he has already presented to
the Court. Whereupon the party forthwith posted to London, and with all speed
returned to Civil again with more ample and large letters testimonialls and
certificates, according to their request, and exhibited them to the Court.
Notwithstanding, the Inquisitors still shifted him off, excusing themselves by
lack of leisure, and by occupation in greater and more weighty affairs, and
with such answers delayed him whole other 4. months after. At the last, when
the party had welnigh spent all his money, and therefore sued the more
earnestly for his dispatch, they referred the matter wholly to the Bishop. Of
whom, when he repaired unto him, he had this answer: that for himself he
knew what he had to do: howbeit he was but one man, and the determination of
the matter appertained unto the other commissioners as well as unto him: and by
thus posting and passing it from one to another, the party could obtain no end
of his suit. Yet for his importunity sake, they were resolved to dispatch him,
but it was on this sort: One of the Inquisitours called Licentiato Gasco, a man
very well experienced in these practices, willed the party to resort unto him
after dinner. The fellow being glad to hear this news* and supposing that his
goods should be restored unto him, and that he was called in for that purpose
to talk with the other that were in prison, to confer with him about their
accounts, the rather through a little misunderstanding, hearing the Inquisitor
cast out a word, that it should be needful for him to talk with the prisoner;
and being thereupon more than half persuaded, that at the length they meant
good faith, did so, and repaired thither about the evening. Immediately upon
his coming, the Iayler was forthwith charged with him, to shut him up close in
such a certain prison, where they appointed him. The party hoping at the first
that he had bin called for about some other matter, and seeing himself
contrary to his expectation, cast into a dark dungeon, perceived at the length
that the world went with him far otherwise then he supposed it would have
done. But within two or three days after, he was brought forth into the Court,
where he began to demand his goods: and because it was a device that well
served their turn, without any more circumstance they bid him say his Aue
Maria. The party began, and said it simply and plainly on this sort, after the
English fashion: Aue Maria gratia plena dominiu tecum, benedictatu in
mulieribus, and benedictus fructus ventris tui Jesus. Amen. The same was
written word by word as he spoke it: and without any more talk of claiming
his goods, because it was bootelesse, they command him to prison again, and
enter an action against him as an heretic, forasmuch as he did not say his
Aue Maria after the Romish fashion, but ended it very suspiciously; for he
should have added moreover Sancta Maria matter dei ora pro nobis peccatoribus:
by curtalling whereof, it was evident enough (say they) that he did not allow
the mediation of Saints. Thus they picked a quarrel to detain him in prison a
longer season, and afterward brought him forth into their Stage disguised
after their manner: where sentence was given, that he should lose all the goods
which he sued for, though they were not his own, and besides this suffer a
years imprisonment. His name was John Framton a citizen of Bristow.

In the confiscation of goods, it is neither any great novelty, nor a thing so
rarely seen in this holy House, that strangers goods should be also seized
among other men's. Otherwise (say they) it might easily be wrought, if they
should give ear or credit to such allegations, that many by means thereof
might color their goods under another man's name, and by some false and forged
Certificates prove them to appertain to other men, and so defraud the Kings
Eschecquer. For remedy whereof, and for the better avoiding of all couerts and
collusions, the holy House thinks it the safer way to offer wrong than to
suffer any. As within these few years there arrived at Civil a certain rich
Merchant stranger, whose goods were afterwaad confiscate for religion. Among
the which they seized a very fair and a goodly ship, such one, as by all men's
judgments, there never rode a better nor a fairer upon the river. The party
brought sufficient proof that the ship was none of his own, and yet
notwithstanding the Inquisitours found a means that the law went on their
sides, so that the ship fell out in trial to be theirs. And this Merchants
name was Reuchino.

Moreover, in the same Court of Inquisition at Civil, there was one of the
Citizens, a very godly and a virtuous man, severely persecuted by the
Inquisitours for religion, howbeit not executed therefore. And among other of
his punishments, this was one piece: that all his goods whereon he lived and
maintained himself, reasonably well and honestly among his neighbors, should
be wholly consiscate, and he commitied to close prison for ten years.
Wherein, after he had remained by the space of two or three days, living there
full barely (God wot) of a poor stock, that diverse well disposed persons had
gathered for him of their devotion, having somtine lived in reasonable good
estate; one of the Notaries of the Inquisition, came unto him with a bill
signed and subscribed by the Inquisitours, charging him to pay to the Notaries
hands 130. ducates for his commons and other expenses, during the time of his
abode in Triana their prison for the Inquisition. The party made answer (as
the truth was) that those good Fathers had taken from him all that ever he had,
so that nothing was left him; and where nothing was, they could have nothing.
Howbeit this answer contented not the Inquisitours, but they sent the Notarie
unto him once again, straightly charging him either to pay the money out of hand,
or else to be removed from that private place, and carried to the common
iayle, and there to remain till he had discharged it. What mad fools were
these, to confiscate all his goods, and charge themselves by account for them
into the Eschequer, not foreseeing to demand allowance for his charges?

About the same time wel-neer, the House of the Inquisition at Civil
apprehended a certain noble woman, whose name was Ioanna Bohorquia, the Lady
and wife of one Francisco Varquio, a noble gentleman, and baron of Higuera,
daughter to one Pedro Garsia Xeresio a very rich Citizen of Civil. The cause
of her trouble was, for that a sister of hers called Maria Bohorquia, a very
virtuous virgin, and one that afterward was burned for her profession and
faith, had confessed in the extreamitie of her torments, that she had
conference with her sister in these matters of religion diverse times. This
Lady, when she was first committed to prison, was gone with child well-nigh
half a year: in respect whereof, neither did they shut her up so close, nor
dealt with her otherwise so hardly, as they used to deal with others, for the
regard of that that was within her. Notwithstanding, within four days after
her deliverance, they took the child away from her, and the seventh day next
after, they shut her up in close prison again, entreating her in all things as
they did the other prisoners, and with as much cruelty as they used to any: in
so much that in all her miseries the only comfort that she had, was, of the
good company of a certain virtuous maiden that was her fellow prisoner for a
time, but afterward sent to the stake. Unto whom she bare such good will,
that being on a time carried forth to the rack, and recaried to prison, sore
strained thereon and so shaken in pieces, that having a bed of flags which
served them both to couch on, more painful a great deal then easefull,
whereon she tumbled her self so well as she could (though hardly God knows,
and to her great pain and grief) the good Lady being not in case able to do
her any other good, yet did she inwardly show singular tokens of love and
compassion toward her. The same maid was scarce recovered, or her joints well
knit again, but the said Lady was likewise carried out to be served in the
same sort, and was so terribly tormented in the Burrie and Trough, that by
reason of the exceeding strait straining of the strings pearcing to the very
bones of her arms, thighs, and shinnes, she was carried to prison half dead
and more, the blood gushing out of her mouth amain, and in so great abundance,
that it could not be otherwise, but that somewhat was broken within her body:
but after 8. days God delivered her from these ravening Lions, and set her
with himself in everlasting rest and peace. The bruit of which fact the
Inquisitours labored earnestly to suppress, lest it should be noised abroad
among the common people, that they had so villanously torn in pieces this
tender Lady upon the rack: but the beholders of this their tyranny could not
hold it in. Now surely, if she had been a witch, or a traitor to her husband,
or a murderer of her own children, and the temporal Magistrate had dealt so
with her to make her confess these horible factes, what time he were to give
up his accounts (as the manner is) he should pay for it full dearly, if so be
that he had thus cruelly and without all reason entreated any person
whatsoever. Yet the holy House is not to yield account of any such matters, but
may rack to death even such, whom they themselves after more precise and exact
proof, do acquit for innocents, and escape scotfree therefore, as it came to
pass in the example of this virtuous lady. For being one of such estate, and of
so good name and fame that they must necessarily yield some account of her case
unto the common people, and were destitute of proofs sufficient (though they
had left no device or policy unpracticed, that they could imagine) seeing the
matter so apparent to all the world, that by no means it could be dissembled:
therefore the very first day of their next Triumph, they caused their sentence
which they had given upon her, to be openly read there unto the people one this
wise: Forasmuch as this Lady died in prison (without showing how or by what
means I warrant you) and upon diligent hearing and consideration of her cause,
is found innocent: therefore the holy house does wholly acquit and discharge
her of all suites and quarrels commenced against her by the Fiscal, and does
restore her to her former estate of estimation and honor, absoluing her
clearly from all guilt and crime: and thereupon do command, that restitution
be made of all such goods as were seized into the Sequester, unto the hands of
such persons as have right and title thereunto, etc. Thus, after that they had
most beastly murdered her on the rack, they made her this goodly amends, to
denounce her not guilty. God will one day (no doubt) ask an account of this
their beastly and barbarous tyranny, since they maintain it by the same power
and authority in earth, which he has ordained, for the revenge of these and
such like injuries.

Notwithstanding, not long after it happened, that the holy house was advised
and fully bent to lay their baits and spread their nets in certain quarters
there: but if they had not upon better aduisement afterward wound them up
again, they themselves unawares had given Rome such a gird, as I believe all
the Lutherans hitherto have not given it a greater. And thus it was. There were
certain persons, that were much more busy than I believe they had thank for,
which found great fault with a foul company Monks and other religious men,
for abusing their auricular Confession; under the color thereof, masking with
honest matrons and maidens that resorted unto them, making it a means to
break their suits by, and to compass their purposes. The which thing the holy
House thought indeed worthy of consideration and redress. But forasmuch as
it was a hard to know who were these wooers and brokers, where none was
appeached specially and by name (as it happens in a matter wherein a
multitude offends) they caused proclamation to be made throughout all the
Churches within the province of Civil very solemnly, that whosoever knew of
their own certain knowledge, or had heard by report of others, of any Monks
or other religious or spiritual persons (as they call them) that had abused
their holy sacrament of Confession, to any such abominable acts or
enterprises, or that any other ghostly Father had dealt in any such like sort
with any of his shrift children, that every such person and persons privy to
any such matters, should come in within thirty days, and signify it to the
holy House of Inquisition; enioining moreover, very great penalties for such
as should refuse or contemn to come in accordingly, and to make declaration,
what they were able to say: The proclamation was no sooner made and published,
but there came such a number of women, only inhabitants within the city of
Civil, to complain of their ghostly Fathers, that twenty Notaries, and as
many Inquisitors would not have sufficed to take the names of such as came in
and entered their complaints: wherefore the Inquisitors, having more to do than
well they could dispatch, gave them other thirty days come in and do the
like. But because so little time would not serve (they came in so thick) they
gave them so much more respite again the third time: and after that the
fourth, and there they were informed to lay a straw. For very many honest
matrons and of good calling, partly of a foolish fear and superstition, lest
they should be excommunicated, and partly in respect of their husbands whom
they were loath to offend and bring into a jealousy or suspicion of their
honesties, kept themselves at home, thinking to epsy better some opportunity
to speak with the Inquisitours apart. Whereupon they they attired themselves
with vailes or mufflers after the manner of their country, and went to the holy
house as privily as they could. Notwithstanding, their husbands did so narrowly
watch them during all the time of this appeaching, that they could not possibly
pass so privily but diverse of them were espied, whereby they occasioned their
husbands vehemently to suspect their honesties. On the other side, it was a
jolly sport to see the Monks and Friars and Priests go up and down hanging
down their heads, all in dump and melancholy, by means of their guilty
consciences, quaking and trembling, and looking every hour when some of the
Familiars should take them by the sleeue, and call them in Coram for these
matters. Insomuch that a number feared lest as great a plague were come among
them, as the persecution that was so hot about that time against the Lutherans.
But the Inquisitours perceiving that these matters thus purposed, would sound
not only to the great hinderance of themselves, but also turn to the decay of
the whole Church of Rome, and that this only enterprise of theirs, if it
should go on and take effect, would be enough to bring all their spirituality
into utter hatred and obloquie, but specially tend to the discredit of their
auricular confession, which began already to be but of small account, although
it was a matter that otherwise deserved both straightly to be examined, and
severely to be punished: yet did they in time take it up, and made a stay
therein, contrary to all men's expectations: winding up all these matters,
whereof the Court was now orderly and lawfully seized. And as the report was,
the Monks and Priests made a common purse, and with a good round sum greased
the Pope in the hand, so that he was content to grant a general pardon to all
the whole company of Confessors, of his fatherly love and affection toward
them, remitting all offenses done or committed by them, and commanding the
Inquisitours to surcease from proceeding any further, but wholly to suppress
such things as were passed already, not suffering them in any case to come to
light. Howbeit those that are privy to the Inquisitours dealings, say it is an
unlikely matter, affirming, that if the Pope should make any such grant, yet is
the holy Inquisition of such preeminence, that if they take in hand any matter
of weight, they will not surcease upon the Popes inhibition or countermanding,
and that it is oftener seen, that their authority prevails against the
Popes, than his against them, as by this example following may more plainly
appear.

Not passing two years before this, the Bishop of Rome had by a like foolish
part and unawares cut the Inquisitors combs, by publishing a general Iubily,
which they call a general charter of pardon, for the safety of all
Christendom, because Christ belike did not sufficiently provide therefore,
besides a number of other pardons and indulgences for such as were suspected to
be Lutherans: so cunningly can this fellow make a gain of the Gospel to
himself. And whereas he cannot avoid the dart that Christ has sent into the
world to plague him withal, but that he must be stricken therewith, he cease
not to turn it some way to his own advantage. The words of the pardon were
these: That whosoever in time past had been a Lutheran, and would forsake that
sect, might be absolved thereof by his ghostly father. An old device of the
devil, that in as much as there arose about the same time great trouble in
Spain, but specially in Civil the chief city thereof, and that a number
offended therein, and began now to shrink from them, they might the more
quietly and with less danger keep them in obedience, going about to win them
by a kind of clemency and mercy, though fained and counterfeit, rather then
by dealing with them straightly or severely. Howbeit, here was nothing found
fault withal save only the preiudicing of the holy House, whereof as it
seemed, the Pope had no great regard. Whereupon, they of the Inquisition being
somewhat moved, by reason that that one only clause had lost them a good booty,
contemned the Popes pardon, and resisted it with might and maine, commanding
peremptorily, that no such pardon should be published, as should turn the holy
House to any prejudice: by means whereof neither was it received ne proclaimed.
Lo, here may a man see Satan divided against himself, and perceive thereby,
that this denying of the Popes absolute authority, which these good gentlemen
punish in others with fire and sword, as being a necessary article of our
belief, is but a nose of wax, which they turn what way they list: so that it
serves them rather in stead of a trap to entangle us withal, then accounted
of as an article of our faith, in the observation whereof consists our
salvation.

The property of every tyrant is, specially to hate both mercy and truth,
and to use all cruelty and extremity that may be: or else to seek utterly to
be hated, when he sees there is none other means to uphold him. As it was
said sometime by one: Whom men fear, they do but hate. And truly, if a man be
disposed to mark them well, he shall easily perceive, that there has bin
hitherto no tyrant, that has more duly observed these laws, nor executed
them more cruelly, than this holy House has done, devising to do all injury
and extremity that possibly they can, only to bring men in fear and awe of
them: so that they seem to desire nothing so much as this; that all men may
fear them, hate them who dare, forasmuch as they punish trifling to ye^, and
matters of no importance, yea such as are scarce blameworthy, most severely and
beyond all measure, as by the examples here ensuing may appear most manifestly.

At what time their Church was in so good and quiet estate, that the
Inquisitors had leisure enough to take their pleasure abroad, it chanced that
the Bishop of Tarracon high commissioner in the Inquisition at Civil (of whose
holiness I have made mention before) walked in a summers day for his
recreation by the sweet gardens that stand by the River Guadalqueuir,
accompanied with all his train and in his state as he was wont at diverse other
times to do. Hard upon the bank of a certain pond that was in the same
garden, where my Lord Bishop at that time was recreating himself, by chance
there sat a little child playing, that was the gardiners son, not passing two
or three years of age, out of whose hands one of the Inquisitours Pages happened
to snatch a reed wherewith the child was making himself sport, as children
are wont to do, by means whereof the child cried after his reed. Tke father
hearing the child cry, came straightway to know the cause, and understanding
it, was somewhat offended therewithal, and prayed the Bishops Page to give the
little child his reed again: but because he made little account of the
gardiners words, proudly scorning and disdaining the poor man, he offered to
snatch it from him, and by reason that he held somewhat hard, a shiuer of the
reed raced the Pages hand. It was no deaths wound I wis, nor any great maime,
such as should deserve any great punishment, but only a small scratch, like as
a broken reed could make; I wot not well what to make of it, nor how to
describe it: such a thing as the very child would have made no moan for. The
Page yet goes to his Lord that walked not far off, to make complaint of this
bloodshed. Whose Lordship commanded, that the gardener should be taken
immediately and carried to Triana, where he was laden with irons, and there
continued by the space of nine months, and in the end lost that little that
he had: which was not much God knows, and yet a hard thing for the poor man to
recover and get before hand again, his wife and children perhaps staruing in
the mean time. And all this was only because he had no special regard to the
Bishops Page, in forbearing him as a member of the holy House: but after the 9.
months he released him, making him believe, that he had dealt with him in
much more gentle and mild sort, than his case deserved.

There was also in Civil a certain poor man that labored for his own
living, and for his whole family full duly and truly, and with the sweat of
his brows, whose wife a certain Churchman kept against his will, and neither
the holy Inquisition, nor any other Court would punish this villainy. This
poor man on a time being among his companions, where one of the company
ministered talk about purgatory, and happened to take his tale by the end, of
mere simplicity, rather then of any malice, and to say, that he had
purgatory enough for his share in that a vile knave kept his wife from him
perforce, etc. the which talk coming to the good Priests ear, gave him
matter enough to work upon, and to procure the poor man a double displeasure.
Whereupon he accused him to the holy House, as one holding an evil opinion of
purgatory. And they thought this a great deal more heinous offense, than the
wicked fact of the Priest. For the poor soul for this only offense was taken
and thrust into prison, where he remained two whole years together, and at the
length was brought upon the stage, and had judgment to wear the Sambenite, by
the space of of 3. years more, in some private place of imprisonment; and
after that time expired, to be dismissed or further retained as the
Inquisitours should think good. Neither did they leave him any one groat of
all his poor substance, as they did let the Priest alone with his harlot: but
notwithstanding his long imprisonment, did likewise confiscate that little that
was renaining. Behold, this is the Spanish Inquisition, which so stoutly
maintains the Christian faith, purges religion of heresies, and persecuteth
the teachers thereof.

Moreover, there was at Saint Lucars a certain stranger, howbeit such a one as
had remained in Spain by the space of twenty years, who of a very blind
superstition dwelt in a wilderness within a Chapel: where hearing it
reported on a time, that a great number of Lutherans were daily apprehended at
Civil by the Inquisitours, and that they had made an edict, whereby
commandment was given under pain of excommunication, that every man should
repair to the holy House with all speed, and declare to the holy Inquisition
whatsoever he knew either by himself, or by any other, concerning any of
these aforesaid matters (for the Inquisitours meant special favor to such, as
voluntarily would come in and accuse themselves) this doltish Hermit came to
Civil, went to the holy House, and accused himself before the Inquisitours.
The matter was, for that he being sometime at Geneua, had heard a certain
Friar dispute of such matters, namely, of Justification by faith in Christ, of
purgatory, and such other like, and liked thereof very well, though afterward
since that time he gave no great heed to them, nor greatly remembered them,
and therefore came now to confess his fault, and to crave their pardon. But as
soon as the Inquisitors had heard his confession (perhaps to fill up some
empty room in their iayle, or to make up their tale, wanting an odd man, they
sent the Hermit to prison, where after he had remained a space, they brought
him out upon the stage, and there gave sentence upon him to wear the
Sambenite, and to suffer three months imprisonment, and to forfait all his
goods. So shameless (Lo) are these shauelings, that they can play such
pretty pranks openly, and so severely punish these trifles even in their own
darlings.

There issued also in the self same Triumph a certain honest man a Citizen of
Civil, without either cap or cloak having a taper in his hand, of whom they
exacted, after he had bin imprisoned a whole year together, a hundred ducates
to wards the charges of the Inquisition. The cause of his trouble was, for
saying, that these outrageous expenses bestowed in the erecting of those
curious monuments (as they unproperly term them) made of paper and wickers on
holy Thursday to Christ that is in Heaven, as also the other, that are spent on
corpus Christiday (as they of Civil are marvelous excessive that way) should
be more acceptable in the sight of God, if they were bestowed upon the poor in
alms, or in the bestowing of poor and fatherless maidens in marriage. For the
which words the party was both punished in this sort; and as one suspected for
a Lutheran, abiured de vehementi.

Also at the self same time, and in the very same Triumph there was a
certain poor man brought before the people, who on a time as there chanced a
quarrel to arise betwixt him and a Priest of Eciia a city in Granata, happened
to say of the Priest in presence of other, that he could not be persuaded,
that ever God would come down into the hands of that most abominable
adulterer. For the which saying, the Ordinaries deputy had punished this poor
man, howbeit the Priest held not himself content therewithal, but did
afterward before the Inquisitours lay blasphemy to his charge: who not with
standing his former punishment, commanded him to be shut up close for a year,
and at the end thereof, caused him to be brought out before the people in their
solemn Triumph without either cloak or cap, with a taper in his hand, having a
barnacle clapped upon his tongue, to revenge the blasphemy that he had
uttered, and so was abiured de leui.

Among the rest, there were also two brought into the stage at the same time,
both young men and students: The one for writing in his tables certain verses,
the author whereof was unknown: which were so cunningly contrived, that they
seemed to sound both ways, either to the great praise or dispraise of Luther,
as it pleased the reader to construe them: for the which only cause he
endured a whole years imprisonment, and was afterward brought upon the
scaffeld in his hose and dublet, bare-headed with a wax taper in his hand, and
banished Civil and the suburbs thereof for 3. years space, and abiured de
leui. The other only for taking a copy of those verses, liking them well for
the device sake and pretty invention, had the like judgment, save only that
in stead of banishment, he paid 100. ducates toward the charges of the holy
House.

With such examples as these be, a man might easily fill whole volumes, but
that I suppose these to be sufficient which are already reported, to occupy
men's ears withal, that they may understand and see a great sort of more
strange parts than these, which the holy House plays daily, whereby appears
most manifesty, by what spirit they are guided and governed in all their
doings, and what their intent is, and how good their title i^ whereby they
claim and challenge to the place it self the name of the holy House, to
themselves the titles of holy Fathers and Patron of the Faith: where with they
have bleared men's eyes hitherto: so that it is easy for every man to judge
whether Christian godliness. and the true knowledge and worshipping of God,
with the kingdom of Christ (the perfect comfort of all good men) be by these
means increased and enlarged, or rather not destroyed, scattered and
subverted* and Satan's kingdom that is built upon lies, wrought with craft and
subtlety, up holden and maintained by cruelty, robbery, and murder of many
good and godly men; whether I say it be not hereby more amplified and enlarged.

CHAP. XV.
Certain special treatises upon diverse godly Martyrs of Christ, who dying
very constantly like good Chrstians for the profession of the Gospel, yet the
Inquisitors notwithstanding devised to defame and slander them with Apostacy
and reuolting.

THe Inquisitours think it not sufficient to execute such by most cruel
death, as contemning all their tyranny, remain firm and constant in the
profession of the Gospel of Christ, before their faces and in open Court, but
seek by all means possible as much as lies in them, utterly to extinguish in
them the life of their souls, which is Christ lesus dwelling in their hearts
by faith, of whom they have declared themselves to be faithful Confessors as
well at their death as in their life: For when they see all their polices void
and to have none effect, because Christ takes into his mighty protection and
safeguard all his servants, so that no man is able to take them out of his hands
(as he says himself) then devise they means to rob them as much as in them
lies of their name and renown of constancy, by scattering abroad false tales
and misreports of them after their deaths, yea sometimes ere they be dead, as
they stand upon the stage, clapping their engines upon their tongues, because
they should not contrary them, reporting by them, that they have forsaken
their former faith, and returned to the Romish religion.

And this is a double device of the devils own brain, for two special
considerations, which do evidently prove that they are assisted by his wicked
spirit. For hereby they do not only rob the Martyrs themselves of their due
deserved praise for their constancy and perseverance: but also the Church of
Christ is spoiled of those examples, wherein she should otherwise rejoice, in
making her reckoning. Therefore since that in diverse Acts of faith (as they
term them) they have dealt in this sort with diverse, of whose constancy God
has many ways assured us: it will be expedient that unto this former treatise
I do also add these several and particular histories, to the intent that the
honor and estimation that is due to good and godly Martyrs, may be yielded
unto them accordingly, and the Church like wise rejoice as she has good cause:
lastly, that the memory of them may be preserved and kept, both to the glory
of God, the increase of his Church, and the utter shame and confusion of this
their holy House.

John Pontio de Leon.
IN the first session holden at Civil against the Professors of Christian
religion (whom they call Lutherans) there was brought forth in the triumph at
the same time, one John Pontio de Leon, son to Rhoderico Pontio de Leon Earl
of Balen, borne of a noble House, and a very good gospeller, as well for his
learning and knowledge, as for the practice thereof, with the continuance of
many years, as I my self am able to make report for the great familiarity
and acquaintance that I had with him a long season, and therefore (if need
were) could give a true and a faithful testimony thereof (before God I speak
it) but that all that ever knew him, or that had occasion to mark his
conversation, will with one consent (I dare say) testify the same. Among other
virtues that appeared to be in him vnsainedly and without hypocrisy, he was
singular in one thing, in that he had an exceeding love and compassion toward
his poor and needy brethren: insomuch that being left very wealthy by his
father, able to continue that port that his Ancestors kept, fell by such means
almost into stark beggary: howbeit such as was to him neither noisome nor
grievous. Not with standing, diverse have given their blind and foolish verdits
of him therefore, attributing that to folly and prodigality, which he did of a
rare and singular virtue. But since he lived so well that none could justly so
much as suspect any evil example of life to be in him, and many were in their
extremities relieved by his goodness: besides this, accepted in so good part
his poor and hard estate, as by all men's judgments he did very patiently, and
in such sort as a great deal meaner men would scarce have taken a far better
estate than he was in; these things must needs be evident proofs of a
singular grace of God to be in him, and such a perfect kind of virtue as was
void of all hypocrisy. Yet in recompense of that singular pity and compassion
which he showed in this world toward others, he was apprehended by the
Inquisitours for professing the Gospel, and after he had manfully maintained
his quarrel against their malicious falsehoods during the time of his
imprisonment (which was the space of two or three months) whether it were the
very extremity of their torments that enforced him, or their fair and
flattering promises of safety and deliverance that allured him, but he
shrunk at the length and yielded, where erst he was invincible, stooping and
submitting himself to the obedience of the Romish Church. The first that ever
enticed him so shamefully to revolt, was one of these stinging and venomous
flies whom they had cast into prison with him in manner as has been already
declared: who being a man very well learned, and besides that a deep
dissembler, did rather by his cunning enchantments bewitch him, than by any
force of reasons dissuade or seduce him. Howbeit though God suffered him so to
fall for a while, that he might somewhat understand the frailty of man, and
sensibly feel it in himself, yet still remembering his own word and promise,
that none shall take any of his flock from under his hands, did not long time
thus leave him to himself, but raising him up again most mightily, restored
unto him the double strength that he had before. For the very night immediately
before his execution he did most manfully defend the truth against his
Confessor in the hearing of diverse as well prisoners, as also the Officers of
the holy House: for at such times, their confession is not mere auricular:
insomuch that being demanded by the Priest whether he would be shriuen or no,
where before the time of his apprehension and imprisonment he used commonly to
go to shrift, he now refused, rebuking the Priest for his labor. And being
urged with his former doings, answered, that he did it to serve the weakness
of his brethren, and for fear of offense to them that as yet were not
proceeded so far, and yet made his choice of his ghostly father; so as his
shrift was more like a godly collation, than a popish confession: Mary now
(says he) as the case stands there needs no such yielding. The next day,
when sentence was pronounced upon him, were openly read these articles among
others, for the which he was chiefly and principally condemned. First that he
should say, that he from the bottom of his heart abhorred the Idolatry that
was committed in the adoration of the bread, and therefore so often as it was his
chance to meet it, being carried abroad to sick persons, he either turned some
other by-way, and avoided it, or else hasted so that he forewent it, because he
should otherwise have bin enforced to do unto it some kind of worship or
honor; and at many times chancing to be in the high Quier, would turn his
back because he would not behold the elevation, and for the most part used to
go to the place where execution was accustomably done, (like as was Smithfield
here in London) and there would walk a good sort of turns, to the end, that by
continual meditation of the martyrdom, but specially of that faithful and
glorious confession, which the wicked of this world by force and tyranny caused
the godly there to make unto Christ (by thus acquainting himself with the
place) he might be the more emboldned, looking one day to be called thither,
and so should in the mean time prepare himself, patiently to take it when it
came. Likewise, at such times as by order he should receive his Maker (as they
say) he used to remove his household, and to send them to some other place,
making them believe at their return that he had so done, because they should
not be offended to see him take such liberty. But the effect of his confession
moreover was this: that the justification of a Christian man rests only in
the merirs of Jesus Christ through only faith in him, and that other purgatory
there was none. As for the Popes pardons and indulgences, they were but mere
parchment and lead, and he very Antichrist, etc. concerning my self (says he)
I am not only willing, but desirous to dye and ready to suffer any other
punishment for this truth which I have confessed, esteeming of this world ^and
the treasures thereof in none other respect, then for my necessary uses, to
serve my necessity, and the rest to bestow in the maintenance and setting
forward of the same doctrine which I have of late professed: and therefore I
beseech God daily upon my knees both for my wife and children, that they may
all continue in this quarrel to the very death. Howbeit the holy House labored
earnestly by all means, to deprave him, and therwithall, to deprive him of the
due commendation for that notable confession made by him, spreading abroad
false tales of his fall and departure from his late profession, most
spightfully and maliciously. Notwithstanding I am able in few words to confute
them, even by this one argument, that in the exemplifications which they caused
to be made of such matters as were done and passed in that act or session,
being not very circumspect, they have unawares told the plain truth
themseluesgoing about to set out the offenses and punishments of this good man,
contained in these words, which are extant unto this day: John Pontio de Leon
was burned as an Obstinate Lutheran heretic. The which word of it self, to
such as doubt of the parties constancy, is occasion sufficient to suspect the
Inquisitors crafty and deceitful dealing. But as for us, his good
conversation, whereof diverse can bear witness, has credit and persuasion
enough of itself.

John Gonsalue a Preacher.
THere was executed likewise, at the same time and Triumph, a certain Preacher
that some time had been a Priest, but at that time no great Clerk: yet
afterward a man of very godly life and conversation, and one that became very
well learned in the scriptures, whence only he learned true Godliness,
giving over all that Sophistical and Dunsicall divinity, wherein he had
spent a great deal of time very idly. In all his sermons he bent his whole
force to beatinto men's minds the true way and means of our Justification to
consist in Christ alone, and in steadfast faith in him, all the merits of man
quite abandoned and set apart. His name was John Gonsalue. But of such
profession, there could ensue none other effect than did. As for his
confession, by the Inquisitours own reports, it was all one with the former
that John Pontio made, so that it fell out accordingly, that as before times
they were joined together in familiarity and friendship, they should also now
be linked together in like profession, and make the like ends. Howbeit the
night before his death, preparing himself to dye, he suffered a great conflict
with his Confessors; whom notwitstanding after much adoo on both sides, he
sent away with shame enough. And at his departure out of the Castle Triana,
toward the scaffold, accompanied with two of his own sisters that went to the
same feast that he did, leaving also behind him two of his brethren, whereof
the (...)e and his mother were in like case executed at the next act, yet did
he show himself to be of a notable courage and constancy. For at the very
first step, issuing out of the castle gate and standing in the full view of all
the people, which had heard him at diverse times make very many godly sermons,
^e began with a loud voice to recite the 106. Psalm. Deus laudem mea(...) ne
tacueris, etc. cursing and condemning all hypocrites as the worst sort of people
that were. Neither changed he his countenance any thing at all after he was
mounted upon the stage, albeit they had stocked his tongue; because he began
somewhat to comfort one of his sisters, whom he knew to be tender of nature,
exhorting her to constancy and perseverance. Also when his sentence was in
reading he gave very good ear unto it, being nothing therewithal dismayed,
either at the degradation, whereunto they settled themselves after their manner
very solemnly, or at the putting on of such ornaments and ensigns as were
appointed for him and his mates. The which things tho they seemed in the eyes
of the world very odious, and much founding to his rebuke and infamy, yet in
the sight of God and his Angels, were beautiful (no doubt) and glorious. To
wit: they despoiled him of those vile and wicked Massing robes, and arrayed him
with a Sambenite, a cope, and a paper hatte. But night drawing on, and such as
should suffer being come into the place of execution, they were all commanded
to say their Credo, the which each of them did severally: and when they came to
that article: I believe the holy Catholic Church, they were also commanded to
add thereunto the Church of Rome. But there they stayed all at once. Then were
the Monks and Friars in hand with John Gonsalues sisters and other women then
presently to be executed, that they would add it in their belief, and in that
article put in the Church of Rome. Who answered, that they would do as John
Gonsalue did, not because they depended upon him, or were doubtful either what
to say themselves, or else what he would do, but to the intent that his tongue
might by that means be loosed, that he might declare his mind as well
concerning that article, as the rest of his whole belief. Whereupon having his
tongue at liberty, like a good and godly schoolmaister he comforted them,
willing them to be of good cheer, and told them there was no more to be added.
Immediately after this confession thus by them made, they broke their necks with
a trice, ere the fire were kindled, and forthwith began to noise abroad, that
they had added those words of the Romish Church in that article of their
belief, accordingly as they were willed to do, and so departed, acknowleding
and confessing the Church of Rome to be the true and Catholic Church.

Of four women of Siuil.
IN the congregation at Civil, which the Inquisitours had wellnigh consumed by
fire, among those that had been a long time professors of the truth, there
were four women most notable and famous above the rest, for their good and
godly conversation. That is to say: Isabella Vaenia, Maria Viroesia, Cornelia,
and one Bohorquia youngest of the four: for she was scarcely 21. years of age,
and yet for virtuous conversation comparable to her other fellows: but in the
knowledge of holy Scriptures, which she had gotten by continual reading, and
studying, and conference with godly and learned men (whereof there were in
Civil a great number at that time) she became so singular, that she did not
only far exceed and surpass her fellows, but many of our Masters that
are taken for great learned Clerks, whom in the time of her imprisonment she
drove oftentimes to the wall, by their own confession, and made them ashamed
of themselves. But Vaenia the first woman was a Matron for manners, and her
house a School of virtue, and a place of resort, where the congregation
assembled to sing Psalms and hymns to God both day and night. Nothing was
there profaned, nothing done of hypocrisy and dissimulation, all was pure and
perfect religion. At the last, the time being come that God had appointed for
them, to be made ready and ripe for him, and so to be both apt and able
professors of his name and truth, the Inquisitors sent for them, and at one
draught caught these four with diverse other of their neighbors. The first
thing that occasioned this Bohorquia to such earnest study of the Scriptures,
was a little skill which she had in the Latin tongue, wherein it was lawful to
read the Scriptures, both as often, and as long as she listed; being restrained
and forbidden, that in no case the common people should read them in their own
tongue. Yea her schoolmaister D. Giles, a man whom she did specially choose for
his singular integrity of life, as well as for his excellent learning, was
wont to give this testimony of her, that he never came into her company but
he learned somewhat, and so departed thence always better learned than he
came. During the time of her imprisonment, the Monks and Dominicanes had great
disputations with her, marueiling as much at the passing excellency of her wit
in answering all their subtle and sophistical objections, and (as it were)
cutting them so quickly with the sword of Gods word, as also at the wonderful
memory which she had in citing the holy Scripturs so readily: insomuch that
after they had done disputing and reasoning with her, they gave very good
testimonies of her constancy and sober behavior, albeit they termed it by the
names of wilfulness and obstinacy. After they had kept her a long time in
that dark dungeon, and there caused her to endure all the cruel and extreme
torments that might be (by means whereof they forced her to confess of her
own sister, that she was also one of the same religion: which was the
occasion first of her sisters imprisonment, and so consequently of her death,
being murdered most cruelly among those villains by extreme torments) they
brought her forth upon the scaffold, with diverse other godly men and women,
whereof I made mention before. How beit she came in such sort as one making a
semblance of joy and mirth and conquest over the holy Inquisition, rather then
otherwise. The which strange countenance of mirth, for so much as it was rare
to see in her, and unaccustomed, uttered by singing Psalms to God, the
Inquisitours of spite and malice, sought to alter into another tune, by setting
a Barnacle on her tongue in the way as she went, which notwithstanding ere they
came to the scaffold they did undo again. When they had read their sentence
upon her openly, and given judgment of death, the Inquisitours asked her
whether she would recant yea or no, acknowledging her heresies which heretofore
she had most wilfully maintained. Whereunto she answered them roundly, that
neither she would, nor truly could confess so much. And so from thence she
passed with her other companions to the place of execution accompanied with
these hypocrites, still calling upon her and her fellows by the way to add
the Church of Rome in the article of their creed: but she among the rest most
stoutly withstood them. Notwithstanding, the abominable villains, to the intent
to blemish their good name and renoune by their most villainous trecheries,
strangled them with halters, as though they had at their last hours returned
to the Romish Church: in consideration whereof, the Inquisitours taking pity on
them, would not suffer them (say they) to be burned quick. Moreover, their
tyranny did also extend to the very walls where these holy assemblies and
congregations were kept. For there was special commandment given, that the
house wherein Vaenia dwelt, should be razed to the earth, from the very
foundation, and converted to a perpetual wast ground, and in the midst of
the plat an inscription to be set in marble; for the wicked and idolatrous
generation, a monument of many misdeedes, but to the Godly, a perpetual
memorial of the true servants of God, in whom Christ did most truly and
perfectly dwell.

Ferdinando a Sancto Ioanno.
THis man likewise was one of the chief and most worthy members of the same
congregation; I mean for the true fear of God that was in him, his singular
honesty, his seruent and exceeding zeal of doing good to his neighbors
without any regard of his own commodity, not in respect of his parentage, or
any curiosity about his body, or otherwise in his behavior or speech. A young
man indeed, yet for integrity of life, very notable and famous, President of
the House of learning (as they term it) and chosen thereunto by the judgments
of many godly men that were first founders thereof, to instruct and teach the
youth in the College called the College of children. In the which office
after he had remained by the space of 8. years, to his great commendation, he
was perceived to be a Lutheran, that is to say, a man conformed to the very
pattern of true and perfect piety: whereunto also (as his duty required) he had
wrought his scholars, as much as lay in him to do in a time of so great
persecution and tyranny. But his reward for his pains, if we respect man's
recompencing, was much like unto that which the common sort of thankless people
yield a man for his good deserts: but respecting faith, such as Christ foretold
his disciples that they should find among men. For, being most terribly
tormented upon the Ieobit or the Trough, and so shaken in every joint, that
when he was taken down thence he was not of strength able to move any part of
his body: notwithstanding those villains the tormenters took and drew him by
the heels in this plight all along to his prison, as it had been a dungsacke
or any carrion. The occasion why the Inquisitours dealt so extremely with him,
was for answering them somewhat roundly and homely, without relenting or
yielding unto them one jot. Howbeit, during the time of this strait
imprisonment, God used him as a mean to comfort and erect a certain young man
called Morzilio, a Monk of the cloister of Saint Isidore, laid in for
professing the gospel openly, who by means of the Inquisitours fair and
flattering promises, had a little before relented and yielded somewhat in
religion. The which thing (no doubt) was the ordinance of God, that these two
should be matched together in one prison. For this Ferdinando, perceiving the
young Nouice to faint in courage, rebuked him sharply, accused him of cowardice
before God, and driving him thereby to repentance, confirmed and strengthened
him at the length: So that within few days Morzilio prayed to come to his
answer, and before the Inquisitors, then and there, solemnly renounced that
recantation which he had lately made, desiring that his former confession might
stand^, the which he took to be very Christianlike* Yet was he strangled at
the very same time, and afterward burned: marry whether he died in Gods favor
or the Inquisitors, that knows God alone. But to return to Ferdinando. After
sentence was given, the Inquisitours demanded of him, whether he were
determined still to continue the same man, and to affirm the same heresies.
Whereunto he answered them very roundly and bluntly (after his fashion) in
the hearing of all the people that he had uttered nothing but the very pure
and perfect Gospel, and the true belief of a Christian man, and therefore was
far from accounting them heresies. Whereupon immediately they took away from
him a cross of wood which they had thrust betwixt his singers and the cord
that bound his hands, and therewithal clapped a Barnacle upon his tongue,
which remained there until the fire had consumed it, and thus was he burned
quick.

Iuliano Ferdinando.
IT is a wonderful thing I assure you for a man to consider, that in so
wearyish a thing as this Iuliana was and so poor, that a man would think he
had nothing left but skin and bone, there should be so great courage and
stoutnesse of stomach: but that the holy Prophet says, and daily experience
besides confirms, that God has oftentimes chosen the weaklings of the world
to confound the strong and mighty. For this same Iuliano the little (as
commonly he was called for the smalnesse of his stature) being in Germany
without all the Inquisitours reach, and there conversant with many learned men,
among whom he came to the knowledge of true and perfect godliness, by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, rather then by any man's persuasion or counsel,
took in hand a very weighty and a dangerous enterprise: to wit, the
transporting into Spain of two great dryfattes full of Bibles printed in the
Spanish tongue, such was the feruencie of his zeal to publish and set abroad
the light of the Gospel in his own country. In the which attempt and
enterprise, there was a great cause of fear, as if he had undertaken to bring
in cart-loades of Scorpians or other more venomous beasts, the hypocrites had
so stopped all ventes, and made a restraint in every port, because no manner of
light or understanding should by any means come unto them. Notwithstanding all
this, God under his mighty protection, and by his own safeconduct, brought
that holy burden thither, and that which was most miraculous of all, so
provided, that it was both landed and discharged within the walls of Civil:
where were such busy searchers and catchpols prying in every corner, that a
man might with a great deal more ease have deceived Argus for all his eyes, of
the Cow which he had in charge to keep. The which dew of Gods grace sent unto
them so seasonably, that Paradise of the Lords did most joyfully and thankfully
receive, whereby the fruit (no doubt) grew to ripeness, and became more
plentiful against the time of harvest and reaping. For at the last this matter
broke out, and came to the Inquisitours knowledge: first by means of a foolish
fellow, more fearful a great deal than need was, and afterward by an
unfaithful brother, pretending to profess the Gospel, wherein he seemed to
have profited reasonably well, but shortly after showed himself to be a Judas,
and a champion for the Inquisition, cloking and coloring his malicious
purpose, with that counterfeit pretense of religion, and by that means
betrayed the whole congregation. Then the Inquisitors well nosed like the
devil, and finding a little, followed on so far, till at the length they
sprung the whole couie, found the neast, took both young and old, and so made
hauoke of all. And this was the first ^ouzing they had, which broke that holy
heard, that was so great in number, that the hunters themselves at the first
were afraid of them, and the spoil of them such afterward, that they filled
all their larders, and were enforced further to seek for other cellers to
bestow them in, and to cause so many o^ens to be heated, that they were almost
quenched with the suet of the Dear. For there were taken at Civil at that one
time 800. and 20. of them or thereabouts, roasted at one fire. Among the which,
this Iuliano was one of the first that was apprehended and sent to prison,
where he lay continually, solitary and without any company, laden with irons
above 3. whole years. By means whereof, there were daily, diverse and sundry
sights to be seen. Howbeit the constancy of this man was so great and so
wonderful, that the tormenters themselves, were sooner wearied, than he
impatient for all his torments; and notwithstanding his weak and wearyish
body, yet always remained of sufficient strength in mind to abide all their
tyranny, insomuch that he never departed from the rack with worse cheer or
less courage, then he was of at his entrance: so that all their torments, all
their theatnings, and all extreamitie which they could do or practice upon
him, did not make him yield or shrink one jot, but that returning from the
rack, or rather drawn thence by other of his fellow-prisons, he would
signify unto them, how he had conquered and confounded his enemies, singing
on this sort: Vencidos vanlos frayles, vencidos van: Corrulos van los lobos:
Corridos van. As much to say in English as thus. The Monks depart vanquished,
they depart vanquished: the Wolves do fly with shame, they fly with shame.
But long before this time came, he was much troubled in the first days of
hearing with the Monks, and other such maintainers of iniquity as they are;
by whom the Inquisitours, being utterly unlearned themselves, use to control
and ouerrule heretics. From whom so often as he returned, he delighted always
to sing that song, in token of triumph over his adversaries. And on the great
and solemn day of their Doom, being brought out of his prison into the Court
of the Castle Triana, to be apparelled with such trinkets as are appointed for
persons condemned (like as other of his companions were) the report is, that
with a marvelous good courage and countenance he began to exhort them in this
wise. My brethren be of good cheer, this is the hour wherein we must be
faithful witnesses to God and his truth before men, like as it becomes the
true servants and soldiers of Christ, and within this little while we shall
have him ready to witness with us again, and shall within few hours triumph
with him in Heaven for ever. But immediately, as he was making this good and
godly exhortation, the villains set a Barnacle on his tongue, and so he went
to his execution. How beit standing upon the step whereon they that are to be
executed use to stand, being not able in words to utter the courage and
constancy of his mind in the patient sufferance of all these torments for the
Gospels sake and the profession thereof, he expressed no less in gestures and
behavior. First, kneeling down, and kissing the step whereon he stood: and
afterward being tied to the stake, and covered up to the head and ears with
fagots, did diverse and sundry times shrink his head into the midst of them,
as one most willing to receive his death, and desirous to hasten the same:
whereby, like a good soldier of Christ, he did very well foresee and provide
to have his confession notified, and the infirmity and weakness of his feeble
brethren, if any such there were among them, helped and remedied, encouraging
them by these signs and tokens which he gave them, both steadfastly to stand to
the truth, and lightly to esteem of the punishment. There was also present
with him at his death one D. Ferdin ando Rodriguio, a false Apostle, whose
importunity being not able any thing to remove him from his profession, caused
it to appear in the eyes of men, so much the more glorious: who supposing that
the terrors of death would somewhat have dismayed him, obtained leave of the
chief officer, that his tongue might be loosed, upon hope that he would
sgnifie his conversion to the common people by word of mouth, Howbeit it fell
out quite contrary. For immediately after that his tongue was at liberty, this
Iuliano made as plain and solemn a protestation of his faith, as ever he did
at any other time in all his life. As for his friend and acquaintance that gave
him so evil counsel speaking flatly against his own conscience (as he knew
full well) he gave him such an ^tem, and so took him up for stumbling, that
the villain having not a word to answer him for very shame, to the end to be
even with him some other way, fell into this outery and exclamation. O that
Spain, the conqueror and dame over so many countries, should be thus troubled
with such a caitife. Kill him, kill him. And I warrant you there were butchers
enough ready to do as he bad them, and to give him his deaths-wound. The rumor
also was spread of this man, that he had likewise recanted during the time of
his being in prison: but God be thanked it fell out in the end far otherwise.

John de Leon a Monk of Saint Isidors cloister.
THis man at the first was but a tailor in Mexico that famous City in the West
Indies, called Noua Hispania, and at his return thence to Civil again, felt
in his conscience (as many good men do) a certain ^ea^e of God, though blind
and not proceeding of knowledge, whereby he was moved to become a Monk. yet
his hap was such by Gods good means, who did so provide for his desperate
attempt, that he entered into Saint Isidors cloister in Civil, wherein the
greater part of the covent at that time was well affected in religion. But
after he bad been schooled there by the space of two or three years, and
conversant among them, he began to be weary of this monkish and solitary
kind of life, seeking means to forsake his order, as he did indeed:
coloring the matter with his continual disposition to sickness; and yet
being once out, had such a desire to talk with his former schoolmaisters, that
had instructed him in the true and perfect religion, that he returned thither
again, for conference sake and for their company. But all in vain Form the
time of his absence, all they for whose respect he entered into that ilfauored
order once again, had left their coules, and were fled into Germany.
Whereupon he perceiving that there was no place of abode for him, determined
to alter his purpose so soon as he could certainly learn what was become of
his old companions, and whither they were gone. But here perhaps some evil
disposed persons will call him a double Apostata in forsaking his order twice.
Marry the wiser sort will give him double honor therefore, and account him the
godlier man two to one. Therefore trudging after his fellows, and (as it were)
tracing them, he met with them at the length at Franckford with much ado, both
for the painfulnesse of his journey and the perils of passage: and from thence
went with them to Geneua, to meet with the rest of his acquaintance that were
settled there. About the same time, by means of Queen Mary's sudden death,
and that the crown of England descended upon the most gracious Lady Queen
Elizabeth, they of the English congregation, that by occasion of the late
tyranny were dispersed here and there in Germany, were by Gods good grace
called home againeinto their own country: whereupon diverse Spaniards that
soiorned at Geneua, thinking England a meeter place for their congregation, did
accompany the Englishmen, that returned homewards into England, and for their
more safety divided themselves into several companies. For the Inquisitours
took the departure of the Monks in so evil part, as well in respect of
forsaking their order, as renouncing their religion, that albeit they were but
few in number, yea but a handful (to speak of) in respect of the world, yet
they determined to plague them soundly, if they could come by them: and
thereupon sent out their flies to lie in wait for them every where as they
should pass, specially at Colyne, Franckford, Antwerpe, and all the high ways
that lay from Geneua that way: and in like case all the ways on the other side
from Geneua to Millayne. The charges whereof were allowed out of the kings
treasury largely enough, both of the kings own liberality, and of the desire
which the Inquisitours had to catch them. And God knows much a do there was,
sparing neither for labor nor cost to find half a dozen dogs to do this
feat, and to hunt them out: besides other great privileges and immunities that
were promised to such as would undertake to bring them again. A strange thing
to consider, how the Inquisitours detest and abhor the light of the Gospel,
that they persecute it to the very death. This fellow therefore had gotten him a
companion, one John Ferdinando of Valladolit, a very godly man, and purposing
to pass together into England thorough Germany, were laid for at Argentyne, by
means whereof they were dogged, and taken in a certain port in Zealand, as
they were taking ship to cross over into England. And being apprehended, this
John de Leon took the arrest with so good a courage, that he never changed
countenance at it, but so soon as the messengers had said that their errant
was to him, he made them answer straight way. Well (quoth he) let us go in Gods
name, for he (no doubt) will be with us. Whereupon they were both brought back
into the town, and there racked most pit fully, to the intent to make them
confess of their other companions; and within a few days after were shipped
and carried into Spain: each of them, during the time that they were in the
ship, having a certain Iron chain wrought like a net, that covered both head
and face, within the which there was also another engine of iron made like to a
man's tongue, which being thrust into their mouths took away the use of their
tongues. And in these continual pains and torments, besides other ginnes and
fetters of iron wherewith they were bound both hand and foot, they were brought
into Spain, and there delivered into the Inquisitours prisons: John de Leon to
the Inquisitours prison at Civil, and his fellow to Valladolit, where he was
afterward in defense of Gods quarrel executed by fire quick: as was also one
Doctor Cacalia a companion of his, but a little before him, whose brother or
sisters daughter this man had married. Howbeit John de Leon remained a great
while in prison, where he tasted the Inquisitors tyranny, suffering both
hunger and cold, as also endured all their torments each after the other: and
at the last was brought forth in their solemn show, arrayed in like sort as the
other that had continued and perseuered as he had done. It was a pitiful thing
to behold, and (no doubt) would have made many a man afraid to see so griezly a
sight, and such a ghost as he was: his face so ouergrowne with hair, his
body so lean as any rake, having nothing left to cover his bones save only
the very skin; and to the increase of his pain, their Barnacle was set upon
his tongue, that it was loathsome to see the long streams of fleame come out
of his stomach, and hang roping from his mouth to the ground, as he stood
upright. But when sentence of death was pronounced upon him, having then his
tongue set at liberty, to the intent that he might abjure and recant (as they
supposed he would have done) he made such a confession with such a
countenance, so quietly, without any apparent motion or affection; though in
few words, yet so effectually, as if he had been in his best estate and most
liberty that ever he was in. At the very last hour of his death, there was
assigned unto him a certain Monk to dispute with him, one of the same cloister
that he himself had once been on, and whose nouice he was the first year
after that he entered that unlucky order, that he might record unto him the
principles of his old popery and superstition. Howbeit the more means that
they used to assault him withal, the stronger he grew and the more able to
resist them: for Christ (doubtless) like a good captain defended his
soldier. In the end, he was executed as cruelly, as in his life time before
he had been tormented miserably, but with as quiet and patient mind as might
be. For so it was always likely that so good a man as he, should make so good
an end.

Francisca Chauesia.
Toward the furnishing of the same show, there was also one Francisca
Chauesia, a modest Virgin and one of a perfect profession, a Nun of the
cloister of Saint Elizabeth. A wonderful thing to consider how the perfect
knowledge of Christ could come to her through such Iron doors and gates,
notwithstanding all the froward superstition wherein she was almost drowned.
But the election of God in his Son Christ is a matter of such force and
efficacy, that nothing can withstand it at the time appointed. Besides this,
her hap was so good otherwise, to have unto her schoolmaister one D. Aegidio,
of whom we have to speak hereafter. Truly the shining light of Gods Gospel
could not long time be hid under that bushel, but when the time was come, it
would appear and shine to the joy and comfort of the whole Church of God, and
to the abolishing of darkness and iniquity. Well, the conclusion was, that
coming before the Inquisitours, and entreated as others had been before her,
at the length she was brought out unto the stage or scaffold: where she
(albeit that in all her life time she had had no great conference with men)
yet many times by her manlike answers, did put the Inquisitors to afoule foil:
and did moreover, not only most constantly affirm the truth, but also most
sharply rebuked those good Fathers, calling them dumb Dogs and the generation
of Vipers. But of all the rest, the small regard which she had either of death
or the pains thereof, and specially the cheerful countenance which she kept
still even to the very fire, was most worthy the sight of all that beheld it.

Christophoro Losada a Physician.
THis man in like case was scholar to D. Aegidio, taught and trained up by him
in the principles of true religion. Among whose other good gifts and blessings
of God, wherwithall he was endued, this one thing was in him most worthy of
admiration, that whomsoever he took in hand to teach and instruct in virtue
and godliness, he did therewithal kindle as it were a certain seruent zeal in
their hearts, whereby they were enflamed to all the exercises of love and
charity both inwardly and outwardly; and besides this, maruellously animated
and encouraged to patience at the very hour of their deaths. Whereby he gave
an evident testimony to such as were enlightened with Gods spirit, that Christ
was always present with him to make perfect his ministry, writing with his
holy Spirit in their hearts inwardly the same in effect that he in words
pronounced outwardly. But besides the good hap that this man had to light upon
so good a schoolmaster, it was also his chance to meet with no worse a
father in law, a man so zealous and well affected in Gods religion, that this
Losada being a suter to his daughter, although he were a fair conditioned
man, very well learned, and better seen in his faculty then a great sort of
practifers be, yet would he not grant unto him his good will for having his
daughter to wife, till he were for a while become scholar to Doctor Aegidio,
and learned of him some godly and virtuous instructions. A very hard condition
surely for a learned man, and one that thought himself sufficiently
cathechised, to submit himself to another man's instruction, but specially to
D. Aegidio, that was commonly suspected in religion at that time. Howbeit at
the length he condescended thereunto, whether for virtues sake, as desirous of
better instruction, or for his wives, I know not. But howsoever it were, or in
what respect so ever he did it at the first, he applied it so earnestly, that
notwithstanding he lost his master ere he could well have spared him, yet
after his masters death he declared how much he had profited under him: in so
much that as well for his singular learning and skill in Scripture, as for his
virtuous and godly conversation, he was thought the happiest and worthiest
person to be Superintendent over the whole congregation, which was great in
number, though here and there dispersed in corners. As indeed he took it upon
him, and did very well discharge the office of a preacher among them, so far as
he might in such adversity. Afterward by means of those books of Iuliano
paruo, he was apprehended by the Inquisitours (being a thing almost impossible
that such a faithful pastor should hide himself when his flock was
dispersed) before whom he made a plain protestation of his faith, for the
which he endured, first, hard and sharp imprisonment with most cruel
torments, and the open infamy of their solemn show, and lastly was committed
to the fire. Where he, standing at the stake, disputed very notably of true
religion against those importunate hypocrites, who upon a false persuasion that
they had to convert him, gave him the liberty of his tongue, to the intent he
might have answered their expectation. And whereas they of policy fell out of
their Spanish into Latin, because the common people should not understand
them, Losada also (not greatly marking their meaning herein) began to talk in
Latin so copiously and eloquently, that it was a strange thing to hear a man
almost dead to this world, to have his wits so fresh and his tongue so ready,
as ever they were at any time in all his life.

Christophoro Arelliano.
CHristophoro Arelliano, a Monk of the cloister of Saint Isidore in Civil,
was by the confession of the Inquisitours themselves simply the best learned of
all that came before them, and was betrayed by his own friends, such I mean,
as had received a great deal more commodity and honor by him, then ever they
had done by any, yet by their means was brought within the Inquisition. The
cause why he was so highly esteemed and accounted of for learning, was because
of his great reading and study in the schoole-doctours, as they term them.
That is to say, Aquinas, Scotus, Lombardus, and such like, that whatsoever had
escaped them in all their works, making for the maintenance of the truth, with
a very good judgment and a passing memory, next after the scriptures and the
sounder sort of the fathers and doctors of the Church, he did both readily
vouch, and applied them to his purpose very directly, and so brought to pass,
that all his adversaries, with whom the authority of such trifling writers
weigh more then the holy Scriptures of God, were confounded with their own
doctors. Notwithstanding all this, he was condemned to the fire. For with
these maine tyrants fire and fagots is above learning and truth, and able to
control and ouerrule them both. But ere he came so far, he was first brought
solemnly, and set upon the scaffold to have sentence pronounced upon him, where
there was a shameful matter most impudently laid to his charge; That he
should affirm, that the blessed and pure virgin Mary, the mother of Christ, was
no more a maid then he himself was. A seemly speech for these good Fathers to
publish and proclaim in such an open audience, if it had been so that any
were so beastly or so wicked to say it. Yet such means they use to bring them
into hatred among the common people, whom they know many men to have good
opinion and estimation of for their singular and approved virtue. Howbeit when
Arelliano heard that horrible blasphemy, having the use of his tongue (as GOD
would have it) he cried out in the hearing of all the people, that it was a
most impudent and slanderous lie, saying, that as well at this present, as also
at all other times heretofore, he did ever firmly hold, and believe the
contrary, being thereunto persuaded by diverse and sundry places of Scripture,
which he could presently allege if need were. Also for a further vexation,
there stood of purpose one of the Monks of the same house, that had been his
greatest enemy, laughing and rejoicing at his misery, thinking it, belike, not
sufficient to cause so godly a man, so excellently well learned, and a very
innocent besides, to be brought into so pitiful a case, but to amend the
matter withal, seemed to triumph over him in this extremity. The sudden
sight whereof did somewhat move this good man: howbeit like a good christian
he put it up quietly, and pacified himself, giving a good example of patience
to all that beheld it. Finally, standing at the very stake, he comforted and
encouraged a certain monk of the same house called John Chrysostom, that
sometime had been his scholar, and now become his fellow, and so partaker
as well of his death as his doctrine. But forasmuch as I certainly know not the
very true cause why this Monk was executed, I have therefore not annexed him
here unto the rest. Yet thus much I can truly say of him: A preacher he was,
both reasonably well learned and of good conversation and living, for any thing
that ever was objected to the contrary. And therefore those hogs that minded
nothing but their bellies, did not greatly like of him.

Garsias Arias commonly called Seignior Blanco.
THe wonderful providence of God toward his elect, which contrary to common
course does mightily save and defend many that deeply were drowned, and lay a
long season soused in superstition and blindness, fansying it of will, and
withstanding the known truth against their own conscences (which sin the holy
Scriptures call the sin against the holy Ghost, declaring unto us, that the
prayers of the congregation shall not avail such persons as are spotted
therewith) this providence, I say, did most maruellously appear by this one
man's example to be of such force, that the deeper that men are drowned in
desperation, the higher it afterward aduanceth them in honor. This Arias,
whom they commonly called Seignior Blanco, because of his white hairs and
fair skin, had a very sharp wit, and for his time was well studied in
divinity: marry, therewithal somewhat crafty and subtle with a little spice
of inconstancy: which vices also he did so cover with a counterfeit cloak of
religion, that he was able to deceive him that thought himself the wisest man,
yea, and did deceive a great sort indeed. It happened in this time that there
were two sorts of Preachers in Civil, and both of them had a great number of
auditors disposed to hear each part, as they best fancied the one or the
other. The one of them concerning doctrine and precepts, came nigher to the
discipline of Epictetus the Stoic, than to the rule of holy Scripture. But
herein they were inferior to Epictetus, that all his sayings and doings were
one, but in these there was some ods: for they never ceased calling and crying
upon them, to move them to often fasting, to mortification, to denying of
themselves, to continue in prayer at all times, lowly to think of themselves,
which they called humility, and to show the same as well in apparel,
countenance, behavior and speech, as in all the rest of their life. But if you
had stripped these fellows out of their side coats; Well, I will not say all,
but ye should well have perceived them to be men. In sum, all their religion
both top and tail (as they say) rested in works and outward exercises of the
body, quite contrary to the other sect, and therefore they would seem to be
doers in any case. Whereupon they left the true exercises of a Christian man, I
mean justice, mercy, and faith, the only means to attain true
righteousness, and ran by heaps to Masses, to hallowed places, to shrift
(as they call it) and many other such like toys, which the scripture calls
spiders webs that will never prove good cloth, hoping by these and such like
means to be purged and cleansed from their sins. Moreover they urged poverty,
with sole and single life, even unto such as were already coupled in matrimony,
but especially the vow of obedience, as do the foolish friars, to the intent to
get them auditors. And this (say they) is the true denying of our selves, and
therefore extolled it as much as the obedience that is due to God himself.
Further, to the intent to keep them in blindness and ignorance still, they
dissuaded men from the reading of books written of divinity; specially from
Erasmus works, by the which they should learn nothing but a little pride in
their own knowledge, referring them rather to Henricus Herpius, and
Bonauentures works, the A. B. C. and the scaling of mount Sion, and such
others, wherein they should learn humility and obedience toward all, but
specially toward their elders and superiors. Among others they also cited
unto them Masius, Cauallius, Guerra, Petrus Cordubensis, and many other more
then I can well call to mind: For whom perhaps it had been far better never
to have been borne, then to leave such monuments behind them. Of the which
sort of preachers there were diverse, I confess, in some respects very honest
and godly men, but yet none, that understanding the iuggling and treacheries of
their masters, would forsake them, and take a better way. For sundry of them
by their unseasonable kind of fasting, and their curious searching of high and
secret mysteries of divinity, fell into a frenzy, or else proceeding in their
foolish enterprise, grew every day worse and worse, that is to say, of honest
men, became very wicked, Pharisees, enemies and crucifiers of Christ, and in the
end twice so evil as were their masters whom they followed. The other sort
did deal more sincerely with the holy Scriptures, declaring out of them what
was true righteousness and perfect godliness: by means whereof they brought
to pass, that that City bare the name above all other in Spain for their just
and true dealing, by the space of a dozen years together, so that itappeared
that they had fruitfully and effectually heard that piece of Scripture that
treats of true and perfect righteousness. For hereupon came all that
plentiful harvest that has been inning 8. or 10. years, of those good seeds
of the Gospel, which then were by them so painfully sown. The brightness
whereof, according to the nature of light, did so plainly discover all that
counterfeit holiness, and pharisaicall devotion, that it could not be but that
needs there must ensue thereafter, first hatred and then persecution. The
chief, laborers in this harvest, were Constantino, Aegidio and Varquio,
Doctors all, and men both sober, wise, and learned: whose travails in setting
forward the Gospel in so great mists of ignorance, and the worthy ends which
they made at their departures out of this life, as they be worthy of eternal
memory, so will we shield them that they shall not be forgotten. But yet of
all the other adversaries unto the truth, this Arias was most spiteful, and
more malicious than any of the rest (perhaps because the other erred of simple
ignorance, but he contrary to his own conscience kicked against the known
truth) for that the other had been more generally received, was more sightly in
show, and more beneficial to them that followed after it. Howbeit he would not
gloze so openly as other of the same sort would, for fear of discrediting
himself with diverse men of good reputation, and well affected in religion,
with whom he was grown into some favor and good opinion, by reason of that
virtuous and godly disposition, which they saw in him in appearance: but in such
sort behaved himself, and so cunningly conveyed his matters, that though such
as had tried him knew what was in him, yet others took him for a dear friend
of theirs, and esteemed of him as if he had bin their kinsman or brother. But
as touching his subtilties and dissimulation, he showed it most at one time
specially above all others, at what time complaint was made to the Inquisitours
by a sort of hypocrites, persecutors of the truth, of one Gregorio Ruizio, a
man (as the report went of him) very well learned, for a certain thing uttered
by him openly in a divinity lecture in the Cathedral Church of Civil,
tending toward the controversies in religion, and concerning specially a man's
justification. For where the Inquisitors had assigned him a day of hearing, two
days before the day of his appearance, it was his chance to meet with this
master Arias; with whom he had some a^quaintance, by reason that they
professed one kind of study, but chiefly for the report of virtue that was
spoken of him, though unworthily. Whereupon, amongst others that were assigned,
this Arias also was charged to be there at that day, and to prepare himself to
dispute against Ruizio: who like a crafty Apostle so undermined this Ruizio,
that he gat out of him all the reasons and arguments which he had devised against
the day of disputation for the maintenance of his side. For Ruizio (God knows)
taking no great heed thereof, nor suspecting in him any such treachery, more than
he did his ghostly father, communicated the same unto him. Which after Arias
had obtained, he gave him a friendly farewell, and so left him. At the day of
disputation, when both parts were assembled, this Arias was also present, and
joined himself to the other side that were adversaries to Ruizio. The which
when Ruizio beheld, he was somewhat astonished therewithal, and perceived at the
length his Legerdemane, seeing him so readily out off his arguments, which he
had made him privy unto two days before, and to answer them so fully and
exactly, that he had nothing to reply again: whereupon the silly soul being
thus circumuented, and spoiled of all his weapons, yielded himself, leaving to
Arias the honor of the field, which he most like a Judas had gotten by
treason and treachery. The like honest part also for all the world he played
with D. Aegidio. For whereas he meaning nothing but well (as the most constant
bruit is) had referred the matter concerning the opinion of his knowledge and
learning to this man's judgment, because he knew him to be as able to judge as
a great sort of others, he gave such a verdit, as it had been somewhat
reasonable for him to have given in a matter of untruth. Notwithstanding he was
the first in all Saint Isidors house in Civil, that started out of that dead
sleep of superstition and ignorance, wherein they were all dead and drowned,
and by means of a few sparks which this man had set on fire, a great part of
the house began to shake off their drowsinesse, and to see a glimmering of
the truth afar off appear like the dawning of the day, and to desire that
the veil might be drawn, to the end that they might the more easily see the
shining beams of true religion. For the whole scope of all his sermons, for
the which there was a space appointed, as it fell out most conveniently,
sometime by night, from two of the clock in the morning, till four, was
wholly to overthrow all their profession: howbeit not openly, but covertly and
as it were afar off. First, he taught them that singing and saying of their
prayers all the day and night, was no service, nor prayer unto God: that the
exercises of a true Christian man were other then the common people took them
to be: that the holy Scriptures were to be read and studied with diligence,
whence alone the true knowledge and service of God and of his holy will, of
true religion, and such as was most allowable in his sight, was to be had and
learned: to the obtaining whereof, we must (quoth he) use prayer as a mean,
proceeding as well of the sense and feeling of our own infirmities and
necessities, as grounded upon perfect trust and confidence in God. Thus, by
laying these and such like foundations of Christian religion, he made them to
loath that stale stuff of their old and forworn religion, and wrought in them
an earnest desire of the better, but specially moved the^ to the study of holy
Scriptures. Moreover, besides his sermons he read daily a lecture upon
Salomons proverbs very learnedly, and made application thereof with good
judgment and discretion, and had private and familiar conference with diverse,
such as he was daily conversant withal, and used to accompany, only to the
same end and purpose. And for this one thing his hap was always very good, to
have such scholars as were tractable and soon wrought, and (which was
wonderful to consider) such as were not greatly wedded to their monkish
superstitions though they were vowed: whereby he had less to do with them,
and might with more ease give the assault, and in short time batter down this
forced rampire of superstition, with the perfect shot of Gods word. Howbeit his
head was so full of toys and new devices, that after all these wholesome
preparatiues, wherewith he had so wrought in them, that the rest of their
superstitious dregs might more co^modiously be expelled, and that they were
half won to his doctrine, he made them fall to unseasonable fastings and
watchings before the Sacrament, whence they should look for I know not what
inspirations: he caused them to remove all their stuff, books and beds, out
of their celles, and to lie upon the bare earth, or else to sleep standing, to
wear a hairecloth in stead of their shirts, and a hoope of Iron next unto
their skin, with a number of such toys more, as though those stinking weeds
would not have taken root fast enough of themselves, except the earth had first
been cared up with the coulter of Gods word, as was before declared. For after
he had weeded the old superstition, he did nothing else but sow a like seed
again, more corrupt and perilous than the other that grew before. By means
whereof many of his auditors got such good as is like to ensue of so
dangerous a doctrine. Insomuch that mamany of them fell stark mad: some so
consumed with melencholy, that they were half frantic: some caught incurable
diseases and pains in the head, and became almost brainlesse, that they were
not able to serve any turn thereafter: but they that had stronger bodies, and
better stomachs to bear it out withal, had such a pharisaicall pride and
glory in themselves by means of that vain persuasion of holiness and
perfectness, that no wise man will account them in much better case than other
of their fellows. And yet perhaps were Arias excusable herein from this so
grievous guilt, either for want of better knowledge, or by destiny if it were
so, first to take upon him that office, and then so meanly to execute it, but
that I am right well assured that his conscience did condemn all the trash, which
he had planted in place of truth. For at the very same time being among his
companions, would take pleasure in remembering the folly of such men, that were
so forward to run any way that he would prescribe and appoint them.
Notwithstanding such is the force and might of Gods election, that these few
good seeds sown among those fitches, fructified in the end to the great
increase of godliness maruellously. Insomuch, that diverse and sundry of them,
having their consciences cleared and purged of their old hypocrisy, and
scarcely well stayed or quieted with these new devices, sought further by
occasion hereof, for some better instructions, and unawares happened upon the
other sort of Preachers, that taught the truth with more sincerity. Of whom
(after they had entered some acquaintance with them) they learned the principles
of pure and perfect religion, leaving by little and little that evil opinion
which they had generally conceived against the Lutherans. Afterward, being
persuaded that they could by no means attain the perfect knowledge of the
truth, except they would sometime peruse their writings, God did likewise
maruellously provide for them herein, that they had not only such books
brought unto them by a miraculous means, as they had a long time desired, even
at such time as they securely slept and sought for no such things: but also all
other sorts of books that were extant at that time, either in Geneua, or any
part of Germany: so that having such store both of books and masters to
instruct them, they began to nosell their whole covent, insomuch that where at
the first there were only two that durst give the attempt in so dangerous an
enterprise, there were very few in the whole cloister (which at that time was
very well furnished) but they had some taste of true religion and godliness
thereby, and none repined against it. Their time that erst was spent in
mumbling their mattens and prime, was now bestowed upon lectures of divinity:
their dirges either cut off altogether, or curtalled very short: their charters
of pardons granted by Popes in ancient time whereunto all that crew leaned
before, was now accounted for stale stuff. As for images, they had a small
deal of worship done unto them, or none at all. Vain fasting was turned into
seemly sobriety: neither was any taught to be monkish, but to be sincerely
and truly religious, nor any mention made of proceeding in their former
fashions, but much talk rather in derision thereof, and to have them
abolished. Neither did they put this light under a bushel, imprisoning it
within their own walls, but sent it abroad into the City, and the towns and
villages adioining, as well by publishing of books, as by other private
conference. Then all things being brought to so good pass, that nothing was
left in use save only their stout Idol of their mass, and their monkish
profession that rested in their coule and their crown, which could neither
with good conscience be longer suffered, nor attempted without present peril,
and yet no great good like to ensue thereof; they began to devise first, and
afterward determined with themselves, to forsake their neast, and to fly into
German, where they might live with a great deal more safety of their lives
and freedom of their consciences. A very bold enterprise (doubtless) and as
some thought both rash and desperate. For neither was there any great
possibility or likelihood, that not one or two, but so many at once, and such
as were not only the sovereigns of the whole house and fellowship, but famous
over the whole city for their excellent learning, should forsake such a
cloister as the like was not in all the territory of Granata, leaving it in a
manner desolate, and escape in safety from the furthest part of Spain into
Germany. And if they should steal away in several companies and at sundry
times, then were they like to be in evil case that should tarry hindmost. For
the Inquisitors that had been quiet a great while, having intelligence hereof
by some cankred knave or other, would bestirre themselves of all hands.
Therefore they concluded briefly, that either all which were privy to this
counsel, must depart speedily together, or else look to be apprehended
shortly after. But God seeing them in this distress, showed them a means, how
under an honest pretense a dozen of them might take occasion to depart within
one month, and each betake himself a several way toward Geneua, where they
determined to make their abode, and purposed to meet all together within one
tweluemoneth: as for the rest being as yet but young nonices in religion, which
remained behind because they did not greatly like of going away, they within a
while after abode the brunt of the hurly-burly when it came. For at the very
same time there were three burned out of that cloister, and diverse of the rest
diversely punished. Insomuch, that from that day till this, there was never any
examination of matters touching faith in Civil, but that house has always
made out a man, or two. And very likely it is, that the truth sown and planted
there has taken so deep root, that it sticks to the hard stone walls, so
that whilst any one stone stands upon another, it will yearly yield them
one or two Lutherans.

I have by occasion entered into this discourse somewhat largely, partly in
respect of Christ's Church, toward the which I should scarce behave my self
uprightly, if I should rob these men of their renown due unto them, in regard
of the overthrow which they have given to Idolatry and superstition, behauing
themselves as courageously as they adventured dangerously, preferring virtue
and godliness before authority and power, voluntarily refusing their present
estates wherein they lived with some worship and in much pleasure, and instead
thereof contenting themselves to be poor and disdained, banished from their
own country, to suffer shame and ignominy: finally, to be every hour in
danger of their lives, which they led notwithstanding in very great misery. Of
the which good and prosperous success, a great part next unto God we do owe
unto this Arias, of whom our purpose is presently to entreat, forasmuch as all
this great fire, that has enflamed to Gods glory, not only that house, but
diverse places in the city abroad, besides a number of other without the city
which we mean not to touch, bred of those few sparks which this man kindled at
the first: who by reason of his unconstant and fickle nature, being half
suspected of his friends, and hated of strangers, was diverse and sundry times
complained upon to the Inquisitors, conuented before them, answered the matter,
and so discharged. At the last it came to pasle, in that troublesome time
wherein every man almost was apprehended for religion, that Arias also went to
the pot with his fellows indeed, though he had diverse times shifted it off
before. The which end was foretold him two or three years before by
Constantino, and that with a vehement affirmation, on a time when Constantino
bad this Arias to his house to dinner, where were present at the same time
Aegidio and Varquio, to the intent to take him up somewhat roundly for his
halting, forasmuch as gentle admonitions used before would nothing prevail.
But in process of talk when they were rebuking him most earnestly, he start
out in a bravery and said, that he feared greatly lest he should shortly see
Bulls set forth in open show, prophesying somewhat plainly of the Inquisitours
Theater. Whereunto Constantine made him this answer: Behold Arias, before God I
tell it thee, that thou shall not sit mounted alost, as thou supposed to see
and behold oaths, but shall stand below, and be condemned thy self. As indeed
it came to pass by Gods secret and divine providence, that notwithstanding he
had been in time before a faithless fellow, yet his last apprehension turned
not to his undoing, but wrought in him effectually, and contrary to hope
brought forth in him the fruits of of true repentance. For he did so
earnestly and deeply lament and bewail his former estate, that whereas before
time, he had been as fearful as ever was Hare of Hounds, or Ape of whip, now
being upon the rack with a marvelous constancy (which argued in him a
wonderful exchange) he withstood the enemies of Gods truth, and took up the
Inquisitors sharply, that sat in their seats of majesty like Demigods, saying
that they were meeter to drive packs, and that such an office were more sit for
them, than to sit where they do in seat of judgment, and take upon them the
determination of causes in religion, wherein they were as blind and yet as bold
as Bayard; declaring moreover unto them, that for his own part he was heartily
sorry, and did most earnestly repent him, and would do while he had a day to
live, for that he had wittingly and willingly in their presence impugned the
truth against the godly defendants of the same, whereof he himself was now
become a defender. Many other sharp rebukes, so often as he came to his answer,
the Inquisitours received at his hands. But in the end he was brought forth
after their guise and accustomed manner of pomp, arrayed with all their robes,
honorable (no doubt) in the sight of God, though in man's judgment reproachful
and ignominious: a man, to be reverenced for hisage, but specially for the
hearty repentance of his former life, and for that notable confession of the
truth which he made, leaning upon his staff: and so departing from the stage
to the stake with a merry and cheerful countenance, he made satisfaction to
the Church of God by this notable example of repentance at his death, for all
the mischief that he had done thereto by his unfaithful and hypocritical
dealing in the rest of his life time before. O man most happy of all other,
worthy to be shrined, and to have a several place among the chief champions
of Gods truth here in this world, that have forsaken the greatest mischief and
folly, and returned to make the like protestation of Gods truth that other
martyrs and confessors have done before thee: Paul, that chosen and elect
vessel of God, places himself among the first sort of sinners, because 1.
Tim. 1.
he had bin a persecuter of the Church of God, tho of a good zeal, yet not
grounded upon knowledge. In what place then or degree shall we set this Arias
of ours among the sinful sort, who wittingly and willingly, secretly not
openly, behaved himself like an enemy, and persecuted the same? Paul
refers it to the secret purpose of almighty God, that he might obtain the
more mercy, whereof he had made himself unworthy so many ways, saying it was
to this end, that Christ in him might power out all the abundance of his
mercy and graces, for an example to all them that should truly believe in
him. How much then and how plentifully has Christ opened his coffers, and
bestowed his mercies (the treasures of his goodness) upon this new Paul, if we
may so term him? How sure and certain a token does he give hereby, of his
exceeding great mercy, grace, and love toward all sinners? Therefore by this
one example, this lesson may we learn, as by the true mirror of Gods
goodness, to keep our selves from rash judgments and speeches toward such
as we see in the most desperate estate that can be, forasmuch as we cannot
certainly tell what God has determined concerning them, but ought rather to
follow the counsel of Paul, that is, to hope the best.

D. John Aegidio a Canon and Preacher in the Cathedral Church in Civil.
THis Doctor Aegidio, albeit he was a man both apt to attain learning and
painful besides, yet having bestowed his time in unprofitable studies,
notwithstanding that he had run his full race, and attained the highest
degrees in Schools, and professed divinity a long time, (such was the state
of learning in those days) that he had scarcely his Latin tongue. Besides this
his small skill either in the tongues or in any other good learning, he was a
wicked contemner and blasphemer against the holy Scriptures: Yea I have heard
himself be wail the evil success of learning and study in his time, and the
ignorance of that age, confessing it to be such, that whosoever had any ways
meddled with the holy Scriptures in the University of Alcala, where he himself
studied, was so far off from being accounted of among the learned, that many
would scornfully and in great derision term him a good Bibler, preferring
L^mbardus, Scotus, Gregorius, Arithmeticus, and such other Dunses, before the
express word of God, for profoundnesse of wisdom or deep divinity.
Afterward being public Reader of divinity at Siguenca, he was sent for to
Civil, by one Alexander that was his predecessor there, to the intent he might
be their Preacher in the Cathedral Church in Civil: where he was so highly
commended, both for his virtue and learning, that he was Subdeane of the
Church, contrary to their orders, having never been examined by the Doctors,
as the custom is. And truly for such school-diuinitie, as was generally and
universally received all Christendom over, he was very famous, and of great
credit, marry, he never attempted to preach openly, nor had once opened the
Bible, to read or study the Scriptures. And therefore the very first time that
he came into the Pulpit, contrary to all men's expectations, he was found
altogether so unfit for such a function, that he began to be greatly out of
conceit with himself, and to grow in contempt of others: by the daily increase
whereof on both parts, they fell so to repent them, the one for admitting him
so unadvisedly, the other for taking upon him that office so arrogantly, being
unable to discharge it, that both they minded to remove him, and he himself
determined to leave them. But in process of time, after he had thus passed
the pikes by the space of a year or two, it was his chance to meet with one
that gave him such instructions (or rather it was the ordinance of God, that
provided so well, both for him and for the whole city) that within few hours
conference, he learned by that parties means the ready way for a Preacher to
travail in, and what the office and duty of a Preacher was: to the obtaining
whereof it was told him, that he must use other means, other books, and other
masters, then hitherto he had done. Whereat D. Aegidio was somewhat astonished
at the first, hearing him make such a sermon unto him, but especially marvelled
to see his boldness, that being but a plain fellow, and as a man would say a
very Russetcoat, besides that, one taken not to be very well in his wits, would
presume so boldly to teach such a Doctor as he was, being neither familiarly
acquainted with him, nor knowing him to his thinking. Yet D. Aegidio being of a
gentle disposition by nature, and hearing him discourse so largely of the duty
of a Preacher, wherein he acknowledged his own infirmity, did the more
easily bridle himself, and gave him the hearing quietly. The force of whose
persuasions (being a man endued with Gods spirit) was so great, that from that
day forward D. Aegidio was quite altered and become a new man, thinking all his
former life and labor evil spent, and therefore began anew to tread another
path which should lead him unto perfect wisdom and learning, whereof as then
he knew not one step. Furthermore, perceiving his counselor to stand so long
upon that point which concerned the duty of a good Preacher, he took it to be
a sufficient calling for him to that vocation, whereof he knew he should
neither reap commodity nor estimation in this world. Perhaps many will marvel
to hear the party named that was the occasion of so sudden a change and
alteration of such a man in so short space, taking upon him to teach him the
true way to perfect wisdom. Truly I must needs disclose it, to the end that
the wonderful mysteries of Gods election may be manifested and reverenced, who
by the foolish of this world confounds the wisdom of man. His name was
Roderico Valerio, man long ago condemned at Civil by the Inquisitors for a
false Apostle, a counterfeit Prophet, and a wicked deceiuer of the people, and
thereupon banished, and in his exile suffered for the profession of the truth.
Whose wonderful kind of calling to the true knowledge of Christ, since I am
occasioned to make mention of the person, it shall neither be greatly
impertinent briefly to speak of, nor tedious to such as be godly disposed. This
Valerio (a Citizen of Nebrissa, a famous town as any is in all the precinct of
Granata, both for the antiquity thereof, and chiefly for the fame of one
Antonio de Nebrissa a notable Clerk as any was, and one that first restored
the purity of the Latin tongue in Spain in these our days) was descended of
a good house, and of sufficient ability to maintain the worship thereof:
howbeit he employed his wealth, not to virtue, but as commonly such men of
ability do, which think all their honor to consist in the maintenance of a
good stable, and the furniture thereof, in games, in costly and excessive
apparel, in hunting, and other such like pastimes and exercises. For in all
these qualities he was singular above all the young gentlemen of the whole
city: insomuch that he sought not only to match such as were his equals in
degree and ability, but also to exceed them far. In the midst of these vain
fantasies, a certain motion came into his mind (by what occasion, or through
whose persuasion, or otherwise by what means, God knows) but he suddenly
left all his old delights, contemning the speech of the people (which was a
hard thing for a man to do) and bent himself wholly both body and soul to
the exercise of virtue and godliness, that a man would searcely judge him to
be a man of this world. Moreover, the wonderful change that appeared to be in
him otherwise, as well in his speech and behavior, as in his apparel that was
fine and suitable before, gorgious as might be, and now quite altered into
simple stuff and plainest fashion, was well liked of some, but on the other
side a great number thought it mere madness or stark folly. But as the like
false verdites given of the holy Apostles, that were endued with the Holy
Ghost, were attainted by the effects of the same spirit, so the perfect fear
of God, with the bewayling of his former vanities, the earnest desire of
righteousness, and his whole talk tending to these ends and concerning these
matters, always framed according to the prescript rule of Gods word, was a
sufficient proof and evidence to men of perfecter understanding, that the
spirit of God most certainly possessed him. In his youth time he had gotten a
little smack in the Latin, by the help where of he was conversant in the holy
Scriptures both day and night: so that by continual study thereof, he had a
great part of them by heart, and could make application thereof to his purpose
sensibly and marvelous readily. He had also daily conflicts with the spiritual
men (as they call them) the Priests and Monks, which were the causes (said he)
that not only the estate of the Clergy, but also all Christendom was so foully
corrupted, that they were almost hopeless of remedy: for which causes he did
also diverse and sundry times sharply rebuke them. Whereat this pharisaicall
generation much maruelling, enquired of him how he attained so suddenly to all
this skilin holy Scriptures? how he durst presume so arrogantly to inuay
against the very supporters and lights of the Church? For indeed he spared
none, but would tell the proudest of them his mind, being but a layman void
of all good learning, and one that had spent the greater part of his time in
vain and unprofitable studies. Likewise they examined him, by force of what
commission he did it: who sent him: how he was called: and by what tokens he
declared the same. Alas for them good men, when they cannot deny their
abominations, nor longer hold out the light which discovers their darkness,
even now as in all other ages from time to time, they are driven to these
shifts. Howbeit Valerio answered them truly and with a bold courage to every
demand: that he had not fished for that wisdom, and caught it in their most
filthy puddles, and muddie ditches, but had it by the only goodness of the
Holy Ghost, who pours whole floods of grace into the hearts of true believers
most abundantly. As for his boldness, he told them, that both the goodness of
his quarrel, and he that sent him gave him the encouragement, and that the
spirit of God which is bound to no estate or degree, be it in name never so
spiritual, specially if it be corrupt, has heretofore chosen very idiots, and
fishermen, and placed them in the room of Apostles, to control the Synagogue
of the learned touching the law, to appeach them of ignorance, and to call the
whole world to the knowledge of their own salvation: and that the same Christ
had sent him, whose name and authority he had for his warrant: but as for any
sign to declare the same, he said it was the token of a bastardly generation,
and of the branches degenerate from the true stock of the children of God, to
ask for any signs in the time of such light, when all things shine therewith,
yea very darkness it self as clear as noone day. At the length, for these,
and such like matters he was called to his answer before the Inquisitors, where
he disputed very earnestly of the true Church of Christ, and which were the
marks to know it by, how man was justified in the sight of God, and of such
other points of religion: the knowledge whereof, he confessed that he had
attained unto by no means or help of man, but by the only handy work of God,
and his wonderful revelation. Howbeit his madness and frenzy, wherewith the
Inquisitors supposed him to be troubled, excused him for this time: yet to the
end that he might the sooner come to himself again, they condemned him in the
loss of all his substance, and sent him packing as poor as Job: but he never
repented himself thereof, or became other man; insomuch that within a year or
2. after he was sent for again about the same matters, and then driven to make
recantation: marry, in consideration that they took him to be lunatic still,
they spared him his life, adiudging him nevertheless to wear the Sambenite,
and to suffer perpetual imprisonment during life, save only that on sundays
they brought him forth, with many other more of his companions, and carried them
to Saint Saluatours Church to hear service. Whereas diverse and sundry times he
arose out of his place, and in the hearing of all the people, controlled the
Preacher when he taught them amiss. At what time it so chanced, that the
Inquisitors were not half so bad as other that had been before them, so that
his fact was wound up quietly, and excused by madness and folly. Afterward,
he was removed forth of prison to Saint Lucars, into a certain house of
religion, where he died, being a man above 50. years of age, a very wonder to
the world at that time, sent to awake men out of their dead sleep of
wickedness and ignorance wherein they lay snoring and snorting so long. But
forasmuch as those articles whereof he was most unjustly condemned, were
strange and not heard of in Civil at those days, he had a Sambenite
appointed to wear, such one as was of the largest size that any ware in his
time, the which at this day is to be seen for a special monument of a notable
heretic in the vestry of the chief Church in Civil, in a place where every
man may easily see it, with this inscription wrought in capital letters,
Roderico Valerio a citizen of Nebrissa, an Apostata, and a false Apostle of
Civil, who said he was sent from God. By this man's advertisement, as I showed
before, was this Doctor Aegidio first awaked, and by his instructions came
first to the knowledge of the true Gospel of Christ, which lay buried a long
season before, so that neither master nor scholar once heard so much as one
word thereof. Therefore so often as his matter came in hearing before the
Inquisitours, this Doctor Aegidio did always stand his good friend as much as
in him lay, through whose means it was thought that he found the more favor
at the Inquisitours hands in the mitigation of their sentence upon him, being a
relapse as their term is. But in the end Doctor Aegidio himself bought full
dearly that little courtesy that was showed to this man at his mediation. For
thereby he purchased to himself both much hatred, and grew daily into great
suspicion with all that pack of Pharisees, that could not well away with his
perfect and virtuous sincerity. Besides these good instructions, this Aegidio
was also familiarly acquainted and conversant with Constantino Fontio, a man
excellently well learned, by whose daily conference, he profited maruellously
in study, fell to the reading of good Authors, and so grew to profound
knowledge in the holy Scriptures: but specially concerning such matters whereof
he would preach to edify the people withal, he both learned them perfectly by
conference with otherwise and learned men, and partly by his own reading and
experience: at the length, began to preach as learnedly, godly, and
zealously, as he had before times done coldly, foolishly, and unskillfully. Then
began the hearers to feel the marvelous force of that doctrine which these
three men of great credit and estimation, Aegidio, Constantino, and Varquia
magno taught with one consent, insomuch that the more they grew in knowledge
from their old ignorance and blindness, the more were these men had in
reputation among them, and the old hyporcites despised, that had taught them
other doctrine to the great peril of their souls. Whereupon there were daily
diverse complaints brought to the Inquisitors ears of these men: but specially
of D. Aegidio, who of mere simplicity, and by reason that he was in some more
authority than the rest, did more openly inueigh against the adversaries of
the truth whom they began chiefly to envy at such time as the Emperor in
respect of his singular learning and integrity of life, elected him to the
bishopric of Dortois. For then those hypocrites began to bestirre them of all
hands, and to lay all their heads together to give him a lift, thinking that if
he were once consecrated Bishop there, he would keep a foul coil in their
kingdom. Therefore they cited him to come before the holy House, where plaint
was entered against him by such as were their crafts-maisters, able to work him
mischief, and to bring it about closely, so that by their means he was cast
into prison, and thereupon examined. The first matter was concerning the
justification of a Christian man, and diverse other that depend thereon; as of
man's merits, of purgatory, of the means of satisfaction for sins devised by
man's brain, of the number of Mediators, and whether there were any more than
Christ alone: also concerning the assurance of faith in such as are justified,
etc. Besides these, there were also other matters that fell out by occasion of
an abominable Idol of the blessed Virgin Marie, wrought very artificially by
Ferdinando the King (as the report goes): the which Image, upon diverse feasts
of the blessed Virgin, is set up and showed to the people with great pomp:
whereupon Idolatry or the worshipping of Images came in question. Also by like
occasion of a certain chip of wood that is very superstitiously honored in
the same Church, as a piece of the Cross whereon Christ was crucified, the
which relic Doctor Aegidio wished to be burned, the same matter likewise
came in talk. Moreover, concerning invocation and prayers to dead saints, and
the banishing out of pulpits the devices of man's brain, and of placing therein
the perfect and express word of God and other such necessary matters of like
importance: and therwithal, to set him forward, he was charged to be an earnest
favorer of Valerio de Nebrissa, etc. Whereunto D. Aegidio made answer
particularly, but chiefly touching the first point. whereof he made so perfect
and absolute a defense, so learnedly, so godly, and so absolutely, as any has
bin hitherto heard or seen: in the which answer he gave his adversaries
twenty ways to take advantage of him, and thereupon to infer diverse other
such heresies. But at that time the Inquisitours were not grown so bold as
since then they have been, nor indeed durst burn such a man as he was for
these quarrels, albeit they were urged and called upon on every side very
earnestly so to do. Therefore seeing that they could in no wise make him change
or alter his mind, they began to devise which way they might save his life,
because the Emperor, who lately had elected him to so great a Bishopric, as
also the whole Chapter of the Cathedral Church in Civil, were become very
earnest suitors in his behalf. There was also one of the Inquisitours named
Corrano, a good and a fatherly old man, who for that assurance which he had by
his own knowledge of the good conversation of Doctor Aegidio, and of the
frowardnes of his accusers, stood his very good friend, though his wicked
associate Pedro Diazio was sore against him; who like a proud Apostata forsook
the truth, wherein the same Valerio de Nebrissa had instructed him in his
private lectures upon Paul's Epistle to the Romans: for the which he gave him
at that time most hearty thanks, and yet notwithstanding was now become a
turne-cote. When Varquio was dead, and Constantino in the low countries with
the Emperor being his chaplain and confessor, there were certain
arbitratours appointed on both parts concerning this religion that was newly
come into Spain. And Doctor Aegidio for his part among others named one
Bartholomeo de Zamora, a Monk of the order of Saint Dominicke, a man very well
learned, and one that knew the truth. Who afterward by the Emperors means
was preferred to the Archbishopricke of Toledo: whence he was shortly after
deposed for religion, or as it is more probably coniectured, upon some privy
grudge which the Archbishop of Civil, high commissioner in the Inquisition,
bare unto him, and so after many conflicts with the Inquisitours, at the length
died. But at that time he could not be present at this trial, by reason that
he was attendant upon the Emperor: So that Arias, who was commonly called
Seigneur Blanco, was Judge at that time. But what his verdite was, is already
partly reported in the special history that I have written of him, and perhaps
the same may come forth to light hereafter particularly joined with the answer
that Doctor Aegidio made thereunto. But whether Arias were thereto nominated by
the Inquisitours themselves, or by Doctor Aegidio, as yet it is not certainly
known: so that some being absent, and some fearful to speak their minds for
fear of afterclaps, the determination thereof was referred to one called
Dominico a Soto, a sophister of great same in the University of Salamancke, and
one other of the order of Saint Dominicke, who after great expectation of his
coming, at the last came from Salamanck to Civil, and there entered
disputation with Doctor Aegidio that was but a plaine-dealing man and of a
small foresight, more craftily and subtly then other had dealt before him.
First, pretending much good will toward him, and perceauing that by dealing
with him openly, he could in no case remove him from his opinion, he fained
himself to be iumpe with him in the same: marry he advised him, that
forasmuch as those articles that presently were called in question were
somewhat odious in most men's ears, to the end to stop that gappe, he would
make and publish some apt declaration and exposition thereof, the which he
offered to prescribe unto him in the best sort that he could, that he might use
it if it liked him, or else they two to confer about it, and set it forth to
the better discharge of their consciences, furtherance of the truth, and
contentation of the hearers. Whereupon Asoto prescribed such a president: both
of them conferred about it, and in the end agreed without any controversy.
There was a solemn day of hearing appointed by the Inquisitours for that
purpose, and two pulpits set in the Cathedral Church, the one for D. Aegidio,
the other for Asoto, and all the people were assembled thither. Asoto began his
sermon, and proceeded accordingly. Immediately after the end thereof, he drew
forth of his bosom a declaration quite contrary to that whereupon they were
agreed. For in the former there was nothing but that which was consonant to the
truth and his own conscience: in this, no such matter, but only a plain
recantation of all those things whereof he was accused, and had bin a
maintainer of before by the space of 2. whole years, and lately also during
the time of his imprisonment. But the pulpits were such a distance asunder,
that by means thereof partly, and partly with the murmr of the common
people, whiles every man gave his verdite thereof, there was such a noise, that
Doct. Aegidio could not well understand what Asoto said: but yet for the good
opinion which he had of him, gave him such credit, that at the end of every
article, when Asoto craftily asked his consent thereto, willing him to speak
aloud that the people might hear him, or else to signify so much by some
countenance or gesture, he did so, confessing that he did agree to all those
things which Asoto had read unto them. Whereupon he was presently condemned to
suffer imprisonment for 3. years. Moreover, this crafty Monk procured a
prohibition against him for preaching, reading or writing by the space of 10
years after, enioining him during that time, not to depart Spain. Whereat D.
Aegidio marvelled much, hearing that his punishment was no greater, knowing
nothing hereof, nor understanding after what sort he was circumuented, til the
time that he was brought to prison again: whither diverse of his friends
resorting to visit him, began to rebuke him for denying the truth. The which
things we never came to have any notice of, but of his own mouth in the time
of his imprisonment. During which time he chanced to hear of the death of 3. of
his most deadly enemies, Sbarroia, a sophister and one of y^ order of S.
Dominike, Pedro Mexia, o^e that took upon him very arrogantly the title of a
Philosopher without any manner of good learning, and Pedro Diazio the Inquisitor
that played the Apostata and forsook the truth most wickedly as was before
declared. Neither is it to be otherwise thought then to be the secret judgment
of God, that 3. of the greatest enemies that the truth had, and sore
adversaries to this innocent man, should dye all within one year each after
other, while D. Aegidio was in prison, and his matters in examination, and (as
it is reported) that some of them should depart scarce quietly. Howbeit he
lived four or five years after that retractation which was compassed of him
by such deceitful means, and was nevertheless esteemed of all that godly
congregation, and did as much good to other afterward, as at any other time
being at his most liberty. In the which time, by reason of an embassy which he
was sent in, he visited his brethren that sometime had been scholars to D.
Cacalia at Valladolit professing the gospel under him, and renouncing all
wickedness and impiety. Whom after he had comforted and confirmed, in his way
homeward as he returned to Civil, being sore shaken in that long journey, by
reason that he had not been acquainted with travail of a great while before,
he sickned, and thereupon within a few days after departed this troublesome
life, and went to everlasting rest.

He left behind him certain Commentaries upon the book of GENESIS, and Saint
PAUL'S Epistle to the Colossians, upon certain of the Psalms and Cantica
Canticorum, written by him in the Spanish tongue very learnedly, and like one
plentifully endued with the Holy Ghost, the which are reserved in the custody
of diverse men of trust and credit, as jewels and treasures to the behoof of
the Church. The which albeit they were both learned and godly, yet other things
which he wrote in prison, do so far exceed them for the special
affections moved (no doubt) by the spirit of God, and expressed therein, that a
man may easily see the force of affliction and tribulation, how much it
avails the godly for deep judgment in matters of divinity. But within two
or three years after his death the new Inquisitors thinking that the other who
had the examination of him had dealt a great deal more easily with him than
became Inquisitors, seeing that they could not cite his spirit ^o appear
before them, which was in quietness and in rest, therefore they determined to
show their spite toward his carcass and dry bones. Whereupon they dug him
out of his grave, and buried in his place and under his name a puppet of straw,
brought his corpse upon the scaffold, and used it in such sort as they would
have done himself that sits in Heaven with Christ on the right hand of his
Father, if they could have caught him here in earth. But God that dwells on
high, laugeth at their follies.

Doctor Constantino Fontio, a Canon and Preacher in the Cathedral Church in
Civil.
IT was the singular good hap of the Church (saving that it heaped condemnation
upon it the more) that Constantino should come in place after so godly a man as
D. Aegidio was: by whose means Constantino in very short space maruellously
increased and profited in virtue and sound religion. And therefore, forasmuch as
the worthiness of this man was so great, I am justly occasioned somewhat largely
to discourse of him in this history. Wherein I fear it greatly, lest I shall
not be able sufficiently to set out the commendation of that man accordingly
as his worthiness deserves. For how can I devise to sound thy praises
sufficiently, being the most famous Divine of any that has lived in our days,
and one whom God of his abundant gracious goodness, did indue so plentifully
with so rare qualities, as hardly are to be seen together again in one man,
so that well they may be wondered at, but never valued to their worth? It is a
strange matter, and almost incredible, and yet true that I will report of him,
for I am able to justify it: that of many thousands of men that have viewed
this man's qualities thoroughly, there was never any, but either loved him
passingly, or else hated him spitefully. Therefore as he was ordained to be
both beloved and hated with extremity: so had he many malicious enemies, and
as many earnest friends and favorers. And here I comprehend not under the
name of friends, such as he himself bare good will unto, more than I account
those men among the number of his foes to whom he wished evil: but only such
as he knew not, and yet they with all their hearts both loved and honored him.
For those that he bare special affection unto (forasmuch as he knew the
inconstancy of this world) were only one or two in all his lifetime.
Notwithstanding, such as he thought worthy to be beloved in respect of their
virtue, he would pleasure any way that possibly he could. His youth, in
comparison of other young men that bestudious, perhaps he bestowed not so
praysably: yet so, as it was no hindrance to him in his age afterward, but
that he passed it with great commendation. For being a man of a marvelous
pleasant wit, and in matters of disport pleasantly disposed (otherwise very
fair conditioned) he diminished his credit and estimation somewhat after he
was grown in years, by using himself overmuch to ^esting. Howbeit, that was
only with his adversaries, who notwithstanding would as greatly have disliked
him on the other side, if he had been as sage and grave as either Curious or
Cato. And indeed there are a great sort of his sayings in many men's mouths,
which being well weighed and considered, are more worthy to be called wise
Apothegmes, than pleasant speeches: but they are such as cannot aptly be
expressed, and retain their grace in any other language. Neither did he so
commonly use to iestat any, or so finely, as at those hypocrites the Monks and
Priests that had a certain pride in themselves, of a foolish pharisaicall
opinion of holiness, being but in mere toys and trifles. But most of all he
used to gird the foolish Preachers, whereof there was never any age so full,
whom the holy Scriptures account to be the vilest sort of people that are,
comparing them to salt that has lost his savor, and will serve to no use.
Neither can any man sufficiently marvel at his passing wit, that being in a
barbarous age, when all good learning was almost lost, and forgotten among men,
in this universal time of ignorance, he did either only attain to grounded
knowledge, or had very few fellows. And in the tongues, to wit, the Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew, became so notable without any teacher, that he alone had
been sufficiently able to restore them unto us of himself. As for all other
kind of learning that served to the furnishing of a perfect orator, he
attained not only a superficial sight therein, but a perfect and absolute
knowledge. With these helps he fell to the study of holy Scriptures, wherein
he became so well learned even in his youth, that whenever he was occasioned
to show his opinion concerning any matters, or the signification of any terms
therein, he left nothing untouched that any might doubt of, except such as were
blind as buzzards, and could see nothing. Moreover, he was so eloquent in his
own tongue, that all his auditors were brought into a great admiration
thereof. Being thus furnished with these good gifts, he fell to preaching, and
without comparison passed all them of this age or of the age before him.
Besides these good qualities, he had a singular good discretion and judgment
in all his doings, the which he had attained unto, partly by great study,
partly by long practice and experience, but specially by great search and
profound knowledge in holy Scriptures, wherein he plainly saw, as it had been
from the top of a high Tower, whatsoever all the world did. At such times as he
preached (which commonly was about eight of the clock) there was so great
resort to his Sermon, that after four of the clock in the morning, and many
times from three, it was hard to get a good place in all the Church where a man
might conveniently hear him. Notwithstanding all this favor and affection
which all the people bare unto him (except the malicious hypocrites) besides
his meat and drink for his reasonable sustenance, and his Library which was
but meanly furnished, he gathered together no other great substance: for he was
a man far from those two plagues that have always infected the Church of
Christ, covetousness and ambition. In so much that being offered a good
Canonship in the Church of Toledo, which many a man of his order would think
himself in happy case if he might attain unto, he was so far from the
greedy desire thereof, that he contemned it, rather not caring for it (...)t
after his accustomed manner jeasted at it merrily. For ^mmediatly after the
death of the Bishop of Vtica, that was preacher in the Cathedral Church, the
whole Chapter with one consent offered him that place which they commonly call
the Opposition, and sent for him thither very honorably. But he made them
answer without any great deliberation, that he had great cause to yield them
many thanks for their good opinions conceaved of him, in that they thought him
worthy of so great a dignity, saying that he would do the best he could to
requite their courtesies. Howbeit forasmuch as his fathers and his grandfathers
bones buried many years ago, were now in rest and quiet, he would in no case
do any thing whereby the rest that they were in might be interrupted. And this
(I suppose) was the sum of his answer and the very words which he spoke. For
about that time there grew hot quarrels betwixt the Archbishop surnamed
Siliceus a man of famous memory forsooth, and the chapter of the same Church.
The Archbishop was hated of the chief men of the chapter because he had openly
and in opprobrious manner reported them to be descended of the loine of the
Jews: and they on the other side being men in good estate, and not able to
bear these reproaches, thought to be even with this foolish Bishop that came
from cart and plough, and by good hap (as a man may say) without all respect of
learning or honesty, was preferred to the highest dignity in all Spain next
under the king: and because he was a troubler of common quiet, they purposed to
work him all the spite that might be: by means whereof none were spared that
had been buried by the space of a 100 years, but that this good Archbishop
under pretense of religion made inquiry of the Canons fathers, grandfathers and
great grandfathers, driving them to derive their pedigree out of their graves.
The which foolish and ungodly controversies Constantino took occasion to quip
them for, at such time as he was sent for to supply that place. In like
(...)not long before he refused a Canonship in the Church o^ ^uenca, both rich
to the purse and worshipful besides for estimation, situate in his own native
foil. Moreover, being the first man that brought the knowledge of true religion
into Civil, he did so plainly set it forth and so sincerely, so sharply
rebuked those pedlers that sold all their packs of pardons and other fancies
for pence, laying such things so sore to their charge, that notwithstanding
they saw full well that he would prove a plague both to them and their whole
generation, yet could they not find any just cause to accuse him of but to
their own shame, and yet ceased they not to hate him deadly. Howbeit he took
away their stings so clean, that they could never come conveniently to poison
him: neither did he slack for all that to set forth the truth,
notwithstanding that he knew they lay in wait for him privily. And surely it
was the singular providence of God which so blessed that City, that there
should be in that Church at once three such notable men and so excellently
learned, Constantino, Aegidio and Varquio, which before times were Students
together in Divinity, and now furtherers of virtue and good religion with one
consent, and with like zeal. For Varquio did read upon the Gospel after
Matthew, in the Cathedral Church; and that being done, did afterward take in
hand to expound the Psalter. Aegidio preached daily: Constantino not so often
as Aegidio, but to as great fruit and edifying, continuing all together each
man in his room, till afterward that God sent stormy tempests, to the end
to try each man's building, that Varquio in the midst of this hurly burly,
while he and his adversaries were bickering together, died: Constantino was
sent for by the Emperor and his son Philip, and forced to forsake Civil. So
that Doct. Aegidio was left alone like a lamb among a sort of wolves to
minister matter for a tragedy: the which is already declared in this history.
After whose death Constantino left the Emperors Court, where he had gotten
both wisdom and learning, and returned to Siuil again to set forward the
light of the Gospel that had been stopped for a while. The which thing he did
with as much zeal as ever he did before time: so that both he himself was
very well esteemed, and his sermons liked of all the people exceedingly. It was
also his chance, by reason of a certain order taken by the whole Chapter, to
be appointed the next lent after his coming to preach every other day in the
Cathedral Church. The which when he refused to take upon him because of his late
sickness, being scarcely well recovered, he was compelled to do it perforce,
notwithstanding that he was so weak a creature that he was sometime carried
thither, and for faintnes once or twice in a sermon compelled to drink a
draught of wine to refresh himself withal, and to make him able to hold out til
the end of his hour. The which (doubtless) was a very strange sight to
behold: and yet such favor every man bare toward him, that he was dispensed
withal to use that liberty. Afterward being restored to his health, he
devised a ready way to set forward his purpose, and such as none had trodden in
before him. For by his means one Seignior Scobario a famous man in Civil,
both in life and learning, to whom the Senate of the City by common consent
had committed the charge and oversight of the College of children (commonly
called the house of learning) conferring with Constantino about the matter,
translated the revenue that some drunken chaplen would have devoutly drunk for
his soul, into a yearly stipend, toward the maintenance of a
Diuinitie-lecture in the same College, whereof this Constantino was chosen
reader. Who both happily took in hand and effectually pursued that profitable
exercise: beginning first with Salomons Proverbs, the book of the Preacher,
and Cantica Canticorum. Which after he had passed through very learnedly, he
proceeded into ^ob, and expounded it more than half. All which works are
extant at this day in written hand, gathered very painefully by one of his
auditors named Bab. Wherein it shall appear hereafter, as I can have leisure
to publish them, how far he has exceeded all that have written upon these
books hitherto, and how excellently well learned he was. But some evil spirit
envying the good success of that City, under the pretense of fervent zeal,
caused him to forsake that course wherein he ran before, and afterward
incombered him so many ways, that he was never clear quit of all till his
dying day. About what time welneare, it happened that the chief Canonship (which
was first founded for a Preacher) fell void in the Church of Civil, by reason
of Doct. Aegidio his death. Whereunto the whole Chapter would willingly have
chosen Constantino, as one whom they thought of desert worthy the place, for
the notable gifts that both they and all the whole Citle saw in him of a long
time while he continued Preacher there, but that it would not stand with the
rules of their House to admit him thereunto without oppositions. For upon their
last error in choosing Doct. Aegidio, immediately after, they entered an order,
that none thenceforth should be admitted to enjoy that place without their
accustomed kind of oppositions usual in all Churches. Whereas Constantino on
the other side had always scorned and d^rided those ceremonies, as toys, not
much unlike the contentions of iugglers and minstrels for the best games.
Moreover, one Valdesio Bishop of Civil and a courtier, owing Constantino a
privy grudge from the first time that he preached before the Emperor, and grew
into his favor, was very earnestly in hand with the Chapter, pressing them
with their own decree, after he understood that they were about to undo it
again. Whereupon there was a day appointed for the opposition, and published in
the most famous Cities in Spain, so that diverse came flocking, as it had bin a
sort of crows about a carrion. But the wiser sort kept themselves away from
encountering with him, for the greatfauour and estimation that he was in, so
that there were but only two that abode the brunt: the one called Maiuelo a
Canon of Alcala, the other a Canon of Malaga, hoping belike to get some great
booty thereby. Howbeit the first upon better aduisement returned home again
shortly after to Alcala: the other Canon of Malaga, bolstered by the Archbishop
to spite Constantino withal, wilfully continued the skirmish. At the length,
Constantino being overcome through the great entreatie and persuasion of the
Chapter, but especially moved by the importunate suit of a friend of his, to
whom I wish he had not yielded so much in this (for then perhaps he had been
alive at this time) resolved himself to stand for the Canonship, and to
dispute after the accustomed order: by means whereof fulfilling that ceremony,
he of Malaga was sent to shake his ears, and the Chapter prevailed against
the Bishop. There was also at the same time a little zeal which blinded
Constantino, lest perhaps some prater should have s^ept in place, that would
always be barking against good and godly doctrine: whereas by his accepting of
the same place there was a certain likelihood and hope, that the doctrine
thereby should have the more free passage. In respect whereof, he was the more
willing, rather then for any greedy or covetous desire of attaining any wealth
thereby, the which vice he always contemned with a manly courage. Whereupon,
his adversary that stood against him perceiving himself unable to weigh with
him, either for learning; countenance, or favor which he found at the
Chapiters hand, bent himself wholly to take exceptions to his person, and to
disable him that way. First he began to object against him all his youthly
toys, namely marriage, the which was before he entered into orders, charing him
that neither he was rightly priested, nor came by his degree of Doctorship
orderly. On the other side, a marvelous rabble of the hypocrites that had been
of his old acquaintance began to be galled afresh, seeing him so highly
preferred, insomuch that they fell to revive old matters concerning diverse
points of religion, urging them more earnestly than they had done before time,
and that in the court of ye Inquisition, wherein Valdesio his adversary sat as
Judge. Notwithstanding in the midst of these broiles, Constantino resting
upon the good wills of the Chapter, was installed, and whiles the controversies
were at the hottest, there was much business in that Church by means of
certain books of Iuliano paruo, whereof I made mention before. In the which
storms what place was there wherein Constantino might shroud his head? And yet
being brought before the Inquisitours, albeit he had thoroughly displeased all
his adversaries in the former braules before, yet notwithstanding he avoided
all their quarrels picked against him by his quick and ready answers (after
his accustomed manner) so easily, that they could in no case get him to make any
open protestation of his faith, by the which their hope was to compass and
circumuent him. And in very deed he had escaped at the length, but that God of
his wonderful providence compelled him sore against his will, briefly and
plainly to confess his truth. For nigh about the same time there was a very
honest and a substantial widow, named Isabella Martina, apprehended, in whose
house Constantino had hid certain special books for fear of the
Inquisitours, which he might not auow the keeping of in Spain without present
peril. Whose goods being sequestered according to the custom of the
Inquisition, her son, one Francisco Bertramo, had conueighed diverse Chests of
the best stuff that his mother had, because he would save somewhat, so that
these greedy gulles should not devour all. The which thing coming to the
Inquisitours ears, by means of his untrusty servant who disclosed it, was
the occasion that they sent immediately one Ludouico Sotellio their Alguazill
to demand those Chestes. Who resorted unto him accordingly; as he began to say
his message soberly, Bertramo forgetting the Chestes, and supposing that the
cause of his coming had been for Constantino's books, took the tale out of
his mouth and said unto him: Seignior Ludouico, I know whereabout you come, and
therefore if you will promise me on your honestly quietly to depart upon the
receite thereof, I will show you them. The Alguazill meaning the Chestes (as for
the books he neither came for them, nor knew of any such before) promised him
so to do. Whereupon Bertramo carried him forth with into a secret place far
within the house, and plucking forth a stone or two in the wall, showed him
Constantino's jewels of paper indeed, but far more precious than gold or
pearl. Whereat the Alguazil being somewhat astonished, to find that which he
looked not for, told him that he came to demand no such manner of thing, but
certain Chestes of his mothers goods, which he had purloined from the
Sequester. As for his promise made unto him for his quiet departure, he said
he was not bound thereby otherwise, but that he must needs carry both him and
his books to the Inquisitours. Thus by these means came all Constantino's
writings out of corners to light, and to the Inquisitours hands, contrary both
to his own expectation and his adversaries, which would have given a great
piece of money to have come by them before. And among other of his writings
there was one great volume found written throughout with his own hand, wherein
(as the Inquisitours themselves reported in their sentence which they gave upon
him afterward standing upon the scaffold) he did openly and plainly in manner,
as it were for his own satisfaction, handle these special points: that is to
say, the state of the Church, the true Church and the Popes Church, whom he
called very Antichrist: the Sacrament of the Lords supper: the invention of the
Mass, wherein he said that the whole world was deceived and abused through
ignorance of the holy Scriptures: the justification of a Christian man:
Purgatory, which he termed the wolus head, saying that it was a device of the
Monks to feed their own bellies: also Bulls and Popish pardons, men's merits,
shrift, and other articles of Christian religion. The which book so soon as it
came to the Inquisitors hands, they demanded of him if he knew his own hand:
howbeit he shifted them off from their purpose a good while, and drove them off
from day to day, til at the last understanding the will of God, who had now
taken away all euasions from him, he acknowledged his own hand, and confessed
it to be his own writing, protesting openly, that all things therein
contained were full of truth and sincerity. Therefore (said he) take ye no
further pains in seeking witnesses to testify against me, since you have so
plain and perfect a confession of my opinion and belief, but do deal with
me as it shall please you. After the which examination and answer he remained
in prison by the space of two whole years: where partly by occasion of his
corrupt and naughty diet, though he were not a man greatly curious or dainty
therein before time, but chiefly, of very sorrow consuming him to see so much
labor, both of his own and others his fellows, spent in vain upon that good
Church, which now was so miserably sacked, he fell first to be a little crased,
and afterward being not able to abide the exceeding heat of the Sun, which
made his prison like a hothouse unto him, was feign to strip himself into his
bare shirt, and so to continue both day and night. By occasion whereof he fell
sick of the bloody ^lixe, and within 15. days after dyed, amids the filth and
soil of the prison, rendering up his sweet soul to Christ, for the promoting
of whose glory he had oftentimes before adventured it most manfully. And in
this time of his sickness, as well as at the hour of his death, there was
present with him a certain young man, a Monk of Saint Isidors cloister,
virtuous and well disposed, who also was prisoner there for religion at the
same time, and put in the same prison with him to keep him company. This
Monks name was Ferdinando. Perhaps in the eyes of foolish worldlings this
Constantino seemed to dye, but in very deed he rests in peace. As for the
cruel tortures, which other have accustomably been tormented withal, the
truth is, he never tasted any, not for any regard that these cruel Termagants
had of such a man as he was (whose displeasure he had earnestly procured
against him by his sharp and quick answers while he was prisoner) but
either, for that they determined to delay his punishment, meaning to detain
him, in prison a longer space, to the intent to discourage him, and to keep
other that favored his doctrine any way, or were entered in that religion, in
continual awe: or else, because they thought not that he should have been
taken forth of their hands so suddenly. Whereupon, the Inquisitours bruted a
rumor abroad to the same end and purpose, to daunt such as had been his
scholars, that they might come trembling into the Court, and accuse themselves
before they were sent for, upon hope of the Inquisitours mercy: causing it to
be noised, that he in his life being upon the rack, had confessed unto them of
diverse that were his auditors and scholars. To the which end and purpose,
diverse of the next prison adioining to his, were suborned to affirm that they
heard the cries and shrikes which he made at the time of his tormenting.
Therefore now after his death, seeing him to be taken out of their hands by
Gods good means, so that now they had him no more alive among them to extend
their cruelty upon, they determined notwithstanding to work him such poor
spite as they could, in derogating from the good estimation and report which
he had of all men, spreading false and slanderous tales upon him, that he
should strike himself in a vein with a piece of a broken glass, ^o avoid
both shame and pain. There were also sung openly in the streets over all the
City diverse filthy and slanderous dities sung by boys in his dispraise: but
whether they were published by procurement of the Inquisitours, or some of
their Parasites, or of mere malice devised and set out by the foolish and
variable people, God knows, but the other is the more likely. Also against
the day of their solemn Triumph, his corpse was taken out of the grave, and in
place thereof, a puppet of straw put, and afterward set up in a pulpit so
artificially, resting the one hand upon the pulpit, and holding the other
upright, that it resembled Constantino very lively, in such sort as he was wont
to preach. And no doubt but that dumb Image did preach as effectually in many
men's hearts at that instant as ever he himself had done being alive, in
derisio^ of whom this puppit was made. Then, at what time that sentence was to
be given upon him (to the hearing whereof, diverse came from places far
distant from Civil) the Inquisitours commanded that it should not be
pronounced out of the pulpit where other judgments were accustomably read, but
caused the Image to be brought into their holy Court, and there to have
sentence published: which place was so high, that the the people could not well
understand what was read. Whereupon Calderonio the temporal Judge thinking it
not convenient, and that some other subtlety was meant thereby, moved the
Inquisitours in open audience, that judgment might be given in the accustomed
place, or else read in such sort that the people might understand upon what
occasions they had condemned him. Whereunto when the Inquisitors gave no great
ear, but proceeded as before, there began to be a great tumultamong the
people, forasmuch as they could not well brook that injury, nor indeed would
have put it up as it seemed, but that they saw Calderonio somewhat more quick
with the Inquisitours, and to tell them their duties once again: so that they
commanded the Image to be carried into the accustomed place, and sentence to be
pronounced aloud, to satisfy the people withal. The reading whereof, occupied
about an hour and an half: and the chief matter contained therein, was that
which I have receited before out of Constantino's book. Marry, the
Inquisitours added moreover, that of purpose and upon good consideration they
had omitted many things that were so horrible, so wicked, and so strange, that
it was sore against God commandment to utter them in common audience. There
be diverse of this man's works extant that have passed the print. First a brief
sum of Christian religion. Also one other discourse in the same argument more
at large, but somewhat imperfect, or rather scarcely half finished: for he
purposed to have comprehended the whole body of Christian religion, in two
tomes. In the former he treated of faith: In the other he thought to have
handled the Sacraments, and to have spoken of works, and generally of the
duty of a Christian man. As for the former part, it was already published
some years agone: whereby he procured to himself some displeasure and
suspicion of heresy among the common sort of learned men, forasmuch as
entreating of faith he did not plainly inueigh against the Lutherans, nor
attributed any preeminence to the Bish. of Rome, but had written rather in
derogation of pardons, of purgatory, of men's merits, and such other like
trifles, then in advancement thereof: upon the which suspicions being examined,
he would answer them, that such matters as they wanted in his works were more
pertinent to his second tome, wherein he purposed to discourse of them somewhat
largely. Howbeit this other volume never came to light, except perhaps it were
that which was hidden in the widows house, and came to the Inquisitors hands,
the special points whereof they published, as I have before declared.
Moreover, he set forth a Catechism, which perhaps in other places elsewhere of
more freedom and liberty was not greatly accounted of, but yet in these
places of darkness and ignorance, and under such tyranny, it gave much light
to many. There be also extant six sermons of this good man's, which he made upon
six of the first verses of the first Psalm. Wherein the learned may see, as
well the profound learning that was in him, as also his singular art for
conueiance. But of all his works, which surely were as learnedly written and
as godly as any that ever were read in Spain, the confession of a sinner, not
passing two or three sheets long, exceeded all the rest, both for the zeal,
learning, and eloquence uttered therein, most lively expressing the affections
of a Christian man, incident to such an argument. First he brings in a man
before the judgment seat of God, making him to see, and lively ^o lament his
own filthiness and abomination, to cast off all whatsoever these pharisees
flattering themselves with their own righteousness were wont to cover our
nakedness withal, being either devised or established by man, and therein he
peruseth all the ten Commandments orderly, confessing him guilty of the
breach thereof, and therewithal makes so plain and absolute an exposition of
the whole law, in that short summarie, that in such a breuiat (be it spoken
without offense to any) I have not hitherto seen any so lightsome. In the end
he clotheth them with the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness by faith,
wherewith alonely he encourages and emboldneth man before the face of God, as
much as he discomforted him before when as he brought him to the perfect
knowledge of himself, and the consideration of his own case and estate.
Finally, there is no one lot that concerns christian religion, but he has
touched it, referring it to some purpose in that brief table: nor any
affection that can be in a man, from the very first letter of the law til the
last end of the Gospel, and the fruition of the heavenly habitation, but he
has most lively expressed it. Neither had he been ever able to devise such a
piece of work, notwithstanding his passing gifts of nature and helps of art,
except he had first learned them by often experience in himself. All the which
books of his writing, worthy (no doubt) to be reserved for ever, albeit the
Inquisitours had a little before unawares allowed, yet at this time they
condemned them: not for any thing found in them worthy of condemnation (as they
themselves testified in their sentence upon him) but because there should be
nothing extant that might remain as a monument or a memorial sounding any
ways to the commendation of him whom they had holden accursed. Lastly, they
showed their poor spite upon that good man's dry bones, which they dug out
of the earth, and upon that counterfeit Image made to his likeness. Howbeit he
himself being exalted above the clouds, and taken out of their chains, and
delivered from their unjust judgments (besides the loss of these notable and
worthy monuments mentioned before) has caused a great number of his familiar
friends and acquaintance comfortless to sit, lamenting and bewayling the miss
of such a man. O detestable tyranny that deseruest a thousand curses, seeing
thou can not restore them again, what amends will thou be able to make to
the world for the death of so many godly men as thou have most shamefully
slain and murdered?

FINIS.

