HOW SVPERIOR POWERS OGHT TO BE OBEYED OF THEIR subjects: and Wherein they may
lawfully by Gods Word be disobeyed and resisted. Wherein also is declared the
cause of all this present misery in England, and the only way to remedy the
same.

BY CHRISTOPHER GOODMAN.

The Lord has brought upon them a nation from a far country, an impudent
nation and of a strange langage.

Baruch 4. Deuteronomy. 28. Printed at Geneua by John Crispin. M.D.LVIII.

WILLIAM VVHITINGHAM TO ALL THEM that love to Know the truth and Follow it:
Grace and peace.
IGnorance the mother of error and professed ennemie to Gods Truth, has two
daughters by whose flatteries and subtle practices she blyndeth men's eyes,
obscureth the Truth, and withdraws us from the way of knollage: Custom, and
Negligence. Whereof the first so bewitcheth us, that although we wallowe and
walter in darcke blyndenes, yet as it were by dreaming we seem to walk in the
bright sun shyning: so that Custom and compagnie may far sooner draw us to
perdition, then Truth and reason bring us to the understanding of our error.
The other being a domestical seruante and well acquaynted with our manners, by
crafty flattery does overcome us. For the flesh is proud and swells
against God, she glories in her own wisdom, she loves her own consel, she
deliteth in her own imagination and policy: and albeit we know that slothful
Negligence is an impediment and block in our nature to stop us from Truth:
yet willingly we give place to her flattering persuasions, and suffer her to
train us to wilful destruction. So that betwixt Custom and Negligence we
rather hold with damnable Ignorance, and wisshe to be plonged in abominable
errors, then by diligent study and serching of the Truth learn to know our
duty to God, and what he requires of us to do toward our neighbor. Then
if we would avoid these evils, we must love and embrace the contrary virtues:
and if Custom be wicked and withholde us from God, we must spedely reject her
and cleave unto God: and if Negligence have noseled us in the den of
Ignorance, we must purchase by diligence to proffit in the schole of knollage.
For the acheuing whereof (when M. Christopher Goodman one of our ministers,
according to the course of the text, expounded both faithfully and co^fortably
this place of the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 4. d.
Judge whether it be just before God to obey you rather then God) certain
learned and godly men most instantly, and at sundry times required hi^ to
dilate more at large that his Sermon, and to suffer it to be printed, that not
only we here present, but our brethren in England and other places might be
persuaded in the truth of that doctrine concerning obedience to the
magistrate, and so glorify God with us. Which request he admitted not easily,
til at length well wayinge how many perished in their ignorance for lack of
means to attain to the knollage of the truth: and also conferringe his
articles and chief propositions with the best learned in these parts (who
approved them) he consented to enlarge the said Sermon and so to print it, as a
token of his duty and good affection toward the Church of God: and then if
it were thought good to the judgment of the godly, to translate the same into
other la^gages that the proffit there of might be more universal. There is no
doubt but many overcome with old Custom, or yelding to negligent Slothfulnes
will either dispraise this proffitable work, or neglect it. For euel Custom
deliting in Ignorance will straight way fly to her wonted argument: What is
this new doctrine? Mar. 1 c. Act. 17. c
and whence is it? Negligence on the other part cries maliciously: We have
books enough: what need we yet to be set to schole? Thus Satan with double
subteltie deludeth the world, keeping his ever so fast tied in the bands of
blind Ignorance, that they can nether stir hand nor foot: they are blind
and can not se what is good: and though it be offered, yet are they insensible
and can not feel it. The truth of Gods word is to them most odious: but man's
dreams and devils doctrines are in great estimation and reverence. Their
false prophets and papistical priests have so charmed them, that Ignorance is
holden for knollage, error for truth, superstition for religion, disobedience
for obedience, the Mass for the Lords Supper, Purgatory for Christ's blood,
works for faith, Belial for God, and as S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 11. d
If they bring you into slavery, ye endure it: if they devour you, ye suffer
it: if they spoil you of your goods, ye are content: if they prefer them
selves and thrust you down, ye forbear it: if they smite you on the face, yet
ye can sustain it. And thus the children of Satan had rather rot in their
barbarous ignorance, then by submitting the^ selves to the mercies of God,
aspire to the perfect understanding of his heavenly will reueiled unto us by
his word. But thou the son of God, show thy duty and love toward thy
merciful Father, endeavor to know his will, declare thy affection toward his
Scriptures, be zealous of his glory, reverence his ministers, and receive
thankfully his graces given to his Church by them. Prove diligently and try
by the touchstone who speak the words of God in pure simplicity as in Gods
presence, 2. Cor. 2. d.
and who cehoppe and change the same, making merchandise thereof to traffic
according to man's pleasure. Nether do we desire only that you should be
persuaded in this truth because we our selves so believe: but we exhort you,
Job. 4. f.
that as the Samarita^s did not only believe in our Savior Christ because of
the womans report which brought the news, but forasmuch as they them selves
heard him, and knew that Christ was the Savior of the world: so when you
shall well examine these things by the rule of Gods word, you would not so much
by our report as by your own judgment and knowlage credit the truth.
Remembering that the worthy people of Beroe were co^me^ded by the holy Ghost,
Act. 17. c.
because they tried by Gods word whether the ministers preachi^g agreed with
the same or no. Seeing then by these examples we are bond to seek the will of
God manifested unto us in his Scriptures, what excuse shall we allege for our
pretensed ignorance? Behold here* thou hear the Eternal speaking by his
minister, in whose mouth he has put his word, and whose lips must keep the
Law and the understanding thereof, as writes the Prophet Malachie. Chap. 2. a
Beware therefore that thou neglect not him that bri^geth the word of God, but
quickly give ear and obey. For if thou desire to know thy duty to thy
Prince, and his charge likewise over thee, read this book and thou shall well
understand both: If thou wish for Christian liberty, come and se how it may
easily be had: If thou would love God above man, here thou shall know how to
obey God rather then man. Let the Apostles of Christ here be thy schole
masters, and then the more thou learnest: the less occasion shall thou have
to repent. Obedience is necessary where God is glorified, but if God be
dishonored thy obedience is abominable in the sight of God, be it never so
beautiful in man's eyes. Gods word is our guide to lead us in our doings: when
it commands us to obey God, we must disobey man in the contrary: for no man
can serve two masters: and when our heavenly master commands obedience to
man, it is ever to be understand, in the Lord. So that obedience to Gods Laws
by dissobeyi^g ma^s wicked laws is much commendable, but to disobey God for
any duty to man is all to gether damnable: as in the discourse of this book
thou shall fully be asseured, if God open thyn eyes to se the truth, and move
thy heart to embrace it. The Spirit of God, which is the scholemaistre to lead
us into all truth, lighten your hearts, give you minds to understand, and
courage to execute his holy will, to the setting forth of Christ's kingdom, the
proffit of his Church and confusion of Satan's power and Antichrists. Amen.
From Geneua this first of January. 1558.

THE PREFACE.
AS there is nothi^ge to be compared to true obedience, in preserui^ge the
commonwealth of towns, cities, and kingdoms: or in maynteyninge true religion,
True obedience renders to God due honor and also to man as his office
requires. what great danger it is, not to put difference between obedience
and disobedience.
Christian peace and co^corde (for thereby every man is instructed how to render
unto God his due honor and glory: and to man that, which his office
requires) Eue^ so is there nothing more hateful to God, nether more hurtefull
to man, then so to be bewitched with Satan's false illusions, that they are not
able to put difference betwyxte obedience and disobedience: but as men without
all judgment and natural sense, take the one for the other, being in them selves
plain contrary, which is the only cause of all disorder and lamentable
confusion, where with the whole world is both this day, and has been also
from the beginning, most miserably defaced and oppressed. For when vile man,
replenished with pride, vain glory, and gross ignorance, will measure
obedience with the crowked line of his own corrupt judgment, and not with
the infallible truth of Gods holy word, he must needs prefer his own
decrees, fantasies, and ordinances, to the comfortable Laws and lively
precepts of God his creator. Then in place of justice, he receaueth injustice,
for right wrong, for virtue vice, for law will, for love hatred, for truth
falshod, for plain dealing dissimulation, what plags come for disobedience.
for religion superstition, for true worship detestable idolatry: and to be
short, for God Satan, for Christ Antichrist, and with him such plages of
God, and disorder among me^, as are this day set before our eyes to behold
in all places throughout the universal world, and have been likewise even from
the beginning. When Adam was placed in paradise, Genesis 3.
being a creature most perfect, and abundinge in all wisdom and heavenly
knowledge, and would at the persuasion of his wif measure obedience rather by
his own reason, Adam disobeied God and was greuouslie punished.
then by the word and sentence of God before pronounced: behold, he was not
only spoiled of wisdom and knowledge, becomminge a very fool, in
comparison of that, which he was before: but also sodaynlie destitute of all
other singular gifts, as of innocence, and immortality, was confounded at
the voice of the Lord, asshamed at his own nakedness, and felt the dreadful
indignation and curse of God, which he had procured, not only to him self,
but brought the same also upon all his posterity after him. All ma^kinde was
justly punished for Adams disobedience
When the whole world was so corrupted in their own ways in the days of
faithful Noha, no regard was at all to the obedience of the living Lord,
nor yet to the godly admonitions of just Noha: Genesis 6.
but every man was so drowned in his own lusts, The world plaged in Nohas
days for disobedience
that the space of an hundredth and twenty years was not sufficient to move
them to repentance. And therefore could they not escape the strange and horrible
judgment of God, which immediately after followed most justly. And although
in that wicked generation abonded all kind of wickedness, as well against God
as man, in so much as the earth then might be compted a very hell, yet from
whence proceaded all this rebellion against Gods mighty majesty, but only
for that they measured all things after their own corrupt reason, The cause
of all disobedience is, not to measure our doings by Godds word. Romans 2.
and not by his holy Laws and precepts? Which they had now received of
their forefathers, heard of Noah, yea, and had them ingrafted naturally in
their hearts. The probation whereof might easily be deduced from all ages even
to our time by innumerable and evident examples, if it were needful in so
plain a matter. For who is so blind that may not se how man shows his
rebellion, We must not measure our obedience after our oune phantesies.
never so much, as when he would be most obedient in his own sight and
judgment? not measuringe the same by the streght line and true touchestone,
which is the Law and word of God, but suffringe him self to be led by his
own corrupt judgment and affections.

This turned the Wisdom of the Gentiles into mere folishnesse, inue^tinge
shameful idolatrye for true worshipp, Romans 1.
as witnessethe the Apostle.

Mat. 15.
This blinded the Ieues with hypocrisy and cloked holiness, making the Law
of the living Lord to give place to their invented traditions by man.
Disobedience is the puddle of all herisies and error.
Out of this stinkinge puddle of man's brain have issued forth so great
diversity of opinions and dangerous herisies, wherewith the Church of God
has be^ at all times horriblye tormented. Finally from hence has
Antichriste filled his pestilente cupp of all sorts of deadly poison, Apo.
17. Antichriste is the plage of God for ma^s disobedience.
where of he has made the whole earth almost, and her kings and Princes,
not only to drink: but to be most vilelie overcome and dronken. In whose
defense they have armed them selves against the Lord and Christ his Son:
Psalm. 2.
who^ notwithstanding with impudent mouths they profess, where as in very
deed they persecute him most cruelly in his Saints by all means possible,
The tyra^ts are Antichrists tormentours and persecute Christ
fightinge, as men in a rage, under the banner of that filthy beast. And yet
these men in the middle of their fury, without all obedience and order,
subuertinge the Laws of God and of nature, will be called notwithstanding the
defenders of the faith, mayntayners of true religion, autours of peace,
teachers of obedience, and most discrete governors of commonweals and
policies. To the intent therefore that these disguised persons (which abuse
the whole world) may appear in their own lively shape, and be known as they
are in deed, I have thought it good, Thoccasion wherefore this treatise was
writ, and what proffit we may gather thereof.
having occasion by this worthy answer of Peter and John, and being hereto
of diverse godly persons provoked, somewhat to write of true obedience: to wit,
what God him self requiereth of us, and what he commandethe to be given also to
men. Whereby (God willinge) the disguised clokes, and crafty pretenses of
obedience, used and practiced by the ungodly worldlings, shall be discovered:
who have soght always, and yet do seek under the pleasant name of obedience,
only to maintain their ambition, pride and liberty: whereby we shall learn
also how in times past we have been shamfullie abused in yelding to the
wilful will of man, in obeying his ungodly commandments, and fearinge man
more then God: and finally how it behooves us to repent our former
ignorance, and with diligence to redress the same, having more light and
fuller knowledge.

PETER AND JOHN ANSWERED UNTO the^, and said: Whether it be right in the sight
of God to obey you rather the^ God, judge you. Act. 4.
CHAP. I.
To whom this answer was given, and upon what occasion, how little the malice
of the Iues prevailed against the Apostles, in sekinge to stopp the Gospel by
their crafty fetches and chastisynges.

TO the end we may have more sensible fealinge of all these things, The
circumstance of the answer wayed.
let us diligently consider this answer of S. Peter and John: as well to who^
it was made, as upon what occasion. After that these ii Apostles, through the
malice of the Priests, the Gouernoure of the Temple and the Sadduces, Act. 4.
were violently thrown into prison the night before, for preaching to the
people at Jerusalem in the porche of Solomon, the resurrection from death in
the Name of Jesus: and the next day folowi^ge were set forth, and presented
to the whole Senate and Concile of Jerusalem, where was assembled all the chief
Rulers and Elders of the people of Israel, Annas also the hie Priest, and
Caiaphas, and John, and Alexandre, men of great reputation, with others of the
kindred of the high Bisshopp, to be examined of the^, in whose name or power
they had cured the lame criple (who being above 40 years old, and lame from
his birthe was daily brought to the porche of Salomo^ to beg his alms) Peter
replenisshed with the holy Spirit, a^swered with great boldness, that they
wroght that miracle in the Name and power of Jesus Christ the true Nazarit,
Whom the Ieues had crucified, and God had raised from the death: in so much
as the mouths of the whole Concile were stopped and had nothing to say
against them, but as men astunnisshed wondered at the constant boldness of
Peter and John in their answer. Then (says S. Luke) did the whole Concile,
that is, all these forenamed Magistrates by common consent straytelie charge
the Apostels Peter and John, The magistrates co^mande the Apostles not to preach
Christ.
hereafter not so much as once to speak to any man, much less to preach
in the Name of Jesus: thinking by this means to stop the course of the
Gospel, and hinder the glory of Christ, who^ they before had crucified as a
malefactor and blasphemer of Gods Name. And althoghe they were destitute of all
reason and Scripture to answer the Apostels, who had all ready confounded the:
yet through authority and ponishme^te, which they threatened, they thought
craftelie to put the Apostles to silence, and so at length to obtain the
victory. As we see this day the Papists their successors, express enemies
of the Gospel, The papists succead the Jews in malice and persecution.
and sworn soldiars of Antichriste, every where practice, who being overcome
with the manifest Scriptures, and their blasphemous mouths stopped with the
truth of Gods word, fight notwithstanding maliciously against Christ with
power, authority, threatnyngs, Papists are the generation of Vipers. John. 8.
horrible ponishmentes, and cruel murder, resemblinge that old serpent, whose
broude they are, which was a murderer from the begyninge.

But when the whole assembly had craftelie co^sulted, and wrought all that they
could against the faithful servants of God: The Gospel increases when it
is persecuted.
they were never the less disapoynted of their porpose. For the glory of
Christ more brightelie shyned, and the truth of his Gospel was better known
and farther published, and their falshod and raginge madness more espied, and
abhorred of the godly. For what extreme madness was this to set them selves
against God, so to trust in their own power as though they were able to
resyste and overcome the power of the all mighty, Romans 1.
which is the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ (as witness the the
Apostle) To think that the threatenings of me^, should more prevail with the
Apostels of Christ, then the threatenings of God and his horrible judgments
appointed for the disobedient? We must rather fear Gods judgments then man's
threatnyngs.
Could not the Jews distroye Christ and his doctrine, whiles he was mortal
and lived amongst them in the flesh, to whom they did almost what they list,
an yet would after think to bring it to pass, when he was risen again by
his mighty power, and made immortal? If they could not keape him in the
grave for all their diligent watch, when he was dead and buried: think they it
possible to pluke him down from heaven, from the righthande of his father,
where he fitteth and reigns in euerlasti^ge glory? Oh vain and foolish
men: he has overcome al ready the whole world, and cast forth of it the
Chief Prince and Ruler Satan, who is no more able to prevail against his
truth and servants. Christ and his word are inuinsible.
Are you more subtle or stronger then Satan, who is your lord and master so
long as you fight against Christ the Son of God? Could not so mighty a
Prince with stand his power, and you lewd souldiars of his, will think to
obtain the victory? Death, which no man can escape, could not hold him,
neither the power of hell praeuayle against him: and yet would you have him at
your commandment, most maliciously and traitrouslie sighfightinge against
his ho^nor, who soght by all means, and yet does, to do you good and save you?
But o miserable and vile wretches, double is your condemnation in the sight of
God, which not contented to forsake Christ your selves, do so maliciously with
your threatenings labor to frustrate others of his most confortable graces.
Mat. 23.
Full well does our Savior Christ paynt forth your raginge envy, sainge, Woe be
to you Scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites, because you shutt the kingdom of
heaven before men, not entering your selves, neither will you suffer such as
come, to enter.

CHAP. II.
How the papisticall Church and Conciles can not but err, and how they being
compared to the Jews, are no less deniers and blasphemers of Christ* then the
Jews.

Great occasions of repentance offered to the Jews.
I will not here rehearse what just occasion of repentance was offered to this
whole assembly of the Jews (if their hearts had not been hardened) as well by
the plain and sensible doctrine taught by the Apostels, which they could not
improve with all their learning: An horrible falling away from God.
as by the mighty powere of God declared in so many and wonderful miracles
wroght by them in the name of Christ to confirm his Gospel and resurrection,
which the Jews notwithstanding stubbernly did reiecte: Nether yet will I
speak of the strange defection and notable falling away from God amongst
them in Jerusalem, Romans 3. and 9. The Ieweshe church errethe.
which at that time (in the judgment of man) appeared to be the only
Church of God, to whom appartayned the promises, who of al other nations had
the Law, and Prophets to instruct them, who only professed the true and
euerliuinge God: and yet amongst them all that were assembled, was not so
much as one man to stand upon Christ's part with the Apostels, but consented
and agreed with one accord, that in the Name of Christ they should preach no
more to the people. Only this I would put you in remembrance of, before we
proceade any further, how vain and uncertain the doctrine of the blasphemous
Papists is, which is grounded upon no other foundation, The papists church
erreth.
then upon the authority of their Church, their Councils, and decrees of men.
And here in dare I make the papists them selves judges, The Jew ishe chmrche
was first.
whither their Church be of more authority or antiquite, then was the Church
of the Jews which was the first of all, and auctorised by God immediately: Or
whither their Concils at the appointment of the Romish Antichriste, were more
orderly called and assembled, then was this Council holden at Jerusalem by the
appoyntme^t of the Chief priest and Bishopp? As for their Church, the Jews
had the manifest word and promise of God^ yea, there was no other Church,
then visible upon the earth, besides that which the Apostels then began to
build upon the true conerstone Jesus Christ: where as the papists have not
so much as one word or promise to prove that they are (as they impudentlie
brag) the Church of God, but many rather most playnlie prouinge them to be
the very Synagoge of Satan, and lively members of Antichriste. If then this,
which seemed the true Church of God, and auctorised by him, so shamefullie
erred: marvel it is that the papisticall Synagoge and members of Satan should be
found establishers of the verity, which always since they have been raised
up from hell, have soght nothing but the utter subversion thereof? Nether can
they defend them selves by any authority to assemble, or by any learning,
or outward show of holiness: The locusts which came out of the botto^les pit.
sei^g in none of these points they may be compared to this assemble, where of
S. Luke makes mention. For here was the high Priest Annas, here was
Caiaphas, here were the temporal Magistrates, the gouuerners of the Temple, the
Seniors of Jerusalem, the learned Scribes, and Pharisees. And what could any
man wish fore in the judgment of man, that there was not, to make a lawful
Council? And yet thou see the counclusion was against the Lord and his
anointed Son. Will thou then hope for any better at the papists assembles
and Concils, who in persecuting Christ continually, and his holy word,
show them selves open enemies to both? Do thou here behold the Jews,
which professed the true living God, without all apishe maumetrie and Idols,
forbidden in their Law: nevertheless malitiouslie to consulte against their
true Messiah: and will not yet cease to credit the papists, sayng, That their
Churches and Concils can not err, The papists are more wicked then Jews.
where as they dishonor the living Lord, having their Temples replenished
with all kind of idolatry: yea, when their own consciences do condemn them,
that there was never the like impiety committed in all Israel, as their
filthy Concils have taught and commended? But thou will say perchance, that
there is no comparison betwixt the Jews, playnelie denying Christ, The
papists deny Christ, as well as the Jews do.
and the papists which do confess him: and thereupon wilt conclude, that the
papistical Concils may not so easily err, as those which were holde^ of the
Jews at Jerusalem, against the Apostels and their doctrine. As concerning
their Concils, I may not answer now: for that were an infinite work to
repeat all their absurdities. If any man would but once read them over, he
should need no other persuasion to abhor them, and to confess this my saying
most true in all the Concils holden by the Romish Antichriste. The papists
are more blasphemous then the Jews.
But to compare them with the Jews in denying of Christ, thou shall prove
them more blasphemous. For the Jews after a sort did confess their Christ
and Messiah in waiting for him daily to deliver them, and save them from the
misery wherein they were, and now are, and from al their enemies according as
God promised: but when they would not acknolledge him, whom their fathers did
persecute and crucify, and whom the Apostels taught to be risen and ascended,
they playnlie denied Christ. They believed that he should be their Captain and
delyuerer, but after an other sort, then by his death and passion: and to an
other end, then to suffer in this world the shame of the Cross.

Euenso do the papists confess Christ, but in effect with the Jews deny
him. The papists confess Christ, but in effect deny him.
They confess Christ which is come in the flesh, borne of the virgin Marie,
crucified for the sins of the world, etc. Which all hitherunto is well, and
agreethe with us. But for as much as they are not with him contented, but will
have an other Christ besides him: 1. Tim. 2
they are manifest deniers of Christ. For (as writethe the Apostel) There is
but one God, one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Jesus Christ, which
gave him self to be the redemption for all. Now when the papists believe not
only in this Christ and Savior, The papists confess Christ to be here in
the world in the form of brad a dead God not able to do any thing.
which came in the flesh, and was borne of the virgin, but also in that
Christ, whom they imagine to come, and to be in the world in the form of
bread, and borne about with the hands of man, not able to go him self: when
they believe not only upon Christ crucified, and hanged upon the Cross, but
in the coniured Idol, hanging by a cord over the alter: not only in Christ
glorified upon the right hand of the father, who liuethe and reignethe for
ever, but in their rownde cake, which (they say) is consecrated, when with out
sense and feeling it lies closed in their box, The boxy mowly, wormy, musty
rotten and corrupted Christ.
subject to mowleinge, worms, and corruption, reserved and kept to be
worshipped as their God, but to their condemnation for ever. More over when
they have other advocates then Christ, other sacrifices for sin, other
merits and means of salvation: it helpethe them no more to prove that they are
Christians, thus impudentlie denying him and his office, then it helps the
Jews, in saying they believe in the true Messiah to come, which is all ready
come, The papists under the name of Christians work treason against Christ.
and reveled to the world. Ye so much the more is their condemnation, for that
under the Name of Christ, whom they dare not deny, they work preuie treason
against him, to subuerte the truethe of his Gospel, and whole fruit of his
death and passion: which is our redemption from death, and hope of everlasting
life, purchased by that perfect oblation, which was offered once for all, Hebr.
10.1. Ioh. 2.
as a sufficient sacrifice for the sins of the the whole world.

CHAP. III.
What inconvenience had comme^ to the Church of God, if the Apostels had
ob^yed the commandment of the Council, and what evils have commen lately upon
England through the preaching of unlawful obedience and yelding to ungodly
Rulers.

LEt us leave the ungodly papists with their wicked decrees and Concils, The
infinite slaughter of martyrs in England.
as me^ that pass the Jews in all manner of wilful stubbernesse and cruel
persecution of the truth, as the horrible slaghter of thousands of martyrs,
which with in these few years in England alone do witness: and return to the
Apostels, Peter and John, to examine what answer they framed to these men of
authority, and Rulers, gathered to gether of all sorts, as you have hard, as
well of the Clergy as of the Laity, of such as the^ had the only
government of Jerusalem under the Romans, to whom they were then tributaries,
which charge and threatening of the whole Council, done with so great aduisement
and consultation, oght not lightly to be esteemed, especially, of the
servants of God, We must not yield in Gods cause, when man threatens.
and their subjects, as the Apostels then were. They were charged and threatened
to preach no more in the Name of Christ crucified. An heavy commandment
doutlesse to Peter and John, especially if it might have taken place: seeing it
was all together contrary to their vocation and charge given unto them by
their master Christ, to preach his Gospel throughout all the world, Luke
24. act. 1.
and to begin at Jerusalem, for which cause they were called and chosen from
amongst all others, and had been of long time instructed of their master
Christ in the knowledge of all his holy Scriptures, and replenished with
wonderful gifts of the holy Ghost, to cure all deseases, to cast out devils,
to drink poison, to tread upon serpents, and to distribute the holy Spirit,
and all those to be as it were seals and co^firmatio^s of their doctrine,
which all had been to no porpose, if this commandment and threatninge of the
Magistrates should have been obeyed, Relenting of the ministers most dangerous.
and the Apostels yielded to their authority. Then the foundation of the
Church should have been shaken, and the whole assemble discouraged: for the two
Chief Captayns gyuinge over, who durst have presumed further?

And truly, if the Apostels at that time had been no further instructed, then
the most part of men are in these our days, and especially have been, and
yet be in our miserable country of England: they would have been in great
perplexity, and sore afraid to have made this, or the like answer sayng: we
may safely follow the example of the Apostels aproued by the holy Ghost.
Judge you whither it be lawful before God to obey you, rather then God. For
the most part of men, yea and of those which have been both learned and
godly, and have given worthy testymonie of their profession to the glory of
God: have thought and taught (by the permission of God for our sins) that it
was not lawful in any case to resist and disobeye the superior powers: A
dangerous doctrine.
but rather to lay down their heads, and submit them selves to all kinds
of punishments and tyranny, thinkinge them selves sufficiently discharged
before God of their vocation and duty, having only the commandment of the
superior power to the contrary, were it never so ungodly and clea^e against
all natural reason: 1. Cor. 3 Man can not dispe^ce with that which God
commands.
whereby many having commandment to preach no more Jesus christ to the
people, without any trouble of conscience have keapt silence, and thought the^
selves sufficiently discharged: nether considering that they were made
stewards of Gods holy mysteries, and that not at the appointment of man, or
for them selves, but by the ordinance of our Savior Christ Jesus, and to be
faithful distributers to others. Nether yet markinge this present answer of
Peter and John, whom they might safely have followed with better assurance: who
in such case, False brethern which betray God and his truth in yelding to the
papists.
have left this lesson for all men, rather to obaye God then man. Others,
hearing the Name of God blasphemed by the false doctrine of the wicked and
shaueling priests, durst not once open their mouths to speak one word in
their masters behalff and his infallible truethe: but stopped their mouths as
do^me dogs, and durst not bark against the raueni^ge wolff when they knew
and saw him coming. Many not minding to obiecte them selves to any danger,
regardinge more their own safety, then the preservation of their flock, No
minister oght to fly and forsake his flock, except he be persecuted only,
and not his flock.
would not abide the wild beast coming, but most shamefullie fled before
the danger came, showing them selves plain hirelings, and no true pastores:
leauinge the selie sheep of God to be devoured, and that because they had
entered in to the fold before to feed of the flock, to eat the flesh, and
devour the people of God as bread, Psalm. 14.
rather then to do their duties.

They which please man rather then obey God.
But all these and such like are here condemned and convicted of euel, which
fearing man more then God, gave ear and obedience to man, rather then to God.
Whereof, besides the just shame that came upon them selves, and the displeasure
of God powered generally upon all (for as much as we all were betrayers of our
master, thoghe not all a like) just occasion of offense and of like
disobedience to God, was ministered to all sorts of men, of what vocation so
ever they were. we must obey the preachers only when they bring Gods word.
For when they saw the teachers and leaders of others to set up obedience of
man rather then of God, and the same confirmed by their own example: those
which knew no other, thought it their part to do the like also in their
vocation and office. And such as were plain enemies to God, The papists
laughe in their sleues, when they see their wicked proceadinges promoted by
unlawful obedience.
the wicked papists or dissolute persons, laughed in their sleues: seeing both
them and their wicked proceadings thereby promoted and furthered. Where as to
defend their kingdom of darckenes, ambition and idle belies, there is no king
so godly, no country so peaceable, nor no kingdom so strong, which through
their deuilishe entreprises and wicked persuasions, they have not studied
utterly to subvert and destroy. As the example of that desperate Moncke, A moncke
who to poison king John, wittingly and willingly poisoned him self. O
malicious devil. Likewise the oration of that most traitorous and pestilent
Cardinal Pole, Cardinal Pole.
does yet witenes to all the papists shame and confusion: wherein he goes about
to persuade the wicked Emperor rather to turn his power and army against
King Henry the eight and England, this dogs own country, the^ against the
infidels, Turckes, and Sarracenes: blasphemouslie termi^g the word of God and
Gospel of salvation to be the Turckesh sede. O impudent mouth: o blasphemous
beast, which say in thy heart, There is no God. And yet to all your shame and
utter destruction of your co^trie, you have received him as a God, whom before
in your lawful kings days, you most justly condemned as a traitor and very
son of Antichrist. The Counselors, whose office is to bridle the affections
of their Princes and Gouuernours, in geui^g such counsele as might promote the
glory of God, and the welthe of their co^trie by this persuasion of obedience,
have hitherto sought, and yet apearinglie do, how to acco^plishe and satisfy
the ungodly lusts of their ungodly and unlawful Gouernesse, wicked Iesabel:
who for our sins, contrary to nature and the manyfeste word of God, is
suffered to reign over us in Gods fury, and have thereby most wickedlie
betrayed Christ, their country, and the^ selves (so much as lies in the^)
to become slaves to a strange and foren nation, the proud Spaniards. The
Nobles also, which (thoghe unworthily will be so called) hearing no other
preaching, To obey is good, but whom, wherein, and how far, ought to be
considered
but that they must obey their Prince, neither knowing who^, wherein, nor how
far, have in like manner, as men disguised upon a stage, turned their nobilite
to open shame amongst all nations, which now behold their folly, and wonder
there at: saying they are made instruments of impiety, and destroyers of their
native country, which first were ordained in Realms to stand in defense of
true religion, laws, and wealth of their nation, and to be a shylde (to their
power) against their enemies in time of war, and a brydel at home to their
Princes in time of peace: neither to suffer them in this sort to rage against
God, and utterly to conteme the wholesome laws of the Realm, to satisfy their
filthy lust and vain glory, nor so cruelie to murder, and against nature
to devour the people of God, their subjects, whom they are charged by their
office to succoure and defend, and have therefore a fearful count to make for
donige the contrary.

The justices and other under officers.
The Justices likewise in Towns and Cities, as Maieres, Shryffs, Baylyfes,
Constables, Iealers and all such inferior officers, following the same exsample
of unlawful obedience, whose office and charge it is to minister justice
whithout respect of persons, Officers and Judges degenerat.
to defend the simple and innocent, and to punish all transgressors and
malefactors, blasphemours of Gods holy Name, violent oppressers of
innocents, as be the bloudthurstie papists: are now become ministers of
injustice, and tyranny, made tormentours of their own natural Country men,
most blouddie butchers of their brethren, and merciless murderers of the
children of God: and that in such cruel sort, as never was heard of before
since the death of Christ, where any profession of his Name has been. In
so much that they are made a spectacle and gasinge-stock to all countries and
nations, amongst whom is any fear of God or civil policy, which would
not have believed it to be possible, if their ears and eyes were not this day
sufficient witnesses. For to understand that the papists were cruel butchers
and insatiable bloudsuckers, The papists naturally thurst for blood.
had been no news at all, they have been such from the beginning. But when
they both hear and see those that profess the Gospel, and would be counted
Christ's sheep, Falls Gospelers, slaves unto papists.
turned for fear of displeasure, or losinge of their office in to the nature
of bloudthurstie woulues, to execute against God and their conscience, the
ungodly commandments of the papists: to be at commandment, not only to
their unlawful Queen, but also to every shaven Sir John, to imbrue their hands
with them in innocent blood: this makethe all men to wonder and be astonished.

To conclude, The common people.
the residue of the common people, seeing their superiors of all degrees and
estates, by whom they should be governed with godly laws, and to whom they
ought obedience in the fear of God only, thus couardly to forsake their
obedience to God, and utterly contemn the office wherewith he had charged
them, to satisfy the unlawful commandments of their wilful Gouernesse: think
it in no case their part to deny to her like obedience: but with bodies and
goods, Men that do against their conscience and Gods word.
at home and abroad, to fulfill and maintain her will and tyranny, not
withstandinge their own conscience does condemn the^, and the word of God
does playnelie testify, that it is evil and ungodly which they are
commanded to do. Being deceived by misunderstanding this place of Paul and
such like: Romans 13.
It behooves every soul to be subject to superior powers, because there is no
power but of God. For the powers that are, be ordinances of God: and therefore
he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God.

But how little this and other like obiectio^s make for their purpose, we shall
God willinge understand, after that we have better examined this present
answer of Peter and John: who are not contrary to Paul, nor Paul to them,
rightly considered* For thoghe this answer was made of Peter and John in their
own cause to the Magiestrates and Rulers of Jerusalem: yet is it no less
general then the saying of. S. Paul: and partayneth to al conditions of men,
as well Magiestrates and Rulers, as inferior persons and subjects: teaching
them both their office most rightly: the one, what to command, and how to
rule: the other, whom to obey, and wherein to be subject, as in their places
folowinge shall evidently appear.

CHAP. IIII.
The truth of this answer was so sensible, that the very adversaries could
not withstand it.

ANd first to return to the answer, The enemies of God ca^ not deny this
answer to be treue.
we may be assured that it is certain and an undoubted true the, that in all
things, and of all men, and in all places, God is to be obeyed before me^. In
so much as the Apostels were not afraid to co^mite the judgment thereof unto
their extreme enemies: whom they knew right well, would have given contrary
sentence, if their answer had not been with out all controversy. As thoghe
they would have said. After that we have been charged with this office to
preach to all people and nations, and that by God him selffe, to whom all
powers are subject, and all men are bownd to obey, whose judgments none can
escape, and whose wrath no flesh is able to abide: Psalm. 104.
which with the breathe of his mouth, moves the heavens, and makethe the
mighty mountains to shake and tremble, and dryueth all powers (be they never
so strong) to dust and powder. We are contented to make you judges, which
charge us to the contrary: whither this dreadful God may approve our doings in
obeye^ge you being men, and his creatures, yea earth, very dust and ashes in
comparison of his Majesty? Whither man, of what authority so ever he be, is
able to discharge us in the presence of our God, if in holding our peace at
your commandment, Preachers must preach Christ in season and out of season.
we transgress the express commandment of God? That is, not to preach Jesus
Christ crucified: who has chose^ us to the same e^d, endued us with
knowledge, revealed unto us his secret counsels, the mystery of our
redemption, and armed us with all gifts of the holy Ghost, necessary for the
accomplishement of so weighty an entreprise. We need not herein to use many
words or reasons: nor to desire any arbiters to define this matter: be you
your selves judges. Which kind of speaking, men commonly use, when the matter
is evident and out of doubt, known to all men, be they of never so slender
judgment, and need no further reasons, or Scriptures to prove it. The like
kind of reasoninge, the Apostle uses against the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 11.
who permitted their weme^ to pray bareheaded in the Congregation, which he
condemned as an indecent custom, not becommyng the Sayncts of God. For
amongst other reasons, he likewise makethe them selves judges in the matter,
saying: Judge ye among your selves, whither it be cumlie for a woman to pray
bareheaded in the Congregation. Co^cludinge, that very nature does teach the
contrary. In like manner this answer is so true and sensible (that rather God
is to be obeyed then man) that there ca^ be none so malicious or ignorante,
whom very nature will not compel to confess it, if he had no further
knowledge. Nether had these men, for all their great a do, long consultacion,
hie learning and wisdom (desierous also to take occasion against the
Apostels) any thing to say for the contrary. But as Gods enemies are
accustomed, when their mouths are stopped, either with raylinges, or
threatenings, to express their rage: so did they with Peter and John, They
should not so have escaped if they had been before our cruel Counselors
Pharisees and Hypocrites of England.
dimitting them at the last with bitter words and menaces: and they departed
notwithstanding from the Concile, by the means of this answer, conquerours.

CHAP. V.
To obey man in any thing against God, is Unlawful ind plain disobedience.

NOw for as much as we are assured of the truth and certantie of their
answer, what things are to be considered.
whereof none can justly doubt: let us somewhat further consider what things
are pri^cipallie here in contained. First we may hereof justly conclude, that
to obey man in any thing contrary to God, or his precepts thoghe he be in
hiest authority, or never so orderly called there unto (as these men, whereof
Luke speaks, were) is no obedience at all, but disobedience.

Secondly, that it is not a sufficient discharge for us before God, when we
deny to acco^plyshe their unlawful dema^des and threatenings, except we do the
contrary every man in his vocation and office, as occasion is offered, and as
his power will serve. Which things playnlie understand, as they shall give a
clear light in this controversy: so do I not doubt by this present answer and
fact of Peter and John, to prove most manifestly, that althoghe we were
destitute of other examples, yet this might appear sufficient. As touching
the first, Obedience against God is disobedience,
that there is no obedience against God which is not plain disobedience: the
Apostles say, Judge you whither it be right or just in Godds sight to obey you
rather the^ God: which is as much as they would say, It is not just nor
lawful. The^ if it be not lawful and just in Gods sight, who judges things
truly and as they be in deed, it must needs follow that all manner of
obedience against God and his word, is plain disobedience, and the workers
thereof likewise condemned as rebels. Why? Because it is unjust and unlawful
before God: And all true obedience is lawful, which must not be measured by the
will of man, but by the just Laws and ordinances of the living Lord. what
God once willith in his Law to be done or not to be done that ca^ no man
dispense with be it never so small in the sight of man.
So that after God has once pronounced any thing that he would have done,
either in his Law or otherwise: there is no man that may or can dispense
therewith, seem it of never so little importance in the judgment of men. He
that commands the contrary, is a rebel: and he that obeys likewise.
Neither does this appertain to the Apostles and ministers only in their
office, but is a general argument for all sorts, estates, and degrees of men:
for as much as God has like authority of all, and all owe unto him first
and principal obedience: and secondly unto men for him, and in him only:
except they will be enemies to God, and deny him to be their Lord. For so much
it is in effect, when we prefer men to God, obedience to man, before the
obedience to God. It is not the authority of the Prince, or the fear of his
punishment, that ca^ excuse in his presence: who co^ma^deth his people
generalie, Deu. 4.
high and low, rich and poor, man and woman, to hear his voice, and to
observe his statutes. Nether to declyne upon the right hand, nor upon the
left: nether to add any thing thereto, or to take any thing from it: but
to do that only, which the living Lord comma^deth. And if we be the sheep
of the Lords foulde, it is not sufficient for us to hear the voice of our
pastor, and to follow him, except we also deny to hear, much more to follow
any other: that is, which calls not with the voice of the true pastor. Ioh.
10.
And as there ought to be no creature of like authority amongst us, as our
soueraygne Lord and God, whose creatures we be, and the workmanship of his
own hands: even so, there is none like to him in dignity, or may be compared
to him in power, none like to him in riches, or so able to reward his
subjects, being Lord of heaven and earth, disposer of all things present
and to come: distributer not only of all corporal and earthly blessings to
those that fear and serve him: but also powers upon them all spiritual and
heavenly graces in great abundance. Moreover, as by his authority, power,
dignity, riches and liberality, he may of right demand of us obedience: so
must we persuade our selves in not re^dring the same to him willingly, that
none ca^ deliver us from his horrible punishementes and destruction, which he
threatens upon all such as wilfully trangresse his holy precepts, Deu. 28,
and.30. No commandment shall excuse us in the day of vengeance.
and declyne from his Laws. Nether will he regard by what means, or by whose
commandment we transgress his laws. For that can be no excuse for us, thoghe
he be King, Queen, or Emperor that commands or threatens us. For what is
king, Queen, or Emperor compared to God? Is the punishment of earth, Esai.
2.
ashes, of vile man, whose breath is in his nostrilles, more to be feared then
the plages of God, who has power both of body and soul to destroy the^
everlastingly? Was it any earthly power that brought the waters upon the
universal world, Genesis 7
and drowned all mankind for sin, viii persons excepted? Did man destroy
Sodom and Gomorrhe with fire and brymstone? Genesis 14. Exodus 3 4.5.6.14.
Came the plages of Egypt, the drowninge of Pharao, the ouertrow of the
Cananites, the subversion of Jerusalem, by the power of man? If these be the
works of man and not of God, fear man and not God: Amos 3.
but if there be none of these euells which comes upon any City, or contrie,
whereof the Lord is not the worker: beware that the fear of man's punishment,
cause thee not to fall in to the hands of this mighty reue^ger, which is an
horrible thing, as the Apostle writes. Heb. 13.
Princes therefore, and all powers upon thee arth, are not to be compared unto
God, whose Lieutenants only they should be, and are no longer then he will, in
whose hands their hearts are, Pro. 21.
to move and turn at his pleasure. And for that cause it is their duty to
seek all means possible, wherbie the glory of God might be advanced, by whom
they are them selves so highly exalted above their brethern, and in no cause
to minister occasion of rebellion against his mighty Majesty: but rather to
be examples to others (over whom they are constitute) of all Godly liffe and
lawful obedience. In consideration whereof, God him self appoynti^g his people
to have a king, which, when they should come in to the land of promise (for
that was the first promotion that God ordained amongst his people, what manner
of man the Lord would have chosen king. Deuteronomy. 17.
which yet came not to such pride to desire an Emperor) did with great
circumspection, as well appoint them what manner of man they should chose, as
the laws by the which he should rule others, and be obeyed of them. When thou
come (says the Lord by Moses) to the land which thy Lord gives thee,
and shall possess it, thou shall with out doubt, put or constitute a king to
thee: but who^ thy Lord thy God shall chose. Moreover he says, from the
middle of thy brethern shall thou appoint a Ki^ge over thee. For thou may not
appoint a stranger, which is not thy brother. Which law, as it proceaded from
the wisdom of God, who thought it necessary for his people: even so is our
miserable ignorance and unspeakable ingratitude to be lamented, which nether
do understand the goodness of God in these laws, not yet will vouchesaffe to
consult with his heavenly wisdom: all men rather sckinge to chose and procure
them selves Princes and kings after their own pha^tasie, and by ungodly
fetches and policies, then to follow the appointment of the Almighty:
preferringe their own wits to the wisdom of God, which never fails them
that follow it. In comparison of whom all others at lengh, shall show them
selves to be mere fools. Gods Laws must diligently be followed in election
of kings and Rulers and not man's pha^tasie.
If we will be the people of God, let us then search and diligently follow the
Laws of God, especially in so weighty matters, as the election of kings and
Princes, by whom Realms and nations are either preserved if they be Godly, or
utterly distroyed, and shamefullie oppressed if they be ungodly. The first
point or cautio^ that God requires of his people to observe, is, The first
note and observation in chosinge of a king Ezechi. 20
that they chose such a king, as the Lord does appoint, and not as they
fantasy. And what one is he or how should he be known? The people of Israel
(you will say) had their kings appointed them by the mouth of God and
anointed of his Prophets: as David, and his son Solomon. For Saul, thoghe he
was appointed and anoyeted in Gods fury, yet was he not of the Lords
chosinge after this meaning of Moses, who willethe them to appoynte a king
that the Lord shall chose: to wit, of his favor and goodness, such a one as
shall observe the Laws following, Two notes to know whether a king be chosen
of God or no
as we shall see here after. Two means had the Israelites to know their king,
whither he was of God elect or no. The first, by the express commandment
and promise made to some especial man, whereof they neded not to doubt: as was
made to David, and to Salomo^ his son expresslie. The second is by his
word, which he has now left to all men to be the ordinary means to reveal
his will and appointment. Which (if we unfeignedly follow in our doings) we need
no more to doubt, then if God should now speak unto us out of the heavens, as
then he did to the Israelites. The word then gives us these notes to know
whither he be of God or not, whom we would chose for our king. First (as was
said) if he be a man that has the fear of God before his eyes, and zeluslye
with David, and Josias, does study to set forth the same, hatinge
vnfaynedlie al papistrie and idolatry. For this cause God wills that he
should be chosen from amongeste his brethern, and should be no stranger: because
such then had not the fear of God, but were idolaters, to whom no promise of
any kingdom was made, and who also would lead the people to idolatry. Also
in that his exercise is appointed, None oght to be chosen a king or Ruler but
such as will maintain and promote Gods Laws. The second note why kings ar
chosen from amongst their brethern.
the word, Laws and statutes of God, it is manifest that he is not chosen of
God, except he be such a one: and oght not to be anointed or elected as their
king and Governor, what title or right so ever he seem to have theru^to, by
civil policy, except he be a promoter and setter forth of Godds Laws and
glory, for which cause chieslie, this office was ordained.

The next rule to be observed is, that he should be one of their brethern,
meaning of the Israelits: partly to exclude the oppression and idolatry,
which comes in by strangers, as our Contrie now is an example: and partlye,
for that strangers cannot bear such a natural zeal to strange realms and
peoples, as become the brethern: The government of women is against nature,
and Gods ordinance.
but chiefly to avoid that monster in nature, and disordre amongst men,
which is the Empire and government of a woman, saying expreslie: From the
myddle of thy brethren shall thou chose thee a king, and not amongist thy
sisters. For God is not contrary to him self, Genesis 3.
which at the beginning appointed the woman to be in subjection to her
housbande, and the man to be head of the woman (as says the Apostle) who will
not permit so much to the woman, 1. Cor. 14 1. Tim. 2.
as to speak in the Assembly of men, muchelesse to be Ruler of a Realm or
nation. If women be not permitted by Civil policies to rule in inferior
offices, to be Cou^sellours, Pears of a realm, women by ciuell police are
excluded fro^e all offices in a common wealth.
Justices, Shireffs, Bay lives and such like: I make your selves judges,
whither it be mete for them to govern whole Realms and nations?

If the word of God can not persuade you, by which she is made subject to her
housbande, much more to the Counselle and authority of an whole realm, which
word also appoynteth your kings to be chosen from among their brethern, and
not from their sisters: who are forbidden as persons unmeet to speak in a
Congregation* be you your selves judges, and let nature teach you the
absurdity thereof.

And thus much have I of purpose noted in this matter, to let you see to all
our shames, how far ye have been led besides your commun senses and the
manifest word of God, in electing, Winchester proves her a bastard in his
book de Vera obedientia, and Bo^ner also in the preface of the same book. king
Edward the VI.
anointing, and crowninge a woman to be your Queen and Gouernesse, and she in
very deed a bastard, and unlawfully begotten. But beit that she were no
bastard, but the kings daughter as lawfully begotten as was her sister, that
Godly Lady, and meke Lamb, void of all Spanishe pride, and strange blood:
yet in the sickness, and at the death of our lawful Prince of Godly memory
king Edward the sixth, this should not have been your first counsele or
question, who should be your Queen, what woman you shul de crown, if you had
been preferrers of Gods glory, and wise cou^selours, or naturally affected
toward your country. But first and principally, who had been most meetest
amengest your, brethern to have had the government over you, and the whole
government of the realm, to rule them carefully in the fear of God, They
have now plenty of both sorts.
and to preserve them against all oppression of inward tyrants and outward
enemies. Wherbie you might have been assured to eskape all this miserable and
unspeakable disordre, and shameful confusion, which now by contrary counsele
is brought worthily upon us. I know ye will say, the Crown is not intayled to
the heir males only, but appartaynethe as well to the daughters: The title of
the Crown belongs only by Gods word, to the heirs males.
and therefore by the Laws of the Realm, you could not otherwise do. But if
it be true, yet miserable is this answer of such as had so long time
professed the Gospel, and the lyuelie word of God. If it had been made of
paga^s and heathens, which knew not God by his word, it might better have
been borne with all. But amongst them that bear the Name of Godds people,
with who^ his Laws should have chief authority: this answer is not
tolerable to make the constant and undoubted Law of God, which oght to be the
line of all ordinances, to give place to the vain and ungodly decrees of
men, as experience has now taught you. Moreover, in anointing her as if she
had been a man, was no less absurdity, vsinge thereunto such greasinges and
sha^lesse Ceremonies, and that in the face of all the people: as thoghe Moses
law yet were in force, Your own Laws does not prefer abastard to her that
is lauful begotten*
and Christ our Savior not come^: which has put an end to all such outward
Ceremonies: whose annoyntings were spiritual. For as he was replenished with
all graces of the holy Ghost, and that with out measure, and above all his
felows, kings, Priests, and Prophets: so has he left no other annoyntinge to
be used of his servant: but of the same sort, that is, Heb. 1. Psalm. 45.
spiritual. And if Moses with his Ceremonies were now in full authority, as
he was before Christ: Yet were it not lawful by him to anoynte any woman,
Leuit. 8. 1. Sam. 15. 1 Reg. 19
to any manner of office or dignity, seeing that this Ceremony was never
appointed to any other but only to Priests, kings, and Prophets. How
durst you then be so bold and impudent o Papists, (for this was your
entreprise) to transgress the order of God in the Law of Moses by anoynti^ge
a woman? And also to contemn the liberty of the Gospel, in reducinge and
bringing again the Iewishe Ceremonies, from which by Christ we are delivered?
But it is no marvel if you be all ways like your selves, stubberne and
rebellious enemies to God and contemners of Christ. And therefore leauinge you
to your selves, we will return to Gods appointed limits in his Law, for
the lawful election of kings and Princes. Ye have heard the two first
cautions or rules, that is, how he must be of Godds appointment, and not of
man's* The third rule to be observed in electing of kings.
And also from amongst your brethren and not of your sisters, and why. The
third caution that God specifieth in this election is, that he be none such as
has great number of horses: meaning, as trusts in his own power, and
preparation of all things, for defense of him self, and to overcome his
enemies. For under this name of horses, he comprehends all ingeynes and
furniture of war: such a one, as trusts in them, and makethe not God his
arm and bockler, with faitheful David, is not meet to be king of the Lords
people. Psalm. 52.


For by such means should they be brought to Egypt again, to their old
misery and slavery, if they delited in their horses, from whence the Lord
would have them kept, and not in any case to return. As no doubt, he would
have had us miserable English men, warelie to have kept us in that liberty
of Jesus Christ and our consciences, wherein so mercifully he had brought us:
and not by placeinge an infidel woman over us, to return to our old vomit,
much more viler the^ the slavery of Egypt, I mean the servitude of that
Romish Antichriste. What other notes God gives to chose by.


Other observations he gives also, not to seek many wives, nor to heap up
much gold: but chiflie that he have an example of Gods Laws prescribed
unto him, to read in them all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord and to keep his commandments, and not to lift him self up
above his brethren: meaning, he should rule with all holiness and humbleness,
as did Moses and David. And thereby, does God promise that his days, and the
days of his children shall be prolonged in the middle of Israel.

Of the which we may justly conclude, that by the ordinance of God, no other
kings or Rulers, oght to be chosen to rule over us, but such as will seek
his honor and glory, and will command and do nothing contrary to his Law.
As the kings charge is greater, so is he more bond to God to perform the same.
Wherewith they are no less, ye much more charged, then the common people:
because their charge is double: that is, not only to fear God them selves,
but to see that their people fear him also, to whom they owe in that case all
humble obedience and reverence. For they be (as was said) Gods subjects and
Lieutenantes, for whose cause they must be reverenced, doing their duty. But
if they will abuse his power, liftinge them selves above God and above their
brethern, to draw them to idolatry, and to oppress them, and their contrie:
then are they no more to be obeyed in any commandments tending to that end:
but to be contemned as vile Sergeantes in comparison of the high Judge and
Magistrate, who oght to do nothing, but as he is commanded to do by the Judge
and superior power according to the law. Other wise, if he lift him self
above the chief Judge, lokyng to be honored and obeyed more then he: who would
not abhor such a Sergeant, and not only to withstand his commandment,
but to accuse him as a rebellious traitor, and banishe him from a mongest them?
And yet here is but rebellion against man, who is but mortal. What oght we
the^ to do unto that king or Prince, that lifts him self up against the
Majesty of God, If it be heinous to disobey man, much more God the Lord of al
things.
who is immortal, to whom belongs all power, dominion and honor? Is he any
more in comparison of God, then the Sergeant in respect of the Judge? Shall
the Sergeant be punished as a traitor, and this man honored as a king, which
does no part of the office thereunto belonginge? Or rather is not his crime and
treason greater, and deseruith so much more, as God is more excellent,
compared to any worldly power, then is any king or Prince compared to the
most vileste Sergeant?

Moreover, whence has he this honor? Of him self? Is any man naturally
borne a king, Or has he it of God? And if of God, whereto, but to use it with
God, and not against him. Seeing then it is not just in Gods sight to obey
man rather then God: neither that their is any dispensacion of man that ca^
dispe^ce with his holy commandments, Kings oght to rule in Gods fear with
him and not against him.

To obey a wicked Prince in his wickedness is plain disobedience to God.


neither the authority of Prince, nor fear of punishment can excuse us. Seeing
also, that kings are institute to rule in Gods fear and Laws, as subjects
and Sergeants to God, and not against his Laws, and above him: it must needs
follow (as we first said) that all obedience given to such, wicked Princes
against God, is plain rebellion in his judgment. And in that case to obey
God, and disobeye man, is true obedience, how so ever the world judges. For
as none will condemn Peter and John of disobedience, because they would not
herein obey their ordynarie Magistrates: no more will any which have right
judgment, condemn the like resistance in others, which alike is lawful to
all.

Or else should the Israelites be excused, 1. king. 1.
by cause they obeyed their wicked king Jeroboam in worshippinge his calves in
Dan, and Bethel.

Then should that cruel butcher Doeg, 1. Sam. 22
in killinge Ahimalech with LXXXV Priests or Levites, and the whole town of
Nob, at the commandment of ungodly king Saul, Mat. 2. They will make all
these bla^les (the papists are ^o impudent) rather the^ they will seem to
offend. Mat. 27.
have been preferred to the rest of all his servants and souldiars. And the
souldiars also of cruel Herod should be blameless in murtheri^g and sheading
the blood of so many infantes in Bethlehem at Herod's commandment. Then should
the wicked Jews be gyltlesse of Christ's death and his Prophets, whom they
consented to murder by the parsuasion of their Rulers. And the counterfayte
Christians this day, which every where (but especially in our miserable
country) imprison, famishe, murder, hang, and burn their own countriemen,
and dear children of God, at the commandment of furious Iesabel, and her
false Priests and Prophets, the blouddie Bisshopps and shauelynges, should be
giltlesse in all their doings. But all these does God (who is a Ielious and
righteous God, and cannot abide his honor to be given to any other, Exodus 20.
Psalm 9. Genesis 4.
nor suffer the blood of the innocent long to cry unto him for vengeance)
condemn as blasphemers, idolatres, and cruel murderers: which says: Thou
shall have no other Gods but me. Thou shall not kill. And if God does make
this, disobedience (as thou may plainly see) what commandment of man can
altar his sentence, before whom there is no obedience in evil things? Yea, if
the whole multitude, from the hiest to the lowest, would agree and consent to
do euel, The commandment of the Prince shall not excuse thee in evil doing.
yet must not thou follow them says the Lord. For if thou do
(notwithstanding the commandment of thy Prince, or example of all others) thou
art with them a rebel, and a rebel against thy Lord and God: from whose
wrath and heavy indignation, no man can defend thee in the dreadful day of
his visitacion, which is at hand.

CHAP. VI.
How it is not enough to deny wicked commandments of all kind of Rulers,
except we withstand them also, every man according to his vocation, in doing
the contrary.

AS by this answer before mentioned, we have been taught not to give place to
the unlawful commandeme^tes of Magistrates, in what authority so ever they
be, because it is nothing but rebellion in the judgment of God: even so may we
learn by the same answer and example of the Apostles, how God requiereth more
at our hands, that is, to withstand their precepts, in doing the contrary:
every man according to his office and estate wherein God has placed him. For
as man thinks him self not fully obeyed, It is not inoughe not to do the
wiked commandment of a king, but also to do the contrary.
when we abstain from those things which he forbids, except moreover we do
the contrary, which he commands: euenso may we much more think, that God is
not fully obeyed, when we will not do the ungodly commandments of men,
except also we apply our selves with all diligence to do the contrary. So did
Peter and John make answer, denying to do as they were commanded by the
Magistrates. And as they denied in words, so did they, and the rest of the
Apostles in effect, as the course of the history does witness. Act. 5.
Who went all to gether to the Temple after they were dimissed, and preached
openly in the face of all the people Jesus Christ crucified, not with
standing all the before named threatenings and menacinges, yea afterward, when
they had been imprisoned and then by the Angel of God delivered, and whipped
most vilely, as if they had been slaves: yet were they nothing thereby
discouraged, but continued in one mind and answer, sayng as they did before
with one voice and consent: God must be obeyed before man, and boldly
preached their master Christ, contemning all displeasures which they for his
Names sake sustened, Act. 5.
remembering well his sure and confortable promesses who said: Blessed are you
when men revile you and sklander you, Matthew. 5.
and speak all evil against you, lying, for my sake: be glad and reioce, for
great is your reward in the kingdom of heaven. For so did they persecute the
prophets before you.

Thus see we the^, how the truth of this doctrine is not proved only by the
first examination of Peter and John: All the apostels to gether showed the like
constancy.
but also confirmed the second time by the rest of all the Apostels agreeinge
therein, and suffringe vile scourginge for the same: not only boldly
affirminge it in the presence of all the Magistrates at Jerusalem, but as
constantly approuinge it in their doings: when contrary to their
commandeme^tes, they ceased not more diligently to publishe the doctrine of
salvation: reioysinge and praysinge God, who had made them worthy to suffer
for his Sons sake, their Lord and master. O worthy and manful souldiars, O
most trusty and payneful servants: neither feringe the proud lokes and
malicious threatninges of the whole Senate and power of Jerusalem: No power can
preuail against the faithful.
nor shrinking in their office, for all their cruel punishments. But the more
they were forbidden, and the oftener they were punished: the stouter, stronger,
and mightier were they to fight against their enemes with the spiritual sword,
wherewith they were charged in their masters quarrel: being assured always of
this, that he who gave the^ authority to preach, would give the^ strengh also
for the performance thereof, as he had promesed* saying: Mar 28.
I will be with you to the end of the world. And he being with the^, (as the
Apostle says) what should they care who were against them? Romans 8^
A worthy example and mirour for all such to behold as are called of God to
be his messengers and disposers of his holy mysteries, how faithful they oght
to be in the distribution of the same, 1. Cor. 4.
omitting no manner of occasions, obeying no contrary commandments, nor
fearing the cruel threatninges of men.

God has given them the charge of most precious jewels, and inestimable
riches: not to be hid in a corner, or retained with them selves: Ephe. 3.
but rather (as the Apostle exhorts) to stir up the gift of God, which is
in them, and not to neglect it, 1. Tim. 4.
to preach the word of God, and to be instant in season and out of season, to
convince, 2. Tim. 4.
reprove, and exhort with all softness and learning. Ephe. 6.
For this is that sharp and two edged sword wherewith God has not only
armed them against their enemies: Heb. 4.
but to fight also manfully for others against all powers worldly and
spiritual, with this mighty and spiritual sword the word of God.

For otherwise, if Christ him self had ceased to preach his Fathers will, for
which cause partly he was sent in to the world, for fear of threatninges,
conspiracies, commandments, and punishments of men: where had been this
comfortable doctrine of salvation? When should he have suffered death, for our
redemption and delyuerance?

How should the Apostles and all other faithful martyrs, which by their deaths
in all ages, have given glory to Christ, Christ disobeyed wicked magistrates
and so saved us: but we obey unjust magistrates and destroy our selves.
have left behind them so worthy monumentes, and comfortable writings,
besides the notable examples of constancy in sealinge up their doctrine with
the sheading of their blood, if they had yealded or shronke in executinge their
office for fear of any power. And in our miserable Country, where
Antichrist this day is again for our sins exalted, if commandments of
tyrants should have taken place in all men, as it did with many hirelinge
preachers, some most shamefullie denying their Master Christ, taking upon
them the mark of the beast, ministering poison for food to their flock, some
in making a spoil and pray of their flock, and as cowardes takeyng them to
their feet, leaving the poor lambs of God with out all comfort, to be
devoured of the wild ravenous beasts* some also in playng on both parts with
the halting Israelites, 1. kin. 18. 2. Cor. 6.
think to serve God and Baal: if in all others (I say) as in these, the
ungodly decrees of men should have taken place: how could we have had these
worthy examples of so many hundredth martyrs, who have glorified Christ most
constantly, Obedience to death.
in offringe up their lives as a most sweet savor to the Lord? And that of
all sorts of men and women, young and old, rich and poor, learned and
unlearned, all being herein persuaded (not able perchance to do any more for
the comfort of others, in so general a defection from God) have chose^ rather
with the loss of this corporal life, to obey God, then otherwise to live in
welthe and obey man. For the which, the Name of God be praised for ever, who
stir up our hearts by their examples, and prepare us with the grace of his
holy Spirit to the like constancy and obedience.

Besides this we learn by the commandments of God, that so often as he
forbids any thing which he would not to be done, in the self same, When God
forbids one thing he comma^deth the contrary.
he commands us the contrary, as for example: Thou shall not murder,
Steal, Commit adultrie, or Bear false wittnes. It is not enough to abstain
from these things, neither is God therein fully obeyed, except we do the
contrary, so often as occasion is ministered, that is, to save, preserve, and
defend, as well the goods as the persons of our brethren and neghbours. And
this is a certain and general rule, not only in these examples here named:
but in all other precepts whither they be of the Ten commandments, or any
other besides contained in the Scriptures: that what so ever God forbids
any man, in the same he is charged to do the contrary according to his power,
though all the world would stand against him. In confirmation whereof, let us
only consider the notable example of the Godly Prophet Daniel, Dani. 6.
who when he was commanded in the name of king Darius (by whom he had been
promoted to great honor, Daniel was no English courtier: for he could not
flatter.
and of all other was in best favor, and hiest reputation with him) to ask
nothing of his God, or any other for the space of thirty days, but only of
Darius his king, according to the decree made at the request of his ungodly
counsel, purposlie against Daniel, would not obey the commandment, being not
ignorant that it was a public decree, which all (he only except) obeyed. And
also how death (and that most terrible, to be cast among the hungry lions) was
appointed for a punishment to the transgressors. Note this al ye Gentelmen and
Nobles of Inglande
But Daniel not contented to do as he was commanded, did as he was accustomed,
the contrary* not once, but thrice every day, transgressinge the kings
commandment, prayinge to the living Lord his God. And to the intent it might
be known abroad to al men, that he contemned this ungodly commandment, Daniel
burned with the zeal of Gods glory and would not hide it
he set open his windows more then custom, to the i^te^t that all which
would, might behold his doing: so glad was he to be known to serve the true
and mighty God. Here would our worldly wise men, no dout, condemn Daniel of
rashness and follye in doing, more then was expedient. What need he thus to
provoke the indignation of a Prince, who had power with a word of his mouth to
distroye him? If he would not ask any thing in the Name of Darius as others
did, The counsel of the wordlye dissemblers
yet might he have abstayned from praying to God for that space. Was thirty
days so great a matter, that he might not abstain from praying to God, to
gratify thereby his Prince to whom he was so much bound? And if he would
needs pray to God, could he not have done it preuely and secretly? What need
he to set open his window in the sight of al men? This was an open contempt of
the kings Majesty: this was a greater offense, Carnal Gospelers are halters
o^ both sides
then the fact it self. Thus would the politic and worldlinges reason, as our
carnal Gospellers do daily, to maintain their shameless halting upon both
parts, to cloak their own impiety, and to entice others to do the like. But
faithful Daniel had learned an other lesson, and of a more faithful
scholemaister: even the very same that instructed here the Apostles, the
Spirit of God, the auctor of wisdom, Ioh. 16.
and truth: that he oght not only to contemn the kings unlawful
commandment, but to do the plain contrary. Daniel was not so wise as our
glauering Gospellers.
Nether thought he it sufficient to do this secretly, except openly he showed to
all the world whose seruante he was, and what God he honored. Otherwise, how
cold he have declared to the people, that he loved his God with all his heart,
soul and power, as was commanded?

CHAP. VII.
All men are bound to follow the like example, as well as the Apostles and
Daniel, of what estate and condition so ever they be.

HEre are all excuses taken away from all men, that will be true Christians,
and have the Apostles and Daniel for their instructers and teachers: whither
they be Counselors, Nobles, Pears, Englisheme^ will nether be Apostles
Prophets nor good men.
or inferior and civil officiers. But they will peradventure excuse them
selves, as though God had no thing to do with the^, because they be not
Apostels, nor Prophets. Nevertheless they may be assured, they shall be as they
ever have been, subject to his plages and punishments: and so will he have a
do with them, though they would have noght to do with him. If the temperall
sword had been committed to the Apostels, as well as was the spiritual: if
they had been Pears of a realm, and known so well their duty toward God and
their contrye, as they did to Christ and his Church, being Apostels, would
they have lyfted up their sword against Gods glory, to the subversion of
the truth and their nation, at the commandment of their Prince and king? Or
would they not rather have answered: we are appointed of God to set forth his
glory, and to defend his people, and cannot therefore obey you? How should
they judge well of other men's matteres, that condemn the^ selves in their own
If that would not serve, must they then have ceased at their threatninges
with death and displeasure? Is that sufficient to discharge them, if in not
using their power to suppress tyranny and idolatry, they suffer the people of
God to be devoured? Judge you your selves that bear this Name, whither God
could approve their doings.

Matathias that worthy Captain of the Jews, 1. Mac. ^.
as it is written in the first book of the Machabees, could not so lightly
excuse him self when he was commanded by the cruel officiers of wicked
Antiochus (which had spoiled their Te^pel, rased their waules, murdered their
brethern, and set up idolatry, in so much as all for the most part, applied
them selves to their wicked parsuations) that he, with the residue should
forsake the Laws and sacrifices of their God, to worshipp strange Gods: he
made answer, A notable answer for all true Christians to practice.
to the officer of Antiochus the king (which would to God our Noble men had
perfetly learned) That thoghe all Nations apparteyning to king Antiochus
should obey him, so that every man would declyne from the Laws of his
country: yet I, (says he) my children, and brethern, will stand in the
conuenant of our fathers etc. Which thing he perform din deed to the glory of
God, to his own salvation, and comfort of his brethern and country for ever.

And even at the self same time he slew, not only a Jew, one of his own
brethern, which came to sacrifice in his presence at the alter Modim, according
to the prescript of Antiochus: but killed also the kings officer, that
compelled him thereto, and afterward distroyed the altar, and followed the Law
of God with a zeal, as did Phinees. Matathias had then a little power amongst
his brethern, but nothing to defend him self against the king, and also being
charged with children and kinsfolk (which seemed to be all his power) would
nether pollute him self, nor suffer the^ to be polluted with wicked idolatry,
nor cou^seles, to be oppressed with tyranny. Matathias was no publik person.
And yet we read of no authority or office he had to excuse him by: but
only this one thing which was common to all other of his nation, the Laws of
their country, and covenant of their fathers. Which cause he thought sufficient
to discharge his conscience before God, and to approve his doings. For as much
as God had commanded him not only to deny to do the commandment of the
cruel tyrant Antiochus (under who^ all Jerusalem then was by conqueste) but
manfully to profess him and his, as open adversaries to his Laws and to
resist idolatry by force, Look well upon this example al ye inhabitants of
England
in killing the idolatrer and the kings servant (by whom he was compelled) and
in subuerting the altar, where upon the idolatrous sacrifice should have been
done. Which was, as you see, manifest resisting of the superior power, being
but man, to the intent he might show true obedience to his Lord and God, i^n
defending and maynteyning his Laws (which he calls the covenant of their
fathers) yea and with the temporal sword to the uttermost of his power. The^
if Matathias herein did discharge his conscience before God and man, in
resisting by temporal power the king, his commandments and officiers: it is
not only the office of Apostles and preachers, to resist, but the dewtie
likewise of all others according to their estate and vocation. But you will say
perchance, that this book of the Macabees is not of sufficient auctoririe to
persuade your consciences in the like case, because it is not reputed to be
amongst those books which are autentique, and named Canonical. Truth it is,
but that thou (which art in like and better estate, because of thy power and
authority, wherewith thou art as well charged before God as king or Emperor)
may and should with a safe conscience, follow this worthy example, it is
most true and certain. Mattathias fact depe^dethe not of the authority of
the history but of the word of God. Mattathias doing and the Apostels are both
like.
For the fact of Mattathias depends not upon the authority of the book,
wherein it is contained: but upon the word of God, whereupon it was grownded.
For has he done any otherwise in his vocation, then the Apostles did in
theirs? Did not they say, that God is to be obeyed rather then man? And so
said Mattathias, and much more playner: that thoghe all nations would obey
Antiochus: yet he, and so many as he could procure, should obey the true God
and his Laws. And like as the Apostles, according to their answer, openly and
plainly in fight of the people did use the spiritual sword, manfully fighting
against all rebellion of man in Gods cause: so did Mattathias use the
temporal sword according to his power, moved by the same reason against
idolatry and oppression which is manifest rebellion against God. Yea and if
their were nether example nor Scripture to prove his fact: yet would very
natural reason compel every man to allow the same, as most Godly. And that
therein he did nothing but his duty, which thing was approved in the judgment
of that age, and as a lawful fact and monument write and left to be red and
practiced of all posterity, the Law of nature so directing their judgments.

But to put you out of all doubt, we will confirm it with an other testimony
most surely auctorised, and the very same in effect, Joshua made the like
answer to the Israelites. Iosue. 24.
of that renowned and worthy Captain Joshua, the son of Nun, whom God him
self had chosen to succeed Moses in the government, and leading of the people
of Israel: who after he had declared the benefits of God done unto them, from
the time that he had chosen them to be his people, (namely to Abraham whom he
called from idolatry, to Isaac and Jacob, and to the rest of the people, their
posterity, in delivering them out of Egypt, preseruinge them in the
wilderness, and giving to them his Laws) spoke these words to the Elders and
all the multitude, sayng: Now therefore fear ye the Lord, serve him vnfaynedlie
and faithfully, take away the Gods which your fathers worshipped, beyond
the River, and in Egypt, and serve the Lord. But if you will not serve the
Lord, chose unto you this day whom you will serve* whither ye will serve the
Gods beyond the River, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwele.
As for me and my family, we will serve the Lord: answering as did Matathias.
And this spoke he in his later days, The papists will say, because he was old
that he doted.
to admonish them before hand not to incline to idolatry and to neglecte the
Laws of God, which is the cause of all evil, and gapp to all mischiff. Which
sayng of Joshua, the true servant of God, seemed so Godly in the sight of all
the people, that all were compelled with a uehemencie of spirit to say: God
forbid, that we should forsake the Lord, to serve strange Gods. For the
Lord our God him self, brought us out of Egypt and from the house of bondage.

What will thou more to prove this fact of Mattathias, and therbie thy duty
also, whither thou be of the Seniors of the people, or of the multitude? Here
is thy confession, if thou be of God. If all men would serve strange Godds,
Forget not this if ye fear God and love your lives.
yet will I and my family serve the living Lord. And again, God forbid that
we should leave the obedience of our God, by whom we are created, rede^^d and
saved, to serve strange Gods. And how caneste thou say that thou seruest God
thy Lord, except thou use all such means as he has given to thee in defense
of his glory, beit counsel, learning, authority, power in body or in soul?
All must serve the Lord, when he demands it. And when demands God these
things of us, if not then chiefly, when Satan begins to rage, the word of
God despiced, his Name blasphemed, his Church scattered, his children
miserably oppressed, imprisoned, famished and murdered? Either now must the
counsele of the Cou^seller, the learning of the learned, Other now serve the
Lord or never. Luke 3.
the authority of the honorable, the power of the Nobles, the bodies of the
subjects serve the Lord, or never. For now will the Lord try who are his
people in separating the chafe from the corn, those that love the Lord
vnfaynedlie, and will serve him in deed from the halting dissemblers and
hypocrites, who thi^king thereby to escape present dangers, run headlonge to
their own destruction, thiking thereby to escape the fearful voice of the
Lord, fall in to the pit. And if they come forth of the pit, Esai 24. Iere.
48 Hosa^. 6
they are taken in the net, and cannot escape says the Lord.

There is no way but one, to turn again unto the Lord, who has wounded
us, Repent o countriemen your unlawful obedience, and now at last turn to
your Lord God
and he will heal us: he has stricken us, for our sins, and he will bind
us up again, and within two days will he restore us to lyffe, and the third
day raise us up, and we shall come before his face says the Prophet. And by
what other means can we turn unto the Lord to be healed of our wounds, to be
restored to lyffe again, to be lifted up and brought before his presence: but
by unfeigned repentance, every man of what estate, or condition soever he be?
Considering with tears how shamefullie he has fallen from God, and by what
means, and to call for grace and strength to turn back by the self same means
and ways, Romans 6.
to obey God in walking the contrary. And to Follow the counsel of the
Apostle, that as before we have given our members to serve uncleanness and
iniquity: so now (after true repentance) make them to serve rightousnes and
holiness. Where before we served men and not God, now to serve God and not man,
but in God: Where as we abused all the gifts of God to maintain idolatry and
tyranny, now to use the same to the restoring of Gods glory, and preservation
of his humble and afflicted children: God grant this for Christ's sake, to
sink in your minds.
where as before we have troughe contempt of his graces, especially the word
and Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ brought upon us shame and confusion, now
by reverent receiving of them again, and framing our lives thereunto, we may
remove these plagues, and find fauore and grace in the sight of our God, who
for this cause has stricken us, and by all manner of means callethe us back
from our wickedness, readier to receive us, then we to desire him.

CHAP. VIII.
The conclusion of these two parts with a farther declaration of the same, that
it is both Lawful and necessary some times to disobeye and also to resist
Ungodly magistrates and wherein.

Wherefore (dear brethern in the Lord) to return to our purpose, you may
well understand of these things which have been hitherto mentioned, not only
the cause of all our misery in England this day, to have been for that we
nether taught, knew, nor used true obedience: but also what obedience God
requires of all me^, Obedience
and what he co^demnethe for disobedience. Obedience is to hear God rather
then man, and to resist man rather then God, as by the answer and doings of
the Apostles, and examples of others ye have been instructed. Wherei^ you may
see how little the commandments, threatenings, power, authority, or punishments
of any king, Prince or Emperor, oght to prevail with us against the
commandment of God, where with we are charged.

Can we then pretend ignorance any more? Behold, Ignorance can not excuse
you much less when the truth is so plainlye taught.
very nature does teach all men, which be not destitute of their common sense
and reason, that God oght rather to be obeyed then man: in so much as the
Apostles therein feared not the judgment of their enemies.

Shall authority of man, or power of Princes bleare our eyes any longer: We
must not yield to authority and power.
seeing there is none so ignorant whose conscience does not bear him witness,
that God is most worthy of all honor, and only to be feared for his power:
who made the heavens and the earth, and man ruler thereof, by whose power and
wisdom, as all things were created, so by his wonderful providence are all
things preserved and governed?

Shall the threatenings of man or punishment of Princes move us to leave undone
that which he commands, Threaninges oght not to fear us.
and our vocation requires? Should we honor the^ for their offices and great
titles, because they are called kings, Princes, or Emperors? This must we do
so long as they will be subjects to God, and promoters of his glory, This
doctrine of obedience, is daily sealed with the blood of Saints
of whom they have their authority, as the examples of the Godly Patriarchs,
and Prophets, of Christ him self, and his Apostles, and of all martyrs in all
ages until this day do witness. Which with their blood have sealed up this
doctrine for an undoubted verity: that there is no obedience against God, which
in his judgment is not manifest rebellion.

Do thou then unfeignedly believe in God, and haste given thy self to serve
him, and after art commanded of thy Prince or Ruler, what name so ever he
bear, to committ idolatry in worshippi^g a piece of bread for thy Savior (as
do the Papists) which is open blasphemy against the Son of God?

1. Cor. 10
Art thou willed to be present at the idol service, which the Apostle S. Paul
forbids: or else to make, or erect images in Churches or temples, to hear
Masses, to trot on pilgremage, to purchesse pardons, to confess the Popes
authority, to esteem Gods word for heresy*

Art thou charged to be a tormentour of the Saints of God, to lay hold upon
the^ as did the Scribes and Pharisees, the chief Bishopp and Priests whith
their officiers upon Christ and his Apostles: to bring them before the
Concile to cast then in prison, to flatter them to revile the^ openly, to
famishe them secreatly, and hang them in their gayles, to rack them, The
Shirefs ^ealers and other inferior officers condemned
to bring them to the galows, to the stake, and co^sumyng fire: to see
execution done upon then, as upon thieves, murderers, villains, whoremongers,
adulterours, traitors, idolaters, and blasphemers: when inwardlye thy
conscience cries unto thee, Take heed and beware what thou do to these
men, for they are the very servants of God, Mat 27. Every ma^s answer to
unlawful dissobedience.
as Pilate was admonished by his wiffe? Art thou (I say) commanded to do any
of these things, and fear God? Behold, here art thou taught what answer
it behooves thee to make, and that by the Apostles of Christ: which is, Judge
you whither it be lawful in Godds sight to obey you rather then God. And
again, God must be obeyed before man.

Loss of lininges is not a sufficient excuse to inda^ger thy soul.
If thou will allege the danger of losinge thy living and office, whereby thou
and thy family are found: consider it is a greater matter to lose thy soul,
and to bring the curse of God upon thy whole household, to whom it were far
better to beg in the fear of God, God is the revenger of inocentes blood.
Psalm. 9.
the^ to be gyltie of innocent blood, which the Lord must needs revenge
according to his promise. If thy innocent brother, which is brought to thee,
because he is the servant of God, be ready for Christ's sake to offer up his
life in sacrifice: what great thing is it for thee to offer up thy vile living
for the same cause of rightousnesse? Mat. 16.
For as he in losinge his life has assurance to find it everlastingly: even
so may thou be assured in forgoing thy office, because thou will be no
tormentour of Gods children, against thy duty and conscience, To loose in
the world, is to gain in the heavens. Mat. 10. Psalm. 105,
to have the reward of rightousnesse at the hands of God, who estemeth all
things done to any of these little ones, as done to him self: and forbideth
thee to touch them, sayng, Touch not mine anointed ones.

Therefore, as there is no power or punishment that should cause thee to do evil:
so is there no office or promotion, which thou should not willingly forgo,
rather then in reteyninge it to be an instrument of injurious oppression,
having this rule of our Savior Christ always before thine eyes: Mat. 7.
What so ever ye would that men should do to you, that do you to them also.

Neither is this enough, rather to suffer injury and loss, then that thou
would be a worker of injury to others by any means: but more over it is thy
part to be a withstander of evil, withstand the evil, and supporte the Godly
and a supporter of the Godly to the vttermoste of thy power, as thou have
partly hard all ready, and partly shall hear now following. For as God has
not created us for our selves, Genesis 2. 1. Cor. 10. Gala. 6.
but to seek his honor and glory, and the profit of our neighbor, especially
of such as be of the household of faith: even so are we i^detted to God, to
bestow all those gifts, be they spiritual or corporal, Our detts to God.
wherewith God has blessed us to the self same end, stryuing against all
impediments, helping, defending, comforting, and delivering to the vttermoste
of our power all such as we are assured do fear God, Defend, help, conforte,
and deliver the godly oppressed, and deleuer your own souls. Exodus 23.
and stand in need of our aid and supporte. Otherwise we show our selves to
have more compassion upon brute beasts, as our neighbors ox, ass, or sheep,
which Gods Law does charge us to help, save, or draw forth of the diche,
althoghe it were the beast of our enemy.

Shall we help our neighbors beast and not him self?
Are we then bound to do this to unreasonable and brute beasts, yea to any
thing belonging to our neighbor, and shall we be afraid to do the like to him
self, what time he is in necessity? If his sheep or other of his cattle were
ready to be devoured in our presence of wolves, or such wild beasts: are we
not bound as well in conscience as by the Law of God, to drive the wild
beast away and save his cattle, who can deny this to be our duty? Can we be
excused then in suffringe the souls and bodies of the children of God our
brethern, to be most pitifully distroyed of Gods enemies, by false doctrine
and cruel murdering, and put not to our hands and power to deliver them?

The very Gentiles with out God were taught so much of nature, Not to
wi^thstande evil, the very Gentiles code^ned as injury.
that to do wrong to a another is not only injury, but also they condemn him
as an injurious person, which can, and will not withstand wrong done to a
another. Woe be to thee the^ (o miserable England) among other nations and
peoples, woe to England and her ungodly Magistrates.
which have a long time delited in injustice and cruel oppression. Woe be unto
you most ungodly and careless counselors. Woe be to you Rulers and Magistrates,
from the hieste to the loweste: for that you ruling with out the fear of God,
The wolu^she papists.
see your own flesh and blood, the very la^bes of God daily to fall by
flocks, not in to the diche or pit, but in to the insatiable mouths of the
wolueshe papists: your horrible plagues are at hand if ye amend not.
not only to be hurt and iniuried, but cruelly to be devoured both body and
goods, and their poor wives, children, and families destroyed, and go a
begginge. And yet neither the sorouful sobbes, and continual tears of the
lamentable mothers, nor the pitiful cry of the spoiled infa^tes, nor the
extreme necessity of their dispersed servants, besides the shameful
betrayinge and subuertio^ of the whole Realm daily approchinge, Ye have your
honors to defend and help the godly, yea and all others from oppression and
in jury.
can once move your hard and stony hearts with pity to defend their cause,
and deliver them from tyranny: being promoted to your honors and offices to
that end. Can you, escape the condemnation of the Law, which prefer the
preservation of your beasts and cattle to the precious lives of your own
brethern, Esai. 1.
the Image of the living Lord, The Gentiles shall condemn you in the works
of the law. Romans 2.
whom you are bound to love as your selves? Shall not the Gentiles, which live
besides the Law, stand in judgment against you which profess the Law, when
they are more priest to defend their people from injuries, then you yours?
Your own offices, authority, and power, shall in that day put you to
silence, and confound you.

Was there ever the like contempt of Gods word in Capernaum? The like
idolatry among the heathen? Or like tyranny and cruel murdering at
Jerusalem? Luke 10.
And yet to Capernaum Christ has threatened that it shall be easier for Tire
and Sidon in the last day, then for it. Nomb. 33. Exodus 23. and. 34.
The Gentiles he commanded to be distroyed as his extreme enemies. And as for
Jerusalem that worthy City of the Lord, escaped not his severe judgment:
Mat. 24.
not leauinge one stone upon another, as our Savior himself before prophesied,
and as their miserable state and dispertion this day does testify. England
shall not escape.
Will God then spare England alone, and punish all other nations for less
impiety?

Can he of his justice spare you counselors, you Nobles and inferior officers:
Which spare not to spoil, oppress, accuse, condemn, and murder the people
of God, to deface his glory, and to distroye the whole English Nation from the
earth, so much as in you lies?

Repent, repent you miserable me^: for your sins be at the highest, Repent
shortly: for Gods heavy wrath is at hand Esai. 29.
your cupp of iniquity is full, and the hour of your heavy visitation is come:
when it will be to late for you to flee from the great wrath of Gods
indignation, which shortly is like to be powered upon you. Then shall you well
perceive that there is no salvation but under Gods protection, no comfort with
out Christ, The cause of all these miseries.
no obedience against God, no power that can dispense with the charge of the
Almighty and his commandments: especially when all your counsels against him
and his poor servants shall fall upon your own heads: your wisdom turned
to folly, your nobleness to vileness, your rule and dominion taken from you,
and you made slaves to others: Write this upon your door posts and in your well
decked cha^bers. For it will suerly come if ye repent not.
your fair howses and gorgeous buildinges destroyed, your great possessions
given to your enemies, your wives to be ravished, your mayds deflowred, and
children murdered with out mercy, your pride and hie lokes abated, your welthe
turned to misery, your delicate faare and costly aparell to extreme hunger
and beggerye, your joy and pastance to weepinge and continual sorrow, and in
the end shameful death as you have deserved. And why? Because you have chosen
to obey man rather then G^^, and sought rather to maintain (...) own pride
and dignity, then his honor and glory.

And therefore behold o proud man, Ierre. 50.
I am come to thee (says the Lord of hosts) because thy day is come, and
the time when i will visit thee. For the proud shall fall and be distroyed,
and there shall be noman to lift him up. I will kindle a fire in his Cities,
that shall consume all things about them, etc.

And justly may the Lord do all this to you, saying he gave you not this
dignity, making you Cou^sellers, Noble men, Rulers, Justices, Mayers,
Shireffs, Bailiffs, Counstables, or Gaylers to exalt your selves against his
Majesty, The end of all offices
and to fight against Christ and his members: but to humble your selves in his
presence, to promote his glory, and to defend all those whom he committed to
your charge. How comes it then to pass, that ye have thus betrayde him and
his people, in banishinge his truth to receive falsehod, and have changed
Religion in to superstition, true honoringe of God, in to blasphemous
idolatry, and now (to finishe your procedinges) are ready to to sell your
subjects for slaves to the proud Spaniards, The Spaniardes are godles
a people with out God.

That wicked woman, whom you untruly make your Queen, has (say ye) so
commanded. O vain and miserable men. Mary's unlawful government.
To what vileness are you brought, and yet as men blind, see not? Because you
would not have God to reign over you, and his word to be a light unto your
footestepps, behold, he has not given an hypocrite only to reign over you
(as he promised) but an Idolatresse also: Job. 34.
God forbids women to reign, and nature abhors the same.
not a man according to his appointment, but a woman, which his Law
forbids, and nature abhors: whose reign was never counted lawful by the
word of God, but an express sign of Gods wrath, and notable plague for the
sins of the people. As was the raygne of cruel Iesabel, and ungodly
Athalia, especial instruments of Satan, and whipps to his people of Israel.

This you see not, blinded with ignorance: yea, which is more shame, where as
the word of God freethe you from the obedience of any Prince, be he never so
mighty, wise, or politic, commanding any thing which God forbids, and
herein geuethe you authority to withstand the same, as you have hard: Yet are
you willingly become as it were, Marie a bastard.
bondemen to the lusts of a most impotent and unbridled woman: a woman
begotten in adultrie a bastard by birthe, contrary to the word of God and
your own laws. Read H^lles Cronicle in the 24. of the reinge of king Henry.
8. Oxforde. Cambridge. Orliance. Paris. Angiers. Burges. Bononie. Padua.
Tholosa. Leu. 10 Deu. 19 Ephesians. 2. Gala. 3.
And therefore condemned as a bastard by the judgment of all Universities in
England, France, and Italy: as well of the Ciuilians, as Divines. For now are
we freede from that Ieweshe yoke to raise up seed to our brethern departing
with out issue, by the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has destroyed
the wall and distance betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, and has no more
respect to any Tribes (for conservation whereof this was permitted) but all
are made one in him with out distinction, which acknowledge him vnfaynedlie to
be the Son of God and Savior of the world. For in Christ Jesus there is
nether Jew nor Gentile, Grecian or Barbarous, bond nor free, etc. And
therefore it must needs follow, that king Henry the eight, in marying with
his brothers wife, did utterly contemn the free grace of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which long before had delivered us from the servitude of that law:
king Henry committed incest in begettinge Marie.
and also committed adulterous incest contrary to the word of God, when he
begat this ungodly serpent Marie, the chief instrument of all this present
misery in England.

And if any would say, it was of a zele to fulfill the law which then was
abrogated, he must confess also that the king did not marie of carnal lust,
but to raise up seed to his brother: when the contrary is well known to all
men. Let no man therefore be offended, that I call her by her propre name, a
bastard, and unlawfully begotton: seeing the word of God, which cannot lie,
does give witness upon my part. And moreover, that such as are bastardes
should be deprived of all honor: Deu. 23.
in so much as by the Law of Moses they were prohibited to have entrance in
to the Congregation or assembly of the Lord to the tenth generation. Consider
the^ your ungodly proceadinges in defrawding your co^trie of a lawful king:
and preferringe a bastard to the lawful begotten dawghter, and exaltinge her
which is, and will be a common plague and euersion of altogether: for as much
as she is a traitor to God, The Gosp^ll^rs help her to the crown and she
burns the^.
and promis breaker to her dearest frindes, who helpinge her to their power to
her unlawful reign, were promised to inioye that religion which was preached
under king Edward: which not withstanding in a short space after, she most
falsely ouerthrewe and abolished. So that now both by Gods Laws and ma^s, she
oght to be punished with death, as an open idolatres in the sight of God, and a
cruel murderer of his Sai^ts before me^, and merciles traytoresse to her own
native country.

For Gods word she abhors, Antichriste has she restored, her fathers
Laws contemned, her promise broken, and her brother Godly king Edward as an
heretic condemned* M. Bucer Paulus Phagius, maistris Martyr, etc.
not thinkinge it enough to express her tyranny upon the^ that lived, except
she showed cruelty, or rather a raging madness on the bodies of Gods servants
long before buried, drawi^g the^ forth of their graves to burn the^ as
heretics. And in fine utterly abhorring the English nation, has joined her
self to adulterous Philip, the Spanishe king: who is more blind then they that
can and will not see? Here unto the laws of the real me, the will and
prophecy of her father does prouok the^
to whom she has, and does continually labor to betray the whole kingdom.
And yet ye cannot, or will not see it, nether yet for all this be stirred up to
bridell her affections, and withstand her ungodly doings, to promote the
glory of God, and to preserve your brethren, and your selves: but thinking to
reteyne your promotions by flattery, do hastily draw Gods vengeance upon your
selves and others.

For do you think that Philip will be crowned king of England, and reteyne
in honor English counselors? Will he credit them with the government of
his estate, who have betrayed their own? Shall his nobility be Spaniardes,
with out your lands and possessions? And shall they possess your promotio^s
and lyuinges, and your heads upon your shulders? Come they to make a spoil of
the whole Realm, and leave you and yours untouched? Where is your great
wisdom become? Your subtle counsels and policies, where of you brag so
much, to whom these things be hid, that every child espieth?

If Esai the Prophet had not forespoken these secret judgments of God, Esa. 3.4
29.
in blynding the eyes of the proud contemners, I could not cease to wonder at
your gross ignorance, as now I consider with grief of heart, the misery
which is like shortly to come upon you in full measure, for this calamity,
already powered upon others, through your procurements and studies. Which
fearful judgment of God look never to escape, except suddaynlie ye repent and
change your ungodly purpose. Esai^ 28.
If you be at a covenant with death (as you think) you shall not avoid it,
if you think to escape the common destruction, making dissimulation and lies
your refuge, yet shall you be revealed: for the Lord him self will destroy all
your counsels, because they are not of him.

Yt is not your going to the Mass, your praising of the Pope, your flattring
of your Queen, and shaven Priests of Baal, that can defend you in that day:
nether yet your licenses which some of you purchasse of an infidel to depart
out of your country, Licenses purchased of infidels and lyinge in idolatrous
places, is thought good enough of carnal gospelers.
some lyinge in idolatrous places, differing no thing from them in there
dissolute living, some passinge in to Italy to please their Queen, and to get
an opinion of men that they approve her procedings, rather coveting to have the
name of a blasphemouse papiste, then of Christ our Savior. Thikinge by such
unlawful means to work miracles: but their gains at length will be
confusion, Their dea^^ prove what they be.
as now their fruit which they have brohgt thence do witness that is the want
of Gods fear and open dissimulation.

This is not the way (o vain men) to win Gods favor, and to escape his
fearful judgments: but to increase his wrath and haste^ his vengeance, who
will not be mocked, nether suffer his holy Name long to be blasphemed.
Consider with your selves, and return to the right way, and walk in it while
ye have time, and I will show it unto you.

You have sinned most greuouslie against the Lord: The only means to escape
misery. Psalm. 103.
know your transgressions, and with tears confess the^, every man
vnfaynedlie unto the Lord, who is ready to mercy and slow to anger. You have
despised and abused the word of his dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, the
Author of salvation, in the days of our Godly king Edward (which is the
cause why God has thus plaged us with a tyrant) seek after the word again
and receive it with all reverence. By giving authority to an idolatres woman
ye have banished Christ and his Gospel, Follow wise counsel, least ye and al
your land perish.
and in his place restored Antichriste with all his infections, wherein your
own consciences condemn you of evil. Then in taking again the same
authority from her, you shall restore Christ and his word and do well. In
obeyinge her, ye have disobeyed God. Then in disobeying her, ye shall please
God. Because you have given place to her and her counsels, you are all become
idolatrous hypocryts, and also traitors to your own Country: then by
resisting her selves damnation for their transgressio^ and her wicked decrees,
you must be made true worshippers of God, and faithful English men.

Other mea^s there are not, but to turn to God by repentance, to banishe
falsehode by receaui^g the truth, to overthrow Antichriste, and all kind of
idolatry by honoring Christ and his Gospel: to suppress tyranny by justice:
to withstand oppression and murder by defending the just and innocent, and
punishing the workers of iniquity, of what estate or condition so ever they
be, as after (God willing) shall be proved at large. For as by this means only
Gods honor must be restored, Restore gods honor and escape Gods vengeance
and you escape his vengeance, to obey the^ that obey God, and resist them
that resist his Majesty, re^dringe unto all according to his Laws: euenso,
when they should understand that their subjects be no more as it were brute
beasts with out sense or judgment: but that they know wherein, and how far
they owe obedience, and would no more be led by their deuilishe and ungodly
lusts, as they have been and yet are presently.

Then would their Princes and Rulers also give them selves with all diligence,
if they knew rightly how to obey and wherein, the^ should these things here
mentioned come to pass. Deu. 17.
to study and apply the same Law of God: then would they do nothing them
selves, nor command others, where in they where not assured to please him.
Then would they learn to obey God, which now rebel against him: and to follow
the examples of the Godly kings and Rulers, having the book of the Lord ever
with them, never suffering it to depart from them. Gods book teach the true
obedience.
But as worthy Joshua, Josias, and Iosaphat, to read and study in it day and
night. Not to declyne from it them selves, nor yet to suffer their subjects
therein to be ignorant, which is the only wisdom of God and comfort of all
men's consciences. Then should the Rulers love and preserve their subjects. And
the subjects likewise reverently obey their superiors. To conclude, then
should all be blessed of God, feared of their enemies, sure from all dangers,
void of all idolatry and false religion, Deu. 4.
and esteemed of all nations the wysest and mightieste people upon the earth,
as God promissed to Israel, so long as they should live.

CHAP. IX.
Answers to the contrary objections of such as teach all manner of obedience
to Magistrates to be lawful, taken forth of the New Testament.

But for as much as there is nothing so manifest and true, which is not either
obscured utterly by contrary reasons of man's brain, or else discredited by
other places of Scripture wrongfully understand and applied by many: I have
here thought expedient before I proceade any further, for the better
establishing of the truth, to answer and satisfy, so far as shall please God
to give unto me, all such reasons, auctorities, and Scriptures, as are
aleadged to the contrary: to the intent that we may not only see the truth,
and so be styrred to embrace it, but also may epsy the falsehod, and learn to
avoid it.

And because amongst all other auctorities and reasons, there is none of
greater force the^ that which is written in the Epistle of S. Romans 13.
Paul to the Romans: we will first of all others begin with it. The first
objection.
Let every soul (says he) submitt him self to the authority of the higher
powers: for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained
of God. Who soever therefore resists power, resists the ordinance of God:
and they that resist, shall receive unto them selves damnation. Here (say they)
is a general doctrine affirmed by the Apostle, that every man (none excepted)
must be subject to superior powers: and if every man must be subject, none
oght to disobey.

Besides this, behold the Apostle does not barely affirm this proposition,
sayi^g: Every person (for that he meanethe by every soul) must be subject to
the Magistrates and Rulers, of what condition so ever he be, but proves the
same with a most sure argument gathered of the ordinance of God* because there
is no power but of God. And therefore to resist powers, is to resist God him
self, whose ordinance it is. And not contented with one reason, he confirms
the same with a another depending of Gods punishments, which he has appointed
for all them that resist, which is, to receive to them selves damnation for
their transgressio^: so that they conclude, that it is not only Paul's
authority that makes all men subject to their superiors (which
notwithstanding were sufficient, being the Apostle of Christ) but also the
same is by good and strong reasons confirmed.

Answer
In answering to this objection, I will not long hold you in re^dring the
cause, The cause wherefore the Apostle was moved thus to write.
which as we may probably gether mouid the Apostle to write this to the Romans
concerning obedience to their superiors: but in few words touch so much as
seems necessary. It may apeare very credible (which some Godly and learned
do write) that amongst the Romans, after they had received the Gospel, there
were many under that name, which would be delivered from all subjection:
thinking the office of Magistrates no more necessary to them that professed
Christ: as do this day the Anabaptists and Libertins. Anabaptists. Libertins
Others, who had been once freed from tribute and custom paying, to strange
Magistrates, would thereat take an occasion by preaching of the Gospel to pay
no more tribute to their superiors. Such were diverse of the Jews, Denyars of
tribute
who counted it for abo^dage. And that ki^de of sect was raised up even in
Christ's days, as appears when the Pharisees sent their disciples with
Herodes servants to know his judgment, whither it were lawful for them to
pay tribute to Caesar or no. Mat. 22
And in the Acts, Gamaliel makes mention of one Judas Galilaeus, Act. 5.
which was author of that sect, and moved much trouble amongst the people,
sayng: It was not lawful to pay tribute. By these and such like opinions, the
Apostle (perceauing the office of Magistrates to come in to contempt, and men
to esteem it not lawful, which God him self ordained in defense of his religion
and Civil policy (was moved to write as is before mentioned* exhorting all
men to esteem the office of Magistrates as Gods ordinance, and to obey them
whom God had appointed Rulers over them.

Then as the Apostle writes we confess, and so much as he speaks we
grant, that is, that all men are bownd ^o obey such Magistrates, whom God
^athe ordained over us lawfully according to his word, which rule in his fear
according to their office, as God has appointed. For though the Apostle says:
There is no power but of God: yet does he not here mean any other-powers, but
such as are orderly and lawfully institute of God. Either else should he approve
all tyranny and oppression, which comes to any commonwelth by means of wicked
and ungodly Rulers, which are to be called rightly disorders, and subuersions
in common welthes, and not Gods ordinance. For he never ordained any laws to
approve, but to reprove and punish tyrants, idolaters, we may resist
tyrants and yet not Gods ordinance.
papists and oppressors. Then when they are such, they are not Gods
ordinance. And in disobeying and resisting such, we do not resist Gods
ordinance, but Satan, and our sin, which is the cause of such. Or else, if we
shall so conclude with the words of the Apostle, By the papists gatheri^g.
Satan oght not to be resisted.
that all powers what so ever they be must be obeyed and not resisted, then
must we confess also, that Satan and all his infernal powers are to be
obeyed. Why? because they are powers and have their powers also of God, Job 12.
Iam. 4
which cannot touch man any farther then God permits. But S. James geuethe
us, contrary commandment, saing: Resist the deuel and he will flee away
from you.

And that the Apostle Paul does so restrain his words to all lawful
powers, we need not to seek far of. For in the self same Chap. The proffe of
this answer.
after he does expound his mind: that is, what powers and Magistrates he
means: Such (says he) as if thou do well, thou nedeste not to fear, but
if thou do euel. And again will thou be out of fear of the power? Do well
then: and so shall thou be praised of the same. For he is the minister of God
for thy welthe. But if thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword
for noght: for he is the minister of God, to take vengeance of them that do
evil etc. Whereby we may plainly understand, that althoghe, he says, There
is no power but of God: yet he means such power as is his ordinance and
lawful: whose office stands in these two points, to defend the good, and to
punish the euel: not to be feared for well doing, but for evil, to whom the
sword is given for that purpose. And to such, with the Apostle we grant also,
that every person must be subject and obedient: The papists argument is fully
answered
for they are Gods ordinance. And to disobey or resist such, is to disobey
and resist God him self. And therefore do deserve justly to receive Gods
punishment, which, as the Apostle threatens, is damnation. And this makethe
nothing against our former sentence, but rather confirms the same: approui^ng
no obedience but that which is lawful, that is to say, according to Gods
appointment and ordinance, as does more evidently appear in his words
following: partly in that he demands obedience to such for conscience sake,
and not for fear of vengeance only. As though he would say: so far is it
from reason and Gods word that any man should disobey or contemn the
Magistrates, ordained by God to punish vice and mantayne virtue, that he
needs no other to reprove him of evil in so doing, then his own propre
conscience, which will (justly examined) teach him how Gods ordinance oght to
be reverenced, especially serving to the preservation of the people, in
suppressing wickedness, and promoting Godliness.

For that cause he wills after to pay their tribute, not to every man that
will demand (for unlawful demandes may be lawfully denied) but to whom
tribute belongs, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, and honor to
whom honor is due.

Obedience then he requires of all me^, tribute also, custom, fear,
Obedience is commanded to all men: but yet under condition.
and honor: but under this condition of justice and aequitie, to render these
duties to them that have just title thereu^to. And who are they, but (as I
said before) such as God has appointed to rule over us in his fear, for our
profit, and preservation of the common welthe?

To this also does the sayng of S. The second objection and answer 1. Pet. 2
Peter well agree, thoghe it be brought in of the other party to prove the
contrary: Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake:
whither it be to ki^ge as to the chief, or unto Rulers as unto them that are
sent of him, for the punishment of euel doers, and the praise of the^ that do
well. Behold how Peter here nether dissenteth from him self in his answer
before to the Co^cile, nor here disagreeth from Paul, willi^g obedience to
kings and inferior Rulers: not to all, but to such as are appointed to punish
evil doers, and praise the contrary: and to disobey such, must needs be
condemned for wicked and ungodly rebellion. For such there were as may
plainly appear by. S. Peter's words following, which under the pretense of
liberty would cover and cloak their malice. And this the Apostle forbids
in all manner of subjects, and iustlye.

The third objection and answer.
But you will say, the words of Peter following concerning the obedience of
servants to Masters, does charge us farther then with godly Rulers, and
such as rule according to their office. For to servants he writes on this
wise. Servants obey your Masters with all fear, not only if they be good
and courteous, but also though they be froward: (...)
for so the greek word does signify, a co^brous, froward, or a person
hard to please and self willy. Whereof they will conclude, that Peter
commands obedience to all kind of persons, good and bad: what so ever they
command must be done. and why? because he so charge servants to obey their
masters.

Nevertheless this is to be observed in reading the words of Peter (as also in
all the holy Scriptures) that we must so take them as they agree with him self,
and not against him. Answer.
For the Spirit of God changes not his meaning: but what he says once, he
says for ever. Saint Peter here seems to prevent the objection which
servants (desierous of liberty) might have objected, being willed to obey
their Masters: as thoghe he would say: I am not ignorant that there are many
Masters troblesome, froward, and importune over you: Of what manner of
masters Peter speaks.
which are not so gentle and courteous toward you as becomethe them: well:
that is their faut and infirmity, which you must for Christ's sake, whom you
profess, patiently sustain and bear. For though your Masters be roughe or
froward (he says not wicked and ungodly) that is no cause why ye should not
faithfully serve them for the time of your servitude, so long as they will
nothing of you, but that which is good and godly.

Then the mind of S. Peter is that the shreudnesse or frowardnes of Masters,
is no lawful or just occasion why the servants should be disobedient. And as
this is the very meaning of the Apostle in that place so is it not like that
he would write contrary to him self, when he said: Act. 4.
God oght rather to be obeyed then man. Nether can he be judged contrary to the
Apostle Paul, The true knot of obedience. Ephe. 6.
who binds up all lawful obedience whith this knot, In the Lord: speaking
unto children, and exhortyng the^ to obey their fathers and mothers. But how?
In the Lord says he. And why? For that is just. Then if Paul charge not
children with further obedience to their parents, then in the Lord, to whom
principally they are by Gods commandment and nature bound, will Peter bind
servants to their Masters any further the^ in the Lord? And if it be just
obedience only which is in the Lord: can there be any lawful obedience against
him, either of children toward there pare^tes, servants toward their
Masters, God is our chief Father, Lord and master.
or subjects toward their Rulers or Magistrates? No, God is the first and
principal Father, Master and Lord, to who^ first obedience must be given as
he does dema^de: and to others in him, and for him only, as we were taught at
the beginning.

And that S. Peter had only respect to the rough conditions of Masters, and
not to their unlawful commandment against God and their conscience (which they
are bownde to do for no man's pleasure) the words do playnelie witness. For
this is thanks worthy (says he) if a man for conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wongfully. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for
your faults, ye take it patientlye? etc. Then ye see the meaning of S. Peter is
not to make us subject to any evil or ungodly comma^dementes, but to
persuade all servants not to cast of their duty, during the time of their
servitude, S Peter approves not froward masters.
notwithstanding they be roughly dealt with all of their Masters, which thing
is not spoken here of S. Peter to encourage or maintain froward Masters in
their frowardnes, nor yet to forbid the servants which fear God to seek after
lawful remedy at the hands of superior powers, who for that cause are
ordained to see justice administered to all sorts of me^, Servants oppressed
may seek lawful remedy against their masters.
as well to servants as others: but that they should not think the sharpness
of their Masters to be a cause sufficient to free them from doing their duty
upon the other part.

In like case may we conclude of Princes and Magistrates, How far wicked Princes
may be obeyed.
though they be rough and froward: yea, thoghe before God they are wicked,
ungodly, and reprobate persons (as was Saul) yet so long as their wikednesse
brasteth not out manifestly against God, and his Laws, but outwardly will see
them observed and kept of others, punishing the transgressors, and defending
the innocent: so long are we bound to render unto such, obedience, as to
evil and roughe Masters: because we may not take Gods office in hand to
judge of the heart any farther then their outward deeds do give manifest
testimony. Otherwise, if without fear they transgress Gods Laws them selves
and co^mande others to do the like, then have they lost that honor and
obedience which otherwise their subjects did owe unto them: and oght no more
to be taken for Magistrates: but punished as private tra^sgressors, as after I
have promised to prove.

Here unto they add the saying of our Savior Jesus Christ to Peter, The
fourth objection. Mat. 26. Ioh. 18.
which bad him put up his sword, after he had stricke^ the servant of the high
Priest, and cut of his ear: not mynding by the sword to make resistance.
Whereupon they gather that although it be lawful in doctrine and preaching for
the servants of God to withstand and reprove the enemies, as Christ him self
and his Apostles did: yet it is not permitted to do the same by any outward
or bodily force. For the^ as Christ answered, he might have obtayend of his
Father 12. Legions of Angels for his defense.

To this we shall sone answer, Answer.
if we consider who spoke this, to whom, and for what cause it was spoken.
Which circumstances well waied, give a great light to all like facts and
sayings. First we must diligently consider the office of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which as it was in all points spiritual, as well concerning his
kingdom which he himself affirms not to be of this world, as his Priesthod
and Prophecy: even so for his own part, Ioh 18.
could he use no temporal force or power for the accompleshment of the same,
because he denies that he either came to reign in this world, or else to be
a judge therein: as he answered the man, which would have had him to comande his
brother to divide the lands bewixt them, sayng: Man, Luk 12.
who made me a judge or deuider over you? And being demanded to give judgment
against the woman taken in adultrie, Ioh. ^.
he would not take that office upon him, but said unto the woman, when her
accusers were gone: Nether do I condemn thee: go thy way, and sin no more.

why Christ used not the d^f^nce of the temporal power.
Thus as concerning Christ's own person, who had all things and powers both
in heaven and in earth at his commandment, it is evident that he would use no
temporal power against his enemies: for that he was not therewith charged. Which
example takes not way the office or duty of such as are charged with the
te^porall sword, to use it in defense chieflye of Gods glory, and the
preservation of those that are under them.

Secondly why he forbad Peter also, Why Peter was forbid to use the sword.
and in him all the rest of the Apostles, we can not be ignorant. For who
knows not that the Apostles were witnesses of Jesus Christ chosen forth of
the world (as S. Act 1. Ioh ^^
John says) not to defend their Master by the temporal sword (for that
were to usurp upon another man's office, not apperteyninge to them) to whom
only the spiritual sword was committed, to fight manfully with it against
the world, Ephesians. ^. Hebr 4.
Satan and all spiritual powers. For as the Apostle says: Thoghe we walk
compassed with the flesh, 2 Cor. 1^.
yet do we not war fleshly. For the weapons of our warrfare are not carnal
things, but strong by the power of God to cast down holds: wherewith we
overthrow imaginatio^s of every high thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and bring in to captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. Wherefore, sei^g the office of the Apostles also is spiritual, as
their Masters was: and had only spiritual weapons to use in the defense of
the Gospel, whereof they were ministers: it is not good reason to conclude
their purpose, The absurdite of this reason.
that Magistrates and other inferior officers, oght not to use the temporal
sword in defense of religion: because Christ would not suffer Peter to fight
with the temporal sword. But rather as Christ requires of Peter and of all
the rest, the faithful use of the spiritual sword, where with they were
charged, or else they should be subject to malediction and judgment: For woe be
to me (says Paul) if I preach not: 1. Cor. 9. As the preachers are charged
to use the spiritual sword, so are the Magistrates bond to set forth Gods
glory poral sword.
eue^so may not they escape judgment and the curse of God, which use not the
temporal sword committed unto them with all endeavor in the defense of Gods
glory and his Church, wherewith every man is charged, according to his
vocation and power, none except.

To be short, if our Savior Christ should, as he might by his power, have
withstand the Jews that came to apprehend him and put him to death, how should
he have dronken of that cup which his Father had given him? That is, how should
he by his death and passion have redeemed us, Romans 5. John. 10.
for which cause he came in to the world: not to have his liffe taken from him
against his will, but willingly to lay it down for all.

Then we see that there is nothing in this saying of Christ to Peter, which
can condemn lawful resisting of ungodly Rulers in their ungodly
commandementes. For though it was profitable to all men that Christ without any
resistance should be crucified, being the sacrifice appointed of God the Father
to salvation: yet is it not therefore lawful for the inferior officers, or
permitted to the subjects, to suffer the blasphemy and oppression of their
superiors to ouerflow their whole country and nation, when both power and
means is given unto them lawfully to withstand it, and they by their profession
and office are no less bound to put it in execution.

CHAP. X.
Objections out of the old Testament, and Answers to the same.

THis much being spoken to satisfy such objections as are comonlye alleged
forth of the New Testament: let us see also what may be said against us in
the old, and after what sort they may be truly answered. The first objection
out of Ier. 29.
Jeremy they allege in his letter sent from Jerusalem to the captains in
Babylon, to the Priests and Prophetts, and to all the people of Israel that
then were in Babylon, counselling them how to behave them selves, and to escape
danger. The effect whereof was this: not to rebel, that they might escape, but
to remain still and abide the appointed time of the Lord: yea, to seek the
peace of the City wherinto God had brought them, and to pray to God for it.
For (says he) with the peace of that City, shall your peace be also.

Baruch. 1.
And the like is written in Baruch the Prophet tending to the same end, that they
should pray for the long liffe of Nabuchadnezer and Balthazer his sone, that
under their shadow (that is protection) they might live and serve them a long
time. Wheerin (say they) two things are to be noted against our opinion. The
first, that he forbids them to rebel, and exhorts them patiently to
abide the time appointed of their delyuerance. The second, that they are bownd
to pray for their enemies, and welthe of their Cities, and therein also are
bound to obey them.

This Epistle or letter of Jeremy sent to the Jews at Babylon then captives,
Answer.
we may not deny to be his: thoghe of the Prophecy of Baruch some do doubt,
and esteem it not as Canonical. Nevertheless because they tend both to one
effect in this matter, The cause why Jeremy and Baruch thus cou^selled.
we will admit both. First, granting that their counselle to quietness and
to abstain from rebellion was good and necessary because it proceaded from the
Spirit of God and of knowledge, which spoke or wrote nothing that God had not
reveled unto them: and whereof they also should not admonish others, to the
intent they might give no credit to false Prophets, which would stir them
up to sedition, persuading them that they should not long continewe in
Babylon, when as the Lord had other wise appointed. Whereof when God assured
them by his Prophet, it must needs be counted extreme madness and rebellion
against God, if they should have done the contrary, As we read of wicked
Achab, 1. Kings 22.
who crediting the flatteri^g cou^selle of the false Prophets, disobeyed God
in conte^ning the truth told hi^ by Micheas: but to his own destruction.

Therefore this matter is sone a^swered, where we have the secret counselle of
God reveled unto us, admonishing us to abide in any place, and not to depart
til he call us: we are more then rebels to do the contrary, and must
sustain the danger worthelye. But this is not our question, whether we oght
to remain in any place so long as God has commanded us: The state of the
question.
but whither we oght to do evil at the commandment of Prince or power,
wheresoever we be, or in what estate, be it never so miserable. For though
Jeremy cou^selled the^ with patience to remain in Babylon, yet nether he, nor
Baruch would permit the^ to follow the example of the Ge^tills there, in
idolatry or evil doi^g: as the Epistle of Jeremy sent also to the Jews
captives in Babylon and written in the prophecy of Baruch, Baruch. 6
does abundantly witness. And as the examples of Daniel also, Sidrach, Dani.
3.
Misach, and Abdenago do teach us: which not wihsta^ding their Captivity,
would not obey the kings commandment to do evil.

Also in that they are willed to pray for the good estate of the City wherein
they dwelled, that is Babylon, and for the long liffe of Nabuchadnezer and his
son the cause is also alleged, to the i^te^t that the peace of that City
should also be their peace: why the Jews were willed to pray for Nabuchadnezars
long life.
and for that Nabuchadnezer and his son should be their shadow and protection,
God so moui^g their hearts. Which causes are sufficient why the people of God
should be tha^kfull, that is, to wish well to the places and persons where,
and of whom they receive any benefit, especially peace and protection, as was
promised to the Jews in Babylon.

But what is this to the purpose? The Jews were comanded of God by the
Prophets especially to tarry in Babylon, where the^ for their syns they were
captives, because their own City Jerusalem, and all their country was
destroyed and subject to Nabuchadnezer and there remained no other place where
they might have peace, but in Babylon and under his jurisdiction. Is this then
a sufficient excuse for you that inioye your country and are charged with the
defense thereof, to suffer your selves willingly to be spoiled of Gods glory,
and peace of your consciences, that is, true religion: and you for the same
cause to be oppressed, removed and murdered, to give place not only to them
that hate you, but to the greatest enemies of Christ, the papists, and
idolatrous Spaniards?

Wherefore the Jews should be quiet in Babylon.
The Jews were willed to be quiet in Babylon, because that they and their
brethren also disperced should thereby find more favor and comfort: shall you
therefore forsake God and betraye your country to bring the vengeance of God
and his horrible plagues upon your selves and your brethern, whereof you have
already felt some portion? The Jews were willed to pray for Nabuchadnezer
and his son, for that by them they should pass over a great part of their
captivity with peace, and be also by them defended from other enemies. Are you
therefore excused, that permit your selves to be made a pray to Satan,
Antichriste, and to all sorts of Gods enemies, at the commandment of an
ungodly woman? Who seeks but to consume the English nation, and in the end
to cut your throtes that now are in authority, whom she uses as instruments,
to bring her wicked purposes to pass.

Is your condition now all one with the Jews? The miserable estat of England
In deed brethren it is like to be much worse, and that shortly without Gods
unspeakable mercy: but as yet their is some difference. They were captives and
prisoners under their enemies, in a strange country, but you are yet in your
own country and howses (though most unnaturally you have driven out many by
tyranny). You have yet your own laws amongst you, that is, the Law of God
and of your Realm, if you would use them: by the which you have had all peace
and quietness. And in co^temning these, ye see in to what case ye are brought,
and in to what misery, ready to fall. You may yet with Gods help, and your
endeavor promote his glory, underprop that Realm and common wealth, which by your
falsehod is falli^g in to utter ruin. The fall whereof, you and yours chiefly,
which have greatest charge shall have greateste cause to bewail.

If your Iesabell, thoghe she be an unlawful Gouernesse, and oght not by Gods
word and your own laws to rule, would seek your peace and protection as did
Nabuchadnezer to his captives the Jews: then might you have some pretense to
follow Ieremies counselle: that is, Nabuchadnezer is to be p^^f^rred to your
Iesab^l in the z^ale of God Nabuchadn^zers decree. Daniel. 3.
to be quiet, and pray for her lisse, if she would confess the only God of
the Christians, and not compel you to idolatry no more then did
Nabuchadnezer: who acknowledged the God of the Jews to be the true and
everlasting God, and gave the same commandment throughout all his dominions,
That what soever people or nation spoke evil of the God of Israel should be
rent in pieces, Iesabel worshi^p^th Maozin and caus^th others to do the like.
and his house counted detestable. For (says he) There is no other true God
that so could deliver his servants, as he did Sidrach Misach ad Abdenago.

But because her doi^ges te^d all to the contrary, that is to blaspheme God,
and also compel all others to do the like, what cloak have you here to
permit this wickedness?

To be short, if she at the burninge of three hundredth Martyrs at the least,
could have been satisfied and unfeignedly moved to confess the true Christ
and Messiah, and repented her former rebellion in giving contrary commandment
to all her dominions, charging the^ to receive again the true religion and to
expel all blasphemous idolatry of the pestilent papists: and that none
should speak any evil against Christ and his Religion (as did Nabuchadnezer
by the example of three persons only, who^ the fire by the power of God could
not touch) then were she more to be borne with, and reverenced as a Ruler (if
it were lawful for a woman to rule at all) then were there also some
probability in the reasons of the adversaries of this doctri^e. Otherwise as
you now see, it makes nothing at all for their purpose.

Another Argument is gathered of the words written in the same Prophet Jeremy:
The second objection out of Jeremy. 27.
speaking of the dominion which God was purposed to give unto Nabuchadnezer
ki^ge of Babylon on this wise: I have made the earth and me^ (says the
Lord) and the beasts upon the earth in my strength and stretched out hand,
and it do I give to him that pleases me. And therefore have I given all this
land in to the hands of Nabuchadnezer my servant. And all nations and mighty
kings shall serve him, and till the time of his land do come, that is, till I
visit him, and his country also. And it shall come to pass, that I will
visit the nation or kingdom which will not serve the king of Babell with
sword, famine, and pestilence. Wherefore serve ye the king of Babell and live.
Behold, say they, (who think it in no case lawful to withstand ungodly
Rulers) This wicked king is co^stitute of God, and made his seruante. And
moreover those that should withstand him, are cursed and threatened with sword,
famine, and pestilence. And therefore to disobey such, Answer. Jeremy. 5.
wherefore Tyrants are called Gods instruments.
must needs be unlawful.

Nabuchadnezer as it is written in Jeremy, is called the maule of the Lord,
and his instrument of war, by the which he was determined to beat down all
Nations and kingdoms, punishing them for their sins and idolatry. And
therefore the Lord calls him his serua^te, for that he had chose^ him to that
office. Nether oght we to marvel that God will use the labors of ungodly
persons, seeing all being his creatures are at his commandment, as is Satan
with all his infernal spirits. Then God, having appointed Nabuchadnezer to
this office to be his tormentor, as well in skourginge and correcting his own
people, as in destroyinge his open enemies: it was requisite that God should
minister unto him sufficient power, for the accomplishment of his determinat
counselle, which the Lord did in such abundance, as no Nation was able to
resist him, that should not perish either with the sword of Nabuchadnezer, or
famine, either else in that the Lord hi^ self would from heaven fight on his
part with the plague of pestilence.

And of this what thing else gather we, but first the purpose of Jeremy: that
was to draw the Jews from their folly, which after they had once forsaken
the Lord by rebellion, did think also by their policy to escape Gods
appointed punishment. No no, would Jeremy say: it is to late, The meaning of
the Prophet.
and ye are to weak to fight against the Lord whose work this is. When ye
were Lords within your selves, and had full liberty to honor your Lord God,
accordi^ge to the Laws which he gave unto you, and whereby ye were assured to
live without fear of all nations, you would not. And therefore shall you serve
a strange king, strange laws, and a strange nation til you be well corrected
and humbled: till you have felt by experience what an inestimable comfort it is
to have the living Lord to be your king and governor. And therefore would
Iere^. say, Serve Nabuchadnezer.

Saying the^ this is the appointed plague of God for disobeyinge him and his
Laws, to serve strange kings, and to be captives* you are hereby warned and
taught, rather to turn with all speed to the living Lord, and to set up his
true religion again, that he may defend you: the^ in proceadinge in your
blasphemye for the commandment and fear of any creature, to hasten Gods wrath
and Judgments. The Israelites because they would not receive the often
admonitio^s of Gods P^ophetes to fear the Lord, cooulde not afterward escape
his plagues, nor the fear of men: no more shall you (o inhabiters of England)
without speedy repentance escape the Spaynishe plague of adoulterous Philippe
whom the Lord will make his sword and maul to beat down your towns and
Cities, and to devour the people thereof. Man's yoke is unsupportable.
For saying you have with the Israelites forsaken the sweet and pleasant yoke of
God and Christ his Son: you shall endure the importable yoke of this cruel
and beastly nation.

But what, shall we obey then say you? Yes verily: but against your wills in
captivity and thraldom, as did the Israelites in Egypt and Babylon, to serve
them with your bodies and goods. Saying ye would depart with nothing to
serve our Master and Savior Christ, think you to escape this by obeyinge
your wicked Rulers? By what other means have you fallen into the hands of your
enemies, but by this kind of obedience only? Which as you have hard
sufficiently proved, is in Gods sight plain disobedience and rebellion. But
you will say: Jeremy willed the Jews to serve Nabuchadnezer which was a
wicked Prince, and then with out the fear of God, and therefore are we bownd to
serve our Queen, thoghe she be an ungodly idolatres? what obedience and service
Jeremy requires.
Jeremy speaks but of bodily service, and such as subjects owe to their
superiors in Civil ordinances, and outward doings, and not to defile their
consciences in committing evil. For in such things, both God and his
Prophets, and the examples of all the godly do forbid all obedience. They were
made subjects to the king of Babylon to serve him with their bodies and
goods, as were his own people: and also to pay tribute to him as did
strangers, which he had likewise subdued. The which thing was for their
punishment. And therefore of duty they must patiently bear them.

The^ in few words I answer, that althoghe it be most lawful with patience
to bear the punishment of the Lord for our sin, and not to repine or rebel
against it: yet is it our part nevertheless, and bownden duty, to defend
and maintain the cause of God with all our might: and to whithstand all manner
of adversaries, even to the loss of our goods and lives: being ever assured of
this promise of our Savior and Master, That he that loses his liffe for his
sake, shall find it: Mat. 19.
and he that loses father or mother, frindes or goods in his cause, shall be
rewarded an hundredth fold in this world, and in the world to come with liffe
everlasting.

It is not then wisdom to repine at the rod when it is laid upon us to
beat us, but to return back to our merciful Father with unfeigned
repentance, Gods plagues oght to move us to repentance and not to harden us in
evil.
calling for mercy before hand whiles he does but menace us. And therefore the
threatening or counselle of Jeremy, is but an admonition for us to obey God in
true religion when we have time: that thereby we may escape the like plagues:
and no defense at all for our ungodly behavior in yelding to the deuilishe
decrees of any ungodly Magistrates, what names or titles soever they bear.
For this answer of the Apostles must ever more prevail: God must be obeyed
rather then man. And there is no obedience in evil that can please the
almighty.

Last of all we have to consider the sainge and doing of the worthy seruante
of God the king and Prophet David, The third objection.
1. Sa^. 24 and.49.
who would not lift up his hand against king Saul, notwithstanding he
sought to have murdered David, sai^ge: God forbid that I should touch the
anointed of the Lord: and why? Because he is the anointed of the Lord. If it
be not lawful the^ to touch the king because he is the Lords anointed: it
is likewise unlawful to disobey or resist, for that he is the Lords anointed.

Answer
To which I answer, that to consider the bare words, it would seem true as
they say: but wayi^ge the cause, the matter is easy to answer. The cause why
David was hated of Saul.
The occasion wherefore Saul, hated David, was for that he knew he should
succeade him in his kingdom. As Saul him self does confess in the same
Chapter, saying: I know of a suertie that thou shall reign, and that the
kingdom of Israel shall be establisshed in thy hand. 1. Sa. 24
Swear to me therefore by the Lord, that thou will not cut of my seed after
me, nor destroy my name from my fathers house. This being the^ David's own
private cause, None oght to revenge his own private cause.
it was not lawful for him in that case to seek his own reuengeme^t:
especially in murtheringe violently his anointed king, and the anointed of the
Lord. For it is not written of Saul, that he was an idolatrer or constrained
his people to worship strange Gods, nor yet was about to sell the^ to the
enemies of God the Philistines, against whom he foghte manfully and many times.
Nether that he was an open oppressor and co^temner of the Laws of God, as are
this day all the rulers in miserable England. And therefore David being but a
private man, could have done no violence to his king without Gods especial
inspiratio^, Rulers co^temninge Gods laws are as well subject to the
punishment of the same as private persons.
except in reue^ginge his private cause he had usurped Gods office and soght to
have established him self in his kingdom, not taryi^ge the Lords appoi^tme^t.

But where as the kings or Rulers are become altogether blasphemers of God,
and oppressors and murderers of their subjects, then oght they to be
accounted no more for kings or lawful Magistrates, but as private me^: and to
be examined, accused, condemned and punished by the Law of God, whereunto they
are and oght to be subject, and being convicted and punished by that Law, it
is not ma^s, but Gods doing: who as he does appoynte such Magistrates over his
people by his Law, so does he condemn as well them as the people tra^sgressing
against the Law. For with God there is no respect of persons, as here after
folowith more largely.

Thus we see that althoghe David thought it not lawful in his private cause to
touch Gods anointed, yet are no people or nation thereby constrained either ot
obey their anointed in unlawful demandes, or else forbidden to withstand the
open transgression of Gods Laws and man's. For in that case Saules servants
would not obey him, 1. Sam. 22
commandinge them to murder Ahimelech and the rest of the Levites and
Priests: Deu. 17.
so that not to withstand such rages of Princes in time according as the Law
requires (which commands that the evil be taken forth from amongst you) is
to give them the bridle to all kind of mischiffe, to subuerte all Laws of God
and man, to let will rule for reason, and thereby to inflame Gods wrath against
you, wholly, as your selves in England are this day an example to all nations
and people that bear the Name of Christ.

These are the objections for the most part, or at the least the chiefest,
The objections do clear this doctrine and nothing darken it.
which are commonly alleged against this verity most plain and euidente:
that is that there is no obedience to be allowed against God, which is not in
his sight disobedience. Also that it is lawful for all men according to their
vocation to resist to the uttermost of their power all such as are open
enemies of God, and labor to make them slaves to Satan. These objections as
you plainly see, make nothing to the contrary: but if they shall be depely
considered, do rather strongly confirm the same. Therefore dear brethern, let
no man fear to show him self Gods seruante openly, and to forsake in time the
shameful bondage of Satan, to call back the truth of Gods word again,
whereby ye were once in freedom both of conscience and body: and utterly to
abolishe all vile papistrie the doctrine of devils, and only cause of all your
calamity, both of body and soul.

CHAP. XI.
It apperteyneth not only to the Magistrates and al other inferior officers to
see that their Princes be subject to Gods Laws, but to the common people also:
whereby the tyranny of the Princes and rebellion of the subjects may be avoided.

TO resist evil and to maintain goodness, to honor God truly and to expel
idolatry, every man will confess to be a good and godly act, and cannot but
highly commend the workers thereof, as men acceptable to God, and worthy
members of a common welthe: but when men consider the dangers and displeasures,
which commonly happen to such, then is there great courtesy made who first
shall take the enterprise in hand: and long disputations made whither it be
their duty or no: and to what sorts of men it does belong, as though any were
exempted out of that number which do profess the Name of God. If the superior
power be an idolat^er or a cruel tyrant suppressing true religion and
murdering the Saints of God (as Iesabel of England does with all her rabble
of papistical Bishopps, and shauelinges) who is so ignorant of God, or
destitute of all humanity or natural judgment, that will not aknowledge such a
one to be unworthy the society of the godly and honest: much less to have
the authority and rule over great nations and whole kingdoms?

And not with out cause. For by the Civil Laws, a fool or idiot borne, and
so proved, shall lose his lands and inheritance whereunto he is borne, because
he is not able to use them a right: but especially oght in no case to be
suffered to have the regiment of a whole nation or kingdom. And it is most
certain that there is no such evil can come to any common wealth by fools and
idiots, as does by the rage and fury of ungodly Rulers, maynteyners of
idolatry and tyranny. For folly has commonly joined with it simplicity, The
gouuerneme^t of fools more tolerable then of tyrants.
void of malice and easy to be ordered: but idolatry and tyra^nie rese^bleth
more the nature of wild beasts, cruel bears, and ragi^g lyo^s, the^ the
condition of man. For simplicity, they are replenished with craftines* for
love, they show malice: and for patience, furious rage and madness and being
borne as it were a common plague to all men, cannot once study for the
preservation of a few.

This besides reason, experience teaches all men to be most true, that it
were better to have any fool, the^ such an untamed beast to be over the^.
And that such being altogether with out God, oght to have no authority over
the people of God, who by his word requires the contrary as is most
manifest. And yet to punish, and depose such a one according to the
commandment of God, Deu. 17.
there is none that thinks it Lawful: or at the least will confess it to
appertain unto them, either to do it them selves, or to see it done by others.
As for the wicked counselors, they are plain Gnatos and flatterers, Such as
only flatter the apptites of their prince.
thinking their office to be applied unto their kings and Queen's will, as
though they had no charge of the whole Realm. And therefore will labor to
compass nothi^ge but that which their Princes lust after, or may at the least
please them, not passing if the whole Realm do perish, so they may obtain
their favors. Such, Achitophels deserve to have Achitophels reward, for
their deuilishe cou^selle with out mercy. And as it is with them, so is it
with the rest of all estates, as before has been touched. Nevertheless, the
matter is so evident upon their parts, that all will confess that it chiefly
belongs to inferior Magistrates to see a redress in such disordres: and they
the^ selves can not well deny it.

But as touching the common and simple people, they think them selves utterly
discharged, whither their Prince be godly or ungodly, wise or foolish, The
vain excuse of the co^mu^ people.
a preserver of the common welthe or else a distroyer, all is one to them, they
must be obedient, because they are ignorant, and must be led them selves, not
meet to lead others. And because their doings are counted tumultes and
rebellion (except they be agreeable to the commandmentes, decrees, and
proceadinges of their superior powers and Magistrates, and shall in doing the
contrary be as rebels punished) therefore of all others (say they) we have
least to do, yea nothing at all with the doings of our Rulers. If they rule
well, we shall fare the better: if they be ungodly they have the more to
answer for their ungodliness. What have we to do with their matters? Thus do
all sorts of men from the highest to the love slyppe their heads out of the
collar: and as careless persons not passing which end goes forward, gives
the bridle wholly to their Rulers till destruction remediles ouerflowe all.

To the intent therefore that this simplicity, ignorance, and subjection of the
inferior people, do not altogether blind them, and cause them (as hitherto it
has been proved almost in all places and countries) to suffer them selves like
brute beasts rather then reasonable creatures, to be led and drawn where so
ever their Princes commandementes have called: either to arm them selves
against Christ their Savior in overthrowing the truth of his Gospel to bring
in Antichriste and papistrie: or else to fight against their own brethern the
servants of God, to rob them, expel them out of their one howses,
possessions and country, to torment them and cruelly put them to death: as
thoghe the commandment of the Prince could make that lawful, which God
forbids as detestable: Ignorance can not excuse the people.
as thoghe they being made instruments to their Princes in executing ungodly
tyranny, should not be partakers likewise with the^ of Gods vengeance in the
day of his dreadful visitatio^, when nether their ignorance can excuse, them,
nether commandment of king or Prince defend the^, but they workinge
wickedness with their Rulers shall drink of the same cup with them also.

To the intent (I say) that they should be no more so blinded, nor run
headlonge (as they do) to their own destruction: I have thought good moreover
and besides that which hitherto has been spoken in general (whereof
notwithstanding they might also gather what belongs to them in their
condition and estate) to snewe unto them more especially what may be demanded
of common people by Gods word, and what the people also may lawfully deny to do
by the same word of God. Which as it oght to be permitted and preached to all
men in general: so should it be the common and only rule whereby to frame and
order all men's lives and doings.

And to avoid all incomodities that are accustomed to happen in all common
welthes, Two extremities to be avoided.

To much liberty is not to be permitted to the people.


as well upon the Magistrates part as of the people, there are two extremities:
whereof both must be warned. The first is, that the Magistrates permit not to
their subjects ouermuche liberty, least thereby they fall in to contempt and
subjection of their people: whereof folowethe for the most part, all kind of
dissolutnesse, and carnal liberty, subuertio^ of all good Laws and ordres,
alteracion of common welthes and policies, contempt of God and man: and to be
short, all things turned to disorder and confusion. The second apparteyneth
on the other part, to the people, The liberty of the people.
which oght not to suffer all power and liberty to be taken from them, and
thereby to become brute beasts, with out iudgmente and reason, thinking all
things lawful, which their Rulers do with out exception, comma^de them, be
they never so far from reason or godliness: as thoghe they were not
reasonable creatures, but brute beasts: as thoghe there were no difference
betwixt bond slaves, and free subjects: and as thoghe they had no portion or
right at all in the country where they inhabit: but as they were altogether
created of God to serve their kings and governors like slaves, and not their
kings and governors appointed of God to preserve his people, where of they are
but a portion and members, albeit they occupy the chief room and office, not
to bring the rest of the members in co^tempte and bondage, but to comfort
them, defend them, and norishe them as members of the same body.

And as the people may be assured by Gods word that this liberty apparteyneth
to them, which becomes members of one body and brethern, Deu. 17. Subjects
oght not to suffer the^ selves to be made slaves.
because the Lord God him self (from whom kings have their authority and
power) calls their subjects and people their brethern, charging them in no
case to lift them selves above them, but as brethern to rule in all humbleness
and love over them: euenso, the people, if they suffer this right to be taken
from them, which God of his singular favor has granted then are they an
occasion that their kings and Rulers are turned to tyrants, 1 Samuel 8
and cruel oppressors, according as Samuel promised the people of Israel should
come upon them, insomuche as they had refused his government, who ruled over
them, in all justice, and humbleness, and in such sort as no man could
charge him with any crime. And therefore the Scriptures pronounce that they
rejected not Samuel, but God him self i^ whose fear he ruled. This (says
Samuel) shall be the Law of the ki^ge, which shall rule over you. Your children
shall he take to serve in his chariot, and to be his horse men, The descrip^ion
of a wicked king and tyrante.
and they shall run before his chariot, and he shall constitute also Captayns
of a thousand, and of five hundredth, and others to till his grownde, and to
gather his harueste, to make weapons for war, and harness for his chariots.
Moreover, he shall take your daughters to make his anoyntme^ts, to serve his
kitchen, and to be his clothiers: besides this he shall take your fyeldes and
your vineyardes, your best orchardes of olives and give to his servant, and
of your corn and vines shall he take the tenthes, and give them to his
Eunuchs, and servants: your servants also and maids and the chif of your
youth and your asses, shall he take to do his work. And of your cattle shall
he take the tenth, and you shall become his servants: and you shall cry out
that day in the sight of your king whom you have chosen, and the Lord God
will not hear you that day: and why? Because they had rather have a king and
Ruler of their own appointment, then of the Lords.

Wherefore to avoid the dangers upon both parts, Both Magistrates and co^mo^s
oght to obey Gods Laws.
it is more then necessary that both be subject to that Rule, and with all
diligent care, labor to reteyne it, whereby both may learn their duty, and
be constrained justly to execute the same. For when the common people and
subjects have so large liberty by the negligence of their Rulers, that
customs and unlawful vsages shall be preferred to Gods Laws, and statutes,
and that to maynteyne the same customs, they care nothing if all other good
Laws, either of God or man, do perish: how is it possible without dangerous
tumultes, and rebellion, to bring them to any good order and reformation,
except there be some common, and approved Law, which very nature, and the
fear of God will teach them to reverence, and obey? As for example: amongs
other customs which maintain idleness, and serve the greedy appetite of the
belly (which all men are loath to forgo) how hard a thing were it to bring
them from their Sanctes days? king Edward de sierous that God should have
had his due honor sowght the abolishment of all Saints days.
The abolishment whereof, godly king Edward in his time could not bring to
pass. So great was the number of Papists in the Perlament house, which
mai^teyned those superstitiouse days, some beari^g the name of me^, and some
of women, ascrybi^g that to the creatures of God, which apperteyneth to him
alone, for as much as every day is the Lords work, and oght to serve to his
honor only. They have now in time of papistrie, days of Peter and Paul,
Marie, All days are the Lords and only appertain unto him
and John, with the rest of the Apostles: they have Georges day, and
katherines, Dunstans day the coniurer, and Loye the smithe, with innumerable
others, which maynteyne the idleness of them and of their servant contrary
to the ordinance of God, Saints days with the service appointed unto them
oght by Gods word to be abolished.
appoynting six days for their travel, and the seventh day only to rest,
and that to the honoring of our Lord God.

Also by what means may the people be drawn from the days of riote and
bancketing, which they term frindly feasting and goodfelloweshipp: as from
Whitsontides dronkennes and surfeit, Midso^mers shows and vanities, How hard a
thing it is to alter evil customs.
Christmas riote and bawdry, Shroftetwesdayes glottony, and Lents superstitious
observations, except by some Law of greater importance, the rude people be
otherwise persuaded? And what other Laws are there able to bring this to
pass besides the Laws of God? Wherein if they be not instructed, it is
impossible for any authority or power to withholde them, with out great
danger and tumultes from such kind of disordres and unlawful customs.

Therefore if thou be a Ruler and couete to have the people obedient to thee in
Gods fear, The means to break evil custom.
this must be thy first and principal study to, procure that they may truly
know God by the plain and diligent preaching of his word, wheri^ if they be
well instructed, there is no custom so long continued, no idleness so long
used, no supersticion so deeply rooted, which they will not gladly and
peaceably for go at thy commandment: yea, there is nothing which is evil,
that they can for shame stand in: nor any good and lawful demand, that they
will deny thee. By these means only shall thou obtain honor, maintain thy
right, win the hearts of thy people, and have them all obedient.

And as the Magistrates by this means, are sure to find obedience, and escape
all rebellion, tumultes and disordres among their subjects: euenso is there
no other rule for the subjects to escape the idolatry, tyranny, and
oppression of their superiors, then in reteyning (as their chief possession)
the self same Law and word of God. Permitting rather all things wordlie to
be taken from them, as lands, goods, house, co^trie, father, mother, wiffe,
children, yea liffe it self, then to be deprived by any means of that heavenly
treasure and precious perle, Mat. 13.
for the which they must sell althinges. Whereof to be fully persuaded, it is
necessary to understand what manner of people you are.

If you be the people of God, and unfeigned Christians, then must ye also know
that the Law of God, what treasures God has committed to the charge of his
people.
and Christ your Savior, does appertain unto you: wherein, as without shame
and condemnation ye may not be ignorant: euenso no power, commandment, or
threatninges, should cause you to depart from it, wherein only standethe that
comfort and salvation, which no creature can restore again unto you.

The heathen which knew not God a right, but were idolatrers, yet made their
religion to have the highest place in their common welthes: as Aristotle writes
in his Politiques. In the name whereof they might demand any thing of their
kings and Rulers, and they durst not deny them: and might also with out
offense deny all things which their Rulers demanded contrary to their
religion. In so much as this proverb was common amongst all, Vsque ad Aras:
meaning that against their religion (as they were persuaded) they were bownde
to no person: father, mother, friend, or governor: their love and obedience
toward the^ could stretch no further then to the Altars, that is, so far
as with observing their religion, they might lawfullye perform.

If the Gentills then had their religion in such honor and reverence that
against it (thoghe in deed it was mere superstition and idolatry) they would
acknowledge no obedience: in what estimation should Gods word and the religion
of our Savior Jesus Christ be amongst us that profess his Name, and are
assured of his doctrine to be the undoubted truth and power of God to salvation
of all beleuers? In what reverence we oght to have Gods word.
If the heathen kings and Magistrates could compel their subjects no
farther then the Alters: shall any authority or power compel us farther then
God, and his anointed our chief king, Lord and Master? Let it be counted
shame to us, that the ignorant Gentiles should be found more careful and zealous
in defending their superstition and manifest idolatry, then we are in
mayntayning the true worship of God and his heavenly wisdom.

If we were Turks, Sarasins, Jews or papists, which either knew not God a
right, or else denied his Son Jesus: it were no great marvel if we were led
after the lusts of our ungodly Princes. For as our Master teaches, When the
blind leads the blind, Mat. 15.
both fall in to the diche. But if we will be taken for the people of God and
his sons by adoption in Christ Jesus, then it behooves us likewise to give
obedience, principally to our Lord and Master, to our mighty God and most
louinge Father, as Malachi the Prophet exhorts. Mala. 1.
The son reuerenceth the father, and the servant the master: if I be your
Father (says the Lord) where is the honor that you give me? If I be your
Lord and Master where is my fear? Notinge unto us how it is in vain to call
him Father or Lord, so long as we give him not that honor and reverence which
he demands.

Also, if we will not be taken for blind and ignorante persons, then must we
show forth this light by walking as becomethe the children of light, Ephe. 5.
John. 12.
as the Apostle requirethe indifferently of all Gods children with out
exception, or excuse either of guide or Ruler. For the blyndnesse of our guide,
whither he be of the Clergy or Laytie may be no excuse to us, if in following
him we fall and perish: it is our own fault, and we must bear our own
judgment. For Christ hereof admonishes us: Mat 15.
Let the^ a lone (says he) for they are blind guides, and leaders of the
blind. And again, Mat. 23.
according to their works, see ye do not.

If thou having sight, had appointed to thee a blind guide, wouldeste thou
follow him into a daungerouse pit or deep water, wherein both might perish
because he was thy guide? Then truly might thou be judged of all men worse
then either ox or ass, or any other unreasonable beast, which will not be
driven in such places, as to their outward se^ses appear dangerous.

Nature only teaches all creatures this, to fly from those dangers that
should hurt them: and to desire all things that do them good. Nature teaches
to flee hurtful things
And when God has made this common to all beasts, and inferior creatures,
paynefully to seek their preservation: has he denied the same to man, whom
above all others he will have preserved? God has created all things for man's
commodite
For whose preservation chiefly he has not only created all things and
prescribed his Laws and commandments to prohibet murder, and every other
thing tendinge to his destruction: but also to show the abundance of his
mercies, spared not his dearelye belouid Son, but gave him to the cruel
death of the Cross, that man might have full salvation, not only here in this
world, but everlastingly in the world to come.

Wherefore, if he tender us so much, as to seek by all mea^s possible our
liffe and preservation, then must it likewise follow, that he has constitute
no laws, or ordinances to our destruction, so long as we shall be found
obedient unto them. Then is there no power that rules according to these
laws, which either can or will co^mande us any thing, te^dinge to our
destruction. But if any so do by Gods permission because of our sins, Tobi.
3. Esai. 3.
and rebellion toward him (for which cause only he suffers wicked Princes
to be our Governors) it is (dear brethren) to draw us to repentance, and
knowledge of our sins, and not that we should forsake the Laws of our God,
and to contynew in our wonted rebellion, by yelding to the ungodly
commandments of wicked men.

CHAP. XII.
How much the common people owe to God for his benefits received, what
obedience he requirethe, how far they are charged, what things they have
promised, and how ignorance may not excuse them.

ALL these things being well considered, it is an easy matter for all manner
of subjects to know what liberty belongs unto them, by the word of God,
which they may lawfully claim, as their own possession, and are likewise
bound at all times to practice: wherein also appears what things are
prohibited unto them, which they may in no case exercise. If you therefore be
Gods subjects and people, and he your Lord God and louinge Father, who is
above all powers and Princes, and has made no Laws, but such as are for your
preservation, and singular comfort: then without all controversy there may
be nothing lawful for you by any commandment of man, which your Lord God
in any case forbids: and nothing unlawful or forbidden to you which he
commands, whither it appartayne to the first Table or the Second. A rule
for all to observe.
Which rule if ye observe, you may be assured to please God: like as by doing
the contrary, ye shall purchase his heavy wrath and indignation. For no man
can serve two Masters at once: but he shall hate the one, and love the other.
Mat. 6.
And in hatinge your first and chief Lord to obey and please man, behold
your impiety is intolerable, prefarringe vile man his creature, to the
Almighty God and creator of all.

How much we are bownde to his Majesty, our own conscience does bear us
witness: which can not deny but that we have receauid of him alone our liffe
moving and being, our wisdom stre^gthe, beauty, riches, children, and all
things that are good and profitable, in whose power we may do all things, Ps.
1.7.17
and with out hi^ all flesh is turned to dust and powder.

Moses charged his with nothing that God had not commanded.
Remember the example of the worthy Captain and Prince Moses, who^ God chose
to deliver his people from Egypt, who would not charge the^ with any thing
at any time which the Lord his God had not commanded, evermore speakinge on
this wise, These are the statutes and precepts of the Lord: Thus says the
Lord: Exodus 19. Deu. 4.20
and, Hear o Israel the voice of the Lord, etc. In so much, as he had this
for his only shilde against the murmuring people: It is not against Aaron and
me that ye murmr but against the Lord: which being chosen and appointed of
the Lord, did only execute his will and commandementes. Yea, as for them
selves they confessed that they were nothing. As for us (said Moses) what
are we? meaning but earth and ashes, the creaturs of God, nothing differinge
from others, saving for that authority, whereunto they were called, and the
obedience which they showed in executi^ge not their own wills, but the will
and pleasure of God. Deuteronomy. 10
And why? but because they knew they were the people of God with who^ they were
charged, and being his people, Gods people must be governed only by Gods
Laws. Exodus 19.
how it behooves them to be ruled by no other Laws and ordinances, then by
such as God had given them.

Wherefore if Moses and Aaron, Gods elect and chosen servants had no more
power over the people then his express commandment permit, and that the people
so far and no farther were bownd to obey them: how can we assure our selves
that we offend not Gods Majesty, whose people we would be called, when
witheout his word, yea contrary to his express commandment we satisfy the
requests and statutes of ungodly rulers?

For as Moses could co^mande nothi^ge but from the mouth of the Lord: so
could the people obey nothing but that which proceaded from his mouth also:
as well because they were his people, as for that they had (opromised with one
voice and consent before God and Moses, when the Lord commanded him to say on
this wise to the people. You have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and
how I have carried you upon the wings of Egels, and led you forth to me. If
therefore ye will dilige^tlye hear my voice, and observe my commandment, you
shall be my propre people before all nations: For mine is the earth. And you
shall be unto me a kyngely Priesthod, and an holy people. Which words when
Moses had pronounced before the whole people, they all to gether with one
accord, The people promiss to God and Moses.
a^swered: Whatsoever the Lord shall speak, that will we do. And Moses
praised them (or God rather by moses) sainge, They did well in so answering.
Deu. 18.
And therefore promised to raise them up a Prophet like to him, etc. And this
was the covenant only that God made with them before he gave them the Law in
wrytinge, and the promise that they made to observe the same Law, that they
might thereby be his dear and chosen people.

This example ought never to depart from the eyes of all such as are, or
would be Gods people. Wherein as in a most clear glass it does appear how
they are bownd to God, what God requires of them, and what they have promised
to him. For as the Lord God required nothing of the Israelits, but that
which was their duty to do, and he by his exceadinge benefits in delyueringe
them from their enemies had well deserved: even so he byndeth the^ to nothing,
but to obey him. Nether did they promise any farther, saying: We will do all
things (not what Moses or Aaron or any other after them shall of them selves
command) but whatsoever our Lord God shall speak, that will we do. More then
this God required not, nether were they bownde any farther but to the Laws of
God only, which they promised for them and their posterity to observe. All
christians are no less bond to ob^y God and his Laws, then were the
Israelits.
And God for that cause blessed them above all nations, with his unspeakable
benefits.

So are we no less bownde to obey the self same God of Israel, whom we also
profess in Christ Jesus our Moses and Captain, by whom we are not only
delivered from bodily servitude, but from the most vile and dangerous bondage
of Satan through sin our spiritual enemy. To this worthiest delyuerer also
have we in Baptism promised no lose, yea, much more obedience: because of the
more abundance of graces, which by him we have received. And besides this are
most straightly charged so to do. Not by the voice of any earthly creature,
but by the mouth of God the Father speakinge from the heavens: This is my
dearly beloved Son, Mat. 4.17
in whom I am delited, hear him: whose fidelity also no less passed the
faithfulness of Moses, then did his honor and dignity being the Son of
God, and promised Savior, doing nothing at all, nor teaching any thing which
his heavenly Father had not appointed him to do and to teach.

Wherefore, as the Jews had the Law of God and his commandementes for a
sufficient discharge against all contrary commandementes, of what authority
so ever they were, being no farther bownde to any creature the^ the self same
Laws of God approved: euenso, all such as bear the Name of Christ and would
be taken for the people of God, thoghe they be of the basest and loweste state
of subjects, The co^ma^dement of Princes cannot bynd us contrary to Gods word.
are no farther bownd to any Prince or superior power, nor to their
commandementes, then the commandment of the chief king and Lord does approve
and permit, nor then their promise again to him does require.

Nether may it be a sufficient discharge for thee to allege ignorance,
because thou art a subject, and therefore have nothing to do, to inquire of the
doings or to examyne the commandementes of thy superiors or Rulers, The
ungodly opinion of the common people.
but wilt say with the multitude, If they comma^de well thou art obedient, if
otherwise thou art excused in doing as thou art commanded, and they only have
to answer to God by who^ thou art thus charged. Desceaue not thy self (dear
brother) For as well art thou charged by Gods word to know what they command
thee, and not to do it except it be lawful, As well the obeyer of wickedness as
the comma^der shall be punished.
as they are charged by their office to will nothing of thee, which Gods word
approves not. For as they in commanding and doing evil, shall not escape Gods
heavy wrath and iudgme^tes: no more shall thou, being made an instrument of
their impiety and ungodliness. Therefore to be ignorant in these things,
although thou be a subject, is to contemn the commandment of God, and to
neglecte thine own salvation: for as much as God has charged thee being one
of his people, with the same Laws (the Ceremonies except) wherwithe he charged
his people Israel before, and willith thee no less to know his precepts, and
to obey them, then he willed the Isralites. Deu. 6.11
Of them he required to have his Laws wryte^ upon their doors and posts, to
instruct their children in the same, to talk of them sitting at home, and
when they walked in the way, when they went to bed, and when they should rise.
why the Christians oght greater obedience to Gods word the^ did the Jews. Ioh
1.
But to thee besides all this, God has sent a more shining light, our Savior
Jesus Christ: which every man may clearly behold, except he be wilfully
blind with the stubberne Jews. He is the light that shinethe in darkness,
and lightneth every man that comes in to this world. He has taken away the
shaddoues and Ceremo^ies of the Law, that thou may clearly behold the will
of his Father. He has uncovered Moses face, Exodus 34. 2. Cor. 3.
to the-intent thou may fully consider the secrets of God. For these are the
days whereof the Prophet Joel spoke, Io^l. 2. Esai* 44. Act. 2.
when all should be Prophets, and see visio^s. And it shall come to pass in the
latter days (says God) that I will power forth my Spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons and daughters shall prophecy, your young men shall see visions,
and your auntients shall dream dreams. And moreover upon my servants and
handemaydes in those days, will I power my Spirit, and they shall prophecy.
Act. 2.
Which prophecy. S. Peter affirms to be fulfilled in the kingdom of
Christ, where all things are as plain and evident to all sorts of men and
women, which profess Christ unfeignedly, as before his time they were to the
Prophets them selves, or to such as God appeared unto in dreams or visions.

And therefore, if ignorance of Gods Laws could not excuse the Jews before
Christ's coming, which were contynualy subject to the punishment of God for
their transgressions (thoghe many things were obscure as in shadows and
figures: how much less ca^ it excuse any man now in so great light of the
Gospel? Seeing then thou know thy self bownd to obey thy Lord God above all
others, because of the inestimable benefits thou have received of him in
Christ Jesus, and because he requires the same of thee, and thou have also
promised no less to him in thy baptism and profession: and last of all in
that thou canest not pretend ignorance in such knowledge* and shyninge
brightness, nor yet escape Gods vengeance, which he with out respect of
persons will power indifferently upon all transgressors, be they superior
powers, or inferior subjects. It is thy part then, being a subject, to
learn this lesson of the Apostles (when so ever thou should be constrained,
Both hie and low must learn this lesson of the Apostels.
by commandment or force of tyrants to do evil) That God must be obeyed
before man. Which unto thee will be as sufficient a defense and buckler in all
assaults and dangers, as it is to all other sorts of men in authority and
office: as was before declared.

Art thou then, being a subject commanded to worshipp stocks and stones
which this day to our shame are erected again in England? Idols for the true
God.
Behold thou have Gods commandment for thy defense: Thou shall commit no
idolatry, nor make to thy self any graven image etc. Exodus 2^. Deu. 5.
Art thou charged to be at the idolatrous Mass, wherein Christ thy Lord is
blasphemed? Behold, The abominable mass for the holy Supper of the Lords.
he has given thee an other charge: that is, to celebrate his Supper,
according as he left in example, sayng: Do you this, that is, which ye se me
do, and not which the powers of the world, or the pestilent papists command.
Also do it (says Christ) in remembrance of me, Mat. 26 Comparison betwixt the
mass and the Lords Supper. 1. Cor. 11
and not of your frindes alive or departed, as teach the Papists. For none of
the^ died for you. More over do it to show forth the death of Christ, til
his coming, as witnesses the Apostle: and not to make a new sacrifice for
sin, as the Papists blasphemously both teach and preach. How the Sabbath is
abused.
Art thou commanded by men to dishonor the Sabbathe day in worshipping of
Saints and abstayning upon their days and euens from thy lawful business?
Behold, God thy Lord charge thee no further then only with his day of
rest, saying: See thou keep holy the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: and not
of Peter, Paul, Marie, To swear by Saints is contrary to Gods word. Deuteronomy.
6.10 Joshua. 23. Esai 45.
James or John. Art thou commanded to swear in the name of Marie and all the
Saints in heaven? (which is the papistical oath) Behold, the Lord says,
Thou shall only swear in the Name of thy Lord and God. Art thou commanded
not only to take the Name of the Lord in vain, but also to forswere thy self
most shamefully against Gods glorious Majesty, and the honor of our Savior
Christ? (as all they have done which lately have sworn to acknowledge
Antichriste the bloody butcher of Rome to be their head and governor) Behold,
The Lord will not suffer his house unpunished that takes his Name in vain:
much less such perjured and forsworen wretches. Art thou commanded to
persecute thy parents and friends, charged not to succor them in their
necessity, because they profess the doctrine of salvation? Art thou forbidden
lawful marriage, because thou art a minister of Gods word, and permitted to
live in all kind of filthy uncleanness, as do the Sodomiticall Priests,
Monks, Freers, No^nes, Cardinales, Deanes, Archdeacons, and all other other
orders of Satan: Leu. 20.
behold such does the Lord God as most abominable of all other, co^ma^de to
be put to death.

To be short, when they contrary to their oath and profession, command thee
to receue Antichriste, the beastly Bishop of Rome, with all his filthy
dregs of damnation: The sum of Antichrists doctrine
to burn the word of God and the faithful interpreters and professers of the
same: to forgo the comfortable preaching of the Gospel, and reading of the
Scriptures: to persecute Christ in his members: to aid the enemies with thy
goods and body against the dear children of God: to fight in other countries
with out any just cause or occasion, and to suffer thy wiffe, children,
kinsfolks and countryemen to be most cruelly spoiled, Unlawful wars.
oppressed and murdered for want of thy defense at home (as they most
shamfully have done of late, which at the commandment of that cruel tyra^t,
Oh lamentable misery.
prepared them selves to fight against the French king, and their own
brethern the Skottes, whiles the Spaniards put them selves in a readiness to
enter the Realm and make a general spoil and pray of all.

These things and many such like are plainly forbidden you by the manifest
word of God: and therefore to do them for fear or pleasure of any Prince or
power, is plain disobedience and rebellion against the Almighty. And
contrary wise, to answer in this case, and to do as the Apostles have taught,
that is, to obey God rather then man, is the only way to discharge your
consciences, to do your duties, and to please God: no more to be made by
ignorance the instruments of his sworen enemies (what title so ever they
bear) to subuerte Gods glory, oppress your brethern, and distroye your
country: but repenting your former ignorance and impiety, to be made
instruments of the contrary to the uttermost of your power, least you be
taken in your sin, and prevented with the bitter cup of Gods indignation,
already prepared for the workers of iniquity, and all such, as are ayeders,
and partakers with them, when nether power can defend the superiors, nor their
commandmentes, excuse the subjects.

CHAP. XIII.
The readiness of the people to defend idolatry, superstition, and earthly
commodities: and their slothfulness in maynteyning the contrary. How they
are charged to see the Laws of God kept, and the transgression of the same
punished, if their rulers do neglecte them. And that they may lawfully punish
their Magistrates as private persons transgressing the Lords precepts.

But what remedy? (say you) we being but subjects with out power, and
wisdom cannot help it. The more pyttie dear Countriemen, Rebellion against
the lawful government of godly king Edward and obedience to the unjust
usurpation of wicked Marie.
that you have so stoutly or rather stubbernely showed your wills and power in
the days of Godly king Edward the VI. your late Prince and governor, and
the zealous servant of God: who soght to rule you in Gods fear, and under whom
you had the confortable word of God, and were delivered from the Romish
Antichrist, and from all superstition, for the most part, having your Realm
free from strangers, and quiet from all enemies, enjoying your goods and
friends in peace with out all force. impriso^ning, reuili^g, banishing, or
murdering) It is to be lamented (I say) that then receiving all these
blessings of God, by the means of so worthy a Prince, ye were able to
conspire, rise and rebel with the danger of bodies, goods and souls, against
your godly and lawful king: and that chiefly to defend the deuilishe Mass,
and all the puddels of popery with the Caterpillars and rabble of all unclean
spirits, as Cardinals, Reu. 16.
Bishopps, Priests, Monks, Freers, Nonnes etc. And now in these matters
wherein consists the glory of God, the preservation of your own lives, and
defense of your country you are without all will, power and help.

To restore Antichrist again, whom ons God had banished to all your comfortes,
How fare man's iugdment differs from Gods.
you were not ashamed to term it obedience, and to count your selves therein
no rebels, but lawful resisters: but to defend Christ and his confortable
Gospel (which then you had in possession) that are you persuaded to be open
rebellion. To arm your selves against your superiors, to defend your commons
and earthly commodities with holden from you, by the greedy desire of new
vpstarte gentlemen, how willing and ready have you showed your selves? Worldely
commodities preferred to spiritual benefits
But to hold and reteyne your spiritual possession not promised only, but
given in to your hands, you are most slow without all hope and courage.
Shall not this be to your just condemnation? When God calls you to a
rekening, what ca^ you have to answer? Are ye any better then the Gergezites,
Mat 9.
which desiered Christ to depart from them because they lost their hogs
and swyne? yea, ye are worse then they were by much, because ye have professed
Christ and received him and his doctrine, and with him unspeakable benefytes
and treasors. And yet notwithstanding have not only desiered him to depart
from amongst you as they did: but laid violent hands upon him, persecuting
him with sword, banishment, fire, and cruel death, as though he had been your
mortal enemy. O ingratitude intolerable! Christ your merciful Lord (who
destroyed nothing of yours, but preserved and increased, even your swine and
hogs, and all other beasts and cattle in great abundance) you have despiced
and utterly denied, to have Antichriste to be your Lord and governor, and
with hi^ all filthy swine, wild bears, wolves, bores, tigers, and lions to
devour, destroy, and overthrow all things: not your fields and pastures
only: but villages, Towns, Cities, and Castles, yea your selves, your wives,
and children, and what so ever you count most precious.

Well, the day of the Lord will come, when you shall feel what it is to fight
for your Mass, and to betraye the Gospel, to rise and rebel against your
lawful Prince, and to obey and defend a bastard, and open enemy to God, an
utter destruction of the whole realm: to murder and banishe your natural
countrieme^ and loving brethern, to honor and receive strangers Gods express
adversaries: a cruel people, a proud nation: a people of a far and of a
strange langage, Baruch. 4 Ieremi^. 5. Deuteronomy. 28.
whose tongue ye shall not understand, an impudent nation, and hard hearted
people, with out all pity and mercy, which nether will be moved with the
lamentable voice of the mothers, nor show any compassion for the pitiful
cry of their sucklinges and infantes. And whi? because ye have chose^ to obey
vile man, yea a raginge and mad^ woman, A Godly and most necessary admonition
rather then the almighty and merciful God. Repent, repent, o ye people of
England, for your destruction is at hand. Forsake with speed the unlawful
obedience of flesh and blood, and learn to give honor i^ time to the liui^g
Lord, that he may stay his hand, and draw to him again his stretched out
arm, that you may find mercy, and that the bothom of your cupp be not turned
upward.

Alas say you, what is this we hear? Be not the people, of them selves as she
epe without a pastor? The vain excuses of the people.
If the Magistrates and other officiers contemn their duty in defending Gods
glory and the Laws committed to their charge, lies it in our power to
remedy it? Shall we that are subjects take the sword in our hands? It is in
deed as you say, a great discouraging to the people when they are not stirred
up to godliness by the good example of all sorts of Superiors, Magistrates
and officers in the faithefull executi^g of their office: and so much more
when they are not defended by them in their right and title, as well concerning
religion, as the freedom of their natural country: but most of all when
they, which should be there guydes and Capitayns, are become instruments to
enforce them to wicked impiety. Nevertheless, all this can be no excuse for
you, seeing, that evil doings of others, whether they be Lords, Dukes, Barons,
knights or any inferior officers, may not excuse you in evil. And thoghe you
had no man of power upon your part: Deu. 4.5 and 6. 1. Chro. 29.
yet, it is a sufficient assurance for you, to have the warrant of Godds word
upon your side, and God him self to be your Captain who wills not only the
Magistrates and officers to root out evil from amongst them, beit, idolatry,
blasphemy or open injury, but the whole multitude are therewith charged also,
to who^ a portion of the sword of justice is committed, to execute the
judgments which the Magistrates lawfully command. And therefore if the
Magistrates would whollye despice and betraye the justice and Laws of God, you
which are subjects with them shall be condemned except you maintain and
defend the same Laws against them, and all others to the vttermoste of your
powers, that is, with all your strength, with all your heart and with all your
soul, for this has God required of you, Exodus 17
and this have you promised unto him not under condition (if the Rulers will)
but without all exceptio^s to do what so ever your Lord and God shall command
you.

As touching idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.
it is worthy to be considered what Moses wrytethe, or rather the Spirit of
God by hi^, how the Lord in that place charge the whole people to stone to
death without mercy the false Prophet or dreamer, when any should rise up
amongst the^, yea thoghe the things came to pass which he before spoke, if
that thereby he soght to persuade the^ or draw the^ to idolatry. And also how
he suffered such amongst his people to try and prove the^, whether they would
love him with all their heart and with all their soul, meani^g (as every man
may well perceive) that if they should yield for all their signs and wonders
to idolatry, and not punish such false Prophets and dreamers as God had
raised up: that the^ they loved him not, yea that they had plainly forsaken and
denied him, for that he commanded expreslye that every such Prophet should be
put to death, and therefore charge to take the evil from amongst them. Which
commandment as it is not given only to the Rulers and Governors (thoghe I
confess it chiefly apperteyneth to their office to see it executed, for which
cause they are made Rulers) but also is common to all the people, who are
likewise bownde to the observation of the same: euenso is the punishment
appointed of God, belonging to all manner of persons without exception, being
found transgressors. For the Lord is a just punisher, Ecclesi 35 Deuteronomy. 10.
Leui. 19.
with whom there is no respect of persons, who wills his people to be like
him in their judgments. In iudgeme^te (says the Lord) comitte no
unrighteousness, nether respect the face of the poor, nether be you afraid at
the co^tenau^ce of the mighty, but judge uprightly to your neghbour.

Deuteronomy. 13.
Moreover that every person both high and low is charged of God with this
Law, and none freede from the punishment, it is evident in the same Chapter
following: Where God does not permit somuche as privy whispering in thy ear,
tending to idolatry, unpunished, no not of thy dearest friend or kinsma^,
sayng: If thine own natural brother, What zeal we oght to God in punishinge
idolatrers.
son, daughter, or the wyffe of thine own bosom, or thy neighbor whom thou
loueste as thine own liffe, secreatly provoke thee to idolatry, to serve
strange Gods, either far or near, give not place to him, nether hear him,
nether let thine eye have pity upon hi^, nether shall thou pardon him, or hide
him, but shall utterly sley hi^: thy hand shall first be upon such a one to
kill him, and then the hands of all the people etc.

The like commandment is also given in the 17. and 18. Chap. of the same book,
charging all the people of God in general, to see idolatry punished without
mercy, and that in all persons. Wherefore we may most certaynely conclude,
that if the Rulers and Magistrates in this case, would not execute the Laws
of God where with they are so straightly charged, that then the people are not
discharged, except they put it in execution to take the evil from amongst
them, to whom it also belongs. Next, that no person is exempted by any Law
of God from this punishment, be he king, Queen or Emperor, that is, either
openly or privily known to be an idolatrer be he never so near or dear unto
us, he must dye the death. For God has not placed them above others to
transgress his Laws as they list, As al persons oght to obey Gods Laws,
so oght they to be punished if they transgress them.
but to be subject unto them as well as others, over whom they govern. And if
they be subject unto his Laws, they must be subject to the punishment also,
when they be fownd disobedient transgressors: yea, so much the more as their
example is more dangerous. For look what wickedness reigns in the
Magistrates, the subjects commonly take encouragement thereby to imitate the
same, 1. king. 14.21.
as we see in the examples of Jeroboam. Achab and wicked Manasses, who being
suffered in the beginning to commit idolatry, and to erecte idols, made the
same likewise laufull to all their subjects. Number. 25.
For the same cause God commanded Moses to ha^ge up all the capitaynes and
heads of the people, for that by their example they made the people idolatrers
also: he had no respect to their authority, because they were Rulers, but so
much the rather would he have them so sharply punished, that is, hanged
against the sun without mercy: which judgment, thoghe it was done at Gods
commandment first, and after at Moses, yet were the people executors of the
same, and all did understand that it was just: and not for that time only,
but to be a perpetual example for ever, and a sure admonition of their duty
in the like defectio^ from God, to ha^ge up such Rulers as should draw them
from him.

And thoghe it appear at the first sight a great disordre, that the people
should take unto them the punishment of transgression, yet, when the
Magistrates and other officers cease to do their duty, they are as it were,
without officers, yea, worse then if they had none at all, and then God gives
the sword in to the peoples hand, and he him self is become immedialty their
head (If they will seek the accomplishment of his Laws) and has promised to
defend them and bless them. Leui. 26. Deu 27.30


And although the rebellion of the people, their ingratitude and contempt of
Gods Laws has been such at all times, that it is a rare thing to show
their duty in this behalf, by any example: Iud. 19.20
yet is there one fact of the Isralites worthy memory, and appertayni^g, to
this purpose, which is written in the book of the Judges, at what time they
had no lawful Magistrate in all Israel. Who notwithstanding rose up wholly
together against the Tribe of Beniami^ in Gabaa (because of that shameful
vilanie, which the sons of Belial had done to the Levites wiffe) and said or
agreed amongst them selves, The common people with out a Governor prepare
the^ selves to war.
that none should depart to their houses or tents, before they were revenged
of their own brethern the Beniamites, to flea those detestable persons, which
had so shamefully abused the Levites wiffe, albeit she was an harlot, and they
without a guide or Captain: not knowing when they came to the field who
should be their governor to lead the^, and give the onset, before they had
co^sulted with God, who appointed unto them Judah. Here do we see the eleven
Tribes, to whom the Leuite made his complaynt, in sendinge to every Tribe a
portion of his wiffe, did not excuse them selves to show justice, because they
wanted a lawful Magistrate to govern them, nor thought them selves discharged
for that they were as sheeppe without a pastor: except they did thus arm them
selves against the sons of Belial the ungodly Beniamites to see the
Judgments of God executed according to his Law (and as they said them
selves) to cut of the evil from amongst, then dema^dinge in the end the wicked
me^ that had committed that vilanie.

But you will say: It is an other matter for the people to enterprice such an
act being without a Ruler, and when they have a Ruler appointed unto them,
without whom they may do nothing. To this I answered before, that it is all one
to be without a Ruler, and to have such as will not rule in Gods fear. Yea it
is much better to be destitut altogether, then to have a tyrant and murderer.
For then are they no more publik persons, contemning their publik authority in
vsinge it against the Laws, but are to be taken of all men, as private
persons, and so examyned and punished. Never the less, to the intent ye may
understand, that the governor oght not to take away all right from the
people, nether discharge the^ utterly, from the execution of justice: let us
consider a like example of the peoples zele under the worthy Captain Joshua,
Joshua. 22.
who when they but hard that the Sons of Ruben, the Sons of Gad, The
people assemble in Gods cause.
and the half Tribe of Manasses, had erected up an Altar in their portion,
which God had given them beyond Iordane, thinking that they had so done, to
have sacrificed thereon, and so to have fallen from God: assembled them selves
together wholly, against the Rubenytes, Gaddites and half Tribe of Manasses to
revenge that defection from God (as they took it) thoghe afterward they
proved it to be nothing so. Which fact, as it declared an earnest true zele in
the people for the defense of Gods glory, and his religion: so Joshua their
Captain, nether did nor ought to have reproved them: yea, happy might Joshua
think him self, that had his people so ready to maintain of their own
accord the Laws of God, which before in the days of Moses were so
stubburne and rebellious. And if this readiness was commendable, having a
worthy Magistrate and godly Captain: how necessary is it to be used amongst
the people when they have ungodly and wicked Princes, who seek by all means to
draw them rather from the Law of God, then to encourage them to maintain the
same? Wherefore this zele to defend Gods Laws and precepts, wherewith all
sorts of men are charged, it is not only praise worthy in all, but required
of all, not only in abstayninge from the transgression of the said Laws, but
to see the judgments thereof executed upon all manner of persons with out
exception. And that if it be not done by the consent and ayed of the
Superiors, it is lawful for the people, yea it is their duty to do it the^
selves, as well upon their own rulers and Magistrate, as upon other of their
brethere^, having the word of God for their warrant, to which all are
subject, and by the same charged to cast forth all evil from them, and to
cut of every rotten membre, for fear of infecting the whole body, how dear or
precious so ever it be. If death be deserved, death: if other punishme^tes, to
see they be executed in all.

Romans 13.
For this cause have you promised obedience to your Superiors, that they might
herein help you: and for the same intent have they taken it upon them. If they
will so do, and keep promise with you according to their office, then do you
owe unto them all humble obedience: If not, you are discharged, and no
obedience belongs to them: because they are not obedient to God, nor be his
ministers to punish the evil, and to defend the good. And therefore your
study in this case, oght to be, to seek how you may dispose and punish
according to the Laws, such rebels against God, and oppressers of your selves
and your country: and not how to please them, obey them, and flatter them as
you do in their impiety. Which is not the way to obtain peace, and
quietness, but to fall in to the hands of the almighty God, and to be
subject to his fearful plagues and punishments.

CHAP. XIIII.
This is no doctrine of Rebellion, but the only doctrine of peace and means to
inioye quietly the comfortable blessings of God, which oght not to be wisshed
for only of the people, but carefully soght for also.

ANd althoghe this seem a strange doctrine, perrelous, and to move sedition
amongst the people, and to take from the lawful Rulers all due obedience: yet
whosoever will consider the matter a right, shall find it sound and true
doctrine, and the only doctrine of godly peace and quietness, and means to
avoid all strief and rebellion, by which only Superiors shall rule in the
fear of God, and subjects reverently obey them without grudging or
murmuring. For is there any laws more parfit then are the Laws of God? Or
did any man better know the nature of man, then he which created man? Or any
more desierous to keep them in his fear, and true obedyence, then God him
self, who chose them for his people? Then who is so mad and impudent, God which
made man knows best what Laws are most expedient for his preservation.
to think that peace and quietness can be amongst any people or nation, by
observing the Laws of wicked men, rather then in reteyning the wholesome Laws
of God? That man which is not able to rule him self, can better govern his
subjects and defend them, than God may his people? That the people shall
rather enjoy all blessings of God, in yelding to the wickedness of the
ungodly Rulers, then to see them straightly punished for transgressions of
the confortable Laws of the almighty? For after that God had once given his
Laws to his people, he showed them playnlie by Moses that he required nothing
else of them, Deuteronomy. 10.
but to fear him and to walk in his ways, to love him, and serve him with
all their heart and to keep his precepts and statutes, which he commanded
them that day. And why? because (says Moses) he is the God of Gods, the
Lord of Lords, the great mighty and dreadful God, which has no respect
of persons, nor takes any rewards. And this fructe shall you be suer of in
keepinge his Laws. He will be your praise, and your God: Deuteronomy. 4.
that is (as in an other place the same Moses writes) He will make you a wise
people, a mighty Nation, praised and co^me^ded of all Nations, which shall
say, This is only a wise people, and a people of understanding and mighty.
For what people is so great, which has their God so friendly and familiar
with them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call to him for? For
whiles we obey his Laws, and suffer them in no case, and in no person to be
transgressed and left unpunished (to the vttermoste of our power) we are
assured that the blessings which God after promised, shall be powered upon us:
that is to be blessed at home and a broad, in the fruit of our womb, Deuteronomy. 28.
of our land, of our beasts and cattle. And the Lord will make our enemies
which rise against us to fall before us, to enter in one way against us, and
to flee by seven ways before us. And all the people of the earth shall see
that the Name of the Lord is called upon amongst us, and shall be afraid of
us.

Yt is then no new doctrine which God so long ago taught to the Israelites,
nor no rash or perelous doctrine whereby they are only made wise, and most
strongly defended. Nether yet does it minister occasion of rebellion, without
which there can be no godly peace or quietness, as your experience in
England has all ready (as I suppose) sufficiently taught you: who have felt
rather hellike torments, and shameful confusion, since ye permitted the wild
bores to cast down the hedge of the Lords vinyarde, that is, his Laws and
precepts, then any manner of godly peace, either in consciences or bodies: Let
your own consciences be Judges in this behalf
which misery shall have no end before you reclayme with a vehement zele and
love, your right title and possession of Gods Laws, which you have most
unthankfully given over and neglected.

If the true zele of Gods people had been in you when popery began to be
preached in the place of the Gospel, when the Mass was reduced in place of
the Lords supper, and that by the ignorant Papists and malicious shauelyngs,
The contempt of Gods word is the door to all licentious wickedness.
when Antichrist was restored to displace Christ: could ye have suffered this
vnponished? Or if you had punished it as you were then charged by Gods Laws
and man's, durst they have proceaded to such impiety? If you had required the
Magistrates to rule you in Gods fear and not in tyranny, and that you would
reverence them as Gods ministers so rulinge you, otherwise, not to acknowledge
them but as his enemies, and so to take them: durst either that Iesabel so
ragingly have trode^ Gods word the Gospel of Christ our Savior as a polluted
sow under her feet, either else so rashely destroyde her fathers and brothers
Laws before her? Durst she without all shame so openly and unfaithfully have
broken promise to them (which to their own sorrow, and all others this day)
were her chief promoters? Assure your selfs no. If you had required all
Massemongers, and false Preachers to have been punished with death (as is
appointed by Gods word for such blasphemers and idolatrers, and if they to
whom it apperteyned, had denied, your selves would have seen it performed at
all times, and in all places) then should you have showed that zele of God,
which was commended in Phinees, Number. 25.
destroyinge the adulterers: and in the Israelites against the Beniamites, as
before is noted. Ye then had not the Pristes of Baal so swarmed abroad, nor the
servants of God have been in such abundance murdered. But great was our
sins before, that this deserved: and cold was our zele to Godwardes after,
that this shame have suffered: and gross is our blind dulnes, which will not
yet see nor seek to remedy it.

what rules are to be observed in resisting the superior powers
Nevertheless in all these enterprises you must be certain and sure of this
one thing, that under the name of Religion and pretense to promote Gods
glory, you seek not either your private gaynes or promotio^, as did all the
carnal Gospelers, and such as would be co^ted the chief pillars and
mainteyners of the same in times past amongst you. And therefore under the
cloak of Christ, seeking the world, when Christ seemed to have the upper hand:
are now returned to their oldemaister Antichriste, to be his hired souldiars,
and to fight under his banner against Christ and his servants, by whom they
were first promoted. Which treason God is prepared all ready to revenge, to
pluck from them his feathers, and to set forth to the whole world their shame
and nakedness. For he is a just God, Psalm. 5.
and hates iniquity, and therefore will be no cloak to cover their falshode
and covetousness.

Also ye must beware that private displeasure, and worldly injuries move you
not more to seek reuengement of your adversaries, then the true zele and
thirste of Gods word, the lively food of your souls. For then do you seek
your selves, and not God: then take you his office out of his hand, to whom ye
oght to commit all your private displeasures and injuries: Deu 32. Ezech. 9.
Rom 12.
then can ye not look to have Gods right hand upon your part, but rather may
be assured to find him your enemy, and strongly armed against you. To resist
evil therefore is your part, and to maintain Godliness, but symply and
unfeignedly, for the love of virtue, and hatred of vice, if you will be sure to
prosper, and avoid Gods heavy displeasure, Psalm. 7. Iere. 17.
who is the sercher of your hearts and secreats, and will in time disclose them
and make them known to all men.

But you perchance would grant me all this, that it is both lawful and
godly, if the people wholly together would follow the example of zealous
Phinees and the Israelites, A doubt which trobleth the people.
as before was mentioned, and take punishment them selves upon all blasphemers
of God, manifest betrayers of their country, and cruel murderers of their
brethern: seeing the Laws of God and publycke peace can be by no other means
restored. But when the people them selves agree not, when they are divided
amongst them selves, and the greatest part of them perchance papists, and
will be maynteyners of such ungodly proceadings as are now brought in to
England, how is it possible that by the weaker part, Gods glory should be
restored?

To this I answer, that as I know the restoringe of Gods word, The answer.
and comfortable doctrine of our Savior Christ to be the only work of God,
and of no man (thoghe he forsake not man as a mean external) and also am not
ignorant that he regards not the multitude and strenghe of man to accomplish
his purpose, Number 13. 1 Samuel 14. Judith: 9. Judges. 6.
who has been accustomed to give the victory to a few in number, and weak in
strengh, that the glory might be his: so will I not counselle you rashely to
cast your selves in to danger, but patiently and ernestly to call to the living
Lord for mercy, and acknowledging your sins (for which this plague is powered
upon you) to desire him to show some sign of conforte: who has promised to
hear your groninges, and to behold your affliction, Exodus 2.3
as he did the groninges and oppression of his people in Egypt, when they were
brought to full repentance and fealing of their sins: so that he came down
from heaven, and appeared to Moses, and sent him to be their Captain, whom
they once had forsaken: as you have done Christ.

Judge. 3.
And as he also sent Othoniel to deliver his people, when they cried unto him in
that captivity that they were in under the idolatrous king of Mesopotamia for
the space of eight years. A suer sign that God hears our prayers when he
geuith us a mean to deliver us.


Nether is this enough to call upon God for help, except ye utterly forsake
the wicked doctrine and doings of the papists, and seek also (to the
uttermost of your power) for remedy in following the example of the people of
God, as it is written: which did not only serve God and call to him for help,
at what time they were destitute of their worthy Captain Judas Machabeus: 1.
Match. 6
but also soght it, and demanded it where it was like to be found. And
assemblinge them selves together, came to Jonathan his brother, desiering him
to be their guide and Captain, to help them in their misery, and to defend
them against the enemies of God, their whole nation being then most cruelly
oppressed on every side, and the most part of them in vile slavery, seruinge
the strange Gods of the heathen. The^ Ionatha^ pityinge their estate and his
own, did not deny their request, but willingly took in hand that dangerous
enterprise, bei^ge assured that the cause was lawful, to maintain to his
power Gods glory and to succor his afflicted nation, as his brother Judas had
done before him. And doing the same with a simple eye, according as he was
bound, God prospered his doing, and he had good success

Therefore if they did well in dema^dinge succor, and he discharged his
conscience in granting their request, why is it not also lawful for you to
seek help of the^ that be able and willing: and for them likewise to grant
help, to whom God has lent it for that use especially?

But I know your answer: experience (say you) has taught us the contrary.
For if God had been pleased herein with. Sir Thomas Wyat that valiant Captain
taking in hand the like enterprise: it should undoubtedly have had better
success. But he being a man, and of God, of great estimation amongst all
goodmen, was notwithstanding apprehended, condemned, and at the last (although
he was promised his pardon) as a traitor beheaded. Sir Henry Isley.
And besides him Sir Henry Isley knight, with many godely men for the same
fact, hanged, and murdered. The like also ye will affir me of that Noble man
Henry Lord Graye, Marquis Dorset, and Duke of Suffolk: The Duke of Suffolk
who only for the zeal that he had to promote Gods glory, and the liberty
of his country, prepared him self with that power he could make to the aid
of the said Wyat, according to his promise. But being deceived, or rather
betrayed by such as he trusted unto, The Lord Thomas Graye.
was in the end also apprehended, and with his brother the Lord Thomas Gray
(a Gentleman of great courage, and towardness, likewise beheaded.

Although I mind not to stand long in the praise of these worthy men's factes,
who most cowardly were of many betrayed, which since perchance have felt some
part of worse misery: yet so much must I needs confess in their behalf, that
none but papists, or traitors can justly accuse them of treason or
disobedience. Of who^ to be misdained or slandered, is in the eyes of the
godly, no small commendation, and praise. For to pass over with silence the
duke of Sulffolke (whose noble pare^tage and ernest love that he bare to the
promoting of Christ's Gospel, and the wealth of his country, is to all
English men sufficiently known) what I beseech you moved Wyat that worthy
knight to rise? Was it his poverty? Behold, he was a famous Ge^tleman of
great lands and possessions, stowt and liberal in the service of his Prince,
faithefull to his country, and merciful to the poor. Soght he ambitiously
honor? Which of his enemies could herewith justly charge him? Did he this
because he was of a troublesome and busy nature, which could not be under
lawful government. His great wisdom, modesty, and gentle behavior at all
times, and to all persons, did well declare the contrary: ever more being
found a faithful Captain to his Prince in the field, and an obedient
subject at home. What the^ moved him to this dangerous entreprise? Verily, the
zeal of Gods truth and the pity that he had to his Country, what moved M.
wy at to this enterprise.
for the miseries he saw to approach by the usurped power of ungodly Iesabell,
and her merciles papists the sowldiars of Antichriste. If it be treason to
defend the Gospel and his Country from cruel strangers and enemies, the^ was
Wyat a traitor and rebel. but if this was his duetye, and all others that
professed Christ amongst you, then are all such traitors, as did deceive
him: and such as took not his part also, when time and occasion by him was
justly offered.

And though his enterprise had not such sucesse, as we would have wisshed: yet
was it no worse then our cowardnesse, and unworthiness deserved. Which nether
oght of any therefore to be condemned, nether should be any discourageme^t to
others in the like. For some times we see the very servants of God to have
evil success in their doings, How dangerous it is to judge the cause by the
success. Iud. 29
according to ma^s judgment: and yet God is well pleased therewith. As the
example of the Israelites, whereof we made mention before does most
manifestly approve: at what time they armed them selves against the
Beniamites, and that at the commandment of God, and yet were twice
disconcfyted, losing the first time 22. thousand men: and the next day following
18. thousand: both times, consulting with the Lord, and following his
commandment.

If thou will here pronounce according to the effect, behold, thou shall
prefer the vile and adulterous Beniamites to the servants of God: those
which most abhominably abused the Levites wiffe, to them that with the zele of
God soght to have the transgression punished. Even so, say I of worthy Wyat:
If you judge his fact according to the success in man's reason: then shall you
prefarre to him all the false and flattering Counselors, all wicked and
blouddy Bishops, and all others that would be counted Nobles, which in very
deed be traitors to God and his people. But Wyat, I dowte not, departed with
praise the servant of God, where all these are left to perpetual shame and
destruction without speedy repentance. O noble Wyat, thou art now with God,
and those worthy men that died for that enterprise* Happy art thou, and they
which are placed in your everlasting inheritance, and freed from the misery
of such as were your enemies, in so just and lawful a cause: who live as yet
patrones of idolatrers, of thieves and murderers, against who^ thou and thine
shall stand one day as judges to their co^de^nation.

For what can you Nobles or Cou^sellers say for yourselues at that day, when
God shall call you to account (ye know not how sone) which have permitted
Wyat, and with him the whole Church and common wealth of England to fall into
the hands of Gods enemies, and would not reskewe him, some of you having then
in your hands sufficient power not only to have supported him and others
which fear God according to duty and promise. but to have tamed the ra^ping
lions, raginge bears, and raueninge wolves? The comdemnation of the Nobles in
forsakinge Wyat.
Have ye not herein justly condemned your selves as faint hearted cowardes and
manifest trayters, not only to Wyat, but to God him self, to his poor
oppressed servants, and to your own native and ruynous country? But your
ungodly fetches and wicked doings (whereof I am not all together ignorant) with
your names, I do now purposlye omit: percha^ce God in the mean season will
change your minds, softe^ your hard hearts, and call you to repentance.
Otherwise doubt ye nothi^ge, but God will minister either to me, or some other
(or it belong) the like occasion to set forth your shame and nakedness to all
posterity, as you most worthily have deserved: who hitherunto have showed
your selves (in contemnyng so many and notable occasions offered by Gods
providence, Gospellers fearinge man more then God are made instruments of Satan.
as well since as in the days of Wyat) to be me^ in whom is nether zele to
religion, nor love to your country. And therefore I leauinge you to Gods
mercies, or fearful judgments, will speak a word or two by the way, to
the^ which will be called Gospellers, and yet have armed them selves against
the Gospel drawing forth with them out of their country to maintain Philipps
wars, and to please Iesabel (who seeks by that means, to cut their throtes
craftily) their poor and ignorant tena^tes and other souldiars without
knowledge, whiles their brethern be burned at home and their country like to
be wasted, spoiled, oppressed, possessed, and replenished with ungodly
Spanyardes. Is this the love that ye bear to the word of God? (o ye
Gospellers) have ye been so taught in the Gospel to be wilful murderers of
your selves, and others abroad, rather then lawful defenders of Gods people,
and your country at home? Is Gods cause become unjust and not meet to be
defended: and the cruel murder and shameful slaughter of Princes approved?
This has not the Gospel taught you, but chieflye in all your doings to
seek the kingdom of God, next to love your neighbor as your selves: and in
no case to be murderers (as all you are) that either for pleasure of Princes,
or hope of promotion, or gain of wages are become Capitayns, or souldiars in
unlawful wars, especially in this case and dangerous time.

Then which of you all now for shame can accuse that zealous and godly man Wyat,
whither ye be of the Nobles, Cou^sellers, Lords, knights, or of the common
souldiars? I will make your own consciences judges in this matter, whither
worthy Wyat or you should be taken for traitors? He, whither wyat and those
that died with him: or the Counselers Nobles and other that yet live are
traitors.
who in the fear of God and love toward his country soght to defend all,
and to distroye none: or you, who seekinge the defense of none, labor to
destroy all? He, who indeuered him self to withstand wicked Iesabel, and the
only traitors of Gods truth, and their country, as Priests, Bishopps, and
papists: or you that have been their maynteyners, with shildes and bucklers.
He, who according to the word of God, soght with the danger of all his goods,
lands, and liffe, to keep out strangers, which were coming to rule over you,
and to devour you: or you, which have been means with your lives, lands, and
goods to bring them in, and to defend them? He, who would be openly known in
his doings as he was in heart, their enemy: or you which hate them inwardly,
and yet do what you may to show your selves friends outwardly? But tell me
your gaynes in the end. To conclude, he who did his endeavor among his
contriemen at home to defend them, Souldiars goinge with their Captayns to
unlawful wars and leuing their country destitute, are rebels to God and
traitors to their country. Genesis 9. Deuteronomy. 5. Leui. 24. The comdemnation of
London in forsakinge wyat.
or you which helpinge your enemies abroad, labor to destroy your frie^des
and country at home?

Also you subjects and souldiars, which are gone with them to butcher your
selves and others without cause or conscience, contrary to the word of God,
be you assured that before him you shall be condemned as rebels and
disobedient persons, where as your godly brethren which in a just and lawful
cause died with faithful Wyat, are allowed before God, and of all goodmen
commended.

O London, London, thou that boasted thy self to be the Jerusalem of all
England, wherein Christ chiefly was preached, and the truethe of his Gospel
best known, remember how thou forsookest that godly Captain, and what
promise thou made him. Thou (I say) which might have been an example and
comfort to all the Cities, and Towns in England, and to have made the
papists to tremble and quake for fear. God grant that for thy faint heart in
that behalf, and shameful falling from God in murdering then and since so
many of his servants and Prophets, thou be not left likewise destitute and
desolate, not one stone left upon a another, as happened to Jerusalem. Mat. 24.
Thou can not herein defend thy self, which since have been ready, and yet
art to maintain wicked Iesabell in her tyranny at home, and in her ungodly
and nedeles wars abroad with thy goods and body at her commandment, being
thereby made an ayeder, helper, and furtherer of all her ungodly oppression and
tyranny. And therefore must needs be partaker with her of the dreadful plagues
and punishments, which God has appointed for such impiety.

Wherefore to conclude this matter, if Wyats cause was just and lawful, as
thou must needs confess: for if he were fautie in any point, it was chiefly
in this, that he pretended rather the cause of his country, then of Gods
Religion, which always oght to be preferred, and with out the which no Realm
or nation may long co^tynewe in quietness: for the^ God keeps not watch
over the^. If also he was betrayde of others, and soght not to betraye any: if
he purposed Gods glory, and the defense of his country: If the justness of
the cause oght to try his doi^ges, and not the effect that followed, or the
preue^ti^ge of time, where unto he after a sort was inforsed: the^ oght no
person, whither he be a Ruler, or subject, Counselor, Noble, public or
private to be discouraged, but rather encouraged by Wyats example. The people
to seek and demand help of the^ that are able, and they to grant the^
succor willi^gly: seeking by all means possible to restore Christ again, and
his ki^gdome, with whom you have lost all godly liberty and quietness: and
to expel Antichrist and all his adherentes, by whom you are brought in this
miserable slavery and bondage, both of bodies and souls.

And thoghe it succeed not the first or second time, no more then did the
entreprise of Wyat, or of the Israelites: yet when God shall see your zele and
diligence, to be applied only in seekinge to maynteyne his kingdom, and the
glory thereof: he will help no dowte at lenghe to confound all his enemies, as
he did the third time confort the Israelits to the utter destruction of the
adulterous Beniamits. We oght to be contented with Gods word only and look
for no new revelation.
We must now look for no revelations from the heavens to teach us our duty,
it being so plainly set before our eyes in his word. And if in this case
considerately begone in the fear of God, it should happen any of you to
perish, consider you perish but in the flesh to live with God: leaving in
the mean time an example behind you, that you lived in his fear and soght
his glory according to your duetye.

CHAP. XV.
What remedy or counsel is left, to the poor and afflicted servants of God,
at what time they are destitute of all outward mea^s and supporte of me^.

TO the people of Israel, whom God from among all nations chose to be his
peculiar people, he did not only give his Laws, ordinances and statutes: but
also instituted all kind of officiers to see the same Laws put in execution.
And besides this, appointed such as might be leaders and defenders of them in
time of war against their enimes, and such as should maintain their right at
home in time of peace: as were their judges and princes appointed over every
Tribe, besides their king and chief governor, to whom it was lawful for the
people and for every Tribe to resort in time of danger, to ask counsele and
desire help, who were likewise bound to hear their cause, and support them,
whither it were by counselle or bodily travel.

In like manner God has no less mercifully delte with you in England, The
graces of God toward England are most abundant if they would use the^
not only giving unto you his Laws and holy word, with far greater light
and playner declaration of his will and pleasure then ever was published to the
Israelits: but also has furnished you with all sorts of Magistrates,
officers, and governors necessary for the accomplishment, or rather execution
of the same. To whom it oght to be no less lawful for you to resort for
comfort in your necessity, then it was to the Israelites, and they as much
bownd to hear you. For this cause have you Mayres, Shiriffs, and Aldermen in
Cities, Counstables and Bailiffs in Towns, knights and Justices, in Shires and
countries. To these oght the people to have concurse in necessity, who should
be their refuge and aid in all trouble and adversity.

But if all these be so shamfully corrupted, and so myndles of their charge and
office, that nether the Citezens can be comforted, nor suckered by their
Mayres, Shiriffes, and Alder men: nether the poor Townsmen and Tennants by
their Justices and Landelordes, but all given over as it were to Satan, and to
serve the lusts of their chief Rulers, care not whether the poor people sink
or swyme, It is impossible for the people to peryshe and the Rulers to escape.
so it be well with them (though it be a thing impossible that the people can
be distroyed and they escape danger, or that their neighbors house ca^ be
consumed with fire, and theirs remain untouched) If all I say, in who^ the
people should look for comfort, were all together declyned from God (as in deed
they apeare to be at this present time in England, without all fear of his
Majesty or pity upon their brethern) and also, if the least and weakest part
of the people in all places feared God, and all outward means of help utterly
taken from them, nether being able to find remedy amongst them selves,
nether ca^ see how to be supported of others: the^ assure your selves (dear
brethern and servants of God) there can be no better counsel, nor more
comfortable or present remedy (which you shall prove true, if God grant you
his Spirit and grace to follow it) then in contynual and daily invocation of
his Name, to rest wholly and only upon him, make him your shilde, buckeler and
refuge, who has so promised to be to all them that are oppressed and depend
upon him: to do nothing commanded against God and your conscience, preferring
at all times (as you have learned before) the will of God, to the will,
punishments, and tyranny of Princes: sayng, and answeringe to all manner of
persons: This has God commanded, this must we do. That has God forbidden,
that will we not do if you will rob us and spoil us for doing the Lords
will, to the Lord must you make answer, and not to us: for his goods they
are, and not ours. If ye will imprisone us, behold, ye are oppressors. If ye
will hang us or burn us, behold ye are murderers of them which fear the
Lord, and are created to the Image of God: for whose contempt ye shall be
straytly punished. And for our part, if you take from us this vile and
corruptible lyffe, we are assured the Lord will give it us again with joy,
and immortality both of body and soul.

If God give you grace to make this or the like answer, and strengh to
contemn their tyranny, you may be certain and sure to find unspeakable
conforte and quietness of conscience, in the mydle of your danger and greatest
rage of Satan. And thus boldly confessinge Christ your Savior before men (as
by the example of thousands of your brethren before your faces God does
mercifully encourage you) you may with all hope and patience wait for the
joyful confession of Christ again before his Father and Angels in heaven,
that you are his obediente and dearly beloved servants, being also assured of
this, Tyrants can go no farther then God permittith.
that if it be the will of God to have you any longer to remain in this
miserable world, that then his providence is so careful over you, and present
with you, that no man or power can take your liffe from you, nether touch your
body any further then your Lord and God will permit them. Mat. 10.
Which nether shall be augmented for your plain confession, nor yet
diminished for keepinge of silence. For nothing comes to the servants of God
by hap or chance, whose hears of their heads are numbered. Whereof if you be so
assured as you oght to be, there can be nothing that should make you to shrink
from the Lord. If they do cast you in prison with Joseph, the Lord will
deliver you: if they cast you to wild beasts and lions, as they did Daniel,
you shall be preserved: if in to the sea with Jonas, ye shall not be drowned:
or in to the durtie dongeon with Jeremy, you shall be delivered: either in to
the fyrye furnace with Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, yet shall you not be
consumed. Contrary wise, None can lose their life but by Gods appointement
if it be his good pleasure that you shall glorify his holy Name in your
death, what great thing have you lost? Changing death for liffe, misery for
felicity, contynuall vexation and trouble, for perpetual rest and quietness:
chosinge rather to dye with shame of the world being the servants of God,
then to live amongst men in honor being the servants of Satan, and condemned
of God. Otherwise, if you give place to the wickedness of men to escape their
malice and bodily dangers, you show your selves therein to fear man more then
the mighty and dreadful God: him that has but power of your body, and that
at Gods appoyntement, then God him self, who has power, after he has
destroyed the body, to cast both bodies and souls in to hell fire, there to
remain everlastingly in torments unspeakable.

And moreover that which you look to obtain by these shameful shiefts,
Shamfull shifts.
you shall besure to lose with gryef and trouble of Conscience. For this saying
of our Master being true and certain, Mat. 16.
That they which seek to save their liffe (meaning by any worldly reason or
policy) shall lose it: what shall be their gaynes at lengh, when by
dissimulation and yelding to popish blasphemy, they dishonor the Majesty of
God to inioye this short, miserable and mortal lyffe: to be cast from the
favor of God, and company of his heavenly Angels, to inioye for a short
time their goods and possessions among their fleshly and carnal friends: Of
such you have had sufficient proof before your eyes.
when as their conscience within shall be deeply wounded with hellike
torments? when gods curse and indignation hangs contynually over the
heads of such, ready to be powered down upon them? when they shall find no
comfort, but utter dispayer with Judas, which for this worldly riches (as he
did) have sold their Master: sekinge either to hang them selves with Judas,
Judas.
to murder them selves with Frances Spera, Spera. Hales. Morgen.
to drown them selves with Justice Hales, either else to fall in to a raginge
madness with Justice Morgen? What comfort had Judas then by his money received
for betraynge his Master? Was he not shortly after compelled to cast it from
him with this pitiful voice: Mat. 27.
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood? Could any of these forenamed
persons, after they had committed the like treason to our Savior Jesus Christ
find any more comfort in their friends, from whom they were so loath to
depart? Or any more pleasure in their possessions, or assurance in their
treasures? Behold, they had all most miserable lives for the time, and
shameful ends.

Then dear brethern in Christ, what other reward can any of you look for,
commytting the like offenses? Have you any more assurance of Gods mercies then
they had? Would not Christ spare his own Apostle Judas, and yet will pardon
you? Did not judge Hales appearingly profess the Gospel a long space, and
was greatly commended for a godly man amongst the Godly? wicked Day of
Chichester was the cause of his desperation
And yet after by the importunate perswations of the pestilent papists
denyinge his Master, sustained this horrible judgment, that he and such like
might be a perpetual example for you and all men to fear the like or worse
punishemente.

You see therefore how there is no trust but in God, no comfort but in Christ,
no assurance but in his promise, by whose obedience only you shall avoid all
danger. And whatsoever you lose in this world and suffer for his Name, Mat. 10.
it shall be here recompensed with double according to his promise, and in the
world to come with liffe everlasting: which is to find your liffe, when ye
are willinge to lay it down at his commandment.

The second and last remedy.
I am not ignorant how unnatural a thing it is, and contrary to the flesh,
willingly to sustain such cruel death, as the adversaries have appointed to
all the children of God, myndinge constantly to stand by their profession:
which to the spirit notwithstanding is easy and joyful. For though the flesh
be frail, the spirit is prompte and ready. Whereof (praised be the name of God)
you have had notable experience in many of your brethern very martyrs of
Christ, who with joy pacie^tly and tryumphinghe, have suffed and drunk with
thirst of that bitter cupp which nature so much abhors: wonderfully
stre^gthned no dowte by the secreat inspiration of Gods holy Spirit. So that
there oght to be none amongst you so feeble, weak or timorous, whom the
wonderful examples of Gods present power and singular favor in those
persons, should not encourage, bolden, and fortify, to show the like
constancy in the same cause and profession.

Nevertheless, great cause we have thankfully to consider the inspeakable mercy
of God in Christ, which has farther respect to our infirmity, that when we
have not that boldness of spirit to stand to the death, as we see others,
yet giving so much to our weakness, he has provided a present remedy, that
being persecuted in one place, we have liberty to flee in to a another: where
we cannot be in our own country with a safe conscience (except we would make
opon profession of our religion, Mat 10. The great comfort that English
banishhed for Christ sake find in other Countries
which is every man's duty, and so be brought to offer up our lives in
sacrifice to God in testimony that we are his:) he has mollyfied and
prepared the hearts of stranges to receue us with all pity and gladness,
where you may be also not only delivered from the fear of death and the
papisticall tyranny practiced without all measure in that country: but with
great freedom of conscience hear the word of God contynually preached, and
the Sacraments of our Savior Christ purely and duly ministered, without all
dregs of popery, or supersticion of man's invention: to the intent you being
with others refresshed for a space, and more strongly fortified, may be also
with others more willing and ready to lay down your lives at Gods
appointment. For that is the chiefest grace of God, and greatest perfection, to
fight even to the blood under Christ's banner, and with him to give our lives.

But if you will thus flee (well-beloved in the Lord) you must not chose unto
your selves places according as you fantasy, as many of us which have left
our country have done: some dwelling in papisticall places amongst the
enemies of God in the myddle of impiety: in France, as in Paris, Orliance, and
Rone: and some in Italy, as in Rome, Vaenice, and Padua. Which persons in
fleeing from their Queen, run to the Pope: fearing the danger of their
bodies, seek where they may poison their souls: thinking by this means to be
less suspected of Iesabell, show them selves afraid and ashamed of the Gospel,
which in times paste they have stowtly professed. And lest they should be thought
favorers of Christ, have purposly ridden by the Churches, and Congregations of
his servants their brethren, nether minded to comfort others there, nor to
be comforted them selves. Wherein they have showed the coldenesse of their zele
toward religion, and given no small occasion of slander to the word of God,
which they seemed to profess. For being returned again into their Country,
they either become Idolaters with the papists to please the Queen, and keep
their possessions, or else dissemblers with the rest of counterfete christians:
but to their own condemnation at length, except the Lord grant unto them
speedy repentance. For who so are ashamed of Christ, and his Gospel, Mat. 10.
thus denying him before me^: them has he promised to deny, and be a shamed of
before his Father, and Angels, in heaven. This manner of fleeinge then is
ungodly, and (as you hear) dangerous: and therefore not lawful for you therein
to follow their example.

Nether is it enough to keep you out of the dominions of Antichriste, and to
place your selves in corners where you may be quiet, and at ease, and not
burdened with the chardges of the poor, thinking it sufficient if you have a
little exercise in your houses in reading a chapter or two of the Scriptures,
and then will be counted zealous persons and great gospellers. No brethern and
sisters, this is not the way to show your selves manfull souldiars of Christ,
except you resort where his banner is displayed, and his standarde set up:
where the assemble of your brethern is, and his word openly preached, and
Sacraments faithfully ministered. For otherwise, what may a man judge, but that
such either disdain the compagnie of their poor brethern, whom they oght by
all means to help and comfort, according to that power that God has given
them for that end only, and not for their own ease: or else that they have
not that zele to the house of God, the assemble of his servants, and to the
spiritual gifts and graces (which God has promised to power upon the
diligent hearers of his word) as was in David: which desiered being a king,
rather to be a dore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of
the ungodly: Psalm. 84.
lamentyng nothing so much the injuries done unto him by his son Absolon
(which were not small) as that he was depryued from the comfortable exercices
in the Tabernacle of the Lord, which then was in Sion. Nether does there
appear in such persons that greedy desire (whereof Esai makes mention) which
oght to be in the professers of the Gospel, Esa. 2.
who never would cease or rest, till they should clime up to the Lords Hill:
meaning the Church of Christ, sayng one to a another: Let us ascend up to
the Hill of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways, and we shall walk in his foot steps. For the Law shall come
forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Which zele the
Prophet does not mention in vain, but to show what a thurst and ernest desire
should be in the true Christians, and how the same apeareth in seekinge and
resortinge to those places, where it is set forth in greateste abundance and
perfection, as was after Christ's ascension in Jerusalem. And as that zele
showed them to be of Christ, by the like must we be judged Christians also,
that if we flee for Christ, the places where unto we flee may bear witness for
what cause we are fled.

Nether is yt a sufficient excuse which many aleadge, that they believe to be
saved by Christ, that they have sufficient knowledge of their duty, and the
rest, they can supply by their own diligence. Whose faith is not so much
(I dare say) but they have need to defier with the Apostles, Lord increase
our faith. And if they will so confess, why do they forsake the chiefest
means that God has ordained, which is the open Congregations of his people,
where his word, the fountain of faith, is most purely preached, and where
the Godly examples of others may be a sharper spur to prick them forward.
And as for the knowledge and diligence of such, may be no buckler to defend
their doings. For if they have those gifts whereof they boste, where may they
bestow them better then in the Church of God? Except they will say, Worldly
respects which hinder us from God oght to be avoided.
they are borne to them selves, and have the gifts of God which he would have
common to others, applied to their own private fantasy, which is to lap them
up in a clowte, and not to put them forth to the vantage of the owner, as did
the unprofitable servant: and as all they do, to whom God has given either
learning, counsel, or worldly substance, which eithet for the stre^ght of
Cities, pleasantness of air, traffic or marcha^dise, or for any other
worldely respect or polity, do absente the^ selves from the Congregation and
company of their poor brethern, where Christ has advanced his standarde,
and blown his troumpet, as is before said.

If God then give you not strength-at the first to stand in his profession to
the death, nor that you cannot be quiet in conscience, abiding in your
country: you see how his mercy has given you liberty to flee, and what
places he has appointed for you to flee unto, The graces of God toward
England are most abundant if they would use the^
that is, were ye may do good to your selves and others, where ye may be free
from superstition and idolatry, where your faith may be increased rather then
diminished, and your selves strengthened, confirmed, and more strongly armed.

But if you in taryinge will nether stand manfully to Christ your Master,
but betraye him with the Papists in doing as they do, nor yet with thanks
use this remedy that God has granted to our infirmity, to resort to his
Churches godly i^stituted: what answer shall you be able to make to his
Majesty when he shall call for accoumpt of your doings? How shall you avoid
his wrathful indignation, now ready to be powered upon his enemies? Assure your
selffe, they shall be taken in there sin: and you also as God does find you.
If in the tents of his enemies, doing as they do under their standerde, to
be stryken with them, and also to peryshe. For in taking part with their
impiety, you must be partakers of their cupp likewise. Nether is this any
new or hard doctrine that may excede your capacity, but may rather be termed
your a. b. c. and first principles, where in none oght to be ignorant. That is
if we wylbe Christ's scholars, we most learn to bear his cross, and to follow
him: not to cast it ofe our shulders with the enemies, and ru^ne from him. It
is the same lesson which of children we learned in the Lords prayer, that the
Name of God the Father may be sanctified: His kingdom come: His will be do^ne.
Mark it brethern, that your daily prayer turn not to your everlasting
confusion. For if you daily pray, that by you his Name may be sanctified,
that is, that he may be worthily honored for his majesty and wonderful power,
reverenced for his mercy and infinite wisdom, feared for his justice, and
just judgments: and yet for fear of the ungodly, do blaspheme his Name by
dissimulatio^ and outward idolatry, are ye not herein judges of your own
condemnation? Prayng that his Name may be honored with your lyppes, and
blaspheame him in your deeds? When you pray that his kingdom may come, and
yet you your selves do build and establishe the kingdom of Satan? When you
desire that his will may be done, and contrary thereunto, study to maintain
and accomplish the will of Satan and his members?

Wherefore be no more disceaued in so plain a matter. 1. Kin. 19 The conclusion
conteyninge the effect of the whole book.
If the Lord be God, follow him: if Baal be God, go after him. Play no more
the hypocrites, pray not with your lips only, but express the same in your
works. Subject your selves whollye to God: for he has redeemed you. Honor him
alone: for you are his people. Let not the example of any lead you in to
error: for men are but mortal. Trust in the Lord: for he is a sure rock.
Beware of his judgments: for they are terrible. Trust not to your own
shifts: for they will disceaue you. Mark the end of others, and in time be
warned. These lessons are hard to the flesh, but easy to the spirit. The
way of the Lord is a strayte path, but most faithefull, sure, and
comfortable. In this way have you also promised to walk with Christ: and for
the same cause do you bear his Name, that you should forsake the world and the
flesh, to yield unto him all honor and obedience, before the face of men in
earth, that he may bestow upon you the glory of his Father which is in
heaven. To whom with the Son, and holy Ghost be everlasting praise, honor and
glory for euemore. Amen. From Geneua, this first of January. M. D.LVIII.

FINIS.
WILLIAM KETHE TO the Reader.
THe vain heart of man, full frail is and blind,
vncerteynely settled, and rest can none find:
Whose hap is in wandering, to wade the wrong way,
As one apt by kind to run still astray.
For, what thing so good by truethe has been wroght,
Or what so well framed has nature forth brought,
Which man is not prone by craft to accuse,
And natures good gifts does not sore abuse?
Thus see we how man, contemning Gods grace,
Is wholly inclyned, that ill should take place:
Whose will (truethe reiectinge) delitth that to have,
Which nature corrupted would seem still to crave.
Since man then in iudgeinge, so thwartly is bente.
To satisfy fancy, and not true intent:
How hardly in this case, can such judge upright,
When truth does but peep out, as semth to our sight.
Full needful then were it, we had this respect,
Before we receive oght, or oght do reject:
The thing to decide so with Judgment and skill,
That truth may be stickler, and not our one will.
Behold here a truth drawn forth of her grave,
By power sore oppressed, and made a bond slave:
Whose chai^s, though this Author could not re^t or tear,
Yet has he forth brought her, in to most clear air.
With whom now to reason, whosoever will assaye,
Shall learn how ill Rulers we oght to obey.
Which kill, how they ca^e not in their cruel rage.
Respecti^g their will more, the^ law, oath, or charge.
(...) long fostered by suffrance and awe,
Have right rule subverted, and made will their law:
Whose pride, how to temper, this truth will thee tell,
So as thou resist may, and yet not rebel.
Rebellion is ill, to resist is not so,
When right through resisting, is done to that foo,
Who seeks, but by ruin, against right to reign,
Not passinge what perish, so she spoil the gain.
A public weal wretched, and to far disgraste,
Where the right-head is of cut, and a wrong in steed plaste,
A brut beast untamed a misbegotthen;
More meet to be ruled, then reign over men.
A marvelous madness, if we well behold,
When sighs shall assaut me^, to see them selves sold:
And yet when from slavery, their friends would the^ free,
To stick to their foes so, still slaves to be.
For France spiteth Spain, which Englend does threat,
And England proud Spaniards, with salt would feign eat:
Yet England proud Spain aydeth with men, ships, and botes.
That Spain, (France subdued once) may cut all their throtes.
A people perverse, repleate with disdain,
Though flattrie feign hide would their hate, and vile train.
Whose rage, and hot lust, disceate, craft and pride,
Poor Naples their bondeslaue, with great grefe has tried.
Lo, these be the birds which England must feed,
By plantinge of whom, to root out their seed
Their own lands and lives, by them first deuourde,
Their maids then and wives, most vilelie deflourde.
Is this not strong treason, ye unnoble bloudds?
To aid such destroyers, both with lands and goods?
But when they thus pinche you, and ye put to flight,
To what forte then flee you: or where will you light?
For England thus sold, for Spaniardes to dwell,
Ye may not by right, possess that ye sell.
They saying your treason, against your own state,
Will not with theirs trust you, which they know ye hate.
To Skotlande or France, if ye then should cry,
Your vile deeds now present, they may well reply,
And Dutchla^d abhorth you: this the^ does remain,
When Spaniards are placed, ye must to new Spain.
But, oh dreadful plague, and sign of Gods wroth,
On such noble Gnatos, strong foes to Gods trothe.
Whom fond fear has framed, to prop such a stay,
As country and people, so seekth to betraye.
Which thing herein proved, to be with out doubt,
All such full well find shall, as read it throughout.
If then their hearts fail them the right to defend,
Confusion remains for such a meet end.
Give not thy glory to an other: nether that which is profitable for thee, to
a strange nation.

Baruch. 4. The way to life it streicte and few find it.

Mat.7.

Imprinted at Geneua by John Crespin. the first of January. Anno. D. M.D.LVIII.


