A CATALOGVE of the Bishops of England, since the first planting of Christian
religion in this Island, together with a brief History of their lives and
memorable actions, so near as can be gathered out of antiquity.

By F. G. Subdeane of Exceter.

Bona quae facereipsi negligimus, haec ad correctionem nobis Deus ab alijs
fieri demonstrat, vt qui praeceptum non attendimus, saltem exemplis excitemur,
atque in appetitu rectitudinii nil sibi men's nostra difficile existimes quod
perfect peragi ab alijs videt. Greg. Moral. lib. 9.

Mementote praepositorum vestrorum, qui vobis loquuti sunt verbum Dei: quorum
intuentes exitum conuersationis, imitamini fidem. Heb. 13. 7.



LONDINI, Impensis Geor. Bishop. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir THOMAS SACKVYLL, Baron of Buckhurst, Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Chauncellor
of the University of Oxford.
THis work (right Honorable) such as it is, I have thought it no less then my
duty to present unto your Lordship, not only in regard of my self, whom by
many great and undeserved favors you have so bound unto you, as except I will
be very unthankful, I must at all times be ready to tender my self and all my
poor ability unto your service; but also in respect of the matter, which, as
if it had light upon a writer worthy of it, might have yielded a discourse not
altogether unworthy your Honorable regard. So, being but as it is, a memorial
of the lives and actions of the most memorable and famous learned men, that our
country from time has brought forth; Me thinks I cannot commend it unto a
more likely patron then your self, that are not only learned, but also under
her Majesty the Supreme governor of one of those two welsprings of learning
and learned men, our (...) ((...) doubt) (...) unto the worlds end, continual
matter for the like argument, of this, that in this present work I have
handled. I humbly beseech your Lordship instead of some better assurance, to
accept it as a pledge and token of a heart and mind in all duty faithfully
affected unto your Honor, for the advancement whereof in all happiness, I
will not cease (as I am by duty bound) continually to pray unto Almighty God.

Your Lordships Chaplayne ever humbly at commandment, FRANCIS GODWYN.

To the Reader.
I Cannot deny, but my delight in the study of histories and antiquities, has
been somewhat greater, then was needful for a man that had dedicated himself
and his labors unto the service of Gods church in the Ministry. Which (...)
acknowledging in my self, and being unable wholly to (...) ( (...) quemque
voluptas, and I would to God that (...) the woorst might be said of me) I
endeavored long since in some sort to reform the same by restrayning my self
within the compass of such antiquities, as seemed to concern but seasticall
causes or persons. My collections the one way (I mean concerning matters
ecclesiastical) can add nothing unto that large and painful work of Master
Fox. In the other kind (concerning ecclesiastical persons) what many years
reading and observation could yield unto me, some seven or eight years since I
comprised in a volume; which (being persuaded thereunto by diverse my friends no
less godly then wise) I have at last condiscended (after some convenient
augmentation of the same) to publish. The principal reason that moved me
thereunto, is in effect but that, which Tacitus says every historiographer
should propose unto himself, Ne virtutessilea^tur, vtque prauis dictis
factisque ex posteritate and infamia metus sit. In the latter of these (the
faults of those men of whom I am to write) I need not greatly to pain my
self. For it is not to be denied, that the most part of the Chroniclers and
historiographers of our age, have borne a hand hard enough at least upon the
Prelates and Clergy of former times, every where like Chams, discovering the
nakedness of these fathers, but seldom or never indeuouring with Sem to hide
the same, much less affoording unto them any honorable mention never so well
deserved. This kind of dealing though happily intended to good purposes, might
not expect that success and blessing at Gods hand, that the plame and sincere
truth is wont to find. As Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra ( Socrates reports it)
laboring a little too earnestly against one Asterius an Arrian, and so
derogating impiously from the person and dignity of our Savior Christ,
byforcing some reasons of Paulus Samosatenus (that swaruing as far on the
other side dispoyled the same our Savior of his humanity) he fell at last
himself and drew many others into those pernicious and impious errors of the
Samosatenians: Stulti dum vitant vitia in contraria currunt) Even so, these men
inioyning somewhat too furiously the superstition and errors which the Clergy
of former times (much deal of ignorance) did teach and defend; whilst that
the rather to discredit their doctrine, they depraved their persons; it has
pleased God, that this uncharitable course should sort to some other effect
then was intended, and that such, as without his great mercy, was like to have
caused an inconvenience of little less importance (I will not say greater)
then that which our late reformation has redressed. For in the vulgar sort
(which distinguish not so easily between persons and things) it bred a
conceit, not only that the men were wicked, and so their doctrine corrupt
(although I know the consequence to be weak) but also their functions and
callings to be utterly unlawful and Antichristian, which opinion once received
in the minds of the multitude, gave occasion of diverse plots, colored with the
plausible show of reformation, but indeed principally aiming at the goods and
revenues of the church, the temporal rewards of learning; which being once
taken away, what confusion is like to follow, we may easily see by the effects
it brings forth elsewhere. Those countries that heretofore have yielded
great plenty of able-worke-folkes for the Lords vineyard; now that brood is
spent which attained learning, the rewards yet standing whole; they hardly can
show a man able to set pen to paper in defense of the truth. Yea even amongst
us, although the godly and excellent care of her Majesty has preseraed the
state of this our church in such sort, as I think no other reformed Church of
Christendom any thing near comparable unto it; yet the example of other, the
known (...) of so many sacrilegious cormora^ts as await daily the destruction
of the same, and the doubt least it will decay, for that we cannot hope for the
like piety in all succeeding Princes; it so far forth discourageth men from
the study of divinity, as the best wits daily refuse the Universities (or
Divinity at the least, which in some other countries is accounted the surest
way to advancement) and rather betake themselves to any other kind of life.
Hereof it comes to pass, that every age brings forth less plenty of
learned men then other amongst us: And it is much to befeared, least our
posterity will too truly say, AEtas parentum peior Auis tulit
Nos rudiores, mox daturos
Progeniem ineruditiosam.
To make no mention of such other reasons as might induce me to the publishing
of these noses, least I make my porch larger then some principal rooms of my
intended building; I think it necessary now to admonish the Reader, that he
expect not any ample discourse of the lives and actions of the Bishops of our
own time or near unto it. I hane purposly avoided to set down any thing of
them, but what either I find written by other, or elseremayneth to be secne in
public record. And this course I have taken, because I judge it neither
seemly to praise, nor safe to reprehend (how justly soever) those men, that
either by themselves, their near friends or posterity yet living, may seem
either to have allured me to flatter, or feared me from disclosing that truth,
which otherwise I would have uttered. Neither do I think it needful to say
much of them, who being either present in action, or fresh in memory, are
sufficiently known unto us. Whereas moreover, I have passed over in silence
some two Sees; you shall under stand, that I have been forced there (...) for
want of some necessary instructions, which, by reason of the far distance of my
place of dwelling from them, I have not had means to attain, although I have
endeavored the same. I would therefore earnestly pray all men that can, to
yield me help for the supplying of whatsoever may seem to be wanting, either
in those Sees or any other. I shall take it very thankfully at their hands. In
the mean time, this which now I am able to afford unto you, I wish it may be
taken in good part; and God grant it may in some measure prove a means of the
advancement of his glory, and the good of his Church.

Amen.
The Archbishops of Canterbury.
1. Augustine.
IT is very certain and witnessed by Theodoret and Sophronius Patriarch of
Jerusalem affirm that Saint Paul himself was here, and preached the Gospel
after his first imprisonment at Rome. Nicephorus and some other report that
Simon Zelotes came hither, and was the first messenger of the glad tidings of
the Gospel to our nation. But it is delivered by one consent that Saint Philip
the Apostle of the Frenchmen understanding how this Island (from whence first
sprung the superstitious religion of the Druydes) was separated from France by
a small cut of a few hours sail; thought good to send over hither twelve
preachers, the chief whereof was Joseph of Arimathia that buried the body of
our Savior Christ. These men arriving here, the year of our Lord 63. did
their best endeavor for the conversion of our Britains. It pleased not God
they should prevail with the king, who in no wise would be woone from the
superstition of the Druydes: But of the meaner sort of people many there were
that hearkened unto them: yea the king himself admiring their great modesty,
painfulnes and virtuous behavior, was content to assign them a place of
habitation (where Glastonbury now stands) which was at that time and long
after an Island all compassed about with lakes and standing water. And another
king gave unto every of those twelve a hide of land in the country near
adjoining, which are named to this day the twelve hides of Glastonbury. In this
Island of Glastonbury (then called Auallon) Joseph and his fellows found
means to build a church, which after they were dead stood desolate, the whole
Island being forsaken and remaining without any inhabitant many years, even
until the time of king Lucius, which was about the year of Christ 180. It
happened then, a law heretofore made by Claudius Caesar (as Suetonius reports
in his life) was now generally put in execution, by the Romans (who ruled all
this end of the world) commanding that the superstitious religion of the
Druydes should every where be abolished.

The pulling up of these weeds gave good occasion unto the seed of the
Gospel (sowed long before by the preachers before mentioned) now to spring and
bring forth fruit; whereunto God gave so good increase, as Lucius the king
himself was content to put on the sweet yoke of our Savior: which that it
might be the better and the more fruitfully performed, he sent Eluan (a notable
impe and disciple of that holy College at Auallon) and Medwyin a Dutch man
(that were the instruments of his conversion) unto Eleutherius the bishop of
Rome, requesting that he would send other preachers unto his realm by whom he
and his people might be further instructed in the way of truth. He satisfied
his demand and sent unto him two notable men, (...) and Phaganus, by whose
pains and industry chiefly the whole realm was finally converted. They
sought out the ancient church at Glastonbury, repaired the same, and dwelled
there for the space of nine years after. Now king Lucius being himself
Baptized and many of his people, in all parts of his dominions, he caused the
temples of his false gods to be dedicate to the service of the true God, in the
place of their priests he appointed preachers of the Gospel, and for their
Flamines Bishops to the number of 28. Of these 28. three were Archbishops; one
at London whose province was the south part of England: Another at Caerlegion
upon Uske, his province was Wales: And a third at York, unto whose
jurisdiction the Bishops of Scotland and North England were subject. The
Gospel having taken such deep root here, flourished a while very
prosperously: And albeit it were often lopped and pruned afterward, yea the
very maine roots mightily stricken at by the violent endeavor of sundry
tyrants that sought utterly to destroy and abolish the same out of this land:
yet had it ever many constant and open professors that never suffered the light
thereof utterly to be extinguished Amongst many, the most terrible persecution
that ever this church sustained was by the Saxons, who expelled not only
Christian religion, but the followers of the same into a corner of this Island.
Howbeit, even amongst these very barbarous Saxons, there were diverse from time
to time that professed Christ But our country being in a manner all grown
over with Pagamsme (for there was no public allowance of Christian religion
any where but in Wales) it pleased God to give this occasion of replanting the
same here again. It chanced that blessed and holy father Saint Gregory one
day to epsy certain beautiful children to be sold in the streets of Rome,
and understanding they were Pagans, asked of what country they were: It was
answered they were Angles: well may they be so called quoth he, for they look
like Angels. Demanding them of what province they were, it was said they were
of Deira: God grant (says he) they may be De ira dei eruti, delivered from the
wrath of God and made partaker of his mercies by Christ. He proceeded yet
further, and asked how the king of that country was called: understanding his
name was Elle. Alleluia (quoth he) must needs be sung in those parts in praise
of almighty God. Not long after then, this good man being made Pope, he took
especial care of sending preachers into this land for the conversion of the
same. Yet it is not to be denied, and it appears manifestly by the letters of
Saint Gregory himself unto the king and Queen of France, that this care of
his was much stirred up by the forwardnes of some good Saxons, that complained
unto him of the negligence of the French priests, who being so near, would
never take any course for the planting of Christianity amongst them, and
therefore prayed him that he would send preachers thither. He did so, and made
choice of one Augustine a monk of greater virtue then learning, unto whom he
appointed forty other that should accompany and aid him in this holy work.
Being now well onward on their way, they enquired of the state of the country
and manners of the people unto whom they went, and understood so much of their
barbarous and fierce rudenes, as they in a manner all utterly renounced
proceeding any farther in the voyage, and as it were compelled Augustine to
post back to Rome, there to crave license of return. Saint Gregory much
grieved with this (...), writ his letters unto them, wherein he used many
reasons to persuade them in any wise to go forward; whereunto at last they
yielded. They arrived at the Iste of Thanet in Kent the year 596. now just a
thousand years ago. The king of that country (his name was Ethelbert)
entertained them with all courtesy, the rather (as it is to be supposed) by the
persuasion of his wife Berta that was a Christian. There was near unto the
city of Canterbury a church built of old by the Romans and dedicated unto
S. Martin, in which the Queen was wont to pray with Lethardus her Bishop.
There these men were allowed to preach, pray, baptize and use all manner of
exercise pertaining to Christian religion. The king himself all this while
gave them maintenance, came often to hear them, and at last being thoroughly
converted, took on him the badge of Christ by baptism, all his people quickly
following his example. He then also appointed unto Augustine and his companions
a house at Stablegate, and allotted competent revenues unto the same. The
matter being thus far forward, Augustine stepped into France and caused himself
there to be consecrated Archbishop of England by Etherius Archbishop of Arles.
Presently upon his return thence, he sent two of his company unto Rome (
Laurence and Peter) to advertise the Pope of their good success. By them when
they returned he sent Augustine a pall, books, church-ornaments and other
necessaries. He sent also presently unto the king, and writ diverse letters;
some gratulatorie to the king, some unto Augustine exhorting him to diligence
in his calling, and to take heed least the miracles which God wrought by him
for the conversion of this people should make him proud; and lastly, others
unto the Archbishop of Arles to thank him for his good aid and assistance
yielded to these men in this business. In the mean time Augustine had
obtained of the king another church in the midst of the city, built likewise
heretofore by the Romans and dedicated the same unto our Savior Christ.
Soon after, this good king gave unto him also his own palace and chief seat
of his kingdom, remoouing himself unto Rheaculf, called by the Romans
Regulbium now (...): And lastly he laid the foundation of a goodly monastery
which he dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul, known afterward by the name of
S. Augustines. These things being thus ordered, he endeavored to make a concord
and agreement between the Saxons and the Welchmen, who differed from the
Roman church in two things, the manner of baptizing, and the time of the
observation of Easter. Much pains he took to persuade them, yea wrought a
miracle by healing a blind man for confirmation of his doctrine, as you may
read in Beda his Eccl. (...). lib. 2. cap. 2. But they would by no means
consent to any such union, much less yield any kind of subjection to that
authority which he claimed to have over all this Island. He gave not over with
one repulse, but when at the first he could not prevail, he procured a second
conference, at what time there met him seven Britain Bishops and a great
number of monks, especially of that famous monastery of Bannachor a place not
far from Chester wherein there lived by the labor of their own hands 2000.
monks. These men before they came to the place of meeting appointed, thought
good to ask the counsel of a certain Anehorite whom they reputed for a very
holy and devout man, and to know of him whether he thought it best for them to
yield to the directions of Saint Augustine. He advised them, if he were a man
of God, to take the course he showed, and to follow the same And when they
asked how they should discern whether he were such a one or no, he pronounced
this saying of our Savior, Take my yoke upon you and learn of me for I am
meek and humble of heart: If therefore this same Augustine be a meek and
humble minded man, it is a great presumption that he bears the yoke of
Christ, and offers the same unto you: But if he be stout and proud, he is not
of God you may be bold. This therefore says he is my aduire, have a care that
he and his company be first in the place where you meet: If then you being
the greater number he rise not to do you reverence, but despise you, despise
you also him and his counsel. Augustine therefore first entered the place with
his banner and his cross, with singing procession and great pomp; and when
the Britayne Bishops came in, never rose or saluted them at all. This they
taking very ill, gainsaid him in every thing, told him, that as his opinions
were allowed by Gregory, so had theirs long since by Eleutherius both Bishops
of Rome, that they had an Archbishop then commorant at Caerlegion, him they
would obey and none other, especially such a one as he was, a man unknown, and
a stranger not only for his person and language, but much more for his
opinions and strange conceits. Augustine much displeased with this short
answer, prayed them to yield unto him but in three things, to minister
Baptism and observe Easter according to the Roman manner, to assist him in
preaching Christ unto the Saxons. But when they utterly denied to join with
them in any sort, he denounced against them the judgments of God for this
(...), and assured them confidently (as says Beda) of some great calamity
shortly to fall upon their nation; that they which would not have peace with
their brethren, should have war with their enemies, and should find death by
their swords, unto whom they refused to preach the way of life. It came to
pass according to his prediction, that Edelfride king of Northumbers; a Pagan
Saxon came against them shortly after with a huge army, overthrew them in
battle, and slew (besides an infinite number of soldiers and men of arms) a
great many monks, to the number of 1200. that were gathered together there to
fight by prayer: only fifty persons saved themselves by flight. Soon after
this battle (which some say Augustine lived not to see) he died, having been
Archbishop 16. years, to wit, May 25. (which day is dedicated to his memory
in our Calendar) the year 611. or (as some deliver) ann. 605. He was a man of
exceeding tall stature, well favored, and of a very (...) countenance. His
body at first was buried without doors near the church of his monastery,
because the church was not yet finished; but afterward was removed into the
north porch of the said church, in which place all the bodies of the
Archbishops following were laid until Theodore, who was first buried in the
church because the porch was full. Upon the tomb of this our apostle was
engraven this epitaph, Hic requiescit Diuus Augustinus Dorobernensis
Archiepiscopus, qui olim huc a Beato Gregorio Romanae vrbis Pontifice directus
and a Deo operatione (...) suffultus, and Ethelbertum Regem and gentem illius
ab Idolorum cultu ad fidem Christi perdoxit. Here rests the body of S.
Augustine the first Archbishop of Dorobernia, that was sent into this land by
Saint Gregory Bishop of the city of Rome, approved of God by the working of
miracles, and that brought Ethelbert the king and his people from the
worshipping of idols unto the faith of Christ.

2. Laurence.
SAint Augustine before his death had appointed to succeed Laurence a Roman
borne, a very godly and well learned man. He took great pains not only with
his own charge, but also in laboring to reduce the Britons of Wales, the
Scots and Irishmen to one consent in matters of religion. It is likely his
diligence might have done good, but that he was disturbed by the death of that
good king Ethelbert. Eadbald his son succeeded him in the kingdom, who being
a vicious young man, was not ashamed to marry the wife of his late deceased
father. This and other enormities when Laurence like a good John Baptist
doubted not to reprehend him for, he first began to fall out with him, and
afterward, even with Christian religion which awhile he seemed to like of well
enough, but now at last utterly renounced. The people (as commonly it comes
to pass) following the example of their king, they likewise returned to the
filthy vomit of their abominable idolatry, although the Archbishop like a
good Pastor ceased not by earnest exhortations and what other means possibly
he might, to stay them from this horrible relapse. Perceiving at last that his
words did no good, but rather incited the king to a more desperate hatred of
him and religion: He determined to follow Mellitus and Iustus into France, that
(as anon you shall have occasion to read) were lately banished by the wicked
sons of good Sebert king of the East Saxons. The night before the day of his
intended departure, he caused his bed to be made in the very church of his
monastery; where after many tears and sighs, he recommended unto God the
miserable state of his poor church and so sell sleep. It seemed unto him
(says Beda) that S. Peter came unto him and first expostulated the matter with
him, after chid and reprehended him sharply (...) purposing to forsake the
church committed unto him, and lastly whipped his naked body so terribly, as
when he waked, finding it more then a dream all his body was gore blood. He
went immediately unto the king, showing him his wounds, and together related
unto him the occasion of them. This struck such a terror into the king, as by
and by he renounced his idols put away his incestuous wife, caused himself to
be baptized, and for a farther testimony and assurance of his unfeigned
conversion, builded a church in the monastery of S. Peter, and dedicated the
same unto the blessed Uirgine. Laurence very joyful of this alteration, sent
presently for Mellitus and (...) into France; who coming unto him, one of them
(Iustus) Bishop of Rochester he returned unto his old charge, the other he
retained with him hoping to find means he also might be restored to his See
again. In the mean time, even the same year that king Eadbald became a
Christian, himself (I mean Laurence) died and was buried beside Augustine his
predecessor.

3. Mellitus.
AT what time the Britains refused to join with Augustine Gregory,
certifying him, that the harvest here was great, but the laborers very few;
and therefore requested him to appoint some that might assist him in this work
of the Lord. He did so, and sent unto him Mellitus an Abbot of Rome, Iustus,
Paulinus, Rufinianus and others, who arrived in England the year 601. To leave
the rest unto their own places, Mellitus about three years after was
consecrate by him Bishop of London, where king Ethelbert built a goodly church
and dedicated the same unto S. Paul. The fourth year of his consecration he
went to Rome to confer with Boniface the Pope about diverse things, and was by
him honorably entertained. A year or two after his return died both
Ethelbert king of Kent and (...) (that under him ruled the East Saxons) unto
whose jurisdiction London appertained. This Sebert left behind him three
wicked sons, that being never baptized, came notwithstanding one day unto the
church at Communion time, and asked the Bishop what he meant that he delivered
not of that same fine bread unto them as he was wont to do unto their father
Saba and did yet unto the rest of the people. He answered, that if they would
be washed in the water of life as he was and the rest of the people there
present; then would he (...) unto them of this bread also, but otherwise
neither was it lawful for him to deliver nor them to receive it. This
notwithstanding they would have enforced him, and when they could not preuatle,
were so enraged, as they expelled him their dominion, hardly holding their
hands from doing him violence at that time. He being thus exiled, went first
unto Laurence the Archbishop of Canterbury, and finding him in little better
case then himself was at London, departed into France together with Iustus
Bishop of Rochester. Being sent for soon after by Laurence (as above said) it
happened the same year that the said Laurence died, and he was appointed to
succeed him. He was a man of great birth, but of greater mind, exceeding
careful of his charge, despising the world, and never (...) for any thing but
heaven and heavenly things. Having been sick a long time, he died at last of
the gowt, and was buried beside his predecessor.

4. Iustus.
Ivstus (of whom I have before spoken somewhat) was Melhtus after his decease;
wherein having traveled painfully the space of twelve years, he departed this
life Nouemb. 10. ann. 634. and was buried in the porch above mentioned.

5. Honorius.
AFter the death of Iustus, Honorius was made Archbishop; Gregory. He was
consecrate at Lincoln by Paulinus Archb of York. He received a pall from Rome
with letters, wherein authority was given to him and the other Archb.
whenever either of them did fail, to consecrate another in his place without
posting to Rome. This man appointed diverse Bishops to diverse countries, as in
their several places God willing, shall be more at large declared: He also
biuided his province into parishes, that so he might appoint particular
ministers to particular congregations, and having sat Archbishop almost 20.
years, died the last day of February, or (as some other deliver) of September
the year 653. He was buried amongst his predecessors.

6. Deus-dedit or Adeodatus.
The Sea was void after Honorius died the space of 18. Frithona (famous for
his learning and other virtues) was then elected Archbishop, and after that
named Deus dedit. He was consecrate by Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, (York
being then without an Archbishop:) and died the last day of June 664. having
atte^ded that charge carefully about the space of 9. years. He was the first
Englishman that was Archbishop, and the last Archbishop that was buried in the
church porch of Saint Augustines.

7. Theodorus.
ONe Wigardus an Englishman, an ancient and learned Deus-dedit, and sent to
Rome for consecration with letters commendatorie from Egbert king of Kent, and
Oswy king of Northumberland, who also sent presents of great value unto
Vitalianus that was then Pope. It chanced he came to Rome at a time when the
plague was very hot there; and died of the same, as did also almost all his
company that came with him. The Pope understanding the Sea had stood long
void, and careful to see it furnished, made choice of one Adrian an Abbot of
Italy, but borne in Afrike, a grave man and very learned. He would not be
persuaded to take so great a charge upon him; but being importuned thereunto,
he promised to find out a man that should be of greater both learning and
years then himself, and in all other respects very fit for the place. He was
familiarly acquainted with one Theodore a Grecian, borne in Tharsus of Cilicia
S. Paul's country; a man well seen in all kind of good learning and 66.
years of age. Vitalianus notwithstanding refused to allow of him, except the
other would promise to go into England with him also. He was content, did so,
and at his coming thither was made Abbot of S. Augustines. Theodore then was
consecrate Archbishop, April 1. 668. when the Sea had been void almost four
years. In May following they set forward toward England. They had many lets
by the way, and got not thither in a years and a half. They brought with them
great store of books both Greek and Latin, whereof some remain yet to be
seen at this day, as namely a Homer (so fair and exquisitely written, as no
print in the world yet extant is thought to be comparable to it either for
truth or beauty) and diverse other. Unto this man all the British Bishops and
generally all Britain yielded obedience, and under him conformed themselves in
all things unto the rites and discipline of the church of Rome. He was a very
stont and rigorous man, exercising the authority of his place so (...), as
many think it a great blot unto him. How he took upon him to place and
displace (...) Bishops at his pleasure, as Wilfride, Cedda and other, see in
the beginning of York. In his time were held two Synods, one at Hereford (the
Canons whereof you may see in Beda lib. 4. cap. 5.) the other at Clyff beside
Rochester, in which he procured all the Prelates there assembled to set down
their opinions touching the heresy of (...), wherewith his countrymen the
Grecians were much infected: They all detested it, and gave their approbation
of those five famous general Councels, of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon and
the two first of Constantinople. Never before this time had England so happy
days, nor so many learned men as under him, and a little after. Amongst a
great number of other, these were of his breeding, Beda, Saint John of
Beuerley, Albinus, and Tobias Bishop of Rochester, all excellent and very
famous men. He erected (as some say) a kind of school or University at
Creeklade, or rather Greekeslade in Wiltshire, so called of the Grecians that
taught and studied there. These men soon after remoouing thence, are supposed
to have laid the foundations of our University of Oxford. He left sundry
monuments of his learning in writing behind him, and appointed many Bishops in
diverse parts of this land. Having continued Archbishop 22. years he died
September 19. ann 690. being 88. years of age; until which time he would
often say he thought he should live, for that in a dreme it was so signified
unto him many years before. A little before his death he sent for Wilfride
Archbishop of York, and Erkenwald Bishop of London, and confessing himself
unto them; acknowledged that he had done Wilfride great wrong, insomuch as,
there was no one thing that lay so hard upon his conscience as that, and
therefore with tears besought him to forgive him and to pray for him. He was
buried within the church of Saint Augustines Abbey.

8. Birhtuald.
ALmost two years the Sea was void after the death Theodore, Birhtuald Abbot
of Reculuer which stands upon the mouth of the river Gentad, was then elect
January 29. ann. 692. and consecrate by Godwyn the Metropolitan of Wales, or
of France rather as Beda reports. The year following May 30. he took
possession of this his Bishopric. He was a man very well learned both in
Divinity and otherwise, but not comparable unto Theodore his predecessor. He
bare a hard hand upon Wilfride Archbishop of York as Theodore had done before
him, and caused his second banishment, or at least was some means of it. He
was coniured by the Pope, who turned him about, and dealt so with him by
letters, as he made him more earnest for him then ever he had been against
him. No Archbishop ever continued so long in this See as he. He sat 38. years
and a half. Dying then January 9. 731. he was buried at Saint Augustines with
his predecessors.

9. Tatwyn.
THe same year in which Birhtwald died succeeded Tatwyn Cadwyn and Scadwyn. He
was borne in Mercia. A man very religious, and no less learned. Soon after
his consecration there arose a great controversy between him and the
Archbishop of York about the Primacie. Wherein Tatwyn prevailed having
travailed to Rome in person and received his Pall there. He sat three years,
died July 30. 734. and was buried at Canterbury. Unto this man's time Beda (who
died the same year) deduceth his history, the most ancient that England has
worthy credit.

10. Nothelinus.
HEnry Huntingdon affirms one Egbright to have Tatwyn: I have not found him
mentioned else where: and therefore to follow the report of the greater number,
I will omit him and pass unto Nothelin. He was borne at London, of which city
he was Bishop, till he was translated to Canterbury. Beda acknowledges
himself much beholding to this man for diverse things which upon his report he
inserted into his Ecclesiastical story. He received his Pall at Rome ann.
736. and was buried at Canterbury.

11. Cuthbert or Cudbrict.
CVthbert an Englishman, of great parentage, being counsel of Boniface Bishop
of Mentz he called a convocation at Cliff beside Rochester, to reform the
manifold enormities wherewith the Church of England at that time was
ouergrowen. Our kings forsaking the company of their own wives, in those
days delighted altogether in harlots which were for the most part Nuns.
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. The rest of the nobility therefore
following their example, trod also the same trace. The Bishops also and other
of the clergy that should have been a means of reforming these faults in
others, were themselves no less faulty; spending their times either in
contentions and brabbles, or else in luxury and voluptuousness, having no
care of study and seldom or never preaching. Whereby it came to pass that
the whole land was overwhelmed with a most dark and palpable mist of
ignorance, and polluted with all kind of wickedness and impiety in all kind
of people. Cuthbert therefore endeavoring (like a good Pastor) by the
reformation of these things to turn away the wrath of God which seemed to hang
over this land, and to threaten those plagues which shortly after fell upon it
when the Danes invaded the same: gathered together his clergy at the place
before mentioned, and there after long consultation, caused certain Canons to
be decreed which are to be seen at large elsewhere. This man procured Eadbert
king of Kent to command, that the bodies of Archbishops deceased hereafter
should not be buried at S. Augustines (as heretofore) but at Christchurch: And
that he might put his monks of Christ church as it were in possession of this
privilege; he took order his death should be concealed until his funerals
were ended. He died ann. 758. and was buried according to his own desire in
Christchurch, or (as one reports) in a little church near adjoining, which
he had built and dedicated unto S. John Baptist, meaning to settle his
consistory there and to make it a place of burial for himself and his
successors. This church many years after was consumed with fire together with
Christchurch it self and a great part of the monastery. Christchurch was
afterward reedified by Lanfranke.

12. Bregwyn.
BRegwyn was borne of noble parentage amongst the Cuthbert, in regard of his
modesty, integrity and great learning, choice was made of him as the fittest
man to succeed. He took even the like course for his burial as his
predecessor had done. He sat only 3. years.

13. Lambert.
THe monks of S. Augustines taking it very hainously Bregwyn, yet to make the
matter the more sure, they determined to elect Lambert Abbot of Saint
Augustines for their Archbishop, assuring themselves he would now be as
carnest a defender of their liberties, as he had heretofore been an oppugner
in the behalf of S. Augustins; and so indeed he proved. In his time Offa king
of Merria erected a new Archbishopricke at Lichfield, and obtained of the Pope
authority for Eadulfus Bishop there to govern the Diocesses of Worcester,
Legecester, Siuancester, Hereford, Helmhant and Dunwich. So that Canterbury
had left unto him for his province only these, London, Winchester, Rochester,
and Sherborne. Some say that Lambert consented unto this alteration; others
report that he spared no cost to reduce things to their old estate. He sat
many years, and perceauing his end to approach, took order to be buried in
Saint Augustines, infringing by that means the graunts and privileges of the
monks of Christ-church, obtained for the burial of the Archbishops amongst
them. He was very honorably enterred in the Chapter House of Saint Augustines.

14. Athelard or Edelred.
AThelard was first Abbot of Malmesbury, then Bishop Offa soon after this
being dead, together with his son Egfride; Athelard made earnest suit unto
Kenulfe the son of Cuthbert then king of Mercia that he would restore unto
the Sea of Canterbury, the revenues and jurisdiction taken from it wrongfully
by Offa: Hereunto Kenulfus without much ado readily assented, as also Leo the
third that was then Pope. He sat about an eight or nine years, and dying the
year 806. was buried in Christ church to the great coffeehouse of the monks
of S. Angustines.

15. Wlfred.
VVLfred being a monk of Christchurch in Canterbury Leo the third. Except
this, that the ninth year after his consecration he went to Rome about some
business of his church not recorded, I find no other action of his reported.
He was buried at Canterbury in his own church.

16. Theologild.
ALittle while after Wlfred, Theologild or Fleogild Syred succeeded him; but
being taken away before he had full possession, is not reckoned amongst the
Archbishops.

17. Celnoth.
CElnoth that is said to have been Deane of the church Theologild and
continued Archb. 38. years. His time was exceeding troublesome by reason of
the continual invasions of the Danes: yet no memory remains of any action
of his in so long space of so memorable a time. He lies buried in Christchurch
in Canterbury.

18. Athelredus.
AThelredus a great divine, sometimes a monk of Christ Celnoth 18. years. In
his time all the monasteries of England were destroyed by the Danes, so as, for
the space of 90. years after, monkerie ceased throughout the realm; yea in
the North parts there was not seen any either monk or nun in two hundred
years after, viz. until about the middle of the reign of William Conqueror.
Married priests every where inhabited monasteries, whence for a long time after
with much ado they were hardly removed. This Athelredus (as in a manner all
his successors) was buried in his church of Christ in Canterbury.

19. Plegmund.
PLegmund the most excellent learned man of his time Alfred that was afterward
king of England. Being chosen Archbishop, he travailed to Rome in person, and
was there consecrate. Soon after his return (to requite belike the courtesy
he had found there) he took great pains in collecting the alms of al men well
disposed through the land, which the king sent together with much treasure of
his own unto the Pope by Athelmus Bishop of Winchester, appointing a certain
portion of the same to be conveyed unto Jerusalem. Marianus then Pope, a little
before had gratified the king diverse ways: He had granted immunitie of tribute
unto the Saxons school at Rome, and sent sundry presents unto him; namely
(amongst other things) a piece of the cross upon which our Savior was thought
to have suffered death. By this contribution his kindness was sufficiently
requited. The most memorable action of this Archbishop is, that the year 905.
he consecrated seven Bishops in one day. By reason of continual wars, all
the province of the West Saxons had been without any Bishop seven years:
Which Formosus the Pope imputing unto the negligence of the king, sent out an
excommunication against him. He therefore caused Plegmund the Archbishop to call
a convocation, wherein it was ordered, that the country of the Gewisses (which
till that time had but two Bishops, one at Winchester another at Shirburne)
should hereafter have five; viz. besides the Sees before named, Wells in
Sommersetshire, Criditon in Devonshire, and Saint Petrocks in Cornwall. Unto
Winchester was appointed Frithstan, to Shirburne Wolstan, to Criditon (...),
and to Saint Petrocks Athelstan. Moreover at the same time were consecrate with
them, Burnegus Bishop of the South Saxons, and Kenulsus Bishop of Dorchester.
Plegmund sat Archbishop 26. years, and dying ann. 915. was buried in his own
church.

20. Athelmus.
AThelm that had been Abbot of Glastonburie and (as Plegmund in Canterbury.
William of Malmesbury says that this Archbishop laid the first foundation of
the Abbey of Malmesburie: but it seems to be more ancient then so. He sat
nine years, died ann. 924. and was buried with his predecessors.

21. Wlfelmus.
VVLfelm succeeded Athelm, first in Wels, and then

22. Odo Seuerus.
ODo was (...) in the country of the (...) Angles. Christian religion;
insomuch as, they disinherited their son Odo for keeping company with
Christians. He therefore forsaking his country, betook himself to the service
of a noble man in the court of king Edward the elder named Ethelelm; who
perceiving in him a great forwardness and excellency of wit, set him to
school, where he profited exceedingly. He was not baptized till he was come
even unto man's estate. Soon after his baptism, by the counsel of his Lord and
Master he entered into orders and became a Deacon; in which office he continued
preaching very painfully, until at last he was made priest. Some report that
he served in the wars, some while under king Edward before he became a clergy
man; and it is not unlikely. For after he was Bishop he was thrice in the
field, and did his prince notable service. He was preferred to the Bishopric
of Wiltshire (the Sea whereof was then seated at ramsbury) by the special
favor of king Athelston the year 920. King Athelston being dead, Edmund his
brother that succeeded favoring him no less then his brother had done, upon
the death of Wlfhelm, procured him to be chosen Archbishop. A great while Odo
refused (because he was no monk) to take that charge upon him, saying, that
never any man had held that place hitherto but he was a monk. Therein he was
deceived; For Nothelmus and two or three other before him were secular priests,
and not monks.) But he resolute in this error, and loath to break the dance,
was persuaded first to become a monk of Floriake in France; and that done,
accepted of the election. He continued Archbishop 24. years, in great favor
and authority under diverse princes, Edmund, Edward, Athelstan, and Eadred.
Toward the latter end of his time, Edwyn a young Gentleman obtained the
crown, with whom he had very ill agreement. He caused him to be divorced from
his Queen, some say for consanguinity, some allege other reasons. He
excommunicated his concubines, and causing one of them whom the king doted
unreasonably upon, to be fetched out of the court by violence, burnt her in the
forehead with a hot iron, and banished her into Ireland. These things
exasperated the king much against him: But he was taken away by death soon
after, and so delivered from al fear of the kings displeasure. He was buried
on the south side of the high alter, in a tomb built somewhat after the form
of a Pyramid. I take it to be the tomb of ieate standing in the grate near
the steps that lead up to S. Thomas chapel. After his death (which happened the
year 958.) Elsinus Bishop of Winchester (that could never brook Odo in his
life time) by bribery and corrupt means, obtained election unto Canterbury,
and coming thither, spurned at his tomb despitefully, using these speeches,
now at last (quoth he) thou art dead old dotard, and much against thy will have
left thy place unto a man woorthier of it then thy self. Our stories report,
that the next night Odo appeered unto him in his sleep, threatening a speedy
and fearful vengeance of this insolency. According unto which prediction it
fell out, that travailing to Rome for his pall, upon the Alps he was so
oppressed with cold, as he was constrained to put his feet wherewith he had so
contumeliously disgraced his deceased predecessor, into the bellies of his
horses, and yet at last to die for cold. Brithelm Bishop of Wels was then
chosen Archbishop, a virtuous and meek man, but not very fit for government:
In regard whereof king Edgar entreated him and he easily condiscended to abide
still at his old charge.

23. Dunstan.
With the approbation of all men Dunstan Bishop Herstan, and his mothers
Kinedeid. He was brought up for the most part in the Abbey of Glastonbury,
where beside other good learning he was also taught to sing, play upon
iustruments, to paint and carue, in all which he proved very excellent. From
thence he went unto Athelm Archbishop of Canterbury his uncle, who commended
him unto the king; And he partly in regard of the manifold good parts he saw
in him, partly also for that he was near of kin unto him, made very much of
him. So he lived in the court a while, till for a certain miracle (as the
monks call it, which was then imputed to coniuration) with much disgrace he was
driven out of the court. After this he betook himself unto the service of
Elphege Bishop of Winchester, another uncle of his, who persuaded him
continually to become a monk. He could not hear of that side in any wise,
till upon a time falling dangerously sick, and thinking his disease a plague
sent of God for his backwardness in that holy course whereto his uncle
directed him, in great have professed himself a monk. This done, and having
recovered his health, he went to his first nurse Glastonbury, leading there (in
outward show at least) an exceeding strait life. King Edward hearing great
fame of his holiness, sent for him unto the court, where he lived in very
diverse reputation, sometimes judged too familar with fair women, sometimes
accounted a coniurer, but for the most part admired as a most holy and virtuous
man. Under two princes Edmund and Eldred (with whom he was most gracious) he
ruled all things at his pleasure. Edwyn the son of king Edmund that succeeded
Eldred, could in no wise brook him. Some say it was because Dunstan was
forward in reprehending the kings vices; as namely, that when the king rising
from the feast of his coronation, went immediately to his chamber, where a
certain beautiful concubine attended his coming; Dunstan that had gotten
some inkling of the business he went about, followed him boldly, and forced
him not only to leave that enterprise for that time, but also to forswear the
company of that woman. But the undoubted ground of this dislike was this.
Dunstan had so bewitched the former kings with the love of monkery, as they not
only took violently from married priests their livings to erect monasteries,
but also spent very lauishly of their own treasures, which they should rather
have employed in resisting the common enemy both of God and their country the
Dane. King Edwyn perceiving all the wealth of the land to be crept into
monasteries, not only refrained to bestow more upon them, but recalled diverse
of those prodigal gifts his predecessors had made, and when the monks refused
to render them at his demand, he became a very bitter persecutor of them, and
their patrons. Dunstan therefore seeing nothing before him at home but danger
and continual disgrace, got him away into France, and there lived in
banishment the space of a year. In the mean time king Edwyn by the rebellion
of his subjects (at the instigation it is likely of our monks and their
favorers) was deprived both of his life and kingdom. Edgar that succeeded,
warned by his brothers example, was content to curry favor with them, and to
that purpose restored whatsoever was taken from them, and not only called home
Dunstan, but promoted him, first unto the Bishopric of Worcester, soon after
of London, and lastly having been but two years at London, to the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury. In that place he continued 27. years, applying
all his endeavors to the enriching of monks and monasteries inhabited by them,
persecuting and hunting married priests every where out of their living. He died
at last May 19. 988. and was long after canonised a Saint.

24. Ethelgar.
AFter Dunstan succeeded Aethelgar, abbot first of the new

25. Siricius.
SIricius of a monk of Glastonbury was made abbot of Dunstan, and by his
means preferred to the Bishopric of Winchester (as one says) but it was the
Bishop of Wiltshire or Wilton. Ethelgar being dead, he became Archbishop the
year 989. He is blamed much in our histories for persuading to buy peace of
the Danes with 10000. l. He sat sower years, died 993. and was buried at
Canterbury.

26. Aluricius alias Alfricus.
ALuricius was also brought up at Glastonbury, and succeeded Siricius first at
Wilton in the Bishopric there, then at Canterbury. He died ann. 1006. and was
buried first at Abingdon, but was afterward removed to Canterbury.

27. Elphege.
ELphege was borne of great parentage, and spent his Elphege was first buried
in Saint Paul's church in London, afterward carried to Canterbury, by the
commandment of king Knute and there enterred. He was made a Saint and allowed
the 19. day of April for celebration of his memory.

28. Liunig alias Lifwing.
LIunig surnamed Elstan was first Bishop of Wels, and Elphege. His time was
very troublesome, by reason of the continual invasion of the Danes. Besides
many other calamities, he endured seven months imprisonment at their hands;
from which being delivered, he departed into voluntary exile, and bewailed
there the misery of his country, until such time as king Swanus being dead
and Ethelred returning, all troubles were appcased. So it pleased God to suffer
him at last to end his days in peace the year 1020. when he had been
Archbishop about seven years.

29. Agelnothus alias Aethelnotus.
AGelnothus surnamed The Good, was the son of an Agelmare, and is said to
have been Deane of Christchurch in Canterbury, which at that time was
replenished for the most part with canons wearing the habit and garments of
monks, but in profession and manner of life differing much from them. Therefore
when as in that same terrible tithing of the Danes mentioned in the life of
Elphege all the monks were slain except only four; the canons that were now
the greater number, gave unto their governor the name of Deane. From this
place Agelnoth was taken to be Archbishop. Going to Rome to fetch his pall, he
bought (as one reports) an arm of that blessed father Saint Augustine Bishop
of Hippo for an hundred talents of silver, and bestowed it upon the church of
Couentry. He sustained great pains and cost in repairing his church and
monastery destroyed and burnt by the Danes; and by his good advise directed
king Knute (that favored him exceedingly) unto many honorable enterprises. He
died at last having sat Archbishop 17. years and upward, October 29. anno
1038.

30. Eadsin.
EAdsin was a seculer priest, and first chapleine unto king Harold, who
preferred him to the Bishopric of Winchester. Thence he was removed to
Canterbury soon after the death of Agelnoth. He continued Archbishop almost
12. years; All which time he was so oppressed with sickness, as he could not
attend his pastoral charge, but was feign to commit the same to another: and he
made choice of one (...). Abbot of Abingdon, whom he termed sometimes Vicarium
(...), sometimes (...), and sometimes Archiepiscopi (...). He discharged not
his duty according to the trust reposed in him: for he abused much not only
his authority, but also the goods, yea and person also of the Archbishop that
committed the same unto him. In regard whereof, though (...) besought the king
and other about him very earnestly, that he might succeed him, (not knowing
belike how ill he was used so well as they) yet they would not condescend
thereunto: but bestowed upon him the Bishopric of Rochester. Henry Huntingdon
says he was consecrated Archv. But he is mistaken, out of all doubt. Edsinus
departed this life October 28. 1050. was buried in his own church, and after
his death made a Saint.

31. Robert, surnamed Gemeticensis.
RObert a Norman succeeded by the favor of king Edward Eadsin unto
Canterbury. This man is said to have laid the first foundation of the Normans
conquest in England, persuading the king to make Duke William his heir;
whereunto when the king had condescended, himself became the messenger of this
good tidings unto the Duke, taking Harold with him, peradventure to that
purpose, that he might so hamper him with an oath (as indeed he did) and so
bar him from all possibility of the kingdom. This oath Harold afterward
broke; but he sped thereafter, loosing his life and ill gotten kingdom both
together. The Archbishop now assuring himself of the favor not only of the
king present, but of him also that was to succeed: could not endure that any
should bear so great sway as himself in court, and therefore began to devise
how he might overthrow Emma the kings mother, who only seemed to ouertop him.
He began therefore to beat into the kings head (that was a mild and soft
natured gentleman) how hard a hand his mother had held upon him when he lived
in Normandy; how likely it was that his brother came to his death by the
practice of her and Earl Godwyn; and lastly that she used the company of Alwyn
Bishop of Winchester, somewhat more familiarly then an honest woman needed. The
king somewhat too rashly crediting these tales, without any further examination
or debating of the matter, seized upon all his mothers goods, and committed her
to prison in the Nunry of Warwell; banished Earl Godwyn and his sons; and
commanded Alwyn upon pain of death not to come forth of the gates of
Winchester. The Queen made the best friends she could to be called to her
answer: But the Archbishop so possessed the king, as other trial of her
innocence might not be allowed then this; She must walk over nine plowshares
red hot in the midst of the Cathedral church of Winchester. If either she
performed not this kind of purgation, or were found any thing at all hurt, she
and the Bishop both should be esteemed guilty; If otherwise, the Archbishop was
content to submit himself to such punishment as they should have endured. To
make short, the Queen lead between two Bishops in open sight of all the
people, performed (as all our histories report) this hard kind of purgation,
and so acquit herself and Alwyn the Bishop of these crimes objected. The king
then greatly bewailing the wrong done to his mother, asked her forgiveness upon
his knees, restored both her and the Bishop unto their goods and former places,
and lastly (to make some satisfaction for his fault committed) would needs be
whipped by the hands of the Bishops there present, and receiving three stripes
of his mother, was by her clearly forgiven, and the wrong promised for ever
hereafter to be forgotten. Emma now and the Bishop to show themselves thankful
unto God for this miraculous deliverance, for a perpetual memorial of the same,
gave each of them unto the monastery of S. Swithun nine Manors, in remembrance
of the nine plowshares. This gift of theirs the king confirmed, and gave
moreover two Manors of his own, to wit, Meones and Portland. Now to return
unto the Archbishop; he doubting of the success of this matter, under pretense
of sickness held himself at Dover, and as soon as he heard how the world
went, well knowing England would prove too hot for him, he got him over into
his own country to the Abbey of Gemetica where he was brought up, and there
overcome (it is like with shame and sorrow) within a short time after ended his
days, and was buried in the Monastery aforesaid, having been Archbishop about
the space of two years or scarcely so much.

32. Stigand.
STigand was chaplain unto king Edward the Confessor, Robert the Archbishop,
he thrust himself into his room (not expecting either his death, deprivation
or other auoydance) without any performance of usual ceremonies. And whether
it were that he mistrusted his title to Canterbury, or inercusable
covetousness I cannot tell; certain it is, that he kept Winchester also
together with Canterbury, even until a little before his death he was forced
to forgo them both. Many times he was cited unto Rome about it; but by gifts,
delays and one means or other he drove it off, never being able to procure
his pall thence so long as king Edward lived. William the Conqueror having
slain king Harold in the field, all England yielded presently unto his
obedience, except only Kentishmen, who following the counsel of Stigand and
Egelsin the abbot of S. Augustines, gathered al their forces together at
Swanscombe near Grauesend, and there attended the coming of the king (who
doubted of no such matter) every man holding a green bough in his hand;
whereby it came to pass that he was in the midst of them before he dreamed of
any such business toward. He was greatly amassed at the first, till he was
given to understand by Stigand, there was no hurt meant unto him, so that he
would grant unto that country their ancient liberties, and suffer them to be
governed by their former customs and laws, called then and til this day
Gauelkind. These things he easily yielded unto, upon this armed intercession,
and afterward very honorably performed: But he conceived so profound a
displeasure against Stigand for it, as he never ceased till he had revenged it
with the others destruction. A while he gave him very good countenance, calling
him father, meeting him upon the way when he understood of his repair toward
him, and affording him all kind of gracious and favorable usage both in words
and behavior: but it lasted not long. The first sign of his hidden rancour
and hatred toward him was, that he would not suffer himself to be crowned by
him, but made choice of Aldred Archbishop of York: for which he alleged other
reasons, as that he had not yet received his pall etc. But the matter was, he
was loath in that action to acknowledge him for Archbishop. Soon after his
coronation, he departed into Normandy carrying with him Stigand and many
English nobles, under pretense to do them honor: But in truth he stood in
doubt least in his absence they should practice somewhat against him: And
namely Stigand he knew to be a man of a haughty spirit, subtle, rich, gracious
and of great power in his country. Presently upon his return, certain
Cardinals arrived in England, sent from the Pope as legates to redress (as
they said) certain enormities and abuses of the English clergy. Stigand by and
by perceiving himself to be the mark that was specially shot at, hid himfelfe
a while in Scotland with Alexander Bishop of Lincoln and after in the Isle of
Ely. At last perceiving a convocation to be called at Winchester, he came
thither and besought the king in regard of his own honor, and the promise
made unto him at Swanscombe (which was not to be offended with him or any other
for their attempt at that time) to save him from the calamity he saw growing
toward him, which he could not impute unto any thing so probably, as his
undeserved displeasure. The king answered him with very gentle words, that he
was so far from endeavoring to take any revenge of that or any other matter,
as he loved him, and wished he knew how to protect him from the danger
imminent: But that which was to be done at that time, must be done by the Popes
authority which he might not countermaund. So do what he could, he was
deprived of his livings by these legates. The causes alleged against him were
these; First, that he had held Canterbury and Winchester both together (which
was no very strange thing, for Saint Oswald had long before held Worceter with
York, and S. Dunstan Worceter with London.) Secondly, that he had invaded the Sea of Canterbury, Robert the Archbishop being yet alive vndepriued; And lastly
that he presumed to use the pall of his predecessor Robert left at Canterbury,
and had never received any pall but of Pope Benedict, at what time he stood
excommunicate for simony and other like crimes. In the same convocation many
other Prelates were deprived of their promotions, as (...) Bishop of Helmham
brother unto Stigand, diverse abbots and men of meaner places. All which was
done by the procurement of the king, that was desirous to place his countrymen
in the rooms of the deprived for the establishment of his new gotten kingdom.
Poor Stigand being thus deprived, as though he had not yet harm enough, was
also clapped up presently in prison within the castle of Winchester, and very
hardly used there, being scarcely allowed meat enough to hold life and soul
together. That was thought to be done to force him to confess where his
treasure lay, whereof being demanded, he protested with great oaths he had no
money at all; hoping belike so to procure his liberty the rather, and then to
make himself merry with that he had laid up against such a dear year. He died
soon after of sorrow and grief of mind, or (as other report) of voluntary
famine, 17. years after he first obtained the Archbishopricke. After his
death, a little key was found about his neck, the lock whereof being
carefully sought out, showed a note or direction of infinite treasures hid
under ground in diverse places. All that the king pursed in his own coffers.
The bones of this archbishoply entoombed at this day upon the top of the north
wall of the Presbytery of the church of Winchester in a coffin of lead, upon
the north side whereof are written these words, Hic iacet Stigandus
Archiepiscopus. he was deprived ann. 1069. and died within the compass of the
same year.

33. Lanfrank.
STigand being yet alive, but deprived as is beforesaid, Lanfranke was
consecrate Archbishop. This Lanfrank was borne at Papia in Lumbardy, twenty
miles from Millayn, where being brought up in learning, and now come unto man's
state, he determined to travail. Through France he came into Normandy,
provoked by the fame and great reports he had heard of Eluin abbot of Becco.
Upon the way thitherward, it was his hap to be encountered with thieves that
spoiled him of all he had, bound him and threw him into a thicket, where he
might have perished with cold and hunger had not God sent some extraordinary
company that way that loosed him, having laien there only one night. Thence he
got him unto the monastery of Becco, and for very want and penury was feign to
become a Reader of Logike there, until he was admitted to the place of a
monk. Soon after that, he was made Prior of Becco, whence in regard of his
singular wisdom and great knowledge in all good learning that those times
could afford) he was called by Duke William to be abbot of S. Stephens in
Cane, a monastery that the said Duke had founded. Now Stigand being displaced
in manner above rehearsed, the conqueror well knowing how much it behooued him
to the establishment of his new erected throne in England, to have a man wise
and faithful in that place; made a special choice of him, as one in all
respects most fit and worthy; which being well known to all men, the Covent
at the kings first nomination readily chose him, the nobility and courtiers
willingly assented, and received him with great applause, and lastly the Pope
affoorded him his pall with extraordinary favor. It is said, at his first
coming the Pope rose up unto him and met him, telling him he yielded him
that honor not of duty, but in regard of his excellent learning, whereof he
had heard great fame. Thomas Archbishop of York was present the same time,
together with (...) Bishop of Dorchester. This Thomas had been lately
consecrated unto York by Lanfrank, and for a certain time refused to make
profession of obedience unto the Sea of Canterbury, even until by the
commandment of the king he was enforced thereunto. Now whether it were
coffeehouse and persuasion of a wrong, or else envy at Lanfranks either
virtue or good fortune that moved him, he presently began to make complaint
unto the Pope of a great miury offered unto his See, in the demand of his
profession. Lanfrank pleaded prescription for his right, and offered to make
proof of the same. The Pope therefore not willing to trouble himself any more
with the matter, committed the hearing thereof unto the king, who in the year
1072. judged it for Canterbury. See more of this quarrel in Thomas of York.
Lanfrank himself was consecrated very solemnly at Canterbury, all the Bishops
in England being present themselves or by their proctors August 29. 1070.
Almost 18. years he continued Archbishop, governing his charge laudably and
happily, till that about the end of his time one action obscured his former
praises, and furthermore was the cause of many great calamities unto him. It is
thought that William the Conqueror left the kingdom of England unto his
yoonger son William Rufus, at the persuasion especially of this Archbishop,
who the rather wished well unto the young prince, because he had been brought
up under him in his childhood. He is blamed much for putting the eldest son
Robert from that which might seem in some sort due unto him; and surely God
blessed him not in that action. The king thus advanced by him, fell out with
him, and drove him out of the realm. The cause of this displeasure is diversely
reported: But most men agree it was none other then this, that the king thought
him a little too busy in exhorting him to virtue and godliness, and
reprehending his manifold vices. Being thus: banished, he trauatled to Rome,
and wandered up and down many countries, till at last (by what intercession I
find not) he was suffered to come home again. Soon after his return, he fell
sick of an ague, and so ended his days, June 4. 1088. or (as Houeden has)
May 24. 1089. He was buried at Canterbury in his own church, unto which he was
a great benefactor. He bestowed much upon the fabrike and reparation of the
same, built much housing for the monks (whose number he increased from 30. to
140.) restored the dignities and offices of old belonging to the monastery, and
recovered unto the same 25. Manors that had been taken from it wrongfully in
times past by Odo Bishop of Bayon and earl of Rent. Moreover he built the
Archbishops palace at Canterbury in a manner all, he founded two hospitals
without the city of Canterbury, and endowed them with competent revenues;
(Saint John's and Harbaldown) He bestowed large money toward the building of the
cathedral Church of Rochester, (or rather indeed built it all) and did much
(the particulars I cannot set down) for the abbey of Saint Albons. He was a
great student, writ many learned works, and (which deserves especial
remembrance) took great pains in reforming the Bible, the copies whereof were
much corrupted throughout England by the negligence of the writers.

34. Anselm.
Four years the Sea continued void after the death of Lanfranke, and the king
pursed the profits thereof. In what good mood I know not, he which was wont
to sell all other ecclesiastical promotions as it were by the drum, bestowed
this Archbishopricke freely, upon a most worthy man, Anselm abbot of Becco.
This Anselm was borne at Augusta a city of Burgundy standing at the foot of the
Alps. His fathers name was Gundulfe (a man of great account in his country)
and his mothers Hemeberg. He came unto Becco of the like errand as Lanfranke
had done, moved thereunto by the great fame of the said Lanfranke, and
professed himself a monk there in the 27. year of his age. Lanfranke being
called away to Cane, he was made Prior, and soon after Abbot, Eluyn the old
Abbot being dead. In that place he continued 15. years, and then was earnestly
requested by Hugh Earl of Chester lying very sick, to come into England unto
him, to confer with him, and to order certain affairesof his. Hither he came
and had much honor done him every where of all forts of people. The king
himself amongst the rest, beside many verbal favors, made offer unto him of
the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, verily hoping belike that a man given to
monastical contemplation and not esteeming worldly pomp, would undoubtedly
have refused the same: For it is certain, that after Anselm had accepted the
offer, pitying belike the spoil and desolation of the church for want of a
pastor; the king would feign have retracted his gift, and persuaded him with
many reasons to leave it; showing him how the burden and trouble of the place
was greater then he should be able to inoure, a man that had spent his time
within the walls of a monastery, and not experienced in managing of great
affairs. But he lost his labor: Anselm kept fast his hold, and was soon
after consecrated by Walkelm Bishop of Winchester, or (as I find also
recorded) by Thomas Archbishop of York, December. 4. 1093. all the Bishops of
the land that could possibly come being present at that solemnity. Presently
after his consecration the king and he fell out. Not long before, the king had
thrown down thirty churches to make his new forest near Winchester. This,
(...) reprehended him sharply for, and besought him to amend that and other
faults, as namely his simony, his extortion, his cruelty etc. wherein he daily
offended God grievously, and greatly dishonored himself. This admonition of
his displeased the king very much; but his quarrel in show was none other then
this, that asking leave to go to Rome to fetch his pall, he had named Urban
Pope, whom the king as yet had not acknowledged for Pope, and for so doing,
accused him of no less then high treason. After great stir and much ado
between them about this matter, it was determined that all the abbots and
Bishops of England should be called together to judge of this controversy. They
met at Rochingham castle, and the matter being proposed by the king, for fear
or flattery they all assented unto him and forsook their Archbishop, except
only Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester. A while (...) endured to live in
continual sear and disgrace, even until he was commanded out of the realm
by the king. Being at Dover ready to take ship, all his carriages were searched,
his goods there and elsewhere soever taken from him and sold to the kings use,
his temporalties seized, and himself set aland in France in a manner naked. He
travailed presently to Lions and was sent for thence by the Pope. At his first
coming to Rome he had all manner of favor: But by that time the king with
golden eloquence (...) him of the cause, his entertainment began to wax colder.
He determined therefore to have returned to Lions, but was stayed by the Pope,
whose pleasure while he was content to await a while longer, the Pope died.
Soon after him, the king died also being chaunceably slain by the glaunce of
an arrow as he was hunting in that forest, for the making whereof Anselm had
reprehended him. He was a very vicious man, covetous in getting and prodigal
in spending, the most sacrilegious symonist that ever reigned in England.
Rejoicing in the gain he made that way, he would often say, Panis Christi panis
pinguis. His death as some report, was miraculously signified unto Anselme in
France. A paper was put into the hand of one of his chaplains no man knew how,
in which was found written, (...) occisus est. Within a few days after,
certain word was brought of the tyrants death, and this notice taken as sent
from heaven. Henry the first succeeded William Rufus in the kingdom, who
presently called home Anselme and restored him to his former place. The first
thing he did at his return, he called a convocation at London, wherein he
deprived many prelates of great place for their several offenses, Guy abbot of
(...) and Eldwyn of Ramsey for symony; Geftry of Peterburgh, Haymo of Cheswel,
and Egelric of Middleton for not being in orders; Richard of Ely, and Robert of
S. Edmunds, all abbots, for other enormities. Diverse canons were agreed upon in
the same convocation too long to rehearse: Some of them tended to the
restraining of clergy men from marriage; which notwithstanding, many married
daily, and many that came for orders refused utterly to make profession of
chastity, as we may see reported by Girard Archbishop of York in an epistle
written by him unto Anselm in the end of S. Anselmes Epistles. The falling out
also of Anselm with the king (which happened presently after) was a great
weakening unto these canons. All the time that the Archbishop was absent (which
was three years) the king had disposed of all Bishoprics that fell, at his
pleasure, giving inuestiture and possession of them, by delivery of the staff
and the ring. And in deed the princes in a manner of all christendom, had taken
this kind of authority unto themselves every where about this time. Bishops
thus appointed demanded consecration of Anselm, which he utterly denied unto
them, professing withal, that he would never receive or repute them for
Bishops that were already consecrated by other upon such election, aleaging how
it was lately forbidden in a council held by Pope Urban 2. that any clerk
should take inuestiture of any spiritual preferment at the hand of any king,
prince or other lay man. The king upon Anselms refusal, required Gerard
Archbishop of York to give these Bishops consecration, whereunto he readily
assented. But William Gifford nominated to Winchester, stood so in awe of
Anselm, as that he durst not accept consecration at Gerards hands. This
incensed the king woonderfully, so as presently he commanded Giffards goods to
be confiscate, and himself banished the Realm. Great adoo now there was about
this matter throughout the realm, some defending the kings right, others taking
part with the Archbishop. In the end, the king doubting what might come of it,
and being loath to give occasion of tumult, considering that himself was a
stranger borne, and that his father by force and much bloodshed, had not many
years since obtained the rule of this land; he determined to send an
Ambassador to the Pope, together with the Archbishop, so to grow to some
reasonable conclusion. The Pope (Palchalis 2.) would not yield one jot unto
the king, insomuch as when the kings Ambassador William Warelwast (after Bishop
of Excester) said he knew the king would rather loose his crown then this
privilege, he answered, yea let him loose his head also if he will, while I
live he shall never appoint Bishop but I will resist him what I may. So without
doing any good, homeward they came. But the king understanding before hand how
the world went, sent a messenger to forbid Anselm entrance into the realm, and
presently seized all his goods, mooueable and unmooueable into his hands. Three
years more this good man spent in exile, all which time he lived with Hugh
Archbishop of Lions. At last it pleased God to open this passage of his
reconciliation to the king. Adela Countess of Bloys the kings sister, fell
dangerously sick in those parts where it chanced the Archbishop to abide. He
went to visit her, and yielded so great comfort unto her in that time of her
distress; as recovering afterward, she never ceased importuning her brother,
until she had wrought an agreement between them, the conditions whereof were
these; First that Anselm should be content to consecrate the Bishops already
nominated by the king: And then that the king should renounce all right to such
nomination or inuestiture for the time to come. These conditions were allowed
by the Pope, and the Archbishop restored not only to his place, but to all his
goods and fruits gathered in the time of his absence. Two years he lived
after this his last return; in which time he persecuted married priests very
extremely. Dunstan, Oswald, Ethelwald, and other enemies to the marriage of
clergy men, had only expelled them that out of monasteries that had wives:
But Anselm utterly forbidding them marriage, deprived them of their promotions
that were married, confiscated their goods unto the Bishop of the Dioces,
adjudged them and their wives adulterers, and forced all that entered into orders
to vow chastity. Half the clergy of England at this time were either married
men, or the sons of married priests. The king therefore pitying the generality
of this calamity, sought to protect them a while from Anselms severity in this
point: But he (I mean Anselm) was a little to resolute in all his
determinations, in so much as he might never be persuaded to yield one jot in
any thing he once intended. So, notwithstanding the kings inclination to
succor so many distressed poor families, the canons of the Convocation before
mentioned were generally put in execution throughout England. About this time
it happened Gerard Archbishop of York to decease, and a second Thomas to be
elected for his successor. What adoo there was between him and Anselm about
profession of obedience, and how it was ended, see in the history of the said
Thomas. To make an end at last with this Archbishop, the year 1109. he fell
extremely sick at Saint Edmundsbury, and thence got him to Canterbury, where
he lay languishing a long time, and at last departed this life April 21. in
the 16. year of his government, and of his age 76. He was buried at the head
of his predecessor Lanfrank in his own church, upon the building and
beautifying whereof, he had bestowed very much money. This Archbishop was a man
of great learning, as his works yet extant testify, and for integrity of life
and conversation admirable. That he was more peremptory in diverse of his
resolutions then became him, and so hot against Clergy men's marriage, I impute
it but to a blind zeal far from any malicious intent of doing wrong.
Undoubtedly notwithstanding these imperfections he was a good and holy man, and
as worthy the honor of a Saint, as any I think that ever was Canonised by the
Pope since his time. In favor of him (to note that by the way) the Pope
affoorded unto his see this honor, that whereas the Archbishop of Canterbury
was wont to sit next the Bishop of Saint Ruffine in all general Councels,
hereafter his place should be at the Popes right foot, and with all used these
words, Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis Papam.

35. Rodolphus.
THe King well remembering how troublesome the authority Anselme had been unto
him, and knowing it greatly imported him to make choice of some quiet tractable
man to succeed in that place; took four or five years deliberation before he
would appoint any thereunto. He was once resolved upon one Farecius Abbot of
Abindon: But (upon what consideration I know not) changing his determination,
advanced Ralfe Bishop of Rochester to that see. This Ralfe or Rodolph was a
Norman borne, a Monk first of the order of Saint Benet and a disciple of
Lanfranke in the Abbay of Cane. Then he became Abbot of Say, was called thence
by Saint Anselm unto the Bishopric of Rochester, consecrate thereunto August.
11. 1108. and removed to Canterbury, in June 1114. His pall was very solemnly
delivered unto him by Anselm Abbot of Saint Sauines, nephew unto Saint Anselm
June 27 at Canterbury. In this man's time (...) obtained consecration of the
Pope unto the Archbishop of York without making the usual profession of
obedience. About this matter there was long time much adoo. This our Archbishop
being an aged and sickly man much troubled with the (...) and lame in his
feet, would yet needs travail to Rome in person about this matter. See the
end of this controversy in Thurstan of York. Eight years Ralfe continued
Archbishop, behauing himself well in the place, but that he was sometimes
wayward and peenish in matters of small moment. Generally he was a very affable
and courteous man, willing to pleasure and not especially noted with any great
vice: Only some blame him for being more delighted with jesting (...) merry
toys, then became the gravity of his age and place, in regard whereof some
have given unto him the surname (or rather nickname) of (...). Three years
before his decease he was continually held of a palsy whereof at last he died
October. 20. 1122. and three days after was buried in the middle of the body of
Christ church in Canterbury.

36. William Corbell.
William Corbel or Corbois, was first a secular priest, (...) de (...) the
Popes legate (...) most bitterly against the marriage of priests, and was the
next night taken in bed with a common strumpet: for shame whereof he presently
got him away (...) all his (...) at six and seven, never taking leave of any
body. In this Synod more Canons were (...) against the marriage of Clergy men:
which notwithstanding, the Archbishop (that in deed was but a weak man) not
able to restrain them of his time from taking wives; prayed aid of the King,
who either set them all to a yearly pension (so many as were married) or else
took some large sum of present money to bear with them. The year 1130.
Christchurch in Canterbury that had lately been new built by Lanfranke, soon
after fell down (a great part of it at least, and was quickly repaired by the
industry of Eardult the Prior) was now I know not by what chance all burnt and
consumed with fire. This Archbishop found means to repair it, and in Rogation
week the year following did dedicate the same (...) solemnly, in the
presence of the King, the Queen, David King of Scotts, and a great number of
the nobility of both realms. King Henry dying that did prefer him, he was
content to betray his daughter Mawd the Empress, and contrary to his oath to
join with Stephen Earl of Bloys, whom he crowned with his own hands; but
with such fear and terror of conscience, as it is noted that the consecrate
host fell out (...) his hand in the middle of mass, by reason of his trembling
and fearful amasednesse. Soon after he died, viz. the year 1136. having
sat almost 14 years, and lies buries in his own church, the particular
place I find not.

37. Theobald.
IN a Convocation held at London by the commandment Albert Bishop of Hostia
the Popes legate. (Theobald was chosen Archbishop) by the suffragan Bishops of
his own Province, and consecrate in the same convocation or synod by the
legate before named. He received his pall at Rome of Innocentius the second, who
also endued him and his successors for ever with the title of Legatus natus.
This Theobald was first a Bendictine monk and then (till he was chosen
Archbishop) Abbot of Becco. A man of no great learning, but of so gentle and
sweet behavior (being very wise withal) as he was greatly (...) of high and
low, Kings, nobles and commons. With the Pope he had often much ado. One
Sylnester a man infamous for many notorious offenses, was presented unto the
Abbotship of Saint Augustines in Canterbury, whon: in respect of his known
unworthiness, the Archbishop (...) to admit. But the Popes letters came so
thick and threefold in favor of him, that after many delays, excuses and
allegations against him, at last he was feign to receive him. There was at the
same time one Jeremy prior of that Abbey, an old acquaintance and friend of
the Archbishops, whom notwithstanding (upon some great occasion it is like) the
Archbishop (...) and removed from his place. In the behalf of this man also,
the Pope (who never was wont to fail where he (...) be well paid for his
pains) began to stickle and to interpose his authority, restoring Jeremy to
his place again till the cause might be heard and determined before him.
Whereat Theobald, though a mild man of nature, being exceedingly moved, in a
great fury vowed he would never exercise any ecclesiastical jurisdiction so
long as Jeremy held that place. He therefore seeing the Archbishop so resolute
against him, and fearing some great inconvenience would fall upon the monastery
by means of this business, and so procure him the hatred of his own company;
upon payment of 100. marks was content to leave his place, and lived a private
monk in the same house ever after. Now in the third year of his consecration
it happened a Council was summoned at Rhemes, whereunto he was called. Henry
therefore Bishop of Winchester King Stephens brother (that by virtue of his
power (...) had often contended with him, and ever opposed himself against him
in the Popes behalf) circumuented this good plaine-meaning man in this fort.
He dealt first with the Pope in no wise to dispense with his absence, and then
with his brother the King to forbid his passage, and perforce to stay him at
home. But such were those times, as it was safer then to offend the King then
the Pope, and therefore he resolved to go, and in no wise to give the Pope
such an advantage, against whom he had now twice opposed himself already
dangerously. Go therefore he would, but all the difficulty was in getting
passasse. All the ports of England were laid for him: yet so cunningly he
handled the matter, that over the seas he got and was at the Council in good
time. The King then following the advice of his brother the Bishop of
Winchester, seized upon his goods and temporalities and banished him the
realm. He like a tall fellow interdicted the King and the whole (...), and
taking advantage of the time which was very troublesome (notwithstanding the
Kings commandment) came home and lived in Norfolk, till by the intercession
of certain Bishops he was restored. Afterward he grew into great favor with
the King, and was the chief means of concluding that final peace at
Wallingford between him and Mawd the Empress. In the year 1152. he summoned
a convocation at London, where the King would have constrained the Clergy to
make (...) his son King, to the disheriting and great injury of Duke Henry
the Empresses son. The intent was spied before, and letters procured from the
Pope to forbid the Clergy to meddle in any such matter. This notwithstanding,
the matter was earnestly followed in behalf of the young Prince (...), in so
much as, when they perceived the business was not effected according to their
desire, they (...) them up in the place where they were gathered together, and
thought by force and threatening to compel them. The greater part seemed to
yield, when Theobald stealing secretly out of the place, took his barge, and
rowing down the Thames, got him beyond sea, and so by his absence the synod
was dissolved. His goods by and by were once more confiscate, and his
temporalties seized into the kings hands. But in a short time after king
Stephen died, and Henry Duke of Normandy surnamed Fitz-(...) succeeded, who
restored him immediately to all his possessions (...). Under him he passed the
rest of his days quietly in great favor and estimation with him. He departed
this life the year 1160. when he had sat Archbishop two and twenty years.
Perceiving his end to approach, he made his will, and gave all his goods unto
the poor or other like good uses. Helieth buried in the South part of Saint
Thomas chapel in a marble tomb joining to the wall.

38. Thomas Becket.
(...) the Conquest never any English man obtained Thomas Becket. He was borne
in London, his fathers name was Giltert a Merchant, his mother was a stranger
borne in Syria. He was first taught and brought up during the time of his
childhood by the Prior of Merton, and seeming towardly, was sent to the
Uniuersity of Paris: Having there attained some more learning and also the
knowledge of the French tongue, he returned and became an officer in some Court
about London, it is said he was a Justice: But waring soon weary of that kind
os life, he found means to get into the service of Theobald the Archbishop,
who quickly espiyng his manifold good parts, (...) him entierly and sent him
into Italy to study the Canon Law, (...) there might be any thing wanting in
him (...) in a common-wealthes-man, for the managing whereof he discerned him
then very fit and likely. Upon his return thence, he was quickly preferred by
the Archbishop unto the Archdeaconry of Canterbury the Prouostship of (...) and
the personage of Bromfield. The Archbishop then seeing him self weak and
sickly, which made him altogether unable to look thoroughly into the drifts and
devices of Courtyers (that in all ages seek to pray upon the Church and ever
need some watchful eye to ouerlooke their practices) commended Thomas Becket
unto the King so effectually, as he was content first to receive him into the
number of his Chapleines, then made him Chauncellor of England, and loaded him
with all kind of spiritual preferment. For Theobald being a wise man, well
perceived Becket to be first so (...) and (...), so painful and industrious,
as the King being yet young, he (...) surely possess him altogether and be
able to withstand any endeavors that might be prejudicial unto the Church; And
again he could not doubt either of his faithfulness to him, or his stoutnesse
in so good a cause, of which both he had had long experience. In regard hereof,
he employed all his endeavors to plant a perfect liking of Thomas Becket in the
mind of the King; wherein he prospered so well, as in a short time no man was
so far in the Kings books as he, nay no man could do any thing in a manner
with the King but he. For the maintaining of this his credit (says one) he
thought it good to relinquish and forsake by little and little all Priestly
either behauior or attire, to affect the pomp and bravery of the Court, to
live as other Courtyers, to fare daintily, to ly long in bed, to hawke, to
hunt, to have many followers, etc. in so much as some sticked not to say, the
Chauncellor had forgotten he was an Archdeacon also, and blamed him for not
living like a Clergy man. But by this means (says he) T. Becket was ever at
the Kings elbow, was partaker of all his counsels, and either by notize given
to the Archbishop, or some device of his own otherwise, could and did stop any
courses that might be prejudicial to the Church. Having continued thus in the
office of Chauncellor four or five years with the great favor and liking of
the King; it hapened Theobald the Archbishop to dye: The king little thinking
what a snake he nourished in his bosom, determined by and by to do his utmost
endeavor for the advancement of him (T. Becket) unto the Archbishoppricke.
Being therefore at that time in Normandy, he sent Richard Lucy a counselor of
special trust into England with charge to effect these two things; first to
procure all the Nobles and best of the comminalty to swear fealty unto young
Prince Henry his son; and then to cause the Monks of Canterbury to elect
Thomas his Chauncellor Archbishop. The first he quickly brought to pass (the
rather by the help of the Chauncellor that was joined in commission with him)
And in the second also he bestirred him self so well, as he caused the whole
convocation of the Clergy (a wost authentical kind of election) to choose
Thomas Becket for their Archbishop no one man gainesaying it except Gilbert
Foliot Bishop of London. He was consecrate Archbishop upon Whitsonday (being
made Priest but just the day before) by the Bishop of Wintchester. ann. 1162.
being not yet full 44. years of age. Presently after his consecration, he
altered all the whole course of his life; became so grave, so austere and so
devout in all outward show, as he seemed quite another man. Also he resigned
his Chauncellorship, certifiyng the King by letters (who was then in Normandy)
he could not serve the Church and the Court both at once. The King that ever
hitherto thought to use Thomas Becket as a school master to instruct and inure
his son in matters of state and policy; was now very sorry that he had made
him Archbishop, seeing he threw off all care of temporal government; and
considering the haughtiness of his spirits, sore doubted whereunto this strange
dealing would grow at the last. Another thing the King greatly disliked in him
was this; that being yet scarcely warm in his seat, he began to look so
narrowly into the state of the land belonging to his see, and to challenge
withal extremity whatsouer might seem to pertain unto him, as he provoked
many of all sorts of people against him, who every where exclaimed with open
mouth and made their complaints thick and threefold unto the King, saying that
having some authority and more knowledge in the Law, under color of defending
the rights of his Church, he took violently from every man what he list. But
the maine quarrel betwixt the King and him was this: The Clergy of those
times bare them selves so bold upon the privileges of the Church, whereby, in
crimes never so heinous they claymed to be exempted from the judgment of
temporal courts; as, daily infinite outrages were committed by Clergy men,
murders, robberies, rapes, etc. which temporal Judges might not meddle
withal, and in the spiritual courts they were either not punished, or for
the most part very lightly. For the amendment and prevention of this
inconvenience in (...) to come, the King intended to publish a certain
declaration of the customs of England, set down long since by King Henry the
first his grandfather, wherein this intolerable and licencious liberty of the
Clergy was somewhat restrained. And that it might not be spurned at by any
(the Archbishop especially he doubted:) he devised to send this declaracion
unto the Pope and to crave his allowance of the same. But the Archbishop having
some inkling of the Kings intent before hand, had so dealt with the Pope, as it
was no sooner seen but it was straight rejected. Herewith the King was so
incensed, as after that time he bent himself altogether to the diminishing and
breaking of all immunities and liberties of the church. And the Archbishop was
so far from seeking to pacify the Kings displeasure, as daily he provoked
him more and more. The particularities thereof to pass over, the King thought
good to try whether he could put in execution the contents of the foresaid
declaration even in despite of the Archbishop or no. He offered the same unto
all the Clergy gathered together in a synod; who as if they had learned all
one lesson, told the King severally in the same words, that they were content
to allow it, (...) ordine (...), so far forth as they might without (...) of
their own coat and calling: Only one man Hilary Bishop of Chichester was
content to yield unto it simpliciter and without condition, but was so bayted
and reviled for his labor, as it is like he often repented it. Yet so the
matter was handled not long after, as first diverse other Bishops were content
to yield unto the King in this demand, and at last even the Archbishop
himself with all his followers. So at a time appointed they met at Clarindon,
and theresware unto the observation of the articles comprised in that
declaration. This notwithstanding, soon after they disliking that they had
done, got the Pope to assoile them of this oath. But the Archbishop now well
assuring himself he had so offended the king, as there was no abiding for him
here, he took ship at Kumney, intending to avoid the (...), but missed of his
purpose, for he was forced by a contrary wind to return to land again.
Presently upon his arrival he was apprehended and carried prisoner to
Northampton (where the king then held a Council) and was there accused of
extortion, perjury, treason, forgery, and many other crimes. His own suffragan
Bishops, though he had appealed unto the Pope, gave sentence against him, and
warranted the king they would make proof of these accusations unto the Pope.
The next night after his condemnation, he escaped away and once more hasted unto
the sea, committed himself very desperately unto a little bad rotten fisher
boat, and accompanied only with three seruitors crossedthe sea, and got into
the low Countries, and thence posted to the Pope at Senon, who placed him in
the monastery of Pontiniac. While he there rested himself, he thundered out
excommunications apace against all such as did observe the articles contained
in the declaration set forth at Clarindon, whereunto himself had once sworn.
The King as fast bestird himself in seasing all the goods and temporalties of
the Archbishop into his hand. He sent also ambassadors unto the Earl of
Flaunders, the French King and the Pope praying them in no wise to foster or
suffer him in their dominions, requesting moreover of the Pope, that he would
confirm and allow of the declaration published at Clarindon. The Pope made an
answer (though frivolous) saying he would consider of the matter. But the
French (with whom the King of England had amity and a league of friendship at
that time) he thinking that this agreement between him and the Archbishop
would breed some stir in England, presently fell to inuading the King of
Englands dominions and took by assault certain holds of his in Normandy. The
Archbishop also about the same time sent out particular excommunications
against all the suffragan Bishops of his Province. The King mightily offended
with this exceeding boldness of the Archbishop, whereunto he well knew he was
hartned and animated by the Pope and the French King: bethough himself how by
all means possible he might vere and grieve him: First, because he knew he
delighted much in the monastery of Pontiniac (which was an Abbey of Cistercian
monks) he signified to all the monks of that order in his dominions, that he
would banish them every one, if they would not procure the Archbishop to be
thrust out of that monastery, which for fear of so great calamity to so many
men was effected. Then he also drove out of the realm, all his kinsfolks,
friends and professed welwillers of whom he suspected him to be any way aided
or comforted. Alexander the Pope Thomas Beckets surest card, was ferited in
much like sort the same time by Friderike (...) the Emperor, as he himself
was. The King therefore by the counsel of Gilbert Bishop of London determined
to ioyns in league with the Emperor, (if possibly he might) that was a
professed enemy both to the French King and the Pope. To this purpose he sent
two ambassadors unto him, persuading him to deals with the Cardinals ( Lucius
the Antipope being then lately dead) to set up another in his room, to whom he
promised all his dominions should yield obedience. The Pope having notize of
this practice, began presentlyto quail, sent the King word he would order all
things between the Archbishop and him to his (...) liking and that out of
hand. Now it had hapened a little before, that the Pope had granted unto the
Archbishop a very large license of excommunicating whom he list in England; the
King the Queen and a very few other excepted. This authority he abused very
intemperately at that time when (...) matters were thus in hammering between
the Pope and (...) King, in so much as he had marred all if the Pope had not
speedly yielded a reason thereof to the King. By this time the French King (the
Popes only Protector against the Emperor) began to spy that he was much more
cold in the defense of the Archbishop then he had been and reprehended him
sharply for it. The Pope therefore not knowing which way to turn him self;
for the satisfiyng of both these potentates, (neither of which he could safcly
offend as things stood) he determined first to labor a reconciliation
between them, and then to make the French King a mediator for the Archbishop.
This he effected, and brought the two Kings together at Paris. Thither also
came Thomas Becket: And suit being made unto the King in his behalf, that he
might return, be restored to his goods and revenues arising in the time of his
absence and lastly (upon his humble submission) to the Kings favor; The King
answered, that for the rest he was contented, but (faith he) the profits of
his Archbishopricke since his banishment I can not allow him, for that I have
already given them to others: Mary recompense I will make him for them to the
(...) of the French King or the Senate of Paris or else of the (...) of the
Uniuersity. Presently the Archbishop was called for, who falling down upon his
knees, used these words, My Lord and sovereign, I do here commit unto your
own judgment the cause and controversy between us, so far forth as I
may, saving the honor of (...) God. The King much offended with that last
exception ((...) honor Dei) turned him about unto the French King and telling
him how much he had done for the Archbishop, and how he had used him, I am
(quoth he at last) so well acquainted with the tricks of this fellow, that I
can not hope for any good dealing at his hands. See you not how he goes about
to delude me with this clause (saving the honor of God?) For whatsoever shall
displease him, he will by and by allege to be prejudicial to the honor of
Almighty God. But this I will say unto you, whereas there have been Kings of
England many before me, whereof some were peradventure of greater power than I,
the most part far less; and again many Archbishops before this man holy and
notable men: Look what duty was ever performed by the greatest Archbishop
that ever was to the weakest and simplest of my predecessors, let him yield me
but that and it shall abundantly content me. Hereunto the Archbishop answered
cunningly and stoutly enough, that the times were altered, his predecessors
which could not bring all things to pass at the first dash were content to
bear with many things, and that as men they fell and omitted their duty
oftentimes; that which the Church had gotten, was by the constancy of good
Prelates, whose example he would follow thus far forth, as though he could
not augment the privileges of the Church in his time, yet he would never
consent they should be diminished. This answer being heard, all men cried
shame upon him and generally imputed the fault of these sturs unto him. But
this was the issue for that time, that they parted without reconciliation. The
King doubting what might come of these broiles, caused his son Henry (that
died soon after) to be crowned King in his own life time, so to assure him of
the succession. Afterward coming into France again, they were upon the
point of reconciliation when the casting out of some such word or another as
before, marred all. At length, the King and he were made friends, but his full
restitution deferred till he had behaved himself quietly a while at
Canterbury, which he promised to do. But he, was so far from perfourming
that promise, as he sent into England before him diverse excommunications which
the Pope had granted out long before, and committed to his discretion. Amongst
other, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of London and Salisbury were named
in them, together with so many as had been dooers in the coronation of the
young King, which the Archbishop said might not be performed of any but by his
appointment. The men thus stricken with this holy fire, hasted them over into
Normandy to make their complaint unto the king, who infinitely grieved at this
kind of dealing, cursed the time that ever he made him Archbishop, or restored
him to his place again, adding, it was his chance ever to do for unthankful
men, otherwise some or other would long ere this have made this proud priest an
example to all such troublesome perturbers of his realm and state. It happened
amongst other, four knights to be present at this speech of the kings, who
gathered thereby, they should do a deed very acceptable unto him if they killed
the Archbishop. Their names were Reynald Fitz-Vrse, Hugh de Mortuill, William
de Tracy, and Richard Briton. In this mean time the Archbishop was come to
Canterbury, and was received there with great joy. Thence he went to London and
so to Woodstocke where the young king then lay. But before he could get to the
kings presence, word was brought him, the kings pleasure was he should first go
to Canterbury and revoke those excommunications before he the king would talk
with him. So he returned again to Canterbury without seeing the king at all.
Soon after his return thither, the four knights before mentioned arrived at
Canterbury, to wit upon Innocents day. They coming unto the Archbishop, told
him the kings pleasure was, he should go to his son and reverently make
offer of doing homage and fealty unto him, for the Barony of his
Archbishopricke: secondly, that he should cause all the strangers he brought
into the realm with him to be sworn to his obedience; and thirdly, that he
should retrcat those excommunications which he had caused to be denounced
against the instruments of the young kings coronation. To this (...) he
answered, that neither the king nor any other mortal man should extort from
him, or any of his by his consent, any (...) or unreasonable oath. And as for
the Bishops and other excommunicate concerning the coronation, it was indeed
(quoth) he a thing done in my behalf and for an injury offered to my church;
But it was the Act of the Pope. If therefore they will swear they shall be
ready to make me amends at the Popes discretion, I will absolve them, otherwise
not. And whatsoever you say, it was the kings pleasure, I should take my best
course for the redress of this abuse by ecclestasticall authority. Many other
words passed between them the same time, they breathing out terrible threats,
and he continuing still the same man without (...) one iotte. At last the
knights departed, giving the monks charge in the kings name, to see the
Archbishop forth coming, and not to suffer him to escape away. At evening
prayer time the same day, they came suddenly into the church, with their swords
drawn, crying, Where Is the Traitor, Where Is the Traitor: The Archbishop who was
then going up the steps toward the quire, hearing the noise, turned back unto
them, and every one of the four striking mainely at him, upon the third or
fourth greice of those stops was slain. His body these knights had determined
to have cast into the sea, or else to have hewn into a thousand pieces: but
the Prior and the monks doubting some such thing, buried it immediately in the
vndercraft, whence shortly it was taken up and laid in a most sumptuous shrine
in the East end of the church. The Pope hearing of this massacre,
excommunicated immediately all that were either authors or consenters to the
same. The king was feign to purge himself by oath, and yet could not be
absolved before he had done certain strange penance as first, that he should
pray devoutly at the tomb of this new Martyr, that he should be whipped in the
chapter house, receiving of every monk one lash, that he should maintain 200.
soldiers for the space of one year at Jerusalem, and lastly revoke the
declaration published at Clarindon, that originally gave the occasion of this
murder. All this (such were those times) the king was feign to perform.

39. Richard.
IN the month of February following the death of Thomas (which was December
28. 1170.) one Robert Abbot of Becco was chosen Archbishop. But he liking
better a quiet life, chose rather to sit (...) where he was, then to adventure
him self in a place subject to the blasts of such terrible tempests as Thomas
Becket was tossed withal. The king then dealt earnestly with the Covent of
Canterbury to choose some mild and soft spirited man, to prevent such broiles
as had been raised by the last Archbishop. They followed his direction, (...)
elected one Richard, a Benedictine Monk Prior of the Monastery of Saint
Martins in Dover, who was presently allowed of the king and the Pope and soon
after consecrate. He was a man very liberal, gentle and passing wise. So he
handled the matter, that in all his time he never was out either with the Pope
or the king. The Pope be entertained with often gifts and money, the kings
favor he retained by yielding and (...) him self to his pleasure. This man
continued Archbishop about the space of ten or eleven years. In all which
time, there happened not any thing concerning him worthy memory, except
peradventure the stir between him and the Archbishop of York Roger. The old
quarrel chanced to be renewed between these two Archbishops concerning the
Primacy; And one Hugocio the Popes Legate coming into England, both of them
requested him to hear and judge this controversy between them. Upon this and
other occasions, a Convocation was summoned at Westminster, where was a stately
throne provided for the Legate. At the time appointed the Legate came and took
his place, and the Archbishop of Canterbury sat him down next unto the Legate
upon the right hand. After this in came Roger Archbishop of York and would
needs have displaced (...) to sit above him: that, when the other would not
suffer, he sat him (...) in his lap. The other Bishops present amassed at this
strange behautor of the Archbishop of York, cried out all upon him, the
Archbishop of Canterburies men by violence drew the other out of his ill chosen
place, threw him dewne (...) his robes almost from his back, trod upon him,
beat him, and used him so despitefully, as the Legate, whether for shame or
for doubt what might happen to him self in such a (...), got him out and went
his way. The Archbishop of York all ragged as he was, bloody and (...) went to
the king, who first was exceeding angry, but when he heard the truth, laughed
merrily at it and said he was well enough ferued. Much adoo there was long after
at Rome about this and the old controversy; the end whereof at last was, that
much money was spent and neither party ever a whit the nearer. The end of this
man is thus reported, how that being a sleep at his manor of Wrotham, there
seemed to come unto him a certain terrible personage demanding of him who he
was? whereunto when for fear the Archbishop answered nothing, Thou art he
(quoth the other) that have destroyed the goods of the Church, and I will
destroy thee front of the earth: This having said, he vanished away. In the
morning betime the Archbishop got him up and, taking his journey toward
Rochester, related this fearful vision unto a friend of his by the way. He
had no sooner told the tale, but he was (...) suddenly with a great cold and
stiffness in his limbs, so that they had much adoo to get him so far as
Halling a house belonging to the Bishop of Rochester. There he took his bed
and being horribly tormented with the cholike and other greefes until the next
day, the night following the sixteenth of February he gave up the Ghost. ann.
1183. His body was carried to Canterbury and honorably interred in the Lady
Chapel.

40. Baldwin.
AFter the death of Richard the Archbishop, a controversy heart would not come
unto it. So the Bishops proceeded and made choice of Baldwin Bishop of
Worcester. This election the monks labored mightily to disanul; professing,
that they liked the man elect very well, but they must not endure such a
president. The king therefore (who favored Baldwin exceedingly) wrought so
with one party and the other, as the Monks were content to elect him, upon
condition he would renounce all benefit of his former election, and the
Bishops themselves would confess the same to be void and of no effect. All
this was done and he received into quiet and peaceable possession of this
Metropoliticall see. This Baldwin was a poor man's son and borne in Excester.
He was first a schoolmaster, then entered into orders and became an Archdeadon:
his Archdeaconry he voluntarily resigned, and intending to forsake the world,
became a Cistercian or white Monk. Having lived so a certain space, he was
made Abbot of Ford in Devonshire. From thence he was called to the Bishopric
of Worcester consecrate thereunto the year 1181. translated to Canterbury in
the end of the year 1184. and solemnly installed there May 19. 1185. being
the first white Monk that ever was Archbishop. Giraldus Cambr. describes the
person of the man in this sort. He was of complexion somewhat swarthy, his
countenance simple and like a plain meaning man but very comely, his stature
indifferent, well made of body, but slender timbred. For his manners, he was
modest and sober, of such abstinence, as fame durst never stamp any sinister
report upon him, of few words, slow to anger, and very studious from his very
childhood. It is a wonder that a man of this disposition should be so much
troubled as he was: with the King he always agreed very well: But between the
Monks of Canterbury and him there was much and continual debate. The occasion
thereof was this. The king greatly misliking the insolency of the Monks,
thought to wrest from them the pre-eminence of choosing the Archbishop in time
to come by this device. He gave direction unto Baldwin their Archbishop, to
begin the foundation of a College at Hackington now called Saint Stephens
being distant from Canterbury about half a mile. This College it was devised
should have one prebend erected by the king, and by every several Bishop of
that province of Canterbury one other, which should ever be of the gift and
patronage of their founders. As for the Archbishop, the building of the church
and other edifices was appointed unto him for his share, which he intended to
perform with great magnificence. The end of this foundation was none other
then this, that it might be a mean of traducing the right of election of the
Archbishop, (a matter greatly importing the king and the whole realm) from the
monks (men of little learning, less discretion, and smalest experience in
matters of government, yet very obstinate and altogether wedded to their own
wills) to other men, in whom the king and the rest of the Bishops (as being
their patrones) might challenge an interest. For the better execution of this
plot, it was ordained, that this college should be dedicated unto Saint
Thomas, who was now grown so famous throughout the world, as every man thought
himself happy that could do any thing to his honor. In regard hereof they made
no doubt, but the Pope would soon be entreated to take from Christ (unto whose
name the monastery of Canterbury was consecrate) all privilege of election,
and to confer the same with many other upon Saint Thomas that famous martyr.
The matter was now very forward and grown to good perfection, in so much as
the foundations were dug, stone, timber, and other provision laid ready in
place for the building, when as the subtle monks suspecting whereunto this
great forwardness of the king and Bishops tended, made their complaint at
Rome. That notwithanding, on went the work: The church partly built was
solemnly consecrate, and diverse secular priests (such Saint Thomas himself
was) instituted and installed into their prebends, when the monks that never
linne laying on load by requests, gifts and al manner of importunate suit to
disturb this platform, procured the Pope to set down an order, that this
corporation should be dissolved, the buildings thereof rased and made even to
the ground. Such were the times, the Popes pleasure was aneuitable necessity;
it must be and was performed. It happened then soon after that Urban the Pope
died, who was a great protector of the monks cause. Gregory the eight
succeeded, a man with whom Baldwyn might do very much. He determined therefore
once more to set on foot his former devise, but in another place. He procured
of the Bishop and Covent of Rochester, for exchange of other land, a certain
quantity of ground at Lambhith, where the Archbishops palace and house of
chief residence is now situate. Thither he caused to be brought by water all
the provision of stones, timber, etc. that was intended to the building of the
college at Hackington, and began the foundation of a goodly church there,
which he lived not to finish. King Richard the first to expiate the fault of
his rebellion and disobedience unto his father, determined to carry a great
power into the holy land. Baldwyn would needs attend him thither, and did so.
By preaching, counsel, liberal alms, and continual erample of a most
virtuous life, he did great good there, until at last in the siege of the city
of Acon being taken with a grievous sickness he died, when he had been
Archbishop even almost seven years, and was buried there. He gave all his
goods unto the soldiers to be divided amongst them at the discretion of Hubert
the Bishop of Salisbury, that soon after succeeded him.

41. Reginald Fitz-iocelinc.
PResently after the death of Baldwyn, the King dispatched Reginald Bishop of
Bathe that was son to Ioceline Bishop of Salisbury, but concealed it till the
Bishops were come together; at what time in the presence of them all (...)
their election, and withal laid hands (...) (...) there present, drew him unto
the Archiepiscopall throne, and violently placed him in the same. Albeit at
that time he withstood them what he might, and with tears (...) besought them
to make choice of some other; yet being asked the next day by the Archbishop of
Roan, whether he assented unto the election, he answered, that so far he was
from ambitious desire of that place, as it was a great grief unto him to be
chosen, and that he would be very glad they would take some other in his room:
Howbeit (quoth he) if they will needs stand to their election, though with
grief and hearty sorrow, I must and will accept of the same. Messengers were
by and by dispatched unto the Pope, who presently affoorded the pall and other
usual ceremonies unto this (...) elect. But before news could be brought of
his confirmation, or he take possession of his new honor, he died at his house
of Dogmersfield in Hamshire upon Christmas day, fifteen days (or as other
deliver the nine and forty) after his election unto Canterbury. He was buried
at Bathe. See more of him in Bathe and Wels.

42. Hubert Walter.
KIng Richard the first, surnamed Cueur de Lion, being Leopold (...) of (...),
at what time the Sea of Canterbury was yet void; well knowing how notable a
stay a good Archbishop might be unto the whole realm in his (...) and having
experience of the great wisdom and other manifold virtues of (...) Bishop of
Salisbury that had attended (...) in all that long and dangerous voyage; he
used what (...) he might possibly to procure him to be translated thither. This
Hubert was borne at a place called West Derham in Norfolk, and brought up
under Raynulph de Glandfeld chief Justice of England. The first preferment he
(...) was the Deamy of York, (...) he was called in the (...) year of king
Richard unto the (...) of Salisbury, by the (...) of Baldwyn the Archbishop,
who loved him (...) in his life time, and at his death trusted him with the
disposition of all his goods. Being yet Deane of York, he bought certain land
of Geoffry Fitz Geoffry in West Derham where he was borne, and founded a
monastery in the same for his own souls health (so himself speaks in his
foundation) as also for the souls of his father, mother, Raynulphde Glandfeld,
and Berta his wife who brought him up. The manner of his election unto
Canterbury was this. The king writ earnestly to the Covent to choose some wise,
quiet, and moderate man, but refrayned to name any, in regard of the former
repulses taken by him and his father. But his mind and particular desire could
not be unknown unto them. He signified unto Elianor his mother, to the
Archbishop of Roan and other, what course he wished to be taken: And so wisely
they handled the matter, as before any man looked for it, the monks (who well
saw how greatly it imported the realm in that dangerous time to have some
worthy prelate in that place) had elected him and published suddenly their
election at Paul's cross, to the great contentment of the Queen and council,
and no less joy of all other sorts and states of people. While his pall was
fetching at Rome, considering how odious Baldwyn had been to his Monks of
Canterbury for not being a Monk as themselves were and in a manner all his
predecessors had been; went to Merton and there professed him self a Monk in
like manner as Regmald the last Archbishop had done. Then he began to bestir
him in leuiyng of money for the kings ransom. So discretly he wrought, as the
Clergy and commonalty of the whole realm did very willingly yield a quarter
of all their revenues for one year, which (together with the plate and
ornaments of Churches that were fame to be sold in this extrenuty) amounted
unto 150000. marks, the sum required by the Emperor. The king returning, made
him presently Lord Chauncelor, chief Justice of England, and high governor of
all his dominions immediately under him. So that being already Archbishop and
the Popes Logate, he wanted no authority that was possible to be laid upon him.
Never was there any Clergy man either before or after him of so great power,
never any man used his authority more moderately. He was blamed and much envied
for taking so many offices upon him. It is remembered that a Noble man said unto
him in scorn, at what time he was made Chauncellor, I have heard of many
Chauncellors made Bishops, but of an Archbishop that would vouchsafe to stoup
to the Chauncellorship, till now I never heard of any. With in two years after
his first promotion to these high places, the better to excuse his ambition, he
made a dissembling and counterfeit show of being desirous to leave these
temporal offices, in so much as, he dealt effectually with the king by letters
to give him leave to resign them, saying, that the charge of his Church was
work enough for one man, whereunto only he would hereafter gladly dedicate
himself. This he did, assuring him self in his own conceit, that the king
had no man about him so likely to manage those affairs as him self, and not
being able to want him, would entreat him to retain them still. It fell out
otherwise then he expected: For though at first the king seemed and
peradventure was unwilling to yield to this his request, yet he found it so
reasonable in the end, as he could not any longer deny the same. Here now this
Archbishop manifestly bewrayed his insatiable desire of rule and government:
Being thus taken tardy in his own snare; as though his mind and determination
were suddenly altered, he signified unto the king by letters, that
notwithstanding his great desire of betaking himself only to spiritual
matters and the manifold infirmities of his age; he would be content to afford
his labor and diligence in his other offices yet a while longer, if therein he
might do him any profitable service. And that the king should not think it
possible to provide himself elsewhere of better officers, he certified him
withal, that in these two years since his preferment, he had gathered for his
use 1100000. marks which he was ready to pay into his coffers, augmenting it is
like the sum, and adding thereto out of his own purse, that so he might in
cleanly sort buy aagaine those honorable and gainful offices, which his
subtle dissimulation had almost lost him. Setting this fault aside whereunto
the greatest wits are most subject (I mean ambition) he was an excellent and
memorable man, a bridle (says on) unto the king, and an obstacle of tyranny,
the peace and comfort of the people, and lastly a notable refuge of all both
high and low against all manner of injury and oppression. Faithful and loyal
he was unto his Prince, loving and very careful of his Country, in which he
caused many excellent laws to be established; He it was that first devised our
assise of bread, our waights and measures of wine, oil, corn, etc. Uery
valiant he was also and performed many great services in the wars, the report
whereof I leave unto the Chronicles. His house keeping they say was such, as
the expense thereof was thought to be nothing inferior unto the kings: And yet
he performed many great works of inestimable charge. Beside the monastery of
Derham before mentioned, he also founded another for Cistercian Monks at
Wulferhampton, but lived not to finish the same; he compassed the Tower of
London with a strong wall and a deep moate, so as the water enclosed the same
quite round, which before that time could never be brought to pass; he
increased the revenues of his see uery much, adorned it with many sumptuous and
stately buildings, and lastly procured diverse notable privileges unto the same,
called in old English, Gled, Dangeld, Hidage, Warpon, Bloodwhite, Childwhite,
Uillenage, etc. Now notwithstanding this his great power and riches, with the
monks of Canterbury he had as much to do as other of his predecessors. By
entreaty and fair means he endeavored to procure their consent for the
finishing of the Chapel at Lambhith begun by Baldwin, sor without their leave
to go about it, he knew it was to no purpose. To this end he sent unto them
the Abbots of Waltam, Reading, and Chertsey, to debate this matter with them.
The very mention thereof was so odious unto them, as by and by they made a
great complaint unto the Pope not only of this, but many other things also,
especially of his intermedling in civil affairs. Hereupon the Pope presently
enjoined him, without farther delay to resign all his temporal offices, which
he (how loath soever) was feign to do. As for the matter of the Chapel,
after it had hung long in the Popes court, the parties grew to a composition,
that upon condition it were pulled down, it should be lawful for the
Archbishop to build another upon a new foundation, to endue the same with an
hundred pound a year revenues and no more, and lastly to place in the same
twenty Canons or Prebendaries. Mary it was conditioned, that no Bishops in any
wise should be consecrate there, no Abbots admitted, no orders administed, etc.
After this, the rest of his days he ended in peace. King John that had
attempted many times to depose his brother King Richard, and was always
hindered in those practices by the diligence faithfulness and wisdom of this
worthy Prelate, estranged him self a while from him, and gave him no
countenance. But finding at last how ill he might spare him, used his counsel,
received intertaiment of him (which was very royal) at Canterbury; trusted him
with the government of the whole realm at his departure into Normandy, and
affoorded him many other gracious favors. Having been Archbishop twelve
years saving four months, he fell into a kind of ague upon the way as he
was riding to Rochester to work an agreement between the Bishop and the
monks there, turned into his manor of Tenham, made his will, and lying sick
there only four days departed this life. He was buried July 13. 1205. in the
South wall of the church beside the quier near Walter Reynald, that long after
succeeded him.

43. Stephen Langton.
THe king did so rejoice at Huberts death, as when it was by any request of
the king; secretly at midnight, made choice of one Reginald their supprior,
taking an oath of him not to make his election known to any, till he came to
the Popes presence, whether he was advised to high himself as fast as he
might. This oath notwithstanding, as soon as he was gotten over the feas, he
bare himself every where as Lord elect, not letting to show the testimonial
of his election to who so demanded the same. This breach of promise so
inceused his (...) against him, as presently they determined to become futers
to the king for pardon of their fault in choosing without license, as also that
now he would permit a new election, supposing the old frustrate and made void
by the (...) of the elect. They did so, and easily obtained their request, but
much the rather because they made show of a readiness in satisfying the kings
desire, that wished the Archbishopricke unto John Gray Bishop of Norwich. He
was then in the North country about some business of the Kings: Being sent
for in all haste, at his first coming to Canterbury, he was solemnly elected,
and his election published in the church before the king and an infinite number
of people. These two elections being presented unto the Pope, he determined to
make use of the monks debate, and discouraging each side (for the greater part
of the monks were then at Rome, some of them (...) their old election for good,
others importunately suyng to have the later confirmed) he practiced secretly
with either of them, to be content to choose yet a third man that he would
nominate unto them, and that was one Stephen Langton a Cardinal of Rome; a man
in regard of many excellent gifts both of mind and body very fit for the place,
and no way to be (...), if he had orderly obtained the same. By birth he was an
English man, brought up in the (...) of Paris, greatly esteemed by the king and
all the (...) of France for his singular and rare learning, made Chauncellor
of Paris, and lastly called thence by the Pope to be a Cardinal of Rome. Now
when by fair means he could not (...) with them (for they feared the kings
displeasure whom they knew to be a hot and violent Prince) he began to terrify
them with threatening, and what by one means or other, made them content at last
to choose him: which done, the Pope with his own hands gave him consecration
at (...) June 17. Then well knowing how hainously the king would take this
matter, he writ letters unto him sweetened with many gentle entreaties, large
praises of the new Archbishop, and seasoned now and then with some touches of
doubtful threatening if he should oppose himself against that was then done.
This notwithstanding, the king in great indignation, banished all the monks of
Canterbury, seized upon their goods and lands, and forbid Stephen Langton
entrance into the realm. The Pope hearing of this, sent his mandate unto three
Bishops, William of London, Eustach of Ely, and Mauger of Worcester, wherein he
willed them first to admonish and persuade the king to restore the monks to
their goods and places, and to give the Archbishops possession of his
temporalties by a day, then if he refused so to do, to interdict the whole
realm. They durst not but obey, and finding the king resolute in his
determination, at the time appointed they published the Popes interdiction, and
as well foreseeing the great trouble to come, as the present danger, got them
out of the land tegether with (...) Bishop of Bathe, and Gyles of Hereford. The
king immediately seized all their goods and temporalties into his hands, and
moreover banished all the friends and (...) of these Bishops that were likely
to yield them any comfort or releife. During the time of this interdict, all
service ceased throughout the realm, except only Baptism of children,
auricular confession, and the administration of the sacrament unto such as lay
upon the point of death. The Pope seeing this course prevailed not, proceeded
to a particular excommunication of the king, and not long after, deprived him
by sentence of all regal authority, a thing till that time in no age ever heard
of. All this while the king esteemed the Popes sword blunt and unable to wound
him, till at last he perceived the French king ready to take advantage of this
sentence, and providing busily to invade his dominions. His own people also
began to fall from him, and to doubt whom in conscience they ought rather to
follow, their own (...) Prince or a foreign intruder; a strange and monstrous
ignorance. Seeing therefore no other remedy, he was feign to yield, received
the Archbishop restored the other Bishops the monks and all the rest banished
unto their goods and reueneues, and moreover was content to resign his crown
into the Popes hands, and upon restitution to assure him by his letters patents
a yearly pension of a thousand marks. This done, he thought all troubles at
an end, when the worst of all was yet behind: For he bare himself so bold upon
the Popes favor (which he had bought dearly) as he doubted not to oppress
diverse of his nobility, with many and continual wrongs, reuoking all former
graunts of privileges at his pleasure upon this point, that he had received
his kingdom from the Pope absolutely, free from all entanglement of any
privileges derived from the same. Hereupon the Barons rebelled, the Archb.
taking their part; and when they doubted least they should not make their party
good against the king, the Pope stuck so close unto him; they procured Lewis
the French kings eldest son to invade the realm. Him together with the
Archbishop and all the Barons, the Pope excommunicated. This great hurly burly
was appeased suddenly by the kings death, who died some say of care and sorrow,
some of surfeit and some say he was poisoned by a monk. His son Henry a
Prince often years old was received to the kingdom, Lewis forsaken, and the
Barons upon promise of obedience unto their king, absolved by the Popes legate.
Clergy men were debarred a while from (...) absolution that they might compound
for the same, which they were glad to do. All things being thus quieted, this
our Archbishop called a convocation at Dsney, wherein many things were decreed,
to be seen for the most part among the principal constitutions. Thither came
a certain young man that showing the marks of wounds in his hands, feet, and
side, professed himself to be no less man then Jesus Christ. He brought also
two women with him, whereof one took upon her to be our Lady, the other Mary
Magdalen. This counterfeit Christ, for his labor was woorthily crucified and
forced to resemble him in the manner of his death, whose life and person he had
(...) immitated and sought to express. Soon after he translated the bones of
S. Thomas Becket from the place where they were first buried in the vndercraft,
into a goodly sumptuous shrine. This was done wonderful solemnly, the king
and greatest part of the nobility of all the realm being present. During the
time of this ceremony, all passengers from London to Canterbury were allowed
horsemeat at the Arthbishops charge, who also caused vessels of wine to run
continually in diverse parts of the city all the day of this translation, that
who so list might drink of them. This solemnity proved so chargeable unto
him, as neither he, nor four of his successors were able to recover the debt,
he cast his See and Church into. He was Archbishop in all two and twenty
years, and died July 9. 1228. at his manor of Slyndon in Sussex, from whence
his body was conueighed to Canterbury, and there buried in the chapel of
Saint Michaell. This man was admirably learned, and writ many notable works,
the Catalogue whereof is to be seen in Bale. Amongst the rest, it is
especially to be noted, that he first divided the Bible into Chapters, in such
sort as we now account them. The Archbishops palace at Canterbury, is said to
have been built in a manner all by this Stephen Langton. Moreover, it is
delivered that he bestowed great cost in making a fair horologe in the South
cross isle of the church near which he lies buried, his monument being
situate in a manner just under the altar.

44. Richard Magnus.
Within a few days after the death of Stephen the Monks with the Kings
license proceeded to election and made choice of one Walt. de Hempsham one of
their own company and presented him unto the K. who by the advice of diverse
prelates refused to allow of him. Which notwithstanding, he got him to Rome
hoping by one means or other to obtain the Popes confirmation. The king
having notize of his intent, sent thither the Bishop of Chester to signify
that he was a man very unlearned and moreover infamous for his life and
conversation, as namely, that he had gotten diverse children upon a certain
Nun, that his father was hanged for theft, and that himself had deserved it
by taking the part of the rebellious Barons. All this would not stay the Pope
from giving him confirmation, until the kings Ambassadors had promised him a
tenth of all spiritual promotions in England, to aid him in his wars against
the Emperor. That being assigned him, he straight way pronounced the election
void and by reason of the insufficiency of the elect, the right of nomination
to be deuolued unto him self; by virtue of which title he took upon him at
the kings request to name unto that see Richard the Chauncellor of Lincoln.
This Richard was a man very well learned, wise, grave, well spoken, and of good
report, stout in defending the rights and liberties of the Church and (which is
not altogether to be neglected) of a goodly personage, tall, straight, and well
favored. He was consecrate at Canterbury by Henry Bishop of Rochester, in the
presence of the king and many of the nobility, June 10. 1229. A little while he
enjoyed that honor, to wit, two years or there abouts. In which time there
happened a controversy between him and (...) de (...) Earl of Kent,
concerning some lands of the Earl of Gloucester, the profits whereof the
Archbishop challenged as due unto him in the minority of the Earl. Hubert was
a man greatly favored by the king for his long faithful service unto his
father and him self; namely for defending the Castle of Dover against Lewis
the French man, he made him Earl of Kent, and chief justice of England. He
had entered upon these lands. The Archbishop first complained of the wrong unto
the king, and finding no remedy at his hands excommunicated all the authors of
this injury (the king only excepted) and got him to Rome. The king
understanding thereof, dispatched messengers thither also to hinder his
proceedings there what might be. The Pope notwithstanding delighted much with
the eloquence, gravity, and excellent behavior of the Archbishop, granted
presently all his demandes. Little joy had he of this victory: Being three
days journey in his way homewards, he fell sick at the town of Saint Genuna
and there died in the Friery, where also he was buried. It is (...) that soon
after his burial, certain thieves brake open his toombe and thought to have
robbed him of his (...) rings, etc. wherein (according to the manner of those
times) he was buried; but that they claue so fast unto him, as by no device
they could take them from him. Believe it as you list. It shall not be amiss
also to note how that in the time of this Archbishop, a great number of
Italians had possessed them selves of the best benefices of England; which
being much spited at; certain mad fellows took upon them by force to
thresh out their corn every where and give it away unto the poor, to rob and
spoil them of their money and other goods. It was done so openly and so
boldly, as it was manifest that some great men were at one end of that
business. The Italians after that time were not so eager upon Euglish
benefices.

45. Saint Edmund.
THe monks of Canterbury by this time weary of contending Ralfe Neuill Bishop
of Chichester, and Chauncellor of England; a man very wise and highly in favor
with the king, who liking well of this election, put him in possession of the
temporalties by and by. The Pope being requested for his approbation, chanced
to inquire of Simon Langton Archdeacon of Canterbury brother unto Stephen the
Archbishop, what manner of man this Ralfe Neuill should be, who told him, that
he was a hot fellow, stout, subtle, an old courtier and very gracious with
the king; it was much to be doubted, therefore he would set the king and him
together by the ears, and cause him to deny the payment of that tribute
granted unto him by king John. This was enough; without more adoo he willed
the monks to choose another, never alleging any matter of exceptions against
him. So to a second election they proceeded, and chose one John their Subprior:
He went to Rome and being examined by certain Cardinals, was adjudged fit
enough for the place; Yet the Pope misliked him for his age, and persuaded the
good old man to forbear to take upon him so great a charge in his old years.
He yielded: and thereupon a third was elected, one Richard Blundy a studient of
Oxford. Him also the Pope refused, because forsooth he held two benefices
contrary to the Canons, and because it was known, he had borrowed a great
sum of money of Peter Bishop of Winchester, wherewith it was thought he feed
well the monks that chose him. The Pope then made request unto such of the
monks as were at Rome to choose Edmund Treasurer of Salisbury, a man very well
known, and indeed famous for his virtue and great learning. They neither durst
deny the Popes request, nor would do any thing in the matter, till they had
understood the pleasure of their Prince, and conferred with the rest of their
brethren. He was content to take their silence for a sufficient election, and
without more adoo sent him the pall into England, little thinking of any such
matter. Both the king and the Covent liking well enough of the man, he was
consecrate at Canterbury by Roger Bishop of London ann. 1234. He was borne (as
some say) at London, and baptized in the same font Thomas Becket his
predecessor had been. But, other affirm more probably that he was borne at
Abingdon in Barkshire son unto one Edward Rich a Merchant: his mothers name
was Mabell. In their elder years they forsook each other by mutual consent
and betook them selves to a monastical life. Edmund their son they caused
to be brought up in the Uniuersity of Oxford. Having attained unto reasonable
perfection in the knowledge of Divinity (whereunto his study was chiefly
directed) he applied himself to preaching wherein he took great pains,
namely in the counties of Oxford, Gloucester, and Worcester, until such time as
he was called to the Treasurership of Salisbury. Being consecrate Archbishop,
he presently fell into the kings displeasure, by opposing him self against the
marriage of Elianor the kings sister with Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester,
because vponthe death of the Earl Marshal her first husband she had vowed
chastity. To have this vow dispensed withal, the king procured the Pope to
send a Legate into England: his name was Otto a Cardinal. (...) also this good
Archbishop offended, and that so grievously, by reprehending his monstrous
covetousness, his bribery, and extortion, as ever after he sought to work him
all the mischief he might. The monks of Rochester had presented unto this
Archbishop one Richard de (...) demanding of him consecration unto the
Bishopric of their Church. The Archbishop denied to afford the same, knowing
him to be a very unlearned and insufficient man. Hereupon the moonks appealed
to Rome, which the Archbishop understanding of, hasted him thither also. Otto
the Legate endeavored to stay him at home, and failing thereof, did his errand
so well at Rome, as not only in that suit, but an other also which he had
against Hugh Earl of Arundell in an other cause of appeal, he was overthrown
and condemned in a thousand marks charges to his great disgrace and
impouerishment. Being at Rome he had complained of many great abuses in
England, and amongst the rest, of the long vacacy of Bishoprics The Pope
seemed willing to redress these things, and namely concerning that matter, set
down this order, that if any cathedral Church continued void above six
months, it should be lawful for the Archbishop to confer it where he list,
as well as any smaller benefice. The procuring of this order cost him a great
sum of money: Yet no sooner was his back turned, but the Pope at the kings
request revoked the same. Being thus continually vexed, thwarted, and
disgraced, he departed into voluntary exile, and there bewailing the misery of
his country, spoiled and wasted by the tyranny of the Pope, spent the rest of
his life in continual tears. Through extreme grief and sorrow, or (as some
think) too much (...), he fell first into a consumption, and after into a
strange kind of ague. Whereupon he thought good to remove from the Abbey of
Pontiniac in France (where he had laien ever since his coming out of England)
unto Soissy, and there departed this life November 16. 1236. eight years after
his first consecration. His heart and entrails were buried at Soissy, his body
at Pontiniac. Within six years after his death he was Canonised a Saint by
Innocentius, who appointed the foresaid day of his death for ever to be kept
holy in memory of him. Jews the French king caused his body to be translated
to a more honorable place then it was first laid in, and bestowed a sumptuous
shryne upon him covered with gold and silver, and richly adorned with many
precious stones.

46. Boniface.
THe monks of Canterbury at the instance of the king Boniface, the son of
Peter Earl of Sauoy, and uncle unto the Queen: a man not greatly to be
commended for any thing but the nobility of his stock, and the comeliness of
his person: For in other respects he was thought utterly unfit, and unworthy
of that place. The king therefore doubting least the Pope would reject him,
caused in a manner all the Bishops and Abbots of England to write their letters
commendatory in his behalf, and so sent him to Lions, where he quickly
obtained consecration at the Popes own hands. At his first entrance into this
See, he found the same indebted by the ouerlashing of his predecessors, to the
value of 22. thousand marks, which he took for an occasion of both absenting
himself from his charge, and also of raking money together by all kind of
means. Departing therefore into his own country; by felling of woods, making
leases and other such like means, he made an infinite deal of money,
promising to employ the same and whatsoever he could save by living privately
at home, in the payment of his churches debt. By the same pretense also he
induced the Pope to grant him in Commendam the Bishopric of Ualentia in
Prouence and diverse other spiritual promotions. But he gave himself to
warring, and spent all he could make in hyring of soldiers. When therefore
(notwithstanding all these helps) the debt was never the less, he was glad by
bribing the Pope with a great sum of money, to procure of him a grant of the
profit of all spiritual preferments that should be void within his province
for the space of seven years. The king a while spurned at this grant, but in
the end half for fear of the Pope (of whom he stood in great awe) and partly
by suit and intercession, he ratified and allowed of the same. Having been
many years absent, he returned into England the year 1250. and took upon him
to visit all his Province in some extraordinary manner. All men knew it was
rather to make money, then for any desire of reformation, and that caused it to
be taken the more odiously. He began first with his own Dioces, which he so
hampered with straight and unreasonable orders, such as he knew men would
rather buy out then endure to observe; that every one said the monks of
Canterbury were (...) justly rewarded for their folly in electing an unlearned
stranger, that was more fit and likely to make a soldier then an Archbishop a
great deal. Coming then to London, he took a small occasion to deface the
Bishop there with (...) and reproachful speeches; and being resisted by the
Deane and Chapter of Paul's (who had appealed from his (...) to the Pope) he
made no more adoo but excommunicated them every one, Going the next day about
the same business to the Priory of Saint Bartholomewes in Smythfield, he was
met very honorably by the Subprior and all the Conent in their coapes. Telling
them by and by he came to visit them, one of the company answered him
reverently, he was very welcome unto them, but they were sorry he came for that
purpose, wherein they must disappoint him: They knew their Bishop (whose only
office it was) to be a very sufficient man for his place, and so long they must
not entertain the (...) of any other. This answer (though gentle enough) so
enraged this lusty Archbishop, as not being able to contain his anger within
any bounds of discretion, he ran violently not to him that had spoken, but to
the Subprior that was next him, struck the poor old man down to the ground,
kicked him, beat and buffeted him pitifully, tore his coape from his back,
rent it into a number of pieces, and when he had done stamped upon it like a
mad man. In this conflict it happened the Archbishop to stumble and fall
backward, by means whereof his apparel loosening, in any perceived a privy
coat under the same. His seruitors and attendants taking example of their
Lord, gave much like intertainment to the rest of the monks as he had given to
the Subprior. By this time the Londoners were up, and taking the matter very
(...) in the behalf of their Bishop whom this injury did originally concern,
laid such wait for the Archbishop, as with much adoo he stole secretly to the
Thames side, and was conveyed by a wherry provided for him to Lambhith. If they
could (...) met with him, they had surely hewn him into 1000. pieces. He was
no sooner come home, but he thundered out his excommunications against not only
the whole Covent of Saint Bartholomew, but the Bishop of London also, as a
favorer of theirs. They all agreeing together, determined to send the Deane of
Paul's a grave and wise man to Rome, and by the letters of certain Bishops
(they knew the Pope would credit) to advertise him of this strange disorder.
The Archbishop understanding hereof, followed thither apace, and entered Rome
with great pomp, nothing (...) but the King and Queens letters which he had
brought, his nobility and great lineage, or if all failed, his purse, should
bear him out in this matter well enough. But understanding how odiously it was
taken by all that heard it, and how hardly the Pope was informed against him;
he fell to entreaty of his adversaries, the Deane of Paul's and the rest, whom
partly by fair promises, and partly by threats, at last he subdued and made
them content to stay their complaint. That matter being so ended, he dealt
earnestly with the Pope to ratify the doings of his (...). The Bishops of his
province understanding thereof, and knowing how great an inconvenience it would
be to them and all their Clergy; they made a collection of two pence in the
mark out of all spiritual promotions in the Province to be expended in suit
of law against the Archibishop. In the mean time the king had written his
letters earnestly to the Pope in the Archbishops behalf, which so enchanted
him with partiality, as the Bishop of London utterly despairing of any
justice, gave over the matter in the plain field: Only thus much was
obtained, that he, the Chapter of Paul's, and the Covent of S. (...) should be
absolved from their excommunication. Soon after this it happened that the
Archbishop (the old malice still boiling in his breast) taking a small
advantage, excommunicated again the Deane and Chapter of Paul's; the
indignity whereof so moved all the Clergy, as they took order to meet at
Dunstable, and there laying their purses together, gathered the sum of four
thousand marks, which they determined to bribe the Pope withal, so he would
deliver them from the misery of this unreasonable kind of Uisitation. The Pope
took their money, and promised them fair: And the Archbishop seeing no
remedy but he must (...) clauo pellere, by taking the same course, fed him
as well on the other side. He whose affection was ever wont to be measured
according to his rewards, so divided his favor, as he took not away from the
Archbishop all authority of visiting, and yet so moderated the same with
circumstances, as it was like to prove tolerable enough. As soon then as he
returned, he went forward in his visitation, wherein he dealt at the first
somewhat mildly, but soon falling to his old byas, caused every where such
stirs and tumults, as it was long after called by the name of the troublous
Uisitation. At Lincoln he fell out with the Chapter there (the Sea being then
void) about the gift of prebends and benefices which he challenged, and had
ever heretofore in the vacacy belonged unto them. One William Lupus Archdeacon
of Lincoln especially resisted him in this matter, and appealed unto the Pope.
This poor man he so vexed and hurryed with his excommunications, and all
manner of molestation he could devise, as at last he enforced him to hide
himself and to steal secretly to Rome, where he was so pitied, as the Pope
was entreated not only to absolve him, but to protect him from the violence of
Boniface, and at last to judge the controversy of his side. So homewards he
got him with assured hope of restoring his church to her ancient privilege.
But being worn out with continual travel and vexation which he had endured
three years, upon the way he died. Now while he was abroad in the rest of his
province, his monks of Christ church in Canterbury had procured of the Pope a
Charter of immunity from all visitation. This being tendered unto him at Saint
Albons, he made no more adoo, but cast it in the fire. The matter being
complained of both to the Pope and the king, no redress could be found. The
king durst not disgrace him for fear of offending his Queen to whom he was
uncle, and the Pope, partly for his kinreds sake (that were mighty men and his
near neighbors) partly because he was his instrument for polling of England,
and brought him in much money, would hardly give ear unto any accusation
against him. This boisterous visitation ended, he got him beyond sea, and with
the money he had scraped together in the same, hired a great number of soldiers
to rescue his brother Thomas, sometime Earl of Sauoy that was kept in prison
by the citizens of (...), who could not endure his tyranny. In this war he had
the Popes Bulls and excommunications at commandment to assist him, of which
having spent a great many, all his money, and no small number of his soldiers to
no purpose, with (...) and sorrow for his loss and disgrace, home he came.
Toward the later end of his time he waxed more moderate, and applied himself
in some reasonable sort to the government of his church. The realm being
filled with strangers of the kings blood by his mother side and their
attendants, that still snatched up all places of preferment, especially (...):
He was content to join with the rest of the Bishops in a request to the king,
wherein he besought him to hauc some regard of his own countriemen, among whom
he might sinde choice enough of wise, virtuous and learned men. The king taking
this speech of his in very evil part, told him he was content to do as he
wished him, and because says he, it is indeed great reason that I should
favor worthy men of my own nation before any unworthy stranger. You and my
brother Aethelmar of Winchester (men utterly unlearned and altens, whom I have
preferred for no other respect then kindred or affinity) shall do well to give
over your places; and you shall see I will soon fill them with men you shall
take no exceptions against. By this and diverse other manifest tokens perceiving
the kings mind to be alienated from him, and knowing himself very ill beloved
of all the commous and clergic in general, waxing weary of England, he selled
his woods, let leases, forced from his tenants and others what money he could
possibly; and having gathered great sums by one means or other, carried it
all with him into Sauoy, whence he never meant to return again. He lived not
long after his arrival there, but deceased in the castle of Saint Helen, July
18. 1270. after his first consecration 26. years six months and sixteen
days, and from the time of his first election nine and twenty years. He
performed three notable things worthy memory; he paid the debt of two and
twenty thousand marks that he found his See indebted in. He built a goodly
hospital at Maidstone called the New works, and endued it with large
revenues. (William Courtney long after translated the same into a college of
secular priests.) And lastly, he finished that most stately hall at Canterbury
with the buildings adioining, which had only been begun by Hubert, and little
or nothing continued by them that followed, but by him at last was thoroughly
perfited.

47. Robert Kilwardby.
Soon after the death of Boniface, the Covent of Canterbury William Chillinden
their Supprior to succeed him. The Pope took exceptions against him as an
insufficient man for the place, and ex plenitudine potestatis, thrust into the
same one Robert Kilwardby. This Robert was a great Clarke, and left many
monuments of the same in writing behind him, an English man borne, brought up
in Paris; whence (having proceeded there Master of Arts) he returned and became
first a Friar Minor, and then Provincial of that order here. The monks that
many times opposed themselves against their kings and lawful Princes, durst
not resist this intruder of the Popes sending, but to preserve their right of
election, were content forsooth to chose him the Pope had before appointed
them. He was consecrate February 26. 1272. being the first Sunday in Lent; at
what time the Prior of Canterbury demanded of him the sum of 3000 marks
spent in the election of William Chillenden, which the Pope promised the next
Archbishop should repay. But he loath to disburse this money, began to pick
holes in the Priors coat, and threatening to deprive him of his place, never
linne sifting of him, till he had entreated his Covent to abate 1300. of the
3000. marks. In the first year of his consecration, he renewed the Statutes
made by his predecessors for his Court of the Arches, and contracted them
briefly into five articles. Then shortly after he visited all his Province and
both the Uniuersities, in which he disputed excellently, and showed himself in
diverse kinds of exercise. Toward the later end of his time he made a
collection for the building of a Monastery for the Friar Minors in London. Men
contributed so largely thereunto, (and he had the help of a certain old
Tower which yielded him stones without charge) as he finished the same with
other men's money, and filled his own purse well beside. Having been Archbishop
about the space of six years, he was sent for to Rome by Pope Nicholas the
third and made Cardinal of Hostia and Bishop of Portua. He resigned then his
Archbishopricke, and getting him into Italy, with in a few months after fell
sick and died (of poison some say) at Uiterbium, where also he was buried.

48. John Peckham.
THe resignation of Robert Kilwardby once known, the Robert Burnell Bishop of
Bath, at that time Chauncellor of England. But the Pope who had therefore
promoted Robert Kilwardby that he might place another in his room, such a one
as he would be sure should serve his turn at all times, perceiving him self
prevented in the election; thrust in ex plenitudine potestatis, in like sort as
last time he had done, John Peckham another Friar. He was borne of mean
parentage in Susser, spent his childhood in the Abbey of Jews, brought up in
Oxford (where he became a Friar) and succeeded Robert Kilwardby in the office
of Prouinctall of their order. From Oxford he went to Paris to study Divinity,
and after a while to Lions to get some knowledge in the Canon Law, without the
which, Diuiuity was esteemed imperfect in those days. At Lions he was chosen
Canon or Prebendary of the Cathedral Church, and by that means being
furnished with allowance to travail; for the increase of his knowledge in the
Canon Law, he went into Italy, and visiting personally all the Uniuersities of
Italy, came lastly to Rome. His rare learning being soon percetued there, he
was made by the Pope Auditor or chief Judge of his Palace, and so continued
till his preferment to Canterbury. He was consecrate the first Sunday in Lent,
which fell upon the sixth day of March 1278. Soon after his arrival in England
the Pope his creator (as he called him) sent unto him a mandate of making
payment of 4000. marks upon very short warning, or else assured him to be
speedily excommunicate. It shall not be amiss to set down the words of his
answer to this demand; Ecce me creastis says he, etc. Behold you have
created me: And if the creature cannot but desire naturally what perfection the
creator can yield, how can I but resort unto you for succor in all my
oppressions and calamities. I received of late certain letters horrible to see
and fearful to hear, denouncing, that except I make payment of 4000. marks
that I became indebted unto certain Merchants of Luca at Rome within the space
of a month after Michaelmas next, I was to be excommunicate with bell, book,
and candle, and that excommunication to be published in my Church, etc. Then
(to make short) he declares how his predecessor at his departure carried away
all the mooueable goods belonging to the Sea, that Boniface had left all his
houses very ruinous, that the King had taken up before hand, one years
profitte of his lands that in the mean space he was feign himself to live
upon credit, and that to borow to serve his necessary uses (the realm being so
exhaust with contiuuall payments) it was exceeding hard. In regard hereof, he
besought him (whom only in truth the matter concerned, though merchants of
Luca bore the name of this debt) to order the matter so, as he might be allowed
a years day of payment, which at last with much adoo was granted him by the
suit of Robert Kilwardby his predecessor, who died (as before is rehearsed)
soon after. The new Archbishop then became a suter unto the Pope, that he
would cause to be restored unto his Church five thousand marks, the value
whereof, the said Robert had carried away with him of the goods belonging to his
See. This he was so far from obtaining, as by and by the Pope began to call
upon him again very hastily for the four thousand marks above mentioned, and
so made him glad to hold his peace for that time, and yet to pay the money at
his day. In the first year of his consecration he sommoned a Convocation at
Lambhith, at what time the Archbishop of York coming to London, caused his
cross to be borne before him within the Province of Canterbury which the
Archbishop of Canterbury took to be a great wrong unto him and his See. It had
been often in question heretofore whether it might be done or no, and much
adoo there had been about it. Therefore to redress this abuse quickly and
good cheap, our Friar devised this course to be taken. He caused proclamations
to be made in all places where he understood the other Archbishop meant to
pass, in which he commanded all men under pain of excommunication to afford
no manner of intertainment, no not so much as bread, or drink, unto him or any
of his company, so long as he bare up his cross in that manner. So except he
and his train should starve, down must the cross there was no remedy. The
Convocation ended, he began a general visitation of his whole province, and
being desirous to know the state of every Dioces, went him self in person to
most of them, using great lenity and gentleness every where. For he was a man
though very stately both in his gesture, gate, words, and all outward show, yet
of an exceeding meek, farile and liberal mind. He took great pains in
laboring a peace between King Edward the first, and Leolin Prince of Wales,
unto whom he went in person, and travailed long with him, but altogether in
vain. He bare a very hard hand upon the Jews, whose Sinagogues he commanded
to be pulled down to the ground throughout his province. But the king was a
means to stay the execution of that commandment so far forth, as he would
have one Church allowed unto them, in the City in which with certain
restraints they should practice their ceremonies. Unto double beneficed men and
non residents he was very hard. Diverse elected unto Bishoprics he rejected,
having no other exception against them. Many he compelled to reform themselves
according to the Canons in that behalf, and some that refused to be
conformable, he finally deprived. Abultery he was wont to punish very
severely. He persecuted a Bishop terribly (his name is not delivered) for
keeping a concubine. One Roger Ham a Priest, he enjoined to three years
penance for fornication, enioyining him to spend all that time in fasting,
prayer, and pilgrimages to Rome, Compostella, and Colon, and moreover
sequestered the fruits of his benefice during those three years, appointing
them to be given unto the poor. Neither (...) he thus with men of his own
coat only. There was a certain knight of (...) called Sir Osborn Gifford: He
had stolen two Nuns out of the Nunry of Wilton: which coming to the
Archbishops ears, he first excommunicated him, and after absolved upon these
conditions; first that he should never after come within any Nunry, or in the
company of a Nun; then, that three Sundaies together he should be whipped in
the parish Church of Wilton, so likewise in the market and Church of Shaftsbury
three other days, that he should fast a certain number of months, that he
should not wear any shirt in three years, and lastly that he should not any
more take upon him the habit or title of a knight, but wear apparel of a
russet color, until he had spent three years in the holy land. All this he
swear should be performed before he might have absolution. If some of our
gentlemen were now and then thus served, they would not be so wanton as they
are. Thirteen years and almost a half this man continued Archbishop holding
all this while his prebend he had first at Lions, which when diverse begged of
him, he would answer, that he might not in any wise spare it; for he looked
every day when being drouen out of England by the king (against whom indeed he
often very boldly opposed him self) he should have no other home to take to.
For the same cause belike it was annexed unto the Sea of Canterbury. Many
succeeding Archbishops enjoyed the same a long time after. He (...) very rich,
and yet in his life time, founded at Wingham a College valued when it was
suppressed at four score and four pounds of yearly revenues, and advanced
diverse of his kindred to great possessions, whose posterity have continued in
the state of Knightsand Esquiers even until our time. He was buried in his
own Church, but in what particular place I find not.

49. Robert Winchelsey.
What countreyman Robert Winchelsey should be, Peckham being dead, he was
straightway pointed out by the expectation of all men unto the Archbishopricke.
The monks therefore chose him with the kings very good liking and great
applause of all men. It was his chance to come to Rome while Coelestious was
Pope, a good and virtuous man, but so simple, as Boniface that succeeded him
could persuade him by counterfeiting the voice of an Angel through a trunk in
the night, to resign his Papacy and become an Heremite again, as before his
election he had been. Not only this simple Heremite, but even all the
prelates and Cardinals there were amassed at his wonderful rare learning, the
like whereof (especially to be joined with such discretion and wisdom) they
well assured themselves was no where to be found. They were desirous therefore
to have made him a Cardinal so to have retained him amongst them: But he
yielding many reasons why he might not be spared at home, obtained at last
consecration and hasted him unto his charge. Upon the day of his
inthronization, it is said he consecrated Bishop of Landaffe one John Monemouth
Doctor of Divinity, and bestowed twenty benefices, ten of very good value upon
ten Doctors, and ten less upon ten Batchelers of Divinity. The Sea being yet
void, the king had caused a convocation to be summoned, in which he required
one half of all ecclesiastical reueneues for one year toward the charge of
his wars. This intolerable exaction the clergy not intending to yield unto,
sent the Deane of Paul's William de Montfort with diverse other Prelates unto
the king to crave pardon, and to show how hard it were for them to yield to
this demand. Being admitted unto his presence, the Deane began his speech, and
after a few words fell down suddenly stark dead. Herewith the king nothing
moved, sent a knight the next day unto the convocation to know whether any of
them durst withstand the king in this demand: if there be any such (quoth he)
let him come forth that I may take order with him as a disturber of the kings
peace. So no man daring to gainesay it, the grant passed for good. The
Archbishop now coming home soon after, called another Synod, wherein his
clergy complained much of the last exaction. The Archbishop told them it was
more the^ they could (...) that they had done, for that in the late Council of
Lions it was decreed, no clergy man should pay any thing to any temporal
magistrate without the Popes license: that therefore they now set down for a
canon to be kept hereafter inuiolably. At that time the king that had had so
liberal allowance very lately, demanded nothing. But within a year or two
after having spent an infinite deal of money in the conquest of Scotland, he
summoned a Parliament at Berwicke, wherein when the Temporalty contributed
liberally toward the charge of that war, the clergy alleging the foresaid
canon, would grant no thing. The king would not take this for payment: And
therefore presently he took order, that all barnes of clergy men should be
locked up: he also made proclamation that from that time forward, all clergy
men were excluded from under his protection, so that hereafter it should be
lawful for any man to sue them, but they might not commence suit against any
other. This constrained them to yield, and all submitted themselves to
allowance of such a proportion as the king liked (it was a fifth part of their
revenues) except only the Archv. who would make no other answer unto the
king but this, under God our universal Lord, says he, we have two other
Lords, a spiritual Lord the Pope, and a temporal Lord the king, and though we
be to obey both, yet rather the spiritual Lord then the temporal. When
therefore he saw all the rest inclined to yield, using no other words then
this, Saluet (...) animam suam, he rose up and suddenly departed. For this
contumacy the king caused all his goods to be seized into his hands, and made
show of greater displeasure. Shortly after, notwithstanding being to make war
in France, before his departure he thought good to receive the Archbishop to
favor again, but this grace endured for a very little while. Presently upon
his return, he laid diverse treasons to his charge, as that he had dehorted his
subjects in his absence from payment of their subsidies, that he had conspired
with diverse of his nobility to deprive him of his kingdom, and to crown his
son Edward, etc. Whether the Archbishop were guilty of all the crimes
objected against him or no, I cannot tell. But certain it is, that as guilty,
he submitted himself to the kings mercy, and besought him for the same in most
humble manner, or rather in deed dejected himself more basely, and lamented
his cause more passionately then became a man that were guiltless, much less
a prelate that would be esteemed, grave, learned or wise. Notwithstanding this
his submission, the king commenced a complaint against him at Rome, banished
him the realm, and seized upon all his goods, mooueable and immovable,
forbidding all his subjects upon great pain to foster him or yield him any
manner of intertainment. He was in that case he must have starued for want of
sustenance, had not the monks of Canterbury secretly taken him in and
adventured to yield him things necessary, till they found means to shift him
beyond sea; which the king afterward understanding, seized upon all their
goods and lands, turned them all even fowerscore monks a begging, forbid all
men to harbor them, and kept them in that miserable state, till after a
certain space he was content to restore them again. These were the violent
courses were taken by Princes in those days: how happy are we that in all
peace, liberty and assurance, quietly enjoy our own without great desert to
the contrary? Two years the Archbishop continued in exile: In which time the
king (Edward the first) died, and his son Edward the second that was to
succeed, thinking it convenient belike at his first entrance to show all
examples of clemency, called him home by letters, and restored him to all his
goods, even every penny of that which had been received of his temporalties in
his absence. Hereby it came to pass that he was the richest Archbishop of many
that were, either before or after him, so that his trouble turned him to great
good. In regard whereof, he was wont to say (Nihil nocebit aduersitas vbi
nulla iniquitas dominatur) so often as he talked of his trouble and banishment.
He was no sooner come home but a new danger encountered him occasioned by his
own woonted boldness. The young king by the counsel of Piers Gaueston (a
wanton and vicious man, banished into Ireland by king Edward the first for
corrupting his son) had committed the Bishop of Couentry to ward at York: A
convocation being gathered, the Archbishop would not suffer any matter to be
debated in the house till the Bishop were set at liberty. This the king was
content to bear with all at that time, and afterward he so behaved himself,
as there never grew any dislike between them. So the rest of his age after his
return from banishment (which was six years) he passed in quietness and great
prosperity, and died at last at Oxford, May 11. 1313. having been Archbishop
about the space of nineteen years. He was a stout prelate and a severe
punisher of sin. He opposed himself against Piers Gaueston, the Spensers,
and other corrupters of the young king very boldly. He enforced John Warren
Earl of Surrey to sorsweare the company of a certain beautiful harlot, with
the love of whom he was greatly bewitched. And afterward when notwithstanding
his oath he returned to her company again and got children upon her, he
accused him to the Convocation of adultery and perjury both, and at last made
him to leave her. Such preferments as fell to his disposition, he ever bestowed
upon men of excellent learning, despising letters and requests of noble men,
which he esteemed not a rush. Many poor scholars he maintained at the
Uniuersities with liberal exhibition, and unto all kind of poor people was
exceeding bountiful, insomuch as therein I think he excelled all the
Archbishops that ever were, either before him or after him. Beside the daily
fragments of his house, he gave every Friday and Sunday unto every beggar that
came to his door a loase of bread of a farthing price (which no doubt was
bigger then our peny-loafe now.) And there were usually every such alms day in
time of dearth to the number of 5000. but in a plentiful 4000. and seldom or
never under, which commumbus annis amounted unto 500. pound a year. Over and
above this, he used to give every great festival day 150. pence to so many
poor people, to send daily meat, drink and bread unto such as by reason of
age or sickness were not able to fetch alms at his gate, and to send money,
meat, apparel etc. to such as he thought wanted the same, and were ashamed to
beg. But of all other, he was wont to take greatest compassion upon those
that by any misfortune were decayed and had fallen from wealth to poorer
estate. For these and other virtues, the common people would needs esteem him
a Saint, and frequented much the place of his burial: Therefore his tomb
(which was situate beside the altar of S, Gregory near the south wall) was
afterward pulled down. His books, apparel, and other mooueables (which were
but of very small value) he gave all such as they were unto his church of
Canterbury. Of all the Archbishops that possessed this See before this man,
(which were 48. there was never any two that had one Christian name.

50. Walter Raynolds.
RObert Winchelsey being dead, the monks of Canterbury Thomas Cobham that was
Deane of Salisbury, and Prebendary of York, a man of such virtue and learning,
as he was commonly called by the name of the good Clerk. The king (Edward the
second) was desirous to prefer unto that place Walter Raynolds Bishop of
Worcester; whom he favored singularly for his assured fidelity and great
wisdom. Before therefore that the said Thomas Cobham could get away to Rome,
the king understanding of his election, sent thither in all post haste,
earnestly requesting the Pope to find means that this Walter might be made
Archbishop. He glad of such an occasion to exercise the utmost of his usurped
authority, without any more adoo, thrust in the said Walter Raynolds into that
See, pretending, that he had reserved the gift of the Archbishopric for that
time unto himself before it fell. Cobham a while stood upon the right of his
election, but perceauing to how little purpose it was to stir with so mighty
adversaries as the Pope and the king both at once, was content to accept of the
Bishopric of Worcester which the other left. This Walter had been a Courtier
a long time, Chapleyne first unto Edward the first, and Parson of Wimberton,
then by Edward the second (whose schoolmaster some say he was) made Treasurer
and Chancellor of England, and preferred to the Bishopric of Worcester the
year 1308. The bulls of his translation were published in Bow Church January
4. 1313. He received his pall Febr. 17. following, and was installed with great
pomp and solemnity April 19. in the presence of the king the Queen and many
nobles. The first thing he did after his coming to Canterbury, was to take
order by giving pensions and diverse sums of money at Rome, that appeals made
from him to the court there should find no favorable intertainment. He
precured also eight several Bulls, containing so many great and extraordinary
privileges. The first gauc him authority of visiting all his province, so as he
should have procurations every where, and yet his charges borne; The second to
visit monasteries and all other exempt places; The third to absolve and
restore to their former state two hundred Clergy men that had incurred
irregularitie; The fourth to dispense with the Minority of a hundred Clearks,
and enable them to take spiritual livings; The fifth to absolve a hundred of
such as by striking any Clergy man had fallen into the danger of
excommunication; The sixth, to grant forty pluralities; The seventh, to require
the gift of any one dignity or spiritual promotion in any church or college
where he should visit; The eight, to grant pardon of a hundred days in any
place where he should visit, preach, give alms, or keep hospitality. Being
thus armed, he performed his visitation, travailing himself in the same till
by the Barons wars he was hindered, and sent for unto the Court by the king.
That war being ended, and execution done upon diverse of the nobles that had
rebelled: Adam Tarlton Bishop of Hereford was apprehended and brought to the
bar to be arraigned for the like fault. All the Bishops of England almost
were then at London. The Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin hearing
of it, in great haste hied them thither, and having their crosses borne before
them, entered the court, by violence took the prisoner from the bar, and
carried him away with them. Much adoo there was about this matter a good while:
and the stir was not quight ended when the Queen rising against her husband,
and setting up her son to (...) the kingdom, at last procured him to be
deposed. This our Archb. then showed himself a very weak man: He was content
a while outwardly to stand with the king (as beside the common duty of a
subject, he was bound to do by benefits received infinite) but first underhand
he aided the Queen with great sums of money, and at last utterly for sooke
him, his lawful prince, his master, his patron that had advanced him by so
many degrees unto an estate so honorable. It pleased God, that (...)
timorousness should be his destruction: By the Queen aforesaid (of whom he
stood so greatly in awe) he was commanded to consecrate one James Barkley
elected Bishop of Excester. He did so, but for his labor was so threatened,
taunted, and reviled by the Pope, that said he had reserved the gift of that
Bishopric unto himself, as for grief and anger together he died, when he had
sat Archbishop 13. years, 9. months, and three weeks. He was buried in the
south wall of Christ's church in Canterbury near the Quier, where his tomb is
yet to be seen, with an inscription which I have read long since, but I think
is now defaced. This man was but meanly learned, yet very wise and of good
government, except when for fear and want of courage he neglected his duty.
He gave unto his Covent the Manor of Caldcote, and the wood of Thorlehot.

51. Simon Mepham.
SImon Mepham Doctor of Divinity, Canon of Chichester, Prebendary of Landaff,
and Parson of Tunstall, a Kentish man borne, one very well learned (as learning
went in those days) was then elected by the monks, approved by the king, and
affoorded consecration by the Pope at Auinion the year 1327. The first thing
he did at his return home was, that he excommunicated all the authors of the
death of Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester, as they had well deserved. Soon
after, he began to wrangle with his monks of Canterbury about certain land:
They complained them unto the Pope, who sent a Nuncio to Canterbury to hear
and determine of this controversy. He condemned the Archbishop in seven
hundred pound charges. After this, he began to visit his province in like sort
as his predecessors had done before him. The Bishop of Excester John Graundson
resisted him (for what cause I find not) appealed to Rome, and would not
suffer him so much as to enter into his Cathedral Church, much less to visit
in the same. These two repulses he took so tenderly, as being yet scarcely
returned home, he fell sick and died, October 12. 1333. at Magfield. His body
was conueighed to Canterbury, and laid in a marble fombe upon the North side of
Saint Anselmes chapel. He sat Archbishop five years and somewhat more.

52. John Stratford.
THe Pope (who now took upon him to dispose of all (...):) John Stratford
Bishop of Winchester. This John Stratford having long and to good purpose
studied the Canon and civil Law, was called to the Archdeaconry of Lincoln.
Being famous for his learning and good government of that jurisdiction, Walter
the Archbishop made him his principal Official and Deane of the Arches, and
king Edward the second shortly after that appointed him Secretary, and so one
of his privy counsel. It chanced he was Ambassador unto the Pope at what
time the Bishop of Winchester died; and he at the request of Walter the
Archbishop bestowed that Bishopric upon this John Stratford then present with
him. This was done without the kings priuity, who desired to have preferred
unto that place Robert Baldock his Chauncellor. Therefore taking it very ill,
that either the one should give, or the other dare to take it without his
knowledge; he was content to give ear unto Robert Baldock who plotted many
devises, a while how to keep him from it, and after how to make him weary of
it. He was consecrate upon the Sunday called then (...) tribulat. iustoru^,
which he thought boaded unto him, how in the whole course of his life he should
find nothing but continual trouble. It fell out according to that ominous
prediction. Never I think any Archb. either before or after him, giving so
little cause, and doing his endeavor to please, was more encombred with
undeserved and often crosses. He had no sooner set foot into this Bishopric
of Winchester, but the king (who at that time was altogether ruled by the said
Robert Baldock) caused all his goods to be seized, and his livings to be
sequestered to his use. Moreover, he caused him to be summoned by certain
strange kind of writs to appear I know not where; and when for fear he was
feign to hide himself, proclamation was made that no man should dare to harbor
him, or give him any kind of entertainment by meat, lodging, or otherwise.
Having endured these miseries the space of a year, he entreated the Archbishop
to be an intercessor unto the king for him; who relating unto him how
dishonorable a thing it was for him to persecute a true subject so terribly,
both for an other man's fault, and an other man's pleasure too; he was soon
woonne to receive the poor Bishop to his grace, and laid all the blame of that
injury upon Robert Baldock. Being thus restored, he grew daily more and more
into the kings favor, whom he served both diligently and faithfully to the
last hour. When all other forsook him, even Walter the Archbishop of whom he
had deserved so notably; this good Bishop would never be allured unto the
contrary part by any means; in so much as, the Queen and Roger Mortimer began
to devise how they might make him away. This he being certified of, hid him
self, and was feign so to hold him self close a long time. In the end, the
king being dead, and all his favorites or partakers either executed, or
otherwise consumed; the Queen and her son king Edward the third, well knowing
they had nothing to lay against this man, but that he was true and loyal to
his Prince, they were content not only to receive him to their favor, but
also to make him Lord Chauncellor of England. Simon Mepham the Archbishop being
then dead soon after, the king was also content to write earnestly unto the
Pope to prefer him unto that See of Canterbury. He did so (as before I have
said.) And the monks thinking it good to make a virtue of necessity, they
forsooth elected him also. About this time it hapened that King Edward the
third began to lay claim unto the crown of France, and passing the seas with
a great power to justify his claim; he thought good to commit the government
of the realm here at home unto the Archbishop. He beside other general
promises of faithfulness diligence, etc. In the charge delivered unto him,
assured the king he should want no money to expend in this exploit; whereunto
all kind of people showed them selves so willing to yield what help they
possibly might, as he took upon him to discern, the king might command of
them what he list. He was not deceived in this conjecture: For no sooner was
the king over the seas, but infinite sums of money were collected with the
very good liking of all people. This money (which all men thought would have
maintained the charge of that war two or three years, the king being young
and so easy to be either mistaken or deceived) was spent in less then one
year. The Archbishop meruelling thereat, (...) the king by letters, to remove
from him such as had had the disposing of his treasure, for that without
imbesilling and falsehood it was impossible so much money should be so soon
consumed. The king on the other side, he put the Archbishop in mind of his
promise, and called upon him continually for more money. He well knowing how
hard it would be to collect any reasonable sum so soon after so liberal
contribution as had been lately yielded; fell to persuading the king to accept
reasonable conditions, which he heard the French King had offered him and to
come home. The king either was or seemed to be exceeding angry with this
motion: yet knowing there was no remedy but he must get him home, his money
being now spent, and his credit amongst the usurers stretched to the highest
pin; He told his soldiers on the one side that the Archbishop had betrayed
him unto the French king, who no doubt had hired him to detain their pay in
his hands; and on the other side made his creditors believe that the Archbishop
had taken upon him the discharge of all his debt, as having now gathered money
sufficient for that purpose. So the coffeehouse of these people being either
alaied, or cast upon the Archbishop, it was devised that for the farther
countenance of this plot, the king should step over into England suddenly, and
cast into prison the Archbishop, together with the Bishop of Chichester the
Chauncelour, and the Bishop of Lichfield the Treasurer. To London he came
secretly in a night, caught the two Bishops and sent them to the Tower; but the
Archbishop by mere chance was gone from Lambhith elsewhether the day before,
and having some inkling afterward of that was meant unto him, got him to
Canterbury and there stood upon his guard. A knight was sent unto him to
require him to make present payment of a certain huge sum of money which the
king said he had taken up of outlandish merchants upon his (the Archbi.)
credit, or else to get him over the seas immediately unto them, and to yield
them his body till the debt were satisfied, for that so the king had undertaken
he should, being animated thereunto by his own promise. Soon after, there
came certain messengers from the duke of Brabant desiring to speak with the
Archbishop, and when he refused to confer with them, cited him by writings to
make payment of certain great sums of money, which they alleged he ought to
the Duke for money the king of England had received. This citation they fixed
upon the high cross at Canterbury with many ceremonies. Now the Archbishop
perceauing what a terrible tempest was growing toward him, (for he was charged
not only with the debt of many thousand pounds more then ever he should be
able to make, but with horrible treason, that might not only take away his
life, but make him odious in his life time, and infamous for ever with all
posterity.) He wrote many letters unto the king, wherein he purged himself
most clearly of whatsoever was objected, and prayed him not to command his
repair unto his presence, until a parliament were assembled, wherein, if he
were to be charged with any crime, he vowed to offer himself unto justice.
Understanding then that the king had written diverse discourses against him unto
the Bishop of London, the covent of Canterbury and others, to the intent they
might be public; for defense of his credit, he thought it requisite to make
his Apology in the pulpit, which he did, taking this for his text, Non
pertinuit Principem, and potentia nemo vieit illum, etc. Eccles. 48. At last a
parliament was summoned, whereunto upon safe conduct he came. He was not
suffered to come into the parliament house before he had answered to certain
crimes objected against him in the court of the Exchequer. He went thither and
receiving a copy of the articles promised to make answer unto them. The next
day coming again unto the parliament, he was once more forbidden entrance. A
great number of people flocking about him in the mean time, he told them how
he had been summoned to the parliament, whereof he was a principal member,
and now being come, was kept out by violence. But says he (taking his cross
into his own hand) I will not hence till I either be suffered to come in, or
hear some cause alleged why I should not. While he stood there, some of the
company began to revile him and to tell him he had betrayed the realm, etc.
Unto whom he answered thus, The curse of almighty God (quoth he) of his blessed
mother and mine also, be upon the heads of them that inform the king so, Amen,
Amen. In the mean time certain noble men chanced to come out, whom he
besought to request the king in his behalf. By their means he was at last
admitted, and being charged with diverse heinous crimes, offered to purge
himself of them, and if they might be proved to submit himself unto justice.
Twelve men were chosen to examine this matter, viz. four Prelates, the
Bishops, of London, Bathe, Hereford and Exceter; four Earls, Arundell,
Salisbury, Huntington and Suffolk, and lastly, four Barons, Henry Percy,
Thomas Wake, Ralfe Basset, and Ralfe (...). All this was but to make the
Archbishop odious with the common people: A fault was committed; And the king
willing the blame thereof should lie any where rather then upon himself, made
all this ado to bleere the peoples eyes. The matter never came to the hearing of
these nobles: but was so handled, that the Archbishop upon great suit and
entreaty of in a manner the whole parliament, must be pardoned all that was
past, and received to favor again. After this, he lived certain years
quietly. Having been Archbishop about fifteen years, he fell sick at
Magfield, and making his will (wherein he gave all he had unto his servants)
died there. He was buried in a goodly tomb of alabaster on the South side of
the high altar beside the steps of Saint Dunstanes altar. He was a very gentle
and merciful man, rather to (...) then any way rigorous unto offenders. His
manner was thrice every day to give alms to thirteen poor people; in the
morning pence a piece; at nine a clock, bread, meat and pottage, and at noone
again every one a loaf and a penny. He gave unto his church of Canterbury a
very sumptuous miter and certain books. He assigned also unto the same a
pension of five pound out of the parsonages of Boughton and Preston
appropriated unto the Abbey of Feuersham: and some deliver that he founded a
college at Stratford upon Auon where he was borne.

53. John Vfford.
THe Pope at this time had so far incroched upon us (Edward the third) much
discontented herewith, writ unto him, very earnestly praying him to forbear
his provisions and reseruations whereby he robbed patrones of their right and
chapters of their elections: telling him, that the disposition of Bishoprics
belonged of old unto the king only, that his progenitors at the suit of diverse
Popes had given that their authority unto Chapters, which if they used not, he
assured himself it deuolued again unto the first graunter, which was the
king. The copy of this letter is to be seen in Thomas (...), and many other.
After the receipt of this letter, the Pope would seldom or never take upon to
give any Bishopric, but unto such as the king made request for. But so,
between the king and the Pope, elections were altogether deluded and made
frustrate. And therefore Simon Mepham being dead, whereas the Covent made
choice of one Thomas Bradwardin to succeed him, the king writing somewhat
earnestly to the Pope in favor of John Vfford, he was by and by pronounced
Archbishop by the Popes oracle and the other utterly rejected. This John Vfford
was son unto the Earl of Suffolk, brought up in Cambridge and made Doctor
of Law there, promoted first unto the Deanery of Lincoln, then to the
Chauncellorship of England, and lastly the Archbishopricke. He never received
either his pall, or consecration: Having expected the same the space of six
months, he died in the time of that great plague that consumed half the men
of England, June 7. 1348. His body without any pomp or woonted solemnity, was
carried to Canterbury, and there secretly buried by the North wall beside the
wall of Thomas Becket, at that place (if I mistake not) where we see an old
wooden toombe near to the toombe of Bishop Warham. This man began to build
the Archbishops palace at Maidstone, but died before he could bring it to any
perfection.

54. Thomas Bradwardin.
THomas Bradwardin (of whom somewhat is said before) John Stratford the
Archbishop in regard of these virtues commended him unto that noble Prince
King Edward the third for his Confessor. In that office he behaved him self
so, as he deserves eternal memory for the same. He was wont to reprehend the
king with great boldness for such things as he saw amiss in him. In that
long and painful war which the king had in France, he never would be from
him, but admonished him often secretly and all his army in learned and most
cloquent sermons publicly, to take heed they wared not proud and insolent
because of the manifold victories God had sent them; but to be thankful unto
him for them, and to have a care to use them moderately. Some there be that
have not doubted to ascribe that notable conquest rather to the virtue and
holiness of this man, then to any other means either of prowess or wisdom
in other instruments of the same. This man that might have obtained of the king
any preferment he would have craved, was so (...) from ambitious desire of
promotion, as it was long besore he could be persuaded to take a prebend of
Lincoln, when it was offered him being before that Chauncelor of Paul's in
London. It is certain also, that he was elected unto the Archbishopricke
without his own seeking, and might easily have made the king for him if he had
endeavored it. When some men maruailed that the king should refuse him, and
prefer any other before him, he answered he could very ill spare him, and he
perceived not he was desirous to be spard. John Vfford being suddenly taken
away as before is declared, the Covent of Canterbury once more chose him, the
king very willingly allowed of their choice, and the Pope having not yet heard
of this their second election of his own accord before any request made cast
upon him this dignity. Hardly shall you find any Archbishop in any age to have
attained his place in better sort. He was consecrate at Auinion by one Bertrand
a Cardinal in the church of the Friar minors there. That ceremony once
performed, he hasted him home into England, where first doing his duty to the
king, he received of him immediately his temporalties with all favor. From the
court he departed to Lambhith to rest himself after his long journey. Lying
there a while with the Bishop of Rochester, he fell sick, and within five
weeks and four days after his consecration died, so that he was never
inthronized at all. He was buried in the chapel of Saint Anselme toward the
South wall.

55. Simon Islip.
SImon Islip being doctor of law became canon of Paul's, Edward the third,
first in the place of secretary, and then keeper of the privy seal. John
Stratford lying upon his death bed, foretold he should be Archbishop. It came
to pass, within two years after his death, though two other were served
before him. The monks with the kings very good liking chose him, and the Pope
would not refuse him: yet being loath to ratify the monks election, he
rejected the same, and ex (...) potestatis bestowed the Archbishopricke upon
him. His bulls were published in Bow church, October 4. 1349. and in the
month of December following he was consecrate by the Bishop of London in
Paul's church. He was inthronized secretly to save charge. For he was a very
frugal and sparing man, never esteeming pomp or outward bravery. He was also
very severe. When he first visited his own Dioces, he deprived many clergy
men of their livings. He passed thorough the Diocesses of Kochester and
Chichester without keeping any great adoo: So that every one made account he
was content to wink at the faults he espied. But they found it otherwise: For
he afterward called home unto him the offenders, and there dealt so with them,
as all men might assure themselves he would prove a very austere man in his
government. John Synwall Bishop of Lincoln, standing in doubt of this asperity
of his, with great cost procured a privilege from Rome to exempt himself from
his authority and jurisdiction But the Archbishop caused the same afterward to
be revoked. The Uniuersity of Oxford had presented unto him the said Bish. of
Lincoln (unto whose jurisdiction Oxford then appertained) one William Palmor^^
for their Chancellor and prayed him to admit him. The Bishop (I know not for
what cause) delayed his admission from time to time, and enforced the
Uniuersity to complain of this hard dealing unto the Archbishop. He presently
set down a day wherein he enioined the Bishop to admit this Chauncellor, or
else to render a reason of his refusal. At that time appointed the proctors of
the Uniuersity were ready together with this William. Palmo^^e to demand
admission: And when the Bishop of Lincoln came not (trusting belike to his
privilege aforesaid) the Archbishop caused his Chauncellor John Carlton Deane
of Wels to admit him, write to the Uniuersity to receive him, and cited the
Bishop to answer before him for his contempt. He appealed to the Pope, would
not come, and for his contumacy was interdicted. Much money was spent in this
suit after wards at Rome. The end was, that the Archbishop prevailed, and the
others privilege was by special order of the Pope revoked, who also granted
unto the Uniuersity at the same time that the Chauncellor hereafter should
only be elected by the scholars them selves, and so presently authorized to
govern them without the admission of any other. This conquest thus atchiued,
he entered yet into another combat in the same land, I mean at Rome. He served
Andrew Vfford Archbishop of Middlesex the Administrator of John Vfford his
predecessor for delapidations and recovered of him 1101. l. fifteen shillings
two pence halpeny farthing, that money he employed in repairing the palace at
Canterbury. He pulled down the manner house at Wrotham and employed the stones
and timber of the same in ending the building that John Vfford his predecessor
aforesaid had begun at Maidstone. Toward this and other charges he obtained of
the Pope leave to crave a contribution of four pence out of every mark from
all the Clergy of his Province. But his officers (whether of purpose, or
peradventure mistaking) demanded and had a whole tenth. All this was within a
year or two of his first coming to the Archbishopricke; at which time also in
a Parliament held at Westminster: the year 1350. the old controversy between
him and the Archbishop of York, about bearing up his cross in the province of
Canterburybegan to be renewed, was compromitted unto the hearing and judgment
of the king, who set down a final order for the same, viz. that the
Archbishop of York should bear his cross in the others province yielding all
preeminence otherwise unto Canterbury, but that in token of subjection every
Archbishop at his entrance should offer an image of gold to the value of forty
pound, at the shrine of Saint Thomas, the same to be sent by some Knight or
Doctor of the Law within the space of two months after his inthronization.
Amongst the rest of his actions, I may not in any wise forget his College of
Canterbury, (which is now become a parcel of Christ Church in Oxford). He
built it, and endowed it with good possessions, appropriating unto the same the
parsonages of Pagham and Magfield. He granted also unto the Covent of
Canterbury the Churches of Monkton and Estrey. It is worthy remembrance
likewise, that when a certain Countess of Kent after the Earl her husbands
death had prosessed her self a Nun, (...) having lived so certain years,
suddenly married a certain knight named Eustace Abricourt contrary to her vow,
and that secretly without asking of banes or dispensation; he punished them
severely for it, but suffered them to live still together and severed them not.
Amongst many good deeds, he is blamed for selling unto the Earl of Arundell
the right which he had unto six and twenty Dear yearly out of certain
grounds of his. He had for them only two hundred and forty marks. After he
had been Archbishop sixeteene years, four months and twelve days, he died
April 26. 1366. Kiding to Magfield, his horse chanced to cast him into a
meiry poole. Wet as he (...) he fell a sleep at his coming thither, and
waking, found himself in a palsy, whereof within a few days after he died. He
bequeathed unto his church of Canterbury a thousand sheep, his vestments which
were al cloth of gold, a very sumptuous coape and much plate, viz. six dozin
of silver dishes, six salts, and four goodly basins all enchased with his
arms. He lies buried in the middle of the body of his church of Canterbury,
under a fair toombe of marble inlaid with brass whereon is engraven this
Epitaphe:

Ospes sanctorum decus and pie Christ tuorum,
Coetibus ipsorum prece iung as (...) precor horum.
Simon (...) oriens, vir bina lege probatus,
Vt nascens, moriens sic nunciacet arcte locatus,
Arcem qui tenuit (...) quondam Pontificatus,
Clero quique fuit regno toti quoque gratus.
Princeps pastorum fac Simon Apostolorum,
Simon vt iste chorum per eos pertingat eorum.
Mil trecenteno sexageno modo seno,
Eius septeno pastoratus quoque deno
Hic kal. Maij seno rupto carnis nece freno
Flos cadit efoeno coelo peto qui sit amoeno.
He took order to be buried obscurely, desiring therein (as in all other
things) to avoid superfluous expense what he might, and not esteeming outward
pomp.

56. Simon Langham.
AFter the decease of Simon (...), the monks of Canterbury William Edindon
Bishop of Winchester for Archbishop, who refused the place. The Pope then with
the kings good liking, removed to Canterbury Simon Langham Bishop of Ely and
Treasurer of England. He was first a monk of Westmin. then Prior, and lastly
Abbot there. Thence he was elected Bishop of London, but before he was
consecrate thereunto, obtained Ely where he continued five years. He received
his pall by the hands of the Bishop of Bathe in Saint Nicholas chapel at
Westminster November 4. 1366. and was inthronized the Lady day following. He
was Archbishop but a little while, viz. two years or little more, and
therefore did not many things very memorable. There was a great strife between
the Londoners and their clergy about tything, which he thus composed; he took
order that they should pay, their offerings, personal tithes, and then also for
the rest a farthing of every 10. s^. rent. From Canterbury college (which his
predecessor had founded) he sequestered the fruits of the benefice of Pagham,
and otherwise molested the scholars there intending to displace them all, and
to put in monks which in the end he brought to pass. John Wickliffe was one
of them that were so displaced, and had withstood the Archbishop in this
business with might and maine. By the Popes favor and the Archbishops power
the monks ouerbore (...) and his fellows. If then (...) were angry with Pope;
Archbishop, monks and all you cannot marvel. But to return to our
Archbishop he sat here only two years. For being made Cardinal of Saint
Sixtus by Pope Urban the fifth September 21. 1368. he left his Archbishopricke
and went to Rome, where shortly after he was made Bishop Cardinal of Preneste
by Gregory the eleventh, and held diverse livings in Commendam, as the
Archdeaconry and Treasurership of Wels with other. He lived there in great
estimation about eight years, and died July 22. 1376. of the same disease his
predecessor had done, viz. a palsy, wherewith he was suddenly taken as he sat
at dinner. He was buried first in the church of the Carthusians (whose house he
had founded) at Auinion, but after three years his bones (by his own
appointment while he lived) were taken up and buried a second time at
Westminster in a goodly toombe of alabaster. It is scarce credible that is
reported of his wonderful bounty and liberality to that monastery, I mean
Westminster. When he was first made Abbot, he bestowed all that he had gathered
together being monk and prior, in paying the debt of the house, which was to
the value of two thousand and two hundred marks: he discharged it every whit,
and diverse other sums of money, also that particular monks did owe; whom he
tendered and cherished as his own children, never taking any thing from them,
but rather augmenting; their portions out of that which was due to himself.
Being Chauncellor and Treasurer, he purchased diverse good pieces of land and
gave it unto them. When he went out of England, he left them books to the
value of 830. l. and roaps, vestments, etc. esteemed worth 437. l. At his death
he bequeathed unto them all his plate, prised at 2700. l. and all his debts any
where due; they amounted unto 3954 l. thirteen shillings and four pence. He
also sent unto the said monastery the sum of one thousand marks to buy forty
marks a year land, to increase the portions os four monks that daily should
say mass for the souls of himself and his parents. To say nothing of the
monastery which he built for the Carthusians at Auinion, the money that he
bestowed only upon the Abbey of Westminster one way or other, is reckoned by a
monk of the same to be no less then 10800. l. They caused this Epitaphe to be
engraven upon his toombe,

Simon de Langham (...) petris hijs tumulatus
(...) ecclesiae monachus fuerat, Prior, Abbas;
Sede vacant, fuit electus Londoniensis
(...), and insignis Ely, sed postea primas
Totius regni, magnus Regisque minister:
Nam Thesaurarius and Cancellarius eius
Ac Cardinalis in Roma Presbyter iste.
Postque Praenestinus est factus Episcopus, atque
Nuncius ex part Papae transmittitur istuc.
Orb dolente, pater quem nuncreuocare nequimus,
Magdalenae festo, milleno septuageno
Et ter centeno sexto Christi ruit anno.
Hunc Deus absoluat de cunctis quae male (...),
Et meritis matris sibi coelica gaudia donet.
57. William Wittlesey.
SImon (...) was uncle unto a young man named William whom he caused to be
carefully brought up and directed unto the study of the Cannon law. Having
proceeded doctor in that faculty his uncle (yt now was become Archb.) sent him
to Rome, that there he might both solicit all his causes, and also get
experience by seeing the practice of that Court. After he had stayed there a
while, he was called home, and preferred by his uncle aforesaid, unto the place
of vicar General, then to the Deanery of the Arches, the Archdeaconry of
Huntingdon, the Parsonages of Croydon and Clyff, and lastly the Bishopric of
Rochester. From Rochester he was removed to Worcester, (his uncle yet living
and ioying much in this his advancement) the year 1; 63. From thence some say
he was translated to London, but that I take to be mistaken. Simon Sudbury was
Bishop of London before he came to Worcester, and so continued till that after
his death he succeeded him in Canterbury. Thither this man was advanced by the
Popes only authority presently after Simon Langham was made Cardinal, viz.
the year 1368. At two several synods he preached in Latin very learnedly;
The later of those sermons he could hardly end for sickness, where with he had
been so much troubled before, as for two years space he was feign to keep
his chamber almost altogether. Not being able to resist the force of this
tedious wearing disease any longer, he paid the debt of his mortality October
11. 1374. having continued in this See almost seven years. He was buried
ouer-against his uncle between two pillars, under a fair marble tomb inlaid
with brass, which is lately defaced by tearing out the brass: I remember that
some sixteen years since I read the Epitaph engraven upon the same. This man
procured the University of Oxford to be exempt from the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Lincoln, and al authority of governing the same to be committed unto
the Chancellor and Proctors.

58. Simon Sudbury.
PResently after the death of William Wittlesey, the Adam Easton. The king with
this choice of theirs was so grievously offended, as he determined to banish
them (the monks I mean) out of the realm, and to confiscate their goods.
Gregory the 11. that then was Pope, though he favored his Cardinal, to shield
the poor monks from the danger of such a tempest, was content to refuse this
election, and to bestow the Archbishopricke by way of provision upon Simon
Sudbury Bishop of London, whom he knew the king liked well enough. This Simon
was the son of a gentleman named Nigellus Tibold, so that his true name was
Simon Tibold: But he was borne at Sudbury a town of Suffolk in the parish of
S. George, and of that (...) took his name, according to the manner of many
clergy men in those days. He was always brought up at school, and being yet
very young, was sent by his father beyond the seas to study the canon law; and
having proceeded Doctor of that faculty, became household Chaplein unto Pope
Innocent: and one of the Judges or Auditors of his Kota. The said Pope by way
of provision thrust him first into the Chancellorship of Salisbury, and then
afterward, viz. the year 1364. into the Bishopric of London. He received the
bulls of his translation thence, June 6. 1375. Two synods or conuocations were
held in his time, at both which he preached in Latin very learnedly. Six
years one month and ten days he governed the Sea of Canterbury laudably, and
at last was most unworthily slain, or rather wickedly murdered by a company
of villainous rebels. By the instigation of one John Ball a seditions malcontent
and hypocritical preacher, the baser sort of the commons arose in diverse parts
of the realm, and intending to destroy all gentlemen, lawyers, cleargymen, and
whosoever were of any account, either for their riches lineage or authority in
the common wealth, came up to London, appointing for their leaders Wat Tyler,
Jack Straw, John Lister, Robert Westhrom, etc. The king understanding of their
coming, sent unto them to know the cause of their repair in so great numbers.
They answered, they were to impart unto him certain matters greatly importing
the state of the common wealth, which if he would understand, he should
speedily resort unto them. The king having received this saury answer, began
to consult with his friends whether he were best to go to them or not. The
greater number (...) him to go. But the Archbishop and Sir Robert Hales
Treasurer of England, (...) him, saying, it was a thing not only (...) and
shameful for a Prince to be commanded by such rascals, but also dangerous unto
his person to commit himself to a route of seditious people, that having once
broken the bands of all duty and allegiance, feared no more to violate the
sacred majesty of their anointed prince, then to wrong their neighbors of
far meaner condition, of whom they had already slain, spoiled and robbed an
infinite number; for which cause they thought it more safe for the king, more
honorable and every way more expedient, to gather some power together speedily
and to set upon them, who being yet unprovided of armor, destitute of good
leaders, and without all skill or experience of warlike affairs would soon be
dispersed and overthrown. This speech of theirs (I know not by what
tell-tales) was carried unto the rebels who swear by and by they would have off
the heads of these cruel counselors. So in all haste to the Tower they came,
where the court then lay, requiring with great outcries the Archbishop, and the
said Sir Robert Hales to be delivered unto them. The Archbishop having heard
some inckling of their intent the day before, had spent all that might in
prayer, and just when they called for him, was saying of mass in the chapel
of the Tower. That ended, and hearing of their coming; Let us now go (says he
unto his men) Surely it is best to dye, seeing to live it can be no pleasure.
With that, in came these murtherous rebels crying, where is the Traitor, where
is the Traitor. He answered, I am the Archbishop (whom I think you seek) but
no Traitor. With great violence then they drew him out of the chapel and
carried him to the Tower hill. Seeing there nothing but swords, and weapons, and
hearing nothing but Kill, kill, away with the Traitor, etc. Yet he was not so
(...), but with great (...) he could go about to persuade them not to imbrue
their hands in the blood of their Archbishop their chief (...), that (...)
offended them to his knowledge, nor (...) so cruel a death at their hands,
assuring them, that all the (...) would be interdicted for it, that the (...)
be punished (...) or last by the temporal Law, and lastly, that though both
these failed, God the just Judge would (...) it (...) in this, or the world to
come, if not both. He was a man admirably wise, and exceeding well spoken. But
these varlets were so egerly bent, as the very songs of the Sirens would
nothing have moved them at all from their intended course. Seeing therefore
nothing but death before his face, with comfortable words, forgiving the
executioner (that scarce ever requested him so to do) with a very cheerful
countenance he kneeled down and yielded him self unto their fury. Once he was
stricken in the neck so weakly, as that notwithstanding, he kneeled still
upright, and putting his hand up to the wound, he used these words, a ha, it is
the hand of God. He had not removed his hand from the place when a second
stroke cut of his fingers ends, and felled him to the ground. With much adoo,
having hacked and hewn his neck with eight blows, they got off his head.
This horrible murder was committed upon Friday June 14. 1381. all which day,
and a part of the next, his body lay there headless, no man daring to offer it
burial: as for his head they nailed his hood upon it, and so fixing it upon a
poale, set it on London bridge. Sir Robert Hales and a great many of others
that day, tasted of the same cup the Archbishop had done. Thus ended this noble
Prelate his days, who though he were very wise, learned, eloquent, liberal,
merciful, and for his age and place reverend, yet might it not deliver him
from the rage of this beast with many heads the multitude, then which being
once incensed, there is no brute beast more cruel, more outrageous, more
unreasonable. How this monstrous tumult was appeased at the last, and the
Authors of the same punished, according to their demerites, the Chronicles at
large declare. To pass it over, the body of this our Archb. after all sturres
ended, was carried to Canterbury, and there honorably enterred upon the
Southside of the altar of S. Dunstane, a little above the toombe of Bishop
Stratford. Being yet Bishop of London, he builded the upper end of Saint
Gregory's Church at Sudbury; and in the place where his fathers house stood
founded a goodly College which he furnished with secular Clearks and other
Ministers. At the time of the suppression thereof, it was valued at one hundred
twenty two pounds eighteen shilllings lands by the year. After his
translation to Canterbury, he built the West gate of the City, and all the wall
from that gate unto Norgate, commonly called by the name of the long wall; A
great work, no less necessary and profitable unto the City, then costly and
chargeable unto the builder.

55. William Courtney.
Soon after the lamentable death of Simon Sudbury the William Courtney Bishop
of London, and the Pope knowing nothing of their election, about the same time
bestowed the Archbishopricke upon him by way of provision. He was the son of
Hugh Courtney Earl of Devonshire, in his youth studied the Canon Law, and had
no sooner entered into orders, but he was quickly loaded with spiritual living
enough, as a prebend in Wels, an other in Exceter, and a third in York, beside
benefices with cure innow. The year 1369. he was consecrate Bishop of
Hereford, sat there flue years and a half, and then removed to London, at
what tune Simon Sudbury was made Archbishop. Thomas Walsingham adds to these
former honors, that the year 1378. he was made Cardinal. I find no mention
of it elsewhere, and therefore doubt much of it. The bulls of his translation
to Canterbury were published in Christchurch there January 9. 1381. Having then
received his temporalties of the King, and done his homage, he went to
Lambhith. Thither came unto him a monk sent from the Covent and Prior of
Canterbury to deliver him his cross, which he did in the Chapel of Lambhith
using these words, Reverend father, I am the messenger of the great King that
does require and command you to take on you the government of his Church, to
love and defend the same. In token whereof, I deliver you this his ensign.
Soon after he received his pall; and then being thoroughly settled, began his
Metropoliticall visitation which he intended to perform in every Dioces of his
province. Having passed quietly through Rochester, Chichester, Bathe, and
Worceter; at Exceter he found some resistance as well as Simon Mepham his
predecessor had done. After the time of his first inhibition, he prorogued
diverse times the day of his visitation, and when he had sat, was not so ha sty
in granting a relaxation of the inhibition as they would have him. Hereby it
came to pass that the Bishop and his Archdeacons were suspended from their
jurisdiction longer (as it seemed unto them) then they ought, and not disposed
to await the Archbishops pleasure any longer, rushed into their jurisdictions
again, his visitation nothing near finished, commanding all men upon pain
of excommunication to repair unto their woonted ordinaries for proof of wills,
administrations, institutions, or any other such like occasions. This
commandment published in many places of the Dioces, the Archbishop pronounced
to be void and required all men in these and the like cases to repair unto him
and none other. Hereupon the Bishop appealed to Rome, and the Archbishop cited
diverse of the Bishops officers to appear before him. His apparator (named
Peter Hill) had also in his bosom a citation for the Bishop himself. It
hapened that some of the Bishops followers, meeting this gentle soumer at
Tapsham, beat him well and thriftily and after forced him to eat the citation
war paper and all. This fact was very prejudicial to the Bishop of Exceters
cause: For it incensed the king against him; in so much as though a while he
did prosecute his aupcale at Rome diligently, he saw himself so ouerborne by
the king, he was like to do no good at all, and therefore resolved to make his
peace with the Archbishop upon reasonable conditions, which he easily obtained.
But they that had abused his Apparator, were put to terrible penance, in diverse
parts of the realm, and were feign to perform the same. One William Bid a
Doctor of the Arches had given counsel unto the Bishop in this cause: For so
doing he was displaced, and upon that occasion an oath was ordained of this
Archbishop, that every Advocate of that Court should take at his admission.
This visitation ended, the Archbishop proceeded to the Dioces of Salisbury,
where he likewise found some resistance. The Bishop there had procured
apriuiledge from Pope Boniface (Urban the 6. being lately dead) that it should
not be lawful for any Metropolitan to visit him or his Dioces by virtue of
any authority granted from Pope Vrbane. The Archbishop (that was a great
Lawyer) (...) he had (...) of himself as being (...) to visit without the
Popes license, and therefore proceeded (...) (notwithstanding that vain
privilege) (...) the Bishop with excommunications and (...) censures, as he was
(...) to yield at last and cry peccani. Since that time our Archbishops have
(...) quietly all (...) of their (...) without resistance. Towars the latter
end of his time he procured a license of the Pope to gather (...) pence of the
pound in all Ecclesiastical preferments within his province. The Bishop of
Lincoln refused to make this collection in his Dioces, and appealed unto the
Pope? That appeal yet depending, the Archbishop died July 31. 1396. at
Maidstone, when he had sat 12. years lacking one month. The old work at
Maidstone first built by Boniface his predecessor for an Hospital, he pulled
down and building it after a more stately manner, translated it into a
College of secular priests, which at the time of the suppression was valued at
one hundred thirty nine pounds seven shillings fix pence by the year. The
church of Mepham quite fallen down, he repaired again and built certain
alms houses near it for the use of poor people. Toward the reparation of the
body of his Church and cloisters he gave 1000. marks; He gave also unto the
same Church a certain image of silver waighing one hundred and threescore
pounds, (...) vestments and thirteen coapes of great value, besides a number
of books. He lies buried upon the South side of Thomas Beckets shrine, at the
feet of the black Prince, in a goodly toombe of Alabaster.

60. Thomas Arundell.
BY the Popes provision Thomas Arondell Archbishop William Courtneyes death.
His bulls were published at Canterbury January 11. Soon after his cross was
delivered unto him at Westminster by Henry Chillinden the Prior of Canterbury
with (...) solemnity, in the presence of the king and many nobles. February 10.
following he received his pall, (...) the 19. of the same month he was
inthronised at Canterbury with great pomp. He was son unto Robert Earl of
Arundell and Warren, first Bishop of Ely, then of York. See more of him there.
He was scarce warm in his seat when by the kings displeasure he was
dispossessed of the same. In the second year of his translation a parliament
was held at London. The king there accused the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of
Arundell that was the Archbishops brother, and diverse other of high treason.
Now because clergy men were forbidden by the Canons to be present at any
trial or judgment upon life and death; the matter being once proposed, all
the Bishops departed the house as their manner was in like cases. The Archbishop
being absent upon this occasion, was condemned together with his brother of
high treason; for which his brother was presently executed, and he commanded
within forty days to depart the realm upon pain of death. He (thus banished)
got him to Rome and found such favor with the Pope, as first he was content to
write earnestly unto the king for his restitution; and when he could do no good
that way, he translated him to the Archbishopricke of Saint Andrews in
Scotland, intending to heap so much ecclesiastical living upon him by
benefices, etc. in England, as he should be able to live in state honorable
enough. The king understanding of his intent, writ a marvelous sharp letter
unto the Pope, telling him plainly he must repute him for his enemy, if he
yielded any manner of succor unto him, whom he knew too well to hate him
deadly. That letter so wrought with the Pope, as after that time he never
endeavored to prefer him farther, and moreover, at the kings request made Roger
Walden (Deane of York, and treasurer of England) Archbishop. He was
consecrate, inthronised, etc. held Synods and did all things belonging unto
that place the space of two years. It hapened in the mean time, that the king
(Richard the second) wos deposed, or at least enforced to resign his crown
unto Henry Duke of Lancaster, that after possessed the same by the name of king
Henry the fourth. Boniface the Pope understanding then of the fall of king
Richard, pronounced the said Roger to be an intruder and usurper of the
Archbishopricke, and by his omnipotent bulls restored Thomas Arundell unto the
same again. As for Roger Walden that was now a Bishop without a Bishopric
(for it is Character indelebilis) he lived so a while, til at last by the kind
endeavor of the Archb. his charitable adversary, he was promoted unto the
Bishopric of London, which he enjoyed but a short time, being taken away by
death within one year after. About a twelve month after the Archbishops
restitution, a convocation was held at London, whether the king sent the Earls
of Northumberland and Westmerland, that told the clergy they came from the
king, but not of that errand that courtiers were wont to be sent for to that
place; they came not for money, but only to signify the kings hearty and
favorable goodwill unto them, and to request their daily prayers for him and
the good estate of the realm. This new broom with sweeping so clean at the
first, was so worn out unto the stumpes, in a year or two, as not contented
with a bare tenth, the next convocation after, he was very angry that a more
liberal allowance was not made unto him; and began to hearken unto the
sacrilegious motions of certain impious politicians, that intending to cast
the burden of all subsidies and other kind of tributes upon the clergy,
let not to say openly in the parliament house, how the laity was not able to
yield any thing unto the kings coffers, for that the clergy had all the wealth
of the land in their hands: And therefore the king must either take from them
their temporalties, or else lay all the burden upon them that only were able
to bear it. The Archbishop (that was undoubtedly a worthy prelate, wise and
very stout) rose up and proved by manifest arguments that the contributions of
the Clergy were after the proportion of their ability, much more liberal then
the subsidies or other paiments of the temporalty in many respects. For (says
he) we pay the tenth of our livings oftener then they pay fifteenths, and
though we serve not in the wars our selves, our servants and tenants do;
neither are we altogether idle, in as much as we pray daily for the king and
the realm, as well in time of peace as war. The prolocutor of the parliament
house at that time was a knight called Sir John Cleyn, that having been a
cleargyman sometimes, without any dispensation forsook the calling and became
a soldier. This profane Apostata was not ashamed to say, it was no matter for
their prayers, so the king might have their money. I see now (quoth the Arch.)
whither the fortune of this realm tends, the prayers of the church being
despised, which should appease the wrath of God justly kindled against us by
the daily monstrous iniquities of our age. Perceauing then that the king (who
at his first coming to the crown had made many open and public protestations
of his love to the church, and his intent to defend and protect the same to the
utmost) that he I say began to harken somewhat too patiently to these wicked
motions; he turned him toward him, and making low obeisance, humbly besought
him, it would please his majesty to remember those gracious and most honorable
speeches, wherein he had often signified his resolute determination of
protecting the church from all injury, as also his oath taken to the same
purpose at the time of his coronation, the danger and dishonor of breaking the
same, and lastly, that he should fear to offend him by whom kings reign, and
before whose tribunal all princes and monarchs never so great must one day
come to be judged. The king seemed to be somewhat moved with these words, and
desiring the Archbishop to take his place again, well (quoth he) howsoever I
do otherwise I will leave the church in as good estate as I found it. The
Archbishop then turning him about unto the proloquutor and certain other
knights of the lower house that accompanied him: You it was (faith he and such
as you are) that persuaded the last king to take into his hands all such celles
in England as appertained unto any religious houses of France or Normandy,
assuring him it would so stuff his coffers, as he could not want in many
years after, and there is no question, but the land belonging to such celles
was worth an infinite sum of money: Howbeit it is certain and well enough
known, that within one year after he had taken that course, he was not the
value of half a mark the richer; and how he thriued afterward otherwise, I
need not tell you. After that time there were no other attempts against the
church in his days. But the clergy were so terrified with that wavering
doubtfulnesse of the king, as they durst not but grant him a tenth every year
after, and though there were no other occasion, the Archbishop was feign to
call a convocation even for that purpose. His end (being as some report it) was
very miserable: his tongue swelled so big in his mouth, as he was able neither
to eat, drink, nor speak in many days before his death, and died at last of
hunger about the end of January 1413. when he had sat one month above 17.
years. He lies buried on the North side of the body of Christchurch in
Canterbury, at the West end whereof toward the North, he built a fair spire
steeple called to this day by the name of Arundell steeple, and bestowed a
goodly ring of five belles upon the same; the first of them, he dedicated to
the holy trinity, the second to the blessed virgin the third to the Angel
Gabriell, the fourth to Saint Blase, and the fifth to Saint John the Evangelist.

61. Henry Chichley.
AFter the death of Thomas Arundell, Henry Chichley Bishop of Saint David's was
elected by the Covent of Canterbury to succeeds him. Now though many Laws had
been made against the Popes usurped authority Henry Chichley was borne at
Highamferrys in Northamptonshire brought up in New College in Oxford (where he
proceeded Doctor of Law) and first preferred unto the Chauncellorship of
Salisbury. Having been employed much in Embassages and other businesses of the
king (wherein he ever behaved himself wisely and to the kings great good
liking) by his means he was made first Bishop of Saint David's and then
Archbishop. He received his pall at the hands of the Bishop of Winchester, the
29. of July, 1414. and bought of the king the fruits of the vacacy (which was
half a year) for six hundred marks. The year 1428. he was made Cardinal
of Saint Eusebius and the Popes Legate, but refused to exercise his power
Legatiue further then he was authorized thereunto by the king. He was a man
happy (enjoying always his princes favor, wealth, honor and all kind of
prosperity many years) wise in governing his See laudably, bountiful in
bestowing his goods to the behoof of the common wealth, and lastly stout and
severe in due administration of justice. In the town of Nigham ferrys where he
was borne, he founded a goodly college for secular priests, which he endowed
with large revenues. He built also in the same town an hospital for poor
people, which he likewise endowed liberally; and his brethren Robert and Will.
Chichley citizens of London, his executors, gave much land unto the same. These
two foundations finished, he began two other at Oxford, one called Bernard
College (now known by the name of Saint John's college) and All Souls college
which yet continues in such state as he left the same, one of the fairest and
seemeliest of our Uniuersity. He bestowed much money in repairing the library
at Canterbury, and then replenished the same with a number of goodly books: He
gave unto his Church many rich ornaments and jewels of great price, and built a
great part of the Tower called Oxford Tower in the said Church. William Molash
Prior there (that I may take any occasion to record so good a deed) the year
1430. furnished that Tower with a goodly bell called to this day Bell Dunstan.
The (...) of that bell at the lowest brim is two yards and somewhat more. But
to return to Henry Chichley no Archbishop ever enioied that honor so long as
he did in 500. years before him. He sat 29. years and dying April 12. 1443.
was laid in a very fair toombe built by him self in his life time, standing
upon the North side of the Presbitery. On it I find engraven this Epitaph.

Hic (...) Henr. Chicheley Ll. Doctor quondam Cancellarius Sarum, qui anno
septimo Henr. 4. Regisad Gregorium Papam 12. in Ambassiata transmissus, in
ciuitate Sanensi per manus (...) Papae in Episcopum (...) consecratus est. Hic
etiam Henricus anno 2. Henr. 5. Regis, in (...) sancta ecclesia in
Archiepiscopum postulatus and a (...) Papa 23. ad eandem translatus, qui obijt
anno. dom. 1443. mensis Apr. die 12.

Coetus sanctornm concorditer iste precetur,
Vt Deus ipsorum meritis sibi propiciatur.
62. John Stafford.
EVgenius 4. the Pope of his absolute authority translated John Stafford,
lately also made Cardinal (as I find reported at leastwise.) He was son
unto the Earl of Stafford, borne at Hook in Dorsetshire in the parish of
Abbots bury, and brought up in Oxford, where also he proceeded Doctor of law.
A while he practiced in the Arches, even until Henry Chichley the Archbishop
made him his vicar general there. By his favor also he obtained the Deanery of
Saint Martins in London, and the prebend of Milton in the church of Lincoln.
King Henry the fifth a little before his death began to favor him much, found
means to prefer him first to the Deanery of Wels, then a prebend in the
church of Salisbury, and afterward made him one of his privy counsel, first
keeper of the privy seal, and in the end Treasurer of England. This renowned
king being taken away by untimely death, though he found not his passage so
clear, yet he still went forward in the way of preferment, and obtained of
Pope Martin the fifth, the Bishopric of Bathe and Wels the year 1425.
Eighteen year he continued in that See, and August 23. 1443. was removed to
Canterbury. In the mean time, viz. the year 1431. in February he was made
Chauncellor of England, and held that place (which you shall hardly find any
other man to have done) eighteen years, even until the year 1449. Waxing
weary then of so painful a place, it is likely he resigned voluntarily the
same. He sat Archbishop almost nine years. Holding a convocation at London
the year 1452. he fell sick, and thereupon departed to Maidstone, where
shortly after he died, viz. July 6. He lies buried at Canterbury in the place
called the Martyrdom, under a flat marble stone, whereupon I find written this
bald Epitaphe:

Quis fuit enuclees quem celas saxea moles?
Stafford Antistes, fuerat dictusque Ioannes.
Qua sedit sede, marmor quaeso simul ede?
Pridem Bathoniae, regnitotius and inde
Primas egregius. Pro praesule funde precatus.
Aureolam gratus huic det de virgin natus.
See more of this man in Bathe and Wels.

63. John Kemp.
THe funeral rites and exequies of John Stafford being performed, the monks
with the kings license proceeded John (...) Archbishop of York. The Pope would
not allow of the monks election, but yet not daring to put any other into the
place, of his own good nature he bestowed it upon the same man that they had
chosen. He received his cross September 24. 1452. at London, and his pall the
next day at Fulham by the hands of Thomas Kemp the Bishop of London his nephew.
Dec. 11. following he was inthronized with great pomp and solemnity. This
Archbishop was born at Wye in Rent: Being Doctor of law, he was made first
Archdeacon of Durham, then Deane of the Arches and Wicar general unto the
Archbishop. The year 1418. he was ro^secrate Bishop of Rochester, removed
thence to Chichester 1422. from Chichester to London the same year, and from
London to York 1425. Dec. 28. 1439. he was made Cardinal of Saint Balbine, and
afterward being Archbishop of Canterbury was removed to the title of S.
Kusine. These his preferments are briefly expressed in this verse:

Bis primas, ter praeses and bis cardine functus.
He continued not at Canterbury above a year and a half, but died a very old
man March 22. 1453. In his life time he converted the parish church of Wye
where he was borne into a college, in which he placed secular priests to
attend divine service, and to teach the youth of the parish. Their governor was
called a Prebendary. This college at the time of the suppression was valued at
fowerscore and thirteen pound two shillings by the year. He was also a
benefactor unto our Uniuersity of Oxford. He died very rich, and in his life
time advanced diverse of his kindred to great wealth; some to the dignity of
knighthood, whose posterity continue yet of great worship and reputation His
body was buried in a seemly monument on the South side of the prerbytery a
little above the Archbishops See. Of him read more in York.

^

65. John Moorton.
John Moorton was borne at Beer or Bery in (...), (Thomas Bourchier) got
knowledge of his manifold good parts, his great learning in the law, his
wisdom, discretion and other virtues, which he not only rewarded by
preferring him to much good spiritual living, but also commended him unto the
king, who made him of his privy Counsel. In all those miseries and afflictions
which that good king endured, he ever stuck fast unto him, and by no means
would be drawn to forsake him when all the world in a manner betook them unto
his victorious adversary. This so notable loialty and faithfulness king Edward
himself honored so much in him, as king Henry being dead, he never ceased to
allure him unto his service, and having woone him, swear him of his Counsel,
and trusted him with his greatest secrets; assuring himself belike, that he
that had been so faithful unto his adversary in so great (...), would no
doubt be as faithful unto him in the like case if occasion should serve. After
many years trial of him and diverse other preferments whereunto he advanced
him, he procured him to be elected unto the Bishopric of Ely, the year 1474.
Not long after his consecration to that See, it happened king Edward to die, who
not reposing greater trust in any one then in this Bishop, made him one of his
executors. The Duke of York therefore his unnatural brother, intending by the
destruction of his children to make a passage for himself unto the crown, and
knowing how watchful an eye this man carried over them, as also how impossible
it was to corrupt him and draw him to be a partner in his wicked confort;
accused him of many great and unlikely treasons, for which he committed him to
the Tower. The innocence of the man would not suffer him to lie there long: Not
being able to stamp upon him any probality of such matter as he laid to his
charge, he took him thence and delivered him to the keeping of the Duke of
Buckingham, who at that time lay for the most part at yt castle of Brecknock in
Wales. This Duke was the only instrument of displacing the children of king
Edward from the crown, and procured the same to be most unjustly set upon the
head of their wicked uncle the Duke of York before mentioned, who was
appointed Protector of them and the realm. These lambs committed unto the
keeping of such a woolfe, were soon devoured, being not only despoiled of the
rule and government of the kingdom which descended unto them by inheritance,
but of their lives (...), which were violently taken from them, by smoothering
the poor innocent children between fetherbeds. Now whether it were the
detestation of this abominable murder (which the duke of Buckingham
pretended) or the unthankfulness of the tyrant, in not gratifying him
according to his expectation, (which is the opinion of most men) or the envy
of his so great advancement, whereof he thought himself better worthy (which
also is likely enough) certain it is that he quickly began to grow malcontent,
and being egged on by the Bishop his ghest, entered at last into a conspiracy
against him, plotted the remoouing of him, and endeavored to match the Earl of
Richmond heir of the house of Lancaster with the eldest daughter of king
Edward that (her brethren being made away) was now out of all question heir of
the house of York, so to throw down headlong the tyrant from the thrown
which he usurped, to restore it to them to whom of right it appertained, and to
join in one these two noble houses, whose contention had wasted away almost
all the nobility of the land. How this device was debated between the Duke and
the Bishop, every Chronicle reports. To let that pass, when the Bishop saw
the Duke had waded so far in the matter as step back he could not, and
seeing how he was able to do the Earl of Richmond better service elsewhere
then where he was, he found a means to slip away in a night disguised; never
making his host the Duke acquainted with his departure. And first he gat him
into his Isle of Ely: but not daring to stay there long, he took ship and
sailed into Flaunders. It pleased God, that as the Duke had been a partner
with the tyrant in his offense, so he should be a partner also with him in the
punishment. For being destitute of the advice of this wise prelate, or rather I
may say destitute of the assistance of God that had determined to revenge his
disloyalty unto his natural prince, he fell soon after into the hands of his
enemy the usurping king that cut off his head, and was within a short space
after overthrown himself and slame in the field by the noble Earl of
Richmond, who took upon him the government of our land by the name of king
Henry the 7. He calling home this our Bishop, made him Chancellor of England,
and Thomas (...) the Archbishop dying, he found means that the monks of
Canterbury elected him for successor, and the Pope not only confirmed and
allowed readily of their choice, but also within few years after, to wit,
September 20. 1493. created him Cardinal of Saint Arastasia. Thirteen years
he enjoyed quietly the Archbishopricke, and died at last the year 1500. At his
first coming he laid a great imposition upon the Clergy of his province,
forcing them by the Popes authority to contribute so largely toward the charges
of his translation, as of his own Dioces only (which is one of the least in
England) he received 354 pound. The year before he died, with great charge he
procured Anselme one of his predecessors to be Canonized a Saint. He bequeathed
in a manner all he had either unto good uses, or unto such of his servants as
he had yet been able to do nothing for. He gave unto the king a Portuis, to
the Queen a Psalter, to the Lady Margaret his God daughter a cup of gold and
forty pound in money, to the church of Ely his miter and his cross. Unto his
(...) and other friends he gave nothing as having preferred them sufficiently
in his life time. His executors he bound by oath to maintain sufficiently
twenty poor scholars at Oxford, and ten at Cambridge for the space of twenty
years after his decease. He bestowed great sums in repairing and augmenting
his houses at Bnoll, Maydstone, Alington park, Charing, Ford, (...), and
Canterbury, and built while he lived a sumptuous chapel in the vndercrofte or
vault which is under the quier. He lies buried in the said chapel under a
marble stone: Howbeit a goodly (...) is erected in (...) of him upon the (...)
of the chapel. See more of him in Ely.

66. Henry Deane.
BIshop Moorton being dead, the monks of Canterbury Thomas Langton Bishop of
Winchester for their Archbishop: But he died of the plague before his
translation could be perfited. Then they elected Henry Deane Bishop of (...).
At what time Perkin Warbeck began to show himself in the likeness of Richard
the young Duke of York king Edwards second son: this Henry Deane was Abbot
of Lanthony. King Henry the seventh that knew him to be a wise and (...) man,
made him Chauncelour of Ireland, where this counterseit Duke began first to
play his part. By his care and diligence he was driven out of Ireland, and
forced to (...) into Scotland. The rather in regard of this good service, the
king procured him to be elected unto the Bishopric of Bangor, which (by reason
yt Bishops had laien from it a long time, holding ever some (...) or other
spiritual living in Commendam, whereupon they lived) was horribly wasted and
spoiled. But this man coming thither, took great pains in recovering diverse
parcels of land that by the incrochment of other for want of looking to (...)
woone from his See. Amongst other things a certain Island between Holy-head
and Anglesey called (...) i. Moylr (...), or the Island of Seals was unjustly
detained from him by the possessors thereof. He euicted the same (...) in law,
and yet was feign afterward to bring a great power of armed men thither to
drive the inhabitants by force out of the same. His church and palace had
been burned and destroyed long before in the time of Henry the 4. by Owen
Glendowr that famous rebel: He bestowed much money in repairing them, but
before he was able to bring the^ to any perfection, he was called away thence
to Salisbury. Being yet very destrous the work should go forward, he left unto
his successor a Myter and a Crosyer of good value, upon condition he should
finish those buildings. After he had been a few months at (...), the
Archbishop dying, he was preferred unto Canterbury. His pall was sent unto him
by Hadrian de Castello the Popes Secretary, (that after was Bishop of Hereford
and Wels) and delivered by the Bishop of Couentry with these words. Ad honorem
Dei omnipotentis and B. Mariae Virginis ac Bb. Petri and Pauli Apostolorum, and
D. N. Alexandri Pp. sexti, and S. Romanae Ecclesiae, nec non and Cantuariensis
Ecclesiae tibi commissae, tradimus pallium de corpore B. Petri sumptum,
plenitudinem viz. Pontificalis officij; vt vtaris eo infra ecclesiam tuam
certis diebus qui exprimuntur in priuilegijs ei ab Apostolica sede concessis.
Having received his pall, he was to take his oath unto the Pope, which once for
all it shall not be amiss to set down. Ego Henticus Archiep. Cantuariensis,
ab hac hora in antea fidelis and obediens ero B. Petro sanctaeque Apostolicae
Romanae Ecclesiae, and Domino meo D. Alexandro Pp. 6. suisque successoribus
Canonice intrantibus. Non ero in consilio aut concensu vel facto vt vitam
perdant vel membrum, seu capiantur mala captione, Consilium vero quod mihi
credituri sunt, per se aut nuntios ad eorum dam^^^^ me sciente nemini pandam.
Papatum Romans and regalia S. Petri adiutor ero eis ad retinendum and defendendum
saluo ordine meo contra omnem hominem. Legatum sedis Apostolicae in eundo and
redeundo honorifice tractabo, and in suis necessitatibus adiuuabo, vocatus ad
Synodum veniam nisi prepeditus fuero Canonica praepeditione. Apostolorum limina
Romans curia existente citra Alps singulis annis, vltra vero montes singulis
biennijs visitabo aut per me aut per meum nuntium nisi Apostolica absoluar
licentia. Possessiones vero ad mensam mei Archiepiscopatus pertinentes non
vendam, neque donabo, neque impignerabo, neque de nouo infeudabo, velaliquo
modo alienabo in consulto Romans Pontifice, sicut me Deus admuet etc. With what
ceremony the cross was wont to be delivered, see before in William Courtney
page 104. This Archbishop died February 15. 1502. the second year after his
translation, at Lambhith. His body was conueighed to Feuersam by water,
conducted with 33. watermen all apparelled in black, (a great number of tapers
burning day and night in the boat) and from thence was carried to Canterbury,
where it was buried in the middle of the place called the martyrdom, under a
fair marble stone, inlaid with brass. He bequeathed to his Church a silver
image of 51. ounces weight, and appointed 500. l. to be bestowed in his
funerals: He built the most part of Otford house, and made the iron work upon
the coping of Rochester bridge.

67. William Warham.
William Warham a gentleman of an ancient house, Henry the seventh, sent him
Ambassador to the Duke of Burgundy to persuade him that he should not believe
the false reports of his Duchess, and to signify how notably she had abused
him and all the world, in setting up two counterfeits against him, Lambert that
made himself the Earl of Warwick, who was then to be seen in the Tower safe
enough, and Perkin Warbeck whom she had taught to name him self Richard Duke
of York, that was certainly known to have been murdered by his wicked uncle
long before. In this business he behaved himself so wisely, as the king
greatly commended him for the same, and the Bishopric of London happening to
be void soon after his return home, he procured him to be elected thereunto.
He had not been Bishop there two whole years when Henry Deane the Archbishop
died, to whose place also by the kings special endeavor he was advanced. He
was inthronised March 9. 1504. with wonderful great solemnity. The day before
his coming to Canterbury, the Duke of Buckingham that was his high steward,
came thither attended with seven score horse to see all things in a readiness.
The said Duke had also the office of chief Butler, and therefore being unable
to do the duties of both; he deputed Sir George Bourchier unto the Butlership.
Him self took great pains to see that nothing might be wanting requisite for
the performance of this ceremony in most magnificent manner. The next day
(which was Sunday) he met the Archbishop over against Saint Andrews Church,
and doing low obeisance unto him, went before him to Christ church. At the
great gate near the market place, the Prior and Covent received him honorably
and carried him to the Church (whether he went from Saint Andrews Church
barefoote) said mass there, and was placed in his throne after the accustomed
manner. From Church he was attended by the Duke as he was thetherward. The
cheer at dinner was as great as for money it might be made. Before the first
mess, the Duke him self came ridinginto the hall upon a great horse bare
headed with his white staff in his hand, and when the first dish was set on
the table, made obeisance by bowing of his body. Having so done, he betook him
to his chamber, where was provision made for him according to his state. With
the Archbishop sat the Earl of Esser, the Bishop of Man, the Lord
Aburgauenny, the Lord Brook, the Prior of Canterbury, and the Abbot of Saint
Augustines. The Duke at his table was accompanied with the Lord (...), Sir
Edward Poynings, the chief Justice of England, named Phineux, Sir Wilham Scot,
Sir Thomas Kemp, and others. A great many other guests were served in other
places, noble men and knights, at one table, Doctors of Divinity and Law at
another, and Gentlemen of the country at a third besides an infinite number of
meaner calling, placed by them selves, according to their several degrees. But
to let pass these matters, and to come unto his government, all the time of
King Henry the seventh (under whom he lived Archbishop some three years) he
enjoyed all manner of prosperity, being in so great favor with his Prince, as
no man greater. He dying, and his son Bing Henry the eight succeeding,
Cardinal Wolsey that was then but Almosuer and Deaue of Lincoln, diued so
cunningly into the bosom of the young king, as by and by he ouertopped the
Archbishop, and quickly wound him out of all authority. First by the kings
means he got from him the Chauncellorship of England: Then being Cardinal,
and the Popes Legate a latere by special commisson, he set up a new court
called Curia (...), under color whereof, he drew (...) of jurisdiction
throughout England into his own hands, and appointed Officials Registers, etc.
in (...) Dioces, who took up all causes and suffered other (...) (to whom the
jurisdiction of right appertained to sit still without either regard or
profit. This deiection of the Archbishop wherein men esteemed him for the time
very vnhapy, fell out to his great good, the others immoderate greatness, was
the cause of his destruction. At what time the K. (...) to be divorced from his
first wife D. Catherine; she (...) choice of this our Archb. and Nicholas West
Bish. of Ely, two lawyers, and of I. Fisher (...) of Rochester, and Henry
Standish Bishop of Assaph Doctors of Divinity, to assist and direct her in that
suit: they did so, and behaved themselves in such sort, as neither the king had
cause to be offended with their ouerforwardnes, nor she to blame their stacknes
or negligence. But the Cardinal yt was joined with Cardinal Campeius in
commission, wherein they were authorized by the Pope to examine the
circumstances of that cause, he I say being more slack in his proceedings,
then the king expected he should, so incensed him against him, as shortly after
he was content first to take the advantage of a Praemunire against him, and then
to cause him to be arrested of high treason, whereof see more in York. Soon
after the Cardinals death there was a convocation held, wherein the clergy was
advertised that they all had fallen into apremunire by yielding unto the
Cardinals power legantine never allowed by the king. They determined therefore
to redeem the penalty they had incurred with the payment of 118. thousand
pounds, whereof the province of York should pay eighteen thousand, and
Canterbury the rest which was 100000. l. When this gift was to have been
presented, they were certified that the king would not accept of the same,
except they declared in a Canon that he was supreme head of the church. Long
this matter was hammering. But at last they agreed to give unto him this new
title, and inserted the same into the instrument of their gift. In the
convocation many canons were made against Lutherans, and many motions for
renouncing the Popes authority, wherein the greatest part being fearful of
resolving either way, the connocation was often prorogued. After many
adiournments it was once more put over from April till October 5. In which
mean space the Archbishop died at Saint Stephens near Canterbury, in the
house of William Warham his kinsman, Archdeacon of Canterbury. That house at yt
time belonged unto the Archdeaconry, but (by what facrilegious means I know
not) was long since nipped away from the same, so that the Archdeacon, except
he be otherwise provided for them by his Archdeaconry, is now houselesse. But
to return unto our Archbishop, he was buried without any great funeral pomp,
giving mourning clothes only to the poor, and laid in a little chapel
built by himselse for the place of his burial upon the North side of the
Martyrdom, and has there a reasonable fair toombe. He purchased much land
for his kindred, and bestowed very much in repairing and beutifying his houses
with fair buildings, even to the value of thirty thousand pound, (as he
professes in his will) for which cause he prayed his successor to forbear
suit for dilapidations against his executors: They were the Duke of Norfolk
and the Lord Windsor. He continued Archbishop eight and twenty years, and died
in the summer the year 1532.

68. Thomas Cranmer.
A Famous and memorable man succeeded William Doctor of Divinity, whose life is
written at large by Master Fox and others. I should loose labor therefore in
writing any long discourse of the same. Briefly to set down that which I
cannot omit without interrupting my course, you shall understand that he was
borne at Arstacton in Nottingham shire, of a very ancient house which as it
should seem came out of Normandy with the conqueror; for it is certain that
in the time of this Archbishop a certain French gentleman named Cranmer came
into England, bearing the same arms that the Archbishop did, who gave him
great intertainment and did him much honor. He was brought up in Jesus
college in Cambridge. Being yet very young, he married, and so lost his
fellowship in the said college: But his wife dying within one year, he was
received into his old place again. For the manner and occasion of his
advancement, his diverse employments before and his actions in the same, his
lamentable fall, his heroical and (...) combats, and lastly his constant death,
I will as (before I said) send the Reader unto Master Fox, who has exactly
set down all the particularities of these things. Only thus much hear, that
he suffered most unworthy death at Oxford March 21. 1556. being the first
Archbishop that ever was put to death by order of law in England, except only
Richard Scroope Archbishop of York.

69. Reginald Poole.
CArdinal Poole was the son of sir Richard Poole (who Henry the seventh) and
Margaret Countess of Salisbury, that was daughter unto George Duke of Clarence
the second brother of king Edward the fourth. They caused him to spend some
time in Magdalen college in Oxford, and being yet very young, sent him beyond
sea by travel to get both learning and experience in the world. In the mean
time king Henry the eight that favored him much (as being near of kin unto
him both by father and mother) before his departure had bestowed upon him the
Deanery of Exceter. He had been in Italy (lying for the most part at Padua) the
space of 7. years, at what time the king having abolished the Popes authority,
sent for him home, and he not coming, proclaimed him Traitor, and gave away
his Deanery unto another. This loss he esteemed little of. Petrus Bembus an old
acquaintance of his was become the Popes chief secretary, who so commended him
unto his master, that shortly after he was content to make him a Cardinal,
persuading himself belike that he would prove a good instrument for English
matters as occasion should serve. And surely if he regarded the worthiness of
the man, in respect of his manifold rare and excellent parts, he could not
lightly prefer any man less obnoxious to exceptions. For he was not only
very learned (which is better known then that itneedeth many words) but also
of such modesty in outward behavior and integrity of life and conversation, as
he was of all men both loved and reverenced. I know well that Pasquill played
his parts with him, and fathered a brat or two upon him, but without any
probability at all. He was made Cardinal May 22. 1536. The Pope employed him
then in diverse Embassages unto the Emperor and the French King, wherein he did
his best endeavor to join them against his own sovereign the King of
England; and not content therewith, he dealt so busily with his letters amongst
his friends in England, wherein he dehorted them from the Kings obedience, and
all conformity unto reformation, as it turned many of them to great trouble,
and amongst the rest, cost his mother her head. It pleased not God that any of
his platformes should take success: And therefore partly malcontent, and
partly also weary of the pains and continual danger these Embassages forced
him unto, he procured the Pope to make him Legate of Uiterbio, where he
determined to lead the rest of his life quietly; But he was disappointed of
his purpose. The Pope (Paul 3.) summoned a Council at Trent. Cardinal Poole
and one or two other joined with him, must needs be his Uicegerents there. He
for his part was nothing so resolute in matters of religion as men expected he
would. In the question of justification he professed to be on our side, and
persuaded one Morell to be of his opinion, a learned Spaniard that lay in the
same house he did, and that was sent out of Spain of purpose to defend the
Popes quarrel in disputation, wherein he was esteemed excellent. Soon after
his return from the Counsel, it happened the Pope to die. A great faction there
was at that time in the college of Cardinals, some taking part with the
Emperor, and some with the French king: Cardinal Poole was altogether
Imperial. All that side and diverse that were indifferent gave him their voices
for the Papacy, whereunto when they had elected him orderly, he forsooth found
fault with them for their rashness, and persuaded them to take further
deliberation in so great and weighty a matter. Hereof the French party taking
advantage, began to cry out, it was reason regard should be had of many French
Cardinals and other that were absent, and could not possibly repair unto the
(...), (...) had lately (...) as it were in (...), and that it was (...) to
(...) feared if they elected any man that were altogether (...) unto him, it
would be a cause of great sturres and (...). One of their company then rising
up, began to take particular exceptions against Cardinal Poole, charging him
with suspicion of incontinency (whereof he alleged some reasons, though
peradventure (...)) as also with heresy, for that he had reasoned for
justification by faith in the Council of Trent, that he preferred Ant.
Flaminius a known Protestant, and kept company much with him, and other
thought ill of that way, and lastly, that in the time he was Legate of (...) he
had been so slack in (...) of heretics, upon whom he seldom (...) any
punishment, but death upon none: This accuser was the Cardinal Caraffa that
afterward was Pope Paul the fourth, an old acquaintance of Cardinal Pooles
many years, even until such time as that partaking in this faction between
the French and Spanish sundred them. Caraffa thought him self the likeliest of
the French side, and in that respect was the rather induced in this sort to
deface his old friend, so to set up him self. But he was utterly deceived in
his expectation. Cardinal Poole cleared him self of all those suspicions
absolutely, so that the next day (or rather I should say the night after the
next day) the company were more resolute for him then they had been before,
and once more elected him Pope. Cardinal Farnesius the last Popes nephew was
the mightiest of that (...). For so ever all Popes lightly take order, that
some Cardinal of their kin shall strike a great stroke in the election of
their successor, that he may be a means to shield the rest of his friends from
that hard measure which successors are wont to (...) unto the favorites of
their predecessor. This Cardinal Farnesius exceeding joyful that he had
brought the matter to so good (...), came unto Cardinal Poole and would needs
adore him by the name of holyfather kissing his feet, etc. But he would not
suffer him so to do, saying he would not have their election a work of
darkness, that the day was the only time for the orderly dispatch of such
business, and therefore he desired them to (...) the accomplishment of their
choice until the (...). They were feign so to do. But whether it were that
his friends were (...) with this double delay, or that they were induced
otherwise to alter their determination; so it fell out, that the next morning
they chose another, the Cardinal de (...) that named himself Julius 3. He
well knowing that the backwardness of Poole made him Pope, ever after made
very much of him and yielded him all manor of favor. And first, to begin
with, he enforced Cardinal Caraffa to ask him forgiveness before they departed
out of the (...). Cardinal Poole professed to be nothing at all (...) with
loosing that place which he took to be a burden importable, and saying his
only desire was to lead his life in quiet contemplation, craved license to
depart unto a certain (...) in the (...) of (...) replenished with monks of
Saint Benet, of which order he was taken for patron during the time of his
residence in Rome. He was scarcely settled there when news came that king
Edward was dead, and that his sister the Lady Mary had obtained the crown, who
was brought up a great while under the Countess his mother by the especial
choice and direction of Queen (...) her mother. And many are of opinion that
the Queen committed her the rather unto the tuition of the Countess, for that
she wished some (...) between one of her sons the Pooles and the Lady Mary
to strengthen her title to the crown in case the king her husband should die
without issue male, for that (as before I have declared) they were descended
from Goorge Duke of Clarence the next heir male of the house of York. Now
Cardinal Poole knowing the Queen had a special affection unto him for his
learning, his nobility, but above all for his religion (and he was a man
personable enough) longed fore homeward, not doubting a dispensation for his
clergy would soon be obtained of the Pope in this case, and assuring himself
that though he missed of the crown, he should not fail of the myter. He
procured himself therefore to be appointed of the Popes legate and to be
dispatched into England with all speed. The Emperor by this time had (...) to
endeavor a match between his son (...) and Queen Mary. Doubting therefore
least the presence of the Cardinal should disturb his platform, he used many
devises to stop and hinder his passage, till such time as the marriage was
concluded. At last (but a day after the fair) over came this jolly legate,
reconciled the realm of England to the Pope, caused the Archbishop of
Canterbury to be deprived and degraded, seating himself in his See, which
things and many more are discoursed of him at large by Master Fox, and
therefore I pass them over. He was consecrate March 22. 1555. in the gray
Friars church at Greenwich. The Lady day following he received his pal in Bow
church, where he made a dry and frivolous sermon touching the use, profit,
signification, and first institution of the pall. March 31. he was installed by
a proctor one Robert Collins his commissary. While these things were a doing,
Cardinal Caraffa his ancient enemy became Pope. He presently discharged our
Cardinal of his power legantine, and made one Friar Peto first a Cardinal,
then his legate, and bestowed the Bishopric of Salisbury upon him. He
alleged against Cardinal Poole that he was unworthy the honor of the legate
Apostolical that would suffer the Queen to proclaim wars against the
French king; but the matter was, the old quarrels were not yet digested, and
this way he thought to pay him home. The Queen kept Friar Peto out of the
realm by force, until the Pope was reconciled unto Cardinal Poole again.
Two year and almost 8. months this man continued Archb. In ye year 1558. many
old me^ fell into quartaine agues (a disease fatal unto elderly folk.) Amongst
the rest, a quartane had seized upon him, and brought him to a low ebb, at
what time news being brought of Queen Mary's death, struck him quite dead.
For he departed this life even the same day that she did, viz. November 17.
1558. being 58. years of age, and six months. He procured in his life time,
the gift and patronage of 19. benefices from the Queen unto his See, which he
no way else benefited, except by the building of a certain gallery toward the
East at Lambhith, and some few rooms adjoining. He purposed indeed to have
bestowed much cost upon his palace at Canterbury, but was prevented by death.
He was a man of indifferent stature, slender, well colored, somewhat broad
visaged, his eyes gray and cheerful, and his countenance mild. His goods he
left to the disposition of one Aloysius Priolus an Italian, who bestowed them
all to good uses, reserving nothing unto him self, but two prayer books. His
body was conueighed to Canterbury, and entoombed on the North side of a little
chapel that is at the East end of Thomas Beckets chapel.

70. Matthew Parker.
MAtthew Parker was borne at Norwich, August 6. Corpus-Christ College there,
and afterward fellow. His first preferment was the Deanery of Stoke, which he
obtained by the favor of Queen Anne Bulleyn whose Chaplain he was. That
College (though he resisted it what he might) was suppressed in the first
year of King Edward the sixth. After the death of that noble Lady King Henry
her husband took him for his Chapleme, in which place he also served King
Edward his son. By these two Princes he was preferred unto many other good
Ecclesiastical promotions, as a Prebend in Ely, by King Henry the eight, the
Mastership of Corpus christi College (where he was brought up) by the election
of the fellows but commandment of the same king, and lastly the Deanery of
Lincoln, with the prebend of Coldingham given him by king Edward the sixth.
Besides these livings he had also the Parsonage of Landbeach four miles from
Cambridge by the gift of the College whereof he was Master. These livings he
quietly enjoyed till the second year of Queen Mary, at what time for being
married, he was deprived and lived poorly all the time of her reign. That
terrible fire being extinguished that consumed so many zealous and learned men,
and the Archbishopricke left void by the death of Cardinal Poole, this Matthew
Parker then Doctor of Divinity sometimes Deane of Lincoln, and Master of
Corpus-christi College, in Cambridge (as before said) was thought meetest for
that high place and preserment. He was consecrate thereunto, December 17. 1559.
held the same fifteen years, (...) months, and deceased May 17. 1575. being
72. years of age. He founded a Grammar School at Rochdale in Lancashire: Unto
Corpus christi College in Cambridge (where he was brought up) he procured
thirteen schollerships, built the inward Library, and two fair chambers in
the same. Moreover, he gave to the Library of that College a great number of
Books some printed, other written, but very rare, and much to be esteemed for
their value and antiquity. He gave them also three hundred and ten ounces of
plate double guilt, the perpetual patronage of S. Mary Abchurch in London,
land for the maintenance of two fellows above the ordinary number, a leasse
for seventeen years, worth fourteen pounds eight shillings de claro, and one
hundred pounds to mainetaine a fire in the Hall there, from Allhallowentide
till Candlemas. He took order for the preaching of fire Sermons yearly in the
Rogation week, in five several Churches in Norfolk. Unto the City of Norwich
(where he was borne) he gave a Basin and Ewer double guilt weighing one hundred
seventy three ounces, and fifty shillings ye ely reuenew, to be divided among
poor people of the same City. Unto Gunnell and Caius College a pot double
guilt, of fifty six ounces, together with a neast of goblets, and certain
books: To Trinity Hall a Scholars place, a Cup waighing fifty three ounces,
a neast of goblets and books likewise; To the Uniuersity fifty written books
of great value, and fifty printed; And otherwise bestowed much money unto
charitable uses, not necessary particularly to be remembered. Upon the
reparation of his palace at Canterbury (which was now greatly derayed) he
bestowed one thousand four hundred pound. At Lambhith also he repaired and
built much to his great charge. But above any thing I may not forget his great
care of preserving antiquities, unto which his care we are beholding for most
of our ancient histories, that but for him were even upon the point utterly to
perish. He lies buried in the Chapel belonging to his house at Lambhith
under a fair marble stone.

71. Edmund Gryndall.
IN the month of February following Edmund Gryndall (...) Bishop of London,
who preferred him unto the service of king Edward the sixth. In the end of which
kings reign, there was an intent that the said Bishop should have been
removed to Durham, and it was thought that Master Gryndall should succeed him
in London. But the death of that good king disturbed the progress of this
platform, and in steed of the expected honorable advancement forced him to a
voluntary exile in Germany, where he lived all the reign of Queen Mary. She
dying, and our now gracious Princess happily succeeding, he was appointed unto
the government so long before intended, elected thereunto July 26. 1559. and
enjoyed the same about eleven years, viz. until May 20. 1570. at what time he
was removed to York. There he sat almost six years and as before is
mentioned was once more translated to Canterbury. Two years before his death
he became blind, and died at Croydon (where also he was buried) July. 6. 1583.
being 64. years of age, having continued Archbishop seven years and almost a
half. In the place where he was borne he founded a free school, which he
endowed with thirty pound land. To Queens college in Oxford he gave twenty
pound land to maintain a fellow and two scholars to be taken out of his
said school: He gave them also the greatest part of his books, and 87. ounces
of plate besides forty pound debt which he forgave them. To Pembroke Hall in
Cambridge he gave two and twenty pound land for the maintenance of a Greek
lecture, of a fellow and two scholars, to be likewise taken out of his
school. To (...) he also gave some books, and forty ounces of plate. To
Magdalen college in Cambridge he gave five pound land for one fellow to be
taken from his school; To Christ's college there five and forty ounces of
plate: To eight little almeshouses in Croydon fifty pound to be bestowed in
land for their relief; and lastly to the city of Canterbury an hundred pound
to be employed upon a stock to set the poor on work.

72. John Whitegift.
Soon after the death of Edmund Gryndall, John Whitegift Bradford in Penbroke
Hall, and afterward became fellow of Peter house in Cambridge. The year 1567.
he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and being chosen Master of Pembroke Hall,
within the compass of the same year was called to the government of Trinity
college. In the mean time he had been reader of both the divinity lectures,
first the Lady Margarets, and after the Queens. Ten years he continued Master
of Trinity college, in which space he was twice Uicechauncellour, and the
year 1573. by the gift of her Majesty (whose chaplain he was) became Deane
of Lincoln. In the beginning then of the year 1577. he was advanced unto the
Bishopric of Worcester, in September following had the government of the
Principality of Wales committed unto him and held the same two years and a
half, even all the time that Sir Henry Sydney the President lived in Ireland
as Lord Deputy. Six years and almost a half he had been at Worcester when
he was called unto the metropolitical See of Canterbury which he yet holds.
Upon Candlemas day 1585. he was sworn of her Majesty's privy counsel. God
grant him long and happily to enjoy these honorable places to his glory and
the good of his Church.

Amen.
The Archbishopricke of Canterbury is valued in the Queens books at 3093, l.
18. s. 8. d. ob. farthing, and was wont to pay to the Pope 1000. ducats at
every income, besides 5000. for his pall.

The old corporation of Prior and Covent of Christchurch being dissolved; king
Henry the eight made a new, of a Deane and 12. Prebendaries. The names of the
Deanes I have thought not amiss here to set down:

1. Nicolas Wotton, Doctor of Law. 2. Thomas Godwyn, Doctor of Divinity. 1566.
3. Richard Rogers, Bishop of Dover. 1584. 4. Thomas Neuyll, Doctor of Divinity.
1597.

The Bishops of London.
AT what time Christian religion was first publicly received in this Island,
there were established in the same 28. Sees or Cathedral churches; whereof
three were Archbishopricks; York, whose province was Scotland and the North of
England; Caerlegion (now called Caerleon upon Usk) to which the Churches of
Wales were subject; and lastly London that had jurisdiction over the rest of
England. To speak of the Archbishops of London (with whom only we have now to
do) there is not any precise Catalogue or continuate history delivered of them.
Some I find mentioned Sparsim in our histories; their names I will set down,
and the Reader must content him self with them.

1. Thean, It is said he built Saint Peter's church in Cornhill, with the help
of one Cyran chief butler unto king Lucius, and made it his Metropoliticall
See. 2. Eluanus, is named the second Archbishop. He built a Library near unto
the same church and converted many of the Druydes to Christian religion. 3.
Cadar. 4. Obinus. 5. Conan. 6. Paladius. 7. Stephan. 8. Iltut. 9. Theodwyn or
Dedwyn. 10. Thedred. 11. Hillary. 12. Guiteline. 13. Restitutus, he was present
at the Counsel of Arles in France the year 326. under Constantius the son
of Constantine the great, and subscribed vitto the Decrees of the same
Counsel, which he brought over with him: One Decree amongst the rest was, that
if a Deacon at the time of his ordering did protest he intended to mary, it
should be lawful for him so to do. Restitutus himself was married. 14.
Fastidius, Gennadius in his Catalogue illustrium virorum, mentions him by the
name of Fastidius Britanniarum Episcopus, and commends certain works of his.
15. Vodinus, he was slain ann. 436. by the procurement of Hengist first king
of the Saxons, for reprehending king Vortigers unlawful marriage with Rowen
Hengists daughter, his Queen and lawful wife being yet alive.

After the coming in of the Saxons, the succession of Archbishops was still
continued in London for the space of three hundredth years, (but secretly) even
until the time that Saint Gregory sent Augustine hither. I find only one of
them named, viz.

15. (...) that being first Bishop of Gloucester, forsook it and took the
charge of London upon him the year 553.
1. Mellitus.
SAint Augustine having established his Metrapoliticall Mellitus, whom he
consecrated ann. 604. This Mellitus converted unto the faith of Christ Sebert
king of East Saxons, who soon after built the church of Westminster, and
dedicated it to Saint Peter. In his time also Ethelbert king of Kent built the
Cathedral church of Saint Paul, that being often increased by Erkenwald and
other, was burnt at last down to the ground some 500. years after, and built
a new in that stately form it now has by Mauritius Bishop of London, and his
successors. King Ethelbert moreover gave Tillingham and other lands unto this
church. Of Mellitus see more in Canterbury, whether he was translated.

2. Ceadda.
AFter the departure of Mellitus the Church of London Sigebert obtaining the
kingdom of the East Saxons, by the persuasion of Oswy king of Northumberland,
he became a Christian and procured Ceadda a virtuous and Godly priest to be
consecrate Bishop of his country. That charge he attended painfully many
years. At last, building a Monastery in the North country called Lestinghen;
the same was scarcely finished, when the infection of the plague being brought
thither, took away not only this Bishop the founder, but almost all the monks
that were now newly placed in the same. Of this man Beda writes much in his
Eccl. history Lib. 3. cap. 22. and 23. He was buried in the foresaid Monastery
of Lestinghen.

3. Wina.
ABout the time that Ceadda died, it happened Kenwalchus Wina the Bishop of his
country, insomuch as, he forced him to fly unto Wlfher king of Mercia, of
whom (being now destitute of living) he bought for money the Bishopric of
London. See more in Winchester.

4. Erkenwald.
VVIna being dead, Erkenwald the son of Offa king Edelburg his sister the
first Abbess there. He converted unto the faith of Christ Sebba king of the
East Saxons: He bestowed much upon building in his Cathedral church of Saint
Paul, increased much the revenues of the same, and obtained for it of diverse
princes many notable and important privileges. Having sat 11. years he died
about the year of our Lord 685. and after his death was honored for a Saint.
His body was laid in a very sumptuous shryne, which not many years since
stood in the East part of the church above the high altar.

After Erkenwald sat these in order successively.
5. Waldhere, of him Beda makes mention, Hist. eccles. lib. 4. cap. 11. 6.
Ingwald, this man lived in the time of Beda, and died 744. 7. (...). 8. Wighed.
9. Eadbright. 10. Eadgar. 11. Kenwalch. 12. Eadbald. 13. Hecbert or Heathobert.
He died the year 802. 14. Osmund or Oswyn, he lived 833. 15. Ethelnoth. 16.
Ceolbert. 17. Renulf or Ceorolf. 18. Swithulf, he lived the year 851. 19.
Eadstan, lived 860. 20. Wulfsius. 21. Ethelward. 22. Elstan, he died an. 898.
or as Asserius says, an. 900. 23. Theodred, surnamed the Good. His body was
laid in a 24. Wulstan. 25. Brithelm, he died the year 958. 26. Dunstan. See
more of him in Canterbury. 27. Alfstan, he lived 966. and 996. 28. Wulfstan.
29. Albun, he taught the children of king Ethelred, and carried them into
Normandy the year 1013. 30. Alwy. 31. Elfward, before he was Bishop, Abbot of
Eueshain; being Bishop, held still his Abbotship in Commendam: waxing old, he
intended to resign his Bishopric, and returning thither again to spend the
rest of his days there: but the monks refused to receive him, whereupon he
took from them many books and rich ornaments that he had sent thither (yea
some also that other men had bestowed) and gave them unto the Abbey of Kanisey
where he lies buried. He died July 25. ann. 1044. 32. Robert, he was
translated to Canterbury 1050. See more there.
33. William.
BY what means I know not, Spearheafocus Abbot of Robert being translated. But
the king displaced him, would not suffer him to be consecrate, and bestowed the
same upon one William that was a Norman (as his predecessor was) and came into
the realm with Queen Emma his (I mean the Confessors) mother. Unto this man
the city of London acknoledgeth it self greatly beholding, for that king
William the Conqueror by his means and instant suit, granted unto them all
kind of liberties, in as ample manner as they enjoyed them in the time of his
predecessor. In thankfulness hereof, the citizens have caused to be engraven
this Epitaphe upon his grave (which is in the middle of the body of his church.)

Guilielmo viro sapientia and vitae sanctitate claro, qui primum Diuo Edwardo
Regi and Confessori familiaris, nuper in Episcopum Londinensem erectus, nec
multo post apud inuictissimum Principem Guilielmum Angliae Regem eius nominis
primum ob prudentiam fidemque singularem in consilium adhibitus, amplistima
huic vrbi celeberrimae priuilegia ab eodem impetrauit; Senatus populusque
Londinensis been merenti posuit. Sedit Episcopus ann. 20. Decessit an. a
Christo nato 1070.

Haec tibi clare pater posuerunt marmora clues,
Praemia, non meritis aequiparanda tuis.
Namque sibi populus, te Londinensis amicum
Sensit, and huic vrbi non leave praesidium.
Reddita libertas duce te, donataque multis
Te duce, resfuerat publica muneribus.
Diuitias, genus and formam breuis opprimit hora,
Haec tua sed pietas and benefacta manent.
34. Hugh d' Oriuall.
AFter the death of Bishop William, the Conqueror Hugh d' Oriuall a Norman.
Within a short space after his preferment, he fell into a leprosy; for cure
whereof by the counsel of physicians he was gelded. It little auailed him;
that notwithstanding, he continued a leper all his life, and so died January
12. ann. 1085.

35. Mauritius.
MAuritius Chaplain and Chauncellor to the Conqueror, Paul's Church in London.
It happened the year 1086. the whole City of London (in a manner) to be
consumed with fire. The Cathedral church amongst the rest going to wrack;
Maurice the year following (which was the first year of his consecration)
intending to reedifie the same, laid the foundation of so huge a plot, as all
men thought it would never be finished. The same fire destroyed a great Castle
standing in that place where Robert Killwardby Archbishop of Canterbury did
afterward build the Black Friars. The ruins of this castle the K. was
content should be employed upon Paul's Church. He gave also unto the Bishop and
his successors for ever the Castle of Scortford with the Appurtenances.
Notwithstanding these and many other helps, this Bishop doing his utmost
endeavor, for the advancement of this noble work, in twenty years that he
sat, was not able to bring it to any perfection. He deceased, September 26.
1107.

36. Richard Beauveys.
RIchard Beauveys surnamed Rufus by some (for difference

37. Gilbertus Vniuersalis.
A Canon of Lions was then preferred to this See, one Gilbert surnamed
Vniuersalis, vir probus and grandaevus (says Florent. Wigorn:) avery aged, but
a very good man. Other report of him, that he was a very covetous man, and a
very rich man, but a very learned man. It seems he was a man of some note in
those days: Saint Barnard writes diverse Epistles unto him. He died the year
1133. trauayling toward Rome.

38. Robertus de Sigillo.
AFter the death of Bishop Gilbert one (...) Abbot Anselme, was elected Bishop
of London, and had his election confirmed at Rome. But presently such
exceptions were taken against him, as thereupon he was not only stayed from
consecration, but deprived also of his Abbotship. His electors were William the
Deane of (...), Ralfe Langford, and Richard (...) (the same I believe) that
afterward was Bishop. The King who very much mistiked this election (having
made request for some other) amongst other effects of his displeasure, caused
the wives of these Canons (as Bale reports) to be imprisoned, and otherwise
shainefully entreated. True it is, that a little before this time, even until
Anselme was Archbishop, many Clergy men had wives: But he so far forth
restrained them, as if any were married afterward, they were very few, and
durst not in any wise be acknowen of it. By reason of the (...) that were about
this election, the Sea continued void a long time. The year 1140. Mawde the
Empress having taken King Stephen prisoner, came to London, and finding the
Bishopric void, caused one Robert de Sigillo a monk of Reading (or as others
say Archdeacon of London) to be elected and consecrate Bishop. Within a year
or two after, he was taken prisoner at Fullham by (...) de Mandeuill a captain
of king Stephens, who ye may be sure could ill brook any man that the Empress
favored. He sat Bishop about ten years.

39. Richard Beauveys.
THe year 1151. Richard Beauveys Archdeacon of Richard Beauveys became Bishop.
He died ann. 1162.

40. Gilbert Foliot.
GIlbert Foliot was first Abbot of Gloucester (as M. has) but Bale affirms he
was Abbot of Leycester, and not of Gloucester. The year 1149. he was consecrate
Bishop of Hereford, continued in that See almost twelve years, and in 1161.
upon the kings special request, he was translated to London. In all the
stirs between Thomas Becket and the king, he stuck unto the king very
faithfully, and was partaker of all his counsels. Mat. Paris reports a
strange thing of him (believe it if you list) that one night coming from the
king, after long conference concerning the business between the King, and the
Archbishop: as he lay musing of those things in his bed, a terrible and an
unknown voice sounded these words in his ears, O Gilberte (...), dum reuoluis
tot and tot, Deus (...) est Ascarot. Taking it to be the devil, he answered
boldly, Mentiris Demon, Deus (...) est Deus Sabbath. At what time the King
banished certain favorites of the Archbishop, that were Clergy men, he
commanded this Bishop to receive the fruits of their livings into his hand.
For obeying the authority of his Prince herein, the Archbishop excommunicated
him. And presently upon the death of the said Archbishop, the Pope
excommunicated him also, but affirming by oath he was not guilty of the
murder, he was absolved. He died February 18. 1187. It seems he was not
only wise, but (for those times) very learned; He writ diverse books mentioned
by Bale. I find in Polycraticus, a note concerning him, that because it
expresses very well an humor much reigning now a days, I think not
unnecessary to offer unto the Reader even as I find it. Venerabilis Pater, etc.
The reverend father Gilbert Bishop of Hereford, would sometimes discourse unto
me (says he) a certain guise of Cloister men, the experience whereof he found
in him self. When first he entered into the Monastery, hot with the fire newly
kindled in him, he was wont to blame very much the sluggishnesse of his
governors. Being preferred him self, he was still moved with (...) toward his
equals, but spared not his betters. He became first a Prior; taking part then
with Priors, he would complain of Abbots. Afterward being made an Abbot,
favoring his fellow Abbots, he ceased not to reprehend Bishops. And lastly,
when he was a Bishop himself, he began to see how much more easy a thing it
is to find faults then to mend them. I think not (says he) that this Bishop
was to be esteemed envious, but being a wise man he expressed pretily an
affection, as it were naturally engraffed in every man; and was the more
willing to take that kind of fault upon him self, that he might be the better
heard of others. Joan. Sarisb. Polycrat. lib. 7. cap. 24. A very wise and
reverend Bishop now deceased, in my hearing has often acknowledged the like
humor in him self before his preferments, and therefore adjudged it the
rather to be borne withal in other men.

41. Richard Fitz-neale.
NIgellus Bishop of Ely (that was nephew to Roger Richard, for whom he bought
of King Henry the second the Treasurership of England, and paid for the same
400. marks. He held that office almost all the reign of the said king, and
was so good a husband in it, as that at the kings death, his treasure (...)
unto 100000. marks. In the latter end of his reign he found means to
prefer him unto the Bishopric of London, whereunto he was consecrate
December 31. 1189. He bestowed much upon the building of his Church and other
edifices belonging to his See, sat there about nine years, and died September
10. 1198.

42. William de Sancta Maria.
William de Sancta Maria succeeded, a Canon of Richard the first. He was
consecrate, June 22. 1199. This Bishop was one of them that interdicted the
whole realm, and excommunicated king John by the commandment of the Pope.
They all endured five years banishment for their labors, as elsewhere is more
at large declared. He resigned his Bishopric January 26. 1221.

43. Eustachius de Fauconbridge.
EVstachius de Fauconbridge was elected unto the Sea of Thomas Prior of Merton
and Richard of Dunstaple. Their order was, that the Abbey of Westminster should
be exempt from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London, that the church of
Stanes should ever hereafter belong to Westminster, the manor and church of
Sunbery unto the Cathedral church of Paul's. This Eustache had been one of
the kings Justices, Chancellor of the exchequer, Treasurer of England, and
twice Ambassador into France. He was a great benefactor unto his Cathedral
church, in which he lies intoombed in a fair monument of marble standing in
the South wall of the East end of the churchurch. He died October 31. 1228.

44. Rogerus Niger.
ROger (in our histories surnamed Niger) Archdeacon of Eustachius, and
consecrate by loceline Bishop of Bathe June 10. following being Trinity Sunday,
together with Richard Archbishop of Canterbury and Hugh Bishop of Ely. This
Roger (says M. Paris) was a very reverend man, religious, learned, painful
in preaching, eloquent, a great housekeeper, of very gentle and courteous
behavior. Whereunto he might have added that he was also stout and very
courageous. One Rustandus the Popes Nuntio being earnest in a convocation for
setting forward a certain prolling devise to scrape up money for his Master;
he not only withstood him openly, but cried out upon the unreasonable and
shameless covetousness of the court of Rome, and was the only means of
staying the course of that exaction. For revenge hereof not long after they
began to frame an accusation against him at Rome, alleging matters altogether
false and frivolous. It forced him to travel thither, and cost him great
sums of money before he could rid his hands of that brabble. The year 1233.
Walter Mauclerke Bishop of Carlisle taking ship to pass over the seas, was
hindered by some of the kings officers, for that he had no license to depart
the realm. These officers for so doing, he excommunicated, and riding straight
unto the court, certified the king what he had done, and there renewed the same
sentence again. About the same time the king gave commandment for the
apprehending of Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, who having sudden notice thereof
at midnight, got him up and fled into a church in Esser. They to whom the
business was committed, finding him upon his knees before the high altar with
the sacrament in one hand and a cross in the other, carried him away
nevertheless unto the Tower of London. The Bishop taking this to be a great
violence and wrong offered unto holy church, would never leave the king (that
was indeed a Prince religious enough) until he had caused the Earl to be
carried unto the place whence he was taken. It is thought it was a means of
saving the Earls life. For though order was taken he should not escape thence,
yet it gave the kings wrath a time to cool, and himself leisure to make
proof of his innocence: By reason whereof, he was afterward restored to the
kings favor and former places of honor. This Bishop died at his manor of
Bishops hall in the parish of Stupenheath on Michaelmas day 1241. or as some
report (I think untruly) October 3. 1243. and was buried in his own church,
where Matthew Paris says diverse miracles were wrought at his toombe. It
stands in the enter close or North wall of the Presbytery a little above the
quire, where is to be read this Epitaphe:

Ecclesiae quondam Praeful praesentis, in anno
M. bis C. quater X. iacet hic Rogerus humatus.
Huius erat manibus domino locus iste dicatus.
Christ suis precibus veniam des, toll reatus.
45. Fulco Basset.
ABout Christmas following, Fulco Basset Deane of Peter Bishop of Hereford unto
London, misliked greatly their choice. This our Fulco was a gentleman of a
grcat house, but a second brother. After he had entered orders, his elder
brother and the only son of that brother, died within the compass of a
year, leaving the inheritance unto him. Our histories blame him for not being
forward enough in the cause of the Barons, that is for being too true unto his
Prince: Otherwise, they give him the praise of a good man, a discreet and
vigilant pastor. Questionless he was a man stout, and no less courageous then
his predecessor. The year 1255. Rustandus the Popes legate held a connocation
at London, in which when he went about to lay an importable exaction upon the
clergy (and it was known the king was hired to wink at it) this Bishop rose
up and openly professed that he would suffer his head to be chopped off before
he would consent unto so shameful and unreasonable oppression of the church.
Yea when the king stormed at this his resistance, and reviled him, saying, that
neither he nor any of his name was ever true unto him, threatening moreover that
he would find means to plague him for it: In the presence of some that he
knew would tell the king of it, he sticked not to say (a speech I confess not
commendable, but bold and courageous) My Bishopric indeed, my myter and
crosier the king and the Pope may take away from me (though unjustly) but my
helmet and sword I hope they shall not. He died of the plague at London the
year 1258. and was buried in his own church upon Saint Urbans day.

46. Henry de Wingham.
HEnry de Wingham Chauncellor of England, chamberlain Ethelmare of Winchester.
The year following, the like offer being made for London, he never made bones
of it, and was consecrate about Midsommer the same year. A small time he
enjoyed that preferment, being taken away by death July 13. 1261. He lies
intoombed in the South wall near to the monument of Bishop Fauconbridge.

47. Kichard Talbot.
Soon after the death of Henry Wingham, Richard Talbot was elected and
confirmed Bishop of London, whether consecrate or no I can not tell. Certain it
is he died upon Michaelinas day the year following, viz. 1262.

48. Henry de Sandwich.
BEfore the end of that year, Henry de Sandwich was Ottobonus the Popes
legate (as he had well deserved) for taking part with the rebellious Barons
against their Prince. He died September 16. 1273.

49. John de (...).
John de Chishull Deane of Paul's, sometimes Archdeacon

50. Richard de Grauesend.
RIchard de Grauesend Archdeacon of Northhampton,

51. Ralfe de Baldocke.
BY the consent of the whole Chapter, Ralfe Baldocke (Clement. 5.) he was
consecrate at Lions January 30. 1305 by the hands of one Petrus Hispanus a
Cardinal. He was very well learned, and amongst other things, he writ (as Bale
records) an history or Chronicle of England in the Latin tongue. In his life
time he gave two hundred marks toward the building of the new work of the
chapel on the East end of his church, now called the Lady chapel, and in
his will bequeathed much toward the finishing of the same. And here by the way
it shall not be amiss to note, that in digging the foundation of this
building, there were found more then an hundred heads of cattle, as oxen,
kine, etc. which seems to confirm the opinion of those that think the
Temple of Jupiter was situate in that place before the planting of Christian
religion, took away those Idolatrous sacrifices. This Bishop died at Stell
July 24. 1313. and lies buried under a flat marble in the said chapel.

52. Gilbert Segraue.
GIlbert Segraue borne in Leicester shire, and brought up him. He was
consecrate Bishop of London, November 25. 1313. and sat about three years.

53. Richard Newport.
RIchard Newport was consecrate Bishop of London,

54. Stephen Grauesend.
STephen Grauesend was consecrate January 14. following,

55. Richard Byntworth, or Wentworth.
RIchard Byntworth had his election confirmed, May 23.

56. Ralfe Stratford.
RAlfe Stratford was consecrate at Canterbury, March Thomas, and died at
Stupenheath having sat Bishop about the space of fourteen years.

57. Michaell Northbrooke.
MIchaell Northbrooke Doctor of Law, had his election

58. Simon Sudbury.
SImon Sudbury alias Tibald Doctor of Law succeeded He

59. William Courtney.
THe year 1375. at what time Bishop Sudbury was removed William Courtney
Bishop of Hereford was called to London, and afterward succeeded the same man
in Canterbury also, viz. in the end of the year 1381. See more of him in
Canterbury.

60. Robert Braybrooke.
RObert Braybrooke was consecrate January 5. 1381. In

61. Roger Walden.
ONe Thomas Langley was then elected Bishop, October Roger Walden, that for a
time had held the place and authority of Archbishop of Canterbury. Never had
any man better experience of the variable uncertainty of worldly felicity. From
the estate of a very poor man, he was suddenly raised to be Treasurer of
England (having been first Secretary to the king, Deane of York, and
Treasurer of the Town of Calis) and then made Archbishop of Canterbury. That
honor he enioied not past two years, but he was removed from the same, and
forced to lead a private life a great while. At last being once more lift up
into a place of honor, he was not suffered to enjoy the same any long time;
within the compass of a year after he was made Bishop of London, he died and
was buried in the Priory of S. (...) in (...). See more of him in T. Arundell
of Canterbury.

62. Nicholas Bubwith.
IN the beginning of the year 1406. Nicholas Bubwith was

63. Richard Clifford.
THe Pope had bestowed the Bishopric of Bathe (by Richard (...) Archdeacon of
Canterbury, the year 1401. But king Henry the fourth then newly come to the
crown, being very desirous of preferring another man to that place, assured
him, he would never give him possession of his temporalties, yet promised him
his favor in some other matter. Hereupon he was content to let go this hold,
and begin a new suit for Worcester, which in the end of the same year he
easily obtained. There he sat about six years, and October 13. 1407. was
translated to London. The year 1414. he trauayled to the Counsel of
Constance, and preached in Latin before the Emperor, and other estates there
assembled. In that Counsel, the long schism was ended, and Martin the fifth,
chosen the sole Pope. The Counsel thinking it meet that thirty persons should
be added to the Cardinals in this election, this Bishop was one of that number:
In which also, there were that named him unto the Papacy. Himself was the
first that named the Cardinal Columna, who thereupon, the rest consenting, was
immediately elected. This Bishop lies buried near the place where the shrine
of Saint Erkenwald stood toward the South: to wit, hard by the monument of Sir
Christofer Hatton.

64 John Kemp.
AFter him, the year 1422. succeeded John Kemp, first afterward to
Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury and York.

65. William Gray.
William Gray Deane of York, was consecrate

66. Robert Fitzhugh.
RObert Fitzhugh Doctor of Law, and Archdeacon of Northampton, was consecrate
September 16. 1431. This man had been twice Ambassador, once into Germany,
and another time to Rome. The year 1435. he was elected Bishop of Ely, but
died before his intended translation could be perfected, viz. upon S. Maurices
day 1435. and lies buried in the Presbitery, a little above the Bishops See,
under a Marble stone, inlaid with brass.

67. Robert Gilbert.
RObert Gilbert Doctor of Divinity and Deane of York,

68. Thomas Kemp.
THe Pope of his absolute authority bestowed the Bishopric T. Kemp, the
year 1449. He was consecrate at York place (now called White Hall) February
8. 1449. by the hands of his uncle John Kemp then Archbishop of York. This
man sat Bishop almost 40. years. He died March 28. 1489. and was buried in
the upper end of the body of his church between two pillars, where he caused
to be built over his tomb a sumptuous chapel, and erected (as I take it) a
Chauntry in the same. He built Paul's cross in form as now it stands, and
was a benefactor of our Uniuersity of Oxford, the particularity how far
forth I know not.

69. I ohn Marshall.
THe Chapter elected for their Bishop one Richard Hill, John Marshall (by the
Popes appointment no doubt) became Bishop of London the same year, and died
the year 1493. This man (if I be not deceived) was Bishop of Landaff before
his preferment to London.

70. Richard Hill.
MArshall being dead, the forenamed Richard Hill (whether

71. Thomas Savage.
THomas Savage was first Bishop of Rochester, translated

72. William Warham.
William Warham Doctor of Law, became Bishop

73. William Barnes.
IN the beginning of 1505. William Barnes was made Bishop

74. Richard Fitz-Iames.
RIchard Fitz-Iames Doctor of Law, brought up in Merton the year 1496.
translated thence to Chichester 1504. and from Chichester to London 1506. He
died the year 1521. A gentleman of an ancient house, learned and very
virtuous. He was buried between the two pillars next unto the steeple on the
north side of the body of the church, under a marble stone, over which was
built a kind of tomb or chapel of wood, that by the burning of the steeple
was also consumed and quight defaced, June 4. 1561.

75. Cuthbert Tonstall.
CVthbert Tonstall Doctor of Law, Master of the Richard Fitz-Iames in the
Bishopric of London, and was translated to Durham March 25. 1530. See more of
him in Durham.

76. John Stokesley.
John Stokesley was inthronized July 19. 1530. and departed

77. Edmund Boner.
EEmund Boner Doctor of Law and Archdeacon of Leycester, Henry the eight, for
renouncing his authority here in England. Soon after his return, having yet
scarcely entered upon Hereford he was called to London, elected October 20.
1539. and installed April 3. 1540. How butcherly he behaved himself in that
place, I refer you unto the report of Master Fox. He was deprived October 1.
1549. restored by Queen Mary August. 5. 1553. and lastly displaced again by
authority of Parliament May 30. 1559. He died in the Marshalsea September 5.
1569.

78. Nicolas Ridley.
AFter the first displacing of Bishop Boner, Nicholas Bishop of Rochester was
translated to London and installed there April 12. 1550. He was a gentleman of
an ancient house, borne in the Bishopric of Durham, brought up in Pembrooke
Hall in Cambridge (where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity) consecrate Bishop of
Rochester September 25. 1547. removed to London (as before is mentioned, and
lastly died for the constant profession of his faith October 16. 1555. the
history whereof and his whole life ye may read in Master Fox more at large.

79. Edmund Grindall.
BIshop Boner being the second time deprived, Edmund was elected July 26.
following, consecrate December 1. 1559. translated to York May 20. 1570. and
after to Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

80. Edwyn Sands.
EDwyn Sands Bishop of Worcester was confirmed Bishop

81. John Elmer.
John Elmer Doctor of Divinity and Archdeacon of Lincoln

82. Richard Fletcher.
The Sea of Bristow having been void many years, Richard Doctor of Divinity,
Deane of Peterborough, and one of her Majesty's chaplains, was consecrate
thereunto in December 1589. translated thence to Worcester in February 1593.
and in the end of the year 1594. to London. He died suddenly in his house at
London, being (to see to) well, sick and dead in one quarter of an hour, June
15. 1596. and was buried in his own Cathedral church.

83. Richard Bancroft.
RIchard Bancroft Doctor of Divinity was consecrate the

This Bishopric is valued in the Queens books at 1119, l. 8, s. 4, d. and
yielded the Pope from every Bishop at his first entrance 3000. florens.
The Bishops of Winchester.
THE Cathedral Church of Winchester (according to a report that I find) was
first built and erected by King Lucius who abolishing Paganisike, embraced
Christ the first year of his reign being the year of our Lord 180. and
placing monks in the same, allotted for their mainteynance large revenues,
which heretofore had belonged for the most part unto the Flamines, and other
heathen priests. This Church (as the same Author says) was hallowed and
dedicated unto the honor of our Savior. October 29. 189. by Faganus, and
Damianus Bishops. About the space of 100. years the Church of Christ had peace
in this land, viz. until the reign of Dioclesian, who endeavoring to root
out Christian Religion, not only killed the professors of the same, but also
pulled down all Churches, and Temples, any where consecrate unto the exercise
thereof. Amongst the rest, this of Winchester at that time went to wrack, the
buildings thereof being ruinated and made even with the ground, and the monks,
and all the officers belonging unto it, either slain, or enforced to fly for
the present time, and yet afterward to deny Christ. This happened Ann. 289. Not
long after the death of this cruel tyrant, to wit, the year 309. it was
again reedified, and that with such wonderful for wardnesse and zeal, as
within one year and thirty days, both it and all the edifices belonging unto
it (as chambers, and other buildings, for the monks and officers) were quite
finished in very seemly and convenient manner. The 15. day of March following,
it was again hallowed and dedicated unto the honor and memory of Amphibalus
(that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution) by Constans Bish
(as my Author says) of Winchester, at the request of Deadatus Abbot of this
new erected Monastery. 200. years and upward it then continued in the same
state, to wit, until the year 319. at which time Cerdick the first king of
the West Saxons, being a Pagan, converted the Church into the temple of Dagon,
slew and chased away all the monks and ministers of the same. Thus much for the
first foundation of this Church, and the estate of the (...), until the
coming of the Saxons. Now let us proceed unto the discourse of the Bishops,
whose faries and succession after this time had never any notable interruption
or discontinuance.

1. Birnius.
THe Province or kingdom of the Gewisses or West Saxons, containing the West
part of England, was goucrned along time by one Bishop that was called the
Bishop of the West Saxons. This Country after the Saxons invaded the same,
received first the faith of Christ in the time of King Kinigilsus by the
preaching of Byroius the first Bishop, who being a very zealous and devout man,
obtained leave of Honorus the Pope of Rome to adventure himself in preaching
Christ unto Infidels. And his promise was to travail unto the most Savage and
Barbarous people in the furthermost part of this I Will, that amongst them he
might sow the seeds of the Gospel: whereupon he was consecrated Bishop by
Asterius then Bishop of Genoa. But coming thither, and finding the country of
the Gewisses, where he first arrived to be altogether Pagans, and without any
knowledge of Christianity, he determined to go no farther to seek that which
even there he had already met withal. It pleased God so to bless his labors,
that in a short time not only great numbers of the common people, and many of
the nobles, but even Kingilsus the king himself believed in Christ, and took
on them the badge and cognizance of Christianity by Baptism. Oswald the king
of Northumberland was present at what time Kinigilsus received this Sacrament
and was his Godfather, being afterward to become his son by the marriage of
his daughter. These two Kings appointed unto Birnius the City of Dorchester for
his Cathedral See, where spending his time in preaching, and other pastoral
offices (not without great an inestimable profit) he died about the year 650.
15. years after his first coming into this Country, and was buried there in
his own Church.

2. Agilbertus.
IN the mean time it had fallen out that Kinigilsus dying, kenwalchus his
son reigned in his steed: who refusing the offer of the kingdom of heaven
by refusing Christ, lost also soon after his earthly kingdom. He had married
the daughter of Penda king of Mercia or Mid-England, and (upon what occasion I
know not) putting her away, married another. For this cause Penda took arms
against him and forced him out of his kingdom. Then for succor he fled unto
Anna king of Esser, a good man and very religious, in whose court he lived the
space of three years, and there was first brought unto the faith of Christ. By
the help of this good Prince he also was restored to his kingdom again. His
father had pulled down the temple of Dagon, and begun the building of a very
fair church in Winchester, but was taken away by death before he could finish
it, and for maintenance of the ministers of the same had allotted all the
country round about within seven mile of the city. This building Kenwalchus
finished, and not only ratified the foresaid gift of his father, but also
himself bestowed upon the same church the mannours of Downton, Alresford and
Wordiam. Soon after the conversion of Kenwalchus, one Agilbertus (a Frenchman
borne) that had spent a great time in Ireland in preaching the Gospel there,
came into this country ann. 650. and of his own accord took great pains in
instructing the people. The king being given to vnderstaud of his learning and
painfulness, prayed him to accept the pastoral charge of his Country;
whereunto he agreed and continued in the same a long time.

3. Wina.
AT last it came to pass that the King misliking his speech and utterance (as
not being able to deliver his mind, but in broken and very bad English, caused
an other (...) to be ordained one Wina a French man likewise, but one that
could speak very good English,) and dividing his Country into two parts,
allotted the one unto Agilbert who held his Episcopal See as before is said at
Dorchester, And the other unto this same Wini appointing unto him for his See
the City of Winchester. This matter Agilbert taking very grievously, (the
rather for that it was done altogether without either his consent or knowledge)
returned in a great chafe into his own country, where soon after he was made
Bishop of Paris. So Wini or Wina, was the first Bishop of Winchester, of whom
some vainly suppose, the City to have taken his name. He lies entoombed in
the North part of the Presbitery upon the top of a wall, where is to be seen
this inscription, Hic iacent (...) Wini Episcopi. Not long after the departure
of Agilbert, the king, (I know not for what cause) fell into great mislike of
Wina and drove him out of his country, who flying unto Wulfhere king of Mercia
or Mid-England, bought of him for money (as it is said) the Bishopric of
London being the first Simonist that is mentioned in our histories.

4. Elentherius.
THe West Saxons were then a long time without a Bishop. In which mean space
Kenwalchus perceiving all things to go against the hair with him, and nothing
to prosper under his hand, but crosses and mischaunces to come thick one in
the neck of another; began to consider with him self, how that by neglecting
religion, he first lost his kingdom, and no sooner embraced Christ, but he was
restored to his crown again, and therefore persuaded himself, that his
negligence in appointing a Pastor that might look unto the service of God, was
the cause why his worldly affairs had no better success. Hereupon he sent an
Ambassador into France unto Agilbert to excuse the wrong heretofore done unto
him, and with all earnestnes to persuade him to return unto his former charge
there again. This though Agilbert refused to do, alleging that he was bound
by promise not to forsake the place he now held: yet that he might show his
readiness to gratify the king in what he might, he sent over with the
Ambassador a priest named Elentherius his own nephew that might (if so it
pleased him) be ordained Pastor and Bishop of that country, testifying that
(for his own part) he thought him not unworthy of the place. He was honorably
received of the king and his people, and at their request consecrate Bishop by
Theodorus then Archbishop of Canterbury. He continued Bishop seven years.

5. Headda.
AFter Elentherius succeeded Headda a very holy and Beda say true) God approved
his government by the testimony of many miracles.

6. Daniell.
HE dying in the year 704. or (as some deliver) 705. after Ina then king of
the West Saxons to divide the province into two parts: whereof the one he
committed unto a kinsman of his own called Aldelmus, commanding him to make
Sherborne his See, and unto the other was ordained Daniell, who following the
steps of his predecessors, continued at Winchester. This man sat 43. years,
and at last perceiving himself unable to govern by reason of old age, he
resigned his Bishopriche an. 741. and became a monk at Meldune or Malmesbury
where he lies buried.

7. Humfridus.
HVmfridus then governed this See for the space of eight years, and died an.
756.

8. Kinehardus.
AFter him came Kinehardus of whom I find nothing

9. Hathelardus.
ANd after him Athelardus or Hathelardus Abbot of Meldune, who the year 794.
was translated to the Metropoliticall See of Canterbury. See more in Canterbury.

Then these:
10. Egbaldus. 11. Dudda. 12. Kineberthus. 13. (...). 14. Wightheinus. 15.
Herefridus slain of the Danes in battle, ann. 834. 16. Edmundus.
ANd Helmstanus of whom likewise little or nothing is delivered, but that he
lies buried upon the North wall of the presbytery together with one of his
successors Kenulphus, as these verses there written do show.

Pontifices haec capsa duos tenet incineratos,
Primus Helstanus huic successorque Kenulphus.
ABout this time many suppose Athelwulf or Athulf (that was king of the West
Saxons twenty years) to have been first Bishop of Winchester by the space of
seven years. Others report that he was a Cardinal of Rome also. Neither of
these can well be true. Certain it is, that being in orders, viz. a Subdeacon,
by the dispensation of Pope Leo he was taken out of the monastery of Winchester
to be king: and that is all I find of this matter worthy credit.

18. Swithunus.
AFter him succeeded Swithunus, the opinion of whose holiness has procured him
the reputation of a Saint. How miraculously he made whole a basket of eggs
that were all broken, and some other things scarce worth the rehearsal: who
so list may read them in Matthew Westminster in his report of the year 862. at
what time (as he writes) this Bishop died, and (according to his own
appointment) was buried in the Churchyard. Some (I know not how truly) make
him Chauncellor of England. Whatsoever his holiness was, his learning
questionless was great; in respect whereof Egbert king of the West Saxons
committed unto his gonernment that same Ethelwolfe his yoonger son that of a
Subdeacon in the church of Winchester, was afterward made king, as before is
declared.

19. Adferthus.
ADferthus succeeded him in this Bishopric, a man (says Florilegus)
sufficiently learned, and that a while discreetly and wisely governed this See.

20. Dumbertus.
DVmbertus the successor of Adferthus died in the year 879. and left his
Bishopric unto Denewulsus.

21. Denewulsus.
THis Denewulsus (as the fame goes) was sometimes Alfred that famous king of
the West Saxons to be so near followed of the Danes that sought nothing more
than his life, as being abandoned of all his followers. He knew no better or
more likely course for his safety then, (dissembling his estate) to deliver
himself for a time into the service of this hogheard, dwelling in a place (at
that time) almost inaccessible and so of very little or no resort. So long he
continued there, as his Master and Dame were almost weary of his service,
wherein he was not so ready as a man should that had had education accordingly.
Of her it is particularly delivered, that when the King let certain Cakes
burn that she had set him to toast, she reprehended him sharply as an
unprofitable servant in these words.

Vere quos cernis panes girare moraris,
Cum nimium gaudes hos manducare calentes.
These cakes that now to toast thou make no have,
When they are ready, thou will eat too fast.
At last it sell out, that the kings friends gathering themselves together, he
joined himself unto them, and his subjects (that now a great while thought
him dead) resorted unto him in so great numbers, as setting upon the Danes, he
overthrew them, and in a short time not only brought them under his obedience,
but also reduced in a manner the whole Realm of England into one Monarchy.
Having thus recovered the peaceable possession of his crown, he was not
unmindful of his old Master, in whom perceiving an excellent sharpness of
wit, he caused him (though it were now late being a man grown) to study, and
having obtained some competency of learning, he preferred him to the
Bishopric of Winchester. Moreover that he might show himself thankful unto
God as well as man, in the place where this hogheard dwelt, he builte a stately
Monastery, the walls whereof are yet partly standing.

22. Athelmus.
OF Athelmus that succeeded, this only is recorded, that the year 888. he
traueyled to Rome, to carry thither the alms of king Alfred. I find not mention
of this man any where but in Matthew. Westminster.

Bertulsus.
HE also reports that one Bertulsus Bishop of Winchester, ann. 897. was
appointed a Guardian of the realm (amongst many others) by king Alfred to
defend it against the Danes. Elsewhere I find him not mentioned.

23. Frithstane.
Certain it is, that in the year 905. one Frithstane was Plegmund Archbishop
of Canterbury at the commandment of king Edmund the elder, the occasion
whereof is elsewhere set down. He was a man highly esteemed of for his
learning, but much morefor his great virtue and holinosse. He sat a long time,
and at last resigned, procuring one Brinstan to be his successor, ann. 931. the
next year after he died: viz. 932.

24. Brinstan.
Brinstan (as is said) became Bishop, ann. 931. and died three years after,
viz. 934.

25. Elphegus Calvus.
HE died in the year 946. Of these three Bishops, diverse miracles are reported
in histories, which need not to be rehearsed.

26. Elfsinus, alias Alfsins.
HE sat till the years 958. and then by bribery, and great sums of money,
procured himself to be (...) to the Sea of Canterbury, of which preferment he
had (...) joy. See Cant.

27. Brithelmus.
He sat about five years. For ann. 963. he died.

27. Ethelwald.
EThelwald Abbot of Abindon continued Bishop nineteen Brinstan his predecessor
appeared unto him, challenging the honor of a Saint, etc. See Matthew.
Westminster in ann. 965. he was a great patron of monks, and no less enemy
unto married priests. At his first coming (...) expelled them out of the old
Monastery to place monks. In the year 867. the Danes had slain all the monks
they could find in Winchester. From which time, secular priests inhabited the
same (being authorized by the king so to do) till the year 971. a company of
monks were brought from Abingdon (of the Bishops old acquaintance it is like)
to shoulder them out of the doors. Not contented thus to have replenished his
own Church with monks, having bought the Isle of Ely, he played the like rex
in that Church (not yet Cathedral) turning a long eight honest Priests into
the world, with their wives and children, to put in monks. And then at
Thorney, he built new or at leastwise repaired an old Monastery that had layen
waste many years. I may not let pass one commendable action of this bishop,
that in time of a great dearth brake all the plats belonging to his Church, and
gave it to the poor; saying, that the Church might in good time hereafter
again be provided of ornaments necessary, but the poor perished for want of
food, could not be recovered.

29. Elphegus.
ELphegus Abbot of Bathe succeeded him, an honest and

30. Kenulphus, alias Elsius.
THis man again is infamous for simony, and aspiring Elsius for Canterbury to
make the old saying true, ill gotten goods seldom prosper. Kenulphus died ann.
1008. And lies buried in his own Church, as before is mentioned.

31. Brithwold.
BRithwold (whom Matthew. Westminster. seems to call Elthelwold) was Bishop after
Kenulphus. It is written of him, that one night being late at his prayers, he
chanced to think of the low ebb of the blood royal of England, which now
was almost all consumed and brought to nothing. In the midst of this
cogitation falling a sleep, it seemed unto him he saw Saint Peter crowning
young Prince Edward, that lived in exile at that time in Normandy, and
furthermore, to show how he should reign 24. years, and die at the last
without issue. This Bishop then (as he thought) asked him who should reign
next, whereunto this answer was made. The Kingdom of England is Gods
Kingdom, and he shall provide a King for it. This dream reported by very
Ancient writers and falling out just according to the prediction, may be an
example unto us, not altogether to neglect and despise the admonition of
dreams, which often fall out strangely. This Bishop whether Brithwold or
Ethelwold died the year 1015.

32. Elsinus, or Eadsinus.
ELsinus or Ealsinus otherwise called Eadsinus, was first Chaplain unto King
Harald, and by him preferred to the Bishopric of Winchester, from whence the
year 1038. he was translated to Canterbury, see more of him in Cant.

33. Alwynus.
HE was of very great authority with Emma the kings mother, that favored him
so much, as many suspected them for living ill together. Robert the Archbishop
of Canterbury acquainted the king with this rumor. Whereupon the king presently
imprisoned Alwyn and dealt little better with his mother, with whom also he was
otherwise offended for allowing him so scantly in time of his minority. She
seemed to purge her self by miracle, offering to walk upon nine plow shares
red hot to prove her innocence, which she is said to have performed, and so
was restored to the favor of her son again. Alwyn also was set at liberty;
and Robert the Archbishop their accuser (whether for shame or fear I cannot
tell) was glad to get him out of the realm. What else is to be delivered of
this Bishop, this his Epitaphe contains.

Hic iacet Alwyni corpus qui munera nobis,
Contulit egregia, (...) Christ rogamus.
Obijt anno 1047.
He lies entoombed upon the North wall of the Presbytery in Winchester, with
(...) of his predecessors before mentioned. See more of him in Robert
Archbishop of Canter bury.

34. Stigandus.
HE was chaplain unto Edward the Confessor, and by Grinketell, that by money
found means to cast out Stigand and placed himself. He could not keep his
hold long: For Stigand quietly recovered it again, and held it till that the
year 1047. he was translated to Winchester: from whence also he was removed
to Canterbury in the year 1052. But whether he (...) his title to Canterbury,
Robert the former Archbishop being yet alive, or whether insatiable covetousness
provoked him thereunto, I can not tell; he retained still Winchester,
notwithstanding his preferment to Canterbury, which was the cause of his
undoing at last. For the Conqueror who came into this realm while he was
Archbishop, being desirous to place his own country men in all rooms of
special authority; and besides having a private grudge at Stigand for forcing
him to yield Kentish men their ancient liberties (whereof see more in
Canterbury) procured him to be deprived of both his Bishoprics upon this
point, that he had contrary to the law held them both together. He lies
intoombed at Winchester with Wyni the first Bishop, enclosed (as it seems to
me) with him in the same coffin: upon the North side thereof is written:

Hiciacet Stigandus Archiepiscopus.
He was deprived an. 1069. and died a prisoner in the castle of Winchester
soon after.

35. Walkelyn.
Soon after the deprivation of Stigand, Walkelyn a

36. William Giffard.
AT this time lay Princes every where took upon them Gregory the seventh first
withstood Henry the Emperor in this case, and made him at last glad to yield
unto canonical elections. King Henry the first taking unto himself the like
authority, placed diverse of his chaplains in Bishoprics (without election)
commanding the Archbishop to consecrate them. Amongst diverse other he appointed
this William Giffard Bishop of Winchester, and required Anselme the Archbishop
to consecrate him. Anselme utterly denied to afford consecration either unto
him or any other in the like case. The king sent then unto Girard Archbishop of
York whom he found nothing strange. But Giffard (says Matthew Westminster)
timens rigorem Sancti Anselm, spernit consecrationem eius, stood so much in awe
of Saint Anselme as he durst not but reject the offer of the others
consecration. The king angry hitherto with the Archbishop only, was now much
more incensed against this Giffard, and in great displeasure banished him the
realm. In the end, the king and the Archbishop grew to this agreement, that
the gifts of the king already passed should be ratified, and his clerks
nominated to Bishoprics, have consecration upon promise, that hereafter he
should not disturb canonical elections, and utterly renounce his pretended
privilege. So after much adoo he was consecrate together with diverse other,
an. 1107. He sat 21. years, and dying January 25. 1128. was buried at
Winchester in his own church: howbeit I see no memorial of him there at all.

37. Henry de Bloys.
THis man was brother unto king Stephen, first Abbot Bale say true) and amongst
the rest one book extant containing an history of the finding of king Arthurs
bones in the abbey of Glastonbury, at what time himself was Abbot, and a
special dooer in that action. If in all the stures and contentions betwixt his
brother and Maud the Empress concerning the kingdom, he stuck close unto his
brother, it is no great marvel. Yet true it is, that his brother being taken
prisoner by the Empress ann. 1141. he accursed and excommunicate all those
that stood against her, whom no man doubted to be the true inheretrice of the
crown. By his means notwithstanding, his brother recocouered quickly his
liberty and kingdom. In the mean time the Empress being jealous of the
Bishop, came suddenly to Winchester; and the Bishop doubting her coming to be
to no other end but to surprise him, went out at one gate as she entered at
another. Within a few days having gotten force about him, he returned to
Winchester in an unhappy hour. For (whether by his direction or no, it is not
certain; but by his company out of all question) the city was fired, the
greatest part thereof being burnt down to the ground, together with the
Nunnery, the Monastery of Saint Grimbald, and more then 20. other Churches,
(some say 40.) This happened upon the 2. day of August 1141. Soon after, his men
burnt and spoiled the Nunnery of Warwell, and himself returning to Winch.
took off from the cross that was burnt in the new Monastery 500. l. of silver
and 30. mark of gold, three crowns with so many seats of fine Arabike gold
set with precious stones. All this he put in his own purse. Now to remember
his good deeds also, you shall understand that he founded that worthy
Hospital of Saint Cross near Winchester: In which place some thing had been
built long before to some such good use. But it was destroyed by the Danes, and
quite ruinated, til this Bishop reedified it, or rather laid new foundations
in the same place, ann. 1132. and endowed it with the reuenew it now has. He
also built the castle of Farnham, destroyed afterward by king Henry the 3. but
reedified by the Bishops of Winch. He was a man as of great blood, so of a
great and high mind. He contended often with the Archbishop of Canterbury for
superiority, under color that he was the Popes legate a latere, and (as some
deliver) a Cardinal. Matthew Westminster. reports that he obtained of Pope Lucius
the title of an Archbishop, receiving from him a pall and authority over seven
churches; But what or which they were I find not. In the 47. year of his
consecration, he fell sick dangerously: whereof the king, Henry the 2.
hearing, came to visit him: But he was so far from yielding the king thanks
for this great grace, as he gave him no looks but frowning, nor speeches but
very sharp and cursed: reprehending him with very bitter words as the causer of
Thomas Beckets death. Yet such was the great meekness of this prince, as he
not only took very patiently this reproof, but long after thought much of
the same. And surely no great marvel: The memory of a dying man's words abides
long: How much more of a Bishop, a grave, wise, and ancient prelate. He
departed this life August 6. 1171. where he was buried I know not.

38. Richard Tocline alias More.
AFter the death of the former Bishop, the Sea stood void Richard Tocline
Archdeacon of Poitiers, by some called More, by other Richard de Iuelcester: He
was consecrate at Lambhith the year following, viz. 1174. together with three
other Bishops, Geffery of Ely, Robert of Herford, and John of Chichester. He
died December 22. 1187. or as his Epitaph has 1189. He lies entombed in the
north wall of the Presbytery, just under Wina, where is engraven this that
follows:

Obijt anno. Dom. 1189.
Presulis egregij pausant hic membra Ricardi
Tocline, cui summi gaudio sunto poli.
39. Godfridus de Lucy.
HE was son unto Richard Lucy chief Justice of England, Richard the first
the manors of Wergraue and Menes, which in times past had belonged unto his
See of Winchester, but (I know not how) had been alienated from the same.
Moreover, he became a great benefactor unto the Priory of Westwood in Kent
founded by his father.

40. Peter de la Roche.
THis man borne in Poytiers being a knight was consecrate John first, and Henry
the third after, as none greater in those times. He with two other Bishops,
viz. Philip his countreyman of Durham, and John Gray of Norwich, animated king
John to withstand the Popes excommunication: but they were all feign to cry
peccaui at last. The year 1214. king John made him chief Justice of England:
the nobles of the realm grudging very much that a stranger borne should rule
over them. After the death of king John, king Henry being a child, the realm
was long governed almost altogether by this Bishop. For William Earl Marshall
dying, he was chosen in his room Protector of the king and realm: And
afterward the king being grown to years of discretion, relied altogether
upon his counsel. He had a nephew (or as some say a son) named Peter d'
Orinall Treasurer of England, in marvelous great favor also with king Henry.
Yet as court favors are variable; so were they often disgraced and often
restored again to the height of worldly happiness, I mean the Princes great
and entire favor. The year 1226 he took his voyage to the Holy land, and
being absent five years, at his return was received with (...) and all signs
of great joy. He died June 9. 1238. at Faruham, when he had sat Bishop the
space of 24. years, and was buried (according to his own appointment) very
meanly and even obscurely in his own church. In his death (says M. Paris)
the counsel of England received a great wound. What good soever happened unto
the church, either by peace or war in the Holy land at the coming of the
Emperor Frederick, it is specially to be ascribed unto the wisdom of this
Bishop. Again (says he) when as discord between the Pope and the Emperor
threatened the destruction of the whole church; he was the special means of
compounding a peace between them. Now of the religious houses he built, and
being built enriched with revenues for their maintenance; These be the names.
Hales of the order of Premonstratenses, Tickford of the same order, Saleburne
of the order of Saint Augustine, viz. Canons regular, and a goodly hospital at
Portsmouth. Again he removed the Church of S. Thomas the Martyr, in the holy
land from a very unfit place, unto a more convenient, and reformed the statues
of the company belonging to the Church, causing the Patriark of Jerusalem to
take order, that whereas they were heretofore mere lay men, now they should be
under the Templers and of their society. And lastly, he bestowed great cost in
fortifying and repayring the Town of Joppa, a notable succor and refuge of
the Christians in those parts. He made a worthy and memorable will, giving unto
every of the foresaid places a huge sum of money: for the least that he gave
was unto the house of S. Thomas of Acon, unto which he beaqueathed 500. marks.
All this notwithstanding, he left his Bishopric very rich, his houses
furnished, and his grounds ready Stocked for his successor. Thus far M. Paris.

41. William de Raley.
The Sea being thus void by the death of Peter derupibus, Henry the 3. dealt
very earnestly with the monks of Winchester to choose in his place the Bishop
elect of Ualentia, the Queens uncle. But they were agreed upon W. de Raley,
Bishop of Norwich, and took exceptions against the elect of Ualentia, calling
him virum sanguinum. When the king heard of their intent, he was exceeding
angry and made great havoc of the Bishops temporalties, swearing, he would
have his will at last, or they should never have Bishop. The monks then seeing
him so obstinately set against the Bishop of Norwich, determined to alter their
purpose, and were content to choose Ralfe Neuill Bishop of Chichester, the
kings Chauncellor: wherein they were so far from contenting him, as he was
much more incensed against them then before; and not against them only, but
the new elect also; from whom immediately, he took the great seal and gave it
to another. As for the election, not without great charges, he caused the same
to be (...) and made void at Rome. Much adoo there was, for the space of five
or six years about this matter. At last the monks seeing no end, and being
resolved against the Ualentine; they proceeded to election again, and chose
according to their first determination, the Bishop of Norwich. This election
was suddenly made and quickly confirmed at Rome. Yet the king ceased not to
spurn at the same, commanding the Mayor of Winchester to forbid the new
Bishop entrance, which he did, and was by him excommunicate for his labor, and
the whole City interdicted. In the mean time the Bishop fealt the burden of
the Kings displeasure so heavy upon him in England, as he thought good to fly
the realm. He got him into France, and was honorably received of the king
there. At last, by the intercession of Boniface the Archbishop, and the Popes
earnest letters unto the King and the Queen, he was restored to the Kings
favor and obtained license to return. For recompense of this benefit and his
fatherly care, the Bishop (says Matthew. Westminster.) in thankfulness bestowed upon
the Pope 6000. marks, which he in good nature took every penny, without
disdainefull return of one denier. The payment of this money, and the charges
of his trouble stuck so close unto him, as though he lived very privately, in
all his life long, he was never able to recover himself out of debt. He died
about the twentieth day of September, 1249. at Turon, whither he had withdrawn
himself with a very small train almost a year before. It is recorded of him,
that being near death, he had the Sacrament brought unto him. And perceiving
the Priest to enter his chamber with it, he cried out, stay good friend, let
the Lord come no nearer unto me, it is more fit that I be drawn unto him as a
traitor, that in many things have been a traitor unto him. His servants
therefore by his commandment drew him out of his bed unto the place where the
Priest was, and there with tears he received the Sacrament, and spending much
time in prayer, afterward, he so ended his life, when he had been Bishop about
the space of six years: for he was translated, ann. 1243. so that the Sea was
void five years.

42. Ethelmarus.
THe King being certified of his death, sent immediately two of his Chaplains
to Winchester, to persuade the monks to elect Ethelmarus the son of Hugh
Earl of March, and Isabell the Queen his mother, so that he was half brother
unto the king, a man (says M. Paris) in respect of his orders, years, and
learning, utterly insufficient. By that time they had labored the matter the
space of a fortnight, the king himself came unto Winchester, and in the
Chapter house made a most earnest request in the behalf of his brother. The
monks too well remembering what great trouble and sorrow they had endured for
denying the kings last request, some of them beaten and sore wounded, many
tormented with hunger, and laden with chains, in long imprisonment, besides
continual charges, of suits and travail, and knowing well they should have no
assistance at Rome, so long as the Kings purse was better then theirs: they
resolved (though they knew the man most unfit) to gratify the King, and so no
man daring to say no, with one consent he was elected. He had at that time
other spiritual living equivalent in revenue to the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury, which that he might keep and yet receive all the profits of the
Bishopric of Winchester; he determined not to be consecrate at all, but to
hold it by his election, and so did indeed, for the space of 9. years. In the
mean time, he and the rest of his countrymen (with whom the realm was much
pestered) were grown very odious as well with the nobility, as the commons,
not only for that their infinite wealth and immoderate preferment, was much
envied, but much more for their pride, and insolency which a man can hardly
bear in his own friend, much less in an alien and stranger, whom men
naturally dislike much sooner then their own Countrymen. Amongst the rest,
this (...) bare himself so bold upon the King his brother, as he gave
commandment to his servants to force a clergy man out of the possession of a
benefice, whereunto he pretended some right; and if he withstood them, to draw
him out of his possession in contumelious manner. The poor man loath to loose
his living, defended it so long, til by my Lord Electes men he was slain
himself, and his people so soar beaten, as within few days one or two of
them died. This fact and other like brought all the Pictauians into such
hatred, as the realm (...) ready to rise against them: which perceiving, to
avoid the tempest growing toward them, the year 1268. they all (...) the
realm. Ethelmar sent over for his treasure whereof he had laid up great
store: but much of it came short being intercepted at Dover, and taken away
from those to whom it was committed. The year after the departure of the
Pictauians, viz. 1259. the monks of Winchester thought good to proceed to the
election of a new Bishop. And knowing it was to no purpose to make choice of
any, but such as the king favored, elected Henry de Wingham then Chauncellor
of England. But he, although (he doubted not of the kings favor) in regard
that another being elected it might prove litigious, refused to consent unto
their election, alleging his own vnwoorthines for want of learning. The king
was content to allow of him condicionally that some stay might be made for a
time to see whether his brother Ethelmar might attain consecration of the
Pope. While the king stood upon these uncertain terms, Henry de Wengham
became Bishop of London the year 1259 and 2. years; after, viz. 1261.
Ethelmar died. He took order his heart should be brought to Winchester where it
was intoombed in the South wall of the presbytery as this Elogium witnesses.

Obijt anno Dom. 1261.
Corpus (...), (...) cor nunc tenet istud
(...), (...) morte (...).
43. John Gernsey.
John Gernsey or John of Oxford (for so also I find him called) Iordanus the
Popes Chauncellor. Presently upon his return he was suspended by Ottobonus the
Popes legate for taking part against the king in the Barons wars, he enjoyed a
small time his honor so dearly bought: the year 1268. he died in Italy and
was buried there at Uiterbium.

44. Nicholas de Ely.
RIchard Moore a Doctor of Divinity was then chosen Peckham at that time
Archbishop of Canterbury took exception against him for holding of many
benefices. And said, that a man of such conscience as were fit for that place,
would rather content himself with less living, then load himself with the
cure of so many souls. He being refused, Nicholas de Ely having been scarcely
one year Bishop of Worcester, was called to this church. He sat 12. years,
and died an. 1290. his body was buried at Wauerly, his heart lies entoombed in
the South wall of the Presbytery with this inscription:

Intus est cor Nicholai Episcop. cuius corpus est apud Wauerley.
One of his name was first Chauncellor, then treasurer of England about the
year 1260. I assure my self it was he.

45. John de Pontissara.
ABout this time the Pope began to take upon him the John de Pontissara was
placed by him upon his absolute authority. He was a great enemy unto the monks
of his church, whose living he much diminished to increase his own. He died
the year 1304. having sat near 24. years, and lies buried in the North
wall of the Presbytery. His toombe has this Epitaphe engraven:

Defuncti corpus, tumulus tenet iste Ioannis.
Pountes, Wintoniae presulis eximij.
Obijt anno Dom. 1304.
46. Henry Woodloke.
HEnry Woodloke succeeded him. Robert Winchelsey Edward the first, who charged
him with treason, this Bishop became an intercessor for him, and in the request
he made to the king in his behalf chanced to call him his good Lord: which
the king took so haynously, as by and by he caused all the Bishops goods to be
confiscate and renounced all protection of him. How he recovered the kings
favor again, I find not. Not long after the said king dying, by the
permission of the foresaid Archbishop he crowned king Edward the second January
22. 1307. and died an. 1316. the 13. year of his consecration.

47. John Sendall.
Walsingham called this man John Kendall, he was

48. Reginaldus Asserius.
THe Pope then thrust in Reginald de Asser his legate, Walter the Archbishop
refusing to afford it unto him) sat little above two years, and died an. 1323.

49. John de Stratford.
John de Stratford Doctor of Law succeeded. When he had

50. Adam Tarlton, alias de Orlton.
ADam de Arlton Doctor of law borne in Hereford, was Isabel the Queen against
her husband king Edward the second. She with her sons and army being at
Oxford, this good Bishop stepped up into the pulpit, and there taking for his
text these words (My head grieueth me) he made a long discourse to prove that
an evil head, not otherwise to be cured, must be taken away. Having gotten the
king into their power, he fearing least if the king at any time recovered his
liberty and crown again, they might receive condign punishment, counseled
the Queen to make him away. Whereunto she being as ready and willing as he to
have it done, they writ certain letters unto the keepers of the old king,
signifieng in covert terms what they desired. They either not perfectly
understanding their meaning, or desirous to have somewhat to show for their
discharge, pray them in express words to declare unto them whether they would
have them put the king to death or no. To which question this subtle fox
framed this answer, Edwardum occidere nolite timere, bonum est. If you set the
point between nolite and timere it forbids: if between timere and bonum it
exhorts them to the committing of the fact: whereupon the king was made away,
and most pitifully murdered by thrusting a hot spit into his fundament. And
who then so earnest a persecutor of the murderers as this Bishop, that when
diverse of his letters were showed against him, eluded and avoided them by
sophistical interpretation, and utterly denied that he was any way consenting
to that heinous fact. How cleanely he excused himself I know (...): But sure I
am he was so far from receiving punishment, as within two months after, viz.
in November 1327. he was preferred unto the Bishopric of Worcester six
years after that he was translated thence to winchester by the Pope December
1. 1333. at the request of the French king: which king Edward taking in very
ill part, for that the French king and he were enemies, detained from (...) his
temporalties till that in a parliament at the suit of the whole clergy, he was
content to yield them unto him. He sat Bishop of Winchester 11. years 7.
months and 17. days: and being a long time blind before his death, departed
this life July 18. 1345.

51. William Edendon.
THe same year William Edendon was consecrate Bishop, Edward the third, being
treasurer of England, he caused groats and half groats, to be coined the year
1350. (coin not seen in England before) but they wanted some thing of the
just sterling weight, which was the cause that the prices of all things rose
then very much. And where as many other times the like practice has been
used, in so much that five shillings has now scarce so much silver in it, as
five groats had 300. years since, no marvel if things be sold for treble the
price that they were 300. year ago. Hereof also it comes to pass, that the
Prince and Nobility cannot possible maintain their estates, with their
ancient rents and revenues, which bring in, though the wonted tale and
number, yet not the due weight and quantity of metal. But to return to
William Edendon, he was also Chauncellor of England, and once elect Archbishop
of Canterbury, but refused to accept it. He founded a Monastery at Edendon
(where he was borne) for a kind of religious men called Bon-hommes: he died
ann. 1366. when he had been Bishop almost one and twenty years, and lies in
a very fair toombe of Alabaster on the South side of the entrance into the
quier, whereon is engraven this rude Epitaphe.

Edindon natus, Willmus hic est tumulatus,
Praesul praegratus in Wintonia Cathedratus.
Qui pertransitis eius memorare velitis,
(...) and mitis, ausit cum mill peritis.
Peruigil anglorum fuit adiutor populorum,
(...) egenorum pater and protector eorum.
M. C. tribus (...) post LXV. sit I. punctum.
His successor William Wickham sewed his Executors for dilapidations, and
recovered of them 1662. l. 10. s. besides 1556. head of neat, 3876. weathers,
4717. ewes, 3521. lambs, and 127. swyne, all which stock it seems belonged
unto the Bishopric of Winchester at that time.

52. William Wickham.
AT the Kings request, William Wickham, his Chaplain, principal Secretary,
and keeper of the privy seal, soon after Edendons death was both elected by
the Prior and covent of Winchester, and allowed of by the Pope who now took
upon him to have an interest in the disposition of all our Bishoprics, as
elsewhere I have more at large discoursed. This man was the son of one John
Perot and Sibill his wife, for whose place of burial, he erected a Chapel
afterward at Tichfield near the town of Wickham in Hampshire. In that town
he was borne the year of our Lord 1324. and (according to the manner of most
clergy men in those times) of that town the place of his birth took his
surname. I find also recorded, that he was wont to be called sometimes by the
name of Long, and that (as it is probably supposed) for no other cause, but in
regard of his stature, which they say was very tall. He was brought up first at
Winchester, and then at Oxford, at the charge of a Gentleman called Nicholas
Vnedall or Woodall. In these places (having first passed the rudiments of
Grammar) he studied Logic, Geometry, Arithmetique, and the French tongue, but
principally the Civil and Canon laws. In all which as he profited exceedingly
for the time he spent in them; so there is no doubt he would have proved so
excellent as men are wont that do long and painefully employ good wits to
such purposes, had he not been even as it were violently drawn from them when
his abode and continuance in the Uniuersity might seem most requisite. His
Patron and exhibitioner being appointed Constable of Winchester Castle, (an
office of great importance in those days) he would employ this his young
scholar as his clarke or secretary, and so took him from the Uniuersity when
he had as yet continued there not fully six years. How long he lived so under
him I find not: But certain it is, his service was very well liked of him:
For besides his personage (which was tall and exceeding comely) not to speak
any thing of his learning (whereof his Master could make no great use) he writ
very fair, penned excellently, and spoke no man better. By reason whereof, he
was often employed in writing letters, yea and sometimes in messages also to
the Court, not only by his master, but by the Bishop, that a while used to
borrow him of his master, and at the last drew him to his service. It happened
then after a while, king Edward the third to come to Winchester, who taking
special note of the behavior and other good parts of this young man, would
needs have him to serve him. He employed him much at the first, in surueighing
his buildings at Dover, Duynborough, Henly, Windsor, Yestanstead, and
elsewhere. In which and all other businesses committed to him, he behaved
himself so well, as he soon grew into great favor and high estimation with
the king, and quickly reaped those fruits that Princes favors are wont to
yield, many rich and honorable preferments. It shall not be amiss to remember,
how that having obtained diverse goodly promotions which he acknowledged to have
received rather as rewards of service, then in regard of any extraordinary
desert otherwise, he caused to be engraven in Winchester Tower at Windsor these
words, (This made Wickham.) Whereof when some complained to the King as a thing
derogating from his honor, that another should seem to bear the charge of his
buildings, and the king in great displeasure reprehended him for it: He
answered, that his meaning was not to ascribe the honor of that building to
himself, but his own honor of preferments unto that building; Not importing
that Wickham made the Tower, but that the Tower was the means of making
Wickham, and raising him from base estate, unto those great places of honor he
then enjoyed. He was first Parson of Saint Martins in London, then Deane of
Saint Martin le graund, Archdeacon successively of Lincoln, Northampton, and
Buckingham, all of the gift of his old acquaintance John Bokingham Bishop of
Lincoln, with whom and Simon Burleigh (a knight afterward of great honor) he
only in a manner conuersed during his abode in Oxford. Besides these
ecclesiastical preferments, the Prouostship of Wels, a number of benefices,
and twelve Prebends in several Churches, he held many temporal offices, as
the Secretaryship, the keeping of the privy seal, the Mastership of wards,
the treasurership of the Kings revenues in France, and diverse other with whose
styles I am not acquainted. But the yearly revenues of his spiritual
promotions only according as they were then rated in the Kings books,
amounted unto 876. l. 13. s. 4. d. He was consecrate Bishop of Winchester, the
year 1367. and was made soon after first treasurer, then Chauncellor of
England, (although whether he were treasurer or no I find some doubt made, and
I dare not (...) it too confidently) whether he were treasurer or no, certain
it is, that many years after he was Bishop he was trusted with all the weighty
affairs of the realm disposed of the kings treasure, and governed all things
at his will. In this greatness of his authority, the king found two notable
commodities, one, that without his care all things were ordered so well, as by
a wise and trusty servant they might; the other, that if any thing fell out
amiss, wheresoever the fault were, the king had opportunity to cast all the
blame upon the Bishop of Winchester. Now whereas long and continual war
(whereby lightly each party is a looser) had consumed, not that only that many
victories brought in, by the ransom of two kings, and by the spoil of diverse
large countries which this noble Prince subdued; but other huge sums of money
also gathered at home by unusual subsidies, and taxations much grudged at by
the commons; all which notwithstanding, the king was so bare, as, for the
payment of debts, he was constrained to bethink him first of some new device
to raise money: The Bishops enemies taking the advantage of this occasion;
induced the king to be content that a solemn complaint might be framed against
him, as if by his misgouernement, the kings treasure had been either vainly
wasted, or falsely imbesilled, for that otherwise for sooth it was impossible
the king should so be fallen behind hand: They charge him therefore with the
receite of 1109600. l. (which amounts to more then a million of pounds)
besides a hundred thousand frankes paid unto him by Galeace Duke of Millaine.
For all this they demand suddenly an account, and to set a better color upon
the matter, patch up a number of other accusations, partly untrue, partly
frivolous, yet sufficient happily to bleare the eyes of the common people, and
diuerting the displeasure of this inconvenience from them on whom otherwise it
must have lighted, to derive it unto him, upon whom if it fell never so
heavily, it could cast him no lower then that place from whence the king had
first raised him. Amongst many enemies that government and envy had provoked
against him; John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster for some other cause needless
here to be (...), bare unto him an implacable hatred. The King was then old and
very impotent, the Duke his eldest son (...), and so governing all things
under him. The Duke therefore found means that William Skipwith Lord chief
Justice condemned him as guilty of those accusations, procured his temporalties
to be taken from him, and to be bestowed upon the young Prince of Wales, and
lastly commanded him in the kings name, not to come within twenty miles of the
Court. The year 1376. happened unto him this trouble, which I may call the
Prologue or (...) of the pageant to be played the year following. I mean the
Parliament, the chief end and purpose whereof was a subsidy, that this
Prelates vexation must make way unto. The Clergy assembled, greeuing much at
the unjust oppression of so worthy and reverend a man; (for his sidelity unto
his Prince, his great care of the common good, his wisdom and integrity were
well enough known to such as understood any thing) they utterly refused to
debate of any matter what soever, till the Bishop of Winchester, a principal
member of that assembly might be present with them. By this means, license was
obtained for his repair thither, and thither he came, glad he might be near
to the means of his restitution: but whether it were that he wanted money to
bear the charge, or to the intent to move commiseration, or that he thought
it safest to pass obscurely; he that was wont to ride with the greatest
train of any Prelate in England, came then very slenderly attended, traveling
through by-waies, as standing in doubt what snares his enemies might lay for
him. After two years trouble and the loss of ten thousand marks sustained by
reason of the same: with much adoo he obtained restitution of his temporalties,
by the mediation of Alice Piers, a gentlewoman that in the last times of king
Edward altogether possessed him. Returning then unto Winchester, he was
received into the city with solemn procession and many signs of great joy.
Soon after his return king Edward died, and the Duke hoping by reason of the
young kings nonage to work some mischief unto this Bishop, whom of all
mortal men he most hated; began to rub up some of the old accusations with
additions of new complaints. But the Dukes malice being as well known as the
Bishops innocence, the king thought good to be a means of reconciling these
two personages, and then was easily entreated, under the broad seal of England
to pardon all those supposed offenses, wherewith the Bishop had heretofore
been charged. This tempest thus ouerblowen, the rest of his days he passed in
great peace and quietness. Two years after his restitution he began the
foundation of that worthy monument, the college commonly called the New
college in Oxford, laying the first stone of the same himself March 5. 1379.
and dedicating it unto the honor of God and the blessed virgin Mary. Being
finished, the first warden and fellows all together took possession of it
April 14. 1386. at three of the clock in the morning. The very next year he
began his other college near Woluesey the Bishops palace at Winchester,
laid the first stone of it March 26. 1387. and finished it also in six years
space, so as the Warden and fellows cntred into the same at three of the
clock in the morning March 28. 1393. Beside the charge of these two worthy
foundations, he build all the body of his church of Winchester from the quier
westward, excepting only a little begun by Bishop Edington: he procured many
privileges and liberties unto his See: he bestowed 20000. marks in reparation
of his house: he paid the debts of men imprisoned for that cause to the sum
of 2000. l. he mended all the high ways between London and Winchester: he
purchased unto his See two hundred marks land: he forgave his officers two
thousand marks which they owed him: he bestowed two hundred pound upon the
church of Windsor: he released his tenants of 520. l. due for a relief at his
incomme: he ordained a Chauntry of five priests at Southwyke: he kept
continually in his house four and twenty poor almesmen: he maintained at the
Uniuersity fifty scholars for the space of seven years before the building of
his college: he built a chapel (as before is mentioned) at Tichfield for the
burial of his parents; and lastly provided for himself ten years before his
death a goodly monument in the body of his church. All these charges
notwithstanding, he bequeathed legacies to the value of 6270. l. left ready
money to pay them, left his heir 100. l. land, and all his houses furnished
plentifully with most rich and sumptuons household stuff. After all these so
memorable actions, having run the course of a long, a happy and most
honorable life, he ended his days in peace the year 1404 being full
fowerscore years of age, and was laid in the toombe so long before provided
for him. Upon it I find engraven these verses, which rather for his honor then
any great commendation they deserve, I have thought good to set down:

Wilhelmus dictus Wickham iacet hic nece victus,
Istius ecclesiae praesul, reparauit eamque,
Largus erat, dapifer, probat hoc cum (...) pauper,
(...) pariter regni fuerat been dexter.
Hunc docet esse pium fun datio collegiorum;
Oxoniae primum stat, Wintoniaeque secundum.
Iugiter oretis tumulum quicunque videtis
Pro tantis meritis quod sit sibi vita perennis.
53. Henry Beauforte.
THe Pope was now grown to that height of tyranny, Alex. Neuill perforce
translated from York to S. Andrews in Scotland, whence (wars being at that
time between England and Scotland) he was sure never to receive penny. And so
he translated John Buckingham from Lincoln to Lichfield, a Bishopric not
half so good. But he choosing rather to have no bread then but half a loaf;
in a very malecontent humor and great chafe put on a monks cowle at
Canterbury, and there lived privately the rest of his life. To his Bishopric
of Lincoln was then preferred Henry Beaufort, son to John of Gaunt by
Katherine Swinford, the year 1397. He was brought up for the most part at Aken
in Germany where he studied the civil and canon law many years; and coming
home, was preferred to Lincoln very young. He continued there seven years, and
presently upon the death of W. Wickham was translated to Winch. June 23. 1426.
he was made cardinal of S. Eusebius, and received his hat with great solc^nity
at Calis the Lady day following. A man of great frugality and therefore
exceeding rich. King Henry the fifth in the latter end of his reign, by great
and continual wars being waxen much behind hand, and greatly indebted; began
to cast a covetous eye upon the goods of the Church, which at that time were
grown to the full height: and there wanted not many that incited him unto the
spoil of the same. This wealthy Prelate (best known by the name of the rich
Cardinal) supplied his want out of his own purse, to divert him from that
sacrilegious course, and lent him 20000. pound, a great deal of money in those
days. He was also valiant and very wise. Pope Martin the fifth, determining to
make war upon the Bohemians that had renounced al obedience unto the Sea of
Rome, made this Cardinal his Legate into that Country, and appointed such
forces as he could make to be at his commandment. Toward the charges of this
voyage, the Clergy of England gave a tenth of all their promotions, and
furnished out 4000. men and more, with this power, he passed by France (doing
there some service for his Prince and Country) into Bothemia, the year 1429.
There he remained certain months, behauing himself very valiantly till by
the Pope he was discharged. In his youth he was wantonly given, and gate a base
daughter named Jane upon Alice the daughter of Richard Earl of Arundell. Her
he married after unto Ed. Stradling or Easterlling a knight of Wales. But this
asdone, before he entered into orders. Toward his latter end he employed his
time altogether either in matters of Counsel and business of the common
wealth, or the service of God and the Church committed unto him. Amongst other
good deeds, it is remembered that he built an hospital in Winchester which he
presently endued with land to the value of 158. l. 13. s. 4. d. of yearly
rent. He died April. 11. 1447. when he had been Bishop of Winchester 43.
years, and from the time of his first consecration, 50. years. Except Thomas
Bourchier that was Bishop 51. years, I read of no English man that ever
enjoyed that honor longer. He lies buried in a reasonable stately toombe
behind the high altar of his Church at Winchester toward the South, the
inscription is much defaced: of it remains only this; Tribularer si nescirem
misericordias tuas.

54. William Waynflet.
A Worthy Prelate succeeded him, William Waynflet Henry the sixth, who for his
great wisdom and integrity was long Chauncellor of England. He was son and
heir unto Richard Pattyn a gentleman of an ancient house, brother unto John
Pattyn Deane of Chichester, and Richard Pattyn that lived at Bas^o in
Darbishire, where he left (as I have heard) a posterity behind him. It
appears hereby that his name was not indeed Waynflet but Pattyn. It was an
ancient custom even till those days that clergy men should take their
surname according to the place where they were borne; and amongst monks and
friars it continued till the very suppression of monasteries. This William
(whether Waynflet or Pattyn) was brought up first in Winchester school, and
then in New college in Oxford. His fellowship there he left to become
schoolmaster of Winchester, but was taken by king Henry the sixth to teach in
his new college of Eaton, whereof at last he made him (as before is said)
Provost. He continued Bishop many years, and would have done much more good
then he did, had he not been hindered by those continual wars between the
houses of Lancaster and York: in all which storms, he stuck always unto his
patron and first preferrer king Henry the sixth. And after his death, king
Edward the fourth knowing the faithful affection and true heart he always bore
unto Henry the sixth his enemy, carried ever a hard hand upon him. Time
notwithstanding and the revenues of that goodly Bishopric, enabled him to
the foundation of that excellent and stately college in Oxford dedicated unto
Saint Mary Magdalene; to the which I think the world has not any one college
in all perfections comparable. He died (as I have been told) August 6. 1486.
having first seen the house of Lancaster (to his great joy) restored again to
the crown in king Henry the seventh. So that between the consecration of
William Wickham, and the death of William Waynflet his next successor saving
one, it is 119, years. A strange thing that three men should hold one
Bishopric sixscore years. He lies buried in the North part of the room
beyond the high Altar over against the Cardinal, in a very fair toombe, the
Epitaphe whereof is quite defaced.

55. Peter Courtney.
IN the month of November 1477. Peter Courtney the Philip Courtney of
Powderham knight, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Walter Lord Hungerford
was consecrate Bishop of Exeter, whence he was translated to Winchester, in the
latter end of the year 1486. At Exeter he bestowed much money in finishing the
North Tower, unto which he gave a goodly bell called after his name Peter bell.
He died December the 20. 1491. having governed the Dioces of Winchester the
space of five years, and was buried in his own Church, whereabouts I know not.

56. Thomas Langton.
THe Bishopric having been void somewhat more Thomas Langton Bishop of
Salisbury was preferred thereunto. He was consecrate to Salisbury the year
1485 sat Bishop of Winchester seven years, and was removed to Canterbury,
but died of the plague, an. 1500. before his translation was perfited. He built
a very fair Chapel in the South side of the Lady Chapel in the Cathedral
Church of Winchester, in the middle of which Chapel his body rests in a
very sumptuous toombe of Marble. This Thomas Langton was some time fellow of
Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge, in memory whereof he bestowed upon that house a
Cup of silver double guilt waighing 67. ounces, whereupon are engraven these
words. Tho. Langton Winton Eps. aulae Penbr. olim socius, dedit hanc (...)
coopertam (...) aulae 1497. qui alienarit anathema sit.

57. Richard Fox.
AT what time Henry Earl of Richmont abiding at Richard the third, and to take
on him the kingdom; He willing to furnish him self as well as he might for
the setting forth of so great an enterprise, determined to crave aid of the
French king. (...) therefore to Paris, he only commenced his suit unto the
king, and having manifold business elsewhere, he left the farther prosecution
of this matter unto Richard Fox a Doctor of Divinity, that chanced to live a
student in Paris at that time. Whether the Earl knew him before, or else
discerned at the first sight (as it were) his excellent (...), certain it is,
he deemed him a fit man for the managing of this great affair. Neither was he
any thing at all deceived in him: For the matter was followed with so great
diligence and industry, as in a very short time all things were dispatched
according to the Earls desire, who soon after obtaining the kingdom,
mindful of the good service done him by Doctor Fox, preferred him immediately
unto the keeping of the privy scale, made him one of his Council, and laid
upon him what spiritual living might possibly be procured him. In the mean
time he employed him continually either in matters of counsel at home, or in
ambassages of great importance abroad. The second year of King Henry's reign
he was sent into Scotland for the establishing of a peace with the king there;
whence he was scarcely returned, when the Bishopric of Exeter falling void,
was bestowed upon him. He held it not past six years but he was removed to
Bath and Wels, and thence within three years after to Durham. There he stayed
six years, and the year 1502. was once more translated, viz. to Winchester,
where he spent the rest of his life in great prosperity. For such was his favor
with the king, as no man could ever do so much with him, no man there was upon
whose counsel he so much relied. Amongst other honors done unto him, it was
not the least, that he made him Godfather unto his second son, that was
afterward King Henry the eight, the Father of our worthy and most happy Queen.
In one only mischaunce he was unfortunate. He lived many years blind before
he died. Whereby ghessing his end not to be sarre off, hc determined to make
unto him self friends of the unrighteous Mammon bestowing well his goods while
he lived. And first he was purposed to have built a Monastery, until that
conferring with Hugh Oldam, Bishop of Exeter, a very wise man; He was advised
by him rather to bestow his money upon the foundation of some College in one
of the Uniuersities, which should be more profitable unto the common wealth,
and more available to the preservation of his memory. As for Monasteries
(quoth he) they have more already, then they are like long to keep. So by the
Counsel of this wise Prelate (whose purse also was a great help to the
finishing thereof) the college of Corpus Christi in Oxford was built and
endowed with competent possessions the year 1516. by this Bishop Richard Fox.
Afterward in the year 1522. he bestowed the cost of building a fair free
school by the castle in Taunton, and convenient housing near it for the
schoolmaster to dwell in: lastely, it is to be remembered, that he covered the
quier of Winchester, the presbytery and (...) adjoining with a goodly vault,
and new glased all the windows of that part of the church. It is said also
that he built the partition between the presbytery and the said (...), causing
the bones of such Princes and prelates as had been buried here and there
dispersed about the church, to be removed and placed in seemly monuments upon
the top of that new partition. Many other notable things no doubt he did which
have not come unto my knowledge. He died at last a very old man and full of
days ann. 1528. when he had woorthily governed the church of Winchester the
space of 27. years. He lies entoombed upon the south side of the high altar
in a monument, rather sumptuons then stately, of the same building with the
partition.

58. Thomas Woolsey.
OF this man I will only say thus much in this place,

59. Stephen Gardener.
The Sea then continued void almost four years. At Stephen Gardener Doctor
of Law, borne at Bury in Suffolk, was preferred thereunto and consecrate ann.
1534. Fourteen years after, viz. June 30. 1548. he was committed to the
Tower for a sermon he preached before the king the day before, being S. Peter's
day at Westminster. When he had continued there the space of two years and a
half, he was by authority deprived of his Bishopric, February 14. 1550. sent
to prison again, and there kept till beginning of Queen Mary, at what time he
was not only restored to his Bishopric and set at liberty, but made Lord
Chauncellor of England, viz. in the month of August 1553. A man of great
learning (as diverse of his works extant do testify) and of two much wit,
except it had been better employed. For the extreme malice he bare to our
religion, he not only burnt many poor men, but wrought all the means his
wily head could devise to make away our blessed Sovereign Queen Elizabeth:
saying often, it was in vain to strike off a few leaves or branches when the
root remained whole. And surely in all reason his cursed policy must have
prevailed, if God had not touched the heart of Queen Mary her sister with a
very kind and natural affection toward her: which notwithstanding, it is much
to be doubted what he might have wrought in time, had not God in mercy taken
him away the more speedily. He died November 13. 1555. exceeding rich, leaving
behind him 40000. marks in ready money (if Bale say true) beside much
sumptuous household stuff. He was buried on the North side of the high altar in
Winchester in a toombe both in place and building answerable to Bishop Fox.

60. John Poynet.
PResently upon the deprivation of Stephen Gardener, Doctor of (...), a kentish
man borne, consecrate Bishop of Rochester April 3. 1549. was translated to
Winchester. Queen Mary having attained the crown, he well knew there was no
living for him in England, and therefore fled the realm and died at Strausburg
in Germany April 11. 1556. being scarce forty years of age. A man of great
learning, whereof he left diverse testimonies in writing works yet extant both
in Latin and English: beside the Greek and Latin he was very well seen in
the Italian and Dutch tongue, and an excellent Mathematician. He gave unto king
Henry the eight a dyall of his own (...), she wing not only the hour of the
day, but also the day of the month, the sign of the son, the planetary
hour; yea the change of the moon, the ebbing and flowing of the sea; with
diverse other things as strange to the great wonder of the king and his own no
less commendation. He was preferred (...) by king Edward in regard of certain
excellent sermons preached before him.

61. John White.
AFter the death of Stephen Gardener, John White Doctor

62. Robert Horn.
January 16. 1560. Robert Horn borne in the Bishopric Edwards days Deane of
the Church of Durham, coming then newly out of Germany (where he lived all
Queen Mary's days) was consecrate Bishop of Winchester. He sat well near
twenty years: but that and what else I have to say of him, let his Epitaphe
declare. He lies under a flat marble stone near the pulpit in the body of the
church, whereon I find engraven these words:

Robertus Horn theologiae doctor eximius, quondam Christi causa exul, deinde
Episcopus Winton, pie obijt in Domino Iun. 1. 1580. Episcopatus sui anno 19.

63. John Watson.
Soon after his death, it pleased her Majesty to bestow John Watson. He lies
buried over against his predecessor on the other side of the body of the
Church, having these words engraven upon the marble stone that covers him:

D. Ioannes Watson huius eccclesiae Winton. Praebendarius, Decanus, ac deinde
Episcopus, (...) pater, vir optimus, praecipue erga inopes (...), obijt in
Domino Ianuar. 23. anno aetatis suae 63. Episcopatus 4. 1583.

64. Thomas Cooper.
THomas Cooper Doctor of Divinity succeeded him, being

65. William Wickham.
HE that succeeded him in Lincoln, succeeded him in the William Wickham, whose
very name I reverence in memory of William Wickham his famous and worthy
predecessor. No Bishop of Winchester ever enjoyed that honor so short a time,
he was translated about our Lady day in the beginning of the year 1595. and
died of the stone in the bladder (or some like disease) the 12. day of June
following at Winchester house in Southwarke, having not made water in
fowerteene days before.

66. William Day.
William Day Deane of Windsor and (...) of Eaton college succeeded, and
holding this place little longer then his predecessor, died a few days before
Michaelmas day 1596.

67. Thomas Bilson.
THomas Bilson Doctor of Divinity and Warden of Winchester, became Bishop of
Worceter the year 1595. and staying there not past two years was translated
to Winchester, where he yet lives.

The Bishopric of Winchester is valued in the Queens books at 2491, l. 9,
s. 8, d. ob. and paid to the Pope for first fruits 12000. ducats.
The Bishops of Ely.
SAint Etheldred (of whom the Cathedral Church of Ely has his name) was the
daughter of Anna King of the East Augles. She was twice married: First unto
Tombert Prince of the South Angles (who gave her the Isle of Ely to her Dower)
And then, he diyng within three years, to Egfrid king of Northumberland. With
him she lived twelve years, and at last left him, and all the pomp and
pleasure she might have lived in, to serve God in such sort as she thought was
most acceptable unto him. She betook her, unto her Isle of Ely, and whereas
Ethelbert king of Kent had long before (viz. ann. 607.) built a Church there by
the counsel of Saint Augustine, she reedified the same, and much increased it
the year 677. and by the counsel of Wilfrid Archbishop of York (but not
without the help of Aldulph her brother king of the East Angles) converted it
into a Monastery of Nuns, whereof she her self became Abbess. This
Monastery was under her, Sexbing, (...), Werburg, and other Abbesses 183.
years until it was destroyed by Pagans, Inguar, and Hubba, the year 890. It
lay then waste a great while. In the end certain secular Priests to the number
of eight, began to inhabit there, but were displaced by Ethelwald Bishop of
Winchester, who bought the whole Island of King Edgar, and by his authority
placed in their rooms an Abbot and monks, unto whom he procured many great
and notable privileges. Brithnod Provost of Winchester was appointed the first
Abbot, ann. 970. He is said to have been murdered by Elsticha the Queen of
King Edilred, causing bodkins to be thrust into his arm holes, because like an
unhappy Actaeon he had seen her in a certain wood busy about sorcery.
Elfsius was the second Abbot, Leofsinus the third, Leofricus the fourth, and
another Leofsinus the (...). He by the Kings consent let out the farms of the
monastery, in such sort as they should find the house provision all the year,
Shalford paid 2. weeks provision, Stableford 1. Littleberry 2. Triplaw 2.
Hawkston 1. Newton 1. Melburne 2. Grantsden 2. Toften 1. Cotnam 1. Wellingham
1. Ditton 2. Horningsey 2. Stenchworth 2. Balsam 2. Cathenho 4. days
provision, and Swansham 3. Spaldwich 2. weeks provision, Somersham 2. Blunsham
1. Colne 1. Hortherst 1. Drinkston 1. Katsden 2. Hackam 2. Berking 2. Needing
1. Wederingseat 1. Breckham 2. Pulham 2. Thorp and Dirham 2. Norwald 2. and
Feltwell 2. Merham was appointed to carry the rent to a certain Church in
Norfolk and there to intertaine comers and goers to or from the Monastery.
Wilfricus the sixth Abbot, bought the manor of Bereham for 25. marks of gold.
In the time of Thurstan the seventh Abbot, the Isle was held by many of the
old Saxon nobility against King William the Conqueror. He therefore by the
counsel of Walter Bishop of Hereford, and other, gave all the Church goods and
lands without the Isle to his soldiers. After seven years resistance, the
Saxon gentlemen, some upon promise of pardon submitted them selves, others
betaking themselves to flight, the place was delivered into the possession of
the Conqueror. (...) Reges plectuntur Achimi; For the fault of these noble men,
the poor monks must be punished: to be restored to their lands, and to enjoy
their Ancient privileges quietly, they were feign to give the king 1000.
marks. For making which money they were constrained to sell all the platc and
silver that was in their Church. The king also fearful least from the same
place the like trouble might happen unto him hereafter, appointed them to
maintain a garrison of 40. soldiers, which they did until such time as
himself called them away, to employ them else where, which was five years
after. Theodwinus was the eight Abbot, Godfry the ninth, and Simon the tenth.
After whose death the place stood void seven years. Richard the son of the
Earl Gilbert was then made Abbot.

1. Heruaeus.
BY this time the revenues of the monastery were l. which sum contained then
more metal, and would go farther in those days then 6000. l. of our money.
Of that 1400. l. the Abbot allowed scarce 300. unto the monks, converting the
rest unto his own use. This Richard therefore, if his mind were any thing so
great as his lineage, could not but disdain to live under the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Lincoln, to whose Dioces Cambridgeshire at that time
appertained. But he had reasonable pretenses for his ambition. He caused the
king to be told, that the Dioces of Lincoln was too large for one man's
government: that Ely were a fit place for an Episcopal See, etc. These reasons
amplified with golden Rhetoric, so persuaded the king, as he not only
consented himself that this monastery should be converted into a Cathedral
Church, and the Abbot made a Bishop; but also procured the Pope to confirm and
allow of the same. After that Richard the Abbot had with great pains and more
cost, beaten this bush a great while, the bird that he had so long and
earnestly thirsted after, fell to another man's share. Himself was taken away
by death when the matter was grown to good perfection and ready to be
finished. The Bishop of Lincoln a while hindered the proceeding of this
business; but his mouth was stopped with three Manors which the king being
liberal of another man's purse, was content to bestow upon him, such as
heretofore belonged unto the monastery of Ely, viz. Spaldwich, Bickleswoorth,
and Bokeden: these were given to the Sea of Lyncolne in recompense of the loss
the Bishop sustained by exempting of Cambridgshire from his jurisdiction: And
that the revenues of the new Bishop might notwithstanding this gift be no less
then the Abbots were, but rather greater, they divised to diminish the number
of monks which were then 70. and to draw them down unto 40. Richard the 11.
and last Abbot being thus taken away when he would most gladly have lived. King
Henry the first with the consent of the monks appointed this Bishopric unto
one Heruaeus that had been Bishop of Bangor; and agreeing ill with the
Welchmen, was feign to leave his Bishopric there, and seek abroad for
somewhat elsewhere. He was translated the year 1109. sat 22. years, and died
August the 30. 1131.

2. Nigellus.
The Sea having been void then two year, Nigellus Roger Bishop of Salisbury
was placed therein May the 28. 1133. He was received with such joy into his
city of Ely, that all the street where he should pass was hanged with
curtains, carpets, and tapestry, the monks and clergy of his Church meeting
him with procession. By reason of his employment in matters of state and
Counsel, he could not attend his pastoral charge, and therefore committed the
managing and government of his Bishopric unto one Ranulphus sometime a monk of
Glastonbury, that had now cast away his cowle, a covetous and wicked man. For
his faithfulness unto his patron and first preferrer king Henry, this Nigellus
is much to be commended. When as Stephen Earl of Bloys contrary to his oath
and promise to king Henry the first his uncle usurped the crown due to Maude
the Empress king Henry's daughter; This Bishop could never be induced to
forsake her, but most constantly stuck unto her, and endured much for her
sake. See more hereof in the life of Roger Bishop of Salisbury.
Notwithstanding those his great troubles, he found means to erect an hospital
for Regular Cannons, in that place where Saint John's College in Cambridge now
stands: the foundation of which house was afterward twice altered: first by
Hugh Norwold his successor, who placed therein a certain number of scholars
to cohabite with the Cannons, giving allowance for their maintenance: and
afterward by Margaret Countess of Richmond and Darby, who new built it,
partly in her life time, and partly by her executors after her death, endowing
it with (in a manner) all the revenues it possesses, and raising it unto that
beauty and perfection which now it has. This man was Bishop 36. (...), and
(...) 29. day of May 1169. having long before seen the issue of his Lord and
first patron King Henry restored to the crown in Henry the 2. He is said
(...) have been buried before the alter of Saint Cross in his own church. See
more of him in the discourse of Richard his son, that was Bishop of London.

3. Galfridus Rydall.
AFter his death, the Dioces of Ely continued without Geoffry Rydell or Rydall
Archdeacon of Canterbury was consecrate Bishop: a very lofty and high minded
man, called therefore commonly the proud Bishop of Ely. He bestowed great (...)
upon the building of the new work of his Cathedral church toward the West,
and upon the steeple, which he built (...) unto the battlements. He died
intestate at Winchester the 21. day of August 1189. a four days before the
(...) of king Richard the first, leaving in his coffers great (...) of ready
money, viz. 3060. marks of silver, and 205. marks of gold. All which the king
was content to take unto (...) to help to bear the charges of his coronation.
He sat Bishop 14. years, 10. months, and 14. days.

4. William Langchamp.
THe last day of December the same year, William Chauncellor of England, was
consecrate Bishop of Ely. One greatly favored by King Richard the first, and a
man very worthy of that favor for many (...) parts in him, had not those his
virtues been matched and ouermatched, with as many great and notorious (...).
When the king took that his famous voyage to (...), he made this Bishop
(Chauncellor before) chief Justice of the South part of England, and Protector
of the Realm in his absence. And least he should want any Authority that might
be given him, he procured the Pope to make him his Legate, the obtaining
whereof (notwithstanding the Kings request) cost him 1000. l. of ready money.
It is a true saying Magistratus indicat virum, the man that in base fortune
seemed to all men not only wise, but virtuous and humble enough; being raised
unto this height of power and authority, as being either drunken and infatuate
with too much and sudden prosperity, or amassed with the brightness of his
own good fortune, began presently to do many things, not only untowardly, and
indiscreetly, but very arrogantly and insolently, sauouring as well of
unconscionable covetousness and cruelty, as lack of wisdom and policy in so
great a governor requisite. That which in our histories is most blamed, and
most odiously mentioned, I find no such great fault withal, that calling a
conuoctiou by virtue of his power Legantine; at the suggestion and entreaty of
Hugh Nouaunt Bishop of Chester, he displaced the monks of Couentree, and put
in secular Priests in their rooms. Officers appointed by the king himself he
discharged; Geoffry Archbishop of York the kings bastard brother, at his first
arrival in England after his consecration, he caused to be apprehended and
drawn from the very Altar of the Church of Saint Martins in Dover unto
prison. John the Kings brother, and afterward king him self, he sought to
keep under and disgrace by all means possible, being jealous (as he said)
least the king dying without issue, he should defraude Arthur his elder brother
of the kingdom; and whether unto his brother now king, he would continue
loyal, having power to invade his kingdom, for certain he wist not. True it
is, that John the kings brother began to take some what more upon him then
needed, and being (...) a reason of some of his doings, made no other answer
but this, I know not whether my brother Richard be alive or not: Whereunto the
Chauncellor replied, if he be living it were untruth to take his kingdom from
him; if he be dead, Arthur the eldest brother must enjoy the same. Now he that
feared not to deal thus with the kings own brother, no marvel if he used
such of the nobility far worse that in any sort opposed themselves against
him. As for the commonalty, he not only grieved them with continual and
needless exactions, and tyrannised intollerably over them otherwise, but
offended them much also with his glorious pomp, and unreasonable proud
behavior. His manner was to ride with no less then 1500. horse, and in his
travail to lodge for the most part at some Monastery or another to their great
and (...) yea there was not any Church in England either (...) or Cathedral
unto which he was not very burdensome some way or other. And his officers were
such prolling companions, bearing themselves bold upon their masters absolute
Authority, as there was no sort of people whom they grieved not by some kind
of extortion. Yea (says Matthew. Paris) all the wealth of the land, was come
into their hands, in so much as scarce any ordinary person had left him a
silver belt to gird him withal, any woman either brooche, or bracelet, any
gentleman a ring, to wear upon his finger. But the Chauncellor he purchased
and bestowed as well Abbotships, benefices and spiritual preferment as
temporal offices all that fell where him pleased, whereby his sernants and
kindred were all grown (...) rich. Among other his follies it is remembered that
he built the outer wall about the Tower of London, and spent an infinite deal
of money in making a deep ditch about the same, thinking he could have caused
the River of Thames (...) go round about it. But that cost was bestowed in
vain. These and many other his misbehauiours incited the people and Nobility
woonderfully against him. In so much as, he feared greatly least some sedition
being raised, force would be offered unto him. He thought it therefore no less
then needful in all places of any public assembly to render reasons openly
of his doings; which being considered, I know not whether he may justly be
thought so blamewoorthy as our Histories for the most part make him. Officers
placed by the king he said he discharged, least the people being grieved with
so many Governors would (...), that insteede of one king they now were
constrained too bey many. What reason he yielded of his dealing with Earl John
you heard before. For his exactions he said they were but such as the
maintenance and incredible charge of so great a war as the king had then in
hand required: and lastly, for a general defense, he protested he had not
taken any course in these or any other matters of importance, for which he had
not some particular direction from the king. These excuses satisfied not men so
fully, but that infinite complaints were daily made unto the king against him,
so that he could do no less then discharge him from his place of
protectorship, which he did, and sent over William Archbishop of Roan to
succeed him, but joining some other in Commission with him, as finding an
inconvenience in giving so much and absolute authority to one man. At this
news his enemies greatly rejoicing, and thinking him a man now easy enough to
deal withal, they conspire against him, and causing a Convocation to be
sommoued, they procure him to be excommunicate for the violence done unto the
Archbishop of York, and with him all other, that were his aiders and ministers
in that enterprise. As soon as he understood of these things, fearing greater
dangers, he bethought himself how he might do to get over the seas: and
knowing that his enemies if they should have any inkling of his intent, would
assuredly (...) the same, or work him some mischief by the way; He devised to
disguise himself in woman's apparel, and so went unto the sea side at Dover
muffled, with a metyard in his hand, and a web of cloth upon his arm. There
he sat upon a rock ready to take ship, when a certain lewd mariner
thinking him to be some strumpet began to dally wantonly with him, whereby it
came to pass, that whereas he was a stranger borne and could speak no
English, being not able to answer this merry mariner, either in words or
deeds; he supposed him to be a man, and called a company of (...), who pulling
off his kerchiefe and muffler, found his crown and beard shaven, and quickly
knew him to be that hateful Chancellor whom so many had so long cursed and
feared. In great despite they threw him to the ground, spitting upon him, beat
him sore, and drew him along the sands. Whereupon a great cry being made, the
Burgesses of the town took him away from the (...), and though his servants
endeavored to rescue him, thrust him into a seller, there to keep him prisoner
till notize might be given of this his departure. It is a world to see, how he
that was a few months before honored and reverenced of all men like an half
God, attended by noble men's sons and gentlemen of great worship whom he
matched unto his neeces and kinswomen, (...) himself happy that he (...),
(...) to be well acquainted with his porters and officers was accounted (...)
small matter: This man once down and standing in (...) of his friends help,
had no man to defend him, no man to speak for him, no man that moved a (...)
to (...) him out of the present calamity and trouble. The (...) John was (...)
to have (...) him some farther notable (...) and (...) Neither was there any
man that for his (...) sake (...) it. The Bishops diverse of them his (...)
regarding notwithstanding his calling and place, would not suffer it, but
causes him to be set at liberty. (...) not long after he got him over into
Normandy, where he was borne and there rested himself after all this turmoile,
till the return of king Richard, with whom he made such fair weather, and so
(...) excused all things objected against him, that in short time he was as
greatly in favor with him as ever heretofore. The year 1197. he was sent
Ambassador to the Pope, together with the Bishop of Durham and other: and
falling sick by the way, died at Poytiers the last day of January, one (...)
above seven year after his (...). He was buried in a monastery of the order of
the (...) called (...).

5. Eustachius.
The Sea was then (...) one whole year (...) somewhat (...) death, Eustachius
Deane of Salisbury was elected, but not (...) till the fourth Sunday in Lent
the year following. A man (says Florilogus) very well seen as well in (...) as
divine and holy learning. He was one of them (...) pronounced the Popes
excommunication against king (...), and interdicted the whole Realm. For
doing thereof, he (...) the kings displeasure would lie so heavy upon him, as
(...) was no (...) in the realm, and therefore got him (...) the seas. This
fell out the year 1208. After (...) years (...), king John being reconciled
to the Pope, he (...) home, (...). the year 1213. and lived not long after.
(...) sat (...) years wanting nine (...), and departed (...) the third day of
(...) 1214. The (...) at the West end of the Cathedral Church was of his
building.

6. John de Fontibus.
AFter his death Galfridus de Burgo Archdeacon of Hubert de Burgo or Borough
Earl of Kent and chief Justice of England was elected Bishop of Ely. But
before the publication of this election one Robert of York was also chosen,
who held the temporalities of the Bishopric without consecration, and
disposed of benefices that fell, and all things belonging to the Sea, as Bishop
for the space of five years. The Pope at last disanulling both these
elections, conferred the Bishoprics March 8. 1219. upon John Abbot of
Fountney, a just and virtuous man. He was Treasurer of England for flue years
and died the year 1225. He is said to be buried before the altar of Saint
Andrew.

7. Geoffry de Burgo.
HE being dead, Geoffry Borough before mentioned was (...) Virgil gives the
same testimony that Matthew Westminster. does of his predecessor Eustachius, that he
was vir in (...) and humanis literis eruditus, a man well learned both in
divine and profane literature. He gave two hundred acres of Moore in Wisbich
marsh to the augmentation of the priory of Ely. He continued Bishop about three
years, and dying the 17. of May 1229. was buried upon the North side of the
Quier..

8. Hugh NorWold.
HVgh Norwold Abbot of Saint (...) succeeded Ioceline Bishop of Bathe and Wels
together with Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, and Roger Bishop of London,
upon Trinity sunday 1229. (...) the tenth of June. This (...) is much commended
for his house keeping and liberality unto the poor, which may well seem
strange, considering the infinite deal of (...) spent by him in building of
his church and houses. The presbytery of the cathedral church he raised from
the very foundation, and built a steeple of wood toward the (...) at the West
end of the church. This noble work he (...) in seventeen years with the
charge of 5350, l. 18, s. 8, d. And the seventeen day of September (...). he
dedicated, (...) (as we commonly call it) hallowed the same in the (...) of the
king ( Henry the third) and his son Prince Edward, the Bishops of Norwich
(...), and many other great personages. All these and an infinite number of
other people of all sorts he feasted many days together in his palace of Ely,
which he built every whit out of the ground, and covered it with lead. In
Ditton and other houses belonging to his See he also bestowed much money. He
died at (...) 9. day of August 1254. being well contented (as he professed) now
to depart the world, after he had seen the building (...) his church finished,
which (...) so earnestly desired. He sat two months above 25. years, and was
buried in the (...) ytery which he had built.

9. William de Kilkenny.
ABout the middle of October following, (...) de (that then for a time supplied
the (...) of the Chauncellor of England) was elected by the monks unto the Sea
of Ely, and was consecrate the fifteenth of August beyond the seas. He was
chaplain unto the king, a councellor of special credit with him, and (as the
(...) of Ely reports, I find it no where else) Chancellor of England A goodly
man of person, well spoken, very wise and learned in the laws. He enjoyed that
preserment a small time: being sent Ambassador into Spain, he died there upon
Saint Mathewes day 1256. when he had been Bishop one year, one month, and
six days. He took order his heart should be brought unto Ely and buried there.

10. Hugh Balsam.
News being brought unto the Court of the death of William de Kylkeny: The
king by and by, dispatched his letters unto the Prior and Covent of Ely,
requiring them in very gracious manner, to choose for their Bishop Henry de
Wingham his Chauncellor, using many reasons to persuade them thereunto. But
they preferring their own knowledge before the kings cemmendations, the 13.
day of November, made choice of Hugh Balfam or de (...) (for so also I find him
called) their Prior, one (as they persuaded themselves) most fit for the
place. Hereat the king being greatly displeased, refused to accept of their
election, and caused the woods, of the Bishopric to be cut down, the parks
to be spoiled, and (...) to be made of all things. Many times he urged them to
a new election, telling them it was not fit, that a place of that strength
should be committed unto a simple cloister man, that had never been acquainted
with matters of state. The new elect therefore got him over the sea to Rome,
hoping there to obtain that which in England would not be affoorded him.
Boniface the Archbishop of Canterbury hearing thereof, although having
diligently sisted and examined him, he could take no exception against him; yet
to gratify the king, writ (...) letters to his friends at Room against him,
and set up one Adam de (...) to be a countersuter to the Pope for that
Bishopric. This Adam was a man of great learning, and had written diverse
books much commended. But he was a very aged man, and moreover a friar minor,
and therefore one that had renounced the world, and all meddling in worldly
matters: which notwithstanding he followed gladly the directions of the
Archbishop, and was well content to have been a Bishop before he died. As for
Henry Wingham the Chauncellor, it is said that he never stirred at all in the
matter, but confessed them both more worthy of the place then himself. It is
said likewise, that the suit in his behalf was first commenced by the king
without his knowledge, and that when he saw the king so earnest and deal so
violently in it, he went unto him and humbly besought him to let alone the
monks in the course they had begun, and to cease farther soliciting of them
by his armed and imperious requests: for (says he) after (...) of the (...) of
God, the grace and direction of his holy spirit, they have chosen a man more
worthy then my self. And God forbid that I should as it were invade by force
that noble Bishopric, and usurp the ministry of the same, with a (...) or
cauterised conscience. The end of this suit (...) this, Henry Wingham was
afterward made Bishop of London. See more of him there. Hugh Balsam came home
from Rome confirmed by the Pope and was consecrate March 10. 1257. He sat 28.
years and three months. In which time he founded a college in Cambridge, by
the name of S. Peter's college, now commonly called Peter house. He first began
the same being yet Pryor of Ely, and finished it in the year 1284. He departed
this life June 16. 1286. at (...), and was buried at Ely before the high Altar
by Thomas Englethorp Bishop of Rochester.

11. John de Kyrkby.
AFter him succeeded John de Kyrkby Deane of (...), John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury, who took exception against him for holding many several spiritual
preferments, saying, yt a man of so good conscience as a Bishop ought to be,
would rather content himself with a little living, then (...) himself with so
many charges. He was consecrate (...) Ely at Paris the 26. or (as other report)
the 29. of (...) 1286. And sitting Bishop of Ely but three years and (...)
months, died March 26. 1290. He was buried in his (...) church by Ralph
Walpoole Bishop of Norwich that (...) succeeded him) on the North part of the
quier before the altar of Saint John Baptist.

12. William de Luda.
THe fourth day of May following was elected William Deane of Saint Martins,
Archdeacon of Durham, and Treasurer of the kings house. He sat seven yoeres,
and (...) buried in the South part of the church between two pillars at the
entrance into the old Lady chapel. This Bishop gave the manor of Oldburne
with the appurtenances unto his See, upon condition that his next successor
should (...) 1000. marks to provide maintenance for three chaplains to serve
in the chapel there.

13. Ralph Walpoole.
(...) adoo there was now about the election of a new John their Pryor, the
rest of John Langton Chauncellor of England. This election being examined
before the Archbishop, and judgment by him given for the Pryor, the
Chancellor appealed unto the Pope and traveled to Rome in his own person.
The Pryor hearing of his journey, (...) him after as fast as he might, neither
was he long behind him, although many blocks were cast in his way. Being
there, they were (...) to resign all their interest into the Popes hand. He
then in favor of the covent set down this order, that they should be at
liberty (Notwithstanding these elections) to choose again, so they chose any
one Abbot in England, except three, to wit, of Westminster, Bury and Saint
Augustines: they belike were not in the Popes favor. The Proctors of the
covent they would not agree to this order, so favorable for them. Wherefore
the Pope being very angry, upon his own absolute authority removed Ralph
Walpoole from Norwich unto Ely, gave Norwich unto the Pryor; and least the
Chancellor should altogether loose his labor, he made him Archdeacon of
Canterbury in the place of Richard Feringes that was then appointed by him
Archbishop of (...). This Ralph Walpoole was consecrat Bishop of Norwich in the
beginning of the year 1288. and sat there 11. years. At Ely he continued
scarce 3. years, but died March 22. in the beginning of the year 1302. He was
buried in the (...) of the (...) before the (...) altar.

14. Robert Orford.
THis time they agreed better, and with one (...), Robert (...) their Prior
upon the 14. day of April ensuing. He sat somewhat more then 7. years, and
ended his life at Dunham January 21. 1309. (...) buried in the pauement
aforesaid near R. Walpoole his predecessor.

15. John de Keeton.
AFter him followed John de Keeton Almoner unto the

16. John Hotham.
Within the compass of the same year a chapleyne John Hotham or Hothun was
made Bishop of Ely; and the next year viz. 1317. Chancellor of England. A
man wise and virtuous, (...) very unlearned. He continued in that office two
years, and (...) giving it over, was made Treasurer. That place also he
resigned within a twelve month, and betook himself altogether to the
government of his church. In his time the (...) in a night fell down upon the
quier, making a most horrible and (...) noise. This steeple (now called the
Lantern) (...), and built it in such order as now we see it; (...) of work
both for cost and workmanship singular. It stood him in 2406. l. 16. s. 11. d.
The new building also of the Presbytery (not so fully finished by Hugh
Northwould, but that somewhat might seem to be wanting) he (...) in every
point, bestowing upon the same the sum of 2034. l. 12. s. (...). d. ob, as a
writing yet to be seen upon the north wall of the said Presbytery witnesses.
So that upon the very fabric and building of the church he spent 4441. l. 9.
s. 7. d. ob. farthing. Besides which, this worthy Benefactour gave unto his
Covent the Manor of Holbourne with six tenements belonging to the same, and
to his church a chalice and two crewets of pure gold, very costly wrought. He
sat almost 20. years, and died of the palsy at Somersham upon Saint Paul's
day January 25. 1336. He (...) in a monument of Alabaster that was sometimes a
very stately and goodly building, but now shamefully defaced, as are also al
other monuments of the church. It stands east from the less Altar, in the
middle, but to the west end of the presbytery.

17. Simon Mountacute.
ABout the middle of March after his death Pope Ben. (...) Monntacute from
Worcester (where he had sat three years) unto Ely. He began the building of
that beautiful Lady Chapel on the north side of the Church, and bestowed an
infinite deal of money upon the same, but could not finish it being prevented
by death. John de (...) a monk of Ely (as I remember) continued that work,
and much deal by the contribution of well disposed people ended it at last. It
is said, that in digging thereabout, he found a (...) of treasure which served
to pay the work men's wages a great while. This Bishop holding his place here
little above seven years, departed from it and the world, June 20. 1344. and
was buried in the Chapel before mentioned.

18. Thomas Lysle.
ALan de Walsingham prior of Ely being then chosen Clement 5. who (...)
potestatis without any more ado, thrust into his place Thomas Lysle or Lyld a
friar preacher, and caused him to be consecrate at Auinion in the month of
July 1344. He was a doctor of divinity, brought up in Cambridge and much
esteemed for his learning. He preached often with great (...) and writ diverse
works mentioned by Bale. Within a (...) or two before his death he endured
great trouble and (...) by the means of Blanch Wake (...) Marshall, the
circumstance whereof it shall not be amiss briefly to set down. This Lady had
certain lands near unto one or (...) of the Bishops houses; by reason of
which neighborhood, many controversies daily arose between them concerning
bounds and other such like matters. The Bishop was a rough and plain man,
hardly brooking such indignities as it is likely a woman of that nobility,
rich, and near of (...) unto the king, would be ready enough to offer. By
reason hereof the Lady conceived a deadly and inueterate (...) against him;
for wreaking whereof, she awaited this (...). The Pope at the request of the
king (or rather the black prince his son) had suffered one Robert (...) to be
consecrate Bishop of Lichfield; a man in many respects very unworthy of that
honor. This good Bishop was not afraid (like another John Baptist) to step
unto the king, and reprehend him for it; which he taking very tenderly,
commanded him in great displeasure to (...) his presence. The Lady before named
thinking it now a fit time to deal with the Bishop, commenced a suit against
him, the ground and color whereof was this. Certain lewd persons had fired
some housing belonging to the Countess, and being apprehended, were content to
accuse the Bishop as accessory to this foul fact. Whereupon before ever the
Bishop heard any thing of the matter, at the instance of the Lady, and
commandment of the king, a Nisi prius passed against him, and adjudged him to
the payment of 900. l. which presently he was (...) to lay down. But esteeming
more the discredife then the (...), never ceased to importune the king till he
obtained license of him to call the Jury and witnesses to a reckoning of their
doings. The time being come when the matter was to be determined, in the (...)
at Huntington, the Countess (...) a means to hinder the Bishops proceedings
by corrupting the officers, who denied him the copy of the former judgment,
without which nothing could be done. Being much grieved heerewith, he went unto
the king, and complained how he was oppressed, requesting him as he was the
guide and life of the law, so he would direct the same according to iustce, and
not see him so ouerborne. This his speech was delivered in somewhat more rough
terms then beseemed him (as the king took it at leastwise) who making the
worst of it, accused him to the parliament then assembled. Some things the king
laid to his charge he denied, and extenuated the rest what he might. But the
king affirmed every thing upon his honor and made some mention of witnesses;
who then durst but take this proof for good? So he was condemned by parliament
and this punishment laid upon him, that hereafter he should never presume to
come in the kings presence. Not long after this, it happened that his servants
meeting with certain of the Countesses men, in a (...), one of her men were
slain. Of this murder the Bishop, is by and by deemed an accessarie and
howsoever he knew himself giltlesse, fearing the success of this matter would
prove but as his other suits had done, he sold all his mooueable goods, put the
money into the hands of his trusty friends, and hid himself. It might not serve
his turn; being absent, he was found guilty by inquest, and his temporalties
seized into the kings hands. Seeing therefore now the woorst (as he thought) he
was content (upon safe conduct) to appear before the king and there desired to
be tried by his peers. Whether his request in that point were satisfied or no
I cannot tell; But certain it is, that by the kings own mouth sentence was
pronounced against him. For it was the manner in those days the king should
determine causes of great weight sitting himself in open court. The matter
being grown to this pass, he called upon the Archbishop of Canterbury to
(...) him such aid as the privileges of the Church affoorded him. he expected
belike, that he should by force and strong arm rescue him in such sort as Adam
Tarlton Bishop of Hereford being accused of treason in the days of this kings
father, was violently taken from the bar by the Archbishop that then was, and
other Bishops. But this king ( Edward the 3.) was no babe; well enough they
knew he would take no such jest; therefore they advised him to submit himself
unto the kings mercy. That he utterly refused to do, and having no other hope
of succor, took the benefit of his safeconduct, tanquam ad anchoram sacram
(...) unto the Pope for help, and acquainted him with all the circumstances of
his trouble, from the beginning unto the end. Hereupon his accusers were cited
to appear in the Popes court, and for not (...) were excommunicate. The
Bishop of Lincoln was commanded to denounce this excommunication (which he did
unto his great trouble:) and also that if any of the excommunicate were dead,
he should cause them to be dug out of their graves, and forbid them burial
in holy earth. This (...) dealing of the Pope moved the king unto great (...):
for diverse of those that were excommunicate, were persons of no small account;
some of them of his privy (...). Proclamation therefore was made throughout the
realm, that upon pain of death, no man should hereafter be so hardy as to
bring into the realm any kind of writing from the Popes court. Some
notwithstanding contrary to this prohibition, delivered letters to the Bishop
of Rochester then Treasurer of England, from the Pope concerning this matter,
and fearing the woorst had armed themselves. This (...), they shrunk away and
fled, but were soon after (...), and diversely punished, some dismembered, other
fair and well hanged. The Pope hearing of this, was so incensed, that he wrote
a very sharp letter unto the king, breathing out terrible threats against him,
if he did not presently reconcile himself unto the Bishop and cause full
amends to be made him for all the loss he had sustained either by the
Countess or him in these troubles. The king was too wise either to do all he
required, or utterly to despise his authority. The (...) he knew was not for
his honor, nor (so far had this tyrant incroched upon the authority of
princes) the other for his (...). Warned by the examples of king John, Henry
the emperor and other; he thought good not to exasperate him too (...); and so
was content to yield unto somewhat. But before the matter could grow to a full
conclusion, it was otherwise ended by God, who took away the Bishop by death.
He deceased at Auinion June 23. 1361. and was there buried, (...) been Bishop
even almost 17. years.

19. Simon Laugham.
INnocentius translated then Reginald Bryan Bishop of John Buckingham afterward
Bishop of Lincoln was then chosen, and was rejected by the Pope, who preferred
to this See Simon Laugham Abbot of Westminster. He continued here but five
years, being in that space first Treasurer, then Chauncellor of England, and
was removed to Canterbury. Of his translation some merry fellow made these
verses:

Laetentur (...) quia Simon transit ab Ely,
Cuius in aduentum flent in Kent (...) centum.
See more of him in Canterbury.

20. John Barnet.
AT what time Simon Laugham was translated to Canterbury, John Barnet was
removed from Bathe to succeed him in Ely. He was first consecrate Bishop of
Worcester 1362. and staying there but one year, obtained Bathe 1363. and
lastly Ely 1366. He was Treasurer of England. Being a very old man before his
coming to Ely, he lived there notwithstanding six years, in which tune he
bestowed the making of four windows, two in the South side, and two in the
North side of the Presbytery. He died June 7. 1379. at Bishops (...), and lies
buried upon the south side of the high altar; in which place there is to be
soon a goodly toombe monstrously defaced, the head of the image being broken
off, I take that to be Barnets toombe.

21. Thomas Arundell.
AFter the death of John Barnet the king writ earnestly John Woodrone his
confessor. But they elected Henry Wakefield Treasurer of the kings house. This
election was made void by the Pope, who placed of his own authority (as I
(...) delivered) Thomas Arundell Archdeacon of Taunton, son unto Robert (...)
of Arundell and Warren, being an aged gentleman of two and twenty years old,
and as yet but a Subdeacon. How be it, some report, that order being taken by
parliament about this time for the ratifying of capitular elections, and
stopping the injurious provisions of the Pope, that this Thomas (...) was
chosen orderly and consecrate at Otford by the Archbishop William Witlesey
April 6. 1375. Having (...) there sowerteene years three months and
eighteen (...), he was translated to York and after to Canterbury. He left
for an implement of his house at Ely a wonderful sumptuous and costly table
decked with gold and precious stones. It belonged first unto the king of
Spain, and was sold to this Bishop by the Black Prince for 300. marks. He
also bestowed the building of the great gate house in the house at Holburne.
See more of him in York and Caterbury.

22. John Fordham.
The Sea had been void but fowerteene days when John

23. Philip Morgan.
THe king then and many noble men commended unto William (...) doctor of law
the kings confessor and keeper of the privy Seal, who was after Bishop of
Lincoln. But they chose Peter their Prior. That election being disliked at
home by the Archbishop, he was fame to seek unto the Pope, whose manner was
little or nothing to regard elections, but to bestow any Bishopric or other
preferment that fell according to his own pleasure, if it were not filled
before the auoidance might come to his knowledge. According to this custom
having no respect of the election of the covent; of his own authority he
thrust in Phillip Morgan into this Bishopric. This man being doctor of law,
was consecrate Bishop of worcester 1419. and soon after (...) death viz.
before the end of the year 1425. removed as is aforesaid unto Ely. He was a
very wise man, governed there with great commendation nine years six months,
and four days. And departed this life at Bishops (...) October 25. 1434. He
was buried at charter house in London.

24. Jews Lushborough.
PResently after his death the Monks elected Robert Fitz hugh Bishop of london:
who died before his translation could be perfected. The king then writ for
Thomas Rodburne Bishop of saint (...): which notwithstanding, they make choice
of another, to wit Thomas Bourchier Bishop of worcester, whose election the
Pope confirmed, but the king utterly refused to restore to him the temporalties
of that see. And so for fear of a praemunire, he durst not receive the popes
bulls of confirmation, but renounced all his interest by this election. The
king then appointed this Bishopric unto Jews Lushbrough Archbishop of Roan
Cardinal and Chauncellor both of France and Normandy that was some way I know
not how kin unto him. By his means a dispensation was gotten of the Pope to
hold Ely in commendam with his Archbishopricke. He enjoyed it six years and
six months and then died at Hatfild Septem. 18. 1443. He is said to have
been buried between two marble pillars beside the altar of relics.

25. Thomas Bourchier.
THomas Bourchier being now once more chosen, without Henry Earl of Esser,
forced deane of saint Martins, then consecrate Bishop of worcester 1435. and
sat there eight years. Here he continued ten years five months and twelve
days, and was then removed to Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

26. William Gray.
The Sea having been void only 14. days, Pope Nicholas William Gray, doctor
of Divinity, placed him in the same. This William was a gentleman very well
borne, to (...) of the noble and ancient house of the Lord Gray of (...),
whose friends perceiving in him a notable (...) and sharpness of wit,
dedicated him unto learning. He was brought up in Baylioll College in Oxford.
Having spent much time there profitably, and to very good purpose, (...) the
study as well of Divinity as Philosophy; he passed over the seas and travailed
into Italy, where he frequented much the lectures of one Guarinus of Uerona, a
great learned man in those days. Following thus his study, and profiting
exceedingly therein, he grew very famous; and no (...), for to see a gentleman
of great lineage, having maintenance at will, to become very learned, especially
in Divinity, is in deed a wonder, and seldom seen. He writ many things both
before and after his preferment, whereof I think nothing now remains.
Neither was he a simple (...) and a bookeman only. King Henry the 6.
perceiving him not onlylearned, but very discrete, and no less industrious,
appointed him his Proctor for the following of all his business in the Popes
court. By this occasion having often recourse unto the Pope, his great learning
and other excellent parts were soon (...) by him, and woorthily rewarded with
this Bishopric. It was impossible such a man should not be imploted in State
matters. The year 1469. he was made Treasurer of England by king Edward the 4.
24. years two months and 21. days, he was Bishop of this See. In which mean
space he bestowed great sums of money upon building of the steeple, at the west
end of his Church, and at his death (which happened at Downham August 4. 1478.)
he bequeathed many goodly ornaments unto the same his church, in which he was
buried between two marble pillars.

27. John Moorton.
A Happy and memorable man succeeded him, John doctor of law from whose
wisdom and devise sprung that blessed conjunction of the two noble houses of
Lancaster and York after so many years war between them. This man was borne
at Berry near Blandford in Dorsetshire, first parson of S. Dunstans in London
and prebendary of S. Decumans in (...) (as my self also sometimes was) then
Master of the Rolls and lord Chauncellor of England. August 9. 1478. (viz.
within (...) days after the death of Bishop Gray) he was elect Bishop of Ely,
where he continued about eight years, and the year 1486. was translated to
Canterbury. Being yet Bishop of Ely, he bestowed great cost upon his house at
Hatfild. At (...) castle likewise all the building of brick was of his charge.
As also yt new leame that he caused to be made for more conuentent carriage to
his town, which they say serves now to small purpose, and many complain that
the course of the river Nine into the sea by Clowcrosse is very much hindered
thereby. See more of him in Canterbury.

28. John Alcock.
AFter the translation of John Morton the Sea was void John Alcock doctor of
Law, and Bishop of Worcester, was preferred thereunto the year 1486. A man of
admirable temperance, for his life and behavior unspotted, and from a child
so earnestly given to the study, not only of learning, but of all virtue and
godliness; as in those days never any man bare a greater opinion and
reputation of holiness. He lived all his life time most soberly and chastely,
resisting the temptations of the flesh, and subduing them by fasting, study,
prayer, and other such good means, abhorring as (...) all food that was
likely to stir him up unto wantonness. He was borne at Beuerley in Yorkshire;
first Deane of Saint Stephens in Westminster and Master of the Rolls,
consecrate Bishop, of Rochester 1471. translated first to Worcester 1476. and
then to Ely (as I said) 1486. about which time he was for a while Lord
Chancellor of England by the appointment of that prudent and most excellent
prince king Henry the 7. Being yet at Worcester he founded a (...), at
kingstone upon Hul; built a chapel upon the south side of the parish church,
where his parents were buried, and (...) a Chauntrey there. He built moreover
from the very foundation that stately hall in the palace of Ely, together with
the gallerie; and in almost every house belonging to his Bishopric, bestowed
very great cost. Lastly, he was the author of a goodly College in Cambridge,
now called (...) College: it was first a Monastery of Nuns, dedicated to
Saint Radegund, and being fallen greatly in decay, the goods and ornaments of
the church wasted, the lands diminished, and the Nuns themselves having for
saken it, insomuch as only two were left, where of one was determined to be
gone shortly, the other but an infant: This good Bishop obtained license of K.
Henry the 7. to convert yt same to a college, wherein he placed a master, 6.
fellows, and a certain number of scholars (since augmented by other
benefactors) and dedicated the same unto the honor of yt holy Trinity, the
blessed Uirgin, S. John the (...), and S. Radegund: what was not expended upon
these buildings, or to other good purposes of like profit, he bestowed in
hospitality and house keeping every whit. Having sat 14. years and somewhat
more, he was taken out of this life to that place where no doubt he finds the
reward of his doings, viz. upon the first day of October 1500. He lies buried
in a chapel of his own building, on the North side of the Presbytery, where
is to be seen a very goodly and sumptuous toombe, erected in memory of him,
which by the barbarous and (...) of some body, is pitifully defaced, the head
of the Image being broken off, the compartiment and other buildings torn down.

29. Richard Redman.
ONe whole year the Bishopric had been void after Alcockes death, when as
Richard Redman Doctor of Divinity, first Bishop of Saint Assaph, then of
Exeter, was translated thence unto Ely. He sat there but three years and an
half, and dying was buried between two pillars on the North side of the
presbytery, where we see a very stately toombe of free stone well built. He was
very liberal unto the poor. His manner (they say) was, in traveling to give
unto every poor person that demanded alms of him a piece of money, six
pence at least; and least many should loose it for want of knowledge of his
being in town, at his coming to any place, he would cause a bell to ring to
give notice thereof unto the poor. No doubt, but he that bestowed thus much in
public, bestowed also very much in private that all the world knew not of.

30. James Stanley.
James Stanley Doctor of Duinity, and brother unto the much there with a
certain woman in very (...) me (...) and all the winter, he would be with his
brother in Darbyshire. So drowned in pleasures he passed his time without doing
any one thing worthy commendation or (...).

31. Nicholas West.
IN the month of October 1515. Nicholas West Doctor of John West a baker. This
Bishop (as I find noted) kept daily in his house an hundred servants; of
which, to the one half he gave yearly (...) marks wages, and the rest forty
shillings, every one being allowed four yards of cloth for his winter livery
to make him a gown, and three yards and a half for a coat to wear insommer.
Daily he gave at his gate warm meat and drink to two hundred poor folk:
and moreover in (...) of dearth distributed diverse sums of money unto the
poor. He governed the Dioces of Ely seventeen years and six months. At
last falling into the kings displeasure for some matter concerning his first
marriage: the grief (...) (as it is thought) cast him into a disease, which
being the worse able to sustain because of a fistula that he had near his
fundament: He yielded unto the necessity of Nature April 6. 1533. He lies
buried in a chapel very sumptuously built by himself in the South east part
of the Presbytery of Ely.

32. Thomas Gooderich
AYeere and 14. days the Sea of Ely was void after the West. In which time I
find that (...) Nicholas Hawkins Doctor of Law was elect unto the same: It is
like he died before he could be consecrate; for he never enjoyed it I am sure.
The 20. day of April 1534. Thomas Gooderich Doctor of Divinity was consecrate,
and sat 20. days above 20. years. He built a fair gallery in the North side
of the palace of Ely, and otherwise in that house bestowed much cost. He died
at Somersham of the (...) tenth of May 1554. and lies buried almost in the
middle of the Presbytery. More would be said of him: but I had rather you
should hear it in other men's words then mine. For I now grow near the time of
which I mean to speak little, as judging it neither safe to reprehend, nor
seemly to praise (though truly) those men whose memoryare fresh and diverse
their friends living. This therefore that I find written upon his toombe I
will impart unto you, and concerning hun no more:

Thomas Goodricus annis plus minus 20. huius (...) Episcopus hocloco (...) est.
Duobus Angliae (...) regibus (...) and (...), foris (...) apud exteros
principes saepe legatus, (...) quidem cum (...) Edwardo eius nominis sexto
aliquandiu (...), magnus tandem factus Angliae Cancellarius. Chariorne (...)
propter singularem prudentiam, an (...) populo propter integritatem and
abstmentiam fuerit, ad (...) est per quam difficile.

In English thus:
Thomas Goodrich for 20. years Bishop of this Church (...) buried in this
place. A man very acceptable unto two noble kings of this realm, in many
actions both concerning the church and common wealth. For abroad he was often
employed in embassages to foreign Princes, and at home, after he bad been of
the privy Council a while unto king Edward the sixth of that name, he was made
at last high Chancellor of England. Whether he were more dear unto his Prince
for his singular wisdom, or more beloved of the commonalty for his integrity
and abstinence, it is even very hard to say. He died the 10. of May 1554.

33. Thomas Thirlby.
AT what time it pleased king Henry the eight to make Thomas Thirlby Doctor of
Divinity. The year 1550. he was (...), by (...) unto the Bishopric of Ely,
but also (...) of her privy Council. After her death, (...) the reformation
intended by our grand (...) Elizabeth; he was committed to the tower (...) from
his Bishopric by act of parlilament. Having (...) a time of imprisonment,
neither very sharp nor very long, his friends easily obtained license for him,
and the late secretary Boxall to live in the Archbishops house, where they had
also the company of Bishop Tonstall till such time as he died. The Archbishop
entreated them all most kindly, as considering no doubt the variablenes of this
mutable world, how possible it was for God that so lately had set him up, to
cast him down, as he had done those men. He lived in this sort the space of
10. years and upwards; taking more pleasure (I assure my self) in this time of
his imprisonment (for so some men will needs esteem it) then ever heretofore
in the midst and fullest stream of his highest honors. He departed this life
at Lambhith August 26. 1570. and lies buried in the middle of the chauncell
there at the head of Bishop Tunstall under a marble stone.

34. Richard Coxe.
BIshop (...) being removed from his place by (...) (as is before said)
Richard Coxe Doctor of Divinity was appointed thereunto by her Majesty that now
(...), and was consecrate December 21. 1559. He was borne in Buckingham shire,
in king Edwards days Chauncellor of the University of Oxford, Deane of
Westminster, and Christchurch in Oxford, (...) unto the said king, Almosner
unto him, and (as Bale also reports) of his privy Council. All (...) Mary's
time he lived in Germany. He was Bishop of Ely seven months above 21. years,
and departed this life July 22. 1581. He lies buried (...) Bishop Goodrich
under a marble stone, upon which (though much of the (...)) I (...) these (...):

Vita (...) vale, (...) vita (...),
Corpus (...), (...).
Interra Christi gallus (...),
Da Christ in coelis te sine fine sonem.
35. Martyn (...).
The Sea having continued void almost 20. years, it pleased her Majesty at
last to appoint unto the same Martyn Heton Doctor of Divinity and Deane of
Winchester, who was consecrate in the end of the year 1599. long and happily
may he well enjoy the (...).

The valuation of this Bishopric in the Exchequer is 2134, l. 18, s. 5, d.
half farthing and the third part of a farthing: in the Popes books 7000.
ducats.
The Bishops of Lincoln.
THe Bishop of that Dioces, whereof Lincoln is now the Sea, sat (...) at
(...), a place distant from Oxford about 10. (...). (...) was all that
country, which now belongs unto the Bishops of Winchester, Lincoln,
Salisbury, Oxford, Bristow, Wels, Lichfield, (...), and (...); and he
(notwithstanding that he governed also the Mercians or Saxons of Mid-England,
who for a while had not any Bishop peculiar unto themselves) he I say (...)
called the Bishop of the West Saxons. Birinus was the first Bishop of this so
large a territory; Of him see more in Winchester. The second was Agilbert a
French man. In his time Kenwalchus king of the West Saxons, caused this huge
(...) to be divided into two parts, the one of which he left unto Agilbert,
unto the other he caused one Wina to be consecrate, appointing Winchester to be
his See, and all the West country his jurisdiction. After Agilbert there was
no other Bishop of Dorchester a long time. He departing into France, Wina and
his successors Bishops of Winchester, governed that See also, or part of it at
least. For it happened not long after that Oswy king of Mercia erected an
Episcopal (...) at Lichfield, and placed one Diuma in the same. He had all
MidEngland for his Dioces; so had six or seven of his successors, butill the
year 678. at what time a Bishop was (...) at Sidnacester, one Eadhead: He
dying within one year, Ethelwine succeeded.

Then these;
Edgar. Kinebert, Beda calls him Embert, and acknowledges himself much
helped by him in the (...) of his Ecclesiastical history. He dyed 733. 733.
Alwigh. 751. Ealdulf, he died ann. 764. 764. Ceolulf, he died 787. 787.
Ealdulf.

After Ealdulf, the Sea continued void many years. The year 872. Brightred
became Bishop. In the mean time, viz. the year 737. another See was erected
at Legecester, now called Leicester (but soon after removed to Dorchester)
and one Tota made Bishop there;

Then these;
Edbertus consecrate ann. 764. Werenbert. He died 768. Vuwona suceeded him (as
has Florilegus.) Other put him before Werenbert. He lived ann. 806. (...). He
died 851. Aldred, consecrate 861. or rather as Matthew. West. reports ann. 851.
The year 873. he was deprived of his Bishopric. (...), consecrate 873.
Halard, by king Alfred appointed one of the Guardians of the realm to defend
it against the irruption of the Danes, ann. 897. Kenulfus or rather (...)
consecrate ann. 905. together with six other Bishops by (...) the Archbishop.
(...), unto him the Dioces of Sidnamcester was also committed (which had now
continued void almost fourscore years) and his See for both established again
at Dorchester. He was a great benefactor to the Abbey Ramsey, and died the
year, 959. Ailnoth, consecrate 960. (...) or Aeswy. (...). Eadnoth, slain by
the Danes in battle, 1016. Eadheric, he died 1034. and was buried at Ramsey.
Eadnoth, He built the Church of our Lady in Stowe, and died the year 1050.
Vlf. He was a Norman, brought into England by Emma the Queen of king Ethelred,
sister to Richard Duke of Normandy. She commended him unto her son Saint
Edward, and found means upon the death of Eadnoth to advance him (though a
man very unlearned) unto this Bishopric. (...) 1052. He and all the (...)
(that through the (...) of Queen Emma possessed the chief places of (...) in
all the realm) were compelled to depart the land. This man amongst the rest
going to the Council of Uercels to complain unto the Pope of his wrongful
vanishment, (...) far soorth bewrayed his own weakness and insufficiency,
as the Pope was determined to have displaced him (...) his Bishopric, until
with gifts, and golden eloquence (...) persuaded him to wink at his
imperfections. It seems (...) died the year following. (...) or (...), was
consecrate the year 1053. (...) 1067. and was buried in his Cathedral Church
of Dor chester.
1. Remingius de Feschamp.
THe last Bishop of Dorchester and first of Lincoln (...), a monk of Feschamp
that (as Bale noseth) was the son of a priest. Unto this man William the
Conqueror (for diverse good services done unto him) had promised long before a
Bishopric in England, (...) it should please God to send him (...). He was as
good as his word, and the year 1070. preferred him to Dorchester, void by the
death of the former Bishop. The consideration of this gift coming to the Popes
ear, he would (...) it symony, and as a (...) actually deprived him of his
Bishopric: But at the request of Lanfrank the Archbishop of Canterbury, he
restored him to his ring and crosyer again. Soon after his first preferment,
he began to build at Dorchester, and intended great matters there. But order
being taken in a Convocation at London by the kings procurement, that
Episcopal sees every where should be removed from obscure towns to greater
cities, he diuerted the course of his liberality from Dorchester to Lincoln.
Lincoln at that time (says William Malmsburie) was one of the most populous
cities of England, of great resort and traffic both by sea and land. Remigius
therefore thinking it a fit place for a Cathedral church, bought certain
ground upon the top of the hill near the castle then lately built by William
the conqueror, and began the foundation of a goodly church. The Archbishop of
York endcuoured to hinder the execution of this worthy designement by laying
challenge to the jurisdiction of that country: This allegation, though
frivolous, was a mean of some charge unto the Bishop, who (not without gifts)
was feign to work the king to be a means of clearing that title. (...)
fabrike of the church being now finished, and 21. prebends founded in the same,
al which he furnished with Incumbents very well esteemed of both for learning
and conversation; He made great provision for the dedication of this his new
church, procuring all the Bishops of England by the kings authority to be
summoned thereunto. The rest came at the time appointed, which was May 9. 1092.
Only Robert Bishop of Hereford absented him self, foreseeing by his skill in
Astrology (as Bale and other affirm) that Remigius could not live unto the day
prefixed, which also he foretold long before. It fell out (according unto his
prediction) that (...) died two days before the time appointed for this great
solemnity. He was buried in that his own new built church. This Remigius was a
man, though of so high and noble a mind, yet so unreasonable low of stature, as
hardly he might attain unto the pitch and reputation of a dwarf. So as, it
seemed, nature had framed him in that sort, to show how possible it was that an
excellent mind might dwell in a deformed and miserable body. Besides this
worthy foundation at Lincoln, he reedified the church and Abbey at (...), as
also the Abbey of Bardney. By his persuasion king William the conqueror
erected the Abbeyes of Cane in Normandy, and Battle in Susser upon the very
place where he had overthrown king Harold in battle, and so made a passage
unto the conquest of the whole (...). The superstitious and credulous posterity
ascribe diverse miracles unto the holiness of this Bishop, wrought (not in his
life time, but) many years after his death.

2. Robert Bloett.
IT happened soon after the death of (...), the king (William Rufus) to fall
dangerously sick at Gloucester: And thinking he should die, began seriously to
repent him of his dissolute and vicious life forepassed: Especially, he showed
great grief for his Simony and sacrilegious oppression of the church and
Clergy men. In this good mood he bestowed the Archbishopricke of Canterbury
(having kept it void four years) upon Saint Anselm, and Lincoln upon Robert
Bloet or Bluet his Chauncellor. When he recovered, he much repented his
repentance, wished they were in his hands again, and tell to his old practices
as (...) as ever heretofore. This Robert Bloet was a man passing wise,
liberal, (...), courteous and very personable, but unlearned, light of
behavior, and much given to lust. Bale reports he had a son named Simon
(base borne no doubt) whom he made Deane of Lincoln. He dedicated his church;
bestowed very much in furnishing the same with ornaments requisite. Unto the
21. Prebends founded by his predecessor, he added 21. more, and very largely
endued (or as some deliver founded) the Abbey of Eynsham besides Oxford, unto
the which monastery he removed the monks of Stow. Again he bestowed the
manor of Charlton upon the monks of Bermondsey, and gave unto the king 500,
l. (or as H. Huntingdon has 5000.) to clear the title that the Archbishop of
York laid unto the jurisdiction of his See. He was consecrate the year 1092.
sat almost 30. years, and died at last suddenly January 10. 1122. Riding by
the kings side talking with him near Woodstocke, he shranke down speechless,
and being carried to his lodging, died in a manner presently. His bowels were
buried at Eynsham, his body was conueghed to Lincoln, and there in his own
church solemnly interred. Upon his toombe was engraven this Epitaphe:

Pontificum Robertus honor, quem fama superstes
Perpetuare dabit, non obiturus obit.
Hic humilis, dives, (res mira) potens, pius vltor,
Compatiens, mitis, cum pateretur, erat.
Noluit esse sui Dominus, studuit pater esse,
Semper in aduersis murus and arma suis.
In decima Iani, mendacis somnia mundi
Liquit, and euigilans, vera perenne vidit.
3. Alexander.
ROger that famous Bishop of Salisbury, was now so Henry the first) as being
able to do with him what he list, he easily entreated him to bestow the
Bishopric of Lincoln upon one Alexander his own brothers son, a Norman
borne, whom not long before he had made Archdeacon of Salisbury, and chief
Justice of England. He was consecrate at Canterbury July 22. 1123. The next
year after, his Cathedral church so lately built, and yet scarcely finished,
was burnt and horribly defaced by casual fire. This man repaired it again,
and added unto it a special ornament, a goodly vault of stone, which before it
had not, and therefore was the more subject unto fire. He also increased the
number of his Prebends, and purchased unto his church certain manors and
other lands. But his chief delight was in building of castles, wherein he
imitated his uncle the Bishop of Salisbury. This humor was the undoing of them
both. To leave the other unto his own place, Alexander built a stately castle
at Banbury, another at Newarke, and a third at Sleford. William Par^^s
reports that he also founded two monasteries, but what or where I find not.
These castles were such eie-sores unto king Stephen, as they provoked him to
pick a quarrel otherwise unto the Bishops, to clappe them up in prison (where
the other died) and to bereave them at once of these munitions and all their
treasure, whereof they had hoorded up great store. They that kept the castle of
Newarke refused to deliver it at the kings summons, till such time as the
Bishop entreated them to yield, signifying (and it was true indeed) that the
king had sworn he should nether eat nor drink before he had possession of
the castle. Hereupon they set open the gates unto the king, and then with much
adoo having lain by it certain months, he was at last released of his
imprisonment. After that, (...) the (...) of his (...), (...) himself wholly to
(...) the (...) of his church, performed that which (...), and (...) made it
simply the most beautiful church of England at that time. He was thrice at
Rome, to wit, the (...) 1142. and 1144. where he behaved himself so, as he
pleased both the king and the Pope very well. The first time he was (...), the
Pope gave him authority to call a (...) as his (...), and especially (...) unto
him the redress of certain (...); for the effecting whereof he caused (...)
canons to be made very necessary for those times. A third journey he made unto
the Pope, lying then in France, in the month of August 1147. where through
immoderate heat of the weather during the time of his travel, he fell (...),
and with much (...) getting home, not long after his return he died having
sat Bishop about the space of 24. years. I (...) in Henry Huntingdon certain
verses written in commendation of him which I think not amiss here to be
inserted:

Splendour Alexandri non tam renitescit honor,
Quam per eum renitescit honor, flos namque virorum.
Dando tenere (...), thesauros cogit honoris,
Et gratis dare festinans, ne danda rogentur.
Quod nondum dederit, nondum se credit habere.
O decus, o moruoo directio; quo veniente,
Certa fides, hilaris clementia, cauta potestas,
Lene (...), doctrina placens, correctio dulcis,
Libercasque decens venere, pudorque facetus.
Lincoliae gens magna prius, nunc maxima semper;
Talis and ille diu sit nobis tutor honoris.
4. Robert de Chisuey.
AFter Alexander succeeded Robert Archdeacon of Leycester, de Chisuey or
Chisueto, by others de Taueto, Querceto or Euerceto (for so diversely I find
him called) a very young man. He was consecrate in September 1147. and died
January 8. 1167. This man added one Prebend unto those that were founded by his
predecessors, purchased a house for himself and his successors (...) unto the
temple at London, and built the Bishops palace at Lincoln in a manner all. He
left his See indebted unto one Aaron a Jew the sum of 300, l. (a great deal
of money in those days) and his successors were feign to see it discharged
long after.

5. Geoffry Plantagenet.
The Sea of Lincoln continued then void after the death of the said Robert
almost seventeen (...); in so much as all men were of opinion, there should
never be any more Bishop there. A certain convert of Tame reputed a very holy
man, and half a prophet in regard of many things he had strangely foretold,
this man I say had given out, that the said Robert lately deceased should be
the last Bishop of Lincoln. This prediction of his many men (...), when not
long after the death of the Bishop before mentioned, they saw Geoffry king
Henry the second his base son and Archdeacon of Lincoln, elected unto that
See. But he contenting himself with the large revenues of that rich
Bishopric, never sought consecration, well knowing he might so sheare the
fleece, though he listed not to take the charge of feeding the sheep. Seven
years he reaped the fruits of that See by color of his election; and then by
his fathers commandment resigned all his interest in the same, became an
entire courtier for eight years more, and at last returning to the church
again, became Archbishop of York. See more of him there.

6. Walter de Constantijs.
ABout the latter end of the year 1183. when all men Walter de Constantijs
Archdeacon of Oxford, was elect and consecrate Bishop of Lincoln. He was very
fearful to accept of the election, thinking assuredly he might not live to be
Bishop, in regard of that vain and false prophecy before mentioned. Being yet
scarce warm in his seat, the Archbishopricke of (...) was (...) unto him, a
place of much higher dignity, but of less revenues then Lincoln a great deal.
(...) the power and force of ambition, that could provoke this man, notably
(...), to forsake riches, and content him self with (...) place (...) less
wealth, but a little more honorable. He was translated to (...) the next year
after his coming to Lincoln, viz. 1184.

7. Saint Hugh.
TWo years after the departure of Walter to Koan, the Matthewes day 1186. one
Hugh the first Prior of the Charterhouse monks at Witteham in Somersetshire
was consecrate Bishop of the said Church. This Hugh (who by his integrity of
life and conversation, and the opinion of diverse miracles wrought by him, has
purchased unto himself the honor and reputation of a Saint) was borne in a
City of Burgundy, called Gratianopolis. By the advice and direction of his
Father, (who having buried his wife, had made himself a regular Channon) he
also entered the same profession being yet very young: But waring elder, he
betook him self afterward unto the straight and severe orders of the
Carthusians or Charterhouse monks (as we commonly call them.) In that kind of
life he not only observed all things requisite by the rule of their order, but
so far surmounted the same in performing much more then it required, as he
grew very famous far and near for his extraordinary abstinence and austerity
of life. It chanced the report thereof to come unto the ears of king Henry
the second: who building a house for Carthusian monks at Witteham above
mentioned, thought good to send Reginald Bishop of Bathe into Burgundy, to
entreat this holy man, to accept the place of the Prior of this new
foundation. With much adoo he assented, and came over with the Bishop. The king
(who for the opinion he had of his holiness, used often privately to confer
with him) remembering how great wrong he had done the Church of Lincoln in so
long keeping it without a Bishop, determined to make amends by giving them a
good one at last, and procured this Hugh before he understood of any such thing
toward, to be elected Bishop of that See. He governed very stoutly and with
great severity, yet so, as he was more reverenced and loved then feared. His
excommunications were very terrible unto all men, and the rather, for that it
was noted (as I find delivered) some notable calamity otherwise did lightly
follow them. His Church of Lincoln he caused to be all new built from the
foundation, a great and memorable work, and not possible to be performed by
him without infinite help. Moreover, he gave unto the King 1000. marks, to
acquit him and his successors, from the yearly payment of a Mantell of
Sables, wherewith by an ancient custom they were wont every newyeares tide
to present him. The year 1200. he would needs make a voyage to Carthusia the
chief and original house of their order. In his return home, he fell sick
of a quartane ague at London and there died, November. 17. 1200. His body was
presently conueighed to Lincoln, and hapened to be brought thither, at a time,
when king John of England and William king of Scots were met there, with an
infinite number of the nobility of both realms. The two kings, for the great
reverence they bare unto his holiness, would needs set their shoulders unto
the beer, and helped to carry his coarse from the gates of the City, until it
came to the Church door: There it was received by the Prelates, carried into
the quire and the funer all rites being ended, buried in the body of the East
part of the Church above the high Altar, near the altar of Saint John
Baptist. The year 1220. (...) was Canonised at Rome, and his body being taken
up, October 7. 1282. was placed in a silver shrine, Who so lists to read the
miracles that are ascribed unto him, may find them in Matthew. Paris that
describes his life at large in his report of the year 1200. Amongst many
things omitted for breuity, I can not let pass one thing which I find
elsewhere delivered concerning him, how that coming to Godstowe a house of
Nuns near Oxford, and seeing a hearse in the middle of the quire covered
with silk, and tapers burning round about it, he asked who was buried there.
Understanding then, it was that fair Rosamond the Concubine of king Henry the
second, who at her entreaty had done much for that house, and in regard of
those favors was (...) that honors (...) her body to be dug Up
immediately, a^^ buried in the Church yard, saying it was a plac^ a great deal
t^o good for a harlot, and it should be an example to other women to terrify
them from such a wicked and filthy kind of life.

8. William de Bleys.
William de Bleys (...) and Canon of the

9. Hugh de Wels.
HVgh (...) of (...), and sometimes (...) John (...) to (...) Stephen (...) for
Archbishop of (...), (whereof see more in (...)) (...) this the elect of (...)
to repair (...) the Archbishop of Roan for consecration. (...) this (...) of
the King, he got unto Stephen Langton and of him was consecrate. The king
hearing of it, (...) upon his (...) and kept him (...) from them, till the
year 1213. This Bishop and Ioceline of (...), laying their purses together,
(...) a (...) hospital at (...). (...) more thereof (...) the life of the said
Ioceline. (...), (...) a (...) in his Church of Lincoln. I have (...) of a
(...) made by him 1211. in which (...) great (...) to his friends (...) kindred,
he (...) 5000. marks. He (...) long after, to (...) 7. 1234. (...) then, he
was (...) in (...) Church.

10. Robert Grosse-teste
June 11. following, to wit, the year 1235. Robert Grossetest Archdeacon of
Leycester was consecrate Bishop of Lincoln. A man famous for his excellent
learning and virtues otherwise. He was borne in Suffolk, of very mean or
rather base parentage. In his youth (according unto the manner of all students
in those times) he traveled into France, partly to increase his knowledge in
other learning, but especially to attain the French tongue, which was then
almost as common here as the English. At his return he was made Archdeacon of
Leycester, and afterward (as before is mentioned) Bishop of Lincoln. In his
time, the tyranny of the Pope was now grown to the full height and (...). What
for appeals unto Rome and bribes at Rome, no jurisdiction here could punish
any fault never so (...). No jurisdiction or other preferment was likely to
fall, but the Popes reservation would take it up before hand, and bestow it at
last upon some stranger (happily a child) that would never come near it all
his life long. The year 1252. notice being taken of this matter, the spiritual
promotions of strangers within this realm were found to amount unto the sum
of 70000. marks by the year, whereas the kings yearly revenues at that time
came not to the third part of that sum. At these and other intolerable
abuses, he repining very much; thought good in person to go to Rome and
acquaint yt Pope with his grieves. He did so, was heard, and with saire
promises dismissed. But when at his return he found no manner of redress of
those things he complained, he feared not to write unto the Pope a very sharp
and Satyricall letter, showing how far he had degenerated from the holiness
of his predecessors, and exhorting him earnestly to reform the monstrous
enormities, that flowing from Rome, as from a corrupt and poisoned fountain
infected the whole Church. This Epistle (if any man desire to see it) is to be
found in Matthew. Paris. The Pope having read it, grew into great choler, and
breathing out many threats, intended some terrible revenge of this so
intolerable a reproach (as he took it) until such time as, one Gyles a
Cardinal of Spain (...) unto him, used these words; Holy father, it shall not
do well (in my opinion) to take any hard or extreme course against this man.
It is but too true that he has written. He is (...) religion a Catholic as
well as we, but for life and conversation so far (...) us, as it is thought
Christendom has not his like. Again, he is known to to be a great learned
man, an excellent Philosopher, well seen in the Greek tongue as well as the
Latin, a profound Divine, and a diligent preacher; These things are well
known to all the Clergy, both of France and England: We have no just matter
against him, we are not able to touch him, yea though we were, it (...) not
wisdom. We shall do well to remember, how (...) it is, quod (...), (...) est
ventura, that there shall one day be a departure, and let us take heed that we
give not the occasion. My advice therefore is, that we (...) content to wink
at this matter, and even let him alone. Some say his counsel was followed, and
the matter passed over in silence. Howbeit, it is also reported (and both may
be true) that afterward (upon some new quarrel (...)) he was suspended at
Rome, excommunicate, and horribly persecuted. And indeed it is certain, that
he would never be iuduced to obey any of those monstrous and unreasonable
bulls: Of (...), discoursing sometimes with his familiars, he would very
confidently affirm, that the Pope was an Heretic, yea and Antichrist. So
Matthew. Paris (...). Notwithstanding these broils, he was a continual and
diligent Preacher, writ books to the number of all most 200. l. (the Catalogue
whereof you may find in Bale) and yet took infinite pains in attending
matters of government and jurisdiction, so far (...) as by the Pope he was
not hindered. He died at last at his manor of Buckden, October 9. 1253. giving
all his books (an excellent library) unto the Friar Minors at (...). He lies
buried in the (...) South (...) of his Cathedral Church, and has a goodly
(...) of marble, with an image of brass (...) it. The Pope not (...) to
persecute him after his death, was once of the mind (...) dig up his body
again, until by the persuasion of (...) other his mind was altered. But see
the just judgment of God upon this wicked Pope (it was Innocent 4.) Lying at
Naples in his way toward (...) (the kingdom whereof in hope he had now
devoured) this bishop appeared unto him in the night, and struck him a great
blow upon the left side, which showed all bloody in the morning; and soon
after the Pope died. This Bale reports out of Ranulfus, Fabian, and others.
Matthew Paris ascribes diverse miracles unto him, and doubtteth not to account
him a Saint, although the Pope ought him not so much goodwill as to afford him
Canonisation. Doubtless he was an excellent man, and deserves the
commendation given unto him by the consent of all writers. Not to trouble my
self with any longer discourse concerning him, I will set down this brief
Elogium of Matthew Paris: He was (says he) Domini Papae and Regis redargutor
manifestus, Praelatorum correptor, Monachorum corrector, Presbiterorum
director, clericoru^ instructor, scholarium sustentator, populi predicator,
incontinentium persecutor, scripturarum sedulus perscrutator, Romanorum (...)
and contemptor. In mensa refectionis corporalis (...), (...) and (...), hilaris
and (...): In mensa vero spirituali deuotus, lachrymosus and contritus: In
officio pontificali sedulus, venerabilis, and (...). Much more you may read of
him in Master Fox.

11. Henry Lexinton.
THe King now was very earnest with the Chapter of Petet d'Egueblank Bishop of
Hereford unto that their See. They alleged, he was a stranger, understood not
the English tongue, and was moreover an evil man, not governing well the
charge already committed unto him. In regard hereof, they humbly besought the
king to hold them excused, and made choice of Henry Lexinton their Deane. He
was chosen December 30. 1253. consecrate. May 17. following. died August 8.
1258. and was buried at Lincoln in his own Church. The year before his
death, he offered some kind of hard measure unto the Uniuersity of Oxford, by
(...) certain liberties that of old belonged unto it. For redress hereof,
they were forced to make their complaint unto the King lying then at Saint
Albons, (...) Matthew Paris a (...) of (...), was (...) the (...) of their
petition, and (as (...)) (...) bold to (...) unto the king, using these (...)
unto (...) in private. I beseech your grace, even for Gods sake, to have
compassion upon the Church now tottering and in great danger of utter
subversion. The (...) of Paris, the nurse of so many excellent and famous
Prelates, is now greatly troubled. If the Uniuersity of Oxford be disquieted
and (...) also (especially at this time) being the second Uniuersity of
Christendom and even an other foundation of the Church, it is much to be
feared, least it cause a general (...) and utter ruin of the whole Church.
God forbid (...) the King that that should happen, especially in my time; I
will endeavor to prevent it. I doubt not he was as good as his word: For I find
no more mention of any farther stirs. This, I have thought good the rather to
set down, to show, what was the reputation of our Uniuersity of Oxford in
those days.

12. Benedictus Grauesend
ANother Deane of Lincoln succeeded him, Benedictus whom I (...) called also
Richard Grauesend. He was consecrate November 3. 1258. and died December 18.
1279.

13. Oliver Sutton.
Oliver Sutton (as Walsingham says) was likewise Flemming.

14. John d'Aldarby.
IOhn'D'alderby or D'aderly, Chauncellor of Lincoln succeeded

15. Thomas Beak.
January 27. following, the Chapter of Lincoln made Thomas Beak Chauncellor
of Lincoln, for their Bishop. The Archbishop of Canterbury, upon what quarrel
I know not rejected this election: But at Rome (where all things were to be had
for money) he got it confirmed. The year 1278. one Thomas Beak Archdeacon of
Dorchester was Lord Treasurer of England. It may be this was the man. And it
should seem he was very old; for he sat but a very short time; which I take
to be the cause that some men make Burwash next successor to D'Alderby. Helyeth
buried (as it seems by a note that I have seen) in the highest cross North
Isle.

16. Henry Burwash.
HEnry Burwash was nephew unto Sir Bartholomew Baron of Leedes, a man of great
authority under king Edward the second. The king by his means dealt earnestly
for the preferment of the said Henry unto the Sea of Lincoln, which he
obtained and was inthronised there about Christmas 1320. within a year or two
after, he fell into the kings displeasure so far, as that his temporalties were
seized upon and detained from him the space of two years. The year 1224. they
were restored unto him again, and he unto the kings favor: but the grudge
thereof (...) so in his stomach, as the Queen rising against her husband
seeking to depose him (as afterward she did) an. 1326. no man was so forward to
take her part as this Bishop; no man so eager against the king his undoubted,
true and natural Prince. He was also a very (...) and miserable man (as
Walsingham reports.) Toward the latter end of his time, he made a new park
at Tynghurst, and enclosed within the same much ground that belonged to diverse
poor men his tenants, for the which he had many a bitter curse of them. After
his death, it is said he appeered unto one that had been one of his gentlemen,
in the likeness of a keeper, with bow and arrows in his hand, a horn by his
side and a green ierkin on his back, telling him, that for the injurious
enclosure of that park, he was appointed to the keeping of the same and to be
tormented there, till it were disparked and (...) open again. He therefore
also besought him to entreat his brethren the Canons of Lincoln, that the
wrong done by him, by their (...) means might be righted. They were so wise as
to give credit unto this report, and sent one of their company named William
Bacheler to see it performed. He did so, hurled abroad the pale, filled up the
ditches, and caused the poor tenants to be restored unto their right again.
This Bishop died at Gaunt in the end of December 1340. having been
successively Treasurer and Chauncellor of England, and was buried in the East
end of his Cathedral church toward the North. At his feet lies a brother of
his named Robert, a knight, a great soldier, and a son of the said Robert
called Bartholomew. They founded a Grammar school in Lincoln and left
maintenance for five priests and five poor scholars.

17. Thomas le Beck.
AFter Henry Burwash, it is said that another Thomas Beak Thomas le Beck, and
by others Thomas Weke, a famous and worthy Clerk (as Walsingham reports.)
He lies buried in the lower cross Isle. When he died, or what time he sat I
find not.

18. John Synwell.
John Synwell succeeded. The year 1351. a great controversy Buckingham, it
must needs be they are mistaken for that this John Synwell died not till the
year 1361. This man (if I mistake not) built a great chapel of Saint Mary
Magdalene without the North wall of the Cathedral church, and lies buried in
the West part or body of the said church.

19. John Bokingham.
John Bokingham keeper of the privy Seal, by the help of John Bokingham lived
about those times a Doctor of Divinity of Oxford, a great (...) man in
scholasticall Divinity, as diverse works of his yet extant may testify: and
for my part I think this Bishop to be the man. The year 1397. the Pope
bearing him some grudge, translated him perforce from Lincoln unto (...), a
Bishopric not half so good. For (...) heart he would not take it, but as
though he had rather have no bread then half a loaf, forsook both and became
a monk at Canterbury.

20. Henry Beaufort.
HEnry Beaufort became Bishop of Lincoln in his place. Henry the fourth, and
is best known by the name of the rich Cardinal. He sat here seven yeees, and
the year 1404. was translated to Winchester. See more of him in Winchester.

21. Philip Repingdon.
PHilip Repingdon Abbot of Leicester, upon the (...) Henry Beaufort unto (...),
was preferred unto Lincoln. This man was sometimes a great follower of
Wickliffe and defender of his (...) not (...) in preaching and open (...) in
the (...), but by writing also; to which purpose, (...) of his (...) yet
remain to be seen. Afterward, whether it were that time altered his (...),
or that he was overcome (...) with (...) of trouble or hope of (...); he was
(...) to recant his opinions at (...). That done, (...) Clergy glad of gaining
such a man unto their party (for (...) was greatly reputed of for his learning)
(...) upon him all manner of preferment. Being now Bishop of Lincoln, the
year 1408. he was made Cardinal of (...) Nereus (...). He continued in that
(...) many years, and in (...) end resigned it. He lies buried under a (...)
stone (...) Grosthead.

22. Richard Flemming.
BIshop Flemming is famous for two things, one that (...) caused the (...) of
Wickliffe to be taken up and (...) the year 1425. and the other, that he
founded Lincoln (...) in Oxford 1430. When he first attained this (...), or
(...) what time he died I find not. He was (...) where we see a high tomb in
the North (...), in the upper (...) of the church, in the (...); in which place
also Robert Flemming his kinseman Deane of Lincoln, lies buried hard beside
him. They were both great learned men, brought up in Oxford, both Doctors of
Divinity and writ diverse learned works.

23. William Gray.
MAy 26. 1426. William Gray was (...) Bishop of London. (...) he was translated
to Lincoln the year 1431. and (...) there about the space of (...) years. He
founded a College at Theale in Hartfordshire for a Master and four Cannons,
and made it a cell to Elsing spittle in London.

24. William Alnewike.
THe year 1426. William Alnewike doctor of law was Henry the fist.

25. Marmaduke Lumley.
What time Bishop Alnewike died, I find not; but certain it is, that (...)
Lumley Bishop of Carlioll succeeded him in that See. He was some times
Treasurer of England consecrate unto Carlioll 1430. sat there 20. year, was
translated hither 1450. and having continued here scarcely one year, died at
London. Toward the building of Queens college in Cambridge (of which
university he was sometimes Chancellor) he gave 200, l. and bestowed upon the
library of that College a great many good books.

26. John Chedworth.
John Chedworth succeeded him, of whom I find nothing, but that helieth buried
under a flat stone by Bishop Sutton, near the toombe of Bishop Flemming. He
was Bishop (as I gather) about an 18. years.

27. Thomas Rotheram.
THomas Scot, alias Rotheram Bishop of Rochester, was

28. John Russell.
IN the Sea of Lincoln John Russell Doctor of Divinity and Richard Duke of
Gloucester that afterward usurped the crown. He has a reasonable fair toombe
in a chapel cast out of the upper wall of the South part of the Church.

29. William Smith.
THe year 1492. William Smith was consecrate Bishop Henry the seventh bestowed
upon it an Hospital called Donhal in Chesshyre, with (...) lands belonging to
it. At Farmworth where he was borne he bestowed ten pound land for the
maintenance of a schoolmaster there. Lastly he became founder of a goodly
college (the college of Brasennose in Oxford) ann. 1513. but lived not to
finish it in such sort as he intended Having sat but only four years at
Lichfield, he was translated to Lincoln, and died the year before mentioned
1513. He lies buried in the West part or body of the church. This Bishop was
the first President of Wales, and governed that country from the 17. year of
king Henry the 7. until the fourth year of king Henry the 8. at what time he
died.

30. Thomas Woolsey.
A Uery little while, scarcely one whole year, Cardinal Woolsey (not yet
Cardinal) was Bishop of Lincoln: Thence he was removed to (...) almost the
(...) of the year 1514. See more of him in (...).

31. William Atwater.
ONe William Atwater succeeded Cardinal. Woolsey,

32. John Longland.
John Longland Doctor of Divinity and Confessor unto king Henry the 8. upon the
death of William Atwater was aduannced unto the Bishopric of Lincoln, and
enjoyed the same a long time, being almost all that while Chauncellor of the
Uniuersity of Oxford. He died the year 1547. and is burted near unto Bishop
Russell in a toombe very like unto his.

33. Henry Holbech.
HEnry Holbech Doctor of Divinity was consecrate Bishop

34. John Tailor.
John Tailor Doctor of Divinity was consecrate ann. 1552. (...) ratgne) was
displaced.

35. John White.
John White Doctor also of Divinity was appointed Bishop

36. Thomas Watson.
Upon the remove of Doctor White, the Bishopric of Thomas (...) Doctor of
Divinity, a very austere or rather a sower and churlish man. He was scarce
(...) in his (...), when (...) Mary dying, he was (...) to (...) the same,
(...) he (...) not (...) himself unto the happy (...) by (...). (...) years
(...) he (...) a (...) and (...) about the year 1584.

37. Nicholas Bullingham.
NIcholas Bullingham Doctor of Law was consecrate

38. Thomas Cooper.
THomas Cooper Doctor of Divinity and Deane of (...)

39. William Wickham.
William Wickham succeeded Bishop Cooper immediately

40. William Chaderton.
William (...) Doctor of Divinity was consecrate

The Bishopric of Lincoln is valued in the Queens books at 894, l. 18, s.
1, d. ob. and paid to the Pope for first (...) 5000 ducats.
The Bishops of Couentry and Lichfield.
1. Dwyna.
OSwy king of Mercia or Mid England erected (...) Diuma or Dwyna Bishop there.

2. Cellach.
CEllach was the second Bishop of Lichfield. He was a Srot (as also his
predecessor was.) After a few years. giving over his Bishopric, he returned
into his own country.

3. Trumhere.
TRumhere was an Englishman borne, but brought up, taught and ordered among the
Scots. He had been Abbot of Ingethling a monastery built where king Oswyn was
slain.

4. Iaruman.
HE converted the East Saxons unto Christianity again, having forsaken it
under Sighere their king. In his time to wit, the year 666. the Cathedral
church of Lichfield was first founded.

5. Cedda.
THe year 669. Cedda was consecrate Archbishop of Wilfride. But Wilfride
returning, he gave place, and living a while a monastical life at (...),
accepted at last the Bishopric of Lichfield under Wulfnere king of Percia
ann. 669. He (...) to have been a godly and very denout man, as (...) in Beca
his Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 3. where his life and death, are at large
reported. He died March 2. 672. having sat there two years and a half, and
was buried at Lichfield.

6. Winfride.
VVInfride a Chaplain of Ceddaes was then (...) Beda witnesses.) Yet it is
said that Theodore the Archbishop of Canterbury, deprived him for I know not
what disobedience the year 674. He returned unto Catbarne a Monastery built by
Cedda, under whom he had lived in the same heretofore, and there lead a very
holy life many years after.

7. Saxulf.
VVInfride being displaced, it was thought good his Saxulf who continued his
(...) at Lichfield still; the other was committed unto Eadhead. He and his
successors (of whom you may see a Catalogue Fol. 1) sat at Sidnacester. This
Saxulf was the first Abbot of (...) now called Peterborough, and persuaded
Wolfer king of Mercia to the foundation of that Monaster.

8. Headda.
AFter Saxulf the Dioces was once more divided, and Wilfride But he being
drouen away thence after a short space, Headda that before was Bishop of
Lichfield, recovered the Jurisdiction again, and governed the same in sort as
his predecessor had done.

9. Aldwyn.
AFter Headda succeeded Aldwyn, that lived in the time of Beda. He died the
year 737.

10. Witta.
THe Country of Mercia was then divided into three Bishoprics. One was
continued at Lichfield, another Witta, Leicester to Tota, and Dorchester to
Eadhead. See more of them in Lincoln. Fol. 228.

After Witta succeeded these.
11. Hemel. He died ann. 764. 12. Cuthfrid. 13. Berthun. 14. Aldulf. Off a King
of Mercia procured the Pope to make this Aldulf 15. Humbert. Matthew. Westminster.
says this man died the year 795. and calls Higbert his successor. Howbeit I
am out of doubt that Aldwin as he was the first, so he was the last Archbishop
that ever sat there. 16. Herewin. He lived ann. 833. as appears by a Charter
in Ingulfus confirmed by him. Page 488. 17. Higbert. 18. Ethelwold. He died
858. 19. Humberhtus. He died 164. 20. Kenferth or rather Kinebert. He died 872.
21. Cumbert. 22. Tunbriht or Bumfrith. He died 928.
By the way now it shall not be amiss to remember that Florentius Wigorn:
(from whom William of (...). (...) little biffenteth) reports this order of
succession, as (...) as I can gather.

13. Berthun. 14. Higbert. 15. Aldulf. 16. Herewyn. 17. Ethelwald. 18.
Hunberht. 19. Cineferth. 20. Tunbright.
That wherein I differ from them, I find in Matthew. Westminster, whom I follow
the rather, for that he sets down not their bare names, but their times of
consecration now and then, yea and their death also.

After Tunbright without all controuer sie succeeded,
23. Ella. 24. Alfgar. 25. Kinsy. He lived ann. 966. and 948. 26. Winsy. 27.
Elseth or Ealfeage. 28. Godwyn. 29. Leosgar. 30. Brithmar. He died 1039. 31.
Wlsius. He died 1054. 32. Leofwyn, Abbot of Couentry.
33. Peter.
THis man forsaking Lichfield, removed his (...)

34. Robert de Limesey.
HE was consecrate the year 1088. translated his (...)

35. Robert Peche, alias Peccam.
RObert, surnamed Peccatum or Peche, and sometimes Peccam, Chaplame unto king
Henry the first, was consecrate 1117. died August 22. 1127. and was buried at
Couentry.

36. Roger de Clinton.
THe king then bellowed this Bishopric upon Roger that was nephew unto (...)
Lord Clinton, a man of great account and authority in his time. December 21.
1129. he was ordered Priest at Canterbury, and consecrate Bishop the day
following. This man built a great part of the Church of Lichfield, increased
the number of his Prebends, fensed the town of Lichfield with a ditch, and
bestowed much upon the castle there. No part of that castle now stands; only
the ditch remains to be seen, and the place where it stood, retains the
name of Castle field. He took upon him the cross at last, went to Jerusalem,
and died at Antioch. April 16. 1148.

37. Walter Durdent.
Walter Durdent Prior of Canterbury succeeded him.

38. Richard Peche.
RIchard Peche was son unto Robert Peche Bishop of Thomas near Stafford, of
which house some name him the founder. He was buried there, dying the year
1181.

39. Girardus Puella.
OF this man, Robertus Montensis writes thus. Magister Girardus cognomento
Puella, etc. Master Gerard surnamed Puella, a man of great learning, and
virtue, the year 1181. was chosen Bishop of Chester in England. That
Bishopric has three Episcopal Sees, Chester, Couentry, and Lichfield. He
died January 12. 1184. and was buried at Couentry.

40. Hugh Nouaunt.
THe year 1186. Hugh Nouaunt a Norman was consecrate Richard the first the
monastery of Couentry for 300. marks, (...) to place secular priests in the
same, he came thither (...) a power of armed men the year 1190. and when the
monks would not give place, inuading them with fine force, chased away some,
beat and lamed other, spoiled their house, burnt their charters and evidences,
etc. and then put in secular priests in their rooms. Bale reports that he
could not carry this matter so clear as that it cost him not some (...): In the
conflict himself was wounded, and that in the church just before the high
altar. It seems he was a man learned, stouts, and wise enough, but not so
straight and careful a censurer of his own manners and conversation as he
should be. No doubt our monks (that were the only writers of those times)
speak no better of him then he deserves: yet they commend him much for his
religious and penitent end he made. Traveling toward Rome, in his own
country of Normandy he fell sick, and perceiving his end to approach, sent for
diverse religious persons, unto whom he acknowledged the looseness of his life,
and with continual tears greatly lamented the same, heartily requested them to
pray for him, gave all his money and goods unto the poor, and lastly put on a
monks cowle, thereby thinking to make the monks amends for all the trouble and
vexation he had wrought them. He died at Beccummer hill, or (as R. Homden
reports) at Betherleuin March 27. 1199. and was buried at Cane, in the 14.
year of his troublesome government. The year 1193. he was robbed of an
infinite deal of treasure near Canterbury traveling toward king Richard that
was then prisoner in Germany. And not long after, being banished the realm for
taking part with king John rebelling against his brother king Richard then
prisoner in Germany, he was saine to buy restitution unto his place with the
sum of 5000. marks.

41. Geffry de Muschamp.
THe monks soon after the death of Bishop Hugh recovered Geffry de Muschamp
Archdeacon of Cleueland. He was consecrate at Westminster (says one) March 15.
1199. But Matthew Paris (whom I rather believe) says it was at Canterbury June
21. He died the year 1208. and was buried at Lichfielde.

42. Walter de Gray.
THe year 1210. Walter de Gray was elected unto this

43. William de Cornehull.
HE was consecrate January 25. 1215. died June 19.

44. Alexander de Sauensby.
ALexander de Sauensby (whom Bale calls Alexander Wendocke) spent much time
in diverse Uniuersities, as namely in Toulouse, Bononia and others, in which he
had the reputation of a great Philosopher, and a profound Dinine. He writ
diverse works well esteemed of in times past. In them he makes report of
diverse visions and strange apparitions he had seen (...). He was consecrate at
Rome upon Easter day 1224. In his time a great controversy was raised between
the monks of Chester and the Cannons of (...) about the election of their
Bishop, which ever since the remoouing of the Sea from (...) had belonged
unto the monks. After the spending of much money upon this suit in the court
of Rome, the matter was ordered there by diffinitiue sentence in this sort. It
was agreed that they should choose alternis vicibus, the monks one time and
the cannons of Lichfield the next. But in all elections as well at Lichfield as
at Couentry, the prior of Couentry was allowed to give a voice, and it must be
the first voice. This Bishop was founder of a house for the Gray friars in the
Southwest part of Lichfield, died at Andeuer December 26. 1238. and was buried
at Lichfield.

45. Hugh de Pateshull.
Soon after the death of the forenamed Alexander, the William Raleigh. About
the same time the Covent of Norwich (that See also being void) chose him
likewise; and he accepting the second offer as the better of the two, left
Lichfield. By reason hereof a new controversy arose between the monks of
(...) and the chapter of Lichfield, whether the turn of Couentry were served in
this election or no. Each party standing upon their title, Lichfield men
elected their Deane, and the monks one Nicholas (...) that was afterward
bishop of Durham: See more of him there. This Nicholas Fernham having notice of
the election, presently renounced the same. The Deane (that was a very good
man) hearing great (...) of the said Fernham, and thinking he refused to
consent unto the election because the title seemed doubtful and litigious,
never ceased importuning his chapter till they also (...) named him. This
notwithstanding, Nicholas Fernham (...) in his (...), both parties through the
kings (...) were induced to consent unto the choice of Hugh Pateshull Treasurer
of Paul's, that had been Treasurer, and was at that time Chauncellor of
England. He was son unto Simon Pateshull sometime Lord chief Justice of
Englane. In the beginning of the year 1240. he was consecrate. Being yet in
his best age and full strength, he was taken away by untimely death December 7.
1241. having sat not fully two years. A man for his life and conversation
unblameable and not unlearned; yet misliked in our histories because in that
little time he governed, he showed himself more favorable unto his cannons of
Lichfield, then the monks of Couentry.

46. Roger de Weseham.
THe king now made earnest request for the election of Richard Abbot of Euesham
and keeper of the great Seal. Some chose him: but the greater part agreed upon
a monk thot was chaunter of Couentry. The Abbot by the means of the king and
his own purse, notwithstanding the insufficiency of his election, had now
obtained the Popes favor for his consecration, at what time he was taken away
by death in Riola a city of Gascoigne, having first resigned the custody of the
great seal into the kings hand. After his death, with consent of all parties
there was chosen one William de Monte Pessulano, a virtuous and learned man:
him also the king misliked. Once more they proceeded to election, and by
persuasion of Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, made choice of Roger de
Weseham Deane of Lincoln: a man very commendable (says Matthew Paris) both
for life and learning. There had been much ado in former times between the
Deanes and the Bishops of Lincoln. This Bishop thinking the reason thereof to
be the greatness of their living, endeavored the more earnestly to prefer this
man, that the Deanery being void, he might somewhat weaken (...) same by
disposing elsewhere the parsonage of Aylsbery that heretofore belonged unto it.
This Roger Weseham was allowed of by the Pope, and consecrate at Lions the
year 1245. before the king ever heard of any such thing toward, For they had
concealed it from him of purpose, thinking if he might once get notice of it,
the business was like never to be effected, Having sat about 11. years, and
being now waren old and very sickely, he resigned his Bishopric upon (...)
day 1256. Two years after he died of a palsy, whereof he had lain sick a
long time.

47. Roger de Molend, alias Longespe.
Upon his resignation, the king labored earnestly to Philip Louell his
Treasurer unto this Bishopric. The Monks of Couentry, that of all other men
could not like of the said Louell (for what cause I know not) that they might
be sure to avoid him, as also at the request of Richard Earl of Cornwall the
kings brother, elected Roger Molend, one to whom the king and the said Earl
were both uncles. Him the king readily accepted, and so March 10. 1257. he was
affoorded consecration. This man was borne and brought up altogether beyond the
seas: (...) reason whereof he was utterly ignorant of the English (...). Being
therefore called upon to be resident upon his Bishopric the year 1283. he
made that his excuse: but it might not serve his turn. John Peckham Archbishop
of (...); not only forced him to residence, but reprehended him exceeding
sharply for his neglect and carelesnes of his charge. He sat long and died a
very old man the year 1295.

47. Walter de Langton.
THe Pope meaning a good turn unto John Bokingham Water Langton Treasurer of
England was preferred thereunto and consecrate December 22, 1296. He lived in
great authority under king Edward the first that favored him much. But his
son Edward the second molested and disgraced (...) all that ever he might.
His father dying in the North country, commanded this Bishop to couduct his
corpse up to London, and when he had so done, for reward of his (...) he caused
sir John Felton Constable of the Tower to arrest him, seized upon all his
goods, and imprisoned him, first in the Tower, then in the Castle of
Wallingford, of which imprisonment he was not released in two years after. In
his fathers life time he had often reprehended the young Prince for his
insolent and dissolute behavior; which good admonitions he taking in (...)
part, wronged and disgraced him many ways, namely one time, he brake down his
parks, spoiled and drove away his dear, etc. The Bishop complained of this
outrage unto the king his father, who being greatly displeased therewith,
committed the Prince his son for certain days. And this was the cause of
the grudge between the young king and him. About yt same time (or I think a
little sooner viz. the year 1301.) he was accused of certain heinous crimes
before the Pope, and compelled to answer the accusation at Rome in his own
person. Though the proofs brought against him were either none or very
slender; yet well knowing whom they had in hand ( Nonerant (...) prae (...)
bouem valde (...), says Matthew. (...).) they were content to detain him there
so long, as it forced him to spend an infinite deal of money, and yet was
never a whit the nearer at last: For the Pope remitted the hearing of the cause
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and yet referred the determination of the same
unto him self at last. The tempests of those troubles being over blown, the
rest of his time he lived (for ought I find) quietly, and being happily (...)
from the Court, attended only the government of his charge. Unto his Church of
Lichfield he was a wonderful great benefactor. He laid the first foundation of
the Lady Chapel there and at his death left order with his Executors for the
full finishing of it. He compassed the cloister of Lichfield with a stone wall,
and bestowed a sumptuous shrine upon S. Cedda his predecessor with 2000. l.
charge. He ditched and walled all the Cathedral church round about, made one
gate of great strength and majesty at the West part of the close, and another
(but a less) on the South part. He builded the great bridge beyond the
Uineyard at Lichfield, ann. 1310. He gave his own house or palace unto the
Uicars for their dwelling, and built a new for him self at the East end of the
close. He (...) ((...) being altogether (...)) (...) of (...), the manor
place of (...), (...) the (...) by the (...) at London. He (...) unto the high
(...) at Lichfield (...), and two (...) of (...) worth 24. l. (...) about with
(...) stones to the value of 200. l. besides many copes, and (...) of (...)
price. He (...) upon the (...) a (...) cup of (...), (...) a pension of 20. s.
by the year: And (...), (...) both unto them and his Church many charters and
(...) from the king. He (...) at London (...) 16. 1321. (...) was buried in the
Lady Chapel which he built.

48. Roger Northbrough.
THe year 1313. Roger Northborough then keeper of

49. Robert Stretton.
Soon after the death of the former Bishop, Robert Stretton much adoo, he
procured the Pope to authorize two other Bishops for the allowance or rejecting
of him (who they were I can not call to remembrance) and they by the exceeding
great importunity of the Prince admitted him to consecration, which he received
September 26. 1360. See more of this matter in Thomas Lylde Bishop of Ely. He
sat Bishop here 25. years.

50. Walter Skirlawe.
Walter Skirlawe Doctor of Law, was consecrate

51. Richard Scroope.
RIchard Scroope Doctor of Law, brother unto William Earl of Wiltshire, and
Tresurer of England, was consecrate August ^. 1386. Sat here 10. years and
was translated to York. His life and lamentable death, you may see there more
at large described.

52. John Brughill.
John Brughill a Friar preacher was first Bishop of Landaff, Richard the
second, translated to Lichfield in the month of September 1398. and sat there
17. years.

53. John Keterich.
John Keterich a Notary of Rome, and Archdencon of Surry, Constance and was one
of the 30. electors that chose Martyn the fifth Pope (authorized thereunto by
the council) together with the Cardinals. He sat almost 5. years, and was
translated to Exceter.

54. James Carry.
AUery little while one James Carry was Bishop of Couentry

55. William Haworth.
WIlliam Haworth Abbot of Saint Albons was conse

56. William Boothe.
WIlliam Boothe was consecrate July 9. 1447. sat 6

57. Nicholas Close.
NIcholas Close consecrate Bishop of Carlioll 1450. was

58. Reginald Buller.
REginald Buller or Butler (for so some call him) was consecrate

59. John Halse.
John Halse was consecrate in the month of November

60. William Smith.
WIlliam Smith was consecrate 1492. sat 4. years, and

61. John Arundell.
John Arundell was consecrate November 6. 1496. and

62. Geoffry Blythe.
GEoffry Blythe Doctor of Law was consecrate September Henry the eight, and
continued in that place till the year 1524. at what time it seems he died.
The year 1523. he was attached for treason, but happily acquitted. He (...)
buried at Lichfield.

63. Rowland Lee.
(...) Leigh Doctor of Law succeeded. A man samons for two things. He (...)
King Henry the eight unto Queen Anne Bulleyn, which happy marriage was the
occasion of that happiness that we now enjoy under our noble sovereign Queen
Elizabeth their daughter. Again, it is to be remembered of him, that being made
President of Wales, the year 1535. in the time of his government (and
peradventure partly by his procurement) the country of Wales was by Parliament
incorporated and united to the kingdom of England, the liberties, laws, and
other respects made common unto the Welsh with the natural English. This
Bishop died Lord President the year 1543. and was buried at Shrewsbury.

64. Richard Sampson.
AFter him Richard Sampson Bishop of Chichester became 1543. This R. Sampson
being a Doctor of Law, and Deane of the Chapel writ some what for the kings
supremacy and was answered by Cochloeus. He writ also commentaries upon the
(...), and upon the Epistles to the (...), and (...). He was consecrate Bishop
of (...) the year 1537. and presently upon his remove to this (...), made
President of Wales. In that office he continued till the second year of king
Edward, at what time he began to show him self a (...), notwithstanding his
(...) writing (...) against the Pope. He died at (...) September 25. 1554.

65. Ralf Bane.
RAlf Bayne Doctor of Divinity borne in Yorkshire, John's College in
Cambridge, and reader or professor of the (...) tongue in Paris, was consecrate
Bishop of Lichfield soon after the death of the other. He (...) upon the
Proverbs of Solomon, and dedicated his work unto Francis the French king.
Having been Bishop almost five years, he died of the stone at London, and was
buried in Saint Dunstans Church there.

66. Thomas Bentham.
THomas Bentham was consecrate March 24. 1559. (...)

67. William Ouerton.
William Ouerton Doctor of (...) succeeded.

This Bishopric is valued in the Exchequer at 559. l. 17. s. 2. d. ob.
farthing, and in the Popes books at 1733. ducates or Florenes.
The Bishops of Salisbury.
1. Aldelm.
AFter the death of Headda the fifth Bishop Iua king of the west Saxons to
(...) his Dioces (which before contained all the country of the west Saxons)
into two parts. The one of them he committed unto Damell, allotting unto him
Winchester for his See, and that Dioces which now does, and ever since has
belonged unto the same: The other part containing the counties of Dorset,
Somerset, Wiltshire, Deuon and Cornwall he ordained to be governed by a Bishop,
whose See he established at Sherborne, and appointed unto the same one Aldhelme
a near (...) of his own, being the son of Kenred his brother. This Aldhelm
spent all his youth in travail, and having visited the most famous
universities of France and Italy, became very learned; in Poetry especially he
was excellent and writ much in Greek and Latin, prose and verse. He delighted
much in music and was very skillful in the same. But his chief study was
divinity, in the knowledge whereof no man of his time was comparable to him.
After his return, he became first a monk, and after Abbot of Malmsbury for the
space of four and thirty years. The year 705. he was consecrate Bishop of
Sherborne, and that (as it seems unto me) at Rome. For it is remembered that
while he stayed there for the Popes approbation, the same Pope (his name was
Sergius) was charged with getting of a bastard, for which fact he was bold to
reprehend his holiness sharply. He writ diverse learned works mentioned by
Beda h. 4. c. 19. and died the year 709.

2. Fordhere.
HE lived in the time of Beda, who says, he also was a

After him succeeded these;
3. (...). 4. Ethelnod. 5. Denefrith. 6. Wilbert. He was at Rome with Wlfred
Archbishop of Canterbury an. 815. 7. Alstane. A famous warrier. He subdued unto
king Fgbright Ethelwlf being at Rome in pilgrimage, he set up his son
Ethelbald against him and forced the father at his return to (...) his
kingdom with his son. He died the year 867. having sat Bishop of Sherborne
50. years. A man (...) wise, valiant, careful for the good of his country,
and (...) liberal. He augmented the revenues of his Bishopric wonderfully.
7. Edmund or Heahmund, slain in battle by the (...) 8. Etheleage. 9. Alssy.
10. Asser. This man writ a certain Chronicle of (...) (amongst diverse other
works) wherein he reports of him self that he was a disciple and scholar of
that famous welchman John, that having studied long in Athens, persuaded king
Alfred to institute a university at Oxford, and him self became the first
public (...) there. He writes furthermore that he was (...) Chauncellor unto
Asser the Archbishop of Saint (...) his near kinsman, who both endured great
vexation and trouble at the hands of one Hemeyd a mighty man of those parts,
that tyrannised intollerably over the clergy there. By reason thereof waring
weary of his office, he left his country, and coming into England to king
Alfred, became schoolmaster of his children, until such time as (...) Bishop
of Sherborne dying, he was preferred to his place. Unto this man the said king
gave the manors of Wellington, Buckland, and Lydyard in Sommersetshyre, which
since have come unto the Bishops of Wels, whereof one (Buckland) yet remains
unto that See. By his exhortation also that good king did much for the
Uniuersity of Oxford, alotting diverse stipends unto the readers and professors
there. This Bishop died the year 883. and was buried at Sherborne. 11. (...)
or Sigelm traveled into India to the place of Alfred, and brought home many
precious stones of great price. 12. (...) or (...). He died 898.
After Ethelwald the Sea of Sherborne stood void seven years by reason of the
Danish wars. The year 905. Plegmund by the commandment of king Edward the
elder consecrate seven Bishops in one day as I have before mentioned in
Canterbury and elsewhere. Three of them were appointed to Sees newly erected
all taken out of the Dioces of Sherborne. One had jurisdiction over Cornwall,
another over Devonshire, and a third over Sommersetshire. Soon after that, a
fourth was placed in Wiltshire, having his See some say at Ramsvery, others say
at Sunnyng, and some other at Wilton. So Sherborn had now left unto it only
Dorsetshire and Barkshire. Of the rest we shall speak God willing severally in
their particular places. But these Bishops of Wiltshire, because their See at
last returned back again whence it first sprang. I will deliver them and
their succession next after Sherborne.

Sherborne.
13. Werstane. He died 918. (...) by the Danes in (...). 14. Ethelbald. 15.
Sigelm. Florilegus mentions one Sigelm to have been slain by the Danes the
year 834. I believe he (...) it (...) 934. 16. Alfred. He died 940. 17. (...).
This man was made Abbot of (...) Dunstan then Bishop of London. Being (...) to
the Bishopric of Sherborne, he displaced (...) priests and put in monks. It
is reported that when he lay a dying, he cried out suddenly, I see the (...)
open, and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God, immediately after
those words giving up the ghost an. 958. 18. Alfwold. He died 978. and was
buried at Sherborne. 19. Ethelrike. 20. Ethelsius. 21. Brithwin or Brithwicke.
He died 1009. 22. Elmer. 23. Brinwyn or Birthwyn. 24. Elfwold. He was a man of
great temperance and (...); for the which in that luxurious age he was much
admired. After his death, these two Sees (...) again (...) and made one.
Wiltshire.
1. Ethelstane. He died 920. 2. Odo that became Archbishop of Canterbury the
year 934. 3. Osulf. He died 870. and was buried at (...). 4. (...). He died
981. and was buried at Abondon. 5. Alfgar or Wolfgar. 6. (...), (...) to (...)
989. (...). 7. (...) or Aluricius, he succeeded his predecessor in Canterbury
likewise the year 995. 8. Brithwold, a monk of Glastonbury, a great
benefactor of that Abbey, as also of the Abbey of Malmesbury. He died 1045. and
was buried at Glastonbury. 9. Herman a Flemming Chaplain unto King Edward the
Confessor was the last Bishop of this petty- See. He labored to have his See
removed to Malmsbery, and had once obtained it of king Edward the Confessor,
but by a countersute of the monks there, he was disappointed. Uery angry with
this repulse, he left his Bishopric, and became a monk at Bertine in
France. But hearing soon after how that Elfwold Bishop of Sherborn was dead,
he returned home again, and with much adoo obtained that Sherborne and his
Dioces might once more be united together again.
1. Herman.
THe fore named Herman living unto the time of William Conqueror, when as he
gave commaundment that all Bishops should remove their Sees from obscure
towns to the fairest cities of their Dioces, made choice of Salisbury and
there laid the foundation of a Church which he lived not to finish. Salisbury
(says W. of Malmsbury) is a place built on the top of a hill, resembling
rather a Castle then a Town, compassed about with a strong wall, and well
provided otherwise of all commodities, but wants water so unreasonably, (as a
strange kind of merchandise) it is there to be sold. This place we now call old
Salisbury, whereof nothing remains at this time but certain desert ruins.
How

2. Osmond.
OSmond being a knight, and a Norman by birth, came into England with King
William the Conqueror. He had been Captain of Say in Normandy and by the
foresaid king was made Chauncellor of England, Earl of (...), and after
Hermans death, Bishop of Salisbury. He was a man well learned and passing wise,
in regard whereof he was always of the (...) counsel and might seldom be
spared from the Court. He continued the building begun by his predecessor and
at last finished the same, adding unto it a library, which he furnished with
many excellent books. This new Church at old Salisbury was finished, and in
an (...) hour dedicated very solemnly by the foresaid (...) (...) with
Walkelin Bishop of Winchester, and John of (...) the year 1092. In an evil
hour I say; for the very next day after, the steple of the same was (...) on
fire by lightning. That he afterward repaired, and furnished his Church with
all manner of ornaments. At last he departed this life Saturday, December 3.
1099. and was buried in his own (...). His bones were after removed to new
Salisbury, where they now lie, in the middle of the Lady Chapel under a
Marble stone bearing this only inscription ANNO. (...). Above any thing I may
not forget, that amongst diverse books he writ (as the life of Saint Aldelme
the first Bishop of Sherborne, etc.) he was first Author of the ordinale
secundum vsum Sarum. It seems he was made a Saint (...) his death: For I find
his name in our Calender the foresaid third day of December.

3. Roger.
KIng Henry the first being yet a private man, and serving Roger that rich and
mighty Bishop of Salisbury that was afterward, served the cure there at that
time, for some very poor salary. This (...) Curate well knowing how to fit the
devotion of soldiers, was so (...) at his business, as he had made an end of
his work before some of the company were aware he had begun. They all cried
out he was the (...) Chaplain for soldiers that might he found. Whereupon
half in jest, half in earnest, the young Prince bid him follow him. He did
so; and albeit he was in a manner altogether unlearned, yet being very subtle
(...) (...), in a short time he wound him self so fast into the Princes
liking, as he acquainted him with his most secret affairs, and used his
counsel in matters of greatest importance. Hereby it came to pass, that he
not only obtained easily for him self the Bishopric of Salisbury, soon
after the said Princes advancement unto the crown, but also procured the like
or greater preferments for many of his kindred. He had a son of his own
called Roger, (...) (...), whom he made Chauncellor of England. He had also two
nephews which he made Bishops, Alexander of Lincoln, and (...) of Ely. This
Nigellus likewise had a son called Richard (...) that long after became
Bishop of London. Neither was he so careful of serving other men's turns, as
that he forgot to feather his own neast: what by the revenues of his
Bishopric and his temporal offices (for he was Chauncellor of England, and
otherwise much employed about the king) he gathered together infinite
treasures, whereof some he bestowed very vainly, and the rest that vuhappily
he reserved, was the cause of hie destruction. He built most sumptuously two
castles, one at Sherborne, the other at Devises, commonly called yt (...),
(...) foolishly to make them without comparison the goodliest and most
magnificent buildings of England. Then afterward somewhat to (...) the vanity
of this humor, he founded two monasteries also, but what they were I find not.
All the time of king Henry he flourished in great honor, viz for the space of
30. years and (I doubt not) had ended his days in the like prosperity, if his
own treachery had not provoked the justice of God to punish the same with the
vengeance of an extraordinary calamity. The said king Henry having lost his
only son and apparent heir Prince William, by misfortune upon the sea; and
having no issue lawfully begotten, left to inherit his kingdom but only
Mawde the Empress. He thought good to take an oath of all the nobility,
wherein they promised to yield obedience to her after his death as their
sovereign, and to none other. This oath, our Roger did not only take
himself, but minister unto the rest of the nobility, for that he was
Chauncellor. Which notwithstanding, forgetting all duties of religion toward
God, of thankefulnes toward his patron, and loyalty to his Prince; he was the
first man (the king being dead) that fell to plotting (...): the advancement of
Stephen unto the kingdom, which (...) his perswasiou he first attempted, and
much deal by his ungracious counsel at last obtained. See how the saying fell
out to be true in him, (...) consilium consultori (...). Within two or three
years after his coming to the crown, this usurping perjured king (for he
also had sworn sworn unto Mawde the Empress) he (I say) lacked money for
many purposes, especially for the compassing of a marriage between Enstace his
only son, and Constantia the French kings sister, which he thought would be
a great establishment of his new erected throne. Now seeing no other readier
mean, he determined to search the coffers of this old Bishop, assuring
himself there to find that might well serve his turn. Being therefore at
Oxford, he sent for him in very friendly manner, praying him to come and
afford him his counsel in matters greatly importing him. Such was the estate
of the (...) at that time, that almost every man stood upon his guard. But the
Bishop being an old Fox and suspicious of what might happen; entreated his
son and the Bishops before named his nephews, to ride with him, that under
the color of their retinue, he might carry strength enough with him to resist
the king, if he should endeavor to offer him violence. The king at their
meeting gave him very gracious countenance, but secretly took order, that a
quarrel should be picked unto some of his retinue. So when he least suspected
any such matter, his people were set upon (under color they had disappointed
some of the kings men of their lodgings) and forced to (...). The Bishop, his
son, and nephews fled also. But the (...) was made too sure beforehand for
them to escape. They were all taken, except only the Bishop of Ely, that (...)
him to the castle of Devises, which he found very well provided, and
determined to hold it against the king. Thither he traveled with all speed
(the king I mean) carrying his prisoners with him, whom he caused to ve very
hardly used and straightly imprisoned, shutting up the one in an oxestall, the
other in a (...) back room more loathsome then the other. At his first
coming, he summoned the castle, intending to prove all means, rather then
he would let this occasion slip, of rifling the same. Therefore when no other
practice would take success (for he tried many) he set up a fair pair of
gallows, and swear he would hang Roger the Bishops son, it the castle were
not presently delivered up unto him. The Bishop of Ely continuing obstinate in
his denial, though his uncle of Salisbury had entreated him earnestly to
yield: the halter was now about the young man's neck and he even ready to
trusse, when his father hnmbly besought the king, that he would accept his best
endeavor for the effecting of his desire, and to save his sons life, was
content to swear, he would neither eat nor drink before the castle were
delivered unto him. Hereupon the execution of the son was stayed, but it cost
the father his life. For the Bishop of Ely his nephew. notwithstanding what
entreaty could be made, suffered his uncle to fast three whole days before he
would give over. The Bishop of Salisbury being now very aged, partly
peradventure by reason of grief, but partly also by reason of so long
abstinence, fell sick and died, rauing and taking on like a man distract of
his wits certain days before his departure. There was found in that castle
of his forty thousand marks of silver ready coined, beside gold, plate and
jewels of inestimable price. All that the king laid hands upon, and with that
money procured indeed the marriage before mentioned to be effected. The Bishops
son was kept long in prison, and dealt earnestly withal to renounce the
(...) and deuote himself to the party of the king, which he most honestly and
constantly refusing, with long suit obtained at last for a great favor, that
he might be banished the realm. To make an end now with this Bishop, he was
elected April. 13. 1102. consecrate August 11. 1207. with diverse other, and
died December 4. 1139. So he was Bishop (accounting the time from his first
election) almost 37. years, flourishing all that while in woonderful great
prosperity, and yet had a miserable and most vnhappyend.

4. Ioceline.
ROger being dead, K. Stephen nominated unto his place one Philip his
Chauncellor. But the Popes Legate and the clergy of Salisbury, utterly
refusing to receive him, he made suit for the Bishopric of Bayon and obtained
the same. After that, it seems unto me one Galfridus became Bishop of Sarum.
But because my proofs are not pregnant, and diverse affirm Ioceline to be the
next successor of Roger except that same Philip (whom no man reckeneth amongst
the Bishops of this See) I will pass him over in silence. Certain it is that
one Ioceline became Bishop of Salisbury, continued so many years, and died the
year 1184. He was excommunicate together with the Bishop of London in the
cause of Thomas Becket, and endured much trouble about him (as you may see more
at large in the life of the said Thomas.) He had a son named Reginald Bishop
of Bathe, and after Archbishop of Canterbury.

5. Hubert.
November 1. 1189. Hubert surnamed Walter (...) Richard Ceur-de-lyon in his
famous voyage to the holy land: Hereof see more in Canterbury, whether he was
translated the year 1193.

6. Robert.
AFter him sat one Robert, of whom I find nothing else recorded.

7. Richard Poor.
RIchard Poor sometimes Deane of Salisbury, was consecrate and bleake, as also
wearied with the often insolences and malapert demeanure of the soldiers that
guarded the Earls Castle; forsook the same, and sending for diverse famous
workmen from beyond the Seas, began the foundation of a new Church, in a place
then called Meryfield. Pandulph the Popes Legate laid the five first stones,
the first for the Pope, the second for the King, the third for the Earl of
Salisbury, the fourth for the Countess, and the fist for the Bishop. In this
work, though he had great help of the king, and diverse of the nobility, yet
was he so far from ending it, as (...). years after his departure, it was
scarcely finished. The Townsmen of old Salisbury they likewise removed their
habitation to the same place, and left the Castle all alone, which having been
the seat of the Earls of Salisbury many years, was given over into the
Bishops hands about the year 1360. and in the time of king Henry the seventh
let down; so as now except a broken tower or two, and some pieces of walls,
there is nothing of it remaining. This good Bishop was translated to Durham the
year 1228. or as some deliver 1225. See much more of him there.

8. Robert Byngham.
THe Chapter of Salisbury elected then for their Bishop Robert (...) one of
their own company, the year 1228. and the year following he was consecrate
at Shaftsbury. This man with great diligence set forward the work begun by
his predecessor, yet was not able to finish the same although he sat Bishop
well near 20 years. He died November 3. 1246. and left his Church indebted
1700. marks. A man of great years, great learning, and great virtue. He lies
buried upon one side of the Presbitery, and his successor on the other.

9. William of York.
WIlliam of York Provost of Benerley succeeded. studied) then in the law of
God a great deal. Matthew Paris reports that he first brought in the custom
that Tenaunts should be suitors unto the Courts of their Landlords. He departed
from these worldly cares the last day of March 1256. having taken much pains
in finishing the building of his Church, and was buried (as is above said) over
against his predecessor.

10. Gyles de Brideport.
GYles de Brideport or Bridlesford, Deane of Wels, was

11. Walter de la Wyle.
Walter de la Wyle succeeded him the year 1264. and

12. Robert de Wikehampton.
RObert de Wikehampton Deane of Salisbury was In his time, viz. the year 1280.
upon Michaelmasse day the Cathedral Church (upon what occasion I can not tell)
was again new hallowed by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury. He dyed the year
1283.

13. Walter Scammell.
Within the space of five years the Church of Salisbury Robert for one;
Walter Scammell Deane also of Salisbury was the second. He was consecrate the
year 1284. and died within a year or two after.

14. Henry de Braundstone.
THe third was Henry de Braundstone who being consecrate

15. Laurence de Hawkborne.
THe fourth Laurence de Hawkborne being consecrate

16. William de Comer.
LAstly William de Comer became Bishop 1288. and sat

17. Nicolas de Longespe.
NIcolas de Longespe was son (I take it) unto William base son of king
Henry the second and Earl of Salisbury that lies buried on the left hand of
the entrance into the Lady chapel. (...) this Earl lying very sick, the
Bishop brought the Sacrament. He understanding of the Bishops coming, met him
at the chamber door half naked, with a halter about his neck, threw himself
down prostrate at his feet and would not be taken up until having made
confession of his sins with tears and other (...) of wonderful hearty and
sincere (...), he had received the Sacrament in most devout manner. Some two
or three days after he lived, continually bewailing his sinful life with
whole floods of tears, and departed 1226. This Nicolas, his whether son or
(...) was consecrate 1291. and dying 1297. was buried (...) by him under a huge
marble stone sometimes inlaid with brass and adorned with the arms of their
house.

18. Simon de Gaunt.
AFter him succeeded Simon de Gaunt a (...)

19. Roger de Mortiuall.
Roger de Mortiuall consecrate 1315 died 1329.

20. Robert Wyuyl.
AT the request of the Queen, the Pope was content to Robert Wiuyll, a man not
only not furnished with competent gifts of learning, but so vnpersonable
(says Walsingham) as if the Pope had but seen him, he would never have cast
so high a dignity upon him. He sat a long time, to wit flue and forty years
and upward, in which it were a great marvel he should not perform some
thing memorable. About the year 1355. he (...) William Montacute Earl of
Salisbury with a writ of right for the castle of Salisbury. The Earl pleaded
that he would defend his title by combat. Whereupon, at a time appointed, the
Bishop was feign to bring his Champion unto the (...) provided for this
purpose. He was clothed all in white, saving that over the rest of his
apparel was cast the coat armor of the Bishop. After him came one with a
staff and another with his target. The Earl likewise brought in his Champion
much in like sort, and all things were now ready for them to go together, when
upon a sudden, by commandment of the kings leters the matter was staid for a
time. Before the second meeting the parties fell to agreement. The Bishop gave
unto the Earl 2500. marks to leave the castle with his apurtenances unto him
and his successors for ever. Beside this, he also recovered the chase of Beer,
and the castle of Sherborne, which had been detained from his See ever since
king Stephen took it violently from Rogre his predecessor, for the space of
200. years He died the six and forty year of his consecration September. 4.
1375. and lies buried under a fair marble stone in the middle of the quire
near the Bishops See. On the South side close by him, lies Bishop lewell, who
(as I have heard) desired to lie beside him.

21. Ralfe Erghum.
RAlfe Erghum Doctor of law was consecrate at Brugis

22. John Waltham.
John Waltham Master of the Rolls and keeper of the prtuy Richard the second
loved him entierly and greatly bewailed his death: In token whereof, he
commanded that he should be buried in Westminster among the kings, many men
much envying him that honor. He died the year 1395 and lies just beside king
Edward the first under a flat marble, the inscription whereof is (though partly
defaced) not yet quite perished. How he resisted W. Courtney Archbishop of
Canterbury in his visitation, and the success thereof, see more in the said W.
Courtney.

23. Richard Meltford.
THe year 1388. in the Parliament called the Parliament by (...) to prison.
The lay (...) the most part they caused to be executed. But the Clergy men
lying by it a while, by the next turn of fortunes wheel were not only set as
high as they were before, but some of them much higher. Amongst the rest,
Richard Metford (a man of (...) eminent place otherwise then by the kings
favor) was imprisoned a great while in the Castle of Bristow. Soon after his
enlargement, the king found means first to advance him to the Bishopric of
Chichester, and then after Bishop (...) death to translate him unto Salisbury,
where he sat about 12. years and died 1407.

24. Nicholas Bubwith.
NIcholas Bubwith Bishop of London, and Treasurer of

25. Robert Halam.
Upon the remove of Bishop Bubwith, one Robert Halam (...) (the council being
not yet ended) September 4. 1417.

26. John Chaundler.
AT what time Bishop Halam died, Martin the (...) was John Chaundler, who sat
Bishop about 10. years.

27. Robert Neuill.
RObert Neuill consecrate 1427. was translated to Durham.

28. William Ayscoth.
William Ayscoth Doctor of Law and Clerk of (...) Cade, naming himself John
(...). A certain number of lewd persons (tenants for the most part to this
Bishop) intending to join themselves to the rest of that crew, came to (...),
where he was then saying of mass. What was their quarrel to him I find not.
But certain it is, they drew him from the altar in his albe with his stole
about his (...) to the top of an (...) not far off, and there as he (...) on
his (...) praying, they (...) his head, (...) him to the (...), and (...) his
(...) shirt into a number of pieces, took every man a ragge to keep for a
monument of their worthy exploit. The day before, they had robbed his cariages
of 10000. marks in ready money. This barbarous murder was committed June 29.
the year aforesaid.

29. Richard Beauchamp.
RIchard (...) succeeded. He built a beautiful and

30. Leonell Wooduill.
LEonell Wooduill consecrate the year 1482. was son (...) Earl (...), and
brother to (...) the Queen of Edward the fourth. A near (...) of his has
assured me, that Stephen Gardmer Bishop of Winchester was begotten by this man;
who to cover his fault, married his mother unto (...) (...), one of his meanest
followers, and caused another of better sort to bring up the child as it were
of alms. When or how he left his Bishopric, I find not.

31. Thomas Langton.
THomas Langton Doctor of Law was consecrate 1485.

32. John Blythe.
John Blythe was consecrate February 23. 1493. and died

33. Henry Deane.
HEnry Deane Doctor of Divinity, Abbot of Lanthony,

34. Edmund Audeley.
THe year 1480. Edmund Audeley, a gentleman of the Audeleys, became Bishop of
Rochester. Thencs he was translated 1493. to (...), and from Hereford the year
1502. unto Salisbury. He lies buried in a goodly chapel built for the
purpose on the South side of the high altar, where also it seems he founded a
chauntry for (...) to be sung for his soul.

35. Laurent. Campegius.
LAurentius Campegius borne in Bononia, Bishop of (...), (...)) June 27. 1517.
The year 1524. he became Bishop of Salisbury, and died Bishop-Cardinall of
Preneste at Rome in the month of August 1539. He was buried in our Lady church
beyond Tyber.

36. Nicholas Shaxston.
IT should seem that the said Cardinal might not be suffered Nicholas Shaxston
Doctor of Dunnity was consecrate unto this See, and sat Bishop four years.
He resigned it July 1. 1539. the same day that Bishop Latymer resigned Worceter.

37. John Capon.
John Salcot, alias Capon Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate

38. John Jewel.
POpe Paul the fourth bearing an old grudge against Poole, soon after his
advancement unto the Papacy, bestowed a Cardinals hat upon one Peter Petow an
obseruant Friar, and a gentleman of an (...) house, whom he made also his
legate a latere, ex (...) potestatis gave him the Bishopric of Salisbury, and
sent him into England to confront the said Cardinal Poole. But Queen Mary
stood so stoutely in defense of her kinsman (and the rather for that the knew
this course to be taken in despite of her, the Pope being all together addicted
unto the French party) as she would not suffer this new legate either to enter
the realm as legate, or to enjoy the Bishopric the Pope had assigned him.
While this matter hung thus in question, Friar Peto died first, and Queen Mary
seen after. It pleased then her Majesty that now is to appoint unto the
Bishopric of Salisbury John Jewel Batcheler of Divinity. He was borne at
Berynarber in Devonshire, brought up in Oxford, first in Merton college, and
then in Corpus Christi. Thence he fled the year 1554. into Germany, and after
4. years (...) returning was consecrate Bishop of this church January 21.
1559. Having sat here well near 12. years, he died at Monketon Farley Septem
23. 1571. in the 50. year of his age, and was buried almost in the middle of
the quire.

39. Edmund Gheast.
EDmund Gheast Doctor of Divinity was consecrate Bishop Wiuyll. He writ diverse
works mentioned by Bale in his Centuries.

40. John Piers.
John Piers Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Christchurch Gheast, both in
Rochester (whereunto he was consecrate March 10. 1576) and in Salisbury the
year 1577. There he sat 11. years (continuing all that while the Queens
Almoner) and was translated to York the year 1588.

41. John Coldwell
The Sea having then continued void 3. years, John Coldwell Doctor of
physic and Deane of Rochester, was consecrate unto the same December 26.
1591. He died in October 1596. and was laid in the same grave where Bishop
Wiuyll had long since been buried.

42. Henry Cotton.
HEnry Cotton Chaplain unto her Majesty was consecrate together with the
Bishops of Exceter, Gloucester, and Bangor, in November 1598.

The Bishopric of Salisbury is valued at 1385, l. 5, s. ob. and paid to the
Pope at every exchange of the Incumbent 4000. ducats.
The Bishops of Bathe and Wells.
Wells (that sometimes heretofore was called (...)) is not a (...) of any very
great antiquity. It seems not to have been a place of any extraordinary
note, until the year 704 at what time (...) King of the West Saxons built a
Church there, and dedicated the same unto S. Andrew. somewhat more then 60.
years after, Kenulphus King also of the West Saxons, gave unto the maintenance
of the Ministers belonging unto that Church, all the lands near adjoining. The
very words of his Charter I have thought good to set down for the antiquity,
and some other things in the same worthy consideration.

In nomine Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Cum constet (...) Catholicis and recte
credentibus in Domino, quod tempora huius temporalis vitae long lateque per
orbem (...) ac diuersis causis quotidie transeunt, nec non (...) aegritudine
preuenti, statim vitam finiendo deserunt, (...) omnia fugitiua (...); beneficia
domini sine aliqua tarditate pauperibus hic tribuendo erogemus, vt illic (...)
mercedis in aeterna patria sine fine cum Domino (...) accipiamus. Quapropter,
ego Cynewlphus occ. Saxonum Rex, aliquam terrae partem, pro amore Dei, and pro
(...) delictorum meorum, nec non (quod verbo dolendum (...)) pro aliqua
vexatione inimicorum nostrorum Corunbiorum gentis, cum consensu Episcoporum
atque satraparum (...), Dei Apostolo (...) ministro Sancto Andreae humiliter
ascribendo donabo; hoc est 11. manentium prope fluuium qui (...) Weluue, ad
augmentum monasterij quod situm (...) iuxta fontem magnum quem vocitant Wielea,
(vt eo diligentius in Ecclesia Sancti Andreae Apostoli, deo soli (...)) (...)
territorijs circumseriptam: A mendie de valle quae dicitur Asancumb, in
occidentali plaga in vnum fontem qui appellatur Diernanwiell, deinde in collem
quem incolae appellant Dornhil, deinde in defertum on picelon dorn, and tunc
vltra flumen Weluue in fontem Holanwielle, and inde in desertum in (...) quae
est iuxta fontem riuuli quem incolae (...) Sealtbroc, and tunc in eundem (...)
flumen Welwe, (...) in ripam (...) vsque (...) Welwe, and (...) in (...)
publicam vsque (...) quem vocitant Ellentrow, and (...) in torrentem (...) in
vadum (...), (...) per campestria inter duas petrosas vias ad supra nominatum
vallem Asancumb.

Si quis (...) infringere vel imminuere ausus sit, sciat se coram Christo and
Sanctis Angelis (...) in (...) examine rationem redditurum. Scripta est haec
Syngrapha ann. Dom. incarn. 766. Inductione 12.

Ego Cynewlfus Gewisorum Rex, hanc meam donationem cum signaculo Sanctae crucis
roboraui. Ego Herewaldus Episcopus, huius munificentiae cartulam propria manu
signaui. Ego Ernchardus Episcopus huic largitati consensi and (...).
1. Plegmund. Aldeim
ALl this while, there was no Cathedral Church there, (...) Archbishop of
Canterbury by the commandment of the King, consecrated seven Bishops in one
day, whereof three were appointed unto Sees newly ereded; Amongst the rest
Aldelm Abbot of Glastonbury was ordained Bishop of Wels and Somersetshire
allotted unto him for his Dioces. He sat here 10. years, and after the death
of Plegmund, was removed to Canterbury. See there more of him, and this new
erection. After him followed these.

2. Wifelnius, who succeeded Aldelm both here and at Canterbury. He lived here
nine years and there 14. a man (says Pol. Virg.) famous as well for virtue as
learning. See more of him in Canterbury. 3. Elfeth. 4. Wlfhelm. 5. Brithelm. He
was a monk of Glastonbury and became Bishop of Wels the year 958. He gave
unto the Abbey of Glastonbury his nurse, the jurisdiction of the Country
adjoining and made it an Archdeaconry annual, to be bestowed upon a monk of
Glastonbury, and he to be elected yearly by the Covent. (...) (...) the year
959. was elected Archbishop of Canterbury. Whereof see more in Dunstan of
Canterbury. He continued Bishop here 15. years and died 973. 6. Kinewardus or
Kinewaldus Abbot of Middleton became Bishop of Wels the year following, sat
11. years and died 985. 7. Sigar. He was Abbot of Glastonbury, sat also 11.
years and died ann. 985. 8. Alwyn, called by some Adelwyn and by others (...).
9. Burwold. His toombe is to be seen with his (...) engraven upon the South
side of the Quier at Wels. 10. Leoningus translated to Canterbury the year
1012. See more of him there. 11. Ethelwyn expelled his Bishopric by Brithwyn,
recovered the same again from him, and shortly after his restitution died. 12.
Brithwyn, who entering into peaceable possession of this See presently upon the
decease of Ethelwyn, with in 13. days after died him self also. 13. (...)
Abbot of Glattonbury. 14. (...) whom some name Bodeca. He was a Saxon of
Germany, or (as some deliver) borne in (...). In his time king Edward the
Confessor gave unto this Church the manors of Congresbury and (...). He was
consecrate the year 1031. sat 27. (...) 7. months and seven days, and was
buried upon the South side of the high Altar in (...). It (...) his toombe is
the highest of those ancient monuments that we see upon the South outside of
the Duier.
15. Giso.
Giso a Frenchman of Lorraine, borne in a village called Trudo within the
territory of Hasban, was sent Ambassador to Rome by king Edward the Confessor,
to to be resolved there of certain doubts concerning matter of religion, about
the time that (...) died. Being so absent, he was elected Bishop by the Chapter
of Wels, and received consecration at Rome April 4 being Easter day 1059.
together with Aldred Archbishop of York, and Walter Bishop of Hereford. At his
return, he found the estate of his Church very miserable; Harald the queens
brother that afterward became for a while king of England, being yet a private
man, (Q^id Domini facient, audent qui talia (...))

Upon what occasion I know not, had spoiled the Church of all ornaments, chased
away the Canons, and inuading all the possessions of the same, had converted
them to his own use; so that the Canons remaining which fled not for sear of
this tyrant (they were only five) they (I say) were feign to beg their bread
The Bishop complaining unto the King of this outrageous havoc, found cold
comfort at his hands: (...), whether it were for fear of Haralds power or his
wives displeasure, he caused no restitution at all to be made. Only the Queen
was content to give of her own. Mark and Modesly unto the Church. After the
death of king Edward, Giso was feign to fly the land, till such time as (...)
the (...) usurper being vanquished and slain, William the Conqueror was a
mean to restore, not only him to his place and country, but his Church also
to all that the other had violently taken from it, except some small parcels
that (I know not by what means) had been (...) unto the Monastery of
Gloucester. Yet in stead of them also, he was pleased to bestow upon the Church,
the manor of Yatton, with the Patronage of the benefice there; and moreover
caused one Ealsi to restore unto the same the manor of (...), which long
since had been altenated from it, by some (...) practice as it should seem.
Giso being thus settled, took great pains, in recovering such other things as
had been (...) from his church, in procuring charters of confirmation for the
better assurance of what already they had, and procuring such things as seemed
to be wanting: Namely, of one (...) a Courtier he found means to obtain the
(...) of Coonth-Nicolas, (...) and Lytton. Then (...) the state of his church
so well amended, he thought good to augment the number of his Canons, and for
their better (...) built then a cloister, a hall, and a dorter or place for
their lodging. Lastly he appointed one Isaac by the name of a Provost to be
their governor. Having been Bishop the space of 28. years he departed this
life, and was buried upon the North side of that place where the high altar
then stood. I take his to be the highest of those old toombes that lie upon
the outside of the quier toward the North.

16. John de Villula.
HE that succeeded ( John de Villula a Frenchman borne in Tours, and a
phisician heretofore by his profession) not content to do nothing toward the
amendment of the state of his church, used all the means he might to impair
and diminish the same. The cloister and other buildings (...) by Gyso for his
canons, he pulled down, and in the place where they stood build a palace for
himself and his successors, forcing them to seek dwellings abroad in the
town. But the greatest wrong of al other was, that never acquainting them with
it, he procured his Episcopal See, which (...) had been seated at Wells, to
be removed to Bathe; and whereas all his predecessors had been known by the
names of the Bishops of Wells, he renouncing Wells, entitled himself
Bishop of Bathe, which city he bought of the king for five hundredth marks,
and founded in the same a monastary for the receipt of his new removed
Episcopal throne. This monastery was first built by Offa king of Mercia ann.
775. and being destroyed by the Danes (who burnt and razed to the ground almost
all the monasteries of England) was afterward an. 1010. reedified by Elphegus
that at last was Archbishop of Canterbury. His building stood no long time:
For the year 1087. both it and in a manner all the city was consumed and
utterly destroyed by fire; in such sort, as this Bishop building it a new from
the ground, and augmenting the revenues (which before were little or nothing)
unto a competent proportion; may not unworthily seem to be the founder and
author of the same. He had scarcely (or indeed not (...) it, when being a very
aged man, he was taken away by (...), to wit, Dec. 29. 1122. having sat 34.
years. He was (...) in the church himself had built.

17. Godfry.
ONe Godfry a Dutchman and chaplain unto the Henry the first. Having (...)
here 12. years, he died Aug. 16. 1135. and was buried at Bathe.

18. Robert.
AFter him succeeded one Robert a monk of Jews, John de Villula was again
consumed with fire. He reedified it, and added whatsoever might seem to have
been left imperfect by the other. In the stirs between Mawd the Empress
and king Stephen, he endured much trouble, being taken prisener at Bathe and
held in captivity a long time by the king. The continuer of Florent. (...).
sets down the history thereof at large. After his deliverance he took
great (...) in laboring an agreement between the churches of Wels and Bathe
who had now many years contended which of them should be honored with the
Episcopal See. At last with the good liking of both parties, he set down this
order, that the Bishops hereafter should be called, Bishops of Bathe and Wels;
yt each of them should by (...) appoint electors (the Sea being void) by whose
voices the Bishop should be chosen; and that he should be installed in both of
these churches. Then, whereas a kinsman of John de (...) being appointed by him
Provost, by virtue of that office had withdrawn and converted unto his own
use, in a manner all the revenues of old belonging to the cannons; with great
labor and cost at last he procured, all that had appertained unto them to
(...) restored again. And to take away all occasion of the like usurpation, he
thought good to divide the lands of the church (...) two parts, whereof the
one he assigned unto the chapter in common; out of the rest he allotted to
every cannon a portion, by the name of a Prebend. He also it was that first
(...) a Deane to be the President of the chapter, and a Subdeane to supply his
place in absence; a (...) to govern the quier, and a Subchaunter under him; a
Chancellor to instruct the yoonger sort of Cannons; and lastly, a Treasurer
to look to the ornaments of the church. The Subchauntership together with the
Prouostship an. 1547. were taken away and suppressed by act of Parliament, to
patch up a Deanery, the lands and revenues of the Deanery being devoured by
sacrilegious cormorants. Moreover, and (...) all this, whereas our church of
Wells at this time was exceeding ruinous, and likely every day to fall to the
ground, he pulled down a great part of it and repaired it. At last he died,
having sat 29. years and 4. months, and was buried at Bathe.

19. Reginald Fitzioceline.
(...) See was then void eight years, eight months, Reginald Fitzioceline a
(...), son unto Ioceline Bishop of Salisbury, and by his gift Archdeadon of
Salisbury was appointed thereunto, being but 33. years of age (or as one
delivers but 24.) This man by suite obtained for the Chapter of king Richard
the first, at what time he set forward in his voyage toward the Holy land', the
manors of Curry, Wrentich and Hatch. He founded the hospital of Saint John's
in Bathe and certain Prebends in the church. Moreover, he granted unto the
city of Wells a corporation and many privileges which by his gift they enjoy
to this day. The year 1191. he was translated to Canterbury. See more of him
there.

20. Sauaricus.
KIng Richard the first being taken prisoner in Germany Leopold Duke of
Austria; The Emperor took order with him, that besides other conditions to be
required of the king for his deliverance; he should make him promise to
prefer a (...) of his (the Emperors; called (...) (then Archdeacon of
Northampton) unto the Bishopric of Bathe and Wels, and moreover to annexe
unto the same Bishopric the Abbotship of (...). For the better effecting of
which purpose, (...) was content to return unto the king the possession of the
City of Bathe, which his predecessor John de Villula had bought of king (...).
These things being brought to pass according to his desire, he altered his
style and would needs be called Bishop of Glostonbury. He was consecrate on
Michaelmas day 1192. at Rome and returning into England by Germany, was there
stayed and left for an hostage, in assurance of payment of the kings ransom.
After his delivery, he yet continued there a long time and became Chauncellor
unto the Emperor: till that the year 1197. the Emperor falling sick, (as
(...) (...) uereth) he was sent by him into England, to release unto the king
all such moneies, as yet remained unpaid of that wrongful and unconscionable
ransom. The Emperor then dying before he could return, he thought good to
remain here still upon his charge. In 12. years that he sat Bishop, he did
not any thing memorable, except happily this may seem worthy remembrance, that
he impropriated the Parsonages of Ilmister and Longsutton, making them
Prebends, and appointing the one of them always to be allotted unto the Abbot
of Muchelney, and the (...) to the Abbot of Athelney, for the time being. The
Prebend of (...) is vanished together with the Abbey of (...): Longsutton
Parsonage by the (...) of Queen Mary was restored to the Church of Wells, and
remains to this day a part of our possessions. This Bishop died August 8.
1205. and was buried at Bathe. Concerning him and the great sums he died
indebted, who so list may read somewhat in the Decretals of Greg. lib. 3. tit.
9. cap. Nouit ille.

21. Ioceline de Wells.
SAuarike being dead, the monks of Glastonbury made (...), (...), (...) being
void, nothing is to be altered in the state of the (...). Before the end of the
year 1205. (...) a Canon of (...) borne also and brought up in Wells (at
leastwise as to me by diverse arguments it seems) was consecrate unto this See
at Reading. The monks of Glastonbury were by and by doing with him; and after
much contention prevailed but so, as they were feign to buy their victory at a
dear (...) allowing unto the (...) of Wells out of (...), the manors of
(...), Pucklechurch, (...) and Cranmer, and the patronage of the beneffces of
Winscombe, Pucklechurch, Ashbery, Christ Malford, Buckland and Blackford. Soon
after this composition made, he (...) feign to fly the realm aad continued in
banishment the space of five years. The cause and manor thereof you may (...)
in Stephen Langton of Canterbury After his return he gave him self altogether
to adorning and increasing the (...) of his Church. He founded diverse Prebends,
impropriated diverse Parsonages to the (...) of his Chapter, and gave them the
manor of Winscombe. He allotted reasonable reuencwes to every of the
dignities, which before that time had small profit by their places. He
appointed bicars to (...) the Prebends in doing the service of the Church: and
laid unto the Bishopric the manors of Congresbury, Chedder, and (...). He
also and Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, (...) their purses together, founded the
Hospital of S. John's in Wells which being suppressed by act of Parliament and
(...) to the Earl of Southampton, he (...) it with Bishop Clarke for
Dogmersfield. Moreover in building he bestowed inestimable sums of money. He
built a (...) Chapel in (...) palace at Wells, and an other at Owky, as
also many other edifices in the same houses: And lastly, the Church of Wells
it self being now ready to fall to the ground, notwithstanding the great cost
bestowed upon it by Bishop Robere; he pulled down the greatest part of it, to
wit, all the West end, built it a new from the very foundation, and hallowed
or dedicated it October 22. 1239. Having continued in this Bishopric 27.
years he died at last November 19. 1242. and was (...) in the middle of the
(...) that he had built, under a (...) toombe of late years monsterously
defared.

22. Roger.
NOtwithstanding the composition lately made by Bishop (...) for the order of
election, the monks of (...) to (...) with the Chapter of (...), (...) of
(...), one Roger the Chaunter of Salu^bury for Bishop (...), for that a kinsman
of the Popes had the aduouson of his (...)) obtained easily consecration by the
Popes means September 11. 1244. After long suit in law between the two
Churches for the righting of this wrong; the end was, that Wells men must
(...) up the wrong, and they of Bathe yield assurance of performing the
composition for the time to come; which was done accordingly. The Bishop (by
whose means this accord (...) made) not living long after, departed this (...)
January 13. 1274. having sat not past four months above three years. He
only of all the (...) of this Church for the space of almost 600. years died
(...) the (...) of 6 years after his coming (...), which in (...) has yet
never happened to any other. (...) is the (...) of our (...) at Bathe.

23. William Bitton, or Button.
THe (...) of Bathe, according to their promise, now at William Button, (...),
and then (...) of Wells, was with one (...) elected. This man had much to do
with the monks of (...), concerning those lands which by composition they had
yielded to the Sea of (...): And although the Bishop had sustained great charge
in diners of the kings services, namely and especially in trauayling into the
furthermost part of Spain about his affairs: Yet he favored altogether the
part of the monks, and gave them h^s uttermost assistance in their suits. They
were ended at by the Bishops death, who deceased in the beginning of the year
1264. having first possessed his brethren and kinsfolks of all the principal
places of our Church of Wells. For I find, that about this time, there was
another William Button, his brothers son, Archdeacon of Wells, and after
Bishop; one Richard Button Chaunter, Nicolas Button a brother of the Bishops
Treasurer, John Button another brother of his Provost of Coomb and Parson of
Ashbery, aster whose death one Thomas Button succeeded in the Prouostship; and
that one Thomas Button (whether the same man or no I can not tell) was first
Archdeacon after William Button aforesaid, then Deane of Wells, and lastly,
the year 1292. Bishop of Exceter. This Thomas Button it was that for the soul
of this William Button our Bishop, gave to our Church the bell commonly called
the sermon bell, as in a French inscription upon the same bell is yet to be
seen. He lies buried in the middle of our Lady Chapel under a Marble toombe.

24. Walter Giffard.
Walter Giffard Canon of Wells and a (...) lain Boniface the Archbishop
(...) 2. years, he was translated to (...) See York.

25. William Button or Bitton.
William Button (...) of Wells and nephew William Button, obtained this
Bishopric the year 1267. A man so greatly accounted of for his holiness
(says Matthew Paris) as when Robert Killwardby Archbishop of Canterbury had
license of the Pope to take consecration at the hand of any Catholic Bishop;
he made choice of him, only in respect of his holiness. He made many good
statutes by which our Church is yet governed: Amongst other things, he ordained
four general Chapter days in the year, at which only times, such things
should be ordered as might (...). It were greatly to be wished, that all other
Churches were to observe the same order. He deceased in the month of November
1274. Many (...) people (especially such as were troubled with the tooth ache)
were wont (even of late years) to frequent much the place of his (...), being
without the North side of the (...), where we see a Marble stone, having a
(...) image graven upon it. He gave unto our Church the manor of Bicknaller.

26. Robert Burnell.
IN the month of January following Robert Burnell Archdeacon Edward the first.
That gave him means of gathering great wealth, which he (...), partly in
building his houses (as namely that goodly hall of the palace at Wells,
pulled down some fifty years since by a (...) of the court, that for a (...)
reward of his (...), soon after lost his head. But his principal care was to
enrich his brethren and (...), whom he greatly advanced. He was much (...) in
(...) affairs, from which he could be so ill spared, as the king was content
for a (...) to let him (...) his court of (...) at Bristoll Some there be
suppose the castle of (...) in (...) to have been built by him, at what time
he was occasioned to hue in those parts. He sat eighteen years, and (...)
burted in the middle of the body of his church, under a marble stone, somewhat
below the pulpit.

27. William de Marchia.
THe same year that Burnell dicd, William de Marchio, then Treasurer of
England succeeded. I have seen, amongst the records of our church of Wells,
the (...) pies of diverse letters unto the (...) and (...) from (...) king, from
diverse of the nobility and the clergy of (...) church, commending this man so
far forth for his holiness, testified (as they write) by many miracles; as
they (...) very earnestly for his Canonisation. I marvel much at (...) For
Matthew of Westminster and Polydor virgill, (...) grievously of him, as the
author of a heinous sacrilege, in (...) sing the king to spoil all the
Churches and Monasteries of England, of such plate and money as lay hoorded up
in them, for the payment of his soldiers. It was Edward the first, (...)
prince, that wanted neither wit to devise, nor courage to (...) cute such an
exploit, and to lay the fault upon another at last. Yet likely enough it is,
that such a fault stamped upon him (how undeservedly soever) might bar him
out of the (...) Calender, who otherwise was not wont to be over dainty (...)
affoording that kind of honor, where fees might be (...) paid in for it. He
sat ten years, and lies entoombed in (...) South wall near the Cloister
door. In this man's time, the Chapter house was built, by the contribution of
well disposed people; a stately and sumptuous work.

28. Walter Haselshaw.
Walter Haselshaw, first Deane, then Bishop (...)

29. John Drokensford.
John Drokensford keeper of the kings Wardrobe succeeded. (...), he bestowed
somewhat in increasing the buildings and liberties of his See, but much more
upon his (...). He had much contention with his Chapter (the story whereof is
to be seen in the (...) book) sat 19. years, and lies buried under a
reasonable saemcly toombe of free stone in the chapel of Saint Batherme,
which is upon the right hand going toward the Lady chapel.

30. Ralfc of Shrewsbury.
With one consent of the chapter of Wels and the covent (...)) cost him at
last a huge sum of money. This man is famous for the first foundation of our
(...) close in Wels. The memory of which benefit is to be seen erpressed in a
(...) upon the wall at the foot of the hall stairs. In (...) the (...), (...)
to request the Bishop in these words:

(...)
(...)
(...) about the (...), we humbly pray.
Together, through (...), dwell we may.
He answers them thus:

(...),
(...).
For your (...), deserts do plead, I will do that you crave,
To this purpose established, here dwellings shall you have.
This picture being now almost worn out; at what time of late years, the
(...) by the gracious favor of her Majesty had their revenues confirmed to
them, being in danger to be spoiled of them by certain sacrilegious
cormorants; they likewise caused a picture of excellent workmanship to be
drawn, (...) a memorial of both the one and the other. These buildings being
erected, toward the maintenance of some hospitality in them, he gave unto that
new College, the manor of (...), and allotted them twenty nobles yearly to be
paid out of the vicarage of Chew. He built moreover a house for the Queristers
and their master: He built likewise the church of Winscomb and the court house
at Clauerton, a great chamber at Cuercrich, and much other (...) in other of
his houses. His palace of Wells he enclosed with an exceeding strong wall and
a large mote, into which he (...) the river running hard by: He gave unto his
church (...) things, of which nothing now remains (I think) but a great
chest bound with iron, in which the Chapter seal is kept. Lastly, it is to be
remembered, that with great (...) he procured the forest of (...) to be
disparked. Having performed these and many other things deserving perpetual
(...); he departed this life at Wiuelescomb Aug. 14. 1363. having continued
Bishop 34. years. His body was buried before the high altar under a goodly
monument of Alabaster, compassed about with grates of iron. About a 60. years
since (for what cause I know not) it was removed to the (...) side of the
presbytery, but lost his grates by the way. The image of Alabaster that lies
upon it, is said to be very like him.

31. John Barnet.
John Barnet removed from Worcester succeeded him, sat

32. John Harewell.
EDward surnamed the Black Prince, obtained then of John Harewell, a chaplain
of his that was Chancellor of Gascoigne. (...) was consecrate at Burdeaur
March 7. 1366. by the Archbishop there. He contributed the third penny toward
the building of the Southwest tower at the end of the church, the Chapter
bearing the rest of the charge. He paid 100. marks for glasing the window at
the West end of the church, (...) gave two great bells, the bigest of which
being cast four times since I was of this church, now at last serves for
(...) greatest of a ring, the goodliest for that number (being (...)) (I
think) in England. He died in the month of June 1386. having sat 19. years,
and was interred over (...) Burwold, where we see a toombe of alabaster, that
seems to have been a sumptuous piece of work, but is now much defaced.

33. Walter Skirlaw.
Walter Skirlaw was translated from Lichfield hither,

34. Ralfe Erghum.
RAlfe Erghum Doctor oslawe was consecrate Bishop of l. Moreover, he built a
college at Wells for fowerteene priests, at the end of the lane now called
Colledge-lane. He lies buried in the body of the church, upon the North side
of that chapel that joins to the great pulpit.

35. Henry Bowet.
THe Bishopric so void, was conferred by the Pope Richard Clifford Archdeacon
of Canterbury who being denied his temporalties by the king, was feign,
notwithstanding the Popes prouisory Bulls, to give place unto Henry Bowet
Doctor of law and Canon of Wells, that with the kings favor was lawfully
elect thereunto. See more hereof in Richard Clifford of London. To Wells he
was consecrate Nouemb. 16. 1401. in Saint Paul's church in London, the king and
all the Nobility being present; and was translated to York December 1. 1407.
See York.

36. Nicolas Bubwith.
NIcolas Bubwith being Bishop of London and Treasurer Martin the fifth. He
built (...) almeshouse upon the North side of Saint Cuthberts church, endowing
it with good possessions for the relief of many (...) persons: They were much
increased afterward by (...) Storthwayth, somewhat also by Bishop Bourne and
other: So that now it maintains 24. poor people. He (...) unto our church
the parsonage of Bucklaud Abbatis: He built our Library over the Cloisters, and
a little Chapel for morrow mass over against the great pulpit. In that
Chapel (built belike for the place of his burial) he founded a Chauntry, and
dying October 27. 1424. was there enterred. (...) supposed he was a great
benefactor and contributor toward the building of the Northwest tower at the
West end of (...) Church: which his arms fixed upon diverse places of (...)
same do partly show. It is delivered also, that he gave (...) unto the Church,
which I find to be the gift of (...) Button the second, and not his, as before
is declared.

37. John Stafford.
BY the Popes gift, John Stafford, a man very noble (...) Bubwith. August 23.
1443. he was advanced to Canterbury. See Canterbury.

38. Thomas Bekinton.
THomas de Bekinton Doctor of Law and Deane of the Arches, writ a very learned
discourse (...) of the Law Salique of the Frenchmen; (An (...) very necessary
for those times; and being as well taken by other, as handled by himself; got
him such favor with that virtuous king Henry the (...), as it was a means to
advance him, first, unto the keeping of the privy seal, and then to this See,
whereunto he was consecrate in the chapel of Caton October 13. 1443. at what
time, the foundations of that chapel being but newly laid, it was hallowed
and he (...) the first mass in the same. This man built the rank of houses on
the North side of the market place at Wells, called the New works. He made a
(...) in the market place, bringing the water from Saint Andrews well. He
built (as to me it least wise seems) the east side of the cloister. He was a
great benefactor to Lincoln College in Oxford; and a great builder of his own
houses, upon the repayring and beautifying of which, he spent first and last
(as himself professes in his will) 6000. marks. Perceiving himself sickely
and not like long to continue, he made his will: and doubting least king Edward
the fourth should make it void by picking some quarrel of treason unto him; (a
thing no doubt easy to be done, for that this Bishop had been always a
constant follower of the house of Lancaster) with great cost he procured from
the said king a confirmation of his will, dated November 3. 1464. In it he
bequeathed to the church of Wels 20, l. in money, four very sumptuous
vestments, 400, l. to buy ropes, a vessel for holy water of silver waighing
10, l. Troy, a cross of silver parcel gilt of the same weight, a chair for
the Bishop to use in the church (which yet remains) and certain cushions
with other ornaments. To the church of Bathe he bequeathed a cup, a censure and
a pare of silver, all waighing 30. ounces beside 30. coapes and other
vestments. To New college in (...) (where it seems he was brought up) a
silver cross of 10, l. weight, a fair bible in 4. volumes, a silver basin of
10, l. weight, certain (...) and other trifles. To Winchester college a
silver cross double gilt waying 9, l. and ten ounces, two silver candlestickes
of the same weight and a number of vestments. To the hospital of Saint
Batherines in London (whereof he had been master) many vestments and 50, l. in
money. To the church of Sutton Courtney (a benefice of his) he gave many
vestments, (...) 5, l. in money, to be divided to the (...) of (...); (...)
also the like (...) to the (...) of (...), (...) which church it is said he was
Prebendary: and so much more (beside certain vestments) to the (...) of (...)
of which place (as being borne there) most men suppose (...) his name. For my
part I think not so; for I (...) swade my self, his liberality in that case
(I mean to (...) place of his nativity) could not have been contained (...)
so narrow a scantling. But (to proceed) unto the Austin Friars of (...) he gave
20, s^. and to the Friar Minors of Bridgewater 20, s^. To ten priests that
should study at Oxeford, and daily say mass for the souls of himself, his
parents and benefactors, especially of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, William
Wickham (...) of (...) John (...): and Walter Thurston 5, l. a piece: and to
ten poor (...) of the same (...) for (...) years 10, d. a week. To (...) of
the better sort he bequeathed 5, l. a piece; (...) yeomen five marks; to every
boy of his household 40, s^. and to so many of his servants as were not
provided of abiding places, meat, drink and woonted wages (...) three months
after his decease. To his successor he (...) 100, l. upon condition he would
accept it in lieu of all dilapidations, otherwise willing his executors to
spend it in (...) against him: and lastly unto his executors he left only 20,
l. a piece, requiring them to employ all the rest of his (...) good uses at
their discretion. They answered very justly, (...) trust reposed in them, and
that with such discretion as wellas (...), that I should do them wrong not to
remember (...). The one was Richard Swanne, (...) of (...) and parson of
Yeuelton, that heretofore had been executor after the same sort unto Richard
Praty Bishop of Chichester (this man dwelt in the cannonicall house that is
near the market place.) Another was, Hugh Sugar Doctor oflawe and Treasurer of
Wells (he built the chapel all offree stone, (...) of wood before, adjoining
to the great pulpit, and dwelt where I now do, in the middle house of the three
that join upon the Cambray.) And the third was John Pope Doctor of Divinity
Prebendary of Saint Decumans and parson of Shyre. These three (as I have been
told by old men) lie buried in a rank together, over against the great pulpit,
under three Marble stones of one fashion. The Bishops goods that remained
vnbequeathed, they bestowed for the most part, in building the Uicars close at
Wells, which had been begun by Bishop Ralfe long before; a sumptuous and
beautiful work. This great benefactor of our Church departed this life,
January 14. 1464. and was buried in a goodly toombe built by him self in his
life time, situate upon the South side of the Presbytery.

39. Robert Stillington.
IN the month of July next after the death of Bishop Bekinton, Robert
Stillington, Doctor of Law, Archdeacon of Taunton, first keeper of the privy
seal, and then Chauncellor of England, was elected to this See, and consecrate
in April following. He built that goodly Lady Chapel in the cloisters, that
was pulled down by him which destroyed also the great hall of the palace
mentioned in Robert Burnell page 12. He died a prisoner in the Castle of (...),
whether he was committed for four years before his death (for what cause I
know not) in the month of October 1487. and was intoombed in the said
Chapel, but rested not long there: For it is reported, that diverse old men,
who in their youth had not only seen the (...) of his funerals, but also the
building of his toombe, Chapel and all; did also see, toombe and Chapel
destroyed, and the bones of the Bishop that built them, turned out of the lead
in which they were interred. Concerning this man and many other Bishops of this
Church, if any desire to understand more, I must refer them to a discourse
heretofore written by me in Latin of them, which is in many men's hands, though
never published.

40. Richard Fox
Soon after the death of Bishop Stillington, Richard Fox

41. Oliver King.
Oliver King Doctor of Law and principal Secretary William Bird the last Prior
there, endeavoring what he might by him self and other to see it finished; had
even brought it to perfection, when the dissolution of the Abbey had almost
overthrown what before was set up. It is great pity that some good man or
other, whom God has enabled, undertakes not the finishing of it; a work then
which, I think nothings is to be performed with so little cost, that were more
likely to be pleasing to Almighty God, acceptable unto men, and memorable with
all (...). This man sat Bishop eight years, and is thought to lie buried at
Windsor in a little Chapel upon the South side of the Quier, over against
which place, upon the enterclose of the Quier I find written (under the
pictures of king Henry the sixth, and his son, king Edward the fourth, and
Henry the seventh) this that follows, Orate pro domino Olmero King iuris
professore, ac illustri Edwardi (primogeniti Henry Sexti) and (...) Regum Edw.
quarti, Edw. quinti, and Henr. 7. principali Secretario, (...) ordinis Garterij
Registrario, and huius Sancti Collegij Canonicqanno Dom. 1489. and postea per
dictum illustrillimum Regein Henry 7. ann. 1492. ad sedem Exon. commendato.

42. Hadrian de Castello.
POpe Innocent the eight hearing of a certain dangerous (...) raised up
against James the third king of Scots; thought good to send into Scotland one
Hadrian de Castello, as a man for his wisdom and other good parts likely to
appease those (...). Being at London he was certified of the king of Scots
death, whom his own subjects had (...) in battle. So resting him self a while
there he grew into acquaintance with John Moorton the Archbishop of Canterbury.
He much delighted with his learning, and discreet carriage; commended him so
effectually unto the king (Henry the seventh) as he thought good to (...) his
Proctor for the dispatch of all his causes at Rome. In that place he behaved
him self so, as the King at (...) in (...) of his pains and fidelity, was
(...) of (...) unto the Bishopric of (...), the year 1503. and then, the
year following, of this See. Pope Alexander the sixth in the mean time, a
little before his translation hither, had made him Cardinal. Here he continued
12. years, until that the year 1518. he was deprived of this and all other
promotions upon this occasion: A Cardinal of Rome called Alfonso Petruccio
consptred with certain other Cardinals, the death of Pope Leo 10. Amongst
them, this our Hadrian was content to make one; moved thereunto (as P. Iouius
affirms) not by any grudge or private displeasure, but only by an ambitious
(...), that surely he should be Pope (...) were once dead. A certain witch or
wise woman as we call them) having heretofore foretold him very strangely
diverse things that had happened to him self and other of his friends; took
upon her to assure him, that after the death of Pope Leo, it should come to
pass, that a certain old man named Hadrian, borne of mean parentage,
preferred only for his learning, wisdom, and other good parts, should be
advanced unto the Papacy. These particularities, Hadrian was persuaded could
agree to none other but him self: For he being borne at Corneto a poor fisher
town of Hetruria, of mean (or rather very base) parentage; only by virtue
and good deserts rose by many degrees unto the preferments before mentioned.
The witches prediction fell out true, but in an other: For Hadrian a Dutchman,
the son of a Erelver of Utright, that had been schoolmaster to Charles the
fifth (...), fell out to be the man that succeeded Leo by the name of (...) the
sixth. What became of this Hadrian afterward, or when he died, I find not.

43. Thomas Woolsey.
Upon the deprivation of Hadrian, Cardinal Woolsey

44. John Clerk.
John Clarke Doctor of Divinity and Master of the (...) Anne of Cleue his
sister. He is (...) in the Mineries at London.

45. William Knight.
William Knight Doctor of Law and Archdeacon of Henry the eight, sat six
years, died September 29. 1547. and was buried under the great Pulpit, which
he caused to be built for his toombe. In the (...) place of Wells, there is a
goodly cross erected partly by this man, as this inscription engraven
witnesses, Ad honorem (...) omnipotentis and commodom pauperum mercatum
Welliae freqnentantium, impensis Gulielmi Knight Episcopi and Richardi Wooleman
huius ecclesiae Cathedralis olim Decani, hic locus erectus est. Laus Deo, pax
viuis, requies defunctis. Amen. Ann. Dom. 1542.

46. William Barlowe.
William Barlowe Doctor of Divinity, sometimes (...) Osythes having been
Bishop of Saint David's the space of ten years or there abouts, was
translated hither to succeed Bishop Knight, and continued here all the days
of R. Edward. In the beginning of Queen Mary, he was forced to leave his
country, Bishopric and all, and to live exiled in Germany, until that by
her death, and the most happy advancement of our now Sovereign, he was at
once restored to his Country, and preferred to the Bishoppricke of Chichester.
There he lived about the space of ten years, and dying the year 1569. was
buried in his own Church.

47. Gilbert Bourne.
BIshop Barlow being forced to forsake his Bishopric Gilbert Bourne Doctor of
Divinity was appointed thereunto by Queen Mary. The nonage of that good king
Edward the sixth, giving opportunity to those horrible sacrileges, that robbed
the cathedral churches of England of (I dare say) the tone half of that they
possessed; had been an occasion of the utter ruin and destruction of this
See, if Bishop Barlow taking advantage of the death of some men in the (...)
end of king Edward, and Bishop Bourne making use of the zeal of Queen Mary
in tendering the state of the church; had not been the means of recovering
what is now left unto the same, even the lands of the Bishopric in a manner
every whit, all the land belonging to the Archdeacon of Wells, and some land
of the Chapter, to wit, the parsonages of Duluerton and Longsutton. And it is
supposed that this man (had he stood up but a little while longer) had
recovered diverse other possessions to his See, that now are thought to be lost
irrecouerably. He was a benefactor unto the Uicars close, and to the almehouse,
and began the foundation of a certain college in the canonical house that
stands near the market place; but was hindered by the death of Queen Mary
and his deprivation, from finishing it. Being displaced for not subscribing
according to order, he was committed to the custody of master Carey Deane of
her Majesty's chapel, lived with him many years, and died at Sylferton in
Devonshire (where he lies buried) September 10. 1569.

48. Gilbert Barkley.
IT pleased then the Queens Majesty that now is, in the Gilbert Barkley,
borne in Norfolk, but descended of the ancient and most honorable house of
the Lord Barkley, at least wise as the arms assigned unto him by the Heralds
do seem to testify. He sat somewhat more then 20. years, and growing into a
lethargy (which diminished much of the vigor and strength as well of his mind
as his body certain months before his decease) at last departed this world
November 2. 1581. being 80. years of age, and was buried upon the North side
of the high altar in his own church, where we see a hansome monument of free
stone built over him.

49. Thomas Godwyn.
THomas Godwyn my dear and most reverend father, was borne at Okingham in
Barkshire, and brought up first in the free school there, then for a little
while under one Doctor Layton Deane of York, who sent him to Dreford, and so
long as he lived (which was not past a two or three year) exhibited unto him
there. He being taken away, it pleased God to provide for him otherwise by
raising up friends that procured him to be chosen fellow of (...) college.
Toward the latter end of king Edwards reign, forsaking that place, he took
on him the teaching of a free school at Brackley, directing his studies partly
to divinity, and partly also to Physic, the practice whereof in Queens Mary's
time (when he might not be suffered to teach any longer) maintained him, his
wife and children honestly. He received orders and his first spiritual
preferments at the hand of Bishop Bollingham, then of Lincoln, after of (...),
in the beginning of her Majesty's reign that now is. By her gracious
appointment, he became first Deane of Christchurch in Oxeford in the seventh,
then of Canterbury in the ninth year of her raigue, and lastly Bishop of Bathe
and (...), being consecrate thereunto September 13. 1584. Having sat fix
years, two months and six days, he departed this mortal life November 19.
1590. at Okingham, the place where he was borne, and there lies buried upon
the South side of the chauncell, under a marble, and near unto a monument
(fixed in the wall) far more answerable unto the ability of him that set it
up, then unto the virtues and deserts of him to whose memory it was erected.

50. John Still.
The Sea having continued void two years and somewhat more, John Styli Doctor
of Divinity, and Master of Trinity college in Cambridge, was consecrate
thereunto in February 1592. He yet lives in the same.

This Bishopric is valued in the Queens books at 533, l. and 15, d. and
paid to the Pope for an Income, only 430. slorens, although in those days it
were one of the richest Sees of England.
The Deanery of Wells was first erected in the time of king Stephen about the
year 1150. as before is delivered, and one Iuo made the first Deane, after
whom have succeeded these:

2. Richard de Spakeston 1160. 3. Alexander. 4. Leonius 1205. 5. Ralph de
Lechlade. 6. Peter de Ciceter. 7. William de Merton. 1236. 8. Ioannes
Sarracenus. 1241. 9. Gyles de Brideport. 1255. 10. Edward de la Knoll. 1256.
11. Thomas de Button. 1284. 12. William Burnell. 1292. 13. Walter de Haselshaw.
1295. 14. Henry Husee. 1302. 15. John de Godeley. 1303. 16. Richard de Bury.
1333. 17. Wibert de Luttleton elect. 1334. 18. Walter de London. 1336. 19. John
de Carlton. William de Camel elect. 1361. refused the place. 20. Stephen de
Penpel. 1361. 21. John Fordham. 1379. 22. Thomas de Sudbury. 1381. 23. Nicolas
Slake. 1396. 24. Thomas Stanley. 1402. 25. Richard Courtney. 1409. 26. Walter
Metford. 1413. 27. John Stafford. 28. John Forest. 1425. 29. Nicolas Carent.
1448. 30. William Witham. 1467. 31. John Gunthorp. 1472. 32. William Cosyn
1498. 33. Thomas Winter. 1525. 34. Ridhard Woolman. 35. Thomas Cromwell, 1537.
36. William Fitz-Williams. 1540. 37. John Goodman. 1548. 38. William Turner.
1556. 39. Robert Weston. 1566. 40. Valentine Dale. 1574. 41. John Herbert.
1589.
The Bishops of Exceter.
This discourse following is taken (for the most part) Verbatim out of Master
John Hookers Catalogue of the Bishops of Exceter.
THe Countries of Devonshire and Cornwall, after their conversion unto
Christian religion, were a while under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of the
West Saxons, whose See was established at Dorchester. Afterward Winchester
being appointed a Cathedral See about the year 660. All the West country was
allotted to the government of the Bishop of that Church, and so continued under
him till that the year 705. Sherborne was made a Cathedral Church. Two
hundred years they were subject unto the Bishop of Sherborne, to wit, until
the year 905. At what time Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury, by the
commandment of the king (as else where I have declared more at large) erected
diverse new Sees, namely at Wells in Somersetshire one, in Cornwall another,
and a third in Devonshire. The Sea of Athelstan the Bishop of Cornwall, was for
a while S. Petrockes in Bodmyn, and afterward Saint Germans. Werstan Bishop
of Devonshire placed him self first at Tawton, but soon after removed to
Credyton now called kyrton: The successors of Athelstan in the Dioces of
Cornwall (as I find) were these:

Conanus. Ruydocus. Aldredus. Britwyn. Athelstan, he lived the year 966.
Wolfi. Woronus. Wolocus. Stidio. Adelredus. Burwoldus.
About the year 1040. (or soon after) Saint Peter's church in Exceter was
appointed the Sea for both Devonshire, and Cornwall. And has ever since that
time so continued.

NOw to come unto the particular history of this church you shall understand,
that amongst many religious houses erected heretofore in and about the City of
Erceter, three there have been sometimes within the seite and circuit of that
place, which is now called the close of Saint Peter's. The first of these was a
house of Nuns where the Deanes house and the Callander Nay or Uicars close
do now stand: The second was a Monastery for monks supposed to be built by
king (...) the third, son of king Ethelwo ph about the year 868. And the
third was also for monks, to wit, of the order of Saint Benet, founded by
king Athelstan, the year 932. thereabout where the East parts of the Church
now called the Lady chapel stands. Of this foundation thus one writes.

Hanc vrbem primus Rex Athelstanus, in potestatem Anglorum effugatis Britonibus
redactam, turribus muniuit and moro ex quadratis lapidibus cinxit, ac
antiquitus vocatum (...), nunc Exeter vocari voluit; ac ibisedens, mansum
quoddam de dit ad fundandum monasterium pro monachis Den and Sancto Petro
famulantibus. Now besides the great charges he was at in building; He gave also
sufficient lands and revenues for their living, whereof Morkshut and (...), be
yet remaining, and are appertaining to the Treasurer of the said Church. But
after the time of King Athelstane, the Danes with great hostility and cruelty
having ouerrun this land, this City and Church was much infested and troubled:
for with no less cruelty did the Danes pursue the English men and Saxons, then
did the Saxons before pursue the Britains. And then the monks not able to
endure the same, fled and forsook their house, seeking places of refuge and
better safety. And so was this monastery lest destitute, and forsaken for
sundry years, until the time of king Edgar. He making a progress into these
West parts to visit Ordogarus Earl of Deuon. (whose daughter he had married)
came to this City ann. 986. and pitying their distressed state, restored them
their house and liuelihoods; And appointed (...) (who afterward was Bishop) To
be their Abbot. After that, they continued together (although in great
troubles) until the time of king Swanus the Dane. He with a great troop and
Army of his Danes came to this City ann. 1019. besieged it, and at length
having taken the same, spoiled, destroyed, and burnt both City and Monastery.
But yet shortly after it was again restored; For King (...) being advertised
of the great cruelties done by his Father (...): did at the request of one of
his Dukes named (...), make restitution unto Atheiuoldus then Abbot, both of
lands, livings, and privileges, as appears by his Charter dated ann. 1019.
About thirty years after this, king Edward the Confessor coming to Exceter,
by the advice of Leophricus Bishop of Crediton, sometimes Lord Chauncellor of
England, and of his privy Council, partly for the better safety of the Bishop
and his successors, and partly to provide a more apt place for the monks,
translated the Bishops See from Crediton to Exceter, and sent the monks to
Westminster. The Bishop then thus removed from the old, and placed in the new;
indoweth his new See with the lands and liuelihoods of his former Church,
pulled down the two monasteries near adjoining, the one of Nuns, the other
of monks, and adds them to his own Church. After Leophricus his successors
following his example, did every of them for the most part endeavor the
augmentation and increase of their Church, some in liuelihoods, some in
liberties and privileges, some in buildings, and some in one thing, some in an
other.

ANno 1112. William Warwest the third Bishop of Exceter began to enlarge his
cathedral church (which at that time was no bigger then that part which is
called the Lady Chapel) and laid the foundation of that which is now
thequier. Anno 1235. or there abouts William Brewer (...), and a Chapter of
(...) and twenty prebendaries; He appropriated to the Deanery Brampton and
Coliton Rawleigh: For the prebendaries he purchased lands, allotting to (...)
of them, the like portion of four pound by the year. Anno 1284. Peter Quiuill
Bishop, finding the Chauncell of his church to be builded and finished to his
hands, built the lower part or body of his church from the quier westward; He
alsos appointed a Chanter and a Subdeane in the church; to the one he
impropriated Painton and Cudleigh, and to the other the parsonage of Cgloshalle
in Cornwall. Moreover he impropriated the parsonage of Saint Newlin in
Cornwall, and of Stoke Gabriell in Devonshire to the Chancellor of the church
for reading of a Divinity Lecture. Anno 1340. John Grandisson Bishop; did
increase the length of his church from the sont Westward and vaulted the roof
of the whole church, so ending and fully finishing the same.

ABout the year of our Lord 1450. Edmund Lacy began to build the Chapter
house, and George (...) finished it. The Cloisters were built by the Deane and
Chapter.

Hereby it appears that from the first foundation of this church under king
Athelstane, until the time that Bishop Graundsone (...) the building thereof,
it was above 400. years, which notwithstanding, so uniformly the same is
compact, as if by one and the same man it had been plotted, begun, continued
and ended.

A Catalogue of the Bishops of Devonshire.
VVErstanus (called by some Adulphus) the first Bishop of Devonshire was
consecrated Bishop of this Dioces an. 905. and had his See at Bishops Tawton.
In the year following, viz. 906. he died and was buried in his own Church.

PVtta after the death of Werstanus, was elected and consecrate Bishop, and had
his See at Tawton. He tataking his journey toward Crediton to see the king (or
as some say, Vsfa the kings licutenant) was by the said Vffas men slain. Upon
his death the Sea was removed to Crediton.

EAdulphus brother to (...) Duke of Deuonshyre and Cornwall, and founder of
Launceston, was consecrated Bishop of Devonshire, but installed at Crediton
where he had his See, and continued Bishop two and twenty years. He died the
year 934. and was buried in his own church.

EThelgarus an. (...). succeeded Eadulphus. This Ethelgarus after he had been
Bishop ten years; he died and was buried in his own church.

ALgarus an. 942. after Ethelgarus was constituted and installed Bishop at
Crediton. And having been Bishop about ten years died and was buried in his
own Church.

ALfwoldus, as Matthew of Westminster writes, was next Bishop after Algarus,
and consecrated by the advice of Dunstane ann. 952. He died 972. and was buried
in his own church.

ALwolfus sat nine years after Alfwoldus, and was buried in his own church.

SYdemanus Abbot of Saint Peter's succeeded. In this man's time the Danes
overcame and spoiled the whole countries of Devonshire and Cornwall, burned
the town of Bodwyn, and the cathedral church of Saint Petroks, with the
Bishops house. Whereupon the Bishops See was removed from thence to S Germans,
in which place it continued until the remoouing and uniting thereof unto
Crediton. Sydemannus in th 12. year after his consecration died, and was
buried at Crediton in his own church 990.

ALfredus (whom Dicetus calls Alfricus) abbot of Malmesbury, was consecrated
Bishop, and installed at Crediton. He was taken for a learned man, and wrote
two books, the one entitled de rebus coenobij sui, and the other de rerum
naturis. In his time king Etheldred endowed the Bishopric of Saint Germans
with lands, liberties, and privileges. The Danes made a fresh (...) upon all
Devonshire and Cornwall, burned and spoiled the Abbey of Drdolphus at
Tauistorke, besieged Exceter, and being removed from thence, were fought
withal at Pynhow about 3. (...) from the city and overthrown. Alphredus after
he had been Bishop about 9. years, died an. 999. and was buried in his own
church.

ALwolfus (as Dicetus writes) was the next Bishop. In his time Sweno king of
Denmark by inticement of one Hugh then Earl of Devonshire, came with a great
host and besieged the city of Exceter, took it and burned it, and with great
cruelty used the people, until in the end Almarus Earl of Devonshire, and the
gentlemen did yield and submit themselves, and so obtained peace. This Alwolfus
about the 15. year of his Bishopric 1030. died and was buried in his own
church.

LIuyngus procured the county of Cornwall to be added unto his Dioces: he was
consecrate 1032. and after became Bishop of Worcester. See more there.

The Bishops of Exceter.
FIrst Leofricus, a man descended of the Butus, brought up in the land of
Lotharingia or Loreine, was so well commended not only for his nobility, but
much more for his wisdom and learning; that king Edward the Confessor had him
in great favor, and made him first one of the prinie Council, then
Chauncellor of England, and lastly (the Bishopric of this Dioces being void)
he was preferred thereunto. By his means the Bishops See was removed from
Crediton to this city of Exceter. The year 1049. (or thereabout) king Edward
the Confessor coming to Exeter, together with his Queen; took order that the
monks of Saint Peter's should be placed at Westminster (as before is mentioned)
and removed the Episcopal See from Crediton to this city. It is remembered,
that himself taking the Bishop by the right hand, and Edeth his Queen by the
left, led him up unto the Altar of his new church, and there placed him in a
seat appointed for him. This Bishop obtained of the same king much good land
and many notable privileges for his church. He made biuers statutes, and
amongst other things, he ordained, that all his Canons or Prebendaries should
lodge in one chamber, and take their diet at one table. He appointed them
likewise a steward that should provide them victuals daily, and once in the
year delivered them new clothes. This kind of government (says William
Malmesbury) he learned in Lorraine, and it is (says he) continued by the
posterity, although by the corruption and luxury of our time somewhat altered
and decayed. After that he had well and woorthily ruled his church and
Diocese, by the space of three and twenty years, he ended his days in peace
Anno 1073. and was buried in the Cemitory or churchyard of his own church
under a simple and a broken marble stone, which place by the (...) of his
Church is now within the South Tower of the same, whereof of late Anno. 1568. A
new monument was erected in the memory of so good, worthy, and notable a
personage, by the industry of the writer hereof: but at the charges of the
Deane and Chapter.

OSbertus or Osbernus a Normaine borne, and brother William, was preferred to
this Bishopric the year 1074. He was Bishop 30. years, toward his (...)
blind, died 1103. and was buried in his own Church. H. Huntingdon, and others
that (...) him, make mention of one Gaufridus Bishop of Erceter about this
time; but they are mistaken. It is (...) (...) (...) Bishop of Constantia that
joined with Odo (...) of Kent, etc.

William Warewest a Normaine borne, and Chaplain William and Henry; a very
grave and a wise man, having been much employed in sundry Ambassayes, was
preferred at last unto this Bishopric by king Henry the first, and consecrate
thereunto in August 1107. together with (...) other. He first began to enlarge
his Church (as above I have mentioned) and obtained from the king Plympton,
Brampton, and Saint Stephens in Exceter. Brampton he gave to his Cathedral
Church, and it was afterward allotted unto the Deane for a part of the corpse of
his Deanery. Saint Stephens with the Sea belonging to the same he reserved to
him self and to his successors, who thereby are Barons and lords in the
Parliament. As for Plympton, he gave it unto a Monastery, which he built there
for Reguler Cannons. In his later days he became blind: which imperfection
notwithstanding, the king thought good to send him Ambassador unto Pope
Paschalis the second, and he dispatched the bussnesse commended unto him, to
the Kings great (...). Not long after his return, having small joy of the
world, he gave over his Bishopric and became one of the reguler Canons of his
own house at Plympton, where he died 1127. and was buried. He was Bishop about
20. years.

RObert Chichester Deane of Sarisbury, was consecrated

RObert Warewest nephew to William Warewest his Theobaldus Archbishop of
Canterbury ann. 1150. After that he had occupied this See nine years or
thereabout, he died ann. 1159. and was buried at Plympton by his uncle.

BArtholomeus Iscanus, otherwise Bartholomew of Exceter, Matthew Paris in his
report of the year 1161. tells a long tale, of a certain strange apparition
or revelation which happened unto him in the country as he visited his Dioces.
He was a great adversary of Thomas Becket. I marvel that any such thing might
be credibly reported of him. After he had been Bishop about fourteen years,
ann. 1184. he died, but where he died or was buried it appears not.

John the Chaunter of the Cathedral Church of this City,

HEnry Marshall Archdeacon of Stafford and Deane of William the Earl Marshall
of England, was consecrated Bishop by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury an. 1191.
he finished the building of his church according to the plat and foundation
which his predecessors had laid, and that done, he purchased the patronage and
Lordship of Wodbery of one Albemarly, which he gave and impropriated unto the
Uicars chorall of his church. After that he had lived 12. years in his
Bishopric, he died ann. 1200. and lies buried in the North side of the
presbytery of his church in a very fair tomb of Marble.

SImon de Apulia Deane of York was consecrated (...)

William Brewer, very shortly after the death of the Simon was elected Bishop,
and consecrated upon Easter day an. 1224. A man very well borne, being brother
to Sir William Brewer knight, the (...) of the eldest daughter, and one of the
heirs to William de Verona Earl of Devonshire founder of the Abbeyes of Tor,
Hartland, and other monasteries. He was of the privy Council under king Henry
the third, and greatly in favor with him. The year 1235. he traveled into
Germany, to conduct thither the Lady Isabell the kings sister, to be married
unto Fridericke the Emperor: and not long after, the said Emperor making a
voyage into the holy land, he attended him thither. Being returned home, and
minding (as his predecessors had done) to leave some good memorial behind him,
he made a Deane, and constituted 24. Prebendaries within his church. To the one
he impropriated Brampton and (...) Rawleigh; for the others he purchased so
much land, as out whereof he assigned to every prebendary (...) pound by the
year, and of these he (...) his chapter. (...) that he had continued here
nineteen years, he died anno 1244. and lies buried in his own church under
a plain marble stone in the middle of the presbytery, not far from the
Bishops See.

RIchard Blondy was consecrated 1245. This Richard (...) his chauncellor, (...)
his register, (...) his official and (...) the keeper of his scale: these, with
other of the household, comparred amongst themselves, (...) the Bishop was yet
(...) who then lay sick and very weak in his bed to make unto themselves
conueyances of such liuelihoods as then lay in the Bishops disposition; and
accordingly made out aduousons and other such graunts, as to them seemed best:
all which were forthwith sealed and delivered according to the orders among
them concluded. These their subtle dealings were not so closely conveyed, but
that the next Bishop following, boulted and found the same out; and did not
only rereuerse all their doings, but also excommunicate them; neither were
they absolved until they had done penance for the same at Saint Peter's church
openly upon Palm Sunday being the 19. day of March 1267. This Bishop in the
twelfe year of his Bishopric died, to wit, an. 1257. and was buried in his
own church.

Walter Bronescome Archdeacon of Surry, was Glaseney in Perin in Cornwall,
and endowed the (...) with fair possessions and revenues, being induced
thereunto by a vision or dream as himself reports in the (...) of the same
He purchased the Barton of (...) and Clist, and gave it to the Hospital of
Saint John's within the Eastgate of the city of Exceter. He instituted in his
own church the feast called Gabriels feast; and gave a piece of land for the
maintenance thereof. He also did by a policy purchase the Lordship and house of
Clist Sachfield, and enlarged the Barton thereof by gayning of Cornish wood
from his Deane and Chapter fraudulently: building then a very fair and
sumptuous house there; he called it Bishops Clist, and (...) the same to his
successors. Likewise he got the patronage of Clist Fomesone now called Sowton,
and annexed the same to his new lordship, which (as it was said) he procured by
this means. He had a Friar to be his chaplain and consellor, which died in
his said house of Clist, and should have been buried at the parish church of
Farryngdon, because the said house was and is in that parish: but because the
(...) church was somewhat far of, the ways foul, and the weather rainy, or
sor some other causes, the Bishop commanded the corpse to be carried to the
parish church of Sowton, then called Clist Fomeson, which is very near and
bordereth upon the Bishops Lordship, the two parishes there being divided by a
little lake called Clist. At this time, one (...) a gentleman was Lord and
patron of Clist Fomeson: and he being advertised of such a burial toward in
his parish, and a (...) way to be made over his land, without his (...) consent
required therein; calls his tenants together, goes to the bridge over the
lake between the Bishops land and his, there meets the Bishops men bringing
the said corpse, and forbids them to come over the water. The Bishops men
nothing regarding this prohibition, do press forwards to come over the water,
and the others do withstand so long, that in the end my Lords Friar is fallen
into the water. The Bishop takes this matter in such grief, that a holy
Friar, a religious man, his own chaplain and confessor, should so
irreverently be cast into the water, that he falls out with the gentleman,
and upon what occasion I know not he sueth him in the law, and so vereth and
tormenteth him, that in the end he was saine to yield himself to the Bishops
devotion, and seeks all the ways he could to curry the Bishops good will,
which he could not obtain, until for redemption, he had given and surrendered
up his patronage of Sowton, with a piece of land: All which the said Bishop
annexeth to his new Lordship. Thus by policy he purchases the manor of
Bishops Clist, by a devise gayneth Cornish wood, and by power wresteth the
patronage of Sowton from the true ownor. This Bishop after he had occupted this
See about 23. years, died July 22. 1280. and was buried in his own church, in
a sumptuous tomb of Alabaster standing upon the South side of the entrance
into the Lady chapel. Upon it this Epitaphe following is yet to be seen.

Olim syncerus pater, omni dignus amore,
Primus Walterus magno (...) hic in honor.
Edidit hic plura (...) laud statuta,
Quae tanquam (...) servant hic omnia tuta.
Atque hoc collegium quod Glaseney plebs vocat omnis,
Condidit egregmm, pro voce data sibi somnis.
Quot loca construxit, (...) quot bona (...),
Quam sanctam duxit vitam, vox dicere quae scit?
(...) gens Exomensis,
Et chorus and turbae, quod natus in hac fuit vrbe.
Plus (...), festum (...) Gabrielis.
Gaudeat in (...) pater iste fidelis.
PEter Quiuill ann. 1281. was consecrated Bishop of Erceter. Walter Lichlade
the first Chaunter, was slame in a morning as he came from the morning service
then called the Mattens which was wont to be said shortly after midnight, upon
which occasion the king earne unto this City, and kept his Christmas in the
same: And thereupon a composition was made between the Bishop and the City,
for enclosing of the Church yard, and building of certain gates there, as
appears by the said composition bearing date, in festo (...) Mariae, 1286.
The king at (...) suit of the Earl of Hereford, (who at his (...) here, was
lodged in the house of the Gray Friars, which then was near the house of Saint
Nicholas) obtained of the Bishop, that they should be removed from thence to a
(...) wholesome place without South gate; whereof after the kings departure
grew some controversy, because the Bishop resused to perform his promise made
to the king. This man also impropriated the parish of Saint (...), and the
(...) of Stoke Gabriell, and united the same to the office of the Chauncellor
of the Cathedral Church, that the said Chauncellor should continually read a
lecture within the said City of Divinity, or of the Decretals. In the eleventh
year of his Bishopric he died, being choked in drinking of a (...). ann.
1292. He was buried in the middle of the Lady Chapel. Upon his toombe is
written, (...) tegit Petrum, (...). The Franciscanes or Gray Friars of this
City, imputed his death to his hard dealing with them. For whereas he had
promised the king to provide a convenient place sor them to build their house
in, and had willed their warden, named Deodatus to seek out and make inquiry
for the same; yet notwithstanding when he had so done, because the same was in
his See, swaruing from his said promise, he utterly denied to perform the
same, being diswaded by Peter Kenefield, a Dominicane or a black Friar, and
(...) unto the said Bishop: For he envying the good success of the
Franciscanes, advises the Bishop, that in no wise he (...) permit them to
enjoy the place which they had gotten. (...) (says he) as under color of
simplicity, they creep into the hearts of the people, and hinder us poor
Preachers from our gains and livings; so be ye sure that if they put foot
(...) your Liberties, they will in time find means to be (...) from out of
your Liberty and jurisdiction. The Bishop being soon diswaded, utterly
forbids them to build, or to do any thing within his See or liberty. About
two years after, the Bishop kept a great feast upon the Sundaynext before
Saint Francis day; And among others, was present with him one Walter Winborne,
one of the kings chief Justices of the bench, who was present when the Bishop
at the request of the king made promise to further and help the Franciscanes.
He now in their behalf, did put the Bishop in mind thereof, and requested him
to have consideration both of his own promise, and their distress. The Bishop
misliking this motion waxed angry, and did not only deny to yield thereunto,
but wished himself to be choked what day soever he did consent unto it. It
fortuned that the same week, and upon the day of Saint Francis eve, the Bishop
took a certain Sirope to drink, and in too hasty swallowing thereof, his
breath was stopped, and he forthwith died. The Franciscanes hearing thereof,
made no little adoo about this matter, but blased it abroad, that Saint Francis
wrought this miracle upon the Bishop, because he was so hard against them.

THomas Bitton Deane of Wells, the year following was I. Roman Archbishop of
York. He left no memorial of any great things done by him, saving that he
continued the building of his church. Fourteen years after that he had
occupied this See, he died September 21. 1307. and was buried under a fair
Marble inlayed with brass before the high altar.

Walter Stapleden, a man learned, wise, and of great Hugh (...) (who (...) to
be (...) of this (...)) went next before him. At broad gate he was received by
his Chapter and Quier in their ornaments, with Te Deum, and so carried into the
church. The usual Ceremonies being performed there, at his palace a great
feast was prepared, for the entertainment of such noblemen and other
parsonages of account as repaired hither at that time. It is incredible how
many oxen, tons of Ale, and Wine, are said to have been usually spent at
this kind of solemnity. Even so much, as the whole yearly revenue at this time
would not suffice to pay for. This Bishop was greatly in favor with king
Edward the second, who made him first of his privy Council, then Lord
Treasurer of England, and employed him in diverse Embassages of great
importance. The year 1329. he was sent Ambassador to the French king, and
joined in commission with the Queen, for the conclusion of a peace between
these two princes. That being ordered and brought to pass according to his
desire, he returned home, leaving the Queen with the French king her brother,
to perfect and finish the agreement already made. She whether weary of her hust
and, or provoked by the insolency of the Spencers and other favorites about the
king; had long since determined to depose her husband from the kingdom, if
possibly she might; and to set up her son Prince Edward. Having therefore rid
away this Bishop, whose loialty and faithfulness to his sovereign she well
knew was immovable; she began to put in practice the execution of this long
plotted designement, and in the end (to be short) exploited the same. While
these matters were a brewing, it happened the king to take his journey to
Bristow; and he thought good to commit the government and custody of the city
of London to the fidelity of this Bishop. At what time therefore the Queen
began to approach near unto the city with her power, he required the Mayor to
send unto him the keys of the gates. The Commons (who altogether favored the
Queens party) hearing this, and perceauing the Bishop purposed to withstand
her; set upon him violently, drew him into Cheap side, and beheaded him there,
together with Sir Richard Stapleton a Knight his brother. Then they carried his
body to his house without Temple bar, and buried if basely in a heap of sand,
in the backside of the same house. In this sort did this worthy prelate loose
his life, in defense of his Prince, and that by their means, who of all other
were bound in the strongest bands of duty and allegiance to have done as he
did, I mean the Queen and the Prince her son. They shortly after, whether
regarding his calling, or destring to make semblance of disliking the manner of
his death, or happily moved with some remorse of conscience, commanded his
body to be taken from the place where it was first (...), and being conueighed
to Exceter, with all funeral pomp, there to be solemnly enterred. He lies
(...) upon the North side of the high Altar, in a fair toombe of free stone:
And his brother before mentioned lies over against him in the North wall of
the North Isle. This murder was committed October 15 1326. And his funerals
were solemnised at Exceter March 28. following. The year 1316. he erected two
houses in Oxford for the better increase and advancement of learning; the one
named Heart hall, the other Stapledons Inn, now called Exceter college; in
which he placed thirteen fellows, and a Rector, whom he appointed to be
chosen annually. This foundation is much increased of late years, by the
liberality of Sir William Peter, late principal Secretary, and others.
Moreover it is to be remembered, that he was a special benefactor unto the
hospital of Saint John's in Exceter, to which he impropriated for the releeuing
of certain poor children, the Rectory or personage of Ernscombe.

James Barkley descended of the noble house of the Lord Burkley,

John Grandesson, being in Italy with Pope John the 22. John Barkley, he at the
kings request bestowed this Bishopric upon him, and caused him tobe
consecrate at Rome October 18. 1327. He was borne and descended of the ancient
house of the Grandessons, Dukes of Burgundy. His Father was named Gilbert, the
brother of Otho, the great Lord Grandesson; which Gilbert (...) into this Land,
was well entertained by the king and nobility. By means of Henry Earl of
Lancaster (with whom he came into England) he married the Lady (...), daughter
and one of the heirs to John Tregos Lord of the Castle of Ewias near Hereford
East, and by her had issue five sons and four daughters, of which this
Bishop was one, who was borne in the parish of Aishpertone in the Dioces of
Hereford. He was from his childhood very studious, became earned, and wrote
diverse books, one entitled (...), an other (...) minores, and a third de
vitis sar ctorum. He was also very grave, wise, and politic. And thereby grew
into such credit with Pope John, that he was not only of his privy counsel,
but also his Nuntio or Ambassador in matters of great weight and unportance,
to the Emperor, to the king of Spain, France, England, and other the
mightiest Princes of Christendom. Being on a time sent in an Embassage to king
Edward the third; he so behaved him self, that the king never ceased until he
had procured him from the Pope, and then he gave him the Archbeaconry of
Nothingham and other great livings; he made him one of the privy council, and
in the end preferred him to his Bishopric. After this, some matter of dislike
falling out between Pope Clement the sixth, and the King, he for his approved
wisdom, was sent in Embassage to the Pope, ann. 1343. for an entreaty of a
peace, and an amity between (...) to be had; and with such wisdom he did his
message, that he obtained his purpose, and made a reconciliation. After his
return home to his Bishopric, he spent his time altogether in adorning and
beautifying of his Church, or building and erecting some good monument or
other. He founded the College of S. Mary Otrey, and endowed the same with
great and goodly liuelihoods; He was a liberal Benefactor to the Uicars
Chorall of his own Church, as also to the College of Glaseney in Peryn: he
builded the two last Arches in the West end of his Church, vaulted the roof of
all the Church, and fully ended the buildings of the same. Leaving it in such
sort, as we see it at this day. The^ also he enriched it with plate and other
ornaments of inestimable value. Moreover he built a fair house at Bishops
Taingtonwhich he left full furnished unto his successors, and did impropriate
unto the same the Parsonage of Radway, to the end (as he sets down in his
Testament) Vt haberent Episcopi locum vbi caput suum (...), si forte in manum
regis eorum (...) caperentur. Before his death he made his last Will, wherein
he gave such large and bouteous legacies, to the Pope, Emperor, King, Queen,
Archbishop, Bishops, Colleges, Churches, and to sundry parsons of high estates
and callings; that a man would marvel considering his great and chargeable
buildings and works otherwise, how and by what means he could have attained
to such a mass of wealth and riches. He was always very frugall, kept no more
men or horses about him then necessary, and ever despised the vanity of all
outward pomp. But this it was not that enabled him to perform these great
works, and yet to leave so much money behind him. He procured an order to be
taken, that all Ecclesiastical persons of his Diocese, at the time of their
deaths, should leave and bequeath their goods to him, or to some other in trust
toward his chargeable buildings, or otherwise to be bestowed in pios vsus at
his discretion. This was the means whereby he grew to this infinite wealth and
riches. He died July 15. 1369. having sat Bishop here almost 42. years, and
was buried in a Chapel which he built in the wall of the West end of his
Church. His funerals by his own commandment were performed without any
mannerof pomp or extraordinary solemnity: In so much as he allowed not either
his servants, Executors or nearest kinsfolks any mourning clothes at all. See
more of him in Simon Mepham of Canterbury.

THomas Brentingham the kings (...) in the (...) Richard the second, he was
chosen to be one of the twelve Peers of the realm under the king. He was a
benefactor to the callenderhay of the Uicars chorall of his own church,
supplied in buildings and otherwise what his predecessors had left undone, and
having been Bishop 24. years, died at Clist the third of December an. 1394 and
was buried in the North side of the body of his own church, in a little
chapel standing between two pillars.

EDmund Stafford, brother to Ralph Earl of Stafford, Edward the third. At the
Parliament holden at Westminster the one and twentieth year of king Richard
the second, he being speaker of the higher house, made a very learned and
pithie oration to prove the absolute authority of a king. His theme was Rex
vnus erit omnibus; and having discoursed at large to that purpose, did
conclude, Quod potestas regis esset sibi (...) annexa and solida; and whosoever
did by any means impeach the same, Poena legis merito essee plectendus. For
the (...) of good letters, he did increase two fellowships in the college of
Stapledons June in Oxford, reformed the statutes of the house, and altered the
name of it, calling it Erceter college. After that he had continued Bishop in
much honor about three and twenty years, he died the fourth of September,
being the seventh year of king Henry the fifth, and lies buried in his own
church in a very fair tomb of Alabaster upon the North side of the entrance
into the Ladis chapel.

James Carry Bishop of Lichfield, being at Florence when Martyn the fifth of
Bishop Staffords death; was then and there made Bishop of this church an. 1419.
He inioyed not long this place, for he died and was buried there.

EDmund Laey Bishop of Hereford was translated from

GEorge Neuill was consecrated Nouemb. 26. an. 1455.

John Boothe Batcheler of the civil Law was consecrated Edward the fourth and
the Earl of Warwick, he removed from hence to his house of Horsleigh in
Hampshire, where he died upon the first day of April an. 1478. and lies
buried at Saint Elements in London.

PEter Courtmay Bishop of Exceter, was (...) in

RIchard Fox succeeded him, and having continued Bishop

Oliver King was consecrate Bishop of this church in

RIchard Redman Doctor of divinity, and Bishop of Saint

John Arundell descended of the ancient and most worshipful Arundels of
Lanherne in Cornwall, was translated from (...) to this Church in the end of
the year 1501. He died at London the year 1503. and was buried at Saint
Clements church without Temple Bar, upon the South side of the high altar,
under a toombe of marble inlaid with brass.

HVgh Oldam was preferred unto this Bishopric by the Margaret countess of
Richmond, whose chaplain he was. A man of more zeal then knowledge, and more
devotion then learning; somewhat rough in speech, but in deed and action
friendly. He was careful in the saving and defending of his liberties, for
which continual suits were between him and the Abbot of Tauestocke. He was
also liberal to the Uicars Chorall of his Church, and reduced them to the
keeping of commons: Toward the maintenance whereof, he gave them certain
revenues and impropriated unto them the rectory of Cornwood. Albeit he suere
not very well learned; yet a great favorer and a furtherer of learning he was.
Once he had intended to have enlarged Exceter college in Oxeford, as well in
building as in revenues; but being denied a fellowship there which he had
earnestly requested in the behalf of one Atkins, he altered his determination,
and contributed largely toward the foundation of Corpus Christi college,
whereof he is esteemed (and worthily) the principal benefactor. He chanced to
dye excommunicate at the suit of the Abbot of Tauistock June 25. 1519. and
might not be buried until an absolution was procured from Rome. He lies in a
Chapel of his own building, cast out of the uppermost end of the South wall
of the Church, where he has a sumptuous and fair monument.

John (...) otherwise Harman, succeeded Oldham by the preferment of K. Henry
the eight, whose Chaplain he then Mary Princess of Wales. Of all the Bishops
in the land, he was accounted the best Courtier, and although he were well
reported for his learning, yet better liked for his courtlike behauior, which
in the end turned not so much to his credit as to the utter ruin and spoil
of the Church. For of two and twenty Lordships and Mannours which his
predecessors had left unto him of a goodly yearly reuenew, he left but three,
and them also leased out: And where he found thirteen houses well furnished,
he left only one house bare and without furniture, and yet charged with sundry
fees and Annuities. By these means, this Bishopric, which sometimes was
counted one of the best, is now become in temporal lands one of the meanest.
He was a great favorer of learned men, and especially of Divines, whom he
preserred in his Church above others, He was very bounteous and liberal unto
all men, but especially unto Courtiers, unto his own kindred and countrymen.
He bestowed much also, as well pains as cost, in building Sutton Coltstil (the
town where he was borne) in procuriug the same to be incorporate, and
endeavoring to set up the making of (...) there, all which proved to little
purpose as I have heard. In his time, after the death of king Henry the eight,
there was an alteration of religion by king Edward the sixth, whereof ensued
rebellion and a commotion in this Diocese, which in some part was imputed to
this Bishop, because he lay far from his Diocese and dwelled in his own
country. Whereupon, he resigned the Bishopric into the kings hands, after he
had been Bishop about thirty years, and lived by the rents of the temporality
of the Bishopric, which when he (...) he did reserve unto himself for term
of his own life. After the deprivation of Miles Couerdale in Queen Mary's
time, he was restored to his Church, and for the better settling of the Romish
Religion, did here stay for a while: But his mind was so addided to his own
country, that he returned thither shortly after, and made his only abode
there, practicing what he could, to settle there the making of (...). But
whether it were that that kind of trade fitteth not that country, or that God
would not bless a practice founded upon such horrible sacrilege, it fell out
in trial to be more chargeable then profitable, and so was soon given over.
This man being very old, died in a pang at Sutton (...) before mentioned the
year 1555. and was buried there.

MIles Couerdale after the resignation of Voysye, was Edward made Bishop of
this city, and consecrate an. 1550. After that he had been Bishop about 3.
years, king Edward died, and then Queen Mary having the crown, the religion
was altered and he deprived. For a farther discourse of his life, and
especially his deliverance out of prison at the suit and importunate request of
the king of Denmark, I commend the Reader unto Master Fox. Of his death only
thus much, that not caring to return to his Bishopric, in the beginning of
her Majesty that now reigns, he settled himself at London, and there leading
a private life, he died at last a very old man, and was buried in Saint Magnus
church.

James Turbeuill a gentleman well borne (Bishop Voysey to recover some part of
the lands of his Bishopric which his predecessor wasted, and did obtain of
Queen Mary to him and his successors the seefarme of the manor of Crediton.
After that he had been Bishop about two years, Queen Mary died, he was
displaced, and after lead a private life many years.

William Alley reader of Divinity in the cathedral

William Bradbridge Doctor of Divinity and Deane Lacy, in which place there is
a seemly monument of freestone built over him.

John Wolton cannon residensary of the church of Exceter,

GEruase Babington Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of

William Coton Doctor of Divinity and cannon resident

This Bishopric by a new valuation rated in the days of King Edward the
sixth, is now esteemed in the Exchequer but at 500, l. yet paid heretofore unto
the Pope after 6000. ducats.
Foelix first Bishop of Norwich.
A Catalogue of the Bishops of Norwich collected (for the most part) out of M.
Alexander Neuill his Norwicus, by R. T.
SIgebert king of the East Angles, after the death of Corpwald returning out of
Frannce (where he lived in banishment) and obtaining his kingdom, brought with
him one Foelix a Burgundian (with whom he had lived familiarly during the time
of his eryle) and made him Bishop of the East Angles; which converting the
people to the faith of Christ, had his See at Dunwich. When he had been Bishop
17. years, he died ann. 649. and was buried at Soham, now called Some, a
monastery, afterward destroyed by the Danes: his body was then removed to
Kamsey.

After him succeeded Thomas which sat five years.

Bonifacius 17. years.

Bissus after the death of Bonifacius was preferred to this dignity, after
whose decease, the Bishopric which before was but one, was divided into two,
the one having his See at Elmham, the other at Dunwich.

The Bishops of Elmham, were
1. Bedwyne. 2. Northbertus. 3. Headewlacus. 4. Neathilferthus. 5. Eanferethus.
6. Athelwolph. 7. Alcarus. 8. Sybba. 9. Humferthus. 10. Humbyrctus. 11.
Weremundus. 12. Wilredus.
The Bishops of Dunwich, were
1. Acceius. 2. Astwolfus. 3. Aerdredus. 4. Cutherinus. 5. Aldberthus. 6.
Eglasius. 7. Heardredus. 8. Aelphunus. 9. Tydferthus. 10. Weremundus. 11.
Wylredus.
In this estate it remained unto the time of Humbertus Bishop of Elmham, and
Wylred Bishop of Dunwich, at what time it was restored to the former estate,
and of two united again into one. Athelfus being the first which enjoyed the
same in the time of king Edwyn, and had his See at Elmham, after whom succeeded:

2. Alfridus. 3. Theodredus. 4. Theodredus. 5. Athelstanus. 6. Algarus. 7.
Alwynus. 8. Alfricus, he died 1038. 9. Alyfreius.
10. Stigandus.
AFter that Alfreius was dead, Stigandus (...) him. He enjoying the place but a
short time, was deprived.

11. Grinketellus.
THe like happened to Grinketellus, which being convicted to have used
unlawful means in obtaining this dignity, was likewise deprived, and
Stigandus restored unto it again. This Stigandus was after Bishop of
Winchester and Archbishop of Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

12. Egelmare.
STigandus being so preferred, found a means also to procure the Bishopric
of the East Saxons unto Egelmare his brother. All these until the time of
William the conqueror had their Sees at Elmham.

Arfastus the first Bishop of Thetford.
KIng William the first substituted his Chapleine Arfastus in the place of
Eglemarus, by whose advise the Sea was translated from Elmham to Thetford.

William Herbert last of Thetford and first Bishop of Norwich.
NExt after him, William Herbert obtained this dignity: A man very famous for
his excellent learning. He was borne at Oxford. His father was Robert is de
Losinge Abbot of Winchester. This Herbertus being Pryor of the Monastery of
Fiscanum in Normandy, came into England at the request of William Rufus, and
living in the Court for a time, behaved himself in such sort, that he was not
only entierly beloved of the king, but obtained many great gists at his hands:
In so much, that within the space of three years, he had so feathered his
nest, that he bought for his Father the Abbacy of Winchester, and for himself
this Bishopric, paying to the king for the same as it is reported the sum
of 1900, l. For satisfaction of which Symony, this penance was enjoined him by
(...) the Pope, that he should erect diverse Churches and (...) as hereafter it
is declared. He translated the Sea from Thetford to Norwich, and built there
the Cathedral Church at his own charges, laying the first stone of the
foundation with his own hands, as this elogium declares, which he caused to be
engraven upon the Wall: (...) primum hums temph (...), dominus Herebertus
posuit in nomine patris and (...) and (...) sancti, Amen. This Church he
dedicated to the blessed Trinity, endowing it with great lands and possessions.
books, and all other necessaries. Having finished it, according to his mind,
he then determines to build an house for himself (for as yet he had none in
Norwich, the Sea being so lately removed from Thetford) and therefore on the
North side of the Church, he founded a stately palace. Again he built fine
Churches; one over against the Cathedral Church on the other side of the River
called Saint (...), another at Norwich also, another at Elmham, a fourth at
Lynne, and a fist at Yermouth He departed this life July 22. in the year of
our Lord, 1119. And was buried in his Cathedral church of Norwich by the high
Altar.

2. Euerard.
HErbert being dead, Euerard Archdeacon of Salisbury was consecrate Bishop of
Norwich June 12. 1121. which dignity although he enjoyed a long space, yet time
the deuourer of all things, has left nothing of him to our remembrance, but
that when he had governed his Church 29. years he ended this life October 15.
1150.

3. William Turbus.
AFter him succeeded William Turbus, a Norman by birth, being in his youth a
monk in Norwich, and afterward Prior there. In his time the Cathedral Church
of Norwich was burned by casual fire. He died in the 25. year of his
consecration the 17. of January.

4. Johannes Oxoniensis.
IN the year of our Lord 1270. John of Oxford Deane of Salisbury was elect
Bishop of Norwich. This man finished the Church, which Herbert (being prevented
by death) had left unperfected. He builded diverse Hospitals for impotent and
diseased people. He founded Trinity Church at (...), and reedified diverse
houses which were by fire (...). He died the 26. year of his consecration June
2. 1200. and was buried near to the high Altar. In his time the Cathedral
Church was again defaced with fire in the second year of king John.

5. Johannes de Gray.
John de Gray was nert preferred to this place. He was a man well seen in the
Laws of the realm, wise, and of great integrity. In regard hereof, King John
was very desirous to have made him Archbishop of Canterbury. See more of that
matter in Stephen Langton of Canterbury. He built that goodly hall at Gaywood,
and the rest of the housing adjoining; Sat about 14. years, died near
Poytiers in his return from Rome, November 1. 1214. and was buried in his own
Church.

6. Pandulfus.
AFter the death of John de Gray, the Sea was (...) for the space of seven
years, after which time, (...) the Popes Legate was elected to the same by the
Content. He was consecrate at Rome by Honorius the Pope ann. 1222. and died the
fifth year of his consecration, the 17. of August. After his death the Sea was
void again for the space of three years.

7. Thomas de Blundeuill.
THomas de Blundeuill an officer of the Exchequer was then preferred unto the
Bishopric of Norwich by the means of Hubert de Burgo that famous chief
Justice of England, and consecrate December 20. 1226. He died August 16. 1236.

8. Radulphus.
AFter Bishop Blundeuill, William Raleigh is said to have succeeded
immediately. But Matthew Westminster witnesses that one Radulphus was
consecrate October 28. 1236. and died the year following.

9. William de Raleigh.
THe Bishopric was then void by the space almost of 3. years. The covent had
chosen orderly for their pastor Simon the Prior of their Church, a grave and
Reverend man, not justly to be excepted against: yet it pleased the King to
mislike him, and easily procured their election to be (...). A Cannon of Paul's
William de Raleigh at last obtained the same, 1239. Within a short time after,
the Monks of Winchester required him for their Bishop, and at last after many
great (...), obtained him, the King all that ever he might resisting the same.
See more of him in Winchester.

Walter de Sufield.
WAlter de Sufield succeeded, a man highly commended for his excellent
learning. He founded the hospital of Saint Giles in Norwich, indowing it with
lands and great possessions. He built also the chapel of our (...) in the
cathedral church, and in the same chapel was afterward buried. Moreover, it
is remembered of him, that in a time of great dearth he sold his plate, and
distributed the money every whit unto the poor. He was consecrate the year
1244. and died May 18. 1257. at Colchester, but was buried as above said, in
which place diverse miracles are reported to have been wrought, and are
ascribed to his holiness.

11. Simon de Wanton.
SImon de Wanton the kings chaplain, and one of his Justices, was consecrate
Bishop of Norwich March 10. 1257. When he had sat 8. years, he died and was
buried by his predecessor. This man obtained license of the Pope to hold all
his former livings in Commendam for sower years.

12. Rogerus de Skerwyng.
ROgerus de Skerwyng was the next Bishop of Norwich, being preferred thereunto
an. 1265. In his time there was a dangerous sedition raised between the
citizens of Norwich and the monks of the Cathedral church; the history whereof
is briefly this: In a fair that was kept before the gates of the priory, there
happened a fray, in which some servants of the covent flew certain citizens. A
Jury being empanncied hereupon, found them guilty, and the officers took order
for the apprehending of the murderers if they might be met withal. The monks
greatly offended herewith, first excommunicated the citizens, then shutting the
gates; not only prepared themselves to defense, but also began to offend the
other, shooting at the passengers first, and afterward issuing out of their
gates, killing diverse persons and spoiling many houses. The citizens greatly
incensed herewith, fired the gates, entered the monastery, and after a long
conflict, a great number being flaine on both sides prevailed, rifled the
priory, and set fire on the same in diverse places at once. This fire consumed
not only the celles and offices of the monks; but the alms house also, the
steeple, and greatest part of the cathedral church. The king hearing of this
tumult (king Henry the third) with all speed posted thither, and caused diverse
citizens to be hanged, drawn and quartered; Amongst the rest that were
executed, a woman that first carried fire to the gates was burned. The monks
for their part appealed to Rome, and so handled the matter, that they not only
escaped punishment, but also forced the citizens to pay them 3000. marks after
500. marks a year toward the reparation of their church, and to present them
with a Pare of gold of seven pound weight. This end was made by king Edward the
first (his father being now dead) at the request and solicitation of the
Bishop, who died an. 1278. having sat 13. years.

13. William Middleton.
AFter him succeeded William Middleton Archdeacon of Canterbury. He reedified
the church, being so destroyed and profaned in the time of Bishop Roger, and
hallowed the same in the presence of the king and many of his nobles. In the
11. year of his consecration, he departed this life the last of August 1288.

14. Radulphus de Walpoole.
IN his room Randulph de Walpoole was elected by the monks, and consecrated
1288. When he had governed with great commendation the space of 11 years, he
was by Boniface the Pope translated to Ely, and lived scarce three years after
his translation. See more in Ely.

5. John Salmon.
THe Pope having translated Radulph to Ely, placed in the Sea of Norwich one
John Salmon Pryor of Ely. The year 1319. he became Lord Chauncellor (...)
England, and continued so about (...) years. This Bishop built the great hall,
and the chapel in the Bishops palace, (...) a chapel at the West end of
the church, in which he ordained four priests to (...) mass continually. He
died in the monastery of Folkstan an. 1325. July 6.

16. Gulielmus Ayerminus.
IT is reported by some, that after the death of Bishop Salmon, Robert Baldooke
king Edwards Chauncellor, was elected by the monks and received his
temporalties the year 1325. But it seems likelier (which other affirm) that
he renounced his election of his own accord. William (...) by the Popes
authority, was then placed in this See, and made Chauncellor by the king. He
gave two hundred pound for order to be taken that two monks (the cellerers of
the covent) should always sing mass for his soul. Having sat almost 11.
years, he died March 27. at (...) near London.

17. Anthony de Beck.
AFter him Anthony de Beck Doctor of Divinity, (...) to the court of Rome
obtained this dignity at the Popes hands. This man behaved himself so
imperiously in the place, that he bereaved the monks of diverse ancient and
long enjoyed privileges, suffering them to do nothing but what seemed good unto
him, plucking down and preferring amongst them whom he listed. Neither could
he only be content thus to tyrannize over them but (...) to have his acctions
reformed or called in question by any others He openly withstood Robert
Winchesley Archbishop of Canterbury in his visitation; affrming, that he would
not answer to those things which were objected against him, unless it were at
that court of Rome. This boisterous and unruly (...) purchased him such hatred
of all men, that at the last he was poisoned by some of his own servants.

18. Gulielmus Bateman.
William Bateman Doctor of the Civil Law; borne at Norwich, and Archdeacon
of the same, was next elected Bishop by the (...) consent of the whole Covent:
a man of (...), and so great constancy, that he could not by any means be
brought to Impair and diminish the privileges and liberties of his church,
although he were oftentimes by many of the nobility (...) thereunto: always to
the uttermost of his power resisting and punishing the sacrilegious drifts of
them, which attempted the same. Amongst the rest it is remembered, that the Lord
Morly having killed certain dear in one of his parkes, and ill entreated his
keepers, he forced the noble man, to carry a burning Taper in his hand through
the streets of Norwich unto the high Altar. Though the king became an earnest
intercessor for him, yea mingling sometimes threats with requests; nothing
could move the Bishop from following his determined course. Furthermore,
whereas the estate of his Bishopric was very litigious before his time, he
never rested, until he had rid it from all (...) and contention, obtaining
also of Pope Clement all the fruits and revenues of the vacant churches in
Norwich, which he left unto his successors. He builded Trinity hall in
Cambridge, giving certain lands for the maintenance thereof, and provoking
other me^ to imitate his good example; he persuaded one Gonwell to found
another hall in the same university, which of late at the costs and charges of
John Caius a learned Physician, has been very much enlarged. At what time
king Edward the third laid claim first unto the crown of France, he made
choice of this Bishop to inform the Pope of his title. In this voyage he died
at Auinion the year 1354. In this man's time happened that great plague
memorable in all our histories, whereof (as some doubt not to affirm) there
died so (...), (...). In the city of Norwich there died ((...)) to the number
of 57104. persons (...) the first of January and the first of July 1348.

19. Thomas Percy.
HEnry Duke of Lancaster bearing a great affect on (...) Thomas Percy brother
to the Earl of Nortumberland, (...) of the Pope (for the Monks refused him)
that this dignity (...) be vestowed upon him. This (...) gave unto the
repairing of the church (which in his time was greatly defaced with a violent
tempest) the some of (...) hundred marks, and obtained of the rest of the
clergy a great (...) to the same purpose. He departed this (...) the (...)
year of his consecration, and (...) to the Chaunter of the church of Norwich,
a house and certain lands lying within the Lordship of (...) Caerlton, (...),
Granthorp, and (...), upon condition, he should procure mass daily to be said
for his (...).

20. Henricus Spencer.
THe (...) of his death swiftly flying beyond the Seas, came unto the ears of
one Spencer, A Gentleman greatly esteemed for his valor and skill in Martial
(...), that served the Pope at that time in his wars: Of him with small
entreaty, be obtained this dignity, for a brother of his named Henry, a man of
his own profession, which of a soldier being made a bishop, came into England,
March 16. 1370. was consecrate in his own Church, by the Archdeacon of
Norwich. Changing then his vesture, but no: his conditions, in what manner of
life he spent his youth, in the same he most delighted even in his (...)
years. And being a better Butcher then a Shepherd, he procured the Popes
authority for leauying an Army; which (not with standing the kings
commandment to the contrary) (...) transported into the Low (...). And after
that he has (...) 7000. (...) an Army of 30. thousand, and burnt the towns of
(...), Dunkyrke, Newport, with certain others: he returned again into
England, where shortly after occasion was given of employing his valor at home
to better purpose. The year 1381. the commons of this realm arose in diverse
parts, and appointed them selves Captains, as Wat Tyler, Jack (...), etc. And
amongst the rest, the Commons of Suffolk and Norfolk made one John Lyster
their Leader, a dier of Norwich, and called him the king of the Commons. This
fellow endeavoring to join his power with the rest that were now at London,
conducting them thither ward, By the way they determined to have surprised
William Vfford Earl of Suffolk, and having him, to use his name for the
setting forward of their devilish intents. Missing of him, they seized upon all
the knights they could find, and made them swear to assist them. One there was
named sir Robert Sale, that seeming to (...) their doings, had his brains
stricken out, by one of his own bondmen. Amongst the rest, that terrified by
his example, were glad to dissemble, sir Stephen Hales, a comely Gentleman, was
chosen to be the caruer forsooth of this goodly king. But to proceed, being
now on their way, they determined to send in a message unto the king, two
knights, sir W. Morley and sir John Brewes with three Archrebels. These
happened to be encountered with their Bishop, at a town called (...), not far
from New market. Being at his manor of Burle near Ockam Castle, he heard of
this (...), and determined to ride thither where he understood they were
assembled. At what time he came to (...), he had in his company but only eight
spears, and a few Archers: Notwithstanding, the weakness of his forces he
boldly inquired of the knights, whether any of the kings traitors were there:
They dissembled a while for scare, but after, told him plainly, that two
notorious Rebels were at the Inn and the third was gone into the town, to
take order for their dinner. These he presently laid hold upon, and without
more adoo, cut off their heads, which he caused to be set upon poales at New
market Thence he hasted toward Northwalsham, where he understood the rebels
had determined to make some stay. By the way diverse Gentlemen that had hid
themselves, joined with him, so that by that time he (...) there, he had a
reasonable company (...) him, with that company (such as it was) he set upon
them, who had (...) themselves with trenches and (...) very (...). The Bishop
for his part recovering the (...), rode into the very midst of them, and (...)
him self so manfully, as if it had been an action agreeble unto his calling,
had deserved great commendation. By his courage especially, the victory in the
end was achieved. The king (John (...)) and the rest of the chiefetaines, were
saine to lean their heads behind them, and the whole Country reduced to a
(...) obedience. Now to proceed unto his other actions, there was great
contention between him and his monks for the space of fifteen years: they
being too weak for him, at last were glad to give him 400. marks to enjoy
their (...) in like sort as heretofore they had done. He sat Bishop (...) 37.
years, and died 1406.

21. Alexander.
ALexander Prior of Norwich, was elected Bishop by the monks, but the king so
misliked their choice, as he not only kept him from his dignity; but also
imprisoned him at Winsor almost a whole year after his election. At the (...)
of Thomas Arondell Archbishop of Canterbury, and (...) other of the Nobility,
he was released, set at liberty, and afforded consecration, ann. 1408. He sat
six years, and was buried in our Ladies Chapel, at the feet of Walter
Surfield.

22. Richard Courtney.
AT the earnest suit of king Henry the (...), Richard Courtney Channcellor of
the Uniuersity of Oxford, a (...) famous for his excellent knowledge, in both
Laws, was chosen by the Covent, and consecrated at Canterbury by the
Archbishop, in the presence of the King and many of the Nobles. A man of great
nobility, great learning, and (...) virtue, very personable also, much favored
by the king, and no less beloved among the common people. He died of a (...)
in Normandy, in the second year after his consecration, ann. 1415. his body
being brought into England, was honorably interred at Westminster.

23. John Wakering.
John Wakering, that for his life, learning, and wisdom, was esteemed nothing
inferior to his predecessor, being keeper of the (...) seal, was elected by
the Covent, and consecrated Bishop of Norwich, by Henry Chichley Archbishop of
Canterbury ann. 1416. In his time the Counsel of Constance was holden; unto
the which this Bishop with many other, were sent out of England by the King. In
that charge he so behaved him self, that he obtained great commendation for
the same. He built the Cloister which is now to be seen in the Bishops
palace, pauing the same with stones of diverse colors: And having governed his
charge with great praise, he died and was buried in the Cathedral Church
before the Altar of Saint George.

24. William (...).
ANno 1426. William (...) Doctor of the laws was elected Bishop and
consecrated at Saint Paul's church in London, by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and in the 10. year of his (...), was translated to Lincoln. See more of him
there.

25. Thomas Brown.
THomas Brown Bishop of Rochester being at the (...) of Basil, had the
Bishopric of Norwich cast upon him before ever he understood of any such
intent toward. In his time the citizens of Norwich harboring their old grudge
in their envious minds; attempted many things against the church: but such was
the singular wisdom and courage of this Bishop, that all their enterprises
came to none effect. He died when he had been Bishop nine years Anno 1445.

26. Gualter Heart.
AFter him succeeded Walter Heart, Doctor of (...), by whose wisdom and
discretion the malicious humors of the malecontent (...), before (...) well
(...), were now altogether extinguished. He (...) the church, and during his
life maintained (...) at Cambridge with all things necessary for them at his
own charges. He departed this life the sixth of May. 1472. in the 26. year of
his Consecration, and was buried in his church of Norwich, near unto the
(...), which he (...).

27. James Goldwell.
THis man (...) 25. years. Of him otherwise there (...) no remembrance.

28. Thomas Ian.
This man died the first year of his consecration.

29. Richard Nyx.
AFter the decease of Ian, Richard Nyx (...), of whom I find little worth the
rehearsing. He has the report of a vicious and dissolute liver, was blind
long before his death, sat 36. years, and died an. 1536.

30. William Rugge.
NExt unto Nyx, William Rugge was preferred unto this dignity, he sat Bishop
14. years, and deceased an. (...).

31. Thomas Thyrlbey.
RVgge being dead, Thomas Thyrlbey Doctor of Law, the first and last Bishop of
Westminster, was removed from thence unto Norwich. He sat about 4. years, and
the year 1554. was translated to Ely. See more in Ely.

32. John Hopton.
THyrlbev being (...) to Ely. John Hopton was elected Bishop of Norwich: he
sat 4. years, and died the same year that Queen Mary did, for grief as it
is supposed.

33. Thomas Parkhurst.
AFter him T. Parkhorst succeeded, which by the providence of God being
preserved from many great dangers and afflictions which he suffered in the
days of Queen Mary, was by our gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth preferred
unto this place, and consecrate September 1. 1560. He died an. 1574. having
sat Bishop almost 15. years.

34. Edmund Freake.
MArch 9. 1571. Edmund Freake Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate Bishop of
Rochester: Thence presently upon the death of Bishop Parkhurst he was removed
to Norwich, and thence also the year 1584. unto Worceter, where he died about
the 20. of March 1590. and (...) buried upon the South side of the body of the
church there, under a seemly monument near the wall.

35. Edmund Scambler.
EDmund Scambler household (...) a while unto the Archbishop was consecrate
Bishop of Peterbourough January 16. an. 1560. upon the translation of Bishop
Freake he was preferred unto Norwich.

36. William Redman.
William Redman Archdeacon of Canterbury (...).

The value of this Bishopric in the Queens books, is 899, l. 8, s. 7, d.
farthing and was (...) at Rome in 5000. ducats.
The Bishops of Worceter.
WVlfher the first Christian king of Mercia being dead, Ethelred his brother
succeeded him in the kingdom. He, by the persuasion of Osher governor of
Wiccia, divided his country (which till that time had never had more then one
Bishop) into 5 parts or Diocesses which he appointed unto five Bishoprics
(whereof one was Lichfield) and erected 4. new Cathedral Sees; one at
Dorchester, another at Leicester, another at Sidnacester, and the fourth at
Worceter. And for the first Bishop of Worceter, choice was made of one
Tatfrith, a man of great learning, who died before he could be consecrate.
After his decease, Boselus was chosen, and consecrate by Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury. This was done (as our histories deliver for the most part) the
year 679.

1. After (...) before mentioned, these succeeded: 2. (...) consecrate 692. 3.
Saint (...) consecrate (...). This man went to Offa king of Mercia, and there
got license of Constantine the Pope to build a monastery in Worceter, and so
did, the same that is now the cathedral church. 4. (...) consecrate 717. This
man lived in the Beda. 5. Mylredus. (...) reports one Deuehertus to have
been Bishop of Worceter the year 766. but I think it an error. 6.
Weremundus. 7. Tilherus. 8. Eathoredus. He gave I comb unto his church. 9.
Deuebertus. 10. Eadbertus or Hubertus. He gave Croley. 11. Alwyn or (...). He
built the chapel of Saint Andrew 12. Werebertus, called by (...) (...) and
(...), consecrate upon (...) being June 7. 872. He was greatly esteemed of king
Alfred for his singular learning, and translated at his request the Dialogues
of Saint Gregory into the Saxon or English (...). 13. Wilferth. He died an.
911. 14. (...) Abbot of Barkley. 15. Kinewold, he gave Odingley unto his
Church. 16. Saint Dunstan (...) to London 958. and afterward 17. Saint Oswald
The year 971. he became afterward 18. Aldulf was also Archbishop of York. 19.
Wulstan, he likewise held York (...) like sort. He is Reprobus. 20. Leofsius,
he died at (...) Aug. 19. 1033. (...) was 21. (...) Abbot of Parshore, the
son of (...) 22. (...), first a monk of Winchester, and after (...)
Brithwaldus Bishop of Saint Germans in Cornwall, was consecrate Bishop of
Crediton or Devonshire 1032. He was greatly in favor with king (...), and
attended him in his pilgrimage to Rome. After his uncles death, he procured
Saint Germans to be united unto his See, and (as it seems unto me) held not
only both them, but Worceter also (to which he was preferred 1038.) until his
death. The year 1040. he was accused for procuring (or consenting unto) the
death of Alfred the eldest (...) of king (...). Some say he purged himself of
that accusation; others say, he was deprived of his livings as (...) guilty,
and returning to (...), died there. But I take the third report to be truest,
to wit, that he was once displaced, and afterward upon better examination of
the cause restored again. He died 1046. at which time even just when he gave
up the Ghost there was such a horrible (...) of thunder and lightning, as men
thought the day of doom had been come. He was buried at Tauestocke, unto
which monastery he had been a great benefactor. 23. Aldred the year 1060. was
translated to York. See 24. Saint Wulstan. Alfred being constrained to give
Wulstan, Pryor of Worceter such a one, and (the king granting free license to
choose whom they liked best) he easily procured the consent of the clergy and
commonalty of the Dioces for his election. This plot never so cunningly laid,
had not the success that was expected. For (...) proved nothing so tractable
as he thought, yielded not to all that he demanded, and yet never sin
wrangling and complaining, until partly in his time, partly in his successors,
he had recovered again whatsoever was taken from his See. Lanfranke Archbishop
of Canterbury assisted very favorably his cause, vrgens aemulum (...) and
potentiae (says W. Malmbury) the rather no doubt says he, because he thought
it best in policy to weake^ the sea of York what he might, that contended with
him in authority and greatness. This Wulstan was borneat Hichenton in
Warwickshire. His Father and Mother (whose names were Eatstan and (...)) long
before their death, severed them selves by mutual consent, and lead a
Monastical life: Then, as though heaven were not to be entered without a monks
cowle, they not only caused (...) son to be taught and brought up in the
Monastery of Peterborough, but also exhorted him earnestly (especially his
Mother) in any wise to become a monk. He did so, followed their direction, and
professed himself a monk at Worceter under Brittegus his predecessor. He was
by and by much admired for the straight life he led; and for the opinion men
had of his holiness so esteemed, as no preferment might (...) whereof he was
capable, but immediately it was cast upon him. He was first made (...) of the
(...), (...) and Treasurer of the Church, after (...) there, the (...) of
Gloucester, and lastly Bishop of that (...). It is said, he (...) to (...)
consent unto his election (...) time, protesting he had rather lay his head
upon a (...) to be (...) off, then to take so great a (...) upon him No man
could persuade him to (...), until that one (...) (...) him sharply for his
backwardnes (...) him, he offended God much in the same. His excuse was (...)
learning: And certain it is, that his defect that way, was so notable, as in
the time of (...) Conqueror ((...) all English Prelates were sifted to the
(...)) he was called (...) question for insufficiency, and had been deprived
(as it is thought, at least wise) if he had not been found somewhat more
sufficient then was expected. He was consecrate September 8. 1062 by Aldred
Archbishop of York, (...) being then suspended. But that he might acquit him
self from usurpation of any right belonging to Canterbury, he not only
required him to make his oath of profession unto Canterbury, but also renounced
all right of pretended jurisdiction unto the Dioces of Worceter, acknowledging
the same to belong not to York (as some of his predecessors had (...)) but to
Canterbury, as to the Metropolitan of the same. New to come unto his
government, we are to remember especially two things memorable of him. One, the
building of the Cathedral church which he raised from the foundation. At what
time it was come unto such perfection, as that the monks forsaking their old
habitation, (...) them selves unto this new built, the other Fabrike whereof
(...) was Author, (as in York you may read more at large) was pulled down.
Which Wulstan seeing, burst out into tears, and being demanded a reason
thereof, by some that told him he had rather cause to rejoice; Our predecessors
(says he) whose monuments we deface, rather (I doubt) to set up the (...) of
our vain glory, then to glorify God, they indeed (quoth he) were not
acquainted with such stately buildings, but every place was a Church sufficient
for them to offer them selves a reasonable holy and lively sacrifice unto God:
We contrariwise are double diligent in laying heaps of stones, so to frame a
material Temple, but are too too negligent in setting forward the building of
that lively Temple the Church of God. The other thing that I determined to
mention is, a notable testimony of his (...) fidelity unto his Prince. All most
all the Nobility of England rebelled against the king William (...) the first
year of his (...). Certain of them, Roger Earl of Mount-gomery, (...)
Newmarket, Roger Lacy, (...) and other, attempted to take the City of Worceter.
This Bishop, not only (...) them, and by continual (...) in preaching and
otherwise contained them in very (...) obedience, but also arming such a number
of people as the City (...) afford, caused them to (...) out and set upon the
(...), whom they (...), killing and taking a number of them prisoners. He died
being (...) years of age, 1095. January 19. which day afterward (...) being
(...) was made a holy day, and appointed unto the celebration of his memory He
was buried in his own Church. (...) the Church being burnt his (...) only
escaped the violence of the fire, how he appeared unto his old (...) (...)
bishop of (...) (being at Creeklade) at the (...) of his death, (...) the same
unto him, and many things more strange; if any man desire to read them, let him
(...) them in (...), (...), and other, that discourse them at large. This (for
my part) I think (...), if not too much. 25. (...), a Canon of Bayon was
consecrate Bishop (...) had placed there, and died afterward at that place.
May 5. 1112. He was buried in the body of his Church, (...) before the
roodlost. He had an elder brother named (...) then Archbishop of York and a
son that afterward was (...) Archbishop there. Of them and some other matter
(...) him, see more in York. Soon after his death, to wit, May 20. (...) the
Cathedral Church, (...), and City of Worceter were burnt and quite (...) with
casual (...). One monk, three servants of the Monastery, and (...) townsmen
perished in that fire.. 26. Theulphus a Canon of Bayon likewise, was elected
(...) his predecessor, in that place (I doubt not) where upon one Marble lying
just before the (...) door, we see the defaced images of two Bishops. 27.
Simon, Chaplain and Chauncellor unto Queen Henry the first; was consecrate
May 23. 1125. He was liberal, according to the proportion of his ability,
affable and very courteons. 28. Alured. After Simon, W. (...) that lived in
those days places Alured for his next successor. (...), some put John (...)
before him, and Florent. Wigorn, leaves him quite out of the reckening. 29.
John Pagham. He gave Bibery unto the Abbey of (...), and the manor of Elm
Bishop unto his own See. 30. Roger son unto the Earl of Gloucester, died
August 9. 1179. at Tours in France and was buried there. 31. Baldwyn Abbot of
Ford consecrate 1181. was translated 32. William de Northale consecrate
September 21. 33. Robert a Canon of Lincoln, son unto William Seneschall of
Normandy, became Bishop of Worceter 1191. and died the year following. 34.
Henry Abbot of Glastonbury was made Bishop of Worceter that Sanarike Bishop of
Bathe and Wels (...) unite that Abbey to his See. See more of that matter in
Wels. He died 1195. 35. John de Constantijs Deane of Roane was consecrate 36.
Mangere Deane of York and Chaplain unto king Richard the first, was
consecrate 1200. He was one of them that excommunicated king John and
interdicted the (...) at the Popes commandment the year 1208. Thereupon he
was feign to fly the (...) and died at Pontiniac in France 1212. the year
before the rest of his brethren were called home. 37. Walter Gray Bishop of
Lichfield was translated hither 38. (...), sometimes a Monk, and after Prior
of Worceter, succeeded. He removed the body of Saint Wulstan into a sumptuous
shrine, and (the church being now thoroughly repaired since the burning of it in
Bishop Sampson, time) he hallowed the same very solemply, dedicating it unto
the honor of the blessed virgin, Saint Peter, Saint Oswald and Saint (...).
This was done 1218. in which year also he died. 39. William de (...)
Archdeacon of Buckingham was 40. Walter de (...), the son of William Lord
(...) succeeded 1237. A man as of great birth, so of no less stomach and
courage. He often opposed himself against the covetous practices and shifting
devises of the Pope and his officers. The first year of his preferment, Otto
the Popes Legate, at a Convocation, sought to take order, for the (...) of such
as enjoyed any benefices against law, not being dispensed withal; thinking
belike, it would provoke many to the purchase of dispensations, they cared not
at what rate. He counseled the Legate to take farther advise of the Pope
before he proceeded too far in this matter, saying, there were many of great
birth whom it concerned; and they were either old, (such having lived long in
very worshipful state, to (...) them now so low he thought it very hard) or
else they were young and lusty, and had rather venture their lines in any
desperate course, then suffer their living to be deminished. I speak this
(quoth he) by mine own experience. At what time it was mine own case, I was
of the same mind. Having said thus much, he put on his Myter and sat him down
again. Other were about to second him, when the Legate seeing no good was to
be done in this matter. bid them trouble themselves no farther, the Bishop of
Worceters advice was good, and he was determined for this time to follow it.
Another time, to wit, the year 1255. (...) another legate, demanded of the
clergy of England a huge sum of (...), and (...) not only bought the kings
consent thereunto, but dealing privately with many private (...) men, promising
some and threatening other, had made a very (...) canuasse. The matter being
proposed, when no man opening his mouth, the (...) assured himself the game
was gatten; this Bishop suddenly rose up, and exclaimed (...) against this
horrible exaction, saying at last, he would suffer himself to be hanged rather
then he would ever consent unto it. Other then following his example, this
impudent (...) was sent away with a sleeuelesse answer The year 1257. he was
sent ambassador into France. The year 1254. he took great pains to work a
peace between the king and the Barons, in whose behalf when he had offered
the king conditions (as he thought most reasonable) which might not be
accepted; he addicted himself unto their party, (...) them to fight valiantly
in the cause, and promised heaven very confidently to them that should dye in
defense of the (...). For this, he was after justly excommunicated by the Popes
legate. He died February 5. 1267. at what time repenting much this fault of
disobedience unto his Prince, he humbly (...) and received absolution from that
excommunication. 41. Nicolas de Ely was consecrate in the beginning of the 42.
Godfry Giffard succeeded. He beautified the pillars of 43. William de
Geynsborough Doctor of Divinity was Lector sacri palatij, (...) the Pope
bestowed upon him this Bishopric. He was a great learned man accounted in
those times and writ much. 44. Walter Reynald, sometime schoolmaster unto king
Edward the second, first Treasurer, then Chauncellor of England, became Bishop
of Worceter 1308. and was (...) to the Archbishopric of Canterbury 1313. See
more there. 45. Walter (...) succeeded. 46. Thomas (...) Doctor of Diusnity
Cannon and Walter (...) (whereof see more in Canterbury) he was glad in the end
to accept of this Bishopric, into which he entered March 31. 1317. He was a
great learned man, writ much, and was moreover so honest and virtuous a man, as
he was commonly called by the name of the good Clerk. He lies buried (as one
delivers) in the North I Will of the body of his church, which I Will he caused all
to be vaulted (...) at his own charge. I should guess by some shadow of the
(...) arms yet to be (...), that his toombe is that which we see upon the
south side of the chapel standing on the North side of the body of the
church. 47. Adam de Orleton Doctor of Law, was consecrate 48. (...) Mont-acute
cousecrate 1333. was by the 49. Thomas (...) consecrate 1337. 50. Wulstan de
(...) Prior of Worceter, consecrate 51. John Thorsby Bishop of Saint David's was
translated 52. Reginald Bryan consecrate Bishop of Saint David's 53. David,
consecrate 1361. 54. John Barnet Treasurer of England, was consecrate 1362.
(...) hence to Wells, 1363. and (...) to Ely, 1366. See Ely. 55. William
Wittlesey nephew unto Simon Islip Archbishop 56. William de Lynne consecrate
Bishop of (...), 57. Henry Wakefield became bishop of (...) 1375. 58.
Tidemannus de Winchcombe. Bale reports one William Badby Doctor of Divinity,
and Consessor (...) John of Gaunt Duke of (...), to (...) been Bishop of
Worceter about the year 1380. It can not be true, and therefore I omit him.
Certain it is that Tydemannus de Winchcomb, a monk and the kings (...), was
thrust into this See, by the Pope at the kings earnest request (notwithstanding
that one John Green was lawfully elect thereunto) the year 1395. Thomas
Walsingham calls this man ((...) I doubt not) Robert Tideman. It should seem
unto me, that this man was for a little while Bishop of Landaff before his
preferment to Worceter. See Landaff. 59. Richard Clifford Archdeacon of
Canterbury was consecrate 60. Thomas Peuerell a Gentleman of an (...) house,
Richard the (...) at his unfortunate being there, 1398. (...) thence (...)
1399. and (...) to Worceter 1407. (...) sat Bishop ten years, died March 1.
1417. and was buried in his own Church. 61. Philip Morgan Doctor of law was
consecrate the 62. Thomas Pulton was consecrate Bishop of Hereford 63. Thomas
(...) succeeded. The year 1435. soon 64. John Carpenter. This man had so
great affection unto 65. John (...) Bishop of Rochester was translated to 66.
Robert Moorton nephew to John Moorton Archbishop 67. John Gygles or de Lilijs
an Italian borne in (...) succeeded 68. Syluester Gigles nephew unto John
Gigles (...) 69. Iolius Medices a Cardinal of Rome, nephew unto Leo 10. and
afterward Pope himself by the name of Clement the seventh was Bishop of
Worceter a little while in the year 1522. in which year he both accepted and
resigned this Bishopric. 70. Hieronymus de Nugutijs an Italian also, obtained
this 71. Hugh Latimer borne in Leicetershire, and brought up in Cambridge,
became Bishop of Worceter 1535. The year 1539. (except he would yield a wicked
and dissembling consent unto the six Articles) there was no remedy but (...)
must resign his Bishopric. He resigned (together with (...) Shaxton Bishop
of Salisbury) July 1. and afterward, to wit, October 16. 1555. sealed the
doctrine which he had long preached with his blood, ending his life in the
fire, for the circumstances whereof, as also of his whole life and actions, I
refer you to Master Fox. 72. John Bell Doctor of Law, and Archdeacon of
Gloceter Katherine. He (...) buried at Clarkenwell by London on the North side
of the East end of the chancell under a marble stone whereon is fixed this
Epitaph:

Contegit hoc marmor Doctorem nomine Bellum
Qui belle rexit praesulis officium.
Moribus, ingenio, vitae probitate vigebat
Laudato cunctis cultus and eloquio.
Ann. 1556. Aug. 11.
73. Nicolas Heath Bishop of Rochester was translated to Mary restored him
again in the beginning of her reign, made him first Lord President of Wales,
then Archbishop of York the year 1553. and lastly Lord Chauncellor of
England, See York. 74. John Hooper, held Gloceter in Commendam. See 75.
Richard Pates (as it should seem by a report that I Latymer. Certain it is,
that he subscribed to the Council of Trent by the name of Rich. Patus Wigorn
Epis. Queen Mary least she should seem to do him wrong, having appointed
Heath to the Archbishopric of York, restored him to Worceter. 76. Edwyn
Sands, translated from London hither, and 77. Nicolas Bullingham translated
from Lincoln. 78. John (...) translated to Canterbury. See Canterbury. 79.
Edmund Freake translated from Norwich, died in 80. Richard Fletcher translated
from Bristoll to Worceter, 81. Thomas (...) translated to Winchester. 82.
Geruase Babington Bishop first of Landaff, then of
This Bishopric is now valued at 1049, l. 17, s. 3, d. ob. farthing. In the
Popes books at 2000. ducats.
The Bishops of Hereford.
AN Episcopal See was first established at Hereford, and

After him these:
2. Tirhtellus. 3. Torteras. 4. Wastold, alias Walstod. He began the making of
a sumptuous cross, which his successor finished. 5. (...), onsecrate 736, was
translated to Canterbury Qui quondam extiterant famosi altique per orbem,
Corpora (...) hominum hic marmor obumbrans.
Tumbaque mirifico (...) fabricata (...),
Desuper exalto (...) cum colmine (...).
Hos ego Cuthbertus sacri successor honoris,
Inclusi titulis exornauique (...).
Pontifices ex his ternos sancta infula cinxit,
Nomina sunt quorum, Walstoldus Torhere, Tirtill.
Regulus est quartus Milfrith, (...) coniuge pulchra.
Quenburga: senis haec extitit ordine quinta.
Sextus preterca est (...) filius Offrith.
6. Podda. 7. Ecca. 8. Cedda. He died 857. 9. Albertus. 10. Esna died 885. 11.
Celmund. 12. Vtellus. 13. Wlfhard. 14. Benna. 15. Edulf. 16. Cuthwulf. 17.
(...). 18. (...). 19. Cunemund. 20. Edgar. 21. (...). 22. Wlfhelm. 23. Alfrike.
24. Athulf. 25. Ethelstan, 13. years before his death he was blind, and
governed by a deputy. He builded the Cathedral Church of Hereford from the
ground, died at his manor of Bosanbirig February 10. 1055. and was buried in
his own church. 26. (...), chaplain unto Duke Harald succeeded Mat.
Westminster gives this testimony of him, that he was undoubtedly, Deitamulus,
in omni religione perfectus, ecclesiarum amator, pauperum recreator, viduarum
and orphanorum defensor, oppressorum subuertor, virginitatis (...). (...) king
of Wales having overthrown the forces of the English men about two miles from
Hereford, immediately assaulted the city, took it, slew the Bishop and seven
of the Cannons, that denied him entrance into the church, and held it against
him, spoiled it of all the relics and ornaments that were portable, and
lastly fired both church, city and all. This Bishop being yet scarce warm in
his seat, was thus slain June 16 1056. when he had been Bishop but only
twelve weeks and 4. days. 27. Walter. After the death of Leofgar, the Sea
continued Aldred Bishop of Worceter. He being translated thence to York,
Walter borne in Lorraine, and chaplain to Queen Edith was consecrate at Rome
by the Pope the year 1060. His end was much more unhappy then his (...). He
chanced to fall in love with a certain comely woman that he met in the
street. A long time he contended with this vile and (...) affection; and he
thought he had quenched the same, when a small occasion renewed it to his
destruction. Having certain linen to cut out, this woman was commended to him
for a very cunning seamster. He sent for her, and his old (...) of (...) desire
easily kindling by this little spark, he (...) errands to (...) his men out of
the way, while he set upon her, first with words, and they not preuayling, by
force. She resisted what she might, but finding him too strong for her, thrust
her sheeres into his belly, and gave him his deaths wound. This W. Malmesbury
tells by hearsay of an uncertain relation, adding moreover, that the king
being desirous it should be esteemed false, forbid the report of it. No other
(...) living near those times makes any (...) of this so memorable an
accident, and therefore it is possible to be untrue. 28. Robert surnamed Lozing
was also borne in (...), William the Conqueror for his manifold good parts
(especially his learning) was preferred by him unto the Bishopric of
Hereford, whereunto he was consecrate December 29. 1079. This man was well
seen in diverse kinds of good learning, but in the Mathematiques he was
excellent, and writ diverse discourses in that kind much admired in those days.
There was a great league of friendship between him and Saint VVulstan, who
certified him of his own death in a dream (as our stories report) called him
to his burial, and assured him he might not stay long after. It fell out true,
for within half a year after (...) other, he deceased June 26. 1095. Now he
foresaw the death of (...) Bishop of Lincoln by Astrology, and therefore
refused to come to the dedication of his new church, I have related in
Lincoln. See Lincoln. He built his church of Hereford anew, following the
platform of the church of (...) or Aquisgraue, and lies buried in the fame,
by the Northwall a little above the chapel of Bishop Stanbery, as the
inscription (at least wise) imports. For my part I am (...) that he rather
(...) in that toombe which is ascribed to Bishop Raynelm, for that the Image of
the same holds the sign of the church in his hand, which me thinks argues
the builder of the church to be in that place enterred. 29. Gerard nephew unto
VValkelin Bishop of Winchester succeeded. Uery shortly after his coming to
Hereford he was removed to York. See York. 30. Rainelmus. King Henry the
first bestowed then this Roger his Larderer. Within a day or two after (not yet
consecrate) he fell sick at London, and being loath to die before he were a
complete Bishop, earnestly requested (...) the Archbishop to affoorde him
consecration; which foolish demand he could not but laugh at, and answered with
silence. Much against his will he died vnbishopped twelve days after his
nomination. He being dead, the king gave this Bishopric (intended to him)
unto (...) the Queens Chauncellor. He received it (as the manner had then long
been) at the kings hands, and was invested into it by the delivery of the ring
and the crosier. Anselm the Archbishop refused to consecrate him and diverse
other that obtained their preferments in like manner, as in his life you may
read more at large. He was so far from importuning him in this matter, as
being now persuaded his election to be insufficient, he renounced the same,
delivering again into the kings hand the ring and crosier that he had
received. Herewith the king was so offended, as presently he banished him the
realm. After much adoo between the king and (...), a reconciliation at last
was wrought, and this man consecrate with diverse other the year 1107. He was
very virtuous, devout, and of good report, except only for his housekeeping,
wherein he was not so liberal as his neighbors wished him. He died October
28. 1115. of the gout, wherewith he was much tormented long before his death,
and was entoombed in the out side of the South partition of the Presbytery, if
happily his toombe be not mistaken for Bishop Roberts, and Roberts for his. 31.
Geoffry de Clyue Chaplain to king Henry the first (...). (...) well his
houses; and (...) the (...) belonging to his See into a (...) good order, being
much wasted and (...) in the time of his predecessors. He (...) a (...) unto
the (...), and left much wealth (...) him, which better might have been
bestowed upon them. He died February 3. 1119. and was laid in the North wall a
little above Robert his predecessor. 32. Richard keeper of the Seal under the
Chancellor 33. Robert de (...) Prior of (...) was consecrate 34. Gilbert
(...) consecrate 1149. The year 1161. (or 35. Robert de (...) succeeded. He
died February (...). 1167. and was buried hard by Robert de (...). 36. Robert
Foliot (...) of Oxford was (...) by the Chapter of Hereford (the king granting
license of (...) election) Thomas Becket. See Richard More of Winch. He studied
in (...) universities of (...), and grew there (...) with Thomas Becket the
(...) who (...) much for his singular learning and other (...) parts, in regard
whereof he also preferred him to his (...), and (...) the foundation of his
advancement to this Bishopric. He died May 9. 1186. and was buried next his
pedecessor. 37. William le Vere a great builder, was consecrate Robert de
Betune, Robert de (...), Robert Foliot and this man. Their toombs are very
like, and but by their place and order hardly to be distinguished. 38. Gyles de
Bruise, the son of William Bruise, a man of John, and at last, was feign to
(...) the realm. Afterward, being suffered to return and received into the
kings favor, he travailed homeward and died in the way at Gloreter November
17. 1215. He left great possessions descended unto him by his ancestors, he
left them (I say) to (...) de Bruise his brother, that married the daughter of
Llewellyn ap (...) Prince of Northwales. This man lies buried upon the North
side of the Presbitery. The image that lies upon his toombe holds the
likeness of a steeple in his hand: whereby it should seem he built one of the
towers or steeples. 39. (...) de Mapenore succeeded. He died about Easter 1219
and lies buried (as I remember) in the North wall near the toombe of Bishop
Egueblank. 40. Hugh Foliot consecrate in the beginning of Nouemb. 41. Ralf de
Maydenstan succeeded him. This man bought Monthault the house belonging to the
Bishopric of Hereford in London, together with the patronage (...) the
parsonage of Saint Mary Monthault adjoining, and gave them unto his See. The
year 1239 he resigned his Bishopric and took on him the habit of a
Franciscane Friar at Oxford. He lived afterward a (...) life at Gloceter the
space of five years, and then dying, was buried there. 42. Peter d' Egueblank
borne in Sauoy was elected August to request in his behalf; news was brought
that the old Archbishop (that he took to be dead and whose place he sought)
was yet alive and aliues-like. The year 1263. the Barons arrested him in his
own Cathedral church, (...) upon his goods, divided his treasure unto their
soldiers (...) his face, and imprisoned him a long time in the castle of
Ordley. He was cursed of so many (says one) it was impossible that many
calamities should not light upon him. Long before this captivity, his face was
horribly deformed with a kind of leprosy which some call Polypus, and (though
he left no means unsought) could not be cured of it till his dying day. He
departed this life November 27. 1268. and lies buried under a large and fair
toombe over against the North door of the quier. This man gave unto his church
two (...) of corn of ninety six bushels a piece, yearly to be (...) to the
Ministers of the same for ever. He also founded a Monastery at Aqua-bella in
Sauoy, at which place it seems he was borne, and caused his heart to be
buried there, as (...) by a monument in the church of that house yet (...). 43.
John Breton Doctor of both laws was also very de iuribus Anglicanis. He died
May 12. 1275. 44. Thomas Cantilupe was a gentleman of a very (...) Robert
Kilwardby (with whom he was very familiarly acquainted) was then Provincial
of the (...) Preachers and Doctor of the Chair in Oxford when he was
presented; but before the time came he should stand in the (...), the said
Doctor Kilwardby was become Archbishop of Canterbury. That notwithstanding, he
(...) this his old friend that honor, as to make a journey down to the
university of purpose, and there (being Archbishop) to (...) him the ceremonies
of his creation. And it is reported moreover that amongst many other praises he
gave him in his oration, he signified, that having been long his Confessor, he
never (...) him guilty of any mortal sin. Omnis (...) mendax: Either the
Confessor, or the Confessee, or the reporter, lied I doubt not. He was
consecrate Bishop of Hereford September 8. 1275. being then Archdeacon of
Stafford and Chauncellor of England. The year 1282. he was feign to travail
to Rome about a controversy between him and John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury. In the way thither he died at (...)-(...), August 25. 1282. His
body was brought to Hereford and there solempnly enterred near the East wall
of the North cross I Will, where we see a high toombe of marble. Many miracles
are said to have been wrought at the place of his burial, in regard whereof,
it pleased the Pope afterward to make him a Saint, and all the Bishops of
Hereford since his time, in honor of him, do bear his coat of arms as the
coat of their See, viz. G. 3. leopards heads ieasant 3. Flower-deluces O. 45.
Richard de Swinfield succeeded, Doctor of Divinity, Elogium witnesses engraven
upon a marble that covers his toombe. 46. Adam d'Orleton Doctor of Law borne
in Hereford, 47. Thomas Charlton Doctor of Law, and Cannon of 48. John
Trillecke sat 16. years and a half. 49. Jews Sherlton or Charlton sat 8.
years, and died the 50. William Courtney consecrate 1369. sat 5. years (...)
51. John Gilbert Bishop of (...), a (...) 52. John (...) or Trefrant, a Cannon
of Saint (...), Henry the fourth (...) the crown. He sat Bishop about (...)
years and a (...), died 1404. and lies buried (...) the South wall of the
South cross (...), where we see a fair and costly monument erected for him.
53. Robert Mascall, being yet very young, became a (...) Henry the fourth (...)
choice of him for his Confessor, and (...) means to prefer him unto the
(...) of Hereford. He built the (...), (...) and (...) of the white (...) at
London. (...) many rich (...) unto that house, died there December 21. 1417.
and there was (...) in a goodly monument of (...). He was often Ambassador unto
(...) Princes, and the year 1415. was sent to the Counsel of (...) with two
other Bishops. 54. (...), Doctor of (...) been (...) 55. Thomas (...) (...)
(...) was consecrate 1420. (...) 56. Thomas (...) Abbot of Saint Mary's in
York, 57. Richard Beauchamp having (...) here two years (...) three months,
was (...) to Salisbury an. 1450. 58. Reynold Butler Abbot of (...) 59. John
Stanbery was (...) brought (...) in Henry the sixth called him thence to be the
first Provost of his new (...) college at (...), and moreover made him this
Confessor. The year 1446. he was elected Bishop of Norwich. But (...) de la
Poole Duke of Suffolk thrust in a chaplain of his own (notwithstanding this
election) and so disappointed him. Shortly after, to wit, the year 1448. the
king found means to prefer him to Bangor, and five years after that to
Hereford, where he sat one and twenty years. He died at Ludlow in the house
of the Carmelites, May 11. 1474. and was buried in his own church upon the
North side of the high altar in a too (...) be of alabaster. A man not only
very learned (whereof he left many monuments in writing) but very wise
exceeding well spoken, and (which is not to be omitted) tall of stature, and of
a very comely presence. But I (...) his greatest commendation, his constant and
immovable fidelity unto his Prince, for which being taken prisoner at the
battle of Northampton 1460; he was committed to the castle of Warwick and lay
in durance (...) long time. Upon his toombe are fixed these barbarous verses:
(...), tetra (...),
Stanbery (...) Ioannis.
Doctoralis erat (...) per (...).
(...) o Christ (...) sordem;
(...) been sedem.
(...) I (...) and (...).
(...)
Mors (...) trux (...).
Anno M. C. (...) L. X. (...) bino
(...) his (...) in (...).
Qui legis (...) pro (...) benigna
Vt sint absque mora (...) sibigaudia digna.
60. Thomas Myllyng being yet very young, became a Edward the fourth, under
whom he was of the privy counsel, and was godfather unto Prince Edward his
eldest son. He died the year 1493. and lies buried at Westminster in the
middle of the chapel of Saint John Baptist, where against the North wall there
is a fleight monument erected in memory of him. 61. Edmund Audeley Bishop of
Rochester was (...) 62. Hadrian de Castello consecrate 1502. was made (...) 63.
Richard Mayo Chancellor and Archdeacon of Oxford, Henry the 7. the year 1501.
was sent Ambassador into Spain to (...) yt Lady Katherine to be married unto
Prince Arthur. Not long after his return thence, to wit, the year 1504. he
was (...) unto the Bishopric of (...), which he held eleven years and
somewhat more. He deceased April 18. 1516. and was buried on the South side of
the high altar, where there is a goodly toombe erected in memory of him. 64.
Charles Boothe Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon of 65. Edward Fox Doctor of
Divinity, and (...) unto Henry the eight, was brought up in Kings college in
Cambridge; often Ambassador in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere, and became Bishop
of Hereford the year 1535. A man very well learned, and secretly a favorer of
religion. M. (...) does dedicate his commentary upon the Evangelists unto him.
Himself also writ diverse books yet extant. He sat only two years and seven
months. But where he died or was buried I find not. 66. Edmund Boner having
been Bishop of Hereford only 67. John Skyp Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon
of 68. John Harley, sometime fellow of Magdalene college in Oxford, was
displaced by Queen Mary, and died soon after. 69. Robert Parsew, alias
Warbington succeeded. 70. John Scory, late Bishop of Chichester, was appointed
unto this See by the Queens Majesty that now is in the beginning of her
reign. He died in the beginning of the year 1585. 71. Herbert Westfayling
Doctor of Divinity, and Cannon of Christchurch in Oxford, was consecrate
December. 12. 1585.
The Bishopric of Hereford is valued in the Exchecquer at 768, l. 10, s. 10,
d. ob. farthing, and yielded the Pope for first fruits 1800. florens.
The Bishops of Chichester.
1. WIlfride Archbishop of York being Egfride king of Northumberland (as in
York you may read more at large) he thought good to occupy his talent by
preaching the word of God amongst the South Saxons. (...) the king of that
country, a little before his coming, had received the faith of Christ, by the
perswas on of Wlfhere king of Mercia. He willing to increase his own
knowledge, and (...) that his subjects should be directed the way of salvation;
made very much of Wilfride, and assigned him an habitation in Seolsey, a place
all compassed about with the sea except one way. All that land, containing
eighty seven households, this king gave unto Wilfride for his maintenance. He
built a Monastery there, and established his Cathedral See in the same. Now it
pleased God (...) bless his labors, as in a short time, great numbers of the
people being converted, embraced Christian religion: And a day being appointed
for their Baptism, they had no sooner (...) the same, but immediately it
rained plentifully, the want whereof had caused a dearth the space of three
years before, and that so great, as not only many died daily for hunger, but
great numbers joining hand in hand forty or fifty in a company, threw
themselves headlong into the sea, choosing rather to die then to endure that
torment of hunger any longer. Thus it pleased God, at once to deliver these men
from temporal death by famine, and everlasting destruction that their
ignorance threatened unto them. Neither was this all the good that Wilfride did
unto them. Their sea and rivers abounding with great store of good fish which
they knew not how to take, he taught them, and caused great store to be caught,
wherewith many poor people were greatly relieved. Having staid five years
there, he was called home into his own country again, and restored to his
Archbishopricke of York. 2. Eadbert. After his departure, Sussex was governed
by Eadbert was consecrate Bishop of Seolsey, which place before that, he
governed as Abbot. 3. Eolla; he being dead, the Sea stood void until after
the death of Beda. 4. Sigga or Sigelm, alias Sigfridus. 5. Alubrith. 6. Osa,
alias Bosa. 7. Giselher. 8. Tota. 9. Wighthun. 10. (...). 11. Beornege. Matthew
Westminster makes mention of Camelec Bishop of the South Saxons that (as he
says) was taken prisoner of the Danes the year 915. and afterward redeemed
with the price of 40, l. sterling by king Edward the elder. 12. Coenred. 13.
Gutheard, he died 960. 14. Alfred, he died 970. 15. Eadelm. 16. Ethelgar Abbot
of the new Abbey at Winchester, consecrate 17. Ordbright. 18. Elmar, he died
1019. 19. Ethelrike, he died 1038. November 5. 20. Grinketell being deprived of
the Bishopric of the East Symony, obtained this 1039. 21. Heca Chaplayne unto
king Edward the Confessor, consecrate 22. Agelrike, a man singularly commended
for his skill in William the Conqueror to assist Gosfrid Bishop of Constantia,
in judging a great controversy between Lanfranke the Archbishop, and Odo
Earl of Kent the kings brother, concerning title of diverse lands; and because
being a very aged man, he was unable (...) from Chichester unto Pikenden hoath
in Kent, where the whole County in a manner were assembled about this matter:
he was brought thither in a wagon or chariot. In a (...) holden at Windsor he
was (...), and that (as Florent. Wigorn. supposes) (...), the year 1070. and
imprisoned at Marleborough.
1. Stigand chaplain unto the Conqueror, translated his See from Seolsey (an
obscure place at that time, and 2. William. 3. Ralfe A man of very high (...),
and no less high of mind. He stood very stoutly in defense of (...) the
Archbishop: in so much as when the king William Rufus threatened him for the
same, he offered him his ring and crosier, saying, it should better become him
to leave his place then his duty. Neither could he ever be induced to forsake
the said Archbishop, until he seemed to forsake his own cause by flying the
country. After that, when the king was content to wink at the marriage of many
Priests in the realm (unto whom the Archbishop was a grievous and heavy
adversary) and received of them yearly a great sum of money for defending
them against the austerity of the other, (I mean Anselme) this Bishop resisted
the collection of that money in his Dioces, calling it the tribute of
fornication, and when (notwithstanding his resistance) it was paid, he
interdicted his own Dioces, commanding the Church doors every where to be
stopped up with thorns. The king (a wise and gentle Prince, Henry the first)
whether not vouchsafing to contend with him, or taking his well meaning in good
part, was not only content to pardon this disobedience, but also bestowed the
money so gathered in his Dioces upon him, saying it was a poor Bishopric,
and needed such helps. And certain it is, that before the coming of this
man, it was indeed exceeding poor. He increased it wonderfully, and yet
notwithstanding built his Cathedral Church of Chichester from the ground. It
was scarcely finished, when as May the fifth 1114. it was quite defaced and a
great part of the City consumed with casual fire He found means to repair it
again being helped much with the liberality of the king and some other. This
Bishop sat many years (the certain time I know not) and drawing toward his
end, delivered unto the poor with his own hands whatsoever he had in the
world, leaving him self scarce clothes to cover him. He was ever a great alms
man, and notwithstanding his great building, a great house keeper also. Neither
was he less careful of the spiritual Temple of Christ then the material; he
was a very painful Preacher, yearly visiting his whole Dioces (preaching in
every place) thrice, reprehending and punishing sin severely, and lastly
performing such other pastoral duties as he thought unto his charge might
belong. 4. Seffridus Abbot of Glastonbury, was brother unto 5. Hilarious. This
man only of all the Bishops in England, was content absolutely to allow of the
declaration after published at Clarindon, without mention of that odious clause
(saluo ordine fuo) but was shrewdly bayted of his brethren for his labor, as in
the life of Thomas Becket you may read more at large. 6. John de Greenford
Deane of Chichester was elected 7. Seffridus the second succeeded. In his time
to wit, October 19. 1187. the Cathedral Church together with the whole City
was once more consumed with casual fire. The Church and his own palace he
both reedified in very good sort. 8. Simon de Wells was elected Bishop
December 22. 9. Richard Poor Deane of Salisbury was consecrate 10. Ralfe,
first Official, then Prior of Norwich, succeeded him in Chichester. He gave to
the Church a Windmill in Bishopstone and died 1222. 11. Ralfe Neuil al. de Noua
villa was elected November Edmund. After that he was elect Bishop of
Winchester. See the success thereof in William de Raleigh of Winchester. He
died February 1. 1244. at London in that house which is now known by the name
of Lincolnes Inn. He built it from the ground to be a house of receite for
himself and his successors when they should come to London. After his time (I
know not by what means) it came to the possession of Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, who somewhat enlarged it and left it the name it now has. This Bishop
moreover builded a Chapel and dedicated it to Saint Michaell without the East
gate of Chichester, and was otherwise a great Benefactor unto his own Church.
12. Richard de la Which. After the death of Ralf Neuil, the Robert Passelew, a
man wise enough, and one that had done the king much good service, but so
unlearned, as the Bishops of the realm (...) much to be joined with him,
procured his election to be disanulled, and Richard de Wiche to be chosen. This
Richard de Wiche was borne at Wiche in Worcetershire, of which place he took
his surname, and was brought up in the universities of Oxford first, and Paris
afterward. Being come to man's state, he travailed to Bononia where having
studied the Canon Law seven years, he became public reader of the same.
After that, he spent some time at Orleans in France, and then returning home,
was made Chancellor unto Saint Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury as also of the
university of Oxford. He was consecrate by the Pope him self at Lions 1245.
and so governed the charge committed to him, as all men greatly reverenced him,
not only for his great learning, but much more for his diligence in preaching,
his manifold virtues, and above all his integrity of life and conversation. In
regard of these things, as also of many miracles that are fathered upon him, he
was canonised and made a Saint some seven years after his death. He deceased
April 2. 1253. the ninth year after his consecration, and of his age the
fifty sixth. He was buried in his own church, and the year 1276 his body was
removed from the first place of burial and laid in a sumptnous shrine. 13.
John Clypping a Canon of Chichester succeeded him. 14. Stephen. Of whom I find
nothing but this, that he was excommunicate the year 1265. for taking part
with the Barons against the king. 15. Gilbertus de Sancto Leofardo died the
year 1305. He was (says Matthew Westminster) a father of the fatherless, a
comforter of mourners, a defender of widows, a releeuer of the poor, a
helper of the distressed and a diligent visiter of the sick, especially the
poor, unto whom he resorted more often then unto the rich. He ascribes also
diverse miracles unto him, believe him as you list. He raised from the
foundation the Chapel of Saint Mary. 16. John de Langton sometimes
Chauncellor of England, builded a costly window in the south part of the
church. This Bishop (or at least he that was Bishop of Chichester the year
1315.) excommunicated the Earl Warren for adultery, whereupon the Earl came
unto him with armed men, and made show of some intent to lay violent hands upon
him. The Bishops men perceiving it, set upon them, and by their Masters
commandment put both the Earl and his men in prison. 17. Robert Stratford
Archdeacon of Canterbury, Channcellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, and Lord
Chauncellor of England, at what time he was preferred to the Bishopric of
Chichester, made suite, he might with the kings good favor give over his
office, which was granted him; but not long after it was laid upon him again.
He died the year 1361. 18. William de Lenne, alias (...), Doctor of law and
19. William Read was sometimes fellow of Perton 20. Thomas Rushooke a Friar
preacher, Doctor of Divinity, and Confessor unto the king, was first Bishop of
Landaff and (the time certain I know not) afterward removed thence to
Chichester. He was drouen away from the (...) by the Barons, and his goods
confiscate by Parliament in March 1388. 21. Richard Mitford was translated to
Salisbury the year 1395. See Salisbury. 22. Robert Waldby was translated from
Dublin 1395 23. Robert Read, a Friar preacher became Bishop of William
Stirkland was elected lawfully, bestowed (...) place upon him at the kings
request. In the end of the (...) year he was translated to Chichester. 24.
Roger Packinton. 25. Henry Ware Doctor of Law. 26. John Kemp Bishop of
Rochester, translated (...) 27. Thomas Poldon, first Bishop of Hereford was
translated 28. John Rickingale Doctor of Divinity. 29. Simon Sidenham Doctor of
Law. 30. Richard Praty. 31. Adam Molins Doctor of Law and sometimes Clarke of
the Council, being Bishop of Chichester, had the keeping of the privy seal
committed to him. He was slain at Portsmouth, by Mariners, suborned thereunto
by Richard Duke of York, June 9. 1449. He gave to the high Altar certain rich
clothes of crimosin velvet. 32. Reginald Peacocke, was borne in Wales, brought
(...) Duke of (...), uncle and Protector of king Henry the sixth, and was
preferred by him unto the Bishopric of Saint Assaph: from whence the year
1450. he was translated to Chichester He was a great defender of the doctrine
of (...), which he was constrained to recant at Paul's cross December 4. 1457.
had his books burnt there before his face, and that notwithstanding he was
deprived of his Bishopric, having a certain pension assigned to maintain
him in an Abbey, and soon after died. 33. John (...) Doctor of Physic
succeeded, one of 34. Edward Story Doctor of Divinity was consecrate Bishop 35.
Richard (...) was translated from Rochester 36. Robert Sherborne, was
translated from Saint David's Henry the 7. a great housekeeper, a great
almes-man, bestowed much money in (...) his church, and increased the number of
the Ministers belonging thereunto. 37. Richard Sampson, Doctor of Law,
consecrate 1536. 38. George Day, Doctor of Divinity, consecrate 1543. (...)
1553. and died Aug. 2. 1556. 39. John Scory, Bacheler of Dininity, was (...)
Elizabeth unto the Sea of Hereford. 40. John Christopherson, Doctor of
Divinity, (...) of Mary some after the death of Day. He was borne in
Lancashire, and brought up in Saint John's college in Cambridge. Aman very
learned, whereof he has left many testimonies behind him. He was deprived by
act of Parliament in the beginning of the happy reign of our now Queen
Elizabeth. 41. William Barlow, Doctor of Divinity, sometimes Bishop 42. Richard
(...), Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate 43. Thomas Bickley Doctor of
Dininity, (...) of Mary's time he was feign to forsake, not only his
fellowship, but the realm also. Most part of her reign he lived in France,
at Paris and Orleans. In the beginning of her Majesty's reign, returning home,
he became (...) unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew. Parker, by whose
means he was preferred unto the (...) of Merton college. Thomas Bentam Bishop
of Lichfield his old acquaintance in Magdalene college, and his (...) in
exile, bestowed upon him moreover the Archdeacomy of Stafford, and a Preuend in
Lichfield. Having governed the said college twenty years, he was called to
the (...) of Chichester, where he sat 11. years. He died at Aldingburne
April 30. 1596. being well near 90. years of age, and was honorably enterred
in his Cathedral Church of Chichester. He bequeathed unto Merton college in
Oxford 100, l. to Magdalene college 40, l. and diverse other sums of money to
diverse other good uses. 44. Anthony Watson Deane of Bristow, and one of her
The Bishopric of Chichester is valued in the Queens books at 677, l. 15,
d. in the Popes books at 333. ducats.
The Bishops of Rochester.
SAint Augustine having laid some (...) (...) to London and (...) a Roman to
(...). This was the year 604. About seven years after he was feign to fly
the realm together with Melhtus Bishop of London, as in his life you may (...)
more at large. The year 622. he was translated to Canterbury. See Canterbury.

1. Iustus therefore was the first Bishop of Rochester. 2. Romanus was the
second. Travailing to Rome, (...) a Iustus the Archbishop and Honorius (...)
Pope, he was drowned by the way. 3. Paulinus the first Archbishop of York
being forced Andrew, which Echelbert the good king of (...) from the ground. 4.
Ithamar was then made Bishop of Rochester, an (...) 5. (...). After his death
the Sea continued long 6. Putta at last was consecrate thereunto by (...)
Edilred king of Mercia burning his church and city, resolved and settled him in
that determination. So he went into Mercia, where he accepted the charge of a
parish church under Saxulf Bishop there, mending his living by teaching a song
school, for he was a great and cunning Musician. In that kind of life he
spent the rest of his time, and could never abide to hear of returning to his
Bishopric. 7. Quichelmus or Gulielmus (so Beda calls him) a little 8.
Gebmundus or Godwyndus accepted it, and held it during 9. Tobias an Englishman
succeeded. He was brought up Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, and Hadrian
Abbot of Saint Augustines. A great learned man, a paynefull Preacher and so
well seen both in the Latin and Greek toongs, as he spoke them no less
readily then his own mother language. He died the year 726. and was buried in
his own church. 10. Aldulfus. 11. Dun or Duna. 12. Eardulf. O^^a king of
Mercia gave unto him and his successors Freindsbury by the name of Ellingham
about the year 77^. Ecgbert a king of Kent gave him certain land within the
Castle of Rochester the year 763. And Ethelbert an other king of Kent gave him
Woldham ann. 759. 13. Diora, unto him the foresaid Ecgbert (that seems to
have been but some petty king, for it could uot be Egbert the fourth
Christened king, that lived 100. years before these times) he I say gave to
this Diora 10. ploughlands in Halling, together with certain Deanes in the
Weald or common wood. 14. Weremund. He died the year 800. 15. Beornmod. He
died 804. 16. Tadnoth. 17. Bedenoth. 18. Godwyn the first.

It is here to be acknowledged, that the series or Catalogue of the Bishops of
Rochester from Beornmod to Siward, even for the space of eight score years, is
but very maimed and imperfect. William (...). affoordeth us for all the time
between Beda and the Conquest (330. years) but nine Bishops. (...) Wigorn:
mentions one more only. A Catalogue remaining in the Church of Rochester
inserteth at once seven other: unto which I must needs add this first Godwyn,
that was undoubtedly Bishop of Rochester the years 833. and 851. as appears
(...) in two Charters, the one of Withlaf and the other of (...) kings of
Mercia, bearing that date and confirmed (...) him. Both of them are exemplified
in Ingulphus. And therefore I should do ill not to allow him a place although
whether this be his due place and order or no I am not able (...) to say.

19. Cutherwulf. 20. Swithulf appointed one of the Gardians of the realm to
defend it against the Danes ann. 897. which year he died, as Asserius
reports. 21. Buiricus. 22. Cheolmond. 23. Chineferth. 24. Burrhicus. Unto him
Edmund the brother of King Athelstane, gave the town of Malling by the name of
three plough lands in Mealings ann. 945. 25. Alfstane. 26. Godwyne 2. 27.
Godwyne 3. One of these confirmed a Charter of King Edgar exemplified in
Ingulphus ann. 966. One of them also as I (...) noted, confirmed a charter
concerning Wulfrunhampton (...) the year 996. Again it is delivered by
Florentius Wigorn: that Godwyn Bishop of Rochester was taken prisoner by the
Danes the year 1011. And therefore whereas Matthew Westminster and others
report that king Ethelrede (...) the Bishop of Rochester in that his own City
a long time, the year 983. and that being warned by Saint Dunstane, he should
take heed least he provoked against him Saint Andrew Patron of that Church;
yet he would not depart (...) till he had wrong from the Bishop 100. l. we
need not make any great doubt but the Bishop so raunsomed, was called Godwyn,
although I find not his name any where set down. It should seem then, that the Sea being become very poor, what through the particular troubles of these men,
and the general calanuties of the times; after their decease, it stood void a
long time, viz. until the year 1058. 28. (...) Abbot of Abingdon was then
consecrate. Upon Eadsine of Canterbury page 25. He died (says William
Malmsbury) at Abingdon the year 1067. a few days after the Conquest of
England by the Normans: Howbeit it is mamfest that the year 1072 he lived, and
was present at that Synod gathered together about Whitsontide, begun at
Winchester, and ended at Windsore, as in the third books of the same William de
(...). ye may perceive. Whenever he died, certain it is he left behind him a
miserable poor Church, destitute of all things necessary. It had not above
four Canons which lived very hardly, and that for the most part by the alms
of such well disposed people as took compassion of their poverty. 29.
Arnostus. Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury intending to reduce this Church to
some better order, consecrated Bishop unto this See one Arnostus a monk of
Becco, a man well known unto him. He lived not to perform any great matter.
Within a year after his preferment he died. 30. Gundulph a monk likewise was
placed in his room Lanfranke, who also caused him to take into his church (not
secular priests, as hitherto had been accustomed) but monks. This Bishop was
a man not greatly learned, but wise, and very industrious. For he handled the
matter so, as he procured not only his church to be new built, but also the
revenues to be increased to that height, as at the time of his death, it did
and was able to maintain fifty monks, some say 60. He was very much helped in
these things by Lanfrank, that beside diverse sums of ready money which he
contributed, bought a certain manor called Heddre, and gave it to the church
of Rochester. Morcouer, whereas Odo Earl of Kent had incroched upon diverse
lands and possessions belonging to the Sees both of Canterbury and Rochester;
by law they recovered them from him; (...), unto Rochester were restored, by
the means of (...), at the suite of Gundolph, and by the judgment of (...)
Bishop of Constantia, together with Egelrike Bishop of Chichester, these
manors. Dettiyng, Stoce, Preston, Daniton, and diverse other parcels. This
trial was held upon (...) hothe, where all the County were assembled at the
kings commandment to give in evidence. Afterward he (...) a Nunry at Malling,
and the hospitalt of Saint Barthelomews in Chettham: Moreover, he built a great
part of the castle of Rochester, namely the great Tower which yet stands. In
recompense of that charge amounting to (...) pound, the king bestowed a manor
upon his See. (...) March 7. 1107. 31. Ralf Abbot of Say, was consecrate August
11. 1108. 32. Earnulph was a Frenchman, brought up a while under Lanfranke at
Becco, and after became a monk at Beauueys. Lanfranke, understanding that he
lived very (...) at Beauueys (upon what occasion I find not) and knowing him
to be a man of excellent good parts, advised him to come to him into England. A
while after his coming over, he lived a private monk in Canterbury,
afterward became Pryor there, then was preferred to the Abbotship of (...),
and lastly, had the Bishopric of Rochester given him by his predecessor the
Archb. of Canterbury December 26. 1115. In all these places he so bestirred
himself, as he left diverse notable monuments of his industrious (...). The
upper end of Christchurch in Canterbury built by Lanfranke being fallen down,
he procured to be built again must magnificently, pauing it with marble,
glasing and beautifying it with sundry kind of stately ornaments. At
Peterborough he increased the number of his monks, and built (...). A little
before his coming away, that, and all other edifices of the monastery were
consumed by casual fire. Now though the diligence and long time of (...) his
predecessor, left nothing very needful for him to perform at Rochester; yet
would he never be idle, but still was either mending and repayring of old, or
setting up some new building. He died in the month of March 1124. being 84.
years of age. I find it reported, that he writ an history of the church of
Rochester, which (if it be not perished) I wish it might be my hap to see. 33.
John Archdeacon of Canterbury, was consecrate 34. (...), whom some call (...)
(but falsely) died 35. Walter, Archdeacon of Canterbury, was the first that
Theobald the Archbishop bestowed this privilege upon them. This Walter died in
July 1182. the 35. year after his consecration. 36. Gualeranus, Archdeacon of
Bayon succeeded, and died de facto detayned the Crosier with them, till at last
each party referring the matter to the Archbishop of Canterbury: the monks of
Rochester delivered into his hands the crosier, which he presently delivered
over again unto the Pryor of Canterbury: and he soon after unto Gilbert
Glannyll the next Bishop. 37. Gilbert de Glannyll, Archdeacon of Luxouia, was
otherwise then by his death, which happened June 24. 1214. But their hatred
against him was so far from dying with him as they would afford him no manner
of obsequies, but buried him most obscurely, or rather basely, without either
ringing, singing, or any other manner of solemnity. The hospital at Strowde
near Rochester (called Neworke) was built, (...), and by him endowed with
those possessions it now enjoys, to wit, the value of 52, l. yearly reuenew.
38 Benedictus Chaunter of Saint Paul's church in 39. Henry de Sanford
Archdeacon of Canterbury consecrate Hugh of Ely and Roger of London, were to be
consecrated. Ioceline Bishop of Wills challenged the perfourmance of this
ceremony as due to him, for that he was the most ancient Bishop of the
province of Canterbury. But this Bishop of Rochester alleged it belonged to
his See (Canterbury being void) to consecrate all the Bishops of that province.
With much adoo, this agreement was made between them, that Rochester should
consecrate the Archbishop, and Ioceline of Wells the other two. Another thing
is remembered of this Bishop scarce worthy the rehearsal, which yet I will not
omit, to show how aptmen even of the grauest sort were to be deceived and
deluded in those times. Preaching at Sittingborne before a great auditory, at a
time when he gave general orders, he declared openly, that God had revealed
unto him now three several times, how that such a day the souls of king
Richard the first, Stephen Langton late Archbishop, and another priest, were
delivered out of purgatory, and no more souls that day but only they three.
He died February 24. 1235. 40. Richard de Wendouer Parson of Bromley (...)
Edmund the Archbishop. He appealing to Rome, was confirmed there in despite of
the Archbishop, with whom the Pope was very angry for withstanding his
shameless and intolerable exactions here. He was (...) 1238. died 1250. and
was buried at Westminster by the kings special commandment, for that he was
accounted a very holy and virtuous man. 41. Laurentius de Sancto Martino a
Chaplain and counselor Henry the third, got a dispensation from the Pope to
hold al his former livings in commendam with this Bishopric: And yet
alleging that his Bishopric was the poorest of England, much meaner then
Carltoll, and therefore his living yet unable to maintain the port of a
Bishop; he never ceased till he had ertorted from the Clergy of his Dioces a
grant of a fifth part of all their spiritual livings for five years, and
appropriated unto his See for ever the Parsonage of Freindsbury. (...) the
Archbishop of Canterbury used this man hardly, inuading his possessions, and
violently taking from him without all right diverse things of old belonging to
his Bishopric. He complained unto the king, unto whose Queen, (...) was
uncle The king answered him in plain terms, he knew he should offend his
wife much, if he should become a stickler between them, wished him to seek
some other remedy, if by importunity he enforced him to interpose his
authority, he should do him more hurt then good. Hereupon he sought unto the
Pope, but he, was so near a neighbor to the Duke of Sauoy the Archbishops
brother, as perceiving quickly little good was to be done there, he was fame to
take patience for an amends, and so sit him down. He departed this life the
year 1274. 42. Walter de (...) Lord Chauncellor of England, Lukes day, 1278.
He lies buried under a reasonable plain Marble toombe in the North I Will of his
church of Rochester, almost over against the Bishops See. 43. John de
Bradfeild, a Monk and Chaunter of the Church of Rochester, was consecrate
1279. and died 1282. 44. Thomas Inglethorp, Deane of Saint Paul's Church 45.
Thomas de Wuldham, Prior of Rochester. 46. Haymo, Confessor to king Edward the
second, (...) named at Heathe (or rather de Heathe) of the Town of (...) in
Kent where he was borne. He built much at Hawling the year 1323. to wit, the
Hall and high front of the Bishops place there now standing, reedified the Wall
at Holborough near unto it, and repaired the rest of the buildings in the same
house, as he did also at Troscliff another manor house belonging to this See.
Moreover in the Town of Hithe (...) named, he founded the Hospital of Saint
(...), for relief of 10. poor people, endewing the same with 20. marks of
yearly reuenew. The year 1352. he resigned his Bishopric into the Popes
hands. 47. John de Shepey. He was made Treasurer of England 48. William
Wittlesey, translated to Worceter 1363 and after to Canterbury See Canterbury.
49. Thomas Trilleck. He died 1372. 50. Thomas Brinton sometime a Benedictine
Monk of Richard the 2. and died 1389. 51. William de Bottlesham, or Boltsham,
whom Walsingham, and other call (but I doubt not falsely) John Bottlesham was
borne at Bottlesham in Cambridgeshire, from whence he took his name. He was a
Friar preacher, a Doctor of Divinity, greatly accounted of for his learning,
more for his eloquence and rare gift in preaching, for which also he was much
esteemed by king Richard the 2. preferred by his means unto the Bishopric of
Landaffe, and after (notwithstanding the election of on Richard Barnet)
translated unto Rochester. He died the year 1401. in the month of May. 52.
John Boltsham, or Bottlesham, Chaplain unto the 53. Richard Young made the
windows of the parrish church of Freindsbury. 54. John Kempe, was translated
first to Chichester 1422. 55. John Langdon, a monk of Canterbury. He was borne
56. Thomas Brown. He being at the Council of Basil, 57. William Wels, Abbot
of York. He died 1443. 58. John Low, a white Monk, Doctor of Divinity,
Henry the 6. in regard of his great learning and painfulnesse in preaching.
After that, he also procured him to be translated to Rochester 1443. He writ
diverse good works very well worth reading, and was a careful searcher after
good books, so as diverse copies of some ancient fathers had utterly perished
but for his diligence. He died the year 1467. and lies buried in his own
Cathedral church over against Bishop Merton, where he has a same marble
toombe, the inscription being not yet altogether defaced. 59. Thomas Rotheram,
translated to Lincoln 1471. and 60. John Alcocke, translated to Worcester
1476. and after 61. John Russell, translated to Lincoln, 1480. See Lincoln.
62. Edmund Audley, translated to (...). 63. Thomas Savage, translated to London
and York. (...) 64. Richard Fitz james, translated to Chichester 1504. 65.
John Fisher, Doctor of Divinity. For denying (...) acknowledge 66. John
Fisher, commonly called the black Friar of 67. Nicholas Heath, became Bishop
of Rochester about the year 1539. was removed to Worceter, 1543. and after to
York. See York. 68. Henry Holbech, translated to Lincoln 1547. 69. Nicolas
Ridley, conseccated in September 1547. was 70. John Poynet, consecrated April
3. 1549. was translated 71. John Scory, consecrated 1550. was deprived in the
beginning Elizabeth preferred to Hereford. 72. Maurice Griffyn, Archdeacon of
Rochester, was consecrated 73. Edmund Guest, consecrated January 21. 1559. was
74. Edmund Freake, doctor of Divinity, consecrated 75. John Piers, doctor of
Divinity, Deane of Christ (...) 76. John Young, doctor of Divinity
consecrated 1578. yet
This Bishopric is valued in the Exchequer at 358. l. 3. s. 7. d. farthing, in
the Popes books at 1300. ducates.
The Bishops of Oxford.
ABout the year of our Lord 730. there lived a Duke of Oxford called Didan. He
had a daughter of excellent beauty named Frideswyde, who though she had many
importunate suitors, men of great wealthand nobility; yet desiring to serve God
in such sort as she thought might be most acceptable unto him, would needs
dedicate her self unto a sole and Monastical life. Amongst the rest of her
wooers, there was one a young Gentleman of great power (some say he was a King)
his name was Algarus. He not preuayling by entreaty, thought to use force; and
upon a time, getting company about him, had almost seized upon his desired
pray; which he had so narrowly beset, as she had no way to escape his hands,
but by flying into a wood. Thither also he followed her, and that so near, as
leaving it, she had much adoo to recover Oxford. Perceiving then that neither
she was able to fly any further for weariness, nor yet to withstand him there;
she called unto God for assistance against this importunate lover, who
thereupon (as the story says) was miraculously stricken blind; And he
continued in that case, till by her prayers he recovered his sight again. Upon
this occasion (says William Malmsbury and the rest of our Histories) the Kings
of England took a conceit, that it was not safe for any Prince to enter
Oxford, in so much, as every one, being loath to venture the trial of it in
himself, it was ever avoided by them, till the time that King Henry the third
proved it altogether vain by his own experience. In this place, Didan, by
the entreaty of his daughter, built a Monastery for Nuns, and appointed her
the Abbess. It happened then obout the year of grace 847. in the time of King
Egelred, that certain Danes flying into this Monastery to save their lives
from the bloody cruelty of the English pursuing them; when otherwise they could
not (...) gotten out, the Monastery was (...), and they all burnt in the same;
But it was reedified shortly after by the said king, and further enriched with
diverse possessions This notwithstanding, soon after it sell into wonderful
great decay, so as no body caring to inhabit the same, it was given by William
the Conqneror unto the Abbey of Abingdon for a Cell or remoouing house. They
not (...) esteeming it, were content that Roger Bishop of Salisbury their
Ordinary, should confirm it unto one (...). Chaplain unto king Henry the
first, a man, wise, learned, and religious, that took upon him to place
Regular (...) in the same. He did so the year 1110. became (...); of this new
(or rather renewed) Monastery himself, tooke-other unto him, repaired in very
good sort the ruinous (...), and by the favor of King Henry the first,
recovered (...) it what lands soever had been given heretofore unto the
Nuns. In this state then it continued, until that (...) Woolsey got
license to convert it into a College 1524. calling it by the name of the
Cardinals College. (...) leaving it imperfect, it pleased King Henry the eight
of (...) memory, to give it a foundation, by the name of Collegium (...)
exfundatione Regis Henrici Octaui, and moreuer made it the Sea of a new erected
Cathedral Church, placing in it not only a Bishop, but also a Deane, (...), a
(...) and other officers, besides 100. (...) that he appointed to be maintained
in the same, of (...) number my self some times was one.

1. Robert King.
THis new erected Episcopal See was first established in the Abbey of Osney,
where Robert King the last Abbot of the same house, and the first Bishop of
Oxford had his Installation the year 1541. About five years after, to wit, an
1546. it was removed unto Christchurch, then commonly called the Cardinals
college. This Robert King being yet Abbot of Osney, was consecrate a titulary
Bishop by the name of Episcopus Roanensis, which is a See in the Province of
the Archbishopricke of Athens. He was translated from this imaginary
Bishopric to Oxford the year 1541. (as before is mensioned) taken away by
death December 4. 1557. and is entoombed on the North side of the East end of
the quier in his own church, where is this Epitaphe to be seen.

Hic (...) Robertus King S. Theologiae professor and prioous Episcopus Oxon.
quiobijt 4. die December. 1557.

2. Hugh Curwyn.
HVgh Curwyn or Coren, Doctor of Law, first Archdeacon of Oxford, and Deane of
Hereford, then Archbishop of Dublyn, and Lord Chauncellor of Ireland was
translated from thence to Oxford (a place of less honor, but more quiet)
October 14. 1567. Having sat there little more then a year, he died at
Swynbrooke, near to Burford, and was buried in the parish church there
November 1. 1568.

3. John Vnderhyll.
AFter his death, the Bishopric continued void many years. At last it
pleased her Majesty to bestow it upon a chaplain of her own, John Vnderhyll,
doctor of divinity, and Rector of Lincoln college in Oxford. He was
consecrate thereunto in December 1589. died in the beginning of May 1592. and
was buried in the middle of the quier of his Cathedral church toward the upper
end.

This Bishopric of Oxford is valued at 354, l, 16, s, 3, d. farthing.
The Bishops of Gloucester.
OSrike king of Northumberland, founded a Nunry in the city of (...), about the
year of our Lord 700. Kineburg, Eadburg, and Eua, Queens of Mercia, were
Abbesses of this monastery one after another. It was destroyed by the Danes and
lay wasle, until that Aldred Archbishop of York began to reedifie the same
about the year 1060. replenished it with monks, and erected from the very
foundation that goodly church, which is now the (...) See of that Dioces. Being
given into the hands of king Henry the eight by Parliament, it pleased him to
alot the (...) of it unto the mayntenance of a Bishop, a Deane, six
Prebendaries, and other ministers.

1. John Wakeman, Abbot of Teuksbury, was the first Bishop of this new
erection. He provided a toombe for his place of burial at Teuksbury in the
North side of a little chapel, standing Southeast from the high altar. Part
of it yet (...). But his body lies at Worthington where he died a house
belonging unto the Bishopric of Gloucester. 2. John Hooper Bishop of Worceter
held Gloucester in Commendam with Worceter, by the license of king Edward the
sixth. His life, actions, and Heroical end are written at large by Master Fox.
3. James Brooks Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Baylioll college in Oxford
succeeded him. 4. Richard Cheyney, Bacheler of Divinity was consecrate April
19. 1562. He died the year 1578. Both he and his predecessor lie buried in one
vault with Abbot Parker the (...) Abbot. His toombe stands in a little
chapel on the North side of the Presbytery almost over against the Bishops
See. 5. John Bullingham, Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate September 3. 1581.
the Sea having been void almost three years He died about the 20. day of May.
1598. 6. Godfry Goldsborough, Doctor of Divinity and Archdeacon of Worceter,
was consecrate Nouemb. 19. 1598.
The Bishopric of Gloucester is valued in the Queens books at 315, l. 17, s.
2, d.
The Bishops of Peterborough.
IN the middle of the river of (...), (which runs by the south side (...)
Peterborough) there is a whirlpoole of infinite depth, that by reason of
springs continually arising there, in the coldest winter was yet never quite
frozen over. This place in (...) time was called Medefwell, and the town
adjoining (taking name of it) Medeswell-(...), or Medeshamstead. Peada the
son of Penda, the first Christian king of Mercia, began the foundation of a
monastery there, the year 656. but was taken away by the treachery of his wife
before he could bring it to any perfection. Wolpher his brother was so far
from endeavoring to finish this work, as being an obstinate Pagane, he put to
death (...) and Ruffyn two of his own sons, for no other cause then this,
that they were Christians Afterward notwithstanding it pleased God so to touch
his heart, as of a persecuting Saul (...) became a good Paul, and in token of
his grief and sorrow for his cruelty to his sons, determined to build up
this monastery, in the most magnificent and stately manner he could (...),
which indeed he performed, being very much helped in the same by the
contribution of Ethelred his brother, as also of Kineburg, and Kineswith his
sisters, who as (W. (...) delivers, do there ly buried. This Monastery he
dedicated unto Saint Peter, and appointed one Saxulf (by whose persuasion he
took in hand this work) to be the first (...) of the same. (He afterward
became Bishop of Lichfield.) Two hundred years after the first foundation and
somewhat more, it flourished in wealth, and great prosperity, to (...), until
the coming of the Danes, who slew the Monks and utterly destroyed all those
sumptuous buildings erected by Wolpher. Having then layen desolate 109. years;
Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester (a great Patron of Monkery) reedified it. He had
begun a new Oundale at Northampton in Northampton shire, when by chance
coming to this place, he thought good to omit that former and to bestow his
cost here. So he made a parish church of his building at Oundale, and reedified
this decayed Monastery of Medeshamstead In digging up some of the old
foundations, it is remembered there were found stones of such huge greatness,
as eight yoke of Oren were scarce able to draw one of them away. King Edgar
holp the Bishop much in this foundation, and Aldulf that was Chauncellor unto
the said king, partly for devotion, partly for malcontentment and grief, that
he had layen upon his only child and so (...) him in his sleep, bestowed all
his substance upon it, and betaking himself unto a monastical life, became
Abbot there. After him Kenulfus another Abbot compassed about this Monastery
with a strong Wall about the year of our Lord 1000. And then (says W.
Malmsbury) because it bare the show of a town or borough, it began to leave
the old name, and to be called altogether Burgh or Borough. and sometimes
(because it was dedicated unto Saint Peter) Peterburrough. Through the
liberality of diverse Benefactors it grew to that greatness of wealth and
possessions, as all the Country round about belonged unto it. In that state it
continued till that fatal day of all our Monasteries, at what time it pleased
King Henry the eight, to convert the same into a Cathedral Church and to
employ the revenues upon the maintenance of a Bishop, a Deane, 6.
Prebendaries, and other Ministers necessary for the celebration of Divine
service. Northamtonshire, and Kutlandshire were taken from Lincoln and
appointed the Dioces of this new crected See.

1. John Chambers.
John Chambers the last Abbot of Peterborough, was the first Bishop.

2. David Poole.
David Poole Doctor of Law, Deane of the Arches, and sometimes Chauncellor of
the Dioces of Lichfield.

3. Edmund Scambler.
EDmund Scambler was consecrate January 16. 1560. and the year 1584. removed
to Norwich. See Norwich.

4. Richard Howland.
RIchard Howland Doctor of Divinity and Master of Saint John's College in
Cambridge succeeded. He died in the month of June, 1600.

5. Thomas Dove.
THomas Dove Deane of Norwich, and Chaplain to her Majesty, was consecrate in
the end of the year. 1600.

This Bishopric is valued in the Exchecquer at 414, l. 19, s. 11, d.
The Bishops of Bristoll.
RObert, surnamed Fitz-Harding, because his father (that was son unto the
king of Denmark) was called Harding; this Robert (I say) being a citizen of
Bristoll, and sometimes Mayor there, founded the monastery of Saint Augustines
near unto the said city, and placed Channons in the same, the year 1148. being
the 14. year of king Stephen. This foundation was afterward confirmed and
augmented by king Henry the second, who so greatly favored the author of the
same, as he preferred him to the marriage of the daughter and sole heir of the
Lord Barkley. Of them are descended all the Lord Barkleys since that time. And
many of them, as challenging an interest in this foundation of their
ancestors, have chosen the church there for the place of their burial. In
that church it pleased king Henry the eight to erect an Episcopal See, and to
convert the revenues of the same unto the maintenance of a Bishop, a Deane,
six Prebendaries, and other officers. The Dioces of this Bishopric is the
city of Bristoll and the county of Dorset.

1. Paul Bush.
PAul Bush Provincial of the (...), was the first Bishop of Bristoll: a man
well learned both in divinity and physic, as his works yet extant may
testify, written in both kinds, some in prose, some in verse. In the
beginning of Queen Mary's reign he was deprived for being married, and died
unhappily a few days before her. He lies entoombed on the North side of the
quier over against the Bishops See in a seemly monument thus inscribed:
Hiciacet D. Paulus Bush primus huius ecclesiae Episcopus, qui obijt 11. die
October. an. dom. 1558. aetatis suae 68. cuius animae, etc.

2. John Holyman.
John Holyman was appointed Bishop of Bristoll by Queen Mary, his
predecessor yet living, and died about the same time that he did.

3. Richard Cheyny.
RIchard Chey (...) consecrate Bishop of Gloucester Apr. 19. 1562. was allowed
to how Bristoll in (...) with Gloucester, and so did for the space of 16.
years, viz. until his death, which happened the year 1578.

4. John Bullingham.
John Bullingham succeeded him in both these Bishoprics.

5. Richard Fletcher.
RIchard (...) doctor of divinity and Deane of (...) was consecrate Bishop of
Bristoll (Bishop Bullingham yet living) in December 1589. When as the Sea had
stood void (otherwise then as it was held by Commendam) 31. years. In the end
of the year 1593. he was translated to Worceter, and soon after to London.
See London.

Bristoll is valued at 383, l. 8, s. 4, d.
The Bishops of S. David's.
THe British histories do all report that in this Island at the first planting
of Christian religion here, there were established 28. Episcopal Sees (as in
Saint Aug. of Canterbury I have before declared.) Of these 28. three were
Archbishoprickes, London, York, and Carlegion, or Caerlheon upon Usk in
Monmouthshire. At Carleon (which was then a great and populous City) in the
time of King Arthur, sat (...) the son of Eurdila a gentlewoman of great
birth, but who was his father it was never known. He was a man of excellent
learning and singular integrity, in regard whereof, when first he had taken
great pains many years, as well in teaching and reading unto his scholars
(whereof he had a great number) as in preaching unto the people; he was
appointed first Bishop of Landaff; and having stayed there no long time, was
made Archbishop of all Wales, by Germanus and (...) two Bishops of France,
that were entreated by (...) Ambrosius king of Britain, to come over and
yield their best help for extinguishing the (...) heresy, that had then
taken great root in this Country. Other (...) being dead, he crowned Other
Pendragon, and afterward that great Arthar king of this Island, and waring old,
resigned his Bishopric unto David a disciple of his. He died and was buried
in the Isle of Enlhi, now called Bardsey (where he lead a solitary life many
years) November 14. ann 612. His bones were afterward removed to Landaff by
(...) Bishop there, May 7. 1120.

1. Saint David.
David before named, was uncle unto king Arthur, (...) son of Xantus a Prince
of Wales, begotten upon one Melearia a Nun. A man very learned, eloquent,
(...) incredible austerity, of life and conversation. He was also very tall of
stature, and of a comely personage. By his diligence, (...) was quite rooted
out, and many earnest professors of the same converted unto the truth. With the
consent of king Arthur, he removed his See from Caerlegion to (...), which
ever since of him is called of the Welsh Twy Dewi, and of us Saint David's. A
place neither pleasant, fertile, or (...): For (as Giraldus Cambr. reports of
it) it is neither furnished with wood, watered with rivers, beautified with
meadows, nor enriched with any kind of fruitful (...); affoording plentifully
nothing but rocks and barren hills vehement winds, and tempests, and lastly the
dangers and injuries whereunto solitary places near the Sea are subject by
Pirates and otherwise. It seems he (...) the frequency of people at (...), as
a means to withdraw him from contemplation, whereunto that he might be more
free, he made choice of this place for his See rather then for any fitness of
the same otherwise. He sat long, to wit, 65. years and died at last ann.
642. (having first built 12. Monasteries in the Country thereabout) being now
146. years of age, as Bale out of the British histories reports. He was
buried in his own Cathedral Church, and many hundredth years after Canonised
a Saint by Pope Calixtus the second. Many things are reported of him
incredible, and therefore not worth rehearsing, although I doubt not but God
affoorded many miracles to the first infancy of our Church, neither therefore
would I be so peremptory in derogating too much from such reports as we see no
reason why they may not be true. Of him they say, that his birth was foretold
(...). years before hand, that he was always attended by an Angel that kept
him company, that he bestowed upon the waters at (...) that extraordinary heat
they have, and (to repeat no more, for this is much more then any discrete man
will believe) that upon a time preaching to a great multitude of people, at
Breuy, the plain ground grew up in their sight, and increased under his feet
unto a pretty hillocke.

After Saint Dauidsate successively these, as Giraldus sets them down.
2. Cenanc. 3. Eliud or Teilau. 4. Ceneu. 5. Morwal. 6. Haerunen, or
Haernurier. 7. Elwaed. 8. Gurnuen. 9. Lendiuord. 10. Gorwyst. 11. Gorgan. 12.
Cledaue. 13. Anian. 14. Eluoed. 15. Ethelmen. 16. Elanc. 17. Malscoed. 18.
Sadermen. 19. Catellus. 20. Sulhaithnay. 21. Nonis. 22. Etwall. 23. Asser. 24.
Arthuael.
Acertaine antiquity belonging unto the Church of Saint David, reports a
Catalogue somewhat different from this of Giraldus, to wit, this that follows:
1. Saint David. 2. Eliud. 3. Theliaus. 4. Kenea. 5. Morwal. 6. Haernurier. 7.
Eluaeth. 8. Gurnel. 9. Lendywyth. 10. Gorwist. 11. Gorgan. 12. Cledaucke. 13.
Eynaen. 14. Eludgeth. 15. Eldunen. 16. Eluaeth. 17. Maelsehwyth. 18. Madenew.
19. Catulus. 20. Syluay. 21. Namys. 22. Sathueney. 23. Doythwall. 24. Asser.
25. Athuael. 26. Sampson.
Of these forenamed Bishops, until Sampson, there (...) no memorial, but
their names only. In his time, the Sea of Saint David had seven Bishops
Suffragans (...) unto it (as the foresaid antiquity declares) to wit, Exceter,
Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, Saint Assaph, and Fernes in Ireland. While he
was Bishop, it happened, the people of all that country were woonderfully
vexed with the Iaundise, so as, great numbers of them died daily of that
disease. By the (...) of his clergy and disciples, he was induced to fly the
country, and sailed into Britain, where the Bishopric of Dola being void,
he was straight way (...) unto the same. He had brought thither with him the
Archiepiscopall pall of Saint David, and used it during his life, as did also
his successors for many years, until they were (...) by the Pope, atthe suite
of the Archbishop of (...) to leave it, and make profession of obedience unto
him, (...) former times. By this occasion it fell out, that she successors of
Sampson in Saint David's, what for want of their pall, or for poverty, or
negligence, or by some other occasion, lost their title of Archbishop, and to
this day never recovered the same. Howbeit they used all authority belonging to
an Archbishop, by consecrating of other Bishops, etc. Neither ever did they
make profession of subjection unto Canterbury until the time of Henry the 1.
king of England, whereof we shall speak more hereafter.

After Sampson succeeded these:
26. Rucline. 27. Rodherch. 28. Elguin. 29. Lunuerd, or Lywarch. 30. Nergu, or
Vergw. 31. (...), or (...). 32. Eneuris. 33. Morgeneu. This man (says
Giraldus) of all the Bishops of S. David's, presumed first to eat flesh, which
none of them had ever done before him. For punishment of which heinous offense,
he supposes it fell out, that afterward he was murdered of Pirates; reporting
withal, how that after his death he appoored to a Bishop in Ireland, using
these words: Quia carnes comedi, caro factus sum: For eating of flesh, I am now
become nothing but flesh. 34. (...). 35. Ieuan. He continued Bishop one only
night. 36. Argustell. 37. Morgenueth. 38. Eruyn, or Hernnn, a godly and learned
man, died an. 1038. 39. Trameriu, or Carmerin. 40. Joseph. 41. Bleithud. He
died the (...) 1070. 42. Sulghein. He for sooke his Bishopric the year 1076.
43. Abraham. The year 1078. or therabout S. (...) was spoiled and destroyed by
strangers, and Abraham the Bishop what through (...) or (...). (...) (...) was
constrained to (...) his (...), (...) notwithstanding he (...) about the (...)
1085. and 1088. died being 80. years of age, the (...) and (...) man, and the
greatest Clerk in all (...); so says the (...) Chronicle of him. 44. After him
a son of his called Rythmarch succeeded (as the Chronicle of Wales
delivers) and died about the year 1100. the godliest, wisest, and greatest
Clerks that had been here in (...) many years before, saving his father,
(says the Chronicle) who had brought him up, and a great number of learned
disciples. 45. Wylfred. He died the year 1115. It seems the (...) Chronicle
calls him Griffri. 46. Bernard, a Norman, Chaplain unto king Henry the
first, and Chancellor to his Queen, was (...) by the Archbishop of
Canterbury July 12. 1115. not (...) by the Clergy of Wales, (as hitherto had
been (...)) but forced upon them by the king that had then newly conquered
Wales. This man being in great (...) with the king, and (...) upon the
goodness of his (...), beg in to take on him the (...) of (...), and caused
his (...) sometimes in Wales to be (...) before him. After long (...) and much
money spent in this cause (...) him and the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bernard
had prevailed at the (...) (as (...). (...)) had not two (...) witnesses
deposed a flat (...) in the (...) of the Pope. Giraldus aforesaid doubts not
confidently to (...) that the power and wealth of the Archbishops of Canterbury
has ouerborne the poor Bishops of Saint David's in this matter without all
right. This Bishop (says Giraldus) was a man in some other respects praise
worthy, but unreasonable proud and ambitious, as most of the Englishmen were
that in those times were thrust into Welsh Bishoprics. Again he was a very
evil husband unto his Church, (...) diverse lands, and letting others for the
tenth penny of that his predecessors made of them, so thinking to make a way by
gratifying of Courtiers, unto some better Bishopric in England. He was
deceived of his expectation. Having been Bishop of Saint David's about the
space of 33. years he died ann. 1148. 46. David Fitzgerald, Archdeacon of
Cardigan succeeded. He died the year 1176. 47. Peter, or Piers, (so the Welsh
Chronicle calls him) a Benedictine monk, Prior of Wenlock, was consecrated
the same year. His Cathedral Church dedicated unto Saint Andrew and Saint
David, had been often destroyed in former times by Danes and other pirates, and
in his time was almost quite (...); He bestowed much in reedifying of the same,
and may in sonie sort be said to have built the church which now stands. 48.
(...), Prior of Lanthony, aregular Chanon, was preserred to this See by the
means of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury. 49. (...) Giraldus, was borne in
Pembrooke shire, near Tynby, of very noble parentage, being near of kin
unto the Princes of Wales; a very comely and personable man of body, and for
his mind, witty, discrete, studious, virtuous and well given. In his youth he
travailed over most part of Christendom. At Paris he read publicly in the
English College with great commendation. Returning home, he grew into great
estimation with king Henry the 2. and became Secretary unto his son John,
with whom he went into Ireland, and being there, writ a description of the
country, as he did also of England and Wales. Some affir me he was Archdeacon
of Landaff; of Brecknock and Saint David's he was for certain. Being elect unto
this See an. 1199. he made challenge unto the title of an Archbishop at Rome,
which controversy how it was debated and ended, ye may read at large in R.
Houeden, his report of the year aforesaid. He was once accused oftreason, but
happily acquitted, lived till he was 70. years of age and upward, and dying,
was buried in his own church. He writ many books, the Catalogue whereof ye
may find in Bale. 50. (...), or Edward, was consecrate 1215. 51. Alselmus. 52.
Thomas, Archdeacon of Lincoln, a Welchman, and a great (...), forsaking other
good preferments, accepted of this Bishoprics (being a miserable poor thing
at that (...)) the year 1247. 53. Richard Carren. 54. Thomas Beck. He founded
two colleges, one at (...), and another at Llan dewy breuy. 55. David Martyn.
56. Henry Gower. He built the Bishops palace at Saint David's, and died the
year 1347. 57. John Theresby, or Thorsby, translated to (...) 1349. and thence
to York, 1352. 58. Reginald Brian, translated likewise to Worceter, 1352. 59.
Thomas Fastocke, died the year 1361. 60. Adam Houghton, founded a college
near to the Cathedral church of S. David. He was Chancellor of England for
a time, about the year 1376. 61. John Gilbert, Bishop of Bangor, was
translated (...) Hereford 1376. and thence hither 1389. See Hereford. 62. Guido
de Mona, died the year 1407. who while (...) lived (says Walsingham) was a
cause of much mischief. 63. Henry (...), was consecrated at Siena by the Popes
own hands, June 12. 1409. sat 5 years and was translated to Canterbury, See
Canterbury. 64. John Keterich, or Catarick, sometimes Archdeacon of Surrey, was
translated hence to Couentry (...) the year 1415. and after to Oxceter. 65.
Stephen Patrington, a Iacobine Friar as one (...), or rather a Carmelite as an
other says, being at the Counsel of Constance, was by the Pope translated to
Chichester in December, 1417. (as the records of Saint David's (...) affirm.)
Howbeit, other say (and I take it to be true) that he refused to accept of the
Popes gift. 66. Benet Nicols, Bishop of Bangor succeeded him. 67. Thomas
Rodburne, a man of great learning, was brought up in Oxford, and became first
(...) of (...), then Bishop of Saint David's. He write diverse (...), amongst the
rest an history or Chronicle. The year 1434. the king (...) to translate him
to Ely, but could not effect it. 67. William Lynwood, Doctor of Law was first
Chauncellor to the Archbishop of Canterbury then keeper of the privy seal,
having been first employed in Embassages to the kings of Spain, Portugal,
and other Princes. He writ much. Amongst other his works, he is famous for
putting in order such Provincial constitutions as had been made by the
Archbishops of Canterbury from the time of Stephen Langton unto Henry (...). He
flourished about the year 1440. but just what time he became Bishop, or when he
died I can not tell. He lies buried at Saint Stephens in Westminster. 68. John
Longton died within 15. days after his consecration. 69. John de le Beer. 70.
Robert Tully a monk of Gloucester. This man I take to be him, that by the name
of Robert (...) is said to have been translated to Chichester the year 1508.
71. Richard Martyn. 72. Thomas Langton. 73. Hugh Pauy. He impropred to the
Uicars Chorall of Saint David's, the Church of Llan Saint Fred. 74. John Morgan
died in the Priory of Caermerthin, and was buried in his own Church. 75. (...)
Vaughan built a new Chapel in his church of Saint David. 76. Richard Rawlyns.
77. William Barlowe, translated to Wells (having safe here 10. years) about
the year 1548. and after to Chichester. See Wells. 78. Robert Farrar, ended
his life in the fire for profession of his faith, the history whereof, and of
his whole life are to be read in Master Fox. 79. Henry Morgan died December
23. 1559. 80. Thomas Young, staying here but a very short time, was translated
to York February 25. 1561. See York. 81. Richard Dauyes Bishop of Saint
Assaph. 82. Marmaduke Middleton Bishop of Waterford in Ireland. 83. Anthony
Rudde Doctor of Divinity, borne in Yorkshire, brought up in Cambridge, having
been for the space of 9. years Deane of Gloucester, was consecrate June 9.
(...).
The Bishopric of Saint David's is valued in the (...) at 426, l. 22, d. ob.
and in the (...) books at 1500. ducates.
The Bishops of Landaff.
THe Cathedral church of Landaff is reported to have been first built in the
time of king (...), about the year of Christ 180. But I perceive not that any
Bishop sat there before (...) yt by (...) Bishop of Altisiodore, and Lupus of
Trecasia (two Bishops of France) was removed to the Archbishopric of
Caerleon. Of yt occasion of their double journey into these parts for they were
twice here) and of (...), whom former ages have made a Saint, see more in the
beginning of Saint David's. So we must account Saint (...) the first Bishop of
Landaff; not that I deny any other to have sat there before him, but because
he is the first whose name is remembered: And it is probable he had no
predecessors, because the memory of all his successors is so carefully
preserved. 2. Saint (...), alias (...), the second Bishop, was very nobly
borne, and brought up under Dubritius his predecessor, and (...), together with
Saint David. I find delivered, that soon after his coming to this
Bishopric, he was constrained by a strange disease reigning in those parts to
fly into France, whence after a season, he returned again, bringing home
with him in three ships, his countrymen that had fled with him upon the same
occasion. He was afterward slain in the church of Llan Delio Fechan by a
certain noble man called (...) His cathedral church (where it seems he was
buried) has ever since borne his name. Unto it in the time of this man and his
successors, many kings of England and princes of Wales have given much land,
and granted diverse notable privilege. Amongst which these are accounted the
chiefest benefactors.

King Iddon the son of Inyr gwent, gave Lanarth with all the lands there,
that belonged heretofore to Saint Dubritius. He gave also Llanteilian porth
halawg, with the territory unto the same belonging.

Maredudd yt son of Rein K. of west Wales gave 3. (...). Aircol Lawhir the
son of Tryfan K. of west Wales gave diverse lands. Cadwgawn, a king was also a
great benefactour, as were all these that follow, Meuric king of Morganwg.
Tewdric, or Theodorike, a king. Morgant, king of Morganwg. Augustus, king of
Brecheiniawc. Iddug, the son of (...), a king. Morgant, king of Glewissig.
Ithael, a king. King's of Erging.
Gwrwodius Cinuin Gwrgant.
Noble men of Wales called in evidences by the name of kings.
Clodri, Lluddgwallawn, Clydiawe, Nogwy, Hywell, Gruffydd ap Owen,
Rys, king of Glewissig. kings of Gwent.
Arthmael, Rhrodri,
kings of Morgannwc.
Rydderch, Iestinap Gwrgant, Caradock,
Gruffydd ap Llewelin king of all Wales.
3. Oudoceus, or Odoceus succeeded Saint Telian. He was also very nobly borne,
and after his death reputed a Saint as was also his predecessor. He died July
2. the year I find not. 4. Vbelwinus alias Vbelwin. 5. (...). 6. Elgistil. 7.
Lunapeius. 8. Gomergwinus, alias Gomergius. 9. Argwistil. 10. Goruanus, alias
Guruan. 11. Gwydlonius, alias Gwodloiw. 12. Edilbinus, alias Edilbin. 13.
Grecielus. 14. Berthgwynus. 15. Trichanus, alias Trycan. 16. Eluogus. 17.
Cadgwaret. 18. (...). 19. (...). 20. Pater. 21. Gulfridus, alias (...). 22.
Nuth. Nudd. 23. (...), alias (...). He died an. 927. 24. Libiauth. Libiauch. He
died an. 929. 25. Gogwanus was consecrate by (...) Archbishop of Canterbury
982. So it seems this See was long void. 26. (...), (...). 27. (...), or
(...), chosen by the kings clergy and people of the country, was (...) by
(...) Archbishop of Canterbury 993 he died an. 1022. 28. (...), was consecrate
by (...) Archbishop of Canterbury October. 1. 1022. He died at Rome the year
1046. 29. Herewald, was consecrate at London by Stigand the Archbishop of
Canterbury in Whitson week 1056. He died March 6. 1103. being 100. years of
age, and having continued in this Bishopric 48. years. 30. (...) Archdeacon
of Landaff, was consecrate together with diverse other Bishops August 10. 1108.
being then but 32. yeeree of age. At his first coming he found his Bishopric
in very poor and miserable estate. The church ruinated even almost to the
ground in the time of the late wars under (...) Conqueror; the revenues of
themselves small, and yet so ill husbanded by the negligence of his
predecessors, as they could now scarcely maintain two chanons beside the
Bishop, whereas there were wont to be 24. Complaining hereof to the Pope,
Calixtus the second, at what time he was at the counsel of Rhemes, viz. the
year 1119. he affoorded him his letters to the king, as also to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and to the clergy and gentlemen of his own Dioces, earnestly
praying them to yield him their best (...) for the reformation of his church
so (...). The Archbishop the rather to draw on the liberality of men in
contributing toward the new building of the church, took upon him to release
the fourth part of all penance (...) unto such as should bestow any thing
toward the (...). By this means (no doubt) having gathered great (...) of
money, he began the building of that church which now stands April 14. 1120.
and having finished it, built a new also all the housing belonging to it. Then
next endeavoring to recover the lands lost or alienated from his See, he
challenged diverse parcels withheld by Barnard bishop of Saint (...), and Richard
Bishop of Hereford, and moreover complained that they had usurped upon the
jurisdiction of these places, Gwhyr, Cedwely, Cantref Bychan, Ystrad Yw, and
(...). Upon depositio^ of 6. witnesses, that al these were of yt Dioces of
Landaff, they were so adjudged by the Popes (...) sentence, who also writ unto
the king and Archbishop (...) restore that right unto the Bishop of Landaff,
and to (...) to yield obedience to him and his successors, as their Diocesan.
Howbeit (how it comes to pass I know not) those places are now and long have
been esteemed, part of the Dioces of Saint David's, and part of Hereford, and
none of them of Landaff. This Bishop died beyond the (...) traveling between
this and Rome an. 1133. 31. (...) that succeeded, had a daughter, married to
Iorwerth ap Owen ap Caradocke, Lord of Caerlheon (...), a great and mighty man
in those parts. He died (...) 1141. 32. (...) died 1153. 33. Nicolas ap (...)
died 1183. 34. William de (...). 35. Henry, Prior of (...). was the founder of
14. (...) in the Church of Landaff. He died 1218. 36. William, Pryor of (...)
died January 28. an. 1229. 37. Elis de Radnor, died May 6. 1240. 38. William de
Burgo, chaplain unto king Henry the 3. was consecrate the year 1244. and died
June 11. (...). having lived blind 7. years before his death. 39 John (...)
Ware Abbot of Margan died about the end of June 1253. 40. (...) de (...) died
January 9. 1265. 41. (...) de (...) died in the end of March 1287. and lies
(...) under a Marble engraven in the East end of the Church of Landaff toward
the North Wall. 42. (...) de (...) Doctor of Divinity was consecrate February
10. 1296. at Canterbury, and died April 8. 1323. He lies in the midst of the
East end of the Church, (elsewhere commonly called the Lady Chapel) under a
flat Marble, having a French inscription now somewhat defaced. 43. John de
(...) a Friar Preacher, was consecrate at Rome, and came to his Dioces of
Landaff upon the (...) of Trinity Sunday 1223. He died at (...) January 2.
1346. and was buried at (...). 44. John Paschall Doctor of Divinity, a
Carmelite of Ipswich, was a gentleman borne in (...), of a family yet remaining
there, and brought up in the Uniuersity of Cambridge; By William (...) Bishop
of Norwich was made a Titulary Bishop and his Suffragan, by the name of (...).
From that imaginary See he was translated by the Pope to Landaff ann. 1347.
died 1361. and was buried at Landaff. He was a man of great learning (for those
times) and left diverse monuments thereof in writing behind him. 45. (...) a
Friar Minor. 46. Thomas (...) a Friar Preacher, and Doctor of Divinity, was
translated to Chichester. 47. William de (...) made Bishop of Bethlehem by the
Pope, was translated first to Landaff and after (viz. the year 1389.) to
Rochester. See more of him there. 48. (...) de (...), was a Doctor of Divinity,
and Monk of Bury where being known for a man of a very pragmaticall and (...)
humor; that he might not trouble them at home, the Covent thought good to
maintain him at Rome for the dispatch of their ordinary businesses there,
taking first a (...) of him, never to seek any office or (...) of (...) house
without (...) priuity and direction. This oath notwithstanding, when shortly
after it fell out that the Abbot died, he found means that the Pope should by
his omnipotent bulls entitle him to that Abbotship, whereunto the Covent (with
the kings good (...)) had now already elected another man far more meet (...)
John (...). For this bad kind of dealing, as also because those prouisory
bulls had heretofore been forbidden by Act (...) Parliament, he was committed
to the Tower, and there (...) prisoner a long time. Neither durst the Pope
yield him any assistance for the justifying of his own gift, because there
was then an Antipope, whom, if the Clergy of England should have been induced
to follow (as by the kings (...) easily they might) it must needs have been
to his great prejudice and hinderance. At the first therefore, the Pope was
determined to have made him a Bishop in Ireland, and whether he did or no I
well know not: But this is certain that the year 1389. Thomas Brinton Bishop
of Rochester (...), the Pope, with the kings good liking, translated the Bishop
of Landaffe to Rochester, and gave Landaff to this Brumfield. 49. Tydemannus
Abbot of Beaulien succeeded Brumfield and (if I mistake not) was that
Tydemannus de (...) that ann. 1395. became Bishop of Worceter. 50. Andrew
Barret, Doctor of Law. 51. John Burghyll a Friar preacher being Bishop (...)
Landaff and Confessor unto the king, was translated unto Lichfield in September
1398. 52. Thomas Peuerell a Carmelite and Doctor of Divinity, was first Bishop
of Ossery in Ireland, (...) thence to Landaff 1399. and thence to Worceter
1407. See Worceter. 53. John la Zouche, a Friar minor, and doctor of Divinity.
It should seem that this man built either a (...) part, or else happily all of
the house at Mathern near Chepstow, the only house that is now left the
Bishop to put his head in. His arms fixed in diverse places of the walls and
windows, to my judgment import so much. 54. John Wellys was likewise a
Minorite, and doctor of Divinity. 55. Nicolas Ashby, Prior of Westminster. 56.
John Hunden, a Minorite, doctor of Divinity, and Prior of kings Langley. 57.
John Marshall, doctor of Divinity, sometime fellow of Merton college in
Oxford, was consecrated 1479. and was (I take it) translated to London the
(...) 1489. 58. John Ingleby, sometime Prior of Sheene, a Carthusian. 59. John
Smyth, doctor of Divinity, died October 16. 1511. and was buried at Christ
church in London, in the chapel of all Saints, on the north side of the
altar. 60. Miles (...), sometimes (...) to the Abbey of Abingdon, and
afterward Abbot of Eynesham. 61. George de Attigua, a Spaniard, a Friar
preacher, and doctor of Divinity, was consecrated March 8. 1516. 62. Robert
Holgate, doctor of Divinity, was consecrated March 25. 1537. and ann. 1544.
was translated to York. See York. 63. Anthony Kitchen, alias Dunstan, doctor
of Divinity, and sometimes Abbot of Eynesham, was consecrated May 3. 1545. and
enduring all the tempestuous changes that happened in the mean time, continued
till the 5. year of her Majesty that now reigns, viz. the year (...). and
then died, having first so impouerished the Bishopric by unreasonable
demises, of whatsoever was demisable, as there was no great cause he should be
so loath to leave it. 64. (...) Jones, Bacheler of Law was consecrated May 5.
1556. 65. William Blethyn, Batcheler of Law, was consecrate April 17. 1575.
66. Geruale Babington Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate Aug. 29. 1591. in
February 1594. translated to Exceter, and afterward to Worceter. 67. William
Morgan, Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate July 20. 1595. and translated to
Saint Assaph September 16. 1601.
This Bishopric is valued in the Exchecquer at 154, l. 14, s. 1, d. and paid
to the Pope for first fruits 700. ducats.
For want of some instructions, I can not as yet set down a perfect Catalogue
of the Bishops of Bangor and Saint Assaph. And therefore leaving them till some
other occasion, I must now pass unto the Province of York, which contains
(besides York the Metropolitan Church) three other Sees, Durham, Carliol, and
Chester.

The Archbishops of York.
1. Paulinus.
NOt to say any thing of the manifold (...) Bishop of Rome. At the request of
Lucius then K. of Britain, sent (...), Faganus and other learned Preachers to
sow the seed of the Gospel here, about the year of our Lord 180. And it
should seem (which our histories also witness.) That God so far forth
blessed (...) labors, That they not only converted many unto the faith of
Christ themselves, but also left a posterity of other, which with like
painfulnesse continued the same doctrine in this Island, till by diverse
tyrants, they were in diverse places oppressed and consumed. Notwithstanding,
whether it were that the Church by them planted had many notable wanes, and
intermissions, or rather eclipses, in which the light of heavenly doctrine was
altogether darkened by great persecution, and so no Ecclesiastical history
preserved; or whether the same being preserved, was destroyed by persecutors,
scarcely any mention remains of any of their Bishops. (...) of London, there
are remembered 15. Archbishops, and of York (...). The first of these, and the
first Archbishop that ever York had, was one named (...), appointed by the
foresaid king Lucius. Again I find it reported, that king (...) made one (...)
Archbishop there: And lastly that Tadiacus was the last Archbishop before the
coming of the Saxons. When they had gotten possession of this Realm, the
Britons (that were the old inhabitants) being drouen into a corner thereof
(Wales and Cornwall) the rest of England was without any knowledge, or (...)
of the Gospel, until the coming of Saint Augustine. And after him a great
while the North parts of this Realm remained in the darkness of their wonted
ignorance, till God tooking upon them with the eye of his mercy, gave this
occasion of their conversion. Edwyn king of (...), was very desirous to marry
Edilburge the sister of (...) king of Kent. She being not only a Christian,
but a (...) virtuous gentlewoman; utterly refused to match with him being a
Pagan, but signified, that upon condition he (...) promise to become a
Christian, she would accept him for her husband. He answered, he could be very
well content (...) do nothing in prejudice of her faith; and to suffer that
not (...) her (...), but her servants and train should practice what (...)
they would: And (...) withal, that if upon consideration and conference with
wise men, Christian Religion should seem more holy and woorthier of God then
his (...), he would not refuse to embrace the same. Upon these (...), Edilburg
was sent unto him to be his Queen. And least by keeping company with heathen
people, she and those that went with her, might in time be (...) with their
Paganism, It was thought convenient to send some (...) and godly man with her,
that might not only instruct (...) admonish them daily, but also minister the
Sacraments unto them, yea and preach the Gospel unto (...). (...) a (...) man
was made choice of, whom they thought good to consecrate Archbishop of York,
which was done by (...) Archbishop of Canterbury the 21. day of July, in the
year of our Lord 625. or as some account, 622. He mindful (...) his vocation,
as soon as he came into the Country, labored diligently to win souls unto
Christ, but without any profit at all a great while: Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur (...).

So long as the King remained obstinate, little good was to be done with the
rest of the people. Him therefore he often exhorted to embrace Christ, and
prevailed at last so far with him, as he promised to do it, if it might please
God to send him victory against Guichelm King of the West Saxons, that had
conspired his death. This victory being (...) according to his desire. He yet
kept not promise, but delayed the matter under pretense of persuading his
Nobles first to be content therewith; And longer still he would have delayed
it, had not God by Paulinus put him in mind of a vision, he had seen long
since (as Beda reports) and it is this. (...) that reigned over the
Northumbers next before him, sought nothing more then the death of this Edwyn,
to whom indeed the Crown of right appertayned. He therefore flying from this
enemy, ranged up and down in many Countries, and that in the most secret
manner he might, till at last he came unto Redwald King of the East Angles,
humbly (...) him that he would save his life by shielding him from (...) his
cruel enemy. The king bid him welcome, and promised to fulfill his request.
Notwithstanding which his promise being offered a great sum of money by
Edilfrid to betray him, and threatened with war, if he condiscended not unto
him; he yielded at last, and determined to gratify him therein, though
contrary to his word and faith given. This resolution of the kings being
understood bya companion of Edwins, he called him out of his bed late in the
night, told him how the world went, and bid him thift for himself; whereunto
he answered courageously, that for his part he would not first break with the
king: if the king esteemed so little of his honor, as to sell it for money,
better it was for him to die by the appointment of him that he knew loved him
(though he loved money better) then by the appointment of his deadly enemy,
whom by flying he well saw he could no longer avoid. Hereupon his companion
departed from him leaving him very pensive, sitting without door upon a stone.
Soon after he was gone, Edwyn espied one coming toward him that he knew not,
who demanding of him why he sat there at that time of the night, other men
being a sleep? What is that unto you says Edwyn whether I spend the night
within door or without? Hereunto the other answered, think not my friend that
I am ignorant of thy sadness, and the cause of thy present grief, I know them
very well: But tell me (quoth he) what reward would thou give unto him that
should rid thee of all this care and trouble, and persuade Redwald neither to
(...) thee (...), nor to (...) do it. When he promised to do any thing in the
(...) that lay in his power to perform, the other (...); what (...) he (...)
also promise thee the kingdom (...) unto (...), and the (...) of thine (...)
that (...); (...) and (...) that thou shall be the mightiest king, not only of
all thy (...), but (...) all the Saxons that ever were in this I (...) Hereunto
he answered in effect as before, he would (...) his best to requite so great a
benefit. Why then (quoth the other, and withal laid his hand upon (...) head)
when all these things shall come to pass, and that thou shall be (...) a more
excellent way, to direct the course and manner of thy life, then ever was
imparted unto any of thy predecessors: Remember by this token (of laying my
hand on thy head) to follow without delay the directions that shall be given
(...). This having said, he vanished away to the great (...) and astonishment
of Edwyn who had not sat there long but his companion before mentioned, came
(...) forth (...) him with great joy, and told him that Redwald by the
persuasion of his Queen had altered his determination, and was resolved
(whatsoever came of it) to stand to his word, and to be true unto him. To make
short, God so (...) his heart that he was not only content to (...) Edwyn (...)
heretofore; but also gathered suddenly a great army, and (...) in person
against Edilfrid, he over came and (...) him in the (...): whereby it came to
pass, that Edwyn with one consent of all his subjects was made king. Now this
vision (says (...)) God revealed unto (...) the Archbishop, who coming unto
the king Edwyn at a time when he chanced to sit alone, deliberating with
himself what religion he were best to follow; he stepped unto him, and laying
his right hand upon his head, asked him if he knew that token: Presently the
king forgetting all Princely majesty, (...) down trembling at poor (...)
(...), and said he (...) it very well, in so much as, hereafter he would follow
his direction (for matters of Religion) in all things. The king being thus
woonne unto Christ, and having received his badge and cognizance by Baptism;
the rest of the nobility first, and then the (...) gave diligent ear unto the
Bishops preaching, and were converted daily in great numbers. It is said that
for 36. days together he never rested one moment, but either instructed the
people by preaching that flocked continually about him, or else imparted Christ
unto them in Baptism, which he ministered in the open fields and rivers,
churches being not yet built. King Edwyn against the time of his own Baptism,
had caused a little church to be erected of boords in the city of York, and
dedicated the same to Saint Peter. Afterward he laid the foundation of a very
stately building round about the wooden church, which (he being taken away by
untimely death) his successor (...) finished. Sedwall king of Wales, and (...)
of Mercia or MidEngland came against this good king, and (God in his secret
judgment permitting the same) overthrew him in the field and slew him. The
country by reason hereof being full of trouble, Paulinus (that saw he might
not with safety abide any longer there) six years after his coming thither,
returned by water into Kent again, and there was entreated to take on him the
government of the Sea of Rochester then void. He sat 13. years, and October
10. 644. was called away to receive the glorious reward of his blessed labors,
19. years, two months and 21. days after his first consecration. He was a
man of a tall stature (as Beda describes him) a little stooping, black
haired, lean faced, his nose thin and hooked, of a countenance both terrible
and very reverend. He was buried after his death in his Cathedral Church of
Rochester.

2. Cedda.
AFter the departure of Paulinus, the Church of York Pagans. (...), (...)
Colonanus and Tuda, succeeding one another in the Bishopric of Lindisfarne,
governed all Northumberland as well as they could during the time of this
troublesome vacacie. At last Egfrid king of Northumberland appointed one
Wilfrid unto the Sea of York, sending him to Agelbert Bishop of Paris
(sometime of Winchester) to (...) of him; where Wilfrid staying very long, and
not giving any hope of speedy return, the same (...). (...) (...) (a very holy
man) without all right unto the same to thrust (...) into the place due to
Wilfrid. Pauing carefully attended that charge not pertaining to him the space
of three years, he was admonished by Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury (...)
he was not rightly and lawfully called to that See, (...) he presently forsook
it, and was made by means of the same Theodorus Bishop of Lichfield.

3. Wilfridus.
THis Wilfrid was borne in the North (...) of Cedda, that of a Councellor and
(...) to the king, had (...) a Monk at Lindisfarne. By him he was (...), being
very sharp witted, profited wonderfully under him. At that time there was a
great contention in the Church about the observation of Easter; whereof this
youth being desirous to be fully informed, determined to go to Rome and study
there a while. By means of Eanfled the Queen (...) and Ercombert king of
kent, he was furnished for this voyage, and sent along with one or two other.
In the way he fell acquainted with (...) Archbishop of Lions, who made very
much of him, and stayed him with him a time, to the great increase of his
knowledge. Continuing then no long time at Rome, in his return homeward, he
was ordered by the Archbishop of Lions aforesaid, who also adopted him to be
his son. He meant not to have returned into his own Country, but that this
Archbishop was taken from him being (...) by (...) the Queen that had cruelly
stain 9. other Bishops before. Presently upon his return home, king Egfrid
gave him a house and maintenance, and many uoblemen admiting much his learning
and eloquence, bestowed diverse things upon him. At last with great applause and
liking of all men, he was chosen bishop, and sent into France, where he was
consecrate by 12. other Bishops: for he refused to take consecration at the
hands of the Scottish bishops that were counsed schisinatiques in not agreeing
with the Church of Rome concerning the time and observation of Easter. Beyond
the Seas he stayed somewhat longer then he needed, being delighted with the
company of many learned men, of that country: and when he would have returned,
by tempest of weather he was driven into far countries, where he wandered a long
time. Coming home and finding another man in his place, he lived a while a
private life. In which mean space he was often invited by (...) king of
Merce-land unto the Bishopric of Lichfield. In the end Cedda being removed
(as before is said) he settled himself at Yarke, and hosced Cedda to Lichfield.
Then, the first thing he went about was to finish his cathedral church left
imperfect by (...), and since his departure very much decayed (for the roof
was fallen, and the walls in many places ruinous) this his church I say he
repaired, and finished, mending the walls, covering it with lead, glasing the
windows and moreover beautified the same with many goodly ornaments. He was so
greatly beloved of all men for his gentleness (...) and liberality, as many
men living, but more at their death (especially clergy men) would put their
goods and children into his hands, the one assuring themselves of a (...)
keeper, the other of a discreet and conscionable (...). Hereby it came to
pass that in short time he became exceeding rich, having many seruitors to
attend upon him, and great store of plate, and other household (...) very
sumptuous. The report whereof coming to the ears of Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury: it put him in mind of the greatness of that dioces and the ability
of the country to maintain more Bishops. Wherefore he went about to appoint
two or three (...) Wilfrid obstinately (...), and the other ceased not to
(...) very earnestly, he appealed unto the Pope, and went unto him in person.
Some report (I think untruly) that he went (...) to persuade the Queen to
forsake her husband, and (...) take her self to a monastery, and that the king
being greatly displeased herewith, first sought to diminish his authority by
making more Bishops, and afterward made diners (...) unto the Pope against him,
seeking to have him (...). Whosoever caused it, certain it is, that to the
(...) he travailed. In passing of the sea, he was driven by a (...) wind into
Frizia, and (...) there all winter preaching the gospel (never hard of in that
country before) unto the king and people, whom before his Departure he
converted unto Christ. The Pope was then at the Counsel of (...), where, both
by him and his counsel it was ordered, that the (...) of the (...) of York
should not be altered without (...) own consent. But Egfride the king so (...)
Theodores devise, as Wilfride at his return (...), he must either yield unto
it or forsake the country. Herein me thinks he was to blame: Not enduring to
take a repulse in a matter he had travailed so much in; He rather chose to
(...) Bishopric, country and all, and to live in poverty and (...). He went
into Sussex, and there (...) to (...) the people of that country unto the (...)
of Christ, became their first Bishop, and laid the foundations of a Cathedral
church, the Sea being afterward removed to Chichester. See (...) hereof in
Chichester. After ten years banishment, king Egfrid dying, Alfrid that
succeeded him sent for Wilfride and desired him to return to his See of York:
which he did. But after five years, the king fell out with him, and (...) him
to Rome again. There purging himself of all the accusations laid against him
by the king, he obtained the (...) letters in favor of him, by means whereof,
and (...) of many friends, with much a do, at last he was restored (...) more
unto his first charge, in which after this his last (...), he lived peaceably
the space of sower years, and (...) then being seventy six years of age,
October the (...) the year 711. forty five years after his first
consecration. He was buried in the monastery of Rippon which himself built:
many other things are at large reported of him by Beda lib. 5. cap. 20. Amongst
the rest his Epitaphe there set down I thought good to insert.

Wilfridus (...) magnus requiescit corpore praesul,
Hane domino qui aulam ductus pietatis amore
Fecit, and eximio (...) nomine Petri,
Cui claues coeli Christus dedit arbiter orbis,
Atque auro (...) ostro.
Quinetiam sublime crucis radiante metallo
Hic posuit trophaeum, nee non quatuor auro
Scribi Euangelij praecepit in ordine libros,
Ac thecam e rutilo his condignam condidit auro.
Paschalis qui etiam solemnia tempora (...)
Catholiciad iustum correxit (...),
Quem statuere patres, dubioque errore remoto,
Certa suae genti ostendit modermina ritus;
Inque locis (...) monachorum examina crebra
Colligit, ac monitis cauit quae regula patrum
Sedulus instituit, multisque domique forisque,
Iactatus nimium per tempora longa periclis,
(...) ternos postquam egit episcopos annos,
Transijt and gaudens caelestia regna petiuit,
Dona Jesus Grex vt pastoris call sequatur.
See more of this Wilfride in Theodore of Canterbury.

4. Bosa.
AFter the first departure of Wilfrid from York, Theodore proceeding in his
intended platform, divided his Dioces into 4. placing one Eata at Hagustald
whom afterward he removed to Lindissarne (another of his new erections)
appointing Tumbert to succeed him, in the Province of the Pictes Trumwyn, and
lastly in the ancient See of York Bosa. At the return of Wilfrid, (...) was
feign to give place, as also John that had succeeded Eata (dead in the mean
time.) Wilfrid being expelled the second time, they were both restored.) Before
then the second restitution of Wilfrid, Bosa died, and John succeeded him. This
John, Wilfrid would not displace (...). (...) (...) the report of a very (...)
man. He (...) ten (...) his (...), and dying, was the first Archbishop that was
buried in (...).

5. John.
THis John called afterward Saint John of Beuerley, Theodore the first
Archbishop of Canterbury, who also preferred him to the Bishopric of (...).
He always had the reputation of a wonderful holy man, and Beda reports many
miracles done by him, lib. 5. cap. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6. as the curing of diverse
folks desperately sick, by prayer; opening the mouth of a dumb man, etc.
which things either they were true, or Beda was much to blame: For he not only
lived in his time and Dioces, But knew him and received the order of priesthood
at his hand. Waxing very old, and having been a Bishop now 33. years, 8.
months and 13. days, with the consent of his Clergy, he resigned and
procured another Wilfred his Chaplain to be consecrate in his room. After
which he lived privately at Beuerley, in the College there built and founded
by himself for Priests, and dying the seventh day of May, the year 721. was
buried in the Porch of the Church belonging to that College. In a (...) held
at London the year, 1416. the foresaid day of his death was appointed to be
kept holy day yearly in memorial of him. Amongst many privileges granted by
diverse kings unto the College of Beuerly for his sake, it is remembered that
King Athelstan made it a Sanctuary, and placed a certain chair of stone in
the church there, upon which he caused this inscription to be engraven, Haec
sedea lapidea dicitur Freedstoole 1. (...) Cathedra, ad quam reus (...),
omnimodam habet (...). This chair of stone is called Freedstoole, that is the
stool of feeedome, unto which who so comes, has all manner of security.

6. Wilfridus. 2.
THe forefaid Wilfride sat 11. years, and died the year, 731:

7. Egbert.
AFter him suceeded Egbert the brother of king Eadbert, Flaccus Albinus or
Alcuinus (sometime keeper of the same, but then schoolmaster unto Charles the
great, in an Epistle to the Church of England in these words. Date (...)
eruditionis (...) quales in patria mea Anglia per industriam magistrimei
Egberti habui, and (...) vobis aliquos expueris nostris vt excipiant inde
necessaria and reuehant in (...) flores Britanniae, and non sit tantum in
Eboraco hortus conclusus, sed etiam in Turome emissiones Paradisi, etc. Neither
was this man only a fauorer of learning in other, but himself also was very
learned, and writ many things, a Catalogue whereof you may see in Bale. He was
buried at York by his brother the King in the Church Porch.

8. Coena alias Albertus.
ALbert called by Florentius Coena sat after Egbertus 7. years, and died at
Chester.

9. Eanbaldus.
COEna yet living (whether he resigned or took him to him for a Coadiutor, it
appears not) Eanbald, being, an old man, was consecrate Archbishop, and lived
af ter his consecration 17. years. He was buried in his own Church.

10. Eanbaldus. 2.
ANother Eanbaldus (...), a Priest of the Church of York. In the year 798. he
called a Synod or (...) of his (...) in which he caused diverse things (...) to
be reformed. What time he died or how long he sat, I find not.

11. Wulsius.
A Little time Wulsius enjoyed his honor, and died the year 831.

12. Wimundus.
WImundus succeeded Wulsius, and sat 17. years. He Matthew Westminster
reports) the year 854.

13. Wilferus.
AFter him Wilferus was Archbishop a long time, 46. Egbert their king, who went
unto Burrhede king of Mercia, and of him were honorably entertained, till that
the year following, king Egbert died, and by the help of king Ricsinus his
successor, Wulferus was called home again. He deceased about the year of our
Lord 900. or as Matthew Westminster has it (whose computation I (...) very
uncertain) 895. In his time the Danes made such havoc in the North country,
as a great while after the Archbishopricke was little worth, and was feign to
be mended often times with the Commendam of Worcester.

14. Ethelbalde.
Then followed these: Ethelbald.

15. Redwarde.
And after him Redward, of whom nothing is recorded.

16. Wulstanus.
BY the favor of the king Athelstan, Wulstanus was then preferred to this See:
In whose time the same king gave unto the Church of York Agmundernes which he
bought of the Danes This Bishop was convict of a heinous crime; forgetting the
dutiful affection that he ought to bear unto Edred his king, for Athelstane
his brothers sake that preferred him; forgetting his oath and allegiance unto
the same king being his natural Prince; yea forgetting that he was either an
Englishman or a Christian: He was not ashamed to lean unto the Danes, and
savor them, a heathen people, and such as sought not only to destroy his
country, but also to root out Christian Religion. For this treason (deserving
a thousand deaths) he was only committed to prison the year 952. and a year
after enlarged again. This is the report of William Malmesbury. Matthew
Westminster says, he was punished in this fort for killing diverse citizens of
Thetford in revenge of the death of one Adelm an Abbot, whom they had slain,
and (...) without cause: two years after his enlargement, he died upon Saint
Stephens day, the year 955. He was buried at a place called Undalum. Except it
be Owndlc in Northhampton shire, how it is now termed I cannot guess.

17. Oskitell.
OSkitell then succeeded, a man of good life and well learned,

18. Athelwold.
NExt followed Athelwold, that having as it were a

19. Oswald.
WIthin the compass of one year, viz. the year 971. Oskitell that (...),
Athelwold that resigned, and this Oswald. He was near of kin unto Oskitell
his predecessor, but (...) unto Odo Archbishop of Canterbury being his brothers
(...). By his (...) he was made first Chanon of Winchester, after (...): for at
that time, the Cathedral Church of Winchester had no monks, but maintained a
company of secular priests, whereof many were married men. Perceiving the (...)
only were now in (...), and other clergy men little (...); by the (...) of
his uncle (...) his place in Winchester, and traveled to Floriake in France,
where he became a monk. Having continued there some (...) or fire years, his
uncle writ often very importunatly unto him to come home, but could never
prevail, till he sent him word of his last sickness, whereof soon after
(...) died. Oswald then destrous to have seen him once more, made (...) into
England, but came too late; the old Archbishop was (...) first. Oskitell then
his other kinsman gave him entertainment, till that by the means of Saint
Dunstan he was preferred to the Bishopric of Worceter, viz. the year 960. two
years after his arriual in England. He built there the church dedicated to the
blessed virgin Mary hard by the church of Saint Peter, and placed monks in
the same, to the end that the priests of Saint Peter's church being continually
disgraced by the people (that very much reverenced the monks) might become a
weary of their places. He was not deceived of his expectation; the people
flocked all unto the monks and left the priests of S. Peter's alone. Partly for
shame, and partly for grief thereof (being per adventure molested otherwise)
the most of them departed thence, and yt rest were feign to take coules unto
them and become monks. The Sea of York being void, King Edgar careful to
place a fit man in the North country (which was then very rude and barbarous)
and thinking none so fit as Oswald, made offer of the same, unto him: and when
he seemed loath to forsake Worceter, was content he should hold both. This man
was the first founder of the Abbey of Ramsey in the Isle of Ely, and a very
liberal benefactor unto the Abbey of Floriake where he was brought up; A great
patron of Monks, and a terrible persecutor of married priests, whereof there
were many in those days. He died at Worceter suddenly, having washed the
feet of certain poor men, (as daily he accustomed) After which kneeling
down to say certain prayers, without any sickness precedent, he gave up the
ghost. William (...) (who reporthis) adds, that the day before his death, he
told diverse of his friends that he should die. He was very learned, and left
some testimonies thereof in writing, not yet perished: for the integrity also
of his life and ro^uersation, he was much reverenced. The greatest fault I
find in him, is, that he was very earnest in setting forth that doctrine of
devils that debarreth men of lawful marriage. The time of his departure was
February 27 an. 992. 32. years after his first consecration, when he had
inioyed York 22. years. He was buried at Worceter in the church himself had
built. Many miracles are reported to have been done at his tomb, in regard
whereof the posterity would needs make him a Saint.

20. Aldulfe.
ALdulfe Abbot of Peterborough, succeeded Oswald in (...)) and one that striued
with his predecessor in liberality toward the monastery of Floriake. He died
May 6. 1002. and was buried in Saint Mary's church at Worceter.

21. Wulstan 2.
ANother Wulstan then by the favor of king Knute, Malmesbury finds great
fault with him, that in Aldulf and Oswald liked it well enough. And all the
exceptions he takes against him, is this, That he was not of so holy a
profession as they, that is, he was not a monk. Having been Archbishop 20.
years he died the year 1023. and was buried at Ely.

22. Alfricus Puttoc.
ONe Leoffius then obtained Worceter, Alfricus Puttoc Hardeknute the king (with
whom he could do much) At a time when they had been somewhat backwards in
payments to be made unto him, to fire that goodly city. He is blamed also for
another barbarous part of the same king, that caused the dead body of his own
brother Harold to be dug up, beheaded, and then cast into the Thames. This
they say was done by Alfricus the Archbishops council. He bestowed much money
upon the college of Beuerley, first in a new and sumptuous shrine for the body
of Saint John his predecessor, and then in purchasing lands to increase the
revenues thereof, viz. some at Milton, other at (...), and again at (...). He
died at Southwell the year 1051. and was buried at Peterborough.

23. Kinsius
AChaplaine of king Edward the Confessor one Kinsius Alfrike. He built very
much at Beuerley, to wit, the Hall, the Church, and diverse other edisices, gave
many books and ornaments to Shyrestone, and other churches of his Dioces, sat
10. years, died at York 1059. December 22. and was buried at Peterborough
where he had sometimes lined a monk.

24. Aldredus.
The Sea of York falling void by the death of Kinsius, Aldredus Edward the
Confessor, and by alleging the example of his predecessors that had held
Worceter in commendam with York, obtained license of him to hold them both,
wherein so holy a man as (...). Edward (me thinks) should have been more
precise. Having prevailed thus far, he went to Rome for his pall together
with the Earl (...) brother to the Queen, Giso after Bishop of Wells, and
Walter of Hereford. The Pope at that time was Nic. the second, a great enemy to
simony, which in this age began to grow very rise. Whether he had heard somewhat
of Aldredes bribing in obtaining this preferment, or whether he fisht it out by
strict examination (which is delivered) he not only refused to establish him
in his Archbishopricke, but also deprived him of the Bishopric he had before.
Homewards they came together in one company, but with diverse affections; Gilo
and Walter joyful for the honor newly done unto them: (for being found men,
not only learned, (...) of good conversation, and not culpable of any
corruption; They were consecrate at Rome with all favor and honor that might
be: (...) the Earl, peasiue for his friend, whose bribes he had received to
the others overthrow; and lastly Aldred almost desperate for so great a
calamity as was fallen upon him. See the power of Almighty God, that not only
raises as it were in a moment from the bottom of misery, unto the top of
happiness; But also does it by such means oftentimes as we think more likely
to cast us down farther, then to relieve us any thing at all. This jolly
company, travailing from Rome toward the Alps, by the way were encountered with
a company of good fellows (in a happy hour for Aldred) that spoiled them of
all they had about them, leaving them neither horse nor money, nor any thing
money worth but their apparel. So there was no remedy, but back to Rome they
must again to furnish them a new for their journey. There Tosti with open
mouth exclaimed against the Pope, saying, there was no reason that far remote
nations should sogreatly stand in awe of his exco^munications, which thieves
and robbers cared not a halfpenny for, but contemned openly and derided even
under his derided that amongst poor Priests, he would play Rex, but let
rebellious varlets do what they list. If by his means (quoth he) our goods be
not restored to us again, let him give us leave to say, that by his fault and
misgouernment we have lost them; and we hope that our King will have such
consideration of us, as in the end, this injury (if he hear of it) shall
prove a greater loss to the Pope then to us. For my part, I will not fail to
certify him of the truth, and to (...) him daily for recompense, which out of
the tribute the Pope has of England, will soon be made. And except he (...)
it better, why he should have any at all. I see not. Partly by means of these
threats, partly in commiseration and pity, partly by importunity of suite,
Aldred at last obtained his Archbishopricke, and had his pall given him upon
condition that he should leave Worceter. Into which See at his return he
wrought (...), but hampered him so, as heretained almost all the commodity to
himself, leaving Wulstan only 12. manors to maintain his state. In defense
of which dealing he alleged, that the lands and possessions of the
Archbishopricke were so wasted and spoiled by the Danes and other in the time
of Wulfere, as since that, they yielded little or no profit. It could not be
altogether true. For Alfrike and Kinsius (as before you heard) built and
purchased much, having no commendam at all. This Aldred likewise built much; A
Hall for the Cannons to dine in together at York, and another at Southwell; At
Beuerley the Hall begun by his predecessors and left imperfect, he finished;
the Presbytery there he raised from the very foundation, as also a goodly
church at Gloucester, even the same which is now the Cathedral Church. This
likewise is commended in him, that whereas the Clergy of those times were very
indecently appareled nothing differing from Lay men, he brought all the
ministry of his province to an uniform and seemly kind of habit. Not many
years after his return, king Edward the Confessor died, and Harold inuading
the dignity royal no way (...) unto him, was crowned by Aldred. Wallian, the
Conqueror also refusing to receive the Crown at Stigands hands (whom he called
the usurper of Canterbury) desired him to perform that solemnity, which he
did, requiring first an oath of him to defend the Church, minister justice (and
amongst other things) to use English men as favorably as Normans. This oath it
seemed unto Aldred the king had broken, and therefore (like a courageous
Prelate) he stuck not to thunder out an excommunication against him, saying
that now worthily he had cursed, whom once unworthily he had blessed. This bold
pranke being reported unto the king, incensed him very much at first, but
thinking better of it, he determined to give fair words a while, and so sent
some to entreat for his absolution. These messengers came too late for the
Bishop being troubled much in mind after the performance of that action, and
either amassed with fear of what might happen after it, or overcome with grief
and repentance of that he had done; never could be merry after, and so by
conceit was cast into a disease, whereof he died. September 11. 1069. This is
the report of W. Malmesbury, others say (namely Florentius Wigorne) that he was
so grieved with the coming in of a Navy of the Danes, as he prayed to God to
take him out of this life, that he might not see the slaughter and spoil which
he thought they would make; And that this grief was the cause of his death. He
was more reverenced afterward then while he lived a great deal, No English man
succeeded him in many years after; And the Normans being odious unto the
people they gladly reprehended all their actions, and comparing them with such
English Bishops as they could remember, made most favorable report of them. One
thing also increased his credit much: Vrsus Earl of Worceter had built a
Castle there to some prejudice of the monks, in so much as the ditch of the
said Castle empaired a little of the Church yard. Aldred went unto the Earl
(having before admonished him to right the wrong) and having demanded of him
whether it were done, by his appointment (which he could not deny) looking
(...) upon (...), he (...); (...) Vrse Have thou Gods (...); and mine, and of
all (...) heads, except thou (...) away this castle, and know thou assuredly,
that thy posterity shall not inherit the land (...) inheritance of Saint Mary.
This his (...) seemed to take effect, for (...) died (...) after, and Roger his
son a very small time enjoying his fathers honor, lost the same, and was
saine to fly the realm for killing an officer of the kings. Thus much for
Aldred, who after his death was buried in his own church.

25. Thomas.
THe king then appointed Thomas a Channon of Bayon Sampson Bishop of Worceter,
whose son Thomas succeeded afterward this Thomas in this See of York. A man
very learned, gentle both in countenance and words, of a very sweet and
amiable behavior, chaste, and (which is not to be despised) of a goodly
personage, being in his youth beautiful, in his latter time well colored, and
his hair, both head and beard as white as snow. At his first entrance, he had
some what to do with Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, unto whom he would not
make profession of obedience^ never (as he alleged) before that time required.
And indeed before the coming of William the Conqueror (says one) the two
Metropolitanes of England, were not only in authority, dignity and office, but
also in number of suffragane Bishops (...). But at this time (says he) they of
Canterbury (...) the new king, that York ought to be subject unto their See,
and that it was for the good and safety of the king, that the church thereof
should be obedient principally unto one; for that otherwise one might set the
crown upon one man's (...), and the other do as much for some body else. This
(...) is more at large debated in Canterbury. The end for that time was, that
Thomas ouerborne by the Archbishop of Canterbury Lanfranke and the king (who
favored him) was feign to appeal unto Rome; both of them being there in
person before the Pope, they fell (as commonly it happens in like cases) from
the chief point, into by matters and articling one against another. What
Thomas laid against Lanfranke I find not. And all that Lanfranke had to say
against him was, that he was a priests son ( (...)) and that the king for his
faithful service had promised him a Bishopric before his coming into
England. These were so great matters in the Popes judgment, as Thomas must be
deprived of his ring and crosier, and not restored to them but by the entreaty
of Lanfranke. As for the matter of Primacy, he left it to the judgment of the
king and Bishops of England, who forced Thomas to yield. Coming then to York,
he found yt estate of his whole Dioces (the city and church especially) most
miserable. The Danes before mentioned coming toward York; the Normans that
held the castle thought good to burn certain houses near the castle, least
they might be a furtherance unto the enemy. This ungentle fire would not be
entreated to stay just where they would have it, but proceeding farther then
his commission, destroyed the monastery and church of Saint Peter, and in fine
the whole city. Before the fire was out, the Danes came and took both city and
castle by force, putting to the sword all the Normans they found there (to the
number of 3000) saving none alive, but one William Mallet, his wife, children,
and a few other. Soon after the destruction of this goodly city, the king came
into these parts with a puissant army against the Danes, not ceasing to make
all manner of spoil as if he had been in the enemies country. So between
the Danes and the Normans, such havoc was made, as all the land from the
great river of Humber unto the river of Tine, lay waste, and not inhabited by
any man for the space of nine years after. In the church of York there were
only three Chanons left, the rest being all either dead or fled away: and they
had left unto them neither house to put their heads in, nor any good means how
to line and maintain themselves. All these faults this industrious Bishop
endeavored to amend. First he new covered and repaired his church as well as he
might to serve the turn for a time. But afterward he pulled down all the old
building, and erected from the very foundation a new, to wit, the Minster that
now stands. His channons dispersed abroad, he called home again, and took
order they should be reasonably provided for. He built them a hall and a
dorter, and appointed one of them to be the Provost, and governor of the rest.
Also he bestowed certain manors and lands upon them, and caused other to be
restored that had been taken from them. The church then having continued in
this state a good while, I know not by whose advise, the Archbishop thought
good to divide the land of Saint Peter's church into Prebends, and so to allot a
particular portion unto every channon, whereas before they lived together upon
the common charges of the church at one table, much in like sort as fellows of
houses do now in the Uniuersities. At the same time also he appointed a Deane,
a Treasurer, and a chanter; and also for the Chauncellorship it was founded of
him before. The church newly built by him he furnished with books, and all kind
of ornaments necessary; but his special care was to furnish the same and the
rest of his Dioces with learned and honest men, with whom he was wont
continually to confer and reason (sometime with one, and sometime with
another) partly for his own exercise, and partly to see, what was in them, and
to raise them up to a diligence in increasing their knowledge. Himself was
very learned, and writ diverse things both in prose and verse. He was also a
very good musition, and could not only sing, but play very well upon the
organs, and did set many songs. Having crowned king Henry the first, August 5.
1100. with the help of Maurice Bishop of London (because Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury lived then in banishment) the 18. of November following being sunday
he died at Rippon, and was buried at York in the Minster himself had built,
next unto Aldred his predecessor.

26. Gerard.
AFter the death of Thomas, Gerard nephew unto Walkenlin William the
Conqueror, and Rofus his son, having been Bishop of Heresord no long time,
he was elected unto York, but obtained not confirmation a great while. For he
refused to make profession of obedience unto Canterbury, till being commanded
by the Popes letters, he performed the same. He sat Archbishop seven years,
and almost six months, and died suddenly in his garden at Southwell, at a
time when no body was with him. He was a good benefactor unto the Church of
York; for he was a means unto the king, to bestow the Church of Laxton upon
the Chapter: and himself having obtayued of him the Churches of Dryfield,
Kilne, Pockington and Burgh, he gave them all likewise to the Chapter. This
notwithstanding, after his death they would not suffer him (bying so suddenly)
to be buried within their church (hardly in the churchyard. So he was laid at
the entrance of the church porch. But Thomas his successor not suffering such
an indignity to be offered unto an Archbishop, removed his bones into the
Church afterward, and caused them to be honorably intoombed. He was a man of
great learning, and for eloquence admirable; but somewhat too eager against
married Priests, whom by no means he could abide. Bale charge him with
forcery and coniuration, because forsooth, that after his death, there was
found in his chamber a volume of (...), who writ of Astrology indeed, but of
coniuration nothing that ever I heard.

27. Thomas. 2.
A Second Thomas succeeded, a Chaplain of the kings, nephew Thomas, and son
unto Sampson Bishop of Worceter. Even as his predecessor, he was very loath to
make his profession unto Caterbury. Being called upon by Anselme the
Archbishop; He made many (...). Wherefore Anselme lying very (...), and
perceiving his end to be near, (...) all the Bishops of England, commanding
them not to consecrate him before he had made his (...), laying a terrible
curse, and (...) upon whosoever (...) do it. The king after (...) death (...)
the Bishop of Worceter (whose son he was) to consecrate him: But he answered
that he would not have the curse of Father (...), for any worldly good. So in
the end being persuaded to yield, as other had done before him; consecration
was afforded unto him, and performed by his Father (...) the foresaid Bishop of
(...), or (as other report) by the Bishop of London, June 27. 1108. This man
erected (...) new (...) in his Church of York, he placed (...) reguler at
(...), he (...) parcels of land unto the College of (...), and purchased of
the king the like liberties and privileges for them that the (...) of York,
(...) and (...). He sat little above 5. years, and died (I think I (...)
say) (...) Martyr. Lying dangerously (...), he was advertised by the (...), the
nature of his disease, to be such, as if he used the company of a woman, he
need not doubt of his (...) otherwise nothing was to be looked for but death.
He (...) rather to (...), then to (...) so high and sacred a calling with so
soul and heinous an (...). So he ended his life February. 19. 1114. and was
buried beside the former Thomas his uncle.

28. Thurstan.
THomas the Archbishop being taken away (as before I Thurstan a Cannon of
Paul's and the Kings Chaplain was chosen to succeed him He, when he could by
no means obtain consecration of Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury, without
making profession of subjection, (...) and forsook the (...) of his election.
Yet remembering himself at last, he went to Rome, to plead his cause before the
Pope, and obtained letters to the king and Archbishop of Canterbury in
commendation of his cause. These letters prevailing nothing with the Archbishop
that would be won by no means, and Thurstan continuing as obstinate in his
resolution; The Sea remained void along time. At last, it fell out, that a
Counsel was summoned to be held at (...). Thurstan craving leave of the king,
to go thither, could not obtain it before he had promised that he would not
receive consecration there. Which promise notwithstanding, so well he followed
his business, that before the coming over of other English Bishops to the
Counsel, he was a Bishop ready consecrate as well as they, and that by the
hand of the Pope himself. So he (and he only I think of all the Archbishops
of York since the Conquest) never made profession of subjection to the
Metropoliticall See of Canterbury. The King hearing of this dealing. was very
greatly offended with Thurstan, and for bad him England. Neither could the Pope
(meeting with the King at Gisors and entreating for him) so pacify his
displeasure, as that he would suffer him to return. After five years
banishment, the Pope writ a very sharp letter unto the king, signifying, that
he would excommunicate both him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury also, if
Thurstan were any longer kept from his See and charge. Hereupon he was called
home, and soon after reconciled unto the King. This man is much praised, first
for his learning, then for his great wisdom and discretion, and lastly for
his industry and diligence, his care and painfulness, in well governing the
charge committed to him. He was a very kind man to his Cannons, unto whom
amongst other things, he affoorded this privilege, that, the yearly profit
of their prebends, being divided into three parts, it should be lawful for any
Canon to bequeath two parts of the year next ensuing his death, alotting the
third unto the Fabric, that is toward the reparation of the church. This
order he set down, not only at York, but at Beuerley also, at Southwell, at
Rippon, and at Gloucester; all which were colleges founded by Archbishops of
York. Moreover it is to be remembered, that he either founded a (...), or
renewed and repaired eight monasteries. In the latter end of his time, to wit
June 4. 1137. a lamentable chance befell his church and city. By casual fire
Saint Peter's church in York, Saint Mary's without the walls, a (...) all of
his own (...) were (...), and the (...) city (...). Having continued in that
(...), from the time of his election, and being a very (...), he determined to
forsake the (...) and (...) a (...) Pontsract, which he did, (...) his
Bishopric January 25. 1140. His cowle was (...) warm upon his back when
death appointed him the use of an other garment. (...) days after his
resignation he died, viz. February 5. the year aforesaid.

29. Henry Murdac.
William Treasurer of York a kinsman of king Stephens took then upon (...)
the (...) of that See. A man very noble by birth and (...), but much more noble
in (...) and (...) manners. (...) obtained not only election, but (...) also
(as (...) unto me) he sent unto Rome for his (...). His (...) there, was not so
good as he looked for: By some (...) many (...) were taken against him, whereby
it came to pass not only his suit was put of and staid for that (...), but
also process awarded to admonish him to come thither in person to answer the
accusations laid against him. At his coming to Rome, he found his adversaries
many (...) mighty. And amongst the rest, it is remembered that Saint Bernard
then living was very earnest against him. (...) the Pope had (...) brought up
in the Abbey of Clareuall under Saint Bernard, together with Henry Murdas, whom
Williams adversaries had set up to (...) a suter for this Archbishopricke. The
Pope being thus carried away with the persuasion of his old acquintance, and
some show of matter and was content to (...) William, and to place Henry Murdac
in his room, whom he caused to be consecrate presently, and sent him home into
England with his Pall. King Stephen hearing this news, was (...) with the
(...) of (...), which all men (...). (...) he (...) upon (...) with the (...)
Archbishop (...) him to (...) unto him in (...) manner; and when he denied,
easily took occasion of displeasure against him. The townsmen of York that
loved William exceedingly for his gentleness and virtuous behavior amongst
them; hearing how the king was affected; refused to receive (...) into their
city. For this resistance he suspendeth the city; which notwithstanding,
Eustach the kings son commanded service to be said as at other times was
accustomed. By means hereof, as also by reason that the kings officers were
very terrible and heavy enemies unto all that had labored for the deprivation
of William; seditions and (...) were daily raised in the city, amongst which a
certain Archdeacon, a friend of the Archbishoppes was slain. Two or three
years these stirs continued, till at last, the kings wrath by means being
appeased, York men were content to receive their Archbishop peaceably. He
governed very austerely the space of ten years, died October 14. 1153. at
Sherborne, and was buried in his Cathedral church.

3. Saint William.
William, immediately after his deprivation, got him Henry the Bishop, that
did first consecrate him. Now ye shall understand, that a little before the
death of Henry Murdac, (...) the Pope his old companion, and Saint Bernard the
Master of them both (for they had been his scollers) were taken out of this
life. William then was greatly animated by his friends to make complaint unto
Anastasius the uew Pope of the wrong heretofore done unto him; and provoked by
their importunity, did so indeed, travailing to Rome, in his own person. He
had (...) commenced his complaint, when news was brought that Henry Murdac
also his old adversary was departed this life. Following then, the advice of
Gregory a Cardinal, a very pollitique and subtle fellow; without any great
suit he was restored unto all his honors and had the pall delivered unto him.
He was returned into England (...), which he kept (...) the Bishop of
Winchester. (...) church, he was (...) upon the way by (...) (...) (...) the
(...) of (...) who (...) him (...) into (...) church, and appealed unto (...)
against him, which he little esteemed, but went forward notwithstanding. All
the rest of the clergy and commonalty (...) him with (...) joy. (...) Virg,
reports, that passing over the river beyond (...), the number of people that
followed him to (...) honor was so (...), as the bridge being but a woden
bridge, brake even inst as the Bishop was oner, and throw them all into the
water. But the blessing and prayer of this holy man (he supposes) prevailed so
much with God, as they were all (...) preserved from drowning. Into his city he
was honorably received, and began a very (...) and gentle government, showing
no token of gall or malice toward his ancient and most bitter cnimies; but he
was taken away by death before he could perform any great matter otherwise.
Soon after Whitsuntide he fell sick (as it seemed) of a kind of ague, and
within a day or two after departed this life. The common report is, that he was
poisoned in the challice at mass. But Newbrigensis (...) this opinion at
large, li. 1. (...). 26. Certain it is yt it was (...) suspected to be so, not
only after his death, but also while he yet lived, in his (...) times, In so
much as one of his chaplains advised him to (...) some (...) or (...) poison,
which he also did as one (...); but other say he answered, quod antidotum
dioinum non adijceret humano, that he would not add the (...) of the body unto
the preservative of the soul, becanse forsooth he had then lately receined the
sacrament. Howsoever it was, he died very suddenly, his teeth waxing very
black a little before his death, and not without some other notes and (...) of
poison. The time of his departure was June 8. 1154. After his death he was made
a Saint, and the day aforesaid June 8, appointed unto the celebration of his
memory. Many miracles are said to have been wrought at his toombe in the
Cashedrall church of York. Believe it that list, I cannot: to sayno more, me
thinks the man whose deprivation Saint Barnard procured, should not be worthy
to be reputed a Saint, or like to work miracles.

31. Roger.
NO sooner was William dead, but Robert the Deane, and Osbert the Archdeacon,
laid plots for the election of Roger Archdeacon of Canterbury, and procuring
the Archbishop and the Popes Legate to become suitors for him, with much adoo
they induced the Chapter to choose him. He was consecrate by Anastasius the
Pope about the end of the year 1154. This man is not gracious in our stories;
yet he is confessed to have been very learned, well spoken, passing wise, and
a great augmenter of the state of his Bishopric, both in revenues and
buildings. The reason is, he favored not monks, by whom in a manner all our
histories are written. He was wont to say, that Thurstan never did a worse
deed, then in erecting the Monastery of Fountney. And that it may (...), he
feigned not this mislike, you shall find in Newbridg. lib. 3. cap. 5. That a
certain religious man coming unto him when he lay upon his death bed,
requested him to confirm certain graunts made unto their house: to whom he
answered, you see my friend I am now upon the point of death, it is no time to
dissemble; I fear God, and in regard thereof refrain to satisfy your
request, which I protest I can not do with a good conscience; A strange
doctrine in those days; but being a wise man and learned, he must needs
discern, that the monks of his time were so far swarued and degenerate from
the holiness of those first excellent men of the primitive Church, as they
resembled rather any other kind of people, then those whom they pretended in
profession to succeed. These men (the monks I mean) to be revenged upon him,
have stamped upon him two notable faults, one, that he preferred whipping boys
unto the chief dignities of the Church, wherein (were it true) no body can
excuse him; The other thing they lay to his charge is manifestly false; They
say he was miserably covetous, and how do they prove it? Because forsooth he
left a certain deal of ready money behind him. Surely in my

^

same, made no haste to receive consecration, as knowing better how to sheare
his sheep, then to feed them, which he knew he might do without consecration
as well as with it. Seven years he held the Bishopric after that sort, and at
length by the persuasion of his father, desirous to have his son near about
him (as some say) or perceiving him unfit to make a clergy man (as other say)
He resigned his interest in the church of Lincoln, and got him to the court,
where he was made Lord Chanucellour of England, and held that office about
eight years, viz. until the year 1189. at what time his father died. Many
Bishoprics at that time were void, and had been some of them a long time, as
York now ten years, and Lincoln seventeen. King Richard therefore
understanding the people murmured and grudged much at these long vacations, and
knowing also it imported him to see his brother provided for; he thought to
stop two gaps with one bush, and at once to furnish York with an Archbishop,
and his brother with a living. So he writ his letters unto the chapter of York
in his brothers behalf, who (not without some difficulty) elected him. He was
consecrate at Tours in France in the month of August 1191. Presently after
his consecration coming over into England, he was imprisoned by (...) Bishop
of Ely the Chancellor, being drawn from the very altar of Saint Martins
church in (...) but he was quickly set at liberty again. And the proud
Chancellor (...) repented him of his rashness and folly, being excommunicate
for the same, and otherwise hardly enough used, as you may see more at large in
his life. This man proved a better Bishop then was expected, governing his
Province (if not somewhat too stoutely, according to the courage (...) in a man
of so high birth and nobility) very well and (...). He is praised much for his
temperance, (...) and (...) both of conntenance and behavior. All the time of
his brother (...) (expecting the wrong done unto him by the Bishop of Ely) he
lived quietly without (...) or complaint of any. Between him and king John
(who was his brother also) there was much ado. In the second year of his
reign, he commanded the Sheriff of Yorkshire to seize upon all the goods
and lands of the Archbishop, and his seizure to return into the exchecquer,
which was done accordingly: whereupon the said Archbishop excommunicated, not
only the Sherisie that had done him this violence, but all those in general
that were the authors of the same, and that had been any means to stir up
the kings indignation against him. The cause of this trouble is diversely
reported: some say, that he hindered the kings officers in gathering a kind of
tax through his (...); others, that he refused to sail into Norwandy with
him, when he went to make a marriage for his neice, and to conclude a league
with the French king. Whether one of these were the cause, or both, or none, I
can not tell; But certain it is, that one whole year his temporalities were
detained from him, his mooueable goods never restored, and yet moreover he was
saine to pay a thousand pound sterling for his restitution. This was a greater
wound then that it might easily be cured. Six or 7. years after, it brake out
again, to wit, an. 1207. King John then being at Winchester required such of
the clergy and Nobility, as were there present to consent, that payment should
be made unto him, of the thirteenth shilling of all the mooueable goods in
England; This motion no man gainesaid, but Geffrye the Archb. his brother.
After this, whether it were he were guilty of some greater attempt, or that he
understood, his brother to be grievously offended with him for withstanding,
this his desire; well perceiving England was too hot for him, secretly he
avoided the Realm, excommunicating before his departure such of his
jurisdiction, as either had paid the said tax, or should hereafter pay it. He
lived then in banishment 5. years, even until he was called to his long home
by death, which was the year 1213. So he continued Archbishop somewhat more
then 21. years.

33. Walter Gray.
The Sea was void after the death of Geffry, the space of Simon de Langton
brother unto Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury was elected by the
Chapter of York. But king John being lately become tributary, unto the church
of Rome, (...) found means to Cassire and disanull that election. If the old
quarrel between the Archbishop and him, stuck yet some thing in his
stomach, I marvel not: but he alleged that he thought it dangerous and very
inconvenient the whole Church of England should be ruled by two brethren, one
at Canterbury in the South, an other at York in the North. He labored then
very earnestly to have Walter Gray his Counselor removed from Worceter to
York. The channons there refused him for want of learning (as they said) but
at last they were content to accept him, in regard (forsooth) of his singular
temperance and chastity: they seemed to be persuaded that he had continued till
that time a pure maid. The matter was, they durst do no other but yield, and
then thought good to make a virtue of necessity. This man was first Bishop of
Chester, consecrate the year 1210. translated thence to Worceter 1214. and
lastly the year 1216 to York; but upon such conditions as I think he had
been better to have staid at Worceter still. The Pope would have no less then
10000, l. for wresting him into the Archbishopric; for yt gathering of which
money, he was feign to be so thrifty, as in all our histories he is infamous for
a miserable covetous wretch: for proof whereof, I will recount unto you a
strange report of M. (...). The year 1234. there was great dearth and scarcity
of corn, and (by reason that the dearth had continued then three years)
mortality of people also, as well by pestilence as famine. Amongst many rich
men that were nothing moved with compassion toward the poor daily perishing
for want of relief, this Archbishop is especially noted, that he had five
years corn in store, and would not thresh it out. Being told at last by his
officers, that it was much to be feared, it was consumed by mice, or some other
way much the worse for so long standing; he (...) them to deliver it to the
husbandmen that dwelt in his manors, upon condition they should pay as much
new corn for it after harvest. They intending to do as he commanded, went
about to take down a great mow of corn he had at Rippon. And first coming
toward it, they saw the heads of many serpents, snakes, (...) and other
venomous creatures pearing out at the ends of the sheaues. This being told unto
the Archbishop, he sent his steward, and diverse of good credit, to enquire the
truth thereof: who seeing that which the other had seen, enforced
notwithstanding certain poor men to go up unto the top of it with ladders.
They were scarcely (...), when they saw a black smoke rise out of the corn,
and felt a most toathsome (...) which compelled them withal have possible to
get the^ down again. Moreover, they all heard an unknown voice saying unto
them, Let the corn alone, for the Archb. and all he has is the devils
possession. To make short they were feign to build a wall about it, and then to
set it on fire, fearing least such an infinite deal of venomous creatures
might infect and poison, or at least greatly annoy the whole country. The
credit of this report I leave unto the Readers discretion. Matthew Westminster
commends the man greatly for his wisdom in government and his loyal (...)
unto his Prince; and that he deserved this commendation, I account it no
slender proof; that Queen Elianore (to whom her husband king Henry the third
had committed the charge of the realm traveling into France) she (I say)
having occasion to cross the seas to confer with her husband, committed the
rule and government of the same unto this Archbishop. It was in the year 1253.
at what time he being a very aged man and sickely, was exceeding loath to take
it upon him. He sat Archbishop above 39. years, in which space he did many
things to the good and benefit, both of his See and church. The manor of
Thorpe he purchased and the church of the same, both which he gave unto his
See. He erected many Chauntries in diverse places. He gave unto his church 32.
wonderful sumptuous coapes; and left a goodly stock of cattle unto his
successors, procuring the king to confirm the gift, and to take order that
every Archbishop should be bound to leave it as he found it. He bought unto his
See the house now called White Hall (and heretofore York place) Hubert de
Burgo Earl of Kent built it, and gave it vnthe Friar preachers in London, who
sold it unto this Archbishop. In the time of Cardinal Woolsies disgrace, the
king required it of him, and he either for fear, or else hope of currying a
little favor with the king that way, yielded by and by. He died at last on May
day 1255. and was buried in S. Peter's church.

34. Sewall.
When the king heard of his death, he determined Sewall their Deane a man
modest, virtuous and learned, being well seen not only in divinity, but in
law also and much other good learning. Diverse of his writings remain and are
remembered by Bale in his centuries. He was a diligent hearer of Edmund of
Abenden (after Archbishop of Canterbury, and canonized a Saint) at what time he
read the divinity lecture in Oxford. This Saint (...) (as Matthew Paris
reports) would often tell his scholar Sewall, that out of all question he
should die a Martyr. Now far forth this prediction fell out true, you shall
hear anon. Now the king not liking this speed of the Chapter men, as not
being for his profit, hindered the new elect what he might, and for want of
better matter, alleged against him, that he was a bastard, and so by the
Cannons incapable of that honor. It was true enough, and how he salued that
soar I cannot tell; A dispensation belike from Rome (where all things were
then to be had for money) took away that obstacle. I find he was consecrate by
the suffragan Bishops, of his own province: July 23. 1256 a year and almost
three months, (...) the death of his predecessor. His Deanery being thus void,
the Pope took upon him to bestow the same upon one Jordan a stranger, that
understood (...) one word of English, and otherwise (...) unworthy of that
goodly preferment. This Jordan doubting least in taking possession he might
happily be resisted, came into the church of York, at dinner time, and
inquiring of one (whom by chance he found then at his prayers) which was the
Deanes stall? Caused two of his own company to deliver him possession thereof.
This being done, though in hugger mugger, was quickly brought unto the
Archbishops ears, who grieved infinitely at the same, and sought, by all
means possible to disannull and make void the Popes gift. The (...) church
men were so amazed with this strange and (...) course (strange in those days,
but afterward too common) as they knew not what to do or say. It seemed most
(...) and detestable unto them, that so high a dignity, and an office of such
importance, in place and authority next unto the Archbishop, should be
conferred upon a base obscure and contemptible fellow. But they stood so in awe
of the Popes tyranny, whereunto the king had subjected, and as it were
prostrate himself, that they durst not make any profession of mislike About
the same time the Pope sent a commandment into England, that 300. of the next
benefices that fell, should he bestowed upon certain Italians that he named,
men ignorant of the English tongue, and though otherwise perhaps worthy the
places appointed them (which is greatly to be doubted) yet in that respect most
unfit to have cure of souls committed unto them. In this injurious course, our
Sewall courageously withstood him, and not only by word and letter sharply
reprehended him, but also in deeds resisted this his tyranny; utterly refusing
to admit either Jordan unto the Deanery, or any other of his Italians to any
other promotion in his Dioces. For his labor he was quickly susspended.
Wherewith he was so little terrified, as that notwithstanding, he stood still
stoutly to his tackling, and yielded not one inch. Jordan therefore, whether
doubting of good success, or wearied with trouble, or in regard, that he
perceived himself very odious in York, resigned his Deanery, accepting a
pension of 100. marks out of it. This composition with Jordan, nothing apeased
the Popes fury. Determining belike to make him an example to other, he first
caused his cross in contumelious manner to be taken from him, and soon after
thundered ont his greatest excommunication against him, causing him to be cursed
throughout England with bell, book and candle. By these, and infinite other
vexations (says Matthew Paris) he was much disgraced in the fight of the
world; but became no doubt far the more acceptable in the sight of God. So long
he denied to how his knees unto this (...), as overcome with care, and not
enduring those (...) all molestations, he died at last heart broken, much better
deserving the name of a Martyr, then many other to whom the church of Rome has
afforded that title. Lying upon his death bed, and perceiving his end to
approach, with watery eyes looking (...) toward heaven in yt bitterness of his
soul he made this prayer, which I think not unworthy in this place to be
inserted: Lord Jesus Christ thou most just judge, from whose (...) wisdom
nothing is hid, thou know how the Pope (unto whom thou have suffered the
government of thy church to be delivered) has with manifold (...) ouerwhel med
my innocence, for no other cause (as thou can witness, and the world doubts
not) then this, that I would not admit men altogether unknown, yea and most
unfit, unto the cure and care of those churches, the rule and charge whereof
unto me (though unworthy) thou have committed: Notwithstanding least by my
contempt the Popes (...) sentence of excommunication become just and deserved,
with all humility I crave to be absolved from the same. But I appeal unto
thee the supreme and incorruptible judge; and both heaven and earth shall be my
witnesses, that he has most unjustly vexed and many ways as grievously, as
wrongfully offended me. Before his end also he writ unto the Pope a very
effectual, and pithie letter, wherein he laid before him at large the
miserable estate into which the (...) of him and his predecessors had brought
the church; praying him to have a care to amend what was amiss, and to
remember that Christ repeated unto Peter thrice, Feed my sheep, but not so
much as once or half once bid him either to flay them or to sheere them, much
less to tear out their very bowels to deuours or destroy them, as he did. But
the Pope was so far from following this good advise, as he not only
contemned the same, but first derided the good Bishop for his labor, and
afterward grew into great choler, taking it hainously, that any mortal man
should be so presumptuous, as to admonish him of his duty. He sat Archbishop
only two years, in which time he reformed many things amiss in the state of
his Church. He caused the stipend of the ministers of Saint Sepulchers chapel
to be increased, and appointed them to be called Cannons: He erected Uicariges
in diverse impropriate churches, which till that time were very ill served, and
did many other things worth memory, but more (...) have done if his time had
been either longer or more quiet and peaceable. He died upon, or near unto
Ascension (...), 1258. and was buried in his Cathedral church: The place of
his sepulture there, was much frequented of the ignorant people, that esteemed
him a Saint. Notwithstanding the great conflicts between him and the Pope, our
monks doubt not to father upon him a miracle of turning water into wine, by
blessing it in time of his sickness. The (...) whereof I leave unto the Reader.

35. Godfry de Kinton.
ABout this time (says Matthew Paris) an order was (...) de Kinton, or (as
other write him) Godfry de Ludham. He was Deane of York, and being elect at
home. travailed to Rome where he received consecration September 23. 1258. This
man (J know not upon what quarrel) interdicted the whole city of York, in the
beginning of lent and restored it not till the third of May following, which
was in the year 1261. He sat six years three months, and eigghteene days
dying then about Twelfetide 1264. he was buried in his own church.

36. Walter Giffard.
AFter the death of Godfry, William de Langton Deane Walter Giffard from Bathe
and Wells to York; He was the Popes Chaplain, and Cannon of Wells, first
Treasurer, then Chauncellor of England; Elected to Bathe May 22. 1264. From
whence he was removed 1266. having continued there only two years. He lived
at York thirteen years departed this life April 25. 1279. and lies buried
there in Saint Peter's church.

37. William Wickwane.
IT shall not be amiss, here to remember, that Onuphrius Bonauenture (whom he
calls Bonauentura Fidanza) to have been preferred about this time from the
Archbishopricke of York unto the place of a Cardinal, viz. in the year 1274.
Paulus (...) de (...), (...) says, that at what time diverse (...) came to the
Council of Lions, to confer with the learned men of our Western church
concerning the difference of opinions between us and them; Thomas Aquinas (who
then read Divinity at Naples) was sent for as the fittest man of that age to
deal with them; but he died in the way. Bonauenture was then appointed to
supply his place, and least the (...) should despise him being but a friar
(...) The Pope offered him the Archbishopricke of York: He was loath says
Paulus (...) to take so great a charge upon him, and upon his refusal was made
a Cardinal. I cannot see how either of these reports should be true. For the Sea of York at that time and long both before and after was full, being
possessed by Walter Giffard from the year 1266. til 1279. Now to leave
Bonauenture as we find him, ye shall understand, that the Deane and Chapter of
York soon after the death of Walter Giffard elected for their Archbishop
William Wickwane, one of their own company, and Chancellor of their church.
Of him little is recorded but that the first year of his consecration, he
removed the bones of Saint (...) his predecessor, and caused them to be placed
in a costly shrine with great solemnity. The king, Queen, eleven other
Bishops, and many nobles being present. He died August 27. 1285. having
continued Archbishop scarcely 6. years.

38. John Romano.
THe 28. of November following, viz. 1285. a cannon of John Roman This man was
of base parentage, but very learned. He built the cross Jle on the North side
of the church toward the palace, and a goodly steeple in the middle of the
church, all at his own proper costs. He built much in the hospital of Saint
Peter, and with his own hands laid the first stone of the great body of the
church upon the South side of the same. He lived not to bring that noble work
to any perfection, being taken away by death March 15. 1295. when he had
continued in that See little more than 10 years. The year before he died, he
excommunicated Anthony Beak Bishop of Durham, being one of the kings Council,
and at that time, beyond the seas in his service. Whereat the king being highly
displeased, the Archbishop thought it his best course, to put himself to his
mercy. He did so, and was saine to (...) the kings favor with 4000. marks.
The indignation of a Prince is death (says the Wise man) And likely enough it
is, that the (...) of his displeasure, and the trouble that ensued it, might
soon cause some incurable disease that took him away. He was buried in his
Cathedral church, which with goodly building he had much augmented and
beautified.

39. Henry Newerk.
THe Deane of York Henry de Newerk) was then chosen

40. Thomas de Corbridg.
AFter him succeeded Thomas de Corbridge Cannon of Thomas Corbridg died at
Lanham the year 1303. and was buried at Southwell.

41. William de Greenfield.
HE that then succeeded William de Greenfild was Canon Edward the first. A
great and wise councellor, very eloquent, and not unlearned. After his election
he was feign to awaite the Popes pleasure two years, before he could obtain
consecration, which at last he received of Pope Clement the fifth anno 1305.
But it cost him 9500. marks beside the charge that he was at while he lay in
the Popes court a suter. By reason of these immoderate expenses he became so
bare, that at his first return into England he was feign to make two
collections amongst his clergy in one year: the first he called a
benevolence, the second an aid. He was a great favorer of the templers, every
where oppressed in those days, especially by the Pope and Philip the french
king. When he had sat nine years, eleven months and two days, he departed
this (...) at (...) December 13. 1315. and was buried in his cathedral church
in the porch of Saint Nicholas.

42. William de Melton.
SOne after Greenfields death, before the end of the year, William de Melton
Provost of Beuerly, and Canon of York, was elected at the instance and earnest
request of the king Edward the 2. With the Pope he found no more grace, then
his predecessor had done; under two years suit consecration could not be had.
It was at last affoorded him September 25. 1317. at Auinion. Almost 23. years
he governed the Sea of York, and that very woorthily: attending diligently
not only the affairs and business of his church, but also his own private
actions, indeuoring by chastity, fasting, prayer, almesdaedes, hospitality,
and virtuous behauior, like a good pastor to teach and instruct, as well by
example of life as preaching and doctrine. He was very good to his Tenaunts;
but careful to preserve; and rather to increase, then any way to unpaire the
state, liberties and revenues of his Church. Yet was he not careless of the
preferment of his servants and kindred, whom (as occasion served) he pleasured
and advanced to very good places: amongst the rest, and by the Popes license,
he purchased to a brothers son, the Manor of (...), Kingsclere, and
Wentworth, which till that time belonged to the Archbishops of Roan. He
bestowed great cost upon the shryne of Saint William, and finished the west
part of the body of his church, with the expenses of 700. marks. He enclosed
also a place called the old (...) at York, with a goodly wall. He deceased
April 22. (or as one delivers April 5.) 1. 340. at Cawood, having sat 22.
years and almost 7. months, in which time, he had been successively
Treasurer and Chauncellor of England. His body lies buried near the (...) in
Saint Peter's Church.

43. William de Zouche.
William de la Souch Deane of York succeeded. He William Kilsby that
contended with him two whole years for this Archbishopricke. He was consecrate
at last by Pope Clement the 6. at Auinion, an. (...). The (...) 1346. king
Edward going into France, left this man his (...) here. The Scots taking
advantage of his absence, came with a great army into England. At a place
called Bewre Park near (...) cross, they were met by this Archbishop and
diverse of our Nobility, October 17. where our men so valtantly behaved
themselves, as the Scots were cuerthrowne, two Earls, 21. knights, and an
(...) number of other slain, many also taken prisoners, and amongst the rest,
David le (...) then king. This Bishop a little before his death began the
foundation of a Chapel, on the south side of the church, intending to be
buried in the same, but being taken away before it could be brought to any
perfection, he was laid before the altar of Saint Edmund the Confessor. He
died August 8. 1352.

44. John Thursby.
THe year 1349. John Thursby Bishop of Saint (...) Urban the (...), whom I
homas Walsingham repeateth to have (...) an English man. In the 10. year after
his (...), he began to build (...) the quier of his Cathedral church: laying
the first stone himself July 29. toward the charge of which work he presently
laid down 100. l. (or as some report 500. l.) and promised to contribute
yearly 200. marks, or as others say 200. l. till it were (...); which (...)
long as he lived, he faithfully performed. He bestowed great cost in
beautifying the Lady chapel with images and pictures of excellent
workmanship; and (...) the bodies of diverse of his predecessors that lay buried
else where about the church, caused them to be (...) in the said chapel in
very (...) manner, leaving a place for (...) in the middle thereof, where,
dying November 6. 1373. at Thorp, he was (...) after solemnly enterred.

45. Alexander Neuill.
Unto this See the Pope then appointed Alexander Neuill Richard the second
which was his destruction. Diverse of the nobility malecontent, took arms
against the king, caused many whom they misliked to be condemned by parliament,
some to death; some to prison, etc. Amongst the rest, this Archbishop was
accused to be one that abused the kings youth by flattery, and with whispering
tales enticed him against the nobility, and for this cause, he was condemned to
perpetual prison, and appointed unto the castle of Rochester there to be
kept. But he, foreseeing the tempest that grew (...) him, fled out of the
realm. The Pope then ( Vrbane the (...)) whether in commiseration thinking to
relieve him, or else using it as a means to make his Archbishopricke void,
(...) he might bestow it; translated him from York unto (...) Andrews in
Scotland. Howsoever it was meant, sure it fell out to be a very bad exchange,
for his part. Scotland at that time refused to acknowledge Vrbane for Pope and
yielded obedience to the Antipope. By means whereof, Vrbans (...) was not of
sufficient force, to inuest him in Saint Andrews and yet quite cut him of from
York, at home. Hereby it (...) to pass, that having the revenues, neither of
the one, nor the other, for very want he was (...) to become a parish priest,
and so lived thrae year at Louane, even until his death. He was banished the
year 1386. lived in (...) almost five years, died 1391. and was buried in the
church of the Friar Carmelites there. This man bestowed much cost in repayring
the castle of Cawod, building diverse towers, and other edifices about the same.

46. Thomas Arundell.
ALexander Neuill being thus displaced under presence Neuill, whereof any one
alone might hardly saeme able to withstand him, but all these together he knew
very well: To this end, as also to gain the more in first fruits, he called
Thomas Arundell from Ely to York, translated the Bishops of Durham to Ely,
Bath to Durham, Salisbury to Bath, and gave Salisbury to John Waltham the kings
chaplain, a man very gracious with him, and keeper of his privy seal. This
Thomas Arundell the year 1396 was removed to Canterbury, the first that (...)
was translated from York (...). While he was at York, he bestowed much in
building upon diverse of his houses, and unto the church he gave, besides many
rich ornaments, two great Basins of silver and gilt, two great Censers, two
other Basins of silver, and two Crewettes. He gave to the use of the Uicars, a
silver Cup of great weight, and a Bowl of silver very massiue and costly
unto the Canons. Being yet Bishop of Ely, he was Lord Chauncellor of England,
and so continued till the year 1396. at what time being removed to
Canterbury, he gave over immediately that office. See more of him, in Ely and
Canterbury.

47. Robert Waldby.
RObert Waldby Bishop of Chichester succeeded Thomas Edward the black Prince,
into France, where he continued long a student, and profited so much, as no
man in the (...) where he lived (Tholous) might be compared with him for all
kind of learning. He was a good Linguist, very well seen in Philosophy both
natural and moral, in Phyficke, and the Canon Law also; very eloquent, an
excellent Preacher, and esteemed so profound a Divine, (...) he was thought
meet to be the Professor of Divinity, or doctor of the chair in the said
University. For these his good gifts, he was much favored of the black
Prince first, then of king Richard his son; and by their favor obtained
first a Bishopric in Gascoigne (as Bale reports) but by another antiquity
that I have seen, he was first Bishop of the Isle of Man; and his Epitaph
says he was first Praesul (...). From that first preferment whatsoever it was,
he was translated an. 1387. to the Archbishopricke of Dublin in Ireland thence
to Chichester 1395. and the year following, became an Archbishop once more,
viz. of York. There he sat not fully three years, but he died May 29. 1397.
and was buriet in Westminster almost in the middle of the chapel of Saint
(...), where an Epitaph is to be seen upon his grave partly (...), and
otherwise not worth the reciting.

48. Richard Scroope.
RIchard Scroope that succeeded Robet Waldby, though William Scroope that was
Earl of Wilshire, and Treasurer of England under king Richard; yet obtained
not (...) high promotion without desert, in regard of many good (...) in him.
For he was incomparably learned (says Thomas Walsingham) of singular integrity
for his life and conversation; and (which is not altogether to be neglected) of
a goodly and amiable personage. He was brought up in Cambridge, and proceeded
there first Master of Art, then doctor of Law: thence he traveled throngh
France into Italy, and became an advocate in the Popes Court, until (such
time as he was preferred to the Bishopric of Couentry and Lichfield,
whereunto he was consecrate August 9. 1386 There he sat ten years, and was
translated to York (...). Nine years he governed that Church landably, and is
commended as well for his own private manners and behavior, as his public
government. His (...) was unhappy and very (...). King Henry had lately deposed
king Richard, by whom this man was preferred, and had cansed his brother the
Earl of (...) to be (...) at Bristow. Whether it were desire to revenge these
wrongs done to his friends, or some other respect, I know not; certain it is,
that the year 1405. he joined with the Earl of Nothumberland, the Earl
Marshall, the Lord Bardolph, and other in a conspiracy against king Henry. The
Earl of Westmerland, and John Duke of Lancaster, the kings son, were then in
the North country when these men began to stir, and gathering what forces
they could, came against them. But finding the other too strong for them, they
inquire of them in peaceable manner what their intent is, in taking arms. The
Archbishop answered, that he meant nothing but good unto the King and the
Realm, as he would gladly certify him if he had secure and safe access unto
him. And therewithal showed a writing unto them containing a reason of his
doing. The (...) of Westmerland having read this wrting, professed to allow
of their enterprise, and praised it for honest and reasonable; insomuch, as
meeting with the Archbishop at a Parley, after a very few speeches, they
seemed to become friends shaking hands together, and drinking to each other in
sight of both their armies. The Archbishop now (...) of nothing, suffered his
men to disperse themselves for a time: But the Earl contrariwise waxed
stronger and stronger, and at last seeing himself well able to deal with the
Archbishop, came upon him sodemly, and arrested him little thinking of any such
matter. The king by this time was come northward as far as Pomfret. Thither
the Archbishop and other prisoners arrested with him, were also brought, and
carried with the king back to York again, (or as other deliver) to Thorpe,
where Sir William Fulford, a knight learned in the Law sitting on a high stage
in the Hall condemned him to be beheaded: Presently after judgment given, he
was set upon an ill favored Jade, his face toward the horse tail, and carried
with great scorn and shame to a (...) hard by, where his head lastly was
stricken off, by a fellow that did his office very ill, not being able to
dispatch him with less then five strokes. He was executed upon (...) being
June 8. 1405. and buried in the east part of the new works of his Church of
York, in which place, as also the (...) where he died, certain miracles are
said to have been done, and are ascribed unto his holiness. It is delivered
also that the king was presently stricken with a (...) after his death. He was
the first Bishop that I (...) put to death by order of Law. No marvel if an
execution so (...) and extraordinary, performed in so odious and (...) a
manner, gave occasion of many tales, and rumors. The Pope excommunicated the
authors of his death, but was easily entreated to absolve them again.

49. Henry Bowett.
THe space of two years and a half the Sea was (...) the Scots came with a
great power into the Realm and besieged Barwicke and the castle of (...). This
Bishop was then a very aged man, and so impotent, as he was able neither to go
nor ride; yet would he needs accompany his countrymen that went against the
Scots, and caused his men to carry him in a chair, that so at least by words
and exhortation he might do his best, though he were not able to fight, nay not
so much as to stand or go. This man is said to be the greatest housekeeper of
any Archbishop that ever sat in York before him. For proof whereof it is
alleged, that he spent usually in his house, of Claret wine only 80. tons.
He departed this life at Cawood October 20. 1423. and was buried in the east
part of the Minster of York by the altar of all Saints which himself built
and furnished sumptuously with all things that might belong unto it. He built
also the Hall in the castle of Cawood, and the kitchen of the Manor house of
Oteley.

50. John Kemp.
THe Pope of his own absolute authority, placed then Richard (...) Bishop of
Lincoln. Many statutes and laws had been made to repress this tyrannical
dealing of the Pope. But his excommunications were such terrible bugs, as men
durst rather offend the laws of their country, then come within the compass
of his censures. Yet the Deane and chapter of York taking stomach unto them,
used such advantage as the law would affoorde them, and by force kept out the
new Archbishop from entering his church. Much adoo there was between them. The
event was, that the Pope unable to make good his gift, was saine to return
(...) to Lincoln again, and to translate John Kempe Bishop of London (a man
better favored of the Deane and chapter) to York. This John Kempe was first
Bishop of Rochester (consecrate the year 1418.) removed thence to Chichester
1422. from Chichester to London the same year, and from London to York 1425.
when the Sea had been void 2. years. At York he continued almost 28. years,
and in his old age, even one year before his death, was content to (...) once
more, viz. to Canterbury. The (...) 1449. he was made Cardinal Sanctae
Ruffinae and was twice Chauncellor of England. See more of him in Canterbury.

51. William Boothe.
HE that (...) him ( William Boothe) was sometime John Kempe unto (...). He
sat (...) 12. years, died at Southwel September 20. and was buried in the
chapel of our Lady there, nigh to the Archbishops palace 1464. He bestowed
much cost in repairing the palace of York. In the latter end of his time,
viz. the year 1464. (...) Minster of York was burnt, I know not by what
chance.

52. George Neuell.
RIchard Neuell that great Earl of Warwick, that (...) and pulled down kings
at his pleasure, advanced his brother George Neuell unto great and high placss,
being (...) but a very young man: By his means he was consecrate Bishop of
Exceter November 25. 1455. at what time he was not fully 20. years of age. The
year 1460. he was made Lord Chancellor of England; the yoongest Chauncelour
I think that ever was, either before or since his time. In that office he
continued till the year 1464. viz. until the marriage of king Edward the 4. In
which action, the king (...) knowing he had given cause of offense unto the
Earl of Warwick (for it was done whilst yt Earl was ambassador in France,
and busy in a treaty for a match between the king and the French Queens
sister) He thought it necessary to weaken him what he might, and so first
removed this his brother from the office of Chauncelour, and bestowed it upon
Robert Stillington Bishop of Bath. Notwithstanding this alienation of the king
from him, the year 1466. (...) obtained the Archbishopricke of york, and held
the same, (but with great trouble) until his death. The (...) of the dishonor
done to the Earl by yt (...) marriage, sticking (...) in his mind, and having
peradventure continual occasions of new greeses be made a (...) with his
brethren to pull down king Edward that had reigned now almost 9. years, and
to set up king Henry the 6. again, who had (...) in prison all that while.
This indeed they performed partly by the help of George Duke of Clarence, king
Edwards brother. And it was the hap of this Archb. to take (...) Edward
prisoner, at (...) in Northhampton shire. He carried him thence, first to (...)
castle, then to (...) castle in york shire. But being of too good a nature
to be a good (...), used him with such courtesy, suffering him to walk abroad,
and often to (...) with a few (...) to attend him, as (were it by the
negligence or unfaithfulness of those that had the charge of him, I know not)
away he escaped, being met upon a plain where he hunted by a troop of his
friends, and wasted by them into a place of safety. (...) half a year that K.
Henry was restored to his crown (...), (...). Edward so handled yt matter, as
coming suddenly to London, and entering yt Bishops palace by aposterne gate,
(...) surprised at once king Henry b the Archbishop that had not long before
taken him, They were both carried thence to the tower of London, where yt good
king was soon after pitifully murdered. But the Archbishop upon the fourth of
June following was set at liberty. About a year after his enlargement, he
chanced to be with the king a hunting at Windsor; and upon occasion of the
sport, they had seen there, made relation unto the king of some extraordinary
kind of game, wherewith he was wont to solace himself at a house he had
built, and furnished very (...), called the Moore in Hartfordshire. The king
seeming desirous to be partaker of this sport, appointed a day when he would
come thither to hunt, and make merry with him. Hereupon the Archbishop taking
his leave, got him home, and thinking to (...) the king in the best manner it
was possible for him, he sent for much plate that he had bid during the wars
(...) his brethren and the king, and borrowed also much of his friends. The
(...) the (...) brought into the (...), the day (...) his (...); (...) sent for
the (...) him, all (...) set a part, to repair presently unto him being at
(...). As soon as he came, he was arrested of treason; all his plate, money,
and other (...) (to the value of 20000, l. were seized upon for the king, and
himself a long space after was kept prisoner at Calis and Guisnes: during
which time, the king (...) unto himself the profits and temporalties of his
Bishopric. Amongst other things then taken from him, he had a (...) of
inestimable value, by reason of many rich stones wherewith it was adorned: that
the king brake and made thereof a crown for himself. This calamity happened
unto him the year 1472. By intercession and entreaty of his friends, with much
(...) he obtained his liberty the year 1476. and a little while (...) the
same, with grief and anguish of mind (as is thought) died at Blithlaw coming
from York. He was buried in the Minster there. In this man's time Sixtus the
fourth made the Bishop of Saint Andrews Primate of all Scotland, and appointed
twelve Bishops to be under him, that until that time were of the Province of
York. The Archbishop (...) it what he might. But the Pope alleging it was
very unfit, that such a (...) should be the Metropolitan of Scotland, as for
the most part (by reason of wars was an enemy unto the same) ouerruled it, and
would needs have it so.

53. Lawrence Boothe.
THe Bishop of Durham, Lawrence Boothe, half brother unto William Boothe
George Neuils predecessor succeeded them in the Sea of York. He was first
Master of Penbrooke hall in Cambridge, consecrate Bishop of Durham September
25. 1457. and twenty years after vizthe year 1477 removed to York. In
August 1472. he was made Lord Chancellor, and continned in that office two
(...). This man bought the manor of Batersey of one Nicolas Stanley, and built
the house there, all which he gave unto his See. He died at Southwell the year
1480. when he (...) (...) Archbishop (...) and nine (...), and was buried (...)
his brother.

54. Thomas Rotheram alias Scot.
THomas Scot otherwise called Rotheram, was borne at (...) in (...), and
according to the manner of religious persons in old time, would (...) take his
surname of the place where he was borne. (...) such education as the country
could afford him, being now ripe for the university, and towardly, was sent by
his friends unto Cambridge, and was chosen fellow of kings college: in which
place he continued till he was called away by preferment. King Edward (whose
Chaplain he was) procured him first the Prouostship of Beuerley, made him
keeper of his privy Seal, and then Bishop of Rochester the year 1467. Staying
there scarce four year, he removed to Lincoln anno 1471. The year 1474. he
was made Lord Chancellor, and continued long in that office, even until the
reign of Richard the usurper, at what time (or a little before) he delivered
the great Seal unto the (...), and is blamed for committing it unto her, of
whom he received it not, and had no right to require it. Being yet at Lincoln,
he bestowed great cost in building the goodly beautiful gate of the schools
at Cambridge, the walks on each side thereof, and the new Library that is at
the east side of that building, which he caused to be done of his own charge,
with some very little contribution of the Uniuersity. It was begun the year
1470. and quite (...) 1476. Having been at Lincoln nine years, he was
translated to York, and enjoyed that honor twenty years lacking one quarter.
In which time he did many notable things worthy memory. At (...) (where he was
borne) he founded a college, by the name of Jesus college, for a Provost that
should be a preacher, five priests, six choristers, and three schoolemasters,
one for Grammar, one for song, and another for writing. He finished Lincoln
college in Oxford (left very imperfect by Bishop Fleming the first founder)
and added five fellowships unto the same, beside those seven which the founder
had ordained. He gave to the church of York (...) of that, which king Edward
had taken away. In diverse of his houses he built much; at White Hall (which
then belonged to the Bishops of York) he built the great kitchen: at Southwell
the pantry, bakehouse, and new chambers adjoining to the ri^^ers and at Thorp
the pantry, bakehou^^ and chambers on the (...). He was very carefulll to (...)
those which either for good service or (...) might (...) he greatly (...). He
died of the plague^ May 29. 1500. at (...), being 76. years of age, and was
buried in the (...) of our Lady chapel in a marble tomb, which himself
caused to be built in his lifetime.

55. Thomas Savage.
HIs next (...) in (...), was also (but (...)) Bishop of Rochester, (...) to
London the year 1493. and soon after Thomas Rotherams death (...) York. This
man was a Gentleman (...), and (as I take it) a knights son; Not preferred
for any (...) great learning, (yet he was a doctor of Law) but as it should
seem in regard of service. He spent his time in a manner altogether either in
temporal businesses (being a great courtier) or else in hunting; wherewith he
was (...) sonablie (...). He built much at (...) and Scroby, and maintained a
great number of goodly (...) fellows to attend him. Before his time, it was
always the custom that the Archbishop at his installation should make a (...)
and sumptuous (...). This (...) a little money (...) brake and (...) his
installation by a deputy in secret manner. Having been 7. year (...), he
died at (...), and (...) order that his body should be buried at (...), but his
heart at (...) in Cheshire inhere he was borne, in a chapel of his own
building which he (...) to (...), but death (...) him.

56. Christopher Bambridg.
CHristopher Bambridge succeeded. He was a gentleman likewise of an ancient
house, borne near Appleby in (...); a doctor of both Laws, first Master of
the Rolls; then Deane of York; consecrate Bishop of Durham in the beginning
of the year 1507. and the next year was translated to York. Being Ambassador
from king Henry the 8. to the Pope, the year 1510. he was made Cardinal at
Rome in the month of March. Whether he stayed there so long, or made a second
journey thither I cannot tell: But certain it is that being there, the year
1514. he was poisoned by one Rinaldo de Modena an Italian priest his steward,
upon malice and displeasure conceived, for a blow his Master gave him, as the
said Rinaldo (being executed for that fact) confessed at the time of his death.
So P. Iouius reports. He died July 14 and was buried there in the church
belonging to the English house, dedicated to the holy Trinity.

57. Thomas Woolsey.
THat famous Cardinal Thomas Woolsey ( of whom we are next to discourse) was
borne in Ipswich, being the son of a poor man, and (as I have often heard) a
butcher. He was sent to Oxford very young, and was brought up there in
Magdalene College: He was first schoolmaster of the Grammar school belonging
to Magdalene College, and preferred to a Benefice in Somersetshire called
Lymmyngton, by the Marquis Dorset, unto whose sons he had been Tutor in
Oxford. Being there, Sir Amyas Pawlet a knight of that country, did him a great
disgrace, setting him in the stocks, upon what occasion I know not. Of that
injury the knight much repented him afterward, at what time this poor
scholar being advanced to the high honor of Lord Chauncellor, not only
rebuked him sharply in words (as there was great cause) but also made him
dance attendance 5. or 6. years in London, until by great suit he obtained
license of departure. His Lord and Patron the Marquis dying, he saw (...)
without all likelihood of further preferment, especially if he should settle
himself upon his (...). Leaving it therefore and determining to seek some
(...) fortune, abroad in the world, he happened to be entertained of an ancient
(...) called (...) John Naphaunt, who (...) an office, of importance in Callis,
wherein (being very (...) himself) he altogether (...) this Woolsey his
chaplain, until such time, as weary of it, in regard of his own weakness
and impotencie, he gave it over. But mindful of (...) chaplains good service,
he (...) left him till he had (...) means to (...) him the kings chaplain.
Now was (...) where he would be. Many times he was (...) to say ((...) heard)
if he could once set but one (...) in the Court, (...) would not doubt but
attain what he (...). And to speak but the truth, it was not only his good
fortune that exalted (...) to that (...) greatness, but much deal his own
(...), and many extraordinary parts in him. He was marvelous witty, well
learned, fair spoken, and passing cunning in winning the hearts of those whose
favor he affected. The first thing he endeavored (being now a courtier) was
(...) make himself known unto such as were nearest about the king: and the
man he specially followed, was Richard (...) Bishop of Winchester, upon whose
council he saw the (...) did most rely. He soon perceived what was in
Woolsey: and at a time when the king bethought him of some witty (...) to
dispatch certain affairs with the Emperor, mentioned him as a fit man. The
king upon his commendation, sent for this chaplain, and committed the business
unto him. The Emperor lay then in the Low Countries, whether (...) Woolsey made
such haste (wind and weather favoring him) as within less then 4. days
after his dispatch, he was back at the court again, having ordered all the
kings businesses to his contentment. By this time, the king saw (...) to be a
man meet for imploiment, and determined (...) to use him. It was not long then
before he (...) him (...) the Deanrie of Lincoln, and a little before his
death (...) him Almoner. That wise and excellent Prince being taken away, he
soon crept so far into the favor of the young (...), as he made him one of
his privy Counsel. In which place, he so applied himself to the (...) humor,
as in short time he possessed him altogether. (...) very (...) and well spoken,
the rest of yt Counsel used him many times as their (...) to (...) their
determinations unto the king. He then having this opportunity of perceiving the
kings inclination, followed ever that course which he saw him willing to have
taken, and advanced earnestly that part whereunto the king inclined, without
respect unto the matter otherwise. Agame, whereas the rest of the Counsel
called often upon the the king, to acquaint himself with matters of state, by
resorting to the Counsel, and affoording his presence at their deliberations;
he would advise him to follow his pleasures, and let Counsel matters alone to
him, assuring him, that at night he should hear as much of him in one quarter
of an hour, as if he had been present all day at those tedious and wearisome
consultations. By this trick he won himself such authority with the king, as
he did even what he list a long time. No marvel now if what preferment soever
fell stood at his refusal. The Bishopric of Tourney in France (which city
the king had lately taken) falling void, (...) was elected thereunto. Within
less then one year after, fell first Lincoln (whereunto he was preferred the
year 1514.) and then immediately after York; which also was presently
bestowed upon him. Following the stream still of this good fortune, and
thinking it best to take his time, he procured the Pope to make him first his
legate a Latere, and soon after (viz. the year 1515) Cardinal. He handled
the matter also in such sort with the king, as he was content to discharge the
Archbishop of Canterbury from the office of Chauncellor and bestowed it upon
him. Then as though the Archbishopricke of York and Chauncellorship of England
were not sufficient for maintenance of a Cardinal, he took also unto him the
Bishopric of Bathe the year 1518 holding it and the abbey of Saint Albons
with diverse other (...) livings in Comme^dam. Four years, and seven months,
he held Bathe and then resigned it to take Durham. Durham also he lastly gave
over the year 1529. in exchange for Winchester. Now you see him at the
highest. It was impossible this greatness should be able to bear his own
burden. Presently after his acceptance of Winchester, he began to fall, and
fell so fast, as (...) death had not happily staid him, he had quickly fallen
(...) much, to much less then nothing. The king upon a displeasure (how just
God knows) discharged him suddenly (...) the office of Chauncellor. His goods
were all seized to (...) kings use, and himself ready to be attaint by
parliament, had not Thomas Cromwell after Earl of Essex, then his servant,
taken great pains in defending him. When that (...) succeeded not, he was
charged to have fallen into a Praemunire by exercising his power Legantine
without the kings license. Hereunto he answered, that he had authority
thereunto front the king under his broad seal (as it was well enough known he
could prove) though that, amongst the rest of his writings were now in the
hands of his enemies. But (quoth he) I will never stand upon that point.
Whatsoever I have, I have it from the king, if it be his pleasure to have me in
a Praemunire, let it be so, I must and will be at his mercy. Almost half a
year he lived near London in great penury; one while at Asher (a house
belonging to the Bishopric of Winchester) and an other while at Richmond; the
which house, the king had lately given him in exchange for Hampton court. All
which time, he had scarce a cup (...) drink in, or a bed to lie in, but what
was (...) him; for (...) mooueables and household stuff of inestimable value,
were all taken away to the kings use. At last he was sent down into
Yorkshire, and there lived all a summer in reasonable good sort. About the
beginning of November that year, which was 1530. the Earl of Northumberland
(...) him of high treason, and took order to have him brought (...) to London:
but he fell sick by the way and died in the (...) of Leicester, (as it should
seem) of a (...); whereunto a continual fever was joined. When he had been
sick the space of 8. days, he died November 29. 1530. having been Archbishop
15. years, and being within a 4. months of 60. years of age. His last words
are said to be these. If I had served (...) as diligently as I have done the
king, he would not have given me over in my gray hairs; but this is the just
(...) that I must receive, for the pains and study that I have had, to do him
service, not regarding my service to God, but only to satisfy his pleasure.
In his flourishing time, he began the building of two most stately colleges,
one at Ipswich, the other at Oxford; and it is great pity he finished them
not. Had they been perfected, I think they would have been two of the (...)
monuments of the world. And surely it were a wonder that any private man
should take two such pieces of work in hand at one time, whereof any one might
seem a great matter for a prince to finish; had not his receipts been
infinite, and his helps otherwise very great. I think verily (and am able to
yield good reason of my (...)) that if one man had now in his hands the
revenues of all the Bishoprics and (...) also in England, his rents (...) not
arise to so high a reconing, as the yearly receipts of this Cardinal. Yet was
it not his own purse that gave him courage to so great an enterprise: for his
bounty was such as he could not but spend all he received. The number of his
servants daily attending in his house were well near (...) hundred, of which
there were one Earl, nine Lords, a great number of Knights and (...). I reckon
not all this while his servants servants, which it is though grew to a far
greater number. He obtained leave of the Pope to dissolve forty small
monasteries, the spoil whereof furnished him principally for the building of
his colleges, but opened a gap withal to king Henry, to destroy all the rest,
as soon after he did. The lands he had provided for his college in Oxford
(though confiscate by his (...)) the king was content to leave (...) that
college (or at least wise other for them) and became the founder thereof,
calling it, Collegium (...) ex (...). Who so desires to know more of this
great and famous Cardinal, let him have recourse unto master Stowes Annals of
England, where his whole life and actions are largely described. And I (...)
myself beholding to him, amongst many other helps, for the greatest part of
this discourse, which I have much (...) gathered thence, and would gladly have
inserted the whole, but that it very much (...) my determined proportion. To
make an end, this our Cardinal was buried in the Abbey of Lecester (where he
died) in the body of the church before the quier door.

58. Edward Lee.
The Sea having been void by the death of Cardinal Woolsey almost one year,
the king preferred unto the same, Edward Lee his Almoner, a great Antagonist of
Erasmus. He was well learned, but no fit match for him. He was much employed in
embassages, both before his preferment, and after. He sat Archbishop thirteen
years, and dying September 13. 1544. was buried in his own church, where is
this Epitaphe to be seen engraven upon his toombe, Edwardus Leus
Archiepiscopus Ebor. Theologus eximius, atque omni literarum genere long
eruditislimus, sapientia and vitae sanctitate clarus, Euangelicae doctrinae
praeconem semper agens, pauperibus beneficus, omnibus ordinibus iuxta charus,
magno de se apud omnes desiderio relicto, hic sepultus iacet Sedit
Archiepiscopus annos paulo minus 13. obijt Ibid. Septaetatis suae anno 62. anno
Christi 1544. In English thus: Edward Lee Archbishop of York, a great divine,
and very well seen in all kind of learning, famous as well for wisdom (...)
virtue and holiness of life, a continual preacher of the gospel, a man very
liberal unto the poor, and greatly beloved of all sorts of men, who greatly
miss, and bemoane the want of him, lies buried in this place. He deceased
September 10. in the sixty two year of his age the year of our (...) 1544.

59. Robert Holgate.
BEfore the end of the same year, Robert Holgate Doctor of Divinity, was
translated from Landaff in (...) (where he had been seven years Bishop) unto
York, and continued there until the beginning of Queen Mary, who caused him
to be deprived, and that (as I take it) for (...) married.

60. Nicolas Heath.
ABout the year 1539. Nicolas Heath, a Londoner borne, (...) of Divinity, and
Almoner unto the king, was made Bishop of Rochester. Within (...) years, he
was removed to Worceter: the year 1551 he was displaced, and Master Hooper
made Bishop there. But Queen Mary restored him again in the beginning of her
reign, and made him President of Wales. Soon after, to wit, the year 1553 he
was translated to York, and upon the death of Stephen Gardener made Lord
Chauncellor of England. These places he held until the happy reign of our
Soneraigne the Queen that now is, at what time he thought good to resign them
both, and lived afterward upon some lands that heretofore he had purchased,
being much favored by her (...), in regard of his diligent and faithful (...)
for her establishment in the throne royal, which (her sister Mary being dead)
no man doubted to be due only unto her. He did but his (...); calling together
the nobility and commons in the Parliament then assembled, he certified them of
(...) (...) death, and (for that he was Lord Chauncellor) gave order for the
proclayming of the Lady Elizabeth. This it pleased her Majesty of her gracious
clemency to take in so good part, as she was content the rather to bear with
faults of his otherwise intolerable.

61. Thomas Young.
THomas Young sometime Bishop of Saint (...) was the first Bishop of York in
this Queens days: He was confirmed therein February 25. 1561. and about the
same time made Lord President of the north. This man (for what cause or purpose
I know not) pulled down the great hall in the palace of York ann. 1562.
which was sumptuously built by Thomas the elder his predecessor almost 500.
years (...). He died June 26. 1568. at Sheffield, and was buried in the
Minster of York.

62. Edmund Grindall.
Upon the deprivation of Edmund Boner, Edmund Grindall was appointed unto the Sea of London, whereunto he was elected July 26. 1559. and sat there about 11.
years. May 22. 1570. he was translated thence to York, there he continued
till the year 1575. at what time, he was promoted unto the Archbishopricke of
Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

63. Edwyn Sands.
EDwyn Sands doctor of Divinity was Uicechauncellor of the University of
Cambridge, at what time the Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen, about which
matter, he endured much trouble and long imprisonment (The history whereof is
reported at large by Master Fox unto whom I remit the reader.) In the
beginning of this Queens reign, to wit December 21. 1559. he was consecrate
Bishop of Worceter, and succeeded Edmund Grindall both in London (whereunto he
was confirmed July 13. 1570.) and also in York. He continued there Archbishop
about (...). years, and dying August 8. 1588. was buried at Southwell.

64. John Piers.
John Piers Doctor of Divinity, being Deane of Christ church in Oxford, was
made Bishop of Rochester and Almoner the year 1576. translated to Salisbury
(continuing still Almoner) the year following; and upon the death of Bishop
Sands preferred to York. This man lived always unmarried, and departed this
life September 27. or thereabouts 1594.

65. Matthew Hutton.
IN the beginning of March following, Matthew Hutton doctor of Divinity, first
Deane of York, and consecrate Bishop of Durham the year 1589. was advanced to
the Metropoliticall See of York, and as yet continues in the same.

The Bishops of Durham.
1. Aidanus.
THe noble and virtuous Prince (...), having attained the kingdom (...)
Northumberland the year 634. and desirous that his countrymen and (...) should
not only be governed by the sword for their temporal good, but also directed
by the word and preaching of the gospel to the everlasting salvation of their
souls, he sent his Ambassador unto his neighbors the Scots (amongst whom were
then many (...) and well learned preachers) requesting them to send unto him
some good man that might instruct his people in the (...) and fear of Christ.
To this his most reasonable request, they quickly condiscended; and sent unto
him first a man, that doing his best endeavor a while amongst them, and
perceauing he could do no good, returned shortly into his own country again,
complaining that they were a barbarous and (...) people, amongst whom he had
been, and such as he thought he could not spend his time worse, then in seeking
to instruct them, that seemed, neither desirous nor capable of knowledge. They
that sent him, very sorry for this tidings, and consulting amongst themselves
what course were now to be taken, it chanced one of them named Aidanus to use
these words. It seems to me (quoth he) that this our brother dealt somewhat
to roughly with his unlearned auditors, not (...) them first with the milk of
gentle words, and easy doctrine, according to the council of the Apostle,
until such time as they were enabled to digest stronger meat: And this I take
to be the cause of the ill success his preaching had amongst them. All the
rest of the company thought it very probable which he had said, and these his
(words occasioning them to remember, besides his learning and godliness, his
notable discretion and known wisdom, they agreed all, that (...) no man was
so likely to amend that fault, as he that had so quickly found and discerned it
in the other, and so with one consent ordained him Bishop of Northumbers. This
Aidanus an humble minded man, a lover of silence and poverty (says William
Malmesbury) avoiding of purpose the pomp and frequency of York, chose for his
See a little Island called Lindisfarne (now Holy Island) where he and diverse of
his successors much deal lead their lives. He was Bishop seventeen years,
during which time, he neglected no duty of a good Pastor, traveling up and
down the country even on foot to preach the Gospel, giving whatsoever he
could get unto the poor, and by the example of his own abstinency, chastity,
(...) and all manner of Episcopal virtues, instructing, as well, as by word and
doctrine. He departed this life nt August 31. an. 651. for grief (as it is to
be thought) of the death of king Oswald that was traitorously slain 12. days
before. Beda makes report of diverse miracles to be done by him, which who so
desires to read, shall find them and many things more concerning him Eccl.
hist. lib. 3. c. 3. 5. 1415. 16. and 17.

2. Finan.
FIunanus (sent likewise thither out of Scotland) was Bishop of (...) after
(...) the space of ten years. He first built a church for his See in the
Island all of timber, and covered it with reed. He had much to do with one
Conan and other about the observation of Easter, which they would have had him
to celebrate according to the manner of the church of Rome. He would not be
induced by any means to any alteration.

3. Coleman.
HIs successor Coleman ( a Scot also) was no less obstinate in the same
matter. After many private conflicts, the year 664. this controversy was
discust in a solemn disputation before the king and all his nobles, who
adjudged the victory unto his adversaries. The (...)tation is set down at
large by Beda lib.3 cap. 25.(...) enduring the disgrace of this foil;
(...)ricke and returned into Scotland again.

4. Tuda.
AMongst diverse that came out of Scotland with Coleman, this Tuda was one, who
having (...) of his (...) for the place, by diligent preaching, and virtuous
behavior under Coleman, upon his departure was chosen to succeed him. He was
content to reform the observation of (...), and to yield to some other things
which had been stood much upon and controuerted between the Scots and Saxons.
Having been Bishop (...) one whole year, he died of the plague anno 665.

5. Eata.
MAny of the Scots that came with Coleman returning with him, the rest chose
Eata for their Abbot, and (...) at Mailros, which place king Oswyn gave unto
them at the request of Coleman. This Eata after the death of Tuda was chosen
Bishop both of (...) and (...), and governed them jointly the space of 3.
years. After the end of which term, he gave over (...) unto one Tumbert. But
Tumbert being deposed by a Synod gathered at a place called Twiford, Cutbert
was elected unto his See of Hagustald. Eata then perceiving that Cutbert had
rather be at (...), took on him once more the government of (...), and
resigned (...) unto Cutbert.

6. S. Cutbert.
THis Cutbert is said to be descended of the blood royal of the kings of
Ireland, being son of one (...), and Sabina his wife, that was daughter unto
a king (...). He was brought up in the Abbey of (...), first under his
predecessor Eata, and afterward under (...), that succeeded Eata there. After
the death of Boisill, he was made Abbot of that Monastery, which he ruled with
great care and sincerity. And not content to look unto those only, the
government of whom was especially committed unto him; He used often to travel
into the country near adjoining, (...) on horseback, sometimes on foot,
preaching diligently the word of God, instructing the ignorant in the way of
life, and sharply reprehending vice where he saw cause. And his manner was to
frequent especially, the most rude and barbarous places, to which he thought no
body else would resort, least the people there being altogether neglected,
might perish for want of their spiritual food. He was a very personable man,
well spoken, and so mighty in persuading, as none that ever he dealt withal
was able to withstand the force of his words. Having continued this manner of
life at Mailros many years, at the importunate request of his old master Eata,
he was content to leave the place and to live once more under him at
Lindisfarne. But affecting much an Eremiticall and solitary life, he refused
to live with the rest of the monks, and seated himself in the Island of Farne,
a desert place 9 miles within the sea, having in it neither house nor water.
Yet there he made a shift to live, laboring with his own hands, till he was
chosen Bishop. A great while he refused obstinately to forsake his solitary
life, even until the king himself coming over unto him, partly by force, and
partly by entreatie, iuduced him thereunto. So with much adoo he accepted
consecration at last, and received the same at York upon Easter day, at the
hand of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury (6. other Bishops assisting him) the
year 684. in the presence of king Egfride, and many of his nobles. After he
had been Bishop two years, he would needs resign, and returned to his
Island again, where seen after he ended his life. The day of his departure
(to wit March 20.) is consecrate unto his memory. He was first buried at (...),
but afterward removed to Durham as hereafter shall be declared. The miracles
that are ascribed unto him and many other things not unworthy the reading, you
shall find in the latter end of the 4. Book of Beda his Ecclesiastical
history.

7. Eadbertus.
ONe year after the resignation of Saint Cutbert, the church of Lindisfarne
was without a Bishop, Edbert was then chosen to succeed him. He covered his
Cathedral church with lead; not only the roof (which before was thatched
with reed) but the walls also. He sat ten years, and dying May the 6.
698. was buried beside, or rather under Saint Cutbert his predecessor, whose
body the monks had now placed in a shyrne above the pauement of the church.

After Edbert followed in order successively these:
8. Edferth or Edfride that lived in Beda his time. 9. Ethelwood, who died the
year 738. 10. Kenulfus, he died 781.
11. Higbald.
HIgbald sat twelve years, and died an. 803. In his time the Danes often
spoiled the Church and monastery of Lindisfarne, so as the Bishop and monks
were feign to forsake it. Taking therefore the body of Saint Cutbert with them,
they determined to seat themselves in Ireland: but being often driven back by
tempest, so as attempting diverse times to cross the seas, they could never
land there; they gave over that enterprise, and rested themselves sometime in
one place, sometime in an other, during the time of all these Bishops.

12. Egbert. 13. Egfredus, he died an. 845. 14. Eaubert, he died an. 854. 15.
Eardulf. 16. Cuthard, he died an. 915. 17. Tilred, he died an. 927. 18.
Withred. 19. (...). 20. (...). 21. Aldred, he died an 968. 22. Alfsius, he died
an. 990.
23. Aldhunus or Aldiuinus.
ABout the year of grace 990. this (...) was consecrate Bishop. The year 995.
or nere thereabout, he came to Durham, or rather (for so is the right name)
Dunholm, which is compounded of two saxon words Dun, signifying a hill, and
Holm, an Island in a river. Before his coming thither it was a place wild and
not habitable being all a wood, full of thick bushes and trees; saving only a
little plain upon the top of the hill, that was wont to be sowed and is the
very place where the church now stands. With the help of the country people,
and (...) Earl of Northumberland, he cut down the wood, cleansed the place,
and in short time made it habitable. All the people, dwelling between the
rivers of These and Coqued, came then and affoorded most readily their best
help unto the building of a church there, never ceasing until in the time of
this Bishop (who principally caused the same) it was quite finished. He was
schoolmaster unto the children of (...), (...) and Edward that after reigned,
and is commonly called Edward the Confessor. The king their father being driven
out of his kingdom by (...) the Dane, the year 1013 he sent him with (...)
his wife and his two sons before named unto Richard Duke of Normandy their
uncle. How seen the Bishop returned I know not, but I find that he died within
three years after, to wit, the year 1017. having continued Bishop almost nine
and twenty years.

24. Eadmund.
THree years after the death of Aldwine the Sea remained void, by reason of
the great troubles and continual wars wherewith the realm was vexed by the
Danes. At the last, God sending a more peaceable time, the clergy of Durham
determined to proceed unto an election. As they were conferring about the
business they had in hand, it happened a certain grave priest to come into
the place where they were gathered together, and (understanding what they were
about) to say merrily unto them, that they were best choose him. These words
used by him in jest, were (...) unto by them in good earnest; insomuch as, upon
a little deliberation they agreed indeed to elect him for their Bishop, and so
did: Matthew Westminster adds (credit him as you list) that the monks
fasting three days and praying unto Saint Cutbert to show some token of his
approbation or dislike of this election; there was a voice heard out of his
shrine (the priest being at mass) that three times named Edmond to the
Bishopric. He was elected the year 1020. But not consecrate in five years
after. He sat alter the time of his consecration 23. years, and dying at
Gloucester anno 1048. was carried thence to his own church of Durham and there
buried. William of Malmsbury commends him much for his industry in adorning
his church and city with buildings and otherwise.

25. Eadred.
PResently after his death, Eadred was made Bishop, enjoyed that honor a very
short time, to wit, 10. months only, and then died.

26. Egelric.
EGelricus a monk (or as I find also reported Abbot) of Peterborough,
succeeded him, by the means and endeavor of Godwyn Earl of Kent. He builded a
church at Cuneagecester (now called Chester upon the street) in memory that
the Bishops of Lindisfarne had rested themselves there, together with the body
of Saint Cutbert, 113. years during the time of the Danish wars. In digging
the foundation of this church, he found such an infinite deal of money, as
after that time, not caring for the revenues of his Bishopric, he resigned the
same unto Egelwyn his brother, and returned himself to the monastery of
Peterborough whence he came. There he bestowed great cost in building and
repairing the church and monastery, as also in making a cawsie with timber,
lyme and sand, through the fennes between Deeping and Spalding, a work very
necessary and of infinite charge. This cawsie was called after the name of the
maker Elrichrode. He resigned the year 1056. and having led a private life now
13 years, in his old age, to wit the year 1069. he was charged (I know not
how justly) with treason and conspiracy against the Conqueror, who drew him
out of his cloister at Peterborough, and imprisoned him at Westminster. There
(says W. Malmsbury) by continual fasting and abundance of tears, washing
away the guilt of his (...) misdeedes, he wanne unto himself such reputation
of holiness, as the place of his burial was much trequented after his death.
He died October 15. 1072. and (if I mistake him not for his brother, as many of
our writers do, who confound the history of these men, and attribute diverse
actions of the one unto the other) was buried in the chapel of Saint Nicholas
in Westminster.

27. Egelwyn.
THis Egelwyn was Bishop at the coming in of the Conqueror, against whom he
always opposed himself. At the last seeing himself not able to withstand
him, and fearing to be too near him, he forsook Durham in the end of the
year 1069. and carried his clergy with him unto the church of Lindisfarne. But
it was not long before they returned again. The king having withdrawn his
forces out of that country, and the Bishop (belike) being taken into favor,
about the beginning of Lent the church was furnished again, and the Bishop
himself entered the same, April 6. within two years after which time, whether
it were the ancient hatred he bore unto the king that now reboiled in his
stomach, or a vain hope of recovering the liberty of his country enthralled
unto the Normans, or offense taken at the unreasonable oppression of the same,
and especially of clergy men (as Stigand and diverse other that were deprived
of their Bishoprics and other promotions. He joined with certain English
Noble men, in a flat rebellion, alleging at first that they feared
imprisonment and hard measure, but indeed purposing to depose the king, and set
up some English man. When things succeeded not according to their expectation,
they were feign to hide themselves in woods and secret places, doing great
spoil in the country, till at last they took the Isle of Ely, which they
defended against the kings power a long space. In the mean time Egelwyn our
Bishop took ship and departed (as Matt. (...). says) into voluntary exile.
But William Malmesbury charge him with piracie and robbery upon the sea. In
the end being taken he was committed to straight prison at Abbingdon, where he
died the year 1071. in winter, refusing (as Flor. Wigor. delivers) for
grief and anger to take any sustenance: Howbet other think his abstinence was
of constraint, and that he would gladly have eaten if he could have gotten
meat. It is said he was buried in Saint Nicholas chapel at Westminster: But
I think him mistaken for his brother Agelrike.

28. Walter.
EGelwyn yet living (but in prison) the king caused one Walter borne in
Lorraine, to be consecrate Bishop. He attending more worldly affairs then the
charge of his flock, gave himself altogether to temporal business, wherein he
wholly occupied himself. He bought of the king the Earldom of Northumberland,
and then making himself a secular Judge, took upon him to sit in the court,
and to determine all causes at his pleasure, dealing withal very corruptly,
and taking still the course that might be most for his own gain. Hereby he
greatly enriched his coffers, but purchased unto himself extreme hatred
amongst the common people, which was his destruction in the end. There was a
certain gentleman of great account named Leolfus, that married Algitha the
daughter of Aldred sometime Earl of Northumberland, from whom the Lord Lumly
that now lives is lineally descended. This Leulfus, to the end he might live
near the church in his later time, and for very devotion, came to Durham to
dwell there, and kept company very much with the Bishop, who loved him
entirely, for many good parts he saw in him; as namely, his wisdom in
descerning, his equity in deciding, and his discretion in ordering and handling
such causes as he committed unto him; in which respect also he used him very
(...), employed him often, and gave him what countenance he could. Now you
shall understand, that unto the same Bishop belonged two men, unto whom for the
most part he committed the (...) of all his affairs; (...) or Leobwyn his
chaplain whom he trusted withal household matters, and Gilbert a kinsman of
his own that dealt in his causes of temporal government. In these offices,
they behaved themselves so, as the Bishop had cause to commend their diligence,
but to blame their rashness and wilfulnes in many things. Which notwithstanding,
he bare withal, either because their industry, and care of his affairs so
blinded his eyes as he could not epsy their misbehauiour otherwise; or else,
being loath to (...) them whom he had once advanced. These men, and especially
(...), did greatly envy the credit that (...) had gotten with the Bishop, and
every where opposed themselves against him, not only in words, traducing his
actions, but in deeds also still thwarting and crossing his endeavors. Whereby
it came to pass, that many tarres fell out between them. One day amongst the
rest, a court being held in the presence of the Bishop, (...) or (...) (for so
also I find him called) according unto his wonted manner, gave (...) ill
speeches, which he not enduring to bear as heretofore he had done ( furor fit
(...)) answered this saucy Chaplain somewhat more roundly then he had
accustomed. Whereupon he rose straight from the court in great indignation (
(...) I mean) and calling (...) aside, with little adoo persuaded him to carry
a certain number of armed men to the house where (...) lay, and in a night to
kill him; which indeed he (...) with great cruelty, murdering not only the
innocent gentleman himself, but also his servants and whole household. The
news of this horrible and outragions cruelty, coming unto the cares of the
Bishop, amassed him very much and suspecting it was done by the advice of
Leofwin, turning him about unto him, O Leofwin says he, thou have already
flaine me by thy tongue. So not doubting it would breed much danger unto him,
he got him into his castle, and presently dispatched messengers unto the
friends and kindred of Leulfus that was slain, protesting that the fact was
committed without his knowledge, that he was maruailous sorry for it, and if any
man suspected him, would be ready to submit himself to any order of law,
whereby he might clear himself. Herewith they seemed to be satisfied; but for
conclusion of a firm peace amongst them, it was thought fit they should meet
and conser of the matter. They met at a place called Goats, head. The Bishop
for his better safeguard betook himself unto the church with his company. The
people (whereof an infinite number were gathered together) aboade without.
Messages a while passed between them, but the more the matter was debated
(being very odious of it self) the more they were incensed. At last it was
told them how not only Leofwin but also Gilbert had been harbored in the
Bishops house, and affoorded countenance of him since the murder: which being
once heard (and it was true enough) they all cried out, it was manifest that
the Bishop was the author of this fact. It is furthermore delivered by Matthew
Paris, that the Bishop not long before this amongst many intolerable exactions
laid upon the country by him, had commanded the sum of 400, l, to be
levied at this time. That being also remembered, while as all the company stood
in a mammering, doubting what course to take, one of some special regard
amongst them stepped up, using these words, Short read, good read, (...) ye the
(...). Hereupon without more adoo they ran all unto the church, killed so many
of the Bishops (...) as they found without doors, and with horrible noise and
outcries bid him and his company to come out unto them. Too late then he
repented that he had committed himself unto the fury of a discontented
multitude, with whom he knew himself before that time nothing gracious. But to
make the best of a badde match, and to try all means of ridding himself from
the danger imminent, he persuaded his kinsman Gilbert there present to go
forth unto them, if happily his death (which doubtless he had well deserved)
might satisfy their (...) and purchase safety unto his Lord and Master.
Gilbert was content, and issuing out, with diverse of the Bishops company, were
all (...) except only two English men servants unto the Bishop (all the rest
were Normans) They being not yet (...), he besought (...) (whose life he knew
well was principally (...)) to go out also. But he utterly refused so to do.
The Bishop therefore going unto the church door, entreated them not to take his
life from him, protested himself to be utterly (...) of the blood of (...),
and showed them at large, how dangerous it would be unto them in particular,
and what inconveniences would follow unto the whole country in general, if
they should defile their hands in shedding his blood, an unarmed priest, a
sacred and consecrate Bishop, their ruler, their governor, their magistrate.
Hoping lastly that his very countenance, his gravity, his age, and the sight
of his person might somewhat move them to compassion for he was indeed a very
reverend man to see to, very tall of stature, head and beard as white as snow,
his face fresh and well colored, and every way (...) personable.) He went out
carrying a green branch in his hand, that so also he might testify his desire
of peace. When he saw that all this auailed not, and the people ran
furiously upon him, he cast his gown over his own head in like sort, as we
read (...) Caesar did in the like case, and permitting himself to their fury,
with innumerable wounds was (...) massacred, together with all his people and
retinue, to the number of 100. only (...) yet remained within the church and
being often called would not come (...). So they set the Church a fire: Not
(...) the fire, he leapt out at a window, and was immediately hewn into a
thousand pieces. This barbarous slaughter was committed May 14. 1080. The
monks of Yarrow came and fetched away the Bishops body (which they found (...)
naked) and could hardly know it for the multitude of wounds; they carried it
to their monastery, from whence it was (...) to Durham and there buried on the
south side of the chapterhouse, but secretly for fear of the (...) that (...)
up and down the town, and once assaulted the castle: when they could not
prevail there, they dispersed themselves, and for the most part came to evil
and unhappy ends. The king in the mean time hearing of this tumult, sent his
brother Odo Bishop of Bayon with many of his nobles, and a great army to take
punishment of this murder, which while they sought to revenge, they brought
the whole country to desolation. Those that were guilty prevented the danger
toward them by (...), so as (...) of them could be taken. Of the rest that
stayed at home, some were unjustly executed, and the rest compelled to ransom
themselves to their utter impouerishing and undoing. This Odo took away from
the church of Durham at that time certain ornaments of great value, amongst
which is especially remembered a certain crosyer of inestimable price. In this
Bishops time and by his endenour, secular Clerks were displaced, and the
church of Durham replenished with monks, the Pope, the King, and the
Archbishop allowing this alteration.

29. William Kairlipho.
The Sea of Durham having been void 6 months after Walter, to wit. November
9. following William Kairlipho Abbot of Saint Uincente, was elected, and
received consecration at the hands of Thomas Archbishop of York, January 3.
following at Gloucester, the king and almost all the Bishops of the realm being
present at that solemnity. The monks (whom he favored much, for he expelled
diverse married priests out of his church of Durham, whom Walter was content to
bear withal, and suffered only monks there) they praise him for a man of
great wisdom, learning and virtue. Certain it is, that he was very subtle,
whereby, (as also by the volubilitie of his tongue which he had passing ready
at commandment) he got very far into the favor of the king William the
Conqueror, and afterward of his son William Rufus, under whom he did even
what he list Unto the later end of these he proved very unthankful, joining
himself with Odo Bishop of Bayon in a rebellious conspiracy against him. The
rebels being overthrown, he was saine for his safeguard to shut himself up
within the walls of Durham. The king hasting thither by great iourneies,
besieged (...), and after a thort time had the town yielded by composition,
wherein it was conditioned, that the Bishop and his company should depart in
safety. So he got him beyond the seas, and lived in (...) three years, viz.
until September 11. 1090. at what time the king coming to Durham, received
him to grace, and restored him to his former dignity, that very day three
years that he had departed thence. After that time he omitted nothing whereby
he might curry favor with the king, ever applying himself that way whither he
saw him to (...). In all the (...) between the king and Anselm, he was the
(...) stirrer against the Archbishop, hoping belike, so to assure himself of
the kings favor; and if Anselm should be displaced which he endeavored) he
thought no man so likely then to succeed him as himself. But he failed in both
of these purposes, for the kings displeasure was his death. He was summoned to
appear before the king at Gloucester, at a day; before which time for grief as
it is thought) he fell sick. When he appeered not, and it was told the king he
was sick; he swear by Lukes face ((...) was his usual oath) he lied, he did
but counterfeit, and he would have him fetched with a vengeance. It appeered the
excuse was true enough; for seen after, viz. January 2. 1095. he died, having
been Bishop fifteen years. This man pulling down to the ground the Church
that (...) had first built began to erect another far more magnificent, but
lived not to finish it. (...), (...) (...) of Scots and Turgot Prior of Durham,
(...) the first (...). stones, July 30. or (as some deliver Aug. 11.) (...). It
is said, that lying upon his death bed, and (as was thought past memory (if not
dead) diverse Prelates that were in his chamber, conferred of the order of his
(...), and amongst other things appointed the place of his burial to be in the
(...), upon the building whereof he had bestowed so much. The supposed dead man
ouerheard them, and gathering his forces together, made shift to breath out
these (...); It shall not please God says he, that you prejudice the honor of
Saint (...) by my burial, for (...) of wham, never any of my predecessors
would enduret o be laid there. Bury you me therefore in the chapter house. It
was performed accordingly: his body was conueighed from Gloucester (where he
died unto Durham, and on the North part of the chapter house there solemnly
enterred. Within a year or two after his first being Bishop, he traveled to
Rome, and obtained there license of Pope Gregory the seventh to bring the
monks from Yarrow and Wermouth into the Cathedral church of Durham. He also
bestowed upon them, not only books and diverse ornaments for the furnishing of
their church, but lands and (...) in sundry places; for the confirmation of all
which gifts, he procured the charter of William the Conqueror under Seal.

30. Ranulf Flambard.
AFter the death of William, the Sea of Durham stood void three years and
four months. The king at last bestowed it upon one Ranulf, rather for the
service he had done him, then for any special service he could hope he would
do, either to God or his church. For he was a very wicked man, but such a one
as had served his turn notably. He was first Chaplain unto Maurice Bishop of
London, and well (...) of him, but not so well as that he would let him have
the Deanery falling void; which he taking very ill in a (...) left him and (by
what means I know not) woond himself into the court. Being passing subtle
and shrewd witted, fair spoken, and nothing scrupulous, but ready to do any
thing for preferment; It was no hard matter for him to obtaiue any thing of the
king ( William Rufus) a very corrupt and vicious prince. His first practice
was, to farm the vacacies of Abbotships and Bishoprics of the king; whereby
he not only enriched himself, but brought great sommes of money into the kings
coffers that never were acquainted with that kind of profit before. The king
perceiving him to be a fit instrument for his purposes, employed him daily more
and more, and at last made him chief governor of all his realm under him, so
as he had all that authority which now the Lord Treasurer, Chauncellor, and
diverse other officers have divided amongst them. For it seems unto me, that
few of those offices were then so precisely distinguished as soon after. This
authority he abused very impudently, not caring whom he offended so he might
(...) either the king or himself. Many times when the king gave commandment
for the leuying of a certain sum of money amongst his subjects, he would
require of the commons twice so much; whereat the king being very well content,
would laugh and say, that (...) was the only man for his turn, who cared not
whom he displeased so he might please his Master. It was impossible, but he
should be very odious, both unto the common people and nobility also. And no
marvel if many complaints were made unto the king of him; against all which
he shut his (...). When therefore that way succeeded not, some of those his
discontent adversaries determined to wreake their malice upon him by killing
him. They famed a message from the Bishop of London his old Master, saying that
he was very sick and ready to depart the world, that he was wonderful desirous
to speak with him, and to the end he might make the better speed had sent him
a barge to (...) him unto his house being then by the water side. He suspecting
no fraud, went with them in great have, attended only by his secretary and
some one or two other; they having him thus in their clutches, carried him not
to the appointed stairs, but rowed (...) on (say he what he would) till they
came unto a ship provided for him ready to set sail. As seen as he perceived
how he was intrapped, he cast away his ring or manuel seal, and after his
great scale (whether the broad Seal of England or no, I know not) into the
river, least they might give opportunity of forging false graunts and
conueyances Then he fell to entreating and persuading, but all to no purpose,
for they were determined he should dye. They had appointed two (...) to
dispatch him, either by knocking out his brains, or tossing him a live (...),
for doing whereof they were promised to have his clothes. These executioners
could not agree upon the division of this reward, for his gown was better
worth then all the rest of his apparel. While they were reasoning upon that
point, it pleased God to raise a terrible and fearful tempest, such, as they
looked every minute to die themselves, and therefore had no very good leisure
to think of putting an other man to death. Ranulf then omitting no
opportunity of his deliverance, like an other (...), by the music of his
eloquence seeks to alay their malice, and to diswade them from the execution
of their bloody determination, laying diligently before them, the danger that
was like to ensue unto them by so cruel a murder, which could not be hid,
promising mountains of gold if they saved his life, and lastly wishing them
to consider, how God by raising this tempest, had threatened to revenge his
death, and had as it were set the image of his vengeance before their eyes.
Whether it were the fear of God or of man, or else the hope of reward that
wrought with them, of such effect were these his persuasions, as first diverse
of the company refused to be pertakers of his murder, one of them then stepped
forth, and vowed to defend him to his power, so as he would live or die with
him. And at length, his greatest enemies were so pacified, as Gerald the author
of this conspiracy was content to set him a land, and to conduct him to his
own house. But not trusting a reconciled foe, as soon as he had so done, he
got him out of the realm, and durst never come in England after. So by one
danger this man escaped another, and might well say as Themistocles, when
banished his country, he found better entertainment of his enemy the king of
Persia, then he could have given himself at home, Perijssem (...) perijssem, I
had indeed been utterly undone, had I not been upon the point to be undone.
Seen after his return from this brave voyage, to wit, the year 1099. he was
consecrate Bishop of Durham, in the Cathedral church of Saint Paul. He was
scarce warm in his seat, when his master the king being slain by the glance
of an arrow, as he was a hunting. Henry his brother succeeded in the kingdom.
This prince not able to withstand the importunity of his nobles, and the
innumerable complaints daily made against this our Bishop, clapped him up in the
Tower: But he so enchanted his keepers with money and (...) words, as they were
content to let him go, and to run away with him themselves. Into Normandy he
got him in the beginning of February 1101. and did never linne buzzing into the
ears of Robert Duke of Normandy, telling him the kingdom of England was his
by right, till he provoked him to attempt the invasion of this realm, but to
small purpose, as in the Chronicles you may see more at large. How long he
lived in exile I find not; it seems not to be long, for he had leisure to
bring many great things to pass at home afterward. He raised the walls of
the body of his church unto the roof; he translated the relics of Saint
Cutbert into the new Church, and bestowed a shryne upon him, he compassed the
(...) with a wall: he caused a number of houses to be pulled down that were
near the church, and might have been either noisome unto it or dangerous by
fire happening among them, he continued diverse banks along the river of Were;
with great charge, built the castle of Norham upon a steep hill near the
river of Tweede, the hospital of kepar, the bridge of Frwgewallate, and
performed same other things worthy commendations. Having sat Bishop 29.
years or thereabouts, he died September 5. 1128.

31. Geoffry Rusus.
GEoffry surnamed Rufus, Chancellor of England was then preferred unto the Sea of Durham, in which he sat 13. years, and died ann. 1141.

32. Will. de Sancta Barbara.
NExt after him, succeeded William de Sancta Barbara Deane of York, a (...)
and very religious man. He continued in this See 9. years and, died 1152.

33. Hugh Pusar.
HVgh Pusar, Pudsey or de Putuaw (for thus diuerfly I find him called)
Treasurer of York and Archdeacon of Winchesier, was elected unto the Sea of
Durham after the death of the foresaid William; rather in respect of his
nobility, and greatness of blood, then of any special worthiness otherwise.
For king Stephen was uncle unto him. He was very wise in ordering of temporal
matters, and ((...) he was not very learned) wonderful eloquent, exceeding
covetous, and as cunning in gathering money, as thirsty and desirous of it.
Henry Murdac Archbishop of York, not only refused to consecrate him himself,
taking exceptions both against his (...) of years and lightness of behavior:
But also sent to Rome to have a Caveat laid in against him there. Eugenius was
Pope at that time, an old acquaintance of the Archbishops, who both were
brought up at Clareual under S. Bernard. But such was the good hap of this new
elect, as a little before his arrival there, (I mean at Rome) Pope Eugenius
was dead, and seen after came certain news thither of the death of the
Archbishop also. Anastasius that succeeded. Eugenius, without much adoo
affoorded him consecration, December. 30. 1153. He sat Bishop a long time,
almost 42. years; in which time he built diverse houses upon his manors out of
the ground, and bestowed much in repairing of the rest. He builte a fair house
at Derlington; He founded the Priory of Finchall; he bought Sadbury of king
Richard the first, and gave it unto his See. He built the bridge of Eluet and
the Galiley at the west end of his Cathedral church, in which he placed the
bones of venerable Beda. Lastly, he built two hospitals, one at Allerton, an
other called Sherburne at the East end of Durham. To Sherburne he allotted
liberal allowance for the maintenance of 65. poor Lasers, and a certain
number of priests. Neubrigenses ascribes this good work partly unto other
men, whom he enforced to become benefactors unto this foundation, being loath
to be at the whole charge himself. At what time king Richard made provision
for his journey into the Holy land, he also took on him the cross, and vowed
to be one of that company. The king understanding that he had prepared a great
mass of money to carry with him, persuaded him to stay at home, and to afford
him his money; which if he would do, he promised to make him Earl of
Northumberland. The Bishop long since repenting the vow he had made, quickly
condiscended to this offer, and accepted the same. The king having created him
an Earl, turned him about unto the company, and laughing, said, he had
performed a wonderful exploit; for (quoth he) of an old Bishop I have made a
young Earl. Now that he might have some colorable ercuse of not performing
his vow, he caused the king to allege that he might not be spared out of the
realm in his absence: And to make this the more probable, giving the king
1000. marks, he persuaded him with golden Rhetoric to make him chief
Justice of England. The like Rhetoric it was that induced the Pope to
dispense with his vow, unto which the excuses before alleged made some way,
but could never have effected the business without that help. At the return of
K Richard from Jerusalem; he found him not so favorable as he expected, and
thinking that he grudged him his Earldom, resigned the same into his hands.
After which, notwithstanding he loaded him sore with many grievous exactions,
well knowing the Bishops bags to be notably (...), for that he had offered
him a great sum of money for the redemption of his Earldom. The king
therefore, being beyond the seas, sent unto him for this money, as
condiscending to his request. But the old Fox well enough (...) his (...),
humbly besought him by letters, either to afford him the Earldome first, or
else to suffer him to enjoy his money quietly. Whereupon the king that knew how
to use him in his kind, writ letters unto him full of reverend and gracious
speeches, wishing him to bring up his money to London, and there to receive the
government of the whole realm which he would commit unto him, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Being very joyful of this favor, toward London he
comes about Shrouetyde, thinking then to take his farewell of flesh, he
surffetted upon the way at Doncaster, and finding himself sick, returned home
to Houeden, where he died March 3. being the saturday in cleansing week. He
was 70. years old at the time of his death; and yet would hardly believe his
physicians, certifying him a little before he died in what danger he was. An
old Heremit named (...), esteemed of many, a very holy man, had told him he
should be blind seven years before his death, which (said our stories)
Godricus meant the blindness of his mind; and he understanding him of the
blindness of his bodily eyes, never cared to provide for death, assuring
himself he had that seven years at least to come. Being yet Treasurer of
York, he begot three (...), all sons; the first borne of a gentlewoman of
great blood, became a soldier; the second, he made Archdeacon of Durham, and
loaded him with many other (...) promotions, which he enjoying but one year
after his fathers death, was also taken away himself. The third (whom the old
Bishop loved most tenderly of all) by his fathers great suit and no less
expense, became Channcellor to the French king. He was so unhappy as to see
that his best beloved son buried. Himself departed this world (as before is
said) in the beginning of Lent an. 1195.

34. Philip of Poitiers.
KIng Henry the second favored much one Philip borne at Poitiers in Aquitaine,
for the long acceptable service he had done unto him: In reward whereof, he
besought him to prefer him unto the Bishopric of Durham then void. The king
well knowing he could not do for him any other way better cheap, commended
him so effectually unto the covent, as they durst not but choose him. He was
elected December 30. 1195. The next year he was sent Ambassador unto the Pope
together with William Longshamp that famous Bishop of Ely who died in the way
to Rome-ward. There (to wit at Rome) he was consecrate May 12. 1197. The year
1200. he went in pilgrimage to Saint James of Compostella. He was a great
hartner of king John against the Pope, aduising him ever to make no reckoning
of his excommunications. The Pope understanding thereof, excommunicated him
also together with the king: Being not yet absolved, he died the year 1208.
and was buried without the church by the hands of lay men, because he stood
excommunicate at the time of his death. This Bishop, by the license of king
Richard the first, set up a Mint at Durham, and began to coin money there the
year 1196.

35. Richard de Marisco.
IT seems the Sea was long void after the death of Philip. For Richard de
Marisco, Lord Chauncellor of England and Archdeacon of Northumberland an old
courtier, was thrust into this See by Gualo the Popes Legate, and consecrate by
the Archbishop of York, the year 1217. During the time of the vacacy, I find
that one Morgan provost of Beuerley was elected unto this Bishopric. He was
bastard brother unto king John, and begotten upon the Lady of a knight called
Sir Ralf (...) or Blewet. Exceptions were taken against him, that he was a
bastard and so by the Canons not capable of ecclesiastical preferment without
special dispensation; which the Pope being loath to grant, advised him to
call himself Blewet, and to allege that he was borne in lawful wedlock,
promising upon that condition to afford him consecration. But he answered,
that for any worldly preferment whatsoever, he would not renounce his father or
deny himself to be of the blood royal. So he lost his Bishopric and (for
ought I find) never attained other preferment after. This Richard was a very
prodigal man, and spent so liberally the goods of his church, as the monks
doubting he would undo them and himself also, went about by course of law to
stay him and force him to a moderation of expense. But it fell out quite
contrary to their expectation. For he being wilfully set, continued law with
them, appealing to Rome, etc. and continued his old course (...) until his
death. The year 1226. in the beginning of Easter term, he rid up to London
with a troop of Lawyers attending on him. At Peterborough he was entertained
in the Abbey very honorably, and going to bed there in very good health, was
found in the morning by his chamberlaines stark dead. He deceased May the
first leaving his church 40000. marks indebted. A monk of Durham bestowed this
ryming Epitaphe upon him.

(...) qui cupitis, Est sedata sitis, Qui populos regitis, Quod mors immitis,
Vobis praepositis, Quod sumvos eritis, lauds pompasque (...). si me pensare
velitis. memores super omnia sitis. non parcit honor potitis. similis fueram
been scitis. ad me currendo venitis.
36. Richard Poor.
THe king earnestly commended one Luke his Chaplain unto the Bishopric of
Durham now void, swearing unto the monks that were sent to crave a Conge
d'lier, they should have no Bishop in 7. year after if they would not be
content to elect him. The covent thinking him unworthy so high a preferment,
chose one William Scot, Archdeacon of Worceter, a grave learned man, and the
kings Chaplain: Howbeit the king offended that his desire was not satisfied,
refused in great displeasure to ratify this election. And understanding that
they sent unto Rome to entreat the Pope to put him in possession of that See;
he sent likewise his Ambassadors, the Bishop of Lichfield and the Prior of
Lanthony, to cross and hinder that designement, which they easily performed:
within a year or two after, they chose with the kings good liking) Richard
Poor Bishop of Salisbury, a notable man. He was first Deane of Salisburie,
consecrated Bishop of Chichester the year 1215. translated thence to Salisbury
1217. and lastly to Durham 1228. Being Bishop of Chichester, he purchased unto
that church Amport which he bought of the church of Winchester. At (...) he is
famous for remoouing his See from old Salisbury, to new Salisbury, where he
began the building of that stately church. See more of him in Salisbury. He
founded a monastery of Nuns called the Charnell at Tharent in (...), and
gave it unto the Queen, who chose that for the place of her burial. He
builded also a Hospital for poor people, near the college of Uaulx in
Salisburie. Coming to Durham, he had enough to do to pay the huge debt of
40000. marks that Richard de Marisco left the lands of his See bound for. He
was a man of rare learning in those times, and of notable integrity for his
life and conversation. A little before his death perceauing his end to draw
near, he caused the people to be called together, and going up into the
pulpit, made a very godly speech unto them, desiring them to mark well that
his exhortation, for he was now shortly to be taken from them. The next day he
did the like, and bidding them farewell, prayed them if he had offended any to
forgive him and to pray for him. The third day he sent for all his particular
acquaintance, called all his family and servants before him, and distributed
unto them presently by hand, such sums of money, as either he ought, or was
willing to bestow upon them: which done, and having set every thing in perfect
order, he took his leave of his friends one after an other: and then falling
to his prayers, when he came unto these words (says M. Paris) In pace (...)
dormiam and requiescam, he gave up the ghost. He died April 15. 1237. and was
buried in the Nunnery of Tharent which he had founded.

37. Nicholas de Farnham.
THomas, Prior of Durham was chosen Bishop upon the death of Poor. Through the
kings backwardnes and dislike, that election was cassate and disannulled. A
long time the monks had labored this suit for their Prior, and had spent much
money in it. At last, (...) they strove against the stream, they gave it over,
the elect himself first yielding. Then chose they Nicholas de Fernham, one
greatly commended both for his manners and learning. This man spent his yoonger
years in Oxford, and having furnished himself there with the grounds of all
good learning, especially Logike, and natural Philosophy; he (...) beyond the
seas, and studied Physic at Paris and Bononia a great while. Returning into
his native country, he gave himself much unto the study of Divinity, and
profited therein so well, as he was esteemed worthy to be a Doctor. By the
counsel of Otto the Legate, the Bishop of Carlisle and other, the king
entertained this man into his service. And first he was (as it seems unto me)
Esquire of his body, then (...) to the (...), (...) ((...)) her instructor or
directer in matters of (...) and (...). When he had now a long time been a
Courtier, it happened the Sea of Lichfield being void, the monks of (...) very
careful of choosing a sufficient man (because they knew their doings would be
sifted) the year 1239. elected him; whom they knew to be a man learned, grave,
virtuous, discreet, very wise, well spoken, and (which makes a man somewhat
the more gracious) tal of stature, personable and of a goodly presence. He
thanked them for their good will, but considering with himself that his title
to that Bishopric was like to prove litigious, (for the Chapter of Lichfield
pretended a right to the election that time) as also the great burden and
charge of the office pastoral, refused in any sort to accept of the same. The
Chapter of Lichfield (who had chosen their Deane) hearing of this refusal; by
the exhortation of the same their Deane (who resigned his right) for their part
also elected him. Which notwithstanding, he persisted in his former
determination, telling them that he felt the burden already so heavy of a
Benefice or two which he had, as he was resolved never to accept any greater
charge of souls. So they were enforced to choose another. Understanding within
two years after how the Covent of Durham with one consent had also chosen him
for their Pastor, he likewise refused, and that more earnestly now then the
last time, adding unto the former reasons this also, that if he should accept
of this place, men would say, how the hypocrite had refused a poor
Bishopric, under color of conscience to stay for a better. In this mind he
continued, till Robert Grosthead (that famous Bishop of Lincoln) reprehended
him sharply for this his backwardness. See thou not (quoth he) how the
monks of Durham, destitute of that comfort which a good pastor should yield
them, entreat thee with tears to afford the same unto them, knowing well
that if thou accept not the place, the king will immediately thrust in some
unworthy stranger to their great grief, and the no less dishonor of Almighty
God? I adjure thee therefore by the blood of Jesus Christ, that thou be content
to put thy neck under this yoke, and to employ thy talent according to the
occasion offered. Persuaded thus, with much adoo, atlast he yielded. The king
very readily allowing their choice, he was consecrate at Gloucester, in the
church of Saint Oswald, by the Archbishop of York, June 9. 1241. in the
presence of the king, the Queen, many prelates, and other personages of honor.
He was not more unwilling to take this honorable burden then ready and
desirous to leave the same. The year 1249. he obtained license of the Pope to
resign this his Bishopric, and about Candlemasse indeed gave it over;
reserving only unto himself for his maintenance during his life, three
Manors, with the appurtenances, Houeden, Stocton, and Esington. His successor
began a little to wrangle with him about that reservation, but could not
infringe it. After he had lived a private life the space of eight years,
giving himself altogether to prayer and contemplation, about the beginning of
February 1257. he departed this world at Stocton. He that is desirous to read
more of this man; in Matthew Paris he shall find often mention of him, viz.
page 768. where he tells how by his means especially the king was content to
receive into favor Walter Marshall, and to give him the Earldom of his
brother lately deceased; again, page 988. he makes a large report of a great
controversy between him and the Abbot of Saint Albones; and lastly page 848.
an incredible tale of his miraculous recovery, being desperately sick of a
dropsy joined with other diseases. He lies buried in the Cathedral Church of
Durham, which together with (...) Melscomb Prior, he covered with a new roof
the year 1242.

38. Walter de Kirkham.
NO sooner had Nicolas Farnham resigned, but the king was in hand with the
monks to elect for successor Ethelmare his own half brother. They would in no
sort condescend to this request; but told him plainly (yet in as good terms
as they could devise) how that his brother was such a one, as they could not
with a safe conscience commit so great a charge unto him, being as yet very
young and not endued with any competency of learning. The king answered, that he
would keep the temporalties eight or nine years in his hands, and by that
time (quoth he) he will be (...) enough. He was not as good as his word; for I
(...), that (...) Walter de Kirkham was consecrate the year following, (...)
that place almost eleven years, and died 1260.

39. Robert Stitchell.
RObert Stitchell succeeded the same year. He founded the hospital of
Gritham. The king had seized upon all the lands of Simon Mountford Earl of
Leicester wheresoever. But whereas he had something of good value in the
Bishopric of Durham, this Bishop challenged it as due unto him by the Earls
attainder, and at last recovering it from the king by law, employed it in the
erection of that hospital. He sat fowerteene years and died August 4. 1274.

40. Robert de Insula.
ANother Robert obtained the place after him, Robert de (...). He continued in
the same nine years, and dying June 13. 1283. was buried in the Chapterhouse
at Durham, where he is covered with a stone very curiously wrought.

41. Antony Beak.
BEfore the end of that year, it seems Antony Beak was invested in the
Bishopric of Durham, in which he so flourished, as (Cardinal (...) excepted)
never I think any either of his prdecessors or successors came near him. He
was wonderful rich, not only in ready money, but in lands also and temporal
renenues: For he might dispend yearly (besides that which belonged to his
Myter) 5000. marks. Much of that he had of the Lord (...), who thinking so to
conueigh it unto his base son (...) (for that he had no other issue) passed
it over to this Bishop in trust; which trust men say he never answered. The
Queens house at Eltham was part of that land. He built the house and gave it
unto Elianor Queen to king Edward the first, as also the castle of Sourton
beside York unto the king which likewise he built. A man now of this
extraordinary wealth must not content himself with ordinary titles: Therefore
he procured the Pope to make him Patriarch of Jerusalem, and obtained of the
king the principality of the Isle of Man which he held during his life. The
year 1294. being Ambassador to the Emperor, the Archbishop of York John Roman
(upon what quarrel I know not) excommunicated him. It cost him 4000. marks
fine and his life in the end. He died (as it is thought) for sorrow. See more
in York. Great sturres there were between this man and his covent of Durham.
He informed the Pope that the Prior there was a (...) simple and insufficient
man to rule that house, and procured the government thereof for all matters
both spiritual and temporal to be committed unto him. Hereupon he sent
certain officers to execute in his name that new obtained authority, which
when they came to the monastery, were shut out of the gates and not suffered to
enter. The monks appealed unto the Pope, and alleged, that the king also had
required the hearing of these controversies between the Prior and the Bishop.
This notwithstanding the Bishops officers made no more adoo, but excommunicated
Prior, Monks, and all, for not obeying their authority immediately. Herewith
the king greatly offended, caused these officers to be fined and summoned the
Bishop himself to appear before him at a day appointed; before which time he
got him to Rome, never acquainting the King with his determination The King
therefore seized into his hand the Bishops liberties, and appointed a new
Chauncellor, new Justices and other officers. He writ also unto the Pope, in
favor of the Prior, who delivering the (...) letters himself, was adjudged a
sober and discrete man, whatsoever the Bishop had reported of him So he was
restored to his place again, but died before he could get home. During the
time of the Bishops disgrace, amongst many other things wherein the liberties
of the Bishopric were (...), it is specially to be remembered that the king
took from him diverse Castles, and lands forfait unto him by John (...) king of
the Scots and other; but (...) Beaumout one of his successors recovered them
again by Law. These broils ended, he gave himself very much to building. The
Ancient manor place at Arkland he did (...). He built the great Hall there
(in which are diverse pillars of black marble speckled with white) the great
Chamber likewise, and many other rooms adjoining. He also erected that same
goodly Chapel there, and placed in the same a Deane and Prebendaries,
alotting the quadrant in the West side of the Castle (built likewise by him)
for their habitation. He built or repaired with great charges Barnard Castle,
the Castles of Alnwike (part of the L. Vessyes land, which he sold afterward to
H. Percy) Gainsoorth, Cuncliff, Somerton, (which he gave unto the king) and the
house at Eltham bestowed (as before said) upon the Queen. Having sat Bishop of
Durham 28. years, he deceased at Eltham, March 28. 1311. and was buried in his
own Cathedral Church.

42. Richard Kellow.
RIchard Kellow (...) Bishop five years, in which short space he bestowed very
much in building at Middleham, Stocton, and Welhall. He died the year 1316.

43. Jews Beaumont.
THe Covent then chose for their Bishop Henry Stamford, Pryor of Finchall, and
sent him to Rome to be confirmed by the Pope. But before he could get thither,
at the importunate suite of the kings of England and France, the Pope had given
that Bishopric unto one Jews Beaumont, a French man borne, and of the blood
royal there. He was lame (...) both his legs, and so unlearned, that he could
not read the bulls and other instruments of his consecration. When he should
have pronounced this word ( Metropoliticae) not knowing what to make of it
(though he had studied upon it and labored his lesson long before) after a
little pause, Soyt purdit (says he) let it go for read, and so passed it over.
In like sort he stumbled at ( (...) aenigmate.) When he had fumbled about it a
while, Par Saint Lowys (quoth he) il n'est pas curtois qui (...) parolle ici
escrit, that is, by Saint Jews he is to blame that writ this word here. Not
without great cause therefore the Pope was somewhat strait laced in admitting
him. He obtained consecration so hardly, as in fowerteene years he could
scarce creep out of debt. Riding to Durham to be installed there, he was
robbed (together with two Cardinals that were then in his company) upon
Wiglesden Moore near Derlington. The captains of this route were named
Gilbert Middleton and Walter Selby. Not content to take all the treasure of the
Cardinals, the Bishop and their train, they carried the Bishop prisoner to
Morpeth, where they constrained him to pay a great ransom. Gilbert Middleton
was soon after taken at his own castle of Nitford, carried to London, and
there drawn and hanged in the presents of the Cardinals. After this, one Sir
(...) and his brother Robert, came with a great company to diverse of the Bishop
of Durhams houses in the habits of Friars, and spoiled them, leaving nothing
but bare walls, and did many other notable (...), for which they (I mean the
captains and diverse of their company) were soon after hanged at York. This
Bishop stood very stoutly in defense of the liberties of his See, recovered
diverse lands taken away from Anthony Beak his predecessor (as before is
mentioned) and procured this sentence to be given in the behalf of his church,
quod Episcopus Dunelmen. debet habere (...) guerrarum intra libertates, sicut
Rex extra, that the Bishop of Durham is to have the forfeitures of war in as
ample sort within his own liberties as the king without. He compassed the city
of Durham with a wall, and built a hall, kitchen, and chapel at Middleton.
But before he could quite finish the chapel he died, to wit September 22 or
(as one delivers) September 28. 1333. He heth buried before the high altar at
Durham covered with a marble stone curiously wrought and inlayde with brass
provided by himself in his life time.

44. Richard de Bury.
IN great (...) (but with no great good speed) the (...) of Durham proceeded
unto the election of a new Bishop (the old being yet scarcely buried) and they
made choice of one of their own company a monk of Durham. This election the
Archbishop of York confirmed; yea the matter grew so forward, as the same
Archbishop was content to give him consecration also. All this while the kings
good will was not sought, no nor (which was a greater oversight as the world
then went) the Popes neither. The king therefore not only refused to deliver
possession of the temporalties unto this elect, but also labored the Pope, ex
plenitudine potestatis to confer the Bishopric upon a chaplain of his
named Richard de Bury, then Deane of Wells. Partly to pleasure the one that
requested, partly to displeasure the other for not requesting, he did so, and
commanded the Bishop of Winchester to consecrate him, which being performed at
Chertsey soon after Christmasse, the king presently invested him in the
temporalties belonging to that See. Now was the monk a Bishop without a
Bishopric. Having no other home, he was feign to return to his cloister, and
therefore very grief (as it is to be supposed) within a few days after died.
This Richard de Bury was borne at Saint Edmunds Bury in Suffolk, whence he
took his surname; for he was the son of one Sir Richard Angaruill knight.
His father died leaving him very young, and committed him unto the tuition of
John Willoughby a priest, his uncle, who brought him up carefully, and that for
the most part in the Uniuersity of Oxford. From thence he was called to teach
Edward of Windsor Prince of Wales. At what time the said Prince fled into
France with his mother, he was principal receiver of the kings revenues in
Gascoigne. Their money failing, he aided them secretly with a great sum of
that he had received for the king. It had almost cost him his life, he was so
narrowly pursued by some of the kings friends that got understanding of it, as
he was glad to hide himself in a steeple in Paris the space of seven days.
King Edward the third his scholar being come to the crown, made him first his
Coferer, then Treasurer of the Wardrobe, and keeper of the privy Seal. In this
last office he continued five years; in which space he was twice sent
Ambassador unto the Pope. The year 1333. he was made Deane of Wells (a goodly
preferment in those days, better I think then the Bishopric is now.) He had
not enjoyed that place one whole year, when he was consecrate unto Durham,
which was December 19. 1333. The year following he became Chauncellor, and
within two years after that, Treasurer of England. Being Bishop, he was often
employed in embassages of the greatest importance. What time of leisure he had,
he spent either in prayer, or conference with his (...) (whereof he had many
about him, and those great learned men) or else in study, wherewith he was
woonderfully delighted. He writ many things not yet perished. Anongst the rest,
in one work which he called (...), he says of himself, (...) quodam libroru^
amore potenter (...) abreptu^. That he was mightily carried away, and even
beside himself with immoderate love of books and desire of reading. And
indeed his study was so well furnished, as it is thought he had more books
then all the Bishops in England beside. He was much delighted with the company
and acquaintance of learned men. Many letters passed between him, Francis
Petrarke, and diverse other then famous for learning. He had always in his
house (as before I said) many Chaplains, all great (...); of which number were
T. Bradwardin, after Archb. of Canterbury, Richard Fitzralph Archb. of Armagh,
Walter (...), I. (...), Rob. (...), and R. Killington, Doctors of Divinity;
Richard (...) and Walter Segraue, the one afterward Bishop of London, the other
of Chichester. His manner was at dinner and supper time to have some good book
read unto him, whereof he would discourse with his Chaplains a great part of
the day following, if business interrupted not his course. He was very
bountiful unto the poor. Weekly he bestowed for their relief 8 quarters of
Wheat made into bread, beside the offall and fragments of his Tables. Riding
between New Castle and Durham he would give 8. l. in alms, from Durham to
Stocton, 5. l. from Durham to Aukland 5. marks from Durham to (...) 5. l.
(...). I (...) it reported that he founded a Hall in Oxford, and (...) it with
some (...) for the maintenance of Students in the same; but I think it
mistaken for that which was done by his next successor. Certain it is, that he
notably furnished a library in that Uniuersity, and took order that the
keeping thereof should be committed unto five scholars, to whom he made a
certain allowance for their labor. He also bestowed many sumptuous ornaments
on his church of Durham. Having continued Bishop there 11. years and almost
three months, he departed this life at Aukland, April 24. 1345. being 58.
years of age. He lies buried in the South Angle of his own church.

45. Thomas Hatfield.
THe Pope had now many years taken unto himself the authority of bestowing
all Bishoprics: which the king and nobility of this realm being much agreeued
with all, made diverse laws and statutes to restore churches and couents to the
liberty of their ancient elections. When the king therefore had labored a
while in this matter; he being destrous of preferring this Hatfield his
Secretary unto Durham (a man that he knew the Pope might justly except against;
and peradventure doubting the covent would not choose him) was content to
request the Pope to give it unto him, and thereby opened a passage unto him,
whereby he entered into possession again of his woonted usurpation. The Pope
glad of this opportunity, without any regard or examination of his worthiness,
by and by accepted of him: And when some of the Cardinals took exceptions
against him, saying that he was not only a mere lay man, but a fellow of
light behavior and no way fit for that place: He answered, that if the king of
England had requested him for an ass, at that time he would not have denied
him. This man it was that built Durham college in Oxford and purchased
certainc lands unto the same for the maintenance of such monks of Durham as
should be thought fit to study there. That college is now called Trinity
College, so named by Sir Thomas Pope that bestowed a new foundation upon the
same. He built also Durham place in London to receive himself and his
successors when they should have occasion to repair thither He was consecrate
Jul. 10. 1345. and died in the beginning of May 1381. So he sat Bishop six and
thirty years lacking only two months.

46. John Fordham.
IIohn Fordham Deane of Wells obtained consecration to the Bishopric of
Durham May 29. 1381. and was inthronised there in September 1382. Seven years
he continued in the same and was translated thence to Ely September. 27. 1388.
See more of him in Ely.

47. Walter Skirlaw.
January 14. 1385. Walter Skirlawe Doctor of Law was consecrate Bishop of
Lichfield He sat there one year, and was translated to Wells. There also he
continued but two years, and the year 1388. removed to Durham in the monethe
of September. The Cloisters of the Monastery there were much deal built at his
charges. He gave toward that work 200. l. in his life time, and 400. l. in his
Will. He bestowed also 220. l. in the building of the Diribitory. He new built
the bridges of Shinkley, Yarrow and Aukland, and the steeple of Holme. he
repaired the Church and the Hall of the manor there. He built a great part of
the Lantern at York where his arms are fixed, and raised from the very
foundation a fair Chapel at Swyne in Holdernesse where he was borne. Lastly
he bequeathed in his Testament great sums of money to the Churches that he
had governed for the buying of ornaments, as namely to the Church of Wells the
value of 150. l. He fate Bishop of Durham 18. years, and died in the beginning
of the year 1406.

48. Thomas Langley.
THomas Langley Priest, and then Lord (...) of England, was consecrate Bishop
of Durham May 7. 1406. at what time he gave over his (...). But a 11. years
after, to wit the year 1417. it was laid upon him again and continued in that
place about six years. In the mean time, viz. June 6. 1411. he was made
Cardinal (together with Robert (...) Bishop of Salisbury) by Pope John 23.
This man bestowed the sum of 499. l. 6. s. 7. d. in repayring of that Galily
in the West end of his church which was first built by Hugh (...) his
predecessor. He also founded two schools in the Place-green, one for Grammar
another for Music: 31. years he continued Bishop here, and dying the year
1437. was buried (as I am informed) in the Galily and lies entoombed before
the Altar there under the Table of the Consistory. I find noted by the way that
about this time, to wit, between the years 1408, and 1498. was bestowed upon
the Cloister of Durham the sum of 838. l. 17. s. ob.

49. Robert Neuill.
RObert Neuill was consecrate Bishop of Salisbury the year 1427. and
translated thence to Durham 1438. He built the Checquer at the castle gate
there, and died anno 1457.

50. Laurence Boothe.
LAurence Boothe was consecrate unto the Sea of Durham, September 25. 1457. He
built the gate of the college at Aukland, with the (...) adjoining. Having
sat here 20. years, he was translated to York the year 1477. See more of him
in York.

51. William Dudley.
WIlliam Dudley succeeded immediately. He was the third son of John Dudley,
alias Sutton, the eight Lord Dudley, as the Epitaph yet to be seen upon his
toombe does witness. He lies buried in Westminster in the chapel that is
South from the toombe of king Edward the third. His toombe stands in the
South wall of the said chapel. He died an, 1483. and sat 6. years.

52. John Sherwood.
John Sherwood became Bishop of Durham 1483. A great learned man, an excellent
Poet, a Grecian, and so good a Lawyer, as for a certain time before his
preserment to this Bishopric, he was the solicitor of all king Edward the
fourths causes in the court of Rome. He brought many copies of diverse rare
Greek authors out of Italy with him. Having continued at Durham about 11.
years, he died the year 1494.

53. Richard Fox.
RIchard Fox was consecrate Bishop of Exceter, an. 1486. translated to Bathe
and Wells 1491. thence to Durham 1494 and lastly 1502 to Winchester. He
changed the hall of the castle of Durham from better to worse; where there
were two seats of regality, he made but one. See more of him in Winchester.

54. William Seuerus.
I Have heard reported that this man was borne at Shinkley, and the son of a
poor man there, a Syueyer or Syuemaker by his occupation, and thence took his
surname. He was first Bishop of Carlisle, translated to Durham 1502. and
enjoying that preferment only two years (or there about) died an. 1505.

55. Christopher Bambridge.
AFter the death of Bishop Severe, it seems the Sea was void two years,
Christopher Bambridge obtained consecration thereunto the year 1507. sat
there but one year, and was removed to York. See more of him in York.

56. Thomas Ruthall.
THomas Ruthall was borne at Cicester in Gloucestershire and brought up in
Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of Law. He was preferred to the
Bishopric of Durham by King Henry the seventh, after whose death, he was made
one of the Privy Counsel unto the young king Henry the 8. who esteemed greatly
of him for his wisdom, and learning, and employed him often in Embassages,
and other businesses of importance. Amongst the rest, it pleased the king one
time to require him to set down his judgment in writing concerning the estate
of his kingdom in general, and particularly to inform him in certain things
by him specified. This discourse the Bishop writ very carefully, and caused it
to be bound in Uelime guilt and otherwise adorned in the best manner. Now you
shall understand, how that it chanced him about the same time to set down a
note of his own private estate containing an inuentory not only of his
vtenstles and household stuff in every of his houses, with their value, but
also of his monyes either owing unto him, or deniers contans ready in his
coffers, which amounted unto an infinite treasure, no less then 100000. l.
This account was written in a paper book of the same fashion and binding that
the other was which he had provided for the king, whereby it happened, that the
king sending Cardinal Wolsey for the other draught that he had so long hefore
required of him, the Bishop mistaking, delivered that which contained the
report of his own wealth and private state. This the Cardinal soon espying
and willing to do the Bishop a displeasure (for there had been long and great
emulation between them) delivered it as he had received it unto the king
showing, how the Bishop had happily mistalien himself; For now (quoth he) you
see where you may at any time command a great mass of money if you need it.
As soon as the Bishop understood his own error, the conceit thereof touched
him so near, as within a very short time after he died. In his time the parish
Church of Cicester was built for the greatest part: And he promised to
contribut much thereunto, but prevented by death performed nothing. Anne (...)
his aunt by the mothers side, gave 100. marks toward that work. The Bishop
himself built the third part of the bridge over the River of (...) toward the
South. He also raised from the foundation the goodly dining chamber at Aukland,
and dying before it might be finished, took order with one Stranguidge that
was his Administrator to perfect it. He deceased at London the year 1523. and
lies buried at Westminster almost over against the the monument of king Henry
the third, in a very seemly toombe, upon which are these words to be read.

Hic iacet Tho. Ruthall Episcopus (...). and Regis (...) Secretarius, qui obijt
1524.

57. Thomas Woolsey.
IMmediately after the death of Bishop Ruthall, Cardinal Woolsey resigning
Bathe (which he held in Commendam with York) took Durham in steed thereof,
and held the same about the space of seven years. In the later end of the
year 1529. he gave it over to have Winchester, which he held little more then
one year, and died November 29. 1530. See more of him in York.

58. Cutbert Tnnstall.
IN the Sea of Durham a notable man succeeded him, and one no less famous for
his virtues then the other for his fortune, (...) Bishop of London. He was
borne at Hatchford in Richmond shire, and was the base son of one Tunstall a
gentleman of a very ancient house. It is reported, that their first auncestor
attended William Conqueror (...) his Barbor, and being raised by him (...)
fortune, in memory of his former estate, took for his arms S. 3. combs A.
But I take this for a fable. The special use of arms is to express unto
posterity the virtues of such as are raised unto gentry, and not to remember
any thing that may be to the disgrace of the bearer, and make him less
honorable. Were the first of this race as he is supposed; because he was not
advanced for being a Barbor but for his faithful and loyal service, such
arms should rather have been given him, as might have registered that virtue,
then twighted him with the baseness of his first trade and manner of life.
Rather therefore should I guess some other occasion of these arms, which as
they were born by him, may have many very honorable significations. But to
leave his arms and speak of himself He was a very rare and admirable man, in
whom I think no man will blame or reprehend any thing but his religion. There
was scarce any kind of good learning in which he was not excellent. A very good
Grecian, well seen in the Hebrew tongue, a very eloquent Khetorician, a passing
skillful Mathematician (famous especially for Arithmetike whereof he writ a
work much esteemed) a great lawier (in that faculty he proceeded Doctor) and a
profound Divine, as diverse his works yet extant do very well testify. But his
greatest commendation of al is that which I find given him by Bale out of (...)
Thomas Moore, that as there was no man more adorned with knowledge and good
literature, no man more severe and of greater integrity for his life and
manners, so there was no man a more sweet and pleasant companion, with whom a
(...) would rather choose to converse. In regard of these manifold good parts
the Archbishop of Canterbury William Warham, not only made him his vicar
general, but also commended him so effectually unto the king, as he thought
good to employ him in many (...) of great weight, and diverse temporal offices
of no less trust. He was first Master of the Rolls, then (as I find recorded)
keeper of the (...) Seals, made Bishop of London the year 1521. and translated
to Durham March 25. 1530. Being yet at London he bestowed much money (...)
Library in Cambridge with good books both written and printed. He built from
(...) ground a most beautiful porch or gatehouse (with a chapel annexed
thereunto of fair stone) in the castle of Durham, and added to the said castle
certain gates with iron bars and portcullices supported with strong walls
on each side. He brought water thither with a conduit, whereas before time it
was served with well-water. He made the gatehouse at Alnewike, and built the
Tolboothe in the market of Durham all of stone, with diverse edifices near the
hinder part of the said Tolboothe, which he gave also to the city of Durham.
Lastly he repaired with great charge the third part of Tyne bridge. Having
continued in this See the space of one and twenty years with great honor,
December 20. 1551. he was committed unto the Tower of London and remained
prisoner there all the rest of the reign of king Edward, viz. nineteen
months. In which time, amongst many other horrible sacrileges (whereunto the
nonage of the king gave opportunity) means was found that the Bishopric of
Durham should be dissolved by act of Parliament. This morsel was ready dished,
and in certain hope already swallowed, when it pleased God, to punish the
devouring covetousness of those times, by taking away that admirable young
prince king Edward. Queen Mary that succeeded, took this bit from the
trencher of those ravening Atheists, and by like authority, the first year of
her reign, restored it unto the former estate, and yt old Bishop both to his
liberty and the possession of the same. Queen Mary dying; for his contumacy
and disobedience unto her Majesty that now reigns (and long may she) he was
justly deprived of his Bishopric, in the month of July 1559. He was then
committed unto the custody of the Archbishop of Canterbury who entertained him
most kindly and seemed very glad of his company. But he enjoyed it a very little
while For within four months after his deprivation, viz. November 18.
following being eighty five years of age, he departed this life at Lambhith,
where he was first consecrate almost forty years before. His body was buried in
the Chauncell of the parish church there, and covered with a fair marble
stone, upon which is (...) this Epithaphe written by Doctor Haddon:

Anglia Cutbertum Tunstallnm (...) requirit
Cuius summa domi laus erat atque foris.
Rhetor, Arithmeticus, iuris consultus and aequis
Legatusque fuit, (...) praesul erat,
Annorum satur, and magnorum (...) honorum,
Vertitur in cineres aureus iste senex.
James Pilkinton.
MArch 2. 1560. James Pilkinton Batcheler of divinity, lately come from beyond
the seas (where he lived all Queen Mary's time) was consecrate Bishop, and
continued in the same See about 16. years. He died an. 1576. and lies
entoombed in his own church before the high altar, West from Bishop Beaumont.

60. Richard Barnes.
RIchard Barnes was brought up in Brasenose college in in Oxford, first
consecrate Bishop Suffragan of Nottingham, preferred to Carlisle the year 1570.
and the year 1577. translated to Durham, where he sat Bishop about 11. years

61. Matthew Hutton.
AFter the death of Bishop Barnes, the Sea was void almost two years. The
year 1589. Matthew Hutton doctor of divinity and Deane of York (in which
place he had continued 21. years) was preferred thereunto. He held the same
about five years, and in the end of the year 1594. was translated to York,
where he yet lives.

62. Tobias Matthew.
OF him that presently succeeded ( Tobias Matthew) I will say no more but what
remains in public records, that being doctor of divinity, by many steps of
preferment (as namely the Archdeaconry of Bathe, the Presidentship of Saint
John's college in Oxford, a Canonry first, then the Deanery of Christchurch
there, and lastly the Deanery of Durham) he ascended at last unto this place,
which (men say) he uses as honorably, as he obtained the same worthily. My
resolution of only mentioning those, that either themselves, or in their
posterity yet live, I hold the more willingly in him, because it is well known
to so many as know me, I am greatly bonnd unto him, and may be deemed partial.
He was consecrate in March 1594. long and happily may he live in that, or such
other honorable place, as his virtues do deserve.

This Bishopric in the Queens books is valued at 1821, l. 17, d. farthing,
and in the Popes books at 9000. ducats.
Carlisle.
THE City of Carlisle, called by the Romans and old Britons, Luguballia, by
Nennius, Caer Lualid, by the Saxons (as Beda writes) Luell, by our Chronicles
(as Roger Houeden and others) Carlwel, by us now a days Carleolum, Carlisle,
and Carlioll (a city no doubt of great antiquity) was wasted, and in a manner
utterly destroyed by the Danes about the year of our Lord 900. The year 1090.
it happened the king of England William Rufus to pass that way into Scotland.
He considering the natural strenght of the place, the pleasantnes of the seat,
the sertility of the soil, and the necessity of a fortification for defense of
the country thereabout, thought good to (...) it, and according to this
determination about three years after, not only raised again the walls (then
flat to the ground, in so much as great trees grew in the ruins of them) but
also bestowed the building of a fair and strong castle in the same, and then
enpeopled it, at first with Dutchmen (whom soon after he removed into Wales)
and afterward with English men of the South parts, he affoording many great
and singular privileges unto them. The government of this new erected city (as
it should seem) was committed unto a certain Norman Priest named Walter, that
came into England with the Conqueror. This man being very rich, began to build
in Carlisle a goodly church in the honor of the blessed Uirgin, intending to
bestow upon it such possessions as God had endowed him withal, for the
maintenance of either Prebendaries, or some other kind of religious persons in
the same. But being taken away by death besore the accomplishment of this so
good a purpose. Adelwald or (...), the first Prior of Saint Oswald in Nostlis,
and Confesser unto king Henry the first (that then reigned) persuaded the said
king to employ the land and revenues that Walter left behind him in the
foundation of a college (not of Prebendaries but of Regular Cannons) to be
annexed unto the church of our Lady before named. He did so, and moreover
bestowed upon the said college six churches with their chapels, to be
impropriated unto the same use, to wit, Newcastle, Newburne, Warkeware, Robery,
Wichingham and Corbridge. Of this college or monastery thus founded and
endowed, he appointed the said Adelwald his Confessor to be Pryor. Now you
shall understand that not only the jurisdiction spiritual, but the renewes
and temporalties also of the City of Carlisle, and all the country round about
within fifteen miles, belonged in former times unto the Bishops of (...), by
the gift of Egfrid king of Northumberland, who bestowed all that territory upon
Saint Cutbert the year 679. But the Bishops of that See being drouen from
place to place by the Danes at what time Carlisle was destroyed, and moreover
all that country so wasted, as hardly a man was to be found in many miles
compass, except here and there a few of the Irish. The Archdeacon of Richmond
by little and little encroched upon the jurisdiction of all Cumberland,
Westmerland and Tiuidate or Aluedale, now a long time neglected by the Bishops
of (...), that in this mean space had seated themselves at Durham. It happened
therefore sometime after the foundation of this college, that Thurstan
Archbishop of York visiting this part of his Province, seeing the beauty of
the church of Carlisle, considering how fit it were to be the Sea of a Bishop,
and knowing how little right the Archdeacon of Richmond had unto the
jurisdiction of all those countries, yea being willing also peradventure to
have a Suffragan the more within his Province; thought good to endeavor the
erection of a Bishopric there. The king favoring much his own foundation,
easily condiscended to grace the same with an Episcopal See; which being
established there by the Pope, license was given to the Channons to elect for
their Bishop whom they list, and Cumberland, Westmerland with Aluedale
appointed to be his Dioces.

The Bishops of Carlisle.
1. A Delwald (whom most of our writers call Athelwulph) the Prior above named,
with one consent of his Cannons, was chosen for the first Bishop of this new
Cathedral Church, and consecrate at York, by his Metropolitan the year
1133. How long he held it, or when he died I find not. 2. Barnard succeeded
him. It seems he died about the year 1186. For Roger Houeden reports that
king Henry the second coming to Carlisle at that time, procured one (...) de
Leedes to be elected Bishop; and when he (upon what consideration I know not)
refused to accept the place, the king offered him 300. marks of yearly
reuenew for the increase of his living there, to wit, the Churches of
Banburge and Scarthburge with the Chapel of Lickhill, and two mannours of his
own near Carlisle. This notwithstanding, he persisted still in his refusal.
3. Hugh the third Bishop died the year 1223. 4. Walter Malclerke the year
1223. was consecrate unto the Bishopric of Carlisle, which he acknowledged to
have obtained by evil and corrupt means, and therefore resigned the same
(moved in conscience so to do as he alleged) June 29. 1246. and took on him
the habit of a Friar preacher at Oxford, in which he continued till his death.
Being Treasurer of England under king Henry the third, the king upon a sudden
not only displaced him from that office, but revoked certain graunts made
unto him heretofore, and charged him with the debt of 100. l. which he
acknowledged not. For redress of these wrongs (as he took them) he determined
to travail to Rome, but was stayed at the waters side by the kings officers,
whom Roger Bishop of London excommunicated for the same, and riding presently
to Worceter where the Court lay, renewed that excommunication in the Kings
presence. How he thriued with these businesses afterward, I find not: But
likely enough it is, that these troubles rather made him weary of the world,
then any such scruple induce him to leave his Bishopric. He died October. 28.
1248. 5. Syluester was elected the year 1246. but not consecrate till February
5. 1247. A while he refused to accept of the election, alleging his own
unworthiness, but at last upon better deliberation yielded. He was one of them
that joined with Boniface the Archbishop, and Ethelmaire the elect of
Winchester in their request to the king, that remembering his promise often
made, hereafter he would not impeach the liberty of elections by interposing
his armed requests etc. (of which matter see more in (...) of Canterbury.) The
King acknowledged he had indeed offended that way, and that especially (quoth
he) in making means for you your selucs, that therefore of all other should
least find fault with it. To this man particularly he used these words. Ette
Syluester (...), qui (...) Lambeus (...), (...) meorum clericulus (...),
qualiter (...) multis Theologis and (...) reuerendis, te in (...) sublimani,
etc. I remember (says he) how I eralted thee Syluester of Carlisle, unto a
Bishopric, having hankered a long time about the Chauncery, and being a petty
Chaplame to my Chaplains, preferring thee before many grave and reverend
Divines, etc. His conclusion was, that if they would give over their places
which they had obtained by so undue means, he would hereafter forbear to
commend any so unworthy. This was the year (...). The year following May the
(...). this Bishop riding a horse somewhat too lusty for him, was cast and so
bruised with the fall, as he died by and by, to wit, May 13. 1254. 6 Thomas
(...), or de Veteri ponte (a gentleman of the house of the Viponts that about
this time were Lords of Westmerland) was chosen soon after (...) death,
notwithstanding that the king made (...) request in the behalf of one John a
counceller of his that was Prior of Newborough. Having enjoyed this preferment
little more then one year, he died in the beginning of October 1256. 7 Robert
de (...) Chaplain unto the Queen, was consecrate by the Bishops of Bathe and
Salisbury at Bermondsey beside London April 10. 1258. and sat fowerteene
years. 8. Ralf a Canon of (...) 1272. sat (...) years. 9. John de Halton a
Canon of Carlisle consecrate 1288. sat thirty two years. 10. John de Rosse
Doctor of Law, thrust into this Bishopric by the Pope without any election,
was consecrate 1318 and sat thirteen years. 11. John de Kirkby Canon of
Carlisle and orderly elected there, was consecrate 1332. and sat twenty years.
12. Gilbert de Welton Doctor of Law made Bishop by the Pope was consecrate
1353. and sat ten years. 13. Thomas de Appleby Canon of Carlisle, elected
there, was glad to (...) the Popes approbation at Rome, and then was consecrate
1363. He sat thirty three years and died December 5. 1395. 14. Robert Read a
Friar preacher was consecrate at the commandment of the Pope, and the request
of king Richard the second, 1396. notwithstanding that William Stirkland was
chosen by the Chapter. Having sat scarcely one year, he was translated to
Chichester. 15. Thomas Merkes a monk of Westminster was likewise thrust into
this Bishopric by the Pope at the Kings request, and consecrate 1397. Amongst
many unworthily preferred to Bishoprics in those days, he undoubtedly was a
man well deserving that honor. for he was both learned and wise; but
principally to be commended, first for his constant and immovable (...) unto
his Patron and preferrer king Richard, then, for his excellent courage in
professing the same, when he might safely, yea and honestly (...) have
concealed his affection. Some other there were of yt Nobility, that remembering
their duty and allegiance, when all the world beside forsook this unfortunate
Prince, followed him with their best assistance even til yt time of his
captivity. This man nothing regarding the danger might ensue, not only refused
to forsake him when he had forsaken himself, but desided him and his cause the
best he could, when he might well perceive, his endeavor might hurt himself
much, without any possibility of helping the other. When the (...) and unstable
multitude, not contented that king Richard had resigned his crown to save the
head that ware it, and their darling Henry (...) fourth seated himself in his
royal throne, importuned the Parliament assembled to proceed yet farther
against him, (...) no doubt that to make all sure, his life might be taken from
him. This worthy and memorable Prelate stepping forth, doubted not to tell
them, that there was none amongst them meet to give judgment upon so noble a
Prince as King Richard was, whom they had taken for their Sovereign and liege
Lord by the space of 22. years and more; And proceeding further, I assure you
quoth he (I report his words as I find them in our Chronicles) there is not so
rank a traitor, nor so errant a thief, nor yet so cruel a murderer,
apprehended or detained in prison for his offense, but he shall be brought
before the Justice to hear judgment; and will you proceed to the judgment
of an anointed King, hearing neither his answer nor excuse? I say and will
avouch, that the Duke of Lancaster (whom ye call King) has more trespassed to
king Richard and his Realm, then king Richard has done either to him or us:
For it is manifest and well known, that the Duke was banished the Realm by
King Richard and his counsel, and by the judgment of his own Father, for the
space of 10. years, for what cause ye remember well enough. This
notwithstanding, without license of R. R. he is returned again into the
realm, and (that is worse) has taken upon him the name, title and (...) of R.
And therefore I say that you have done manifest wrong to proceed against R.
Richard in any sort without calling him openly to his answer and defense. This
speech scarcely ended, he was attached by the Earl Marshall, and for a time
committed to ward in the Abbey of Saint Albones. Continuing yet his loyal
affection unto his distressed Master; soon after his enlargement, he joined
with the Hollands and other in a conspiracy against King Henry; which being
bewrayed to the destruction of all the rest, he only was pardoned;
peradventure in regard of his calling (for it had never been seen hitherto
that any Bishop was put to death by order of (...)) peradventure in some kind
of favor and admiration of his faithful constancy (for virtue will be honored
even of her enemies) peradventure also to this end, that by forcing him to
live miserably, they might lay a punishment upon him more (...) death, which
they well saw he despised. The Pope (who seldom denied the king any request
that he might afford good cheap) was easily entreated, to translate forsooth
this good Bishop from the Sea (...) Carlisle that yielded him honorable
maintenance, unto Samos in Greece, whereof he knew he should never receive one
(...) profit. He was so happy as neither to take benefit of the gift of his
enemy, nor to be hurt by the masked malice of his counterfeit friend:
Disdaining (as it were) to take his life by his gift, that took away from his
Master both life and kingdom, he died shortly after his deliverance, so
deluding also the mockery of his translation, whereby (things so falling out)
he was nothing damnisted. 16. William de Stirkland before mentioned, was
appointed his successor by the Pope at the request of king Henry, and
consecrate at Cawood by the Archbishop of York August 24. 1400. He died August
30. 1419. 17. Roger Whelpdale Doctor of Divinity was elected by the Chapter and
consecrate at London by the Bishop of Winchester the year 1419. He was brought
up in Balioll college in Oxford. Writ much in Logike, Philosophy and Divinity
(in which, as also the Mathematikes and other good learning he was very well
seen) died in his house at London February 4. 1422. and was buried there in
the cathedral church of Saint Paul. His works (I hear) remain yet to be
seen in Baylioll college library. 18. William Barrow Bishop of Bangor was
traslated to Carlisle 1423. died at Rose castle September 4. 1429. and was
buried at Carlisle. 19. Marmaduke Lumley was chosen by the Chapter, consecrate
1430. and having sat twenty years, was translated to Lincoln. 20. Nicolas
Close consecrate 1450. sat two years and was removed to Lichfield. 21.
William Percy son to the Earl of Northumberland was consecrate 1452. and
sat ten years. 22. John Kyngscote Doctor of the Canon Law was consecrate
1462. and sat only one year. 23. Richard Scroope consecrate at York by
George Neuill Bishop of Exceter June 24. 1464. sat four years. 24. Edward
Storey Doctor of Divinity consecrate at Westminster by the foresaid George
Neuill now Archbishop of York October 14. 1468. sat nine years and was
translated to Chichester. 25. Richard, Prior of Durham consecrate at the Popes
commandment without any election, by the hands of his predecessor, and sat
18. years. 26. William Sever Abbot of Saint Maryes in York, consecrate 1496.
was translated to Durham the year 1503. 27. Roger Layburne Doctor of Divinity
a gentleman of a very ancient house borne near Carlisle, was consecrated in
September 1503. and sat there eight years. 28. John Penny Doctor of Law
consecrate 1511. sat 9. years. 29. John Kite, a Londoner borne, and sometimes
the kings Ambassador into Spain, was first consecrate an Archbishop of a See
in Greece, and then made Bishop of Carlisle the year 1520. He died June 19.
1537. and was buried at Stepney beside London, in the middle of the Chancell
toward the North side: where is to be seen a rude Epitaphe upon the marble
that covers him. 30. Robert Aldrich Doctor of Divinity and Provost of Kings
College in Cambridge, was elected Bishop of Carlisle July 18. 1537. and soon
after consecrate. He died at Horne-castle March 5. 1555. 31. Owen Oglethorp,
Doctor of Divinity, and President of Magdalene college in Oxford, a gentleman
well borne, was consecrate 1556. He was so happy as to set the crown of this
realm upon the head of her Majesty that now does (long and happily may she)
possess the same. He was deprived with diverse other Bishops for withstanding
her Majesty's proceedings the year 1559. and soon (...) died suddenly. 32.
John Best, Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate March 2. 1561, died May 22. 1570.
and was buried at Carlisle. 33. Richard Barnes, Bishop of Nottingham, Suffragan
unto the Archbishop of York, was translated to Carlisle July 23. 1570. (...)
the year 1577. was (...) thence to Durham. 34. John Mey, Doctor of (...),
Master of (...) Hall in Cambridge, was consecrate by John Elmer Bishop of
London, (...) thereunto by the Archbishop of York, September 29. an. 1577. He
died in the month of April (...). 1598. 35. Henry Robinson, Doctor of
Divinity, (...) of Queens college in Oxford, was consecrate before the end
of the same year.
Carlisle paid for first fruits to the Pope 1000. ducats, and is now valued to
the Queen in 531, l. 4, s. 11, d. ob.
The Bishops of Chester.
IN the City of Chester there was of old a Nunry, the Church whereof (first
built by that famous Earl Leofricus, and dedicated unto Saint Werburg) being
now become very ruinous, Hugh Lupus the first Earl of Chester after the
Conquest, repaired the same the year 1094. and by the persuasion of Saint
Anselme (whom being dangerously sick, he had sent for into Normandy to be his
ghostly father) replenished it with monks. About the same time (or a little
before, to wit the year 1075.) Peter Bishop of Lichfield removed his See
thither. But his next successor Robert de Lymesey, forsaking Chester, made
choice of Couentry, whence not long after the succeeding Bishops, returned
again to Lichfield. King Henry the eight restored unto this City that honor,
and converting the Monastery aforesaid into a Cathedral Church, erected a new
Bishopric there, appointed the Counties of Chester, Lancaster, and Richmond
to be the Dioces of this new See and the same to be esteemed in the Province of
the Archbishop of York.

1. John Byrd.
THe first Bishop of Chester was John Byrd, borne in Couentry, and brought up
in Oxford. Being Doctor of Divinity and Provincial of the (...), he was
preferred by King Henry the eight to the Bishopric of Ossery in Ireland. From
thence soon after he was removed first to Bangor, and lastly unto Chester.
Certain Sermons preached before the King against the Popes Supremacy, were the
occasion of his advancement. In Queen (...) days he was deprived for being
married.

2. John Coats.
BIshop Coats succeeded him. His Christen name (I take it) was John: For
certain, I can not affirm it. He died soon after his preferment in Queen
Mary's days.

3. Cutbert Scot.
SHe then preferred unto this See one Cutbert Scot, who sitting not past two or
three years, in the beginning of the happy reign of her Majesty that now is
was displaced, and for his disobedience committed to the Fleet; Thence (I know
not by what means) escaping he fled to (...) and there died.

4. William Downham.
William Downham was Chaplain unto her Majesty before her coming to the
Crown, and being preferred by her unto this See, continued in the same about
twenty years.

5. William Chaderton.
VVIiliam Chaderton Doctor of Divinity succeeded, and was translated to
Lincoln the year 1595.

6. Hugh Billet.
HVgh Billet Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Bangor, sat not fully one year.
He died about Whitsontide ann. 1596.

7. Richard Vaughan.
RIchard Vaughan Doctor of Duinity succeeded Bishop Billet in both those
places, being translated hither in June 1597. He yet lives.

This Bishopric is valued at 420, l. 20, d.
FINIS.

