THE FALL OF MAN, OR THE CORRVPTION OF NATVRE, PROVED BY THE light of our
natural Reason.

WHICH BEING THE FIRST GROUND AND OCCASION OF OUR Christian Faith and Religion,
may likewise serve for the first step and degree of the natural man's
conversion.

FIRST PREACHED IN A SERMON, since enlarged, reduced to the form of a
treatise, and dedicated to the Queens most excellent Majesty.

By GODFRFY GOODMAN, her Majesty's Chaplain, Bachelor in Divinity, sometimes
a member both of Trinity College in Cambridge, and of Saint Peter's College
in Westminster.

Ne laeteris quia cecidi, resurgam. MICH. 7. 8. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix
Kyngston, and are to be sold by Richard Lee. 1616.

TO THE QVEENES MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, OUR MOST GRACIOUS Sovereign Lady, and
my most honored Mistress Queen ANNE.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
THE scope and intent of Christian Religion seems only this, to raise up man
from the deapth of misery and sin, to the state of happiness and salvation,
from whence he is fallen: in effecting whereof, the only powerful and
all-sufficient means is Christ crucified, God in our nature, our nature with
God, God and man reconciled in the person of Christ, who was both God and man;
here is the great propitiatory sacrifice. For particular application whereof,
there is requisite in every one, Faith, which (supposing our natural
blindness and ignorance) takes our selves from our selves, places us in God,
seeing him, and beholding him, we see no more then he himself has revealed;
Hope, (supposing our natural distrust and fearefulnes) notwithstanding the
number and weight of our sins, yet casts a sure and strong anchor up into
Heaven, and there lays hold on Gods promises; Charity, (supposing man's
natural disobedience and rebellion) desires a conformity of the head to the
members, and of the members between themselves. Thus Faith looks to the
wisdom and truth of Gods nature, stands astonished at the mysteries, and takes
all the articles of our Creed for her lessons: Hope fastens on the mercy and
goodness of God, by the feruencie of Prayer, and the strong apprehension of
the spirit, making the Lords Prayer her pattern and president: Charity
considers the rule of Gods justice, desires to square all our actions according
to level, and looks to the tables of the Law, as her objects. Here is the
fabric of the Church, Faith lays the foundation, Hope buildes up the walls,
Charity gives it a covering, for Charity does cover a multitude of sins:
but how shall man's natural weakness attain to these Theological virtues?
As in all great buildings, so likewise here there are instruments and tools
appointed to supply our defects; and these are chiefly and principally
Sacraments, and whatsoever else God has commanded for his reasonable service.
This is in effect the sum of Christian Religion, this is the sum of our
ordinary Catechism. Thus before we can raise man, he must first acknowledge
his fall: he that shall intend to make any buildings in Gods Church, must lay
the foundation in man's fall: for this is the porch or first entrance which
leads us to Christian Faith; and therefore speaking hereof, I thought fit to
speak to the capacity of the natural man: herein I shall not need to strain
his understanding, to impose a yoke of faith, when as his own reason shall
reveal it in the substance, though not in the circumstance.

This fall of man appears in the miseries of man, which being truly
discovered, may teach us what we are in our selves. The greatness of our woe
shows the large extent of our sin: this world which we inhabit, is but a
vale of misery, the happiness of this world, is only a painted misery; in
this misery we may acknowledge the great mercy of God, who first created us in
happiness, and notwithstanding our sins has still ordained us to
happiness; and in these miseries, he has given us some ease, as much as is
befitting our present state and condition; in sustaining these miseries, he
has enabled us with patience, and the holy comfort of his spirit; and even our
greatest miseries he has taken upon himself, the more to teach him
compassion, and with his miseries to satisfy for ours. Thus not only the
blessings and good gifts of God, but likewise our miseries set forth his
goodness. And thus as I have endeavored to show the mercy and providence of God
in general to whole mankind, especially for our souls health and salvation;
so here making bold to write unto your Majesty, I could do no less, then
take some notice of the temporal blessings, wherewith God has blessed us
above other people. This blessing especially consists in government, whereby we
receive the fruits of peace, of plenty, of happiness, and live securely under
the protection of our Princes; this blessing seems to be proper to this
nation, proper to this present age wherein we live: for I will not speak how
in former times, this our Land was distracted with small principalities and
gouernements; when it should seem the greatest part lay waste in borders and
confines, when the strength was divided within it self; I will only begin
with the last age of our forefathers.

When as the dissension had long continued between the two houses of York and
Lancaster, it pleased God so to permit, that the house of York staining it
self with his own blood, when a cruel and merciless tyrant did murder most
innocent and harmless Children, and thereby usurped the Crown; this tyranny
being likewise extended to others, and a most reverend Bishop being committed
to safe custody; ( God remembering Joseph in all his troubles), his prison was
his castle of defense, and his close keeping did serve as a counsell-Chamber
for secrecy, where this reverend Prelate, together with the greatest lay
subject, as it were a representative Parliament consisting of Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, Church and state together conspiring, did there contriue the
happy means of their delivery, to bring in Henry of Richmond to suppress this
tyrant. And God blessed the success accordingly, that so still the same
goodness of God might appear unto us, which was once manifested to the
Israelites under the tyranny of Pharaoh, where the poor innocent children
were likewise put to death, the cry of my afflicted people is come up unto my
ears, Exodus 3. 7.

This Henry of Richmond being descended from the house of Lancaster, did
therein seem to promise unto the world all happy success; for men were well
persuaded of that family, being all of them most eminent for great virtues and
qualities (as may appear) Hen. 4. for his behavior and courtesy: the Fifth,
for his valor and magnanimity: the Sixth, for his justice and piety. Now in
the person of this Henry, it is strange to observe the providence of God;
whereas the Cambro-Britaines (whom we improperlie call Welsh) were the most
ancient inhabitants of this Island, being excluded and exiled into the most
remote and barren parts, and there not suffered quietly to rest, but brought
under yoke and subjection, and having once been vanquished, yet could never
be admitted to the common liberty of subjects; and therefore flesh and blood
could not withhold it self, or patiently endure such a bondage, but upon all
occasions they did continually reuolte: behold, this good King Henry
descended from them, bearing their name, and therefore by them making his first
entrance into this happy Kingdom, (in token and memory whereof he gave his
eldest Son the name of Arthur) it has pleased God, that since that time, no
people has continued more loyal and obedient to their Princes then they. So
that now, that which before was spoken more improperly, and is at this time
still carried in the Arms of our young Princes ((...)) it is truly verified
according to the letter; God laughing at the counsels of men, can erect the
pillar of his providence in the vain thoughts and cogitations of man.

Thus in his person, we may consider the quieting and pacifying of that nation;
now being possessed of the Crown, whereas (in humane policy) his sword might
have kept it, as it was won by the sword, yet it should seem, that he
respected rather the good of this kingdom, and the good of posterity. And
therefore by the happiness of his marriage, he (...) several families, by
whose division so many bloody bat^ailes had been fought; our cruelty was
practiced upon our selves* our Towns became unpeopled, our land was left
desolate, and fourscore Nobles and Princes of the blood Royal were slain and
murdered, so that men's minds were daily distracted, and upon every dislike of
the present government, men had free refuge to that part, which they conceived
might be most for their advantage: miserable was the condition both for Prince
and Subject, but now are the roses united, the houses conjoined, by a most
inseparable bond; for chains and linkes of iron are not of such strength and
force, as are the bonds of marriage.

After the happiness of his marriage, follows the happiness of his issue and
succession: for his issue male ending in females, and governing this Scepter
with great glory and magnificence, for the space of a fullage, it pleased God
so to dispose in his providence, that this wise King being to place his two
daughters in marriage, the one into Scotland, the other into France; and
question being made by some of his Counsel where the eldest should be
bestowed? his answer was, that he had rather bring Scotland into England,
then carry England into France: as it were foreseeing in his wisdom (like a
Prophetical spirit) the means and occasions whereby these Kingdoms might
happily be united; and God blessed the success accordingly. For whereas since
that time, by all likelihoode and probability, this Kingdom should have been
united, sometimes to Spain, sometimes to France, and once, by an intended
marriage to Scotland, though otherwise so backed with violence and force, as
being more unnatural, was therefore less acceptable to God: but God, who had
appointed the uniting of these kingdoms, had likewise appointed the means;
lest the greater should seem to conte^ne the less, therefore the lesser
kingdom should contain in it self the right of inheritance to the greater.
And thus this good King being inferior to none, either for valor, (for so he
attained his Crown* or for wisdom, being trained up in the school of Lewis
the eleventh, having tasted both fortunes, made wise by experience; or for his
justice and piety, leaving behind him full coffers, and a plentiful
treasure, he died: for what should we expect but all happy success from the
Son of such a virtuous, such a godly, and most religious Mother, as was the
Lady Margaret Countess of Richmonde?

Now (in these our days) we see the full accomplishing of all those
blessings, which were then only in hope and expectation. For in the person of
our most gracious King, besides all the blessings which were contained in
Henry, we see the perfect uniting of these kingdoms: God forbid that I should
any way parallel, or make comparison between the Graund-childe and his
forefathers, this were fitter to be done between strangers; yet sure I am,
that not in any one property our Sovereign comes short of his Progenitors.
For being to unite two several Kingdoms, it pleased God to give him a
disposition accordingly, such an open and loving heart generally to all (as
being to govern people of diverse nations), that for the truth of his love and
affection* the whole World, or at least this whole Island might not improperly
seem to be his native soil; such a bountiful and magnificent mind, (as
having many kingdoms to be the objects of his bounty), that infinite and
nu^berlesse they are, who have found the sweet benefit of his benevolence,
either for profit or honor, or both; besides his wisdom and learning, wherein
by many degrees he has surpassed all his Progenitors; his government being
agreeable to his nature, so mild, so temperate, that it seems to be
paternall, as if Jacob were now amongst his sons, and had the promised land
in possession. In so much, that since his Majesty's most happy ariuall to this
kingdom, there has followed such a general Peace, as that for such a time
we never enjoyed the like: for here amongst our selves, not any one of our
Nobility has suffered death; the subjects in general have enjoyed such a
free course of justice, and such a secure time, that had it not been for the
monster of our age, the most horrible treason that ever was invented (the
Gunpowder plot), assuredly we should have much doubted, whether it were
possible for the mind of man to hatch any treason, against so loving, so
gracious, and such a merciful Prince. And in regard that this kingdom has
always swaied a great part of Christendom, and has given laws unto others,
etc. it has pleased God, that since his Majesty's coming to the Crown, many
bloody wars have been app^^^sed by his most gracious mediation; and
notwithstanding that the occasions did often appear, which did seem to
threaten bloodshed and war, yet God in his mercy has so prevented it, as
that there was never conceived such a general expectation of an universal
Peace to ensue.

And whereas not any Nation under the Sun, has heretofore so far prevailed
over this Island, as the Danes; by his Majesty's most happy Marriage, we are
now secured from all fear, and seem to be much strengthened by the alliance
of a most stout and warlike people; in so much that both for the entire love,
and brotherly affection to your Majesty, as likewise for the great honor of
this Kingdom, we have twice seen, to our great joy and comfort, The most
valiant and courageous Prince, The high and mighty Christian the fourth, King
of Denmark and Norwey; first riding thorough our streets in triumph, (but in
a peaceable triumph) since privily and vnexpectiuely surprising your Majesty's
person, (for the truth of love cannot always stay the leisure to be attended
on with ceremonies). And thus God to show the perpetual league and covenant
made with us, has so happily contrived, that the means for our perpetual
peace, might be for ever continued; that Nation, which heretofore has been at
our backs to pursue us, now stand like sure friends to back and to aid us.

For our most noble Prince Charles, considering that the continuance of our
happiness depends upon his hope and expectation, I will forbear to speak;
only thus much I may say, that being descended from such noble Progenitors, as
he partakes their nature, so their virtues, carrying a name, which has been
most fortunate to the Christian world, his natural disposition and education
being such, as seems to promise the enlarging of our happiness; My prayers
shall be, that of this fruit, we may receive fruit, and that from his lo^nes
these kingdoms may be for ever established and knit together, as long as the
Sun and the Moon shall endure.

To return to your Majesty, to whom I do owe my particular service:
howsoever your Majesty is no way desirous to hear your own due praise and
commendation, choosing rather to practice, then publish your virtues; yet I can
do no less then acknowledge with great ioyfulnesse of mind, with great
thankfulness to God, the many blessings wherewith it has pleased God to
adorn your Majesty. For what can be required in a Princess, which God has
no^ most plentifully and in a full measure imparted to your Majesty, so
royally and nobly descended, so religious and devout in Gods service, having
such excellent gifts of nature for your wisdom and understanding, and being
every way and in every kind most virtuous in your self; your Majesty did
never favor any, but those that were truly virtuous, and always have
favored those most, who were indeed most virtuous; in so much that being most
free from all affectation of popularitie (which sometimes proceeds not from
the best grounds), yet your Majesty has always been most highly honored, as
generally of all, so especially of those who are truly virtuous; for your
bounty, charity, and magnifice^ce, which appear, as to all upon occasions,
so more particularly in helping relieuing* giving large and yearly pensions
to the servants of the late most noble Prince Henry: for your justice, equity,
etc. not any Princess in the world did ever love justice more truly and
entirely then your Majesty does, taking only the protection of just causes:
insomuch that whereas many thousands are bound daily to pray for your
Majesty; yet I may boldly speak it, that the corruption of man's mind could
never frame unto it self, the lest seeming or supposed occasion of complaint
or grieuance.

These blessings being such and so great, I could do no less then remember
them to Gods glory, your Majesty's honor, and to our great comfort,
beseeching God to continue them, daily to enlarge them, and to make us
thankful for them; and here I do most humbly desire your Majesty to pardon
my boldness, in presenting these my unworthy labors, and together with them
my self, and all my endeavors to your most gracious service and protection;
most earnestly beseeching your Majesty to accept of them, though I do truly
and from my heart acknowledge, that they are all, most unworthy of your
acceptance; yet in recompense thereof, I will humbly beseech God in my daily
prayers, to bless and preserve the Kings Highness, your Majesty, our noble
Prince Charles, the Prince and Princess Palatine, with their issue, together
with that most royal stock and family, from whence your Majesty is
descended* that God in his mercy would give unto you all the blessings of
nature abundantly, the present earnest of his grace, and the future possession
of his glory.

Your Majesty's most humble servant and Chaplain Godfrey Goodman.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, there is nothing which I can so fitly recommend to thy
daily and continual thoughts, as is the meditation of Gods eternal
providence: how God (many infinite ages before the foundations of the earth
were laid) has so ordained the course of this world, that according to his
own just appointment, all things might succeed, and fall out in their due
times and seasons, either for the manifestation of his (...), or justice* and
this providence not including a^one the great necessary, and natural causes
for the preservation of this universe (suppose the motion and course of the
heavens, the preservation of elements, and the ^ike), but also to comprehend
the voluntary and free actions of man; so that God working in man works
according to the condition of man's nature, the freedom of man's will subsisting
with the ouer-ruling hand of Gods providence (for thus the causes are
subordinated), and God working in nature, does no way destroy his own works
and that excellent order, which he himself has appointed from the beginning.

This providence does not only extend it self to the great and most noble
actions of man (suppose the government of kingdoms, and Empires, and whatsoever
else may concern the life and salvation of man), but it descends much lower,
and as it co^prehends the care and protection of dumb beasts, so it stoopes
even to the meanest and basest action of man, as the falling down of his
hair, etc. for wheresoever God begins the action, and makes a creature of
nothing, there the same God with his preventing and subsequent providence, must
continue his own work; for if it be left to it self, it will again return
unto nothing.

For every man daily to consider, how God has dealt with him in his
providence, I suppose it is a most Christian and godly meditation, free from
all superstitious vanity, such as I do greatly recommend to thy practice,
such as I my self (sinful and wretched man that I am) have continually found
in the who^e course of my life; what neither blind fortune, nor the tricks and
subtilties of wit, nor the power and strength of man, could ever have
compassed, I have found that God in his providence has freely wrought and
effected. To let pass all other things which are proper and private to my
self (if thou please to peruse this hom^ly Pamphlet), I think it not unfit
to acquaint thee with this one accident.

When first I made choice of my text, I had thought to have finished it within
the compass of one hour, and having waded into it, (supposing it to be a
subject which did well deserve my labors), God did so dispose of it, that this
whole treatise does only contain the first part or branch of the text.
Secondly, having gathered some obscure and straggling notes for mine own
private use, whe^^as I may boldly say, that no man did ever more abhor the
Press then my self; solemnly protesting that I would sooner be rackt or
pressed to death for silence, rather the^ any w^rds of mine should once hinder
the Press* wishing from my heart, that there might be some general vacation,
that new books might for a time cease, that we might find at length some
leisure to peruse, reuiew, and reprint the old Fathers; not contenting our
selves with patcht pieces, and broken sentences, but that they might be heard
ingeniously to speak for themselves. For as we do recommend the reading of
Scriptures, so let us not neglect the best Commentaries and Expositions of
Scriptures, that so the heat of our zeal, which now is wholly wasted in
controversies and oppositions, might then be spent in the practice of piety
and devotion, etc. Notwithstanding this my resolution, yet I was easily moved
(and the rather because I do not remember any book written of this Subject)
to publish this treatise.

I^ perusing whereof four things there are, wherewith I think fit to acquaint
thee: first, though (I confess) I have herein made use of other men's works,
yet I did forbear to set down any quotations, not that I desire to wrong
them, but that I think it unfit, when occasion did not move me, or necessity
enforce me, there to use many needless and idle quotations. Secondly, though
the punishment and fall of man appears chiefly and principally in respect of
his preparation to grace; yet my self supposing at this time, that I speak
only to the natural man, I thought fit to forbear speaking of that subject,
until first I should make it appear, that there is a sanctifying grace, which
is no way tied or intailed to our nature, which I have reserved as a fit
subject to be treated of in the third branch of my text. Thirdly, in the
latter end of the second part, speaking of the vanity of the creatures, if
therein according to the condition of that subject, I shall sometimes intend
(though much against mine own natural disposition) in this my long tedious
discourse, to give thee some case and recreation, I hope it shall prove no way
offensive, no not against the seuerest and strictest discipline of the Church;
seeing I can therein justify my self, by the practice and president of most
devout Fathers, and others most reverend Divines in all ages. Fourthly,
speaking there of many worldly vanities, my intent is, only to discover them
to be but shadows, in respect of a true bliss, that so every man might fall
into some dislike with himself; yet (I confess) that many things may, and
ought still to be continued, considering the state and condition wherein we
live, as namely the ceremonies of Honor, etc.

My desire is, that thou would judge of the whole, by the whole; of the
parts, by the parts: for if the whole be taken together, I hope I shall not be
found wanting or defective to my intended scope. If sometimes I prove somewhat
obscure, God (who knows the secrets of my heart) can bear me witness, how
free I am from the least affectation of obscurity; and therefore you must
either blame my weakness, as not conceiving things aright, or not able
sufficiently to express mine own conceits: or else you must consider the
subject matter whereof I write, which being very difficult in it self, must
necessarily admit words of Art to unfold it. To conclude, I thought fit to
continue this treatise, in the same form wherein it was first framed,
expecting that the God of truth should give a gr^^ter blessing to the relation
of a truth; neither would my time or leisure permit me to alter it. And if it
shall please God, that this book find happy success, so that some little
good may thereby redound unto Gods Church, whereby I shall be the more
encouraged to proceed in those parts which yet remain; though I purpose to
give full satisfaction (as far forth as it lies in my power), yet if
possibly I can, I will tie my self to the houre-glasse: ingeniously
confessing, that as all other builders are commonly mistaken in their first
works, so my self have erred in laying the foundations, or setting up the
porch of this building.

Thus being men of the same kind, brethren descended from one stock, but
especially as fellow members incorporated into one body, under one mystical
head Christ Jesus, in the most holy communion of his Saints, well wishing and
praying for each other, I do most humbly and earnestly beseech God, that
either thou may receive some small profit by my labors, or that thou may
bestow thine own labors elsewhere more profitably: and so committing thee to
his grace, providence and protection, I rest.

Stapleford Abbats, the 3. of June, 1616. Thine in all Christian duty and
service Godfrey Goodman.

THE FALL OF MAN.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: our
Creator, our Redeemer, our Sanctifier; three persons, and one God, Amen.
1. COR. 2. 14. The natural man cannot conceive the things of the ^^irit of
God.
THere is no mystery in the whole course of Christian religion, wherein I find
my self so much moved and affected with true joy, as when I consider the
extent of Gods mercy, The conversion of the Gentiles.
in the calling and conversion of the Gentiles: for alas, what a^ailes it me
to think of Gods majesty, wisdom, ^ower, justice, eternity, when all these
attributes of God, may turn to my terror and torture? But when I consider the
mercy of God, (...), ^here is that transient property of God, whereby all the
rest of his attributes are imparted to the creatures: and when I consider this
stream of mercy, not to be enclosed within the narrow passage of a few
tribes, not to be appropriated or monopolized to the sons of Jacob; but to
ouerflow the banks, to break down the partition wall, together with the
veil of the Temple, and at length, at length, at length to be-water the
fruitless and barren soiles of the Gentiles; so that with God there should be
no longer any difference or acceptance of persons, but together with the
Sunshine and dew of the heavens, his mercy should drop down with fatness;
here is the sure anchor of my hope, the fullness and consummation of my joy:
And therefore the day of Epiphanie, of all other days in the year, shall be
the day of my greatest mirth and solemnity; wherein those great Magi, those
Princes and Kings being public persons, representing the whole body and state
of the Gentiles, presented themselves, and were accepted of Christ; and we in
their loins, descended from them, together with them received the lot and
portion of our inheritance: Iaphet is now admitted to the tents and tabernacles
of Shem; here is the kingdom of Shilo, which admits no other limits or bounds
of his empire, then the compass and circumference of the whole world; blessed
are the feet of them, which brought us such glad tidings of peace: me thinks
I see the Angels descending and renewing their songs, v^^ng the same notes and
dittie to us, which they did to the sheepheards, Natus est vobis saluato^; A
Savior is borne unto you, a general peace is proclaimed on earth, and good
will toward all men extended: neither can I contain my self, but my joy must
burst into songs, Hosanna, Hosanna to the son of David, blessed be he^, that
co^^s in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest, sing Hallelui^,
Halleluia, Hallel^ia.

I have no sooner ended my song, The fear of a relapse.
but me thinks I am fallen into a cold swear, and am suddenly stricken with
great fear and confusion, as indeed this world, subsisting between Heaven and
Hell, partakes the nature of both; the extremes, and allaies; the excessive
joys of the one, with the fears and terrors of the other, making a strange
mixture between hope and fear: for when I observe the course of things, the
several actions and inclinations of men; when I consider the diseases of these
times, together with all the signs, tokens, and symptoms: alas, alas, I fear
a relapse, I fear a relapse, lest the world in her old doting age, should now
again turn infidel, and that the end of us be worse then the beginning. The
sick patient indeed will not confess her disease: but this does not acquit
her, rather it makes her state more dangerous: never so much boasting of faith,
as there is at this day; for to many it serves as a sovereign medicine, an
excellent antidote, to exclude the necessity of good works: or if any one
should profess open heathenisme and infidelity, what reward should he have
of his folly?

But when I consider, The grounds of this fear.
that nothing is of such difficulty, as to induce faith, and to persuade man,
beyond the course and stream of his own nature, to believe the mysteries of
religion; considering man's natural infidelitle and distrust, the infinite
windings and turnings of his mind, to lay hold on it, to imprison it, and to
chain it to the pillar of faith; considering (I say) that all the marks and
tokens of infidelity do sufficiently discover themselves; a general want of
zeal and devotion; a great neglect of all Christian mortification and
discipline; the ouerflowing and ripeness of s^nne in this last age of the
world; and certain it is, that in every sinn^, there is a mixture of
infidelity, auersio a De^, and of Idolatry, (...) ad cr^aturus, the greater
the sin, the more is the infidelity: for would ye count him an Infidel or
Idolater, that offers up but two grains of incense to an Idol? and will ye
suppose him to be less, who offers and spends his whole life, and consecrates
himself to the worship, service, and the immoderate use of the creatures,
without any thought or reference to the Creator? Considering again the nature
and efficacy of faith: for if the understanding be sufficiently informed, and
thoroughly resolved, the will must necessarily follow her directions; and to
their rule and gouernmental our outward actions must be squared out, and
measured accordingly: for every tree is known by his fruits, and every thing
according to the inward existence, so has it an outward operation: if our
hearts were inligh^ned, they could not produce such works of darkness; if the
fire were kindled, it could not be accompanied with such coldness of charity.
And therefore I pray' pardon me, if I have not so much faith, as to believe the
faith of many, that make an open profession of faith; or at least give me
leave, as in all actions and policies of state, so in religion, sometimes to
suspect and prevent the worst: and therefore while others labor in repairing
the walls, some in erecting and covering the roof, some in beautifying and
adorning the Temple, give me leave to search the foundation, which though it
^^and upon a Rock, Christ Jesus being the head corner stone of the building,
against whom neither storm nor tempest, no not the powers of hell can
prevail; yet if I shall in some sort discover the strength of this building,
we our selves may better secure our selves in the certainty and infallibility
of our faith; the deep and sure foundation will keep us from wavering, and it
may likewise serve to prevent the assaults and attempts of the heathen. Herein
I shall follow the practice of wise husbandmen, who sometimes dig and lay
naked the root, that so the tree may fructify, and bring forth fruit in
greater abundance.

Especially for the honor of our progenitors, to justify the proceedings of
those great Magi, The Magi.
together with the just motives and grounds of their happy conversion, I will
follow their steps, run the same course, and take the same pilgrimage with
them guided by a star, the light of reason, the contemplation of nature. I
will direct my course to Jerusalem, the place of Gods worship; where the law of
God, which gives the best testimony of God, is kept in safe custody; there I
will make a great outcrie, a solemn proclamation, Vbiest, quinatus estrex
Iudaeorum: then after due search of the Law and the Prophets, I will hasten to
Bethelem, where I will adore God in the manger, the Son of God in a cradle.

Thus in this great world you may observe, that first there was a state of
nature, which was the forerunner to the Law: then followed the Law, which was a
preparatiue to the Gospel: now at length succeeds the Gospel, wherein there
is the fullness of knowledge, as much as is befitting our nature and present
condition: if an Angel from heaven shall teach any other way, let him be
accursed: and yet we may expect some further revelation of the mysteries of
Christ's kingdom, when we our selves shall be more capable thereof, which
shall be in the state of happiness and glory.

Thus undertaking to search the groundwork of religion, I will claim unto my
self these two privileges: First, in the foundation no man sets jewels or
precious stones; rubbish or vnhewen stone will suffice, when we look only to
the strength of the building: If I could use many quotations of Fathers,
Councels, Canons, Schoolmen, or humane learning, I would forbear to do it,
these shall serve to polish and beautify the Temple: but I will never admit
them to the groundwork, left in stead of props, they might seem to undermine
and weaken the foundation, if religion should rely upon such incertainties.

Secondly, in laying the foundation, no man is over curious in the workmanship;
caruing and cutting may well be spared, when we regard only the strength of the
building: Pardon me if my style be vulgar, and that I do not observe a right
method; for I will take unto my self this liberty, and in liew thereof I
will only intend demonstratiue proof.

I will be more sparing in alleging Scripture, though it be authentical and
sufficient in it self: yet here I will not expose it to the battle, for I am
to deal with the heathen, her servants and handmaides. Reason and common sense
shall stand in the forefront, Natural reason shall be our guid^
and bear the whole brunt of the combat. Arts and Sciences they do not prove
their own principles, but as they are linckt together in a golden chain, so
they do mutually and reciprocally perform this duty to each other, especially
the Metaphisicks, which as a superintendent takes no particular charge, but
visits her whole province; confirms the principles of Arts; appoints their
circuits and bounds, and gives them their due approbation. Such is the force
and efficacy of truth, that wheresoever or howsoever disposed, still she
carries the same stamp, and stands alike affected to the maintenance of her
self, and is always ready pressed either to fight, or to be deposed, in
defense of her own right.

Since man, according to his condition, is naturally lead by sense, for want of
a better guide, I will take upon me to conduct him, from sensible objects by
the light of his own reason, to the knowledge of things spiritual: and to
this end I have made choice of this text; The natural man cannot comprehend
the things of the spirit of God. The intent of the author.
Wherein I will show first the insufficiency of nature, in attaining the least
part of this heavenly knowledge. Secondly, how nature may rest satisfied,
contented, and yield her assent to the mysteries of faith, notwithstanding her
own ignorance: this shall be the scope and intent of my speech.

But how shall I (that am a natural man) presume to approach, unless I be
guided by Gods spirit? Now the means to obtain this spirit is invocation and
prayer: Prayer, which is a natural sacrifice, taught us by a natural
instinct, and serves as a preparatiue to grace, nature supporting grace,
tending and directed to grace: the vessel and instrument of grace, has first
ingrafted in us preparatiue and disposing qualities to grace. He that seasoneth
and sanctifies nature, power down his grace, and touch my tongue with a coal
from his altar: he that plays the sweet music, first tune the instrument;
let us draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto us.

Blessed Lord God, etc.
IT has been a long objection of many wordlings and Atheists, A general
objection.
who conforming themselves to the loose condition of these times, seek by all
possible means to weaken the grounds and foundations of our Christian faith;
that religion seems too much to enforce the reason and understanding of man;
that whereas by nature we have some inward instinct, some inbred principles and
seeds of knowledge, from whence the reasonable and discoursiue soul draws
her certain conclusions, for our guide and direction here in the course of
this life; yet religion, especially Christian religion, seems wilfully to
oppose it self against the current and stream of man's nature; it propounds
precepts and rules of practice, contrary to man's own inclination; mysteries of
faith, overthrowing the grounds of reason; hope beyond all conjecture and
probability: as if man could conspire against himself, or that the testimony
of the whole world could prevail against the cabinet-counsel and knowledge of
his own soul; as if that God which reueales the mysteries of grace, were not
the same God which first laid the foundations of nature. To whom shall a man
give credit and trust, if the inward light of his own soul shall serve as a
means to delude him? use the best motives and persuasions, yet still the
School holds, that Iudicium vltimum practici intellectus determinat
voluntatem: Man, according to the measure of his own knowledge, gives his
assent or dissent; to be credulous and easy of belief, is no token of the
greatest wisdom.

If reason should be altogether silenced in the points of our faith, the^ God
should move man not answerable to his state and condition, but as a stock, or
as a stone, not any way concurring, no labourer, or fellow wo^kman in the
action. Take away the groundwork of reason and discourse, we shall never be
able to put a difference between the infusions of grace, and the delusions of
error, but all must be admitted alike: for signs, miracles and prophecies have
ceased, which were wont to be the seals for the confirmation of the truth: now
to admit this, were to lead the understanding captive, a thing far more
detestable, then was the slavery and bondage of Egypt.

If this their accusation and complaint were just, if (...) grounds of faith
could not together subsist with the g^^unds of reason, Their ^al^e supposition.
but that there were an opposition and contrariety between both, howsoever I
could not altogether excuse them; for then I should vpbraid God, with his own
workmanship; how shall the vessel say unto the Potter, why made thou me
thus? yet certainly their case would seem much more favorable, to the ears
of an indifferent man; and for my self, I would humbly surcease my duty and
calling, and desire God to use the ministry of Angels, for the conversion of
man; for flesh and blood cannot prevail against the natural inclination of
flesh and blood: nothing can struggle or strive against nature, the current and
stream is so violent: for nature is the foundation, whereupon we must build:
now if the walls, or the roof seem over great, or overthwart to the
foundation, no marvel if the whole building fall to decay. The Philosopher
will testify as much: Natura intus delitescens prohibet alienum: be the water
never so scalding hot, yet will it return to her first and natural coldness.
The Poet will say as much in effect: Naturam expellas furc^, licet vsque
recurret: set the natural man upon the rack, yet is it impossible that ever
he should believe any thing contrary to the light of his own reason: this is a
natural inclination of nature to her self, and it is no way contradicted in
Scripture; for the natural law, the Ceremonial law, and the Judicial law
might together subsist; and at this time the Moral law, imprinted in man's own
heart, is no way abolished: now as is the will of man inclined to our actions,
so is our understandings disposed to our faith, both of them defective, and
neither of them opposite; and therefore the Apostle does here place spiritual
things much above nature, far transcending nature, beyond the Sphere of
nature, but no way contrary or opposite to nature.

Thus by the grace of God it shall well appear, that reason, and man's natural
understanding, are so far from overthrowing the principles of Christian
religion, as that they seem rather greatly to confirm and strengthen them. A
general Answer.
See here the goodness of God; though God needs not the testimony of man, the
Sun at noone day needs not to be discovered by the light of a candle; yet for
man's own satisfaction and contentment, he requires the witness and
testimony of man: Tabernaculum posuit in sole, legem in cord: truth is not
repugnant to truth; nature supports grace; and as both of them proceed from one
fountain, so the same God, who is the author of both, will not destroy his
own works: Sed agit secundum modum vnius cuiusque naturae: If God requires
faith in the understanding, conformity in the will; then undoubtedly the same
God has first infused in them an inclination to both. Compare the
understanding to the eye: suppose you were to apply some medicine, some
plaster or salve; at the first indeed it seems to put out the sight, but at
length it purges and cleanses the eye: natural reason (I confess) of it
self is defective, and cannot apprehend the mysteries of faith; but being once
cured and enlightened by faith, sanctified by grace, it serves to confirm and
strengthen the grounds and principles of faith; and therefore our Divines
suppose reason to have the same reference to faith, which sometimes leaven had
to the sacrifices of the Law; and indeed Scripture signifies, one by the
other: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, Matthew. 18. that is to say, as the
Interpretors expound; beware of the humane wisdom and subtlety of the
Pharisees. Now leaven it was excluded from the sacrifices, Leuit. 2. And in the
seventh of Leuit, it was commanded, that the sacrifices should be laid and
offered up upon leauened bread: Super f^rmentatos panes: the intent of the
lawgiver was, that leaven should be no part of the sacrifice, and yet no
sacrifice to be performed without leaven: reason, or humane knowledge must not
enter into, or comprehend the mysteries of faith; and yet the mysteries of
faith must necessarily presuppose the groundwork and foundation of reason:
Principia religionis sunt nobis innata: reason informs man, that the end of
man's creation consists not in man himself, who undoubtedly shall taste and see
corruption, but in the glory and service of his maker; to him there is due, not
only the subjection of the body, with humility and reverence; but likewise the
obedience of the soul; the will denying it self, and made conformable to Gods
law; the understanding acknowledging his own blindness, prostrating it self
to the light and information of faith; there must be a total and absolute
subjection, befitting the infinite and absolute Empire of the divine Majesty:
and hence it is that neither the vegetative, nor the sensitive, but only the
reasonable creature is made capable of religion: and hence it is that the
invisible God, appearing by the visible creatures, the unbelieving man is made
inexcusable.

That I might herein give all men some contentment and satisfaction, The
general division of the Text.
as far forth as it lies in my power, I have made choice of this text;
wherein I will consider the two extremities; 1. the natural man; 2. the things
of the spirit of God; and then 3. the disproportion which consists, as in
dignity, power, eternity, and all other the divine attributes: Finiti ad
infinitum nulla est ratio seu proportio: so likewise in knowledge, non
percipit, he cannot conceive the things of the spirit of God: that I may deal
with him upon equal terms, that no advantage, or just exception should be
taken; I do here protest, that I will use no other weapons to convince this
natural man, but only the light of his own natural reason: I will lay aside
Scripture, Fathers, Councels, the uniform and Catholic consent of the whole
world: I do only appeal to himself, and to his own knowledge. I stand upon
the goodness and equity of my cause; and therefore I do not fear to make
him, that is the adverse party in the suite, the judge of my cause.

Thus far indeed I must excuse my self; I can do no less then sometimes
use the phrase of Scripture, considering my profession, my habit, bred and
brought up in the Schools of the Prophets; speaking to a Christian Auditorie,
in a religious time, and place. Again, sometimes you must give me leave to
suppose that for a truth, which afterward I will bring to the touchstone; for
all cannot be proved in an instant. Have patience, and forbear me a while,
and I do here promise, that if my whole and entire speech shall be duly
examined, the burden and weight of my arguments shall only rely upon
natural reason.

In the first part of my text, concerning the natural man, A more particular
division of the Text.
I will speak of these three things: first, that by the light of nature we do
discern, and acknowledge the corruption of nature. Secondly, that by the light
of nature we are sufficiently instructed, that nature is no competent guide, to
conduct us to a supernatural end. Thirdly, that nature being thus defective,
there is some higher stare and condition, whereunto being once admitted, we
may be directed to happiness. So in the first part, in the natural man, I
will consider nature corrupted, nature defective and imperfect, nature supplied
by grace. Secondly, in the other extremity I will consider, first, how far
the natural man may wade into the knowledge of the Deity. Secondly, what is
exempted from his knowledge, and whereunto he must not approach, videlicet, to
the things of the spirit of God. Thirdly, in the disproportion consisting in
knowledge, I will first consider the reason why these things are concealed from
reason. Secondly, how man shall satisfy the curiosity of his own mind,
notwithstanding his own ignorance, in the humble submission of his own soul,
together with a sufficient warrant for our faith, and security.

I shall not here need to describe the natural man; for it is not unknown
unto you, that God* Who is the Natural man.
by virtue of his promise, to preserve and continue the same excellent order,
which was first instituted in the creation, has tied himself to impart some
things unto the creatures, as necessary and essential to the being, without
which the creature cannot subsist; other things are added, as only accessory
to the nature, and these depend upon the free will, and choice of the giver.
Hence it is that there are several kinds; and sorts of creatures; and to
every kind, there are several and peculiar properties allotted; (...) between
the vegetative, (...) and the reasonable creature: so of reasonable creatures,
some have only an instinct of nature, a reasonable and discoursiue ^oule,
wherein the principles of humane knowledge are ingrafted: others, besides this
little spark of reason, are further enlightened, by the assistance of Gods
spirit, as children taught by their Schoolmasters. Now conceive man only
consisting of nature, without hope of happiness, or any further direction of
grace (such as were the moral Heathen, the uncircumcised Gentiles) which stare
and condition every man claims, by virtue of his first birth; and here you
have the natural man described. Now that there should be such a difference
between man, and man; that grace should be distinguished from nature, I will
not here insist upon the proof: for by Gods help it shall easily appear, by
the sequel of my speech.

It cannot be denied, but nature in general is much corrupted; which does more
argue the corruption of ma^in particular, being that whole nature is directed
to man. First it appears, in that she is more plentiful, and abounding in
evil, then in good: Vna est recta linea, curuae infinitae: there is but one
straight and direct passage, More evil then good.
but there are many infinite by-waies, and paths: there is but one truth,
answerable to that eternal truth, which is but one, and one alone, above the
Sphere of the creatures: but there are diverse and infinite falsehoods: there is
but one state of a sound and whole constitution; but diseases, and distempers
are numberless: to every virtue, there are many vices opposed; to every mean,
there are many extremes. If nature were indifferent, and indifferently
affected, as well to the one, as to the other; then might we claim (according
to the course and rule of justice) an equal balance. Suppose with the
Maniches, that there were two distinct principles, one of good, another of
evil; yet both of them should be alike bounded in power, and should share
alike in their actions; for otherwise, in time, the one would devour and
extinguish the other: but considering that there is only one fountain, from
whence whole nature proceeds; and that the fountain only of good, without any
mixture of evil: certainly this malignitie of nature, proceeds not from her
first institution, but from some after accidental corruption.

Secondly, if many snares were laid to entrap us, and many evils, counterfeit
and disguised in the habit of goodness, Nature more inclines unto evil, then
unto good.
should assault us; it would then stand with the providence and perfection of
nature, that if she could not utterly abolish them, yet to frustrate their
attempts, to decline from those evils, and to make the creatures more wary,
and cautionate: but it falls out far otherwise, clean contrary; whereas
being placed between generation, and corruption, she should equally partake
of both, according to rule, measure, and proportion; observe the disparitie,
there is but one way of production, one manner of birth, a framing and
fashioning in the womb; but there are infinite by-waies, which lead to
destruction and ruin; fire, water, sword, famine, diverse and several
mischances: many months are required for the constitution of a body, but in an
instant it is suddenly dissolved. Suppose that any part of man were rotted, or
consumed; this part, unless incision be made, will undoubtedly corrupt the whole
body: but why should not the whole body, being greater in quantity, endued with
that active and sovereign quality of heat, rather endeavor and strive to
regaine this one corrupted member, and to restore it to perfection? One man
infected with the plague, is able to inflame the whole City: why should not the
whole City rather, being perfect and sound, recall this one infected member?
One beast tainted with the murren, destroys the whole flock; and all
creatures find it a rule in their actions, that, Facilius est destruere, quam
componere; it is easier to pull down, then to build; it is easier to deface,
then to perfect. See here, nature discouers her self, or at least seems to
complain of her own wants: she is corrupted, she is corrupted; and therefore
no longer to be held as a loving mother, or as an indifferent judge; but to be
accounted as a partial step-dame, wholly tending and enclining to corruption.

Thirdly, The Heavens against the Elements.
to descend more particularly to the several parts of nature; the heavens, and
the earth, seem to conspire the one against the other: for the greatest part
of the year) these inferior bodies seem to be frozen, and congealed with
coldness in the Suns absence; or else to be scorched and consumed with
heat, by his ill neighborhood, and nearer access: the least part of the
year is temperate; as likewise the least part of the earth is temperate and
habitable, either in regard of the climate, or in regard of the soil; barren
heathes, high mountains, stonie^ockes, wast deserts and wilderness: I speak
not of the huge Ocean, which with her arms seems to embrace the whole earth*
and far to exceed it in quantity: but I pra'y, what might cause the
unseasonable weather; excessive drought in the spring, excessive moisture in
harvest; the spring always annoyed with an East wind, which nippes the tender
^ud; and the Autumn always molested with a (...) Western wind, which
scatters the (...) before they are ripened? it should seem, that in the
beginning God did square and proportion the heavens for the earth, using his
rule, leauell, and compass; the earth as the center, the heavens for the
circumference; the earth as an immovable stock, still observes the sa^^
distance, the same situation and place. Whence ^omes the diversity, the
storms, and the tempests, the famine, the pestilence, and the like? can
Magistrates and Rulers conspire to overthrow the State? can Princes commit a
treasonable act? or is there opposition, and factions in heaven, as well as in
earth, amongst those simple and pure bodies, consisting of the same
quin^essence and nature, and therefore in reason should not admit contrariety
in their actions? The Stars in general intend the earths fruitfulness; each
one in particular has his several office and duty: if virtue be added to
virtue, and their influence together concur, it should rather further and
perfect the action; certainly some ouer-ruling hand and providence stirs up
these vprores, and thereby intimates the reciprocal opposition, as of the earth
to the heavens, so of the heavens to the earth; but the root of this dissension
first bred, and is still fastened in the earth, from whence proceeds the first
occasion of these tumults.

Fourthly, I will leave the heavens, and come to these lower regions; for we
are fallen, we are fallen, from the heavens to the earth, The elements against
themselves.
and here I will take a survey of nature: What is it that preserues nature in
the same state, wherein she consists* the Philosopher will tell you: Discors
elementorum concordia: is it possible that a well ordered, and a well governed
state, should only be vpheld and maintained with banding and factions? this
seems to detract from the providence; for it stands with the condition of
creatures to be finite, and to receive bounds and limitations, as in their
nature, so in their actions, and qualities; neither can it stand with wisdom
or justice, that creatures should thus trespass upon creatures, and offend
each other, without any sufficient vmpire, or indifferent judge to take up the
controversy. Shall I tell you the reason? Man, who was principally ordained
for Gods service, as all other creatures for man; man (I say) breaking his own
bounds, being nexus and naturae vinculum, it must necessarily follow, that all
the rest of the creatures, which were bound and knit together in man, should
likewise be inordinate, and ouerflow their own banks: if the Captain and
guide first break the rank, no marvel if the soldiers fall to confusion.
But in the mean time, how stands the Deity affected to this alteration and
change? Metit vbi non semina^it* he had neither part nor portion in man's
sin; yet like an excellent Alchemist, he draws water out of the hard rock,
he turns this sin to a further manifestation of his own glory: he created
not the elements thus rebellious, but leaving them to themselves, then began
the insurrection. Now God like a cunning Statesman, so fortifies each party
and faction, and in a just balance weighes out their strength, that being
equally matched, the combat is so doubtful, as it prolongs the battle, and
at length, in a time best known to himself, he shall no longer interpose
himself as an vmpire; but unbridle them; and give them free power to revenge
their own wrongs, and work their own wrath, and then shall follow the
dissolution of nature. Thus one and the same cause serves as a present token of
mercy, and as a future engine of justice.

Fifthly, but I should leese my self, I should long wander in the vast and
huge elements; let it suffice, that none of them are perfect and pure in their
own proper places and wombes. Of compound bodies.
I will descend to mixed and compound bodies: Here seems to be the pitched
field, the place appointed for the combat and encounter of the elements: see
how they take advantage of the times, and the seasons, desiring to possess
themselves of the best parts; as of the strongest holds: they have their
several sactions, in the body the variety of humors, according to the periods
of ages, and the differences of complections, they have their conquest, their
rule, and their government. But let me stay my self, for if I should proceed
in this subject, I should only make a compound of that which before I have
spoken simple: I will in these mixed bodies, select some proper defects only
incident to them: I will not here accuse, I will not arraigne, I will not
condemn nature (with the Paracelsian) for gathering together the
cast-away-seedes of the creatures; and exhaling them to the womb of an upper
region, does there bring forth a strange Sodomiticall brood. O the abominable
filth and uncleanness of nature!

For those mixed imperfect creatures (the worms, and the flies) which seem to
excel all others, in the variety, and excellency of glittering colors,
generantur ex putri, they are engendered of corruption; the baseness of their
birth shows their condition; Imperfect mixed crea^ures.
they are marks of corruption, more imperfect then the elements, worse then
corruption it self, being indeed the fruits of corruption, notwithstanding
their sense, their motion, diversity of parts and glorious appearance, yet many
of them are bred in an instant, and die in a moment. There is Ephemera, whose
night is a perpetual night, some with the distemper of the day, but all of
them with the change of the seasons, return to their first mother and nurse
corruption. If nature were sound and entire, either she would not busy her
self, to be get such base and contemptible worms; rather she would first
prevent the corruption it self, and give them a more noble birth, and a longer
continuance of life; but being defective, and not able to produce courageous
Lions, brave Vnico^^es, fierce Tigers, stout Elephants, she makes it her task
and employment to be the mother, and midwife of worms, of gnats, and of
butterflies, wherein she seems most to abound, and to bring forth a very
plentiful brood.

Secondly, speaking of things compound, give me leave to compound my argument
of two reasons, not only in imperfect creatures, The Antipathie of creatures.
but likewise in the most perfect. You shall observe a strange imperfection,
the wonder of reason, the astonishment of Philosophy; behold, behold, the
cruel and bloody Antipathie of creatures; this cannot proceed from elements,
or any temper of contrary qualities; for the elements themselves, in their own
native and proper qualities, are not so malignant and treacherous: the
constitution of a body may soon be altered and changed, but you shall never
be able to separate the antipathie and hate: all creatures seem to be bred of
the same mother earth, they feed on the earth, and are dissolved to the earth:
whence is the breach of their love? how came they severed, and disioyned in
affections? once they were lodged, and harbored in one common Arc, from the
inundation of waters; did they there strive for preeminencie, and fall to
banding and factions? seems it not a great disparagement to the government of
nature, that whereas all creatures were ordained only for man's use, yet some
of them should play the tyrants amongst themselves, and feed only upon blood;
and like common Pirates and robbers, seize upon booties and preyes.

Me thinks I hear some punie Philosopher say, that this antipathie in nature,
is recompensed by a contrary sympathy: The Antipathie is not recompensed by a
Sympathy.
if this were so, yet were it no sufficient excuse, considering that whole
nature, and all the parts thereof tend, and are directed to one end; and
therefore should quietly, and patiently together, bear the same yoke, without
any molestation or annoyance, of horns, hoofes, tuskes, or claws: but I fear
that this conceited sympathy, co^sists rather in man's apprehension, as being a
supposed contrary quality to antipathie, without any true ground in nature or
reason: this is my private opinion; for I think that (...), ( naturalis
affectus) stands in opposition to antipathie; or if there were any such
sympathy, in regard of the mutual help, which they receive from each other,
yet this argues their own proper weakness and imperfection, and certainly it
is not so fierce, and so violent, as is the current and stream of antipathie.
Lord how are we fallen, how are we fallen, from the garden of Paradise, to
P^ris-garden? here you shall see the dogs hailing at Bulls, and at Bears; or
if you please, it shall be a stage, or Theater, where you shall see diversity
of fashions, the changes and variety of fortunes, fears and iealousies in
love, and sometimes tragical conclusions, all of them the undoubted marks of
corruption.

You will say that nature, (to prevent the dangerous issue of Antipathie,) has
removed such creatures far asunder; Enmity in the same kind.
and being dreadful to each other, the very fear serves for a caution. I
pra'y let us measure out, and run over this distance; think not your labor
lost, for I will lead you from sport, unto sport; such cruel and merciless
sport, as is from the Beare-Garden, to the Cocke-pit; see how these little imps
of Mars, Cocks of the same kind, of the same nature, how eager they are to be
in the combat, how bravely and valiantly they fight, they will sooner die,
then forsake the field: Degeneres animos timor arguit: when we think they are
almost breathless, and past life, they take only a respite to recover
strength, and to revenge their own wrath, and sometimes unawares, upon
advantage, they give a deadly wound to their foe; if their strength and courage
were employed against the common adversary the Kite, it were much more
tolerable: but see what a dangerous thing it is for a warlike nation, to have
a long and continued peace within themselves; the inbred choler, and natural
lust, engender pride, and break into wrath; neither pride, nor wrath can
endure equalles, or competitors. As in the dumb creatures, so likewise in man;
O the immortal enmity of mortal men! how hardly can Statesmen be reconciled,
who h^uing once drawn out the sword, cast the sheath into the river? Shall I
tell you the reason, God is charity and peace, set a brea^h between God and
man, then farewell charity and peace; we must only expect continual war and
dissension; as in man in regard of his passions, so likewise in the rest of the
creatures, consisting of the same sensible nature with man: as in man in regard
of his offense, so in the creatures, for man's punishment and vengeance, it
stood with the divine justice to set his own enemies at enmity within
themselves: and this serves as an undoubted token and sign of corruption.

Hitherto (you will say) yt I have only insisted in generals, An objection
answered.
and this supposed corruption did only appear in reference and relation to
others: for true it is, that every thing chiefly intends his own proper
happiness and perfection: now as a means to obtain this, it desires to
ouertop others, that suppressing them, it might exalt it self, though I do
not approve this objection; for nature should be a well governed corporation,
consisting of many members and branches; every part according to his own
kind, should be ranked in his several order, and every one in particular
should principally and chiefly intend the perfection and preservation of the
whole, as appears by daily experience: for the earth will ascend, or the
heavens will bow down and descend, rather then an emptiness or vacuitie
should be admitted in nature: and therefore every thing should contain it
self within his own bounds, and not endamage his neighbors: yet for your
further satisfaction and contentment, I will descend to particulars within
themselves.

parts; or that there could be a different condition of the whole from the
parts. But, I pray', how do they excuse nature in general? Forsooth, though
deformity appears in the error, yet the variety serves for the ornament:
then it should seem, that the Sun consisting only of light, for want of
diversity should be base and contemptible, while every plant and weed of the
fields were highly esteemed, for the various and delectable colors. It should
seem that nature can no way set forth her own beauty, but she must bring
ugly, deformed, misshapen monsters upon the stage of this world, that so other
creatures base in themselves, yet comparatiue, in respect of others deformity,
might seem beautiful.

Monsters are rare, and seldom appear to us, though Africa be a fruitful
mother of monsters, I will therefore come to the several kinds in nature of
the two sexes. Certainly the males are the more noble, Females are more in
number.
as consisting of greater heat, and of a better constitution: but nature being
more and more defective, brings forth the females in a far greater number:
whereas in the time of man's innocence, in the state of perfection, the number
should have been equal.

Not to insist in the sexes, I will descend to their actions in the dumb
creatures. You shall hardly discern any tokens or signs of joy, solus homo
est risibilis; but for sorrow and grief, The actions of the creatures be token
her sorrow.
you shall find very many and pregnant testimonies. There is in every
creature, vox naturae inclamantis dominu^ naturae, the voice of nature calling
upon the God of nature; upon any wrong or injustice sustained, they seem to
complain with their cries to the God and creator of nature. And observe, how
apt they are to complain, in so much that the very breathing, inspiratio and
exspiratio, seems to my ears to have the sound and note of a groan.
Scripture does likewise witness as much in effect; the creatures being subject
to vanity, groan under the burden of sin. Some creatu^es there are, which
out of compassion and pity seem to be true penitentiaries, as Doves, quarum
vox gemebunda est, and oculi lachrymab^les, whose voice is a groan, whose eyes
are fountains of tears. A worthy pattern for our example, estote serpents,
be wise as serpents to prevent the voice of the Charmer: but if once ensnared,
estote columbae, then let the sighs of a contrite heart, the tears of a
sorrowful soul, together with the flood of Iordane, wash thy uncleanness, thy
filth and leprosy of sin.

If the actions as fruits, betoken corruption, then I will further proceed and
search out the root of this corruption, which I find to be in nature her
self: for every thing contains in it self the inbred seeds of corruption,
and the more perfect the creature is, the more apt for corruption; The more
perfect the creature is, the more apt for corruption.
as if corruption did belong to the perfection, in this corrupted state of the
creature; or that nature were envious, and would not afford the one without the
other. The finest wool soonest breeds the moth; the most delicious fruit is
aptest to perish; the fairest beauty hastens to wither; the strongest oak is
most annoyed with the ^uie. Lest thou should think, that outwardly the
creatures were only annoyed, and that the root were sound and entire, behold
nature discouers her self, and shows the impostume to have first bred in that
radical humor, which is the foundation of nature: for as it is in trees and
in plants, if any one branch or leaf do miscarrie, the root is unsound; so
is it in the outward works of nature, these being corrupted, do undoubtedly
argue the corruption of nature.

But you will say, that all this does only argue a weakness or imperfection,
An objection answered.
but no punishment or corruption in nature: for it stood in the will of the
founder, to make it more or less perfect, as are the several parts in respect
of themselves. Now suppose that all these imperfections were absent, and that
God should ordain nature, better by many degrees then now she is extant; yet
still there should be limitations and bounds of her goodness; and for want of
a greater height of perfection, we might still challenge her to be in the
state of corruption. This objection will fail, if the premises be duly
considered; for my reasons are grounded upon nature, supposing the state
wherein she consists, and not in reference to any higher condition, wherein she
might have been, first ordained by God: and therefore for the vpshot and
conclusion, I will use this last reason.

Nature is able to bring nothing to perfection, I Nature brings nothing to
perfection.
for at first it stood with the wisdom of the founder, according to the scope
and mark aimed at, and intended in the creation, to impart virtue and strength
to the creature; having directed nature to these ends, she should of her own
self attain to those ends. But see the corruption, see how she fails in her
purposes: Man, without education, is like the dumb beast, savage and wild:
the dumb beasts of themselves are merely unprofitable; the horse must be
taught to hold up his head, to learn his pace, and must be trained up for the
service of war; the trees want lopping, pruning, and grafting; the sweet and
the bitter Almond do not differ in kind, but only in husbandry and usage;
plants must be watered and dug; the earth mellowed and mended; metals
purified and cleansed: and by whom shall all this be performed? if by a
superior agent, then might it be done without disparag^ment; but if a base and
inferior should undertake to controwle and correct nature in her actions, this
were a high contempt and indignity. Here are not second causes, which require
the concourse and influence of their first mouers, but nature is to be taught
and instructed by her handmaid, to receive her last and final perfection from
her vassal and slave, that ill-fauoured ape, mistrisse Art, forsooth, the
learned gossip, which does all things by imitation, taking her grounds and
principles of action from nature; she must be sent for as a midwife to help
the delivery: and hence issues such numbers and troops of Arts, together
with such infinite inventions of men; and among others, the Chemicall Art,
though it deserves high commendation, being rare and wonderful in her
operations, yet with her vainglory and ostentation, she has greatly wronged
and prouock't nature, in so much that if nature were not wholly cast down and
dejected, rather then she would endure the intolerable boasting and bragging of
Mountebankes, she would attempt the uttermost of her power.

To conclude this one point, The sum of all the former reasons.
considering, first, that nature so much abounds in evil; secondly, and is
so much inclined unto evil; thirdly, considering how the heavens stand
affected to the earth; fourthly, how elements amongst themselves; fifthly, how
mixed creatures one to another; sixthly, and in themselves what defects and
imperfections there are; seventhly, how Art serves like a cobbler, or tinker, to
piece up the walls, and to repair the ruins of nature: I hope it will
sufficiently appear that she is corrupted, and much declined from her first
perfection, which certainly was intended by the founder, and by all probable
conjecture was imparted to her, in her first institution. I could be infinite
in this point, but indeed it is not so pertinent, nor does it so nearely
concern my text; I have already alleged seven arguments to this purpose;
seven is a perfect number; as I challenge a rest on the seventh day, so here
I will rest in my seventh argument.

Now in this great uproar and tumult of nature, A transition to man.
when heaven and earth seem to threaten a final destruction; give me leave
with the Mariners of Jonas ship, to cast lots, and search out the first
occasion of this evil. Alas, alas, the lot falls upon man: man alone of all
other creatures, in regard of the freedom of his will, and the choice of his
own actions, being only capable of the transgression, the rest of the
creatures are wholly excluded from the offense; the punishment (I confess)
appears in them, but chiefly and principally in man: I will therefore descend
from the great world, to this little world, which first set on fire, and
inflamed the whole; for I should greatly wrong my self, if I should loose so
much time, as to take a general survey of nature, to wander in the deserts and
caves of the creatures, to search out their imperfections; I will therefore tie
my self to man, and by man alone the fall and corruption shall manifestly
appear. My proofs and arguments I will dispose into three several ranks:
first, for such things which seem to be proper and peculiar to man, in regard
of his constitution, whereof all nature cannot furnish us with the like example
and president; The three parts of this Treatise.
and therefore we may well suppose, that they are the peculiar punishments of
man's sin. Secondly, I will speak of man's condition in general, and compare
man with the beast of the field; whereby it shall appear, that our misery is
far greater then theirs, contrary to the first intent and institution of
nature, wherein she gave us a greater dignity, and so consequently should
impart a greater measure of happiness. Thirdly, I will insist in those
particular punishments of sin, which are related in Scripture to be the
punishments of the first sin; wherein I will show the truth, the certainty,
and I will examine them by the touchstone and light of our natural reason.

Speaking of man's co^stitution, That man is compoun^ed.
it must be supposed, that he consists of several and different parts, which
appears by his composition, and dissolution; the several faculties resident
in several vessels; the several senses tied to their several organs; whereas
if his nature were simple, and not compounded, it should admit no such variety
of parts, no such diversity of functio^s; but shall have a state constant and
stable, homogeneall, every way like unto it self. If then man be compounded,
then assuredly nature requires the fewest principles; as there appears only
action or passion in man, so more is not required in man, save only the two
several fountains of action, or passion; then let me spare my self a
needless and unprofitable labor, for the whole world did ever acknowledge in
man, as in all other creatures, matter, and form. I will therefore lay down
this as a groundwork or supposition, that man consists of two parts; a body
sensible, material, corruptible; and a soul Man consists of a body and soul.
intelligent, spiritual, and incorruptible: for his body, I will refer him
to the trial of all your se^ses, that he is no shadow, or fantasy, but
really consisting of a true body, and such a body as tends to corruption: if
any man doubt of it, I could wish that his pasport were made, that with the
whip and the scourge, he might be conveyed to Golgotha, where he should find
sculles of all sizes.

For his soul, that it is intelligent, not guided, or carried by the stream
of nature, as a dumb beast, but able to discourse, to gather one truth from
another, containing in it self the seeds of all knowledge. If any man seem
to deny this, I will not argue or convince him by reason, for he is not
capable of a reasonable discourse; but (for his punishment) I will rank him in
the number of unreasonable creatures, among the bruit beasts, etc. The soul is
a spirit.
Now if this soul be intelligent, then certainly spiritual, as not
consisting of any earthly matter, which well appears by the quick
apprehension, the strange and admirable operations, conceiving things
immateriall, able to abstract things from their own nature, understanding the
gross and earthly substance in a spiritual manner; and howsoever the
inclination of the flesh, or the disposition of humors stand, (for these may
move and affect) yet still she retai^es the Lordship, and government of her
own actions, not violently carried by an instinct of nature, but having a
free will in her own choice and election, which undoubtedly argues a higher
descent, a greater petegree and lineage then these base elements can afford her,
or can proceed from a well tempered body.

That there should be spiritual substances in general, Spiritual substances.
let us first fly above the conuexitie of the heavens, where elements, and
elementarie bodies cannot ascend. Can you conceive, that there should be a
vast wilderness, uninhabited, unpeopled, lie naked and empty, or rather
furnished with heavenly and spiritual substances, according to the condition
of that place, as is this elementarie world, with bodies gross and
terrestrial? the Philosophers showing the worlds perfection by the diversity
of creatures; some material, some spiritual, etc. as likewise by the various
and strange motion of the heavens, which being simple bodies, should have one
simple motion; and yet their motion being not simple, not for the preservation
of themselves, and that in their own proper places, where every other creature
has rest, peace, and contentment, do hence undoubtedly conclude, that the
heavens are moved by intelligences, and in token hereof, there are influences,
qualities not material, the operation whereof cannot be prevented by
application of any other elementarie or contrary quality: and such is the
force of these influences, as that the Moon being the weakest of all other
planets in power, yet is able to move the huge Ocean, without any corporal
engine or instrument. And surely the heavens can be no otherwise moved then by
intelligences, The Angels are Intelligences.
which in effect are Angels: for in nature, no reason can be assigned why they
should move, not moving for themselves, but for others, and therefore are moved
by others: or looking to them and to their outward form, no reason can be
assigned, why they might not as well move from the West to the East, as from
the East to the West; and the motion it self is so strange and so wonderful,
that the mind of man being an intelligent spirit, notwithstanding our studies,
our circles, excentric, concentric, epicicle, and the like, yet we cannot
possibly describe the motion, and trace out their paths, but we must be
enforced to use impossible suppositio^s, that the earth should turn upon
wheels, and move with her own weight, or that there should be penetration of
bodies, which is a far greater absurdity: and therefore this strange and
wonderful motion must needs be effected by some intelligent spirits. Thus the
school of the Heathen did acknowledge as much in effect, concerning the truth
and certainty of Angels, as our Christian faith does oblige us for our belief.

Let us descend from heaven unto earth: Consider how the elements themselves
do exceed each other, in finenesse and rarietie, and therein come nearer and
nearer the nature of spirits; insomuch that the fire and the air are scarce
sensible, the sight not apprehending them. Are there not motes, which cannot be
discerned but in the Sunne-beames? and in every dumb creature, is not the
form spiritual, All forms are spiritual.
as being the more noble part of the creature, though hidden and concealed,
having both womb and tomb in the matter, and therefore being impotent of her
self, wants a natural instinct for her guide and direction? If this form
were not spiritual, then what penetration of bodies should be admitted? how
slowly should the actions proceed, considering little worms, which in
themselves and in their whole bodies are scarce sensible? What should we think
of their form, they have variety of senses, of motion, they have variety of
parts, of members, of limbs, and of joints? or why should all quality be
immateriall, were it not because they proceed from the form which is
immateriall; as on the contrary, quantity is therefore extended and seems to
be gross and terrestrial, because it proceeds from the matter, and i^ applied
for dime^sions: but of all qualities, it does more manifestly appear in the
objects of our sight, as color and light, which are diffused in a moment,
thorough the compass of the whole world, and find no opposition in their
passage. Thus certainly the forms of things are substances immateriall: but
most especially for man's soul which is reasonable, were it not freed and
exempted from any elementarie composition, it could never judge aright of all
bodies; but according to her temperature, thereafter should follow her censure,
thereafter her appetite and inclination, so that the freedom of man's will
should suffer violence. If then you will suppose in man, a true judgment of
things, and a free liberty in his choice, you must conceive the soul as a
spirit, which is the ground and foundation of both, whereby having only the
divine concourse and assistance, she is not carried with any natural instinct,
as a dumb instrument, but is the root and fountain, as of her faculties, so
of her actions.

If this soul be spiritual, then certainly immortal, The immortality of
the soul.
as being exempted and freed from the opposition and contrariety of
elementarie qualities, whichis the only motive and inducement to corruption:
she comprehends and understands things immortal, some of them being bare and
dumb instruments ordained only for her use and service, suppose the Sun, the
Moon, and the Stars: and therefore we cannot think, that she should be of
less perfection, as touching her time and continuance. The desires of the
soul are infinite, she intends nothing so much as eternity: this is
naturally ingrafted in all of us, and nature cannot fail in her ends. Consider
the maine infusions, which every man finds in himself: sometimes his mind,
either in dreams, or in the strong apprehension of his own thoughts, seems
to presage evil, and this evil undoubtedly follows. Seldom or never do any
great accidents befall us, but the mind seems to prophecy and foretell such
events. Consider again the many visions and apparitions, which from age to age
have bin discovered among the dead, whereof the best authors, the most learned
and judicious make mention. For as I cannot excuse all superstition in this
kind; so absolutely and simply to deny this truth, were heathenisme and
infidelity.

The course and order of the whole universe requires as much in effect: For as
the power of God has already appeared in the creation; his wisdom in the
disposing; his providence in the preserving of nature, and so for the rest of
his attributes, etc. so there must be a time when the justice of God shall
reveal it self: Gods justice does infer the immortality of the soul.
which justice, as it is most commendable in man, so is it much more eminent in
God. This justice, in respect of the whole world, must only be exercised upon
man: for all the rest of the creatures are carried with the violence and
stream of their nature; only man has a discoursiue reason, whereby he may
consult of his own actions; and being once resolved, he has a free will for
his own choice and election, and therefore man (above all other creatures) must
be accomptable for his actions. And to this end, God has given him this
property, that having once performed a work, he begins to reflect and examine
things past; that so it might serve either as a sampler for amendment, or as a
corosiue for repentance. Upon this due examination there follows either such a
joy and contentment, as cannot arise from a sensitive part, nor cannot be
imparted to a dumb beast: or else such a terror, such a fear, such a sting of
conscience, as makes man, above all other creatures, the most miserable. Now I
confess with the heathen, that in the course of this life, Gods justice does
not sufficiently appear: and rather then this justice should suffer the least
eclipse or imputation, I will shake the foundations of the earth, and proclaim
a new heaven, and a new earth. And in the mean time, to find out the
infallible effects of this justice, I will rake up the ashes, and in the dead
embers of man's putrified and corrupted carcass, I will extract an invisible and
immortal soul; which being the suruiuor, shall be liable to the paiments of
debts; and according to the sins or deserts, according to the measure and
extent of Gods mercy or justice, shall be a subject capable of punishment or
glory.

Having spoken of the several parts of his constitution, now at length we
have agreed upon man, we have laid hold on him, and apprehended the party:
now let us proceed in our plea, put in our bills and our articles, and take our
exceptions against him. My first objection is this: That one part of man should
be corruptible the other incorruptible.
All other creatures subsist, as long as their form subsists; for the matter
and the form are both twins, concelued in the same instant, under the same
constellation, and therefore should have the like continuance of being, and the
like success in their actions. Only in man you shall observe the difference;
his soul is immortal, made of a most durable met^all, and yet contained
within the brittle vessel of his weak flesh; as if she were no part of man,
but did inhabit in Tents, and in Tabernacles in the wilderness, always
removing and changing her dwelling, having no certain mansion house to
contain her.

What things are coupled in nature, should necessarily symbolize, and be tied
together by some band, which should equally partake of both. Here is the flesh
and the spirit united; but where is that band, which being neither flesh nor
spirit, should partake of both, and couple both; where is the league or the
amity? Here are no intelligencers assigned to their celestial orbs, no Angels
conuersing with Angels; but the flesh with the spirit, corruptible with
incorruptible, mortal with immortal, live together under one roof, they are
the household servants of one man, and are linckt together in one person:
whereas the Philosopher says, Corruptibile incorruptibile differunt plusquam
genere: Things corruptible and incorruptible, they do not differ in number,
they do not differ in kind; but they seem to belong to a diverse and a
different world, the world of eternity, and the world of corruption: and
therefore in reason should not admit any fellowship or society between
themselves, much less be the members of one and the same corporation.

Me thinks I call to mind the practice of the tyrant, who was wont to couple
the living bodies of men, to the dead carcasses of others, impar coningium,
that, being not able to quicken and revive each other, they might together
corrupt and consu^e. Here is the like tyranny: for it is strange and
wonderful (much against the ordinary course of nature) either how such
several and different parts should be linckt together, to make up one subject,
visible, corruptible, earthly, according to the flesh; invisible,
incorruptible, heavenly, according to the spirit: or being once knit together,
and a league of amity, consisting in a mutual sympathy between both,
concluded, what should at length cause the dissolution?

That man should die, when the better part of man is yet extant; that for want
of the more ignoble and base part (the use of the body) the soul should not
be able to exercise her faculties, either of growth and nourishment, or of
sense and motion; but like a comfortless widow should be strictly tied to her
thirds, only the intellectual part, being her own proper dowry, having
gotten no surplusage to her estate, by virtue of her marriage. When the husband
is once dead, then is the wife let at liberty, from the law of her husband;
but the soul is excluded from any second marriage, and cannot couple herself
to another; she is enforced to a widowhood, and cannot obtain the like fredome
in her choice, which formerly she had in the time of her virginity. All
nature, the whole world cannot afford the like president: and therefore
acknowledge, that it proceeds from the corruption of man, as a proper and
peculiar punishment to man.

You will say, that this property makes the difference of his nature, as
differing from all other creatures; from the Angels in regard of his flesh;
from the beasts in regard of his spirit: and therefore no marvel, if this be
proper and peculiar to himself, as being the special difference of man, and
not any punishment of sin, This objection proceeds from an error; for the
difference of man consists in the reasonable soul, and not in the mortality
or immortality of parts: so I will proceed to a second argument.

The base intertainment of the reasonable soul.
then me thinks nature should make some recompense in the nobleness of man's
birth. Behold then I will describe the solemnity of these nuptials; after her
first approach and infusion, for many months the soul is kept prisoner in the
womb, a place noisome for sent, unclean for situation, a dungeon for
darkness. As man himself is conceived in sin; so is the soul concealed in
shame: the eyes will not dare to behold; chaste ears would be offended to
hear; let not any tongue presume to speak, the uncleanness of man's birth;
see how he crouches with his head on his knees like a tumbler, wallowing in his
own excrements, feeding upon the impurest blood, breathing thorough the most
unclean passages; in so much that Christ, who came to be spit upon, to be
whipped, to be trodden, to be crucified only for man's sake, yet would never
endure the baseness of his conception. I speak not of the foulness of man's
sin and concupiseence; but of his natural uncleanness, being the undoubted
token and sign of his sinful condition. I will no longer defile my speech
with this subject, let the Anatomist speak for himself in his own art: En
qui superbis homuncio, terra and cinis, inter excrementa natus; inter
intestinum rectum and vesicam.

Now when all things are fully accomplished, ad vmbilicum vsque perductus, I
had thought that there should have been some more convenient dwelling, and
fitter for the entertainment of the reasonable soul: That man shoud have no
more parts then the dumb beasts.
for as the sensatiue has more noble faculties then the vegetative; so has it
more parts and more offices assigned for her service; then why should not some
difference, and some addition be made between reason and sense? Man consists
of a liver for his nourishment, of an heart for his vital spirits, of a brain
for his sense: this is all, and all the beasts of the field have as much. But
you will answer me, that man has (in this time of corruption) as many parts,
as ever the first man is supposed to have, or to bring with him from Paradise,
in the state of perfection. My answer is, that the grace, which in the time of
man's innocence did accompany nature, supplied all the defects, and was
sufficient of it self: but man being deprived of that grace, might justly
claim and challenge (according to the excellency of his own condition)
something in nature, some super a bounding parts in his body, to betoken the
dignity of his reasonable soul, above the state of the sensatiue.

You will say, that her prerogative consists not in the number, but in the
goodness and quality of parts: Princes may find entertainment in private
men's houses, but their state shall appear in their own hangings and
furniture. Man's senses are worse then the creatures.
Certainly man comes short of other creatures for every sense; the Eagle for
sight, the Hounds for their sent, the Buck for his hearing, the Ape for his
taste, the Worms for their touch: and for the inward senses, which are the
proper and nearest instruments of the understanding, he that shall well
consider the strange and wonderful operation of the creatures in their own
kind, how curious the birds are in building their nests; how provident every
thing is, for the preservation of it self; how admirable the beasts are in
their natural works; the knowledge whereof, whereby they are directed in
these actions, consists in the fancy; he will easily confess, that in their
inward senses, they cannot but far exceed man. If you reply, that man's
temper and senses, though otherwise none of the best, yet are best applied and
accommodated for man's service and use, as they are the dumb instruments of a
reasonable soul. This is a fond and an idle suggestion: for who can know or
try the contratie? but surely the best should always be fitted for the best,
and this stands with a right and equal proportion according to justice.



Behold in the parts of man a great opposition, and antipathie, between the
flesh and the spirit (as it were) encountering each other. The opposition
between the flesh and the spirit.
Can a kingdom divided in it self proceed from nature, which intends an
uniform order and course in the creatures? I grant there may be contrariety
of qualities in one and the same subject, consisting of contrary elements, for
here the subject is capable of contrariety: but in parts of different nature,
of different condition, where the one by nature is subordinate to the other;
that there should be such opposition, it is exemplum sine exemplo, the whole
fabric and course of nature cannot parallel this with a president; that man
should reflect upon his own actions, should suruay, and view his own works,
and that his own soul should discern and condemn the inclination and
practice of his own flesh; that man distracted and discontented, should say in
the agony of his mind, I see another law in my members, rebelling against the
law of my spirit: Doubtless, non sic fuit ab initio, both of them proceed
from one God, both of them are parts of one man, and therefore (as fellow
yokemen) should tend jointly together, to one and the same end, the happiness
and perfection of man: as in nature there is no contrariety between the
matter and form, the one is active, the other passive; the one apt to give,
the other apt to receive impressio^; the one giving beauty and splendour, the
other supporting and upholding the action. There is no difference between
the^, no more then there is between quantity and quality, rather helping and
furthering, then any way hindering or opposing each others property; only in
man, in man alone consists the difference. And therefore acknowledge it not as
the first intent and institution of nature, but as a punishment of sin; God,
requiting man's disobedience, to show the high wisdom of his government, and
the proportion of his justice, sets the parts of man at enmity with
themselves, which before did together conspire against their God and creator.

You will say, that this is but a light skirmish; some No manner of
subordination.
that the parts, being of a different kind, must likewise be carried with a
different inclination. I will therefore further insist, that in man there is
not that consent, and harmony of parts, which is requisite for the unity of a
person: sometimes the soul proves the mint of our actions, and brands them
with her own stamp; and sometimes the body ouerrules the freedom of our wills,
and bears the whole sway; mores sequuntur hum res, Physiognomie and judicial
Astrology, take this for the ground and foundation of their truth. Is it not
yet resolved who should bear rule? or must it consist of alterations, changes
and turns? or do they seek to prevent each other? Capiat qui capere potest,
quod nullius est hominis, id iure sit occupant^s, as if they did both strive
for the empire, which as yet were not intailed to any certain family or tribe.

But observe a far greater enormitie: whereas the reasonable soul contains
in it self the sensatiue and vegetative faculties; why should she not correct
their errors, mistakings, and defects? why should not the reasonable soul
intermeddle with the concoctions, The reasonable soul not in^^rmedling in the
concoctions.
nourishment and growth of the body? If any thing lies heavy on the stomach,
as she knows the disease, and feels the burden; so why should not the
reasonable soul have power to remove it? Seems it not a great disorder in
nature, that in the body of man there should be two subordinate souls; and
both of them should have their several and distinct operations, as if they
should rather constitute two several creatures, then jointly concur to the
unity of one person; the sensatiue soul intending the works of nature, the
reasonable soul taking only charge of such things, as require free choice and
election: could not all things be more easily performed by one and the same
faculty, as in all other creatures? Then should there be no greater difficulty
to cleanse the unclean blood, to purge the gross melancholy, then now we
find in taking away some spot or blemish from the outward skin; then should
not the secret causes of sudden death (as it were privy conspiracies) suddenly
assault and attempt man, but man in his own wisdom should timely foresee,
and prevent them.

Wherefore serve fibers, muscles or tendons for receiving, retaining, or
expulsion of food, if the soul has no power to apply them? The perfection of
nature (especially) consists within her most secret pauilions: shall the soul
be able to move the thigh, How the inward parts are disposed.
the leg, the arm, the whole body? and yet the least scruple of poison lying
in the ventricle, shall she not be able to disgorge and expel it? In other
creatures (I confess) there is an ordinary course of nature, as in all their
actions an ordinary instinct of nature: they have a time of rising, a period
and time of setting; they can no more order their steps, or their ways, then
they can change their co^plectio^ or growth. But it should be otherwise in man,
who as he is Lord of his outward actions; so he should have the full power and
command of himself, and of the most inward and secret operations of his own
body: for the same reason would sufficiently serve to direct both alike. But
see, see, whole man is corrupted, and therefore neither body with soul, nor
soul with her faculties can together consist; all is in an uproar, since we
forsook him, who is the very bond of all peace, and agreement.

If neither opposition between both, nor want of The soul and the body are
strangers to each other.
though parts of one man, and mutually subsisting together; yet are they
strangers one to another, not any way acquainted with the counsels and
secresies of each other. Whatsoever is proper and peculiar to the soul (for
her faculties, her nature, and powers) she does not any way impart it to the
whole man, but only by way of reflection: looking upon the actions we judge of
the substance; and so we might do if we lived among strangers and heathen,
though certainly the soul cannot be ignorant of her self. Again, whatsoever
is proper to the body, as form, figure, the use and disposition of the inward
parts, notwithstanding that the soul first squared out the body, and fashioned
the members for her own use and service, anima fabricatur sibi domicilium; yet
she knows them not, and therefore must learn them again by inspection, and
dissection of man's body: a cruel, bloody, and merciless spectacle, I
confess; yet such as must be admitted in schools, rather then we should be
ignorant of our own bodies. Thus far as the soul and the body are the
objects of our knowledge: now in their own operations, see how they are
estranged from each other.

Parts as they cannot subsist without the whole, so neither should they be
able to work of themselves; but in man you shall observe actions, which are
appropriated to either part, to the soul and to the body, and cannot be
imparted to both. Though the present condition of man be earthly, made of the
earth, feeds on the earth, and is dissolved to the earth, and therefore the
soul does less discover her self by her proper actions, then does the
material body; An extasis.
yet it is not unknown to Philosophy, that there is an extasis of the soul,
wherein she is carried in a trance, wholly and only intending the intellectual
functions, while the body lies dead like a carcass, without breath, sense,
motion, or nourishment, only as a pledge to assure us of the souls return.
And upon her return, having talked with God, or been transfigured in the
mount, she gives the body no such intelligence or message, but deemes it as a
dumb beast, not fit to be acquainted with so high mysteries; so that the
whole man is ignorant, what has befalne the better part of himself.

Now see how the body requites this unkindness and diseurtesie. It is natural
to every form, that if it be extant, Our infancy.
it should be always in action; especially the more noble form finds the
greater employment: but observe the difference in man; for many years after
his birth, he is like an unreasonable creature, feeds on the pappe, and lies
in the cradle, intending only the actions of nature, and giving no outward
appearance of his reasonable soul; in so much, that were it not for the
feature and form of his body, you should hardly discern his kind: whereas in
all other creatures you shall instantly discern, in the first moment of their
birth, actions proper and peculiar to their state and condition.

But I will pass over our infancy, we have forgotten those days, being now
arrived to our full age: I will therefore make a second instance; once within
the compass of a natural day, in the time of our rest and our sleep, Sleep.
where is there any appearance of a reasonable soul? There is nourishment (I
confess); for nature will have her course in the ^euerall concoctions: there
is sense (I confess); for the body being easily touched, presently it awakens:
there is likewise an inward sense, as appears by our dreams, and the renewing
of our decayed spirits: but for the reasonable soul; there is a sleep
indeed, a dead sleep, even the true image of death, without any show or
appearance of life.

Lest I should be thought a thief or a coward, thus to steal upon man, in the
time of his sleep, to stop his wind, to strangle and choke him in his naked
bed, that he should not be able to speak for himself, and to deny his own
corruption: I will therefore go from his naked bed to Bedlam, Mad men.
where you shall find men naked out of their beds; poor silly wretches,
poor silly wretches, some of them with outrageous fits arising from heat and
from choler: others with melancholy deep impressions, frame unto themselves
fancies of all kinds: some with night watchings and studies, hastening to be
wise, lost their own wits: others in their loue-passions imparted themselves,
and now rest, in their rage and their fury, besides themselves: how are they
tormented, tied to the stakes, whipped with cords, dieted with hunger, tempered
with coldness? The irons enter into their flesh, they are used in the nature of
wild beasts; but their greatest misery is, that they have no feeling of their
own misery. Think not this punishment to be casual and accidental to man,
for these are Lunatickes; the heavens have their actions, and God has his
providence in them: see how the rebellious flesh has clean vanquished the
spirit: O what is man, if man be left unto himself! Of all thy temporal
blessings and graces, O Lord, I do give thee most humble thanks for the right
use of my wits and my senses.

I dare not long converse with mad men, I confess indeed that once they were
sober, and gave some token of a reasonable soul: I will now come unto them,
who are of a milder constitution, with whom I may more freely converse, and to
whom I may approach with less fear; for these are innocents and idiots, Idiots.
let us hear how wisely they will answer for themselves? But I will spare
them that labor, for if you can teach them to ask meat in their hunger,
drink in their thirst, to complain of coldness when it pincheth them, here is
the height and top of their learning; as yet they are not arrived to common
sense; yet commonly they are men of sound bodies, sanguine complections, good
health, long life, nothing is wanting, but only that in man, you shall not
find man. A president without pattern, a punishment only proper and peculiar
to man; no other sensible creature, either in his birth, or his sleep, or in
his madness, much less in the whole course of his life, did ever appear
without sense: who ever saw a quick plant without sap in the root? But in
token, that the first sin of man was the curiosity of knowledge, (for the
penalty of this sin) God has reserved in his own power, the free disposing
of man's reason; that notwithstanding his reasonable soul, his education,
learning, or discipline; yet God has not tied himself to concur with man in
the action; a benefit, which being in the same kind, and seeming natural and
essential to the same kind, God never denies to the rest of his creatures.

I will now alter and change my course: for having The soul has all her
knowledge by learning.
and of the body. The soul, though reasonable; yet in her self, as from her
self, seems to have no understanding; she has no infusions, as the Angels
have; no ingraf^ed knowledge, as other creatures have in their own kind, but
only a power and capacity to understand. In the use and exercise whereof,
sometimes the mind is distracted with variety of her own thoughts, and cannot
intend to direct the edge of her understanding, but our wits are wandering and a
woolgathering; here the soul is grown impotent and weak, and has not the
power of her self: and yet in the mean time, how is she perplexed and
tormented with ignorance, possessed with an immoderate thirst of knowledge,
with a curiosity of knowledge? And on the other side, what great difficulty
and labor appears in the purchase of wisdom? It is gotten by long
experience, and the trial of many conclusions: all ages are not come to that
staiednes, which is requisite for the att^ining of wisdom. When it is gotten,
when it is at the height, then our memory begins to fail us, we know not how
to keep such a treasure: or else you shall discern a sensible change in our
nature; for being old, we grow young again, not in years, but in affections;
there is no difference between the toys and fond^es of youth, and the
forgetfulness and dotage of age, both are the same in effect: and here wisdom
seems like a motheaten garment, which has been heretofore of some value, but
now, for want of rep^iring or trimming, serves for no further use or employment.

Thus far the soul in her self. Now let us see what comfort and furtherance
she receives from the body. The soul is hindered in her knowledge by the body.
Parts should have the greatest reference to themselves, as wanting each others
help, and supporting each other: so that it stood with the wisdom and
intention of nature, in the beginning to fit and to square them one for the
other; so that the body in reason should further the actions of the reasonable
soul. But it falls out otherwise, a full stomach sends up gross fumes,
which intoxicate the brain: the largest and best diet, can spare the least,
and that the worst nourishment for the sensatiue spirits: the fattest soil
yields the foggiest wit; while the fruitless sands, the heath, the rocks, the
mountains, seem to make some recompense for their barrenness with a
plentiful invention. But to come to the immediate actions of the
understanding; what greater obstacle or hindrance can be, then is the burden
and weight of the body? our minds distracted with senses, the senses not
rightly informing; sometimes deluding with snowes, sometimes deceiving with
fancies; never apprehending things in their true value and proportion; and when
they are best disposed, yet their bill of information must be further examined:
for we do not receive the things themselves, but the species or images of
things, which being presented to our understanding, most commonly we judge
according to our passions. But what do we receive from the senses? surely
sensible objects, and not intelligible objects; for the senses are only
employed in particulars, which do not belong to the court or cognizance of the
understanding, which only conceaues the generals; as if the sense should
speak in an unknown tongue, or in a strange language. And therefore the
understanding must first eleuate and give them a new tincture, before they can
come to his censure, hence proceeds that distinction of schools, intellectus
agens, and intellectus patiens, whereas all sense consists in one passion.

You will say, that although the understanding be enforced to make his own
objects, The understanding makes her own objects.
yet is it done with the greatest facility, and ease, a natural action. For
the soul out of her own actiuitie, is able to abstract, her own objects from
the matter, and to give them a like condition to her self; assuredly, all the
difficulty in knowledge consists in raising these objects. Wherefore serve all
the rules of Logic? why should we strive so much for a right method? were it
not that the difficulty consists in the discovery of the truth. The Lawyer
deserves high commendation, if he can truly open his cause, though he never
pass his judgment. From whence arises all the diversities of men's opinions,
when as reason is the same in all men? We do not differ about coulors, we do
not differ about sensible objects: only the difference is in the discovery of
a truth, which in effect is as much as in raising these intelligible objects;
for if the truth lay open and naked, all men would easily assent unto it. Me
thinks it should stand with right reason, that as sense has sensible objects;
so things themselves should present themselves to the understanding, that the
mind should not busy her self, to make her own objects intelligible, but
should only pass her judgment and censure. This is the condition of dumb
beasts in regard of their sense; this is the state of the Angels, in regard of
their infusion; and this should have bin the state and condition of man, were
it not, that man is fallen from the state of his first integrity, and
happiness, to a state of corruption.

Our will is distracted.
which man wageth with himself, possessed with contrary judgments, insomuch
that he proves a stranger to himself, not knowing the resolution of his own
mind. And thus breaking forth into contrary wills, not knowing how himself
stands affected, sometimes he will, sometimes he will not one and the same
action; it being the self same, giving no cause of the alteration and change
of his will. Thus not guided by nature, as all other creatures are, he stands
like a blind man, and knows not how to make choice of his own ways.

How unfitly has nature disposed of man's will; How the boundless appetites of
man do perplex him.
it seems that al other man's faculties are finite, contained within very
narrow banks. The wisdom of man is foolishnes, and serves only to give him
occasion to see his own ignorance, hoc vnum scio, me nihil scire, this only I
know, that I know nothing. The power of man is weakness, all his wealth seems
to be mere beggary; but the desires and appetites of man are infinite, and
boundless. So that in his greatest abundance poor man is discontented, and
much perplexed with his own wants. What shall I say of man? where shall he
seek contentment and rest? or whom shall I accuse? for man himself, I find
him thus ordained by nature. I will therefore make my complaint against nature,
she is corrupted, and having no true contentment in her self, she will not
confess her own baseness, but desires to conceal it and to delude man. And
to this end observe her subtlety, she gives man an infinite desire, intimating
that she has an infinite treasure; but our desires are therefore infinite,
because we receive no contentment at all, and so still wanting, still ^e
desire. For nature that first brought us together, and made us importunate
suitors, to have the creatures in a plentiful measure, has on the other side,
very cunningly set such a difference and disparity between both, that we shall
never obtain our request. As for example, man desires wealth by his labor and
industry, together with Gods blessing; wealth is purchased and gained, this
wealth is laid up in the purse, the chest, or the treasure house very safely (I
confess) but not so fitly disposed; for the mind is still empty, and
therefore still may desire. If I were hungry, and that for my sake, you would
fill another man's belly, I might pine with your charity.

But in the mean (...), nature will excuse her self: for who is the coffere^?
Either (...) your mind together with your treasure, The disparitie between
the objects of the will, and the will it self.
and lock them up both in your closset; or else lay up the treasure in your
mind, and so stay your appetite. This counsel will not serve, nature is to be
blamed; for there is a disproportion between both: who ever saw a bushel
filled up with learning, or a pottle-pot stuffed up with wisdom? Things
spiritual cannot replenish material vessels, neither can bodies penetrate and
satisfy the desires of a spirit. Herein consists the corruption of nature,
that she has given or permitted the appetite, notwithstanding the disparitie;
either she should ^orbeare to desire, or else provide plenty and store of such
condition, as that she might be able to satisfy the request of her suitors, who
now (for want of supply) seem to be mere cormorants.

The faculties of the soul do disagree among (...).
but she does further practice to set the several faculties of the soul in
opposition to themselves. A good wit never agrees with a good memory, I speak
not in regard of the multiplicitie of inventions, which thereby might seem to
ouerpresse the memory, though commendable and good in her self, but it
arises from the very constitution. A moist brain full of spirits is aptest
for invention; but the cold and dry temper longest retains the impression.
Good wits cannot agree among themselves, but fall to banding and factions; and
the witty professions seem to oppose each other, the one desiring to make the
other hateful and odious, and the other striving to make it poor, base, and
contemptible. Sometimes you shall discern wit without discretion; and here
that inestimable treasure of wit, seems to be wholly unprofitable, and
unseasonable, being committed to a fools keeping: and here nature makes man a
witty fool, giving him the substance of wit, but denying the right use and
application. Thus do the faculties jar among themselves; which in effect is
as much, as if I should say, The soul did disagree with it self; for the
faculties are the soul, and the soul is the faculties.

And as it is in our selves, so likewise in others. The witty Poet will break
his jests on the Constable: but here is the mischief, his memory will serve
him to remember and to revenge this injury and wrong. Again, Wits are not the
same in all studies.
the same wits will not suffice for all studies; the superficial Rhetorician
with his colors and Allegories, shall never fadome the grounds and depth of
Philosophy. He that is naturally addicted to Mathematical Engines and lines,
shall never be able to comprehend, within the circles of his sphere, the
notions and abstractions of the Metaphysics. Practical arts can never be
attained unto by speculation, but must be learned by experience. If learning
be not fitted to thy capacity, suppose thy weak brain should be employed in
the Metaphysics, it will make thee a learned fool, beyond thy self. And
generally, the best natural wits can hardliest endure any painfulnes in
study, but expect to receive all by infusion: and lest they should over boldly
adventure upon learning, at the first entrance they are scared away, with words
of art and with notions. If still they proceed, then much reading or plodding
duls the understanding; night-watchings and candle light, distemper the body,
and dazzle the mind. On the other side, the best wits are soonest abused and
seduced, and most easily corrupted: the greatest judgments take the deepest
discontentments, etc.

Before I can descend, from the invisible faculties of The gifts of mind and
body can hardly together subsist.
to the apparent actions of the body, I will first speak of the neighborhood
and soci^tie between both, whether the perfections of body and mind were
ever ma^ched together in one person. You shall observe then, that nature has
set a great difference between them: the fairest complexion is seldom
accompanied with the best wit; women may be proud of their beauty, but not of
their wisdom. The best temper and constitution are not the fittest for the
understanding; the purest sanguine complexion is apter for daliance and
loue-toyes, then for night watchings and studies. The strongest and best
compacted limbs and joints, do argue more ability to be admitted of the
Kings guard, then to be sworn of his Counsel; as formerly you heard, that the
same disposition would not suffice for the right use and exercise of all the
several faculties. The clown for his carriage, who cannot use any ceremonies
of courtesy, but will sooner talk treason, then complement with his pale and
dark skin, with a cloud in his forehead, hollow eyes, churlish looks,
harsh language, hoggish ges^ure, frowning, fretting, and fuming. Here is the
rare, the excellent, and the most angelical understanding, all nature cannot
yield such a most incomparable jewel: sometimes a crooked back, a limping
thigh, ^quint eyes, lame legs, or some monstrous defeature does accompany
the rare gifts of the mind. As if nature had r^pented her self, and to abate
the insolency of man, should clothe this rich jewel with some base (...),
that being not so comely in their outward (...), ^hey are enforced to conceal
their own inward worth: and if they be bold and aduenterous, then nature will
give us a caution, cave quos natura notauit; and the inf^mie of their personage
sildome procures love, especially among the multitude.

But if this wise man proves neither hard favored, nor monstrous; (...)
yet fleame and melancholy, whereof his temper especially consists, what
Rhumes, Catarres, and diseases do they cause in his body? How do they break
out into issues and gowtes* and seem to hasten old age? Odi puerum praecoci
ingenio; I hate a child of a forward wit; either he is already come to his
last temper, or else his climate must alter. What is it, or who is it, that
thou can love in nature, on who^ thou might settle thy affection? If fair
and beautiful to fight, Phisiognomie will tell thee that thou see the whole
man, thou can expect no further use or employment of his service: if
otherwise wise and deformed, how can thou love him, in whom nothing seems
worthy of thy love? We may call thy judgment in question; whereas in all other
creatures, the comelines, beauty, and fit proportion of the outward limbs,
signifies the good inward conditions.

Now at length to speak of the actions of man's body, I will give them the same
entertainment, which formerly I did to the faculties of the soul: for as I am
not malicious, A (...) to the (...) of man's body.
so I will not be pa^tiall. I do here accuse and challenge all the natural
actions of man's body, to be tainted and defiled with corruption, and in all of
them the punishment of this corruption shall manifestly appear. All
punishments may be reduced to these three heads: 1. Dedecus s^u infamia: 2.
Poena seu castigatio: 3. Ser^itium se^ captiuitas. By the first, he suffers
loss in his credit, good name and reputation, and is put to open shame and
infamy. By the second, he suffers detriment and loss in his own flesh, or in
his own substance and goods, being chastised according to law. By the third,
he seems to be imprisoned, and suffers loss in his freedom and liberty,
being tied to serve as a slave. These are the three general heads, whereunto
the exercise of justice does usually extend it self: and to these three heads,
I will reduce all the natural actions of man's body.

For the infamy and shame: Whatsoever nature desires The most natural actions
are shameful.
hidden, and dares not attempt it in the presence of others, certainly she will
never stand to justify the action, but rather at first sight, will easily
confess her infamy and shame. Take the most natural works of man, and you
shall observe, that man is most ashamed of them, as eating, drinking, sleeping,
yawning, etc. I will not speak of the most unclean and secret parts, some
things may be conceived, which may not be spoken. Who ever held it any part of
his commendation to be a great eater, or to sleep while his bones ache? Who
ever went out into the open street, or to the market place, to take a meals
meat; but rather would provide a close cabinet, for such necessary
employments of nature? Is nature ashamed of her most natural actions? then
certainly it betokens a guiltiness.

But you will ascribe it to the strict and austere profession of Christianity,
which seeming over proud and haughty for man's present estate, disdaines to
inhabit the earth, Not religion but nature makes them shameful.
looks up to heaven, and therefore brandeth these actions with shame and
contempt. True indeed, of all the sects in the world, Christian religion has
always been most famous and eminent for strictness of life, and mortification
of flesh; which in my conscience, as it has formerly given the greatest growth
to religion; so the neglect and decay thereof, in these our days, will be the
greatest blow to religion. But herein I will excuse our selves: for not the
Christian alone, but the Turk and the Heathen, both say and practice as much
in effect. You will then say, that religion in general, agrees in this one
point, as teaching all men a maidenlike modesty, to forbear the outrageous
lusts of the flesh, and therein sets the difference between man and beast, and
thus along continued custom, may at length seem to be nature. I cannot rest
in this answer, but I must fasten this shame immediately upon nature her self.
Observe then not only in man, but likewise in the dumb creatures: Are not
those parts which serve for excrement, or generation, concealed and hidden
either in place and situation, or else with feathers, with hair, or some other
covering, which nature has provided for that purpose; in so much that you
shall hardly discern their sex ^ Has she not appointed the shade, the grove,
and the close night to cover and hide them? she is ashamed of them, they are
unclean to the sight; but most absurd in the speech, and both taught us by a
natural instinct. Will thou defile thy mouth with (...) talk; and shall that
appear in thy tongue, which nature has concealed in her basest parts? Be not
so base: remember the nobleness of thy birth, and thy condition farr^ above
beasts; stoop not so low, as to touch, or to kiss with thy lips and thy
tongue, those unclean parts, whereof nature her self is ashamed.

The infamy of these actions shall better appear by this one instance. Call
forth the incestuous or adulterous person, I will here check and correct him.
Thou beast, Our blushing.
worse then a beast, (for many beasts seem to observe the Rites and sanctity
of marriage) see thou not how thou have sinned against heaven, and against
thine own soul? Does not thine own conscience accuse thee? or think thou
that the close night, or darkness it self can cover or conceal thy sin?
etc. I have no sooner spoken these words, but behold his heart faints, his
speech fails him, he trembles and quakes, all his blood appears in his face;
as if the blood being guilty to it self, should step forth and either
excusing or accusing it self, should wholly acqu^^ the spirit: For I see
another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my spirit. Or as if it
were naturally ingrafted in man, that without the effusion of blood, there can
be no remission of sins: and therefore (as far forth as the skin will
permit it) the blood desires to make some recompense for the offense.

Suppose I were to examine a guiltless innocent man, and to charge him with
such crimes which he never attempted; yet sometimes there will appear the same
tokens of modesty and shame* The innocent man will blush.
Nature can be no lier, she will never accuse her self unjustly; though she
may be innocent of this crime, yet she acknowledges the root to be
corrupted, and thereby argues a possibility to commit the like offense: she
will not wholly excuse her self, though she de^ies the particular fact. Or as
if there were such a society and marriage between sin on the one part, and
flesh and blood on the other part, that if sin be conceived in the heart*
thither flocks all the blood to help and further the conception. Or if it be
laid before the eyes, thither is all the blood conuaied, to meet it, and to
give it the best entertainment. Here is a shame, here is a confession, thou
can not be ashamed but of thine own act, and therefore needs thou must
acknowledge thine own corruption: Indicio tuo quasi sorex perijsti; Thou
had no grace to commit sin, and thou shall never have grace to conceal
sin.

brachium seculare, Man punishes himself.
the temporal power, for his chastisement and correction: I will not speak of
punishment imposed by man's law, but willingly undertaken by nature her self.
Why should fearfulness so much possess man? together with a continual
expectation, what evil might befall him, were it not, that it proceeds from a
guiltiness of conscience? How often upon any relation of the least mischance,
do we strike our breasts, our thighs, wring our hands, stamp on the earth,
and then suddenly look up to heaven, as if these outward annoyances could not
any way concern us, were not the root of this corruption within our selves?
And therefore nature seems to punish the root, to curse and defy the earth,
to acknowledge the guilt, together with the just and due vengeance of heaven.

If any greater misfortune befalles us, then we begin to tear the hair, to
bite the flesh, to forbear the societies of men, to refuse the use of our
meat, to neglect our natural rest, to deny all comfort to our selves, and
sometimes it proceeds unto death. When suddenly we lay violent hands upon our
selves, we desire nothing so much as a perpetual separation and divorce,
between the soul and the flesh; like the infinite hate of a deadly foe, who
could be content to wound his own enemies thorough his own sides. Sometimes
man becomes a self-homicide.
No other creature did ever murder it self, but only man; for no other
creature did ever deserve it, so much as man. You will say, that this arises
from passions, which are not incident to the wisest me^: but who has such
absolute power in himself, as yt he can promise to himself, staidness and
constancy in his affections? Or is it not a property of wise men, that they
should always call themselves to accounts, and accuse themselves, as the wise
man says, Sapiens est semper accusator sui. This cannot be without a just
ground, first presuming and presupposing an inward and secret corruption, they
are apt to suspect themselves: whereas the foolish and ignorant conceiving a
casualtie and chance, never dream of just judgments. But I pray' mark the
disposition of man's body, and you shall find that our arms, and our hands,
are fitter disposed to buffer our selves, then to revenge our enemies; they are
bent to our bodies, and yet we cannot embrace our selves, as if we were our
own greatest enemies: whereas in all other creatures, their own horns, their
tuskes, their claws, and their hoofes can no way offend themselves.

I will not speak, how subject and liable our nature is, to many ill
accidences and chances: I will pass over all those diseases, which do not
arise from any distemper or riot, but even from the complexion it self, and
seem to be hereditarie to whole mankind, as other proper diseases are
intailed to certain families and tribes. Old age seems to be a continued
disease, and therefore undoubtedly is a natural punishment of nature to her
self. My second part shall (...) of this subject.

But punishments should be public and open, both for the example of
malefactors, as likewise in natures defense to justify her actions. Behold
then, we are made a spectacle to God* to Angels, to men: our punishment is
therefore laid open and manifest, to God, to Angels, The punishment of our
selves appears in our service of God.
to men. How falls it out, that by an instinct of nature, in all our religious
worship and service of God, we first begin with the punishment of our selves?
Sacrifice (I think) is natural to man, that in liew of our hearts, and for
the sparing of our own blood, we should offer up the blood of others. Before
the Law was given in Mount Sinay, there was a sacrifice: for God has imprinted
this knowledge, not only in the Ceremonial law, but in nature her self; that
both nature and law might guide and direct us to the sacrifice of his son: so
that a sacrifice is common to all nations, common to all religions. The Heathen
at this day use in their sacrifices, the launcing of their flesh, the spilling
of their own blood, the scourging of their bodies, appearing naked before
their Altars. The Idolaters of old time, how cruelly they tormented themselves,
offering up together, with the best part of their substance, their own sons
and their daughters in a bloody sacrifice? The Jews, how strict were they in
observing their fasts; how curious in their washings, putting on their
hairecloth and ashes? The Christian in his service of God, prepares himself
with inward mortification and outward ceremonies; the one serves as a potion of
bitterness, to purge his inward uncleanness; the other as a plaster or salve
to cover his ulcer, as truly acknowledging that inwardly and outwardly, we are
wholly corrupted: and therefore both tend to edification.

For the Angels, there are two sorts of them, either good or bad: but we scarce
hear any mention of the good Angels, of our guardian Angels; for so Scripture
says, God has given his Angels charge over us; and Angels are appointed as
Gods messengers for our ministry. If any extraordinary good do befall us, we
will rather choke it up with unthankfulness, How our punishment appears in
respect of the Angels.
or attribute it to some secret and hidden cause in nature, sometimes to a
mere casualtie and chance, rather then we will ascribe it to them; as being
guilty to our selves, that through our sins and corruptions, we do not
deserve mercy and compassion, but judgment and vengeance. Whereas on the
contrary, for those evil spirits, the firebrands and instruments of Gods
wrath, these are they which we fear; upon every occasion we can say, apage,
apage, avoid, avoid, abr^^unci^ tibi Sathana. Many there are, W^^ches and
Sorce^ers, which have entered a league and fellowship with those bad spirits;
and more are suspected to be of this confederacy and combination, then happily
there are. For we are apt to suspect the worst in this kind, as being priu^e
to our selves, that we deserve nothing but vengeance: and generally (these bad
spirits) they are the tempters and tormentors of whole mankind. And thus we
seem to be ignorant and wholly unacquainted with the instruments of Gods
mercy; but are daily frighted and astonished, and indeed much perplexed and
endamaged by them, who are appointed for the execution of his justice: as if we
did rather converse with them, then with Angels of light, which does surely
argue the fall and corruption of man.

How this punishment of nature, and of man himself, appears unto man; take our
ordinary salutations. Wherefore should I in due respect to my superior, How
the punishment of our selves appears to our selves.
to signify the honor and the reverence, which I bear him, uncover my head,
and bend my self, my knees to the ground, my body to my knees; were (...) not,
that therein I acknowledge the humbleness of mine own mind; and do
prostrate my body, accusing (...) root, and the fountain of my pride and
rebellion? Do you yet require some further testimony of my service? Then in
the salutation, I kiss my hand, as it were taking a corporal oath, signifying
and assuring you, that whatsoever I shall promise you with my lips, I shall be
ready to execute and put in practice with my hands, using the best means that
I can to secure you of my service; still supposing my inward falsehood, and
that you have just cause to distrust me; considering my rebellious nature and
inbred corruption. Thus to honor God, to honor our superiors, we must
dishonor our selves, punish our own flesh, uncover our parts, bend our selves
in subjection. Which were it not man's voluntary punishment of his own
disobedience and sin, it could not stand with the ordinary justice of
nature, or the high dignity of his condition.

The imprisonment of the soul.
having first committed him to sure hold and safe custody. Our soul is
imprisoned within our flesh, why should she not be at liberty, for her flight
and free passage out of this body, that she might go and return at her
pleasure, as she is in all other her actions? Is there any substance (neither
flesh nor spirit, but between both) which might serve to chain and unite in
one linck, these different natures together? Or why should this privilege be
denied man, that in regard of his spirit, he might converse with the Angels; as
in regard of his flesh, he partakes with the beasts? Is he not here abridged
and barred of his good company and society? Suppose man were dismembered and
had lost some of his limbs; seems not the soul to be here contracted within
her self, lodged in a less room, as it were kept close prisoner,
notwithstanding that she retains all her faculties whole and entire, in as
large and ample manner, as she did, when the body was sound and per^it, having
not received them from the body, and therefore not lost them together with the
body; which cannot be said of the sensitive soul.

To come to the material actions of his body, all the honest vocations and
callings of men, what are they in verity and truth, The slaueries of men.
but only services and slaueries? Every seafaring man seems to be a
galley-slaue; every occupation seems a mere drudgerie, the very beasts
themselves do not suffer the like. What a dangerous and painful labor it is
to work in repairing of sea-bankes; some are overwhelmed with waters, others
dye surfetted with cold, the very night must give no rest to their labors? How
many have miscarried under vaults, in working of mines, in digging of
coale-pits, casting up of sand, or of gravel, how many have been buried up
quick and alive? How many have fallen from the tops of high buildings, from
scaffolds and ladders; if some Carpenters and Masons prove old men, yet how
many shall you find not decrepit or troubled with bruses, with aches and
sores? How many trades are noisome, unfit for man's health? I have known a
Student in Cambridge, only in the course of his profession, troubled with five
dangerous diseases at once. How many trades are base and ignoble, not befitting
the dignity of man's condition, as Cobblers, Tinkers, Carters, Chimney-sweepers?
But hark, hark, me thinks all the Cries of London, do not so truly
inform me, what they sell, or what I should buy, as they do proclaim and
cry their own misery. Consider, consider, whether any other creature could
endure the like service; and yet this is no prentiship, that ever we should
expect any better condition, but the whole time of our life must be spent in
this slavery. It is a truth, which will admit no exception, and therefore I
will forbear to make any further complaint; only man's nature is corrupted,
man's nature is corrupted: and therefore with patience we must endure the yoke,
no longer sons of a loving mother, but servants and slaves to a stepdame.

I could be infinite in these points: but calling to mind that I have
proceeded in a legal course, according to the form of law, I have impaneld my
Jury consisting of twel^e reasons, The sum of all the former reasons.
I will use no shifts or delays, but refer my self to their verdict. I will
here only rehearse, and briefly recapitulate, the sum of my proofs;
considering that in the very constitution of man, many things happen, beyond
the common course of nature, without president or pattern, such as could not
stand with the divine providence, were it not, that they are the particular
punishments of man's sin. As for example: 1. That parts of such different
condition, the spirit with the flesh, mortal with immortal, should together
subsist. 2. That the soul being coupled, should find such mean and base
entertainment. 3. That notwithstanding the contract, there should be a
continual disagreement and opposition between both. 4. That there should be no
manner of subordination or subjection, such as were requisite in parts, for the
unity of one person. 5. That being thus parts of one man, yet they should not
be acquainted with each other, but have actions, private and proper to
themselves. 6. That the body should hinder every action of the soul, the
senses faliely informing and distracting the understanding. 7. The will deluded
with shows, vain hopes, false promises, receiving no manner of contentment.
8. The body secretly and cunningly co^spires with the faculties of the soul,
to set a faction and opposition between them. 9. That the comeliness of
parts, the gifts of the body, will not together accompany the gifts of the
mind; but are estranged from each other, and that all the actions of the body
either betoken 10, shame, 11, or punishment, 12, or slavery. Let these
allegations be duly examined, and I do not fear to come to a trial: for I
do here call heaven and earth to witness, that these things cannot stand with
the wisdom of nature, the goodness of nature; neither have they conformity
to the rest of the works of nature: and therefore they serve as an
extraordinary punishment, for some offense undoubtedly, signifying the fall and
corruption of man. And thus much for the very person of man, together with his
parts and constitution.

Deo gratias.
THE FALL OF MAN.
THE SECOND PART.
AS in great buildings intended* all things cannot easily be discerned in the
platform; it lies not in the power of man's wisdom, art, or providence, to
prevent all errors: some faults will escape, which by use and continuance of
time, will better appear and discover themselves: Man in himself, and in
comparison to the creatures.
so is it in the consideration of man, which consists not only in man's
constitution, and the view of his several parts, but likewise in respect of
other creatures, his goods, or his substance, and whatsoever else may befall
him: for every thing in nature presents it self, not only in it self, but
likewise in reference and proportion to others. Thus it is with a Prince or a
subject, who must have an eye, both to his own estate in particular, and upon
what grounds and terms he stands with his bordering neighbors. Now give me
leave, having thus safely lodged man, to take some further account of his life,
and of his actions: I will speak of his miseries in himself, and in comparison
with the rest of the creatures.

Before I dare presume to speak of our miseries. I must first apologize for my
self, lest in a blind devotion I might chance to offend, and seeking to draw
others unto God, I my self might fall from God. Blessed Lord God, A Prayer.
who see the secrets of my heart, and touch^st the strings of my tongue: Lord
thou know I do not (...) dislike my present estate and conditi^n; sure I am,
that thou have done and permitted all things for the best: I do not here
intend to dishonor thee, to disparage the great work of thy creation, to
vilify and abase thy creat^res, to set all things at naught; rather, O Lord, I
shall d^eme my self the basest worm upon earth, and al thy creatures good in
their own kind, according to thine own approbation. But, O Lord, thou
know that I love thee, thou know that I love thee; enlarge my poor
heart, that so thou may increase the measure of thy love in my heart. O
blessed Lord God, who art the God of love, and love in thy self; and imparting
thy self, do together impart the love of thy self; guide me by the
assistance of thy spirit, that in relating these miseries, thy goodness may
better appear, having first created us in happiness; our sorrow and (...)
appear, having i^stly fallen of our selves; whereby suffici^^^ means and
occasions may be offered, with fear and trembling to work out our salvation.
Here is my intent, O Lord, and this thou know right well, for thou see my
thoughts long before they are hatched: forgive me the (...) of my thoughts,
forgive m^ the sins of my mouth, and give a blessing to th^se my labors; let
thy power appear in my weakness, thy glory in my shame. Amen. Having thus
made my peace with God, I will now fall to my intended task.

My second kind of arguments seems to be built upon these three grounds and
foundations: 1. The mercy of God does ouerflow all his works, and all his
attributes, like oil upon liquours. This is plain, for mercy begins his
actions; Mercy begins Gods actions.
God works upon nothing, therefore nothing could move him to work, but his
mercy. Now if all things in man did ^auour of mercy, it were a strong
presumption, that the same mercy still discouers her self, in the
continuance, which did first appear in the creation: but if otherwise you
discern miseries and afflictions in man, acknowledge the fruits of Gods
justice, justice, which must necessarily presuppose some offense; or else could
admit no difference, nor be distinguished from wrong and oppression. Now
justice supposing an offense, could never begin the action; for we could not
offend, when as yet we were not: and therefore acknowledge that the fruits of
Gods justice, together with man's transgressions, are both twins, borne in one
instant, or at least producing each other, and standing in a mutual and
reciprocal relation to each other; the offense to the guilt, the guilt to the
punishment. So that the punishment is not equal in time to the production of
man; first we were existing, before we were punished.

Especially considering, that Gods intent in the creation, was only according
to the nature of goodness, ( vt sit communicatina sui ipsius) to impart his
own being and attributes to the creatures: Miseries are the fruits of justice.
but when I find sorrows and griefs in man, I begin to enquire, where is the
original? for in God there is no sorrow, no grief, no maladies, no
afflictions, no diseases, no death: God did only desire to impart himself;
whence proceeds the malignitie? were it not, that some after-corruption has
stained man's nature. The good wheat was first sown, then came the ill
husbandman, qui super-seminauit zizania, who did abuse the freedom of his own
will to his own shame, choosing rather to die, then to live. And here the
thistle and cockle first began to appear, making man, the creature of Gods
mercy, the favorite of those times (as I may so speak), the object of Gods
justice, the subject of Gods punishment.

My second ground is this: If miseries incident to our nature do befall us in
such number, and measure, as that they do ^arre exceed all our own joys; in so
much that our nature seems to be ouerprest with their burden and weight, and
that our condition should be far better, Our miseries do exceed all our
joys.
not to be, then to be: then certainly the state and condition of man is
clean altered and changed from the first institution thereof. For it could not
stand with the act of creation, or the goodness of the Deity, to make of
nothing, that, which in effect is worse then nothing: So God should descend
lower then himself, not perfiting, but confounding the creatures; and that
nothing, which was before the creation, should not only bear comparison, but
likewise be preferred before the state of some creatures. Now indeed the thought
of man's miseries, here in the course of this life, seemed of that moment to the
ancient and heathen Philosophers, that it was generally held and concluded
among them, for a truth, that melius est non nasci, quam nasci; it were better
not to be borne, then to be borne: So that a wise man might be excluded from
sorrow, he would never thirst after joy; to be dead, we regard it not, but to
dye, here is the torment.

For the believing man and the true Christian, who (besides the miseries of
this life, which he acknowledges to be the rod of Gods wrath, The miseries of
a Christian man.
for the punishment of sin) is likewise perplexed with the fear and terror
of hell, where that rod shall be turned to a serpent. How many of them have
cursed the day of their birth? How earnestly have others besought their speedy
dissolution? Does not Christ witness of that son of perdition, that it were
better for him, if he had never been borne; or that a millstone were chained to
his neck, and both cast into the bottomless Sea? Is this a private and
particular case, and does it only concern Judas? Is not the number of the
elect very small, while whole troops and infinite multitudes of reprobates
(though never so bold and confident of their own righteousness) are daily
rejected? And in the elect people of God, what strange agonies and conflicts
appear between the flesh and the spirit? Does not the way to heaven lie by
the gates of hell, when men with fear and trembling must work out their own
salvation? If the righteous shall scarce answer one for a thousand, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

My third ground is this: Certain it is that the heavens were ordained for
man, and for man alone the whole earth was created. Now supposing all other
things to be directed for man, Man's miseries are g^eater the^ the beasts.
the state and condition of man (according to right reason) should far excel
theirs, as in worth and dignity, so in true joy and all manner of contentment;
nature should be more bountiful and beneficial to man, then to the rest of
the creatures. As for example, in a house consisting of master and servants, if
plenty, case, and contentment can be found under the roof of that house, you
will conceive it in the masters person, and not in the servants: otherwise you
will suppose, a very preposterous order, that things are not as they ought to
be disposed; and that it is some particular grieuance, for some particular
occasion: and thus it befalles man.

Do you doubt, whether the creatures were ordained only for man's use? I will
not convince you with reason, I could wish that you would forbear the use of
the creatures; do not commit theft, defile not your hands with blood; for in
truth you have no right unto them, if they were not appointed for your service.
But for this one time we will acquire you: The beast^ (...) for man.
See you not how their skins serve for our clothing; their ca^kasses for our
food, or inward living; their strength for our labor, some of them for our
sports and delights, some for necessity; they have no more strength or
knowl^dge, then is fit for our service, and use: the horse can make choice of
his food, learnes his pace, remembers his way; and for his strength, it serves
only as a dull instrument, to be moved by others. But God herein deals with
other creatures, as politic and practicing statesmen deal with their
servants; who desire to be attended by such, and of such kind; who are either
pages for age, or otherwise honest good men, who know better how to observe the
condition of servants, then to pry into the secrecies and counsels of their
masters.

Now suppose, that the very same miseries both for number and quality, were
alike incident to man and to beast; yet man's misery were to be reputed much
greater, Their miseries are together compared.
in regard of his personage, his dignity and condition. If you strike or wrong
a gentleman, the offense is much greater, then if it were done to a clown or a
servant: but considering that man's body is much more tender then theirs, of a
more excellent constitution, and therefore more sensible of wrongs; assuredly
the pain and the torment, which he suffers in those miseries, is far greater
then theirs. A wound in the eye does much more torment man, then in the hand or
the foot, but most especially considering the pride and haughtiness of his
own mind, having a truer feeling, and a stronger apprehension of his own
wrongs, that when the smart is once past in the skin, or in the flesh; yet
still the thorn seems to take deep hold in the brain. And thus man
disquiets himself with his own thoughts, that he should be thus dealt
withal, perplexed and tormented like a slave; that it should not be in his
power to prevent the like mischief, but he must lie open and naked to all
dangers; he must stand upon his guard, yet like a disarmed and weaponlesse man,
must wholly commit himself to their mercy: these very thoughts, as they come
nearest the heart, so are they a far greater corrasiue, then the wounds in
the flesh. But I will spare my self all this labor; for I will not speak
much of those miseries, which are common to both; but only of such as are
proper and peculiar to man, and therein we seem to exceed them by many
degrees.

Thus briefly in effect, considering that many miseries are incident to man,
contrary to the first intent of our creation, The sum of these three grounds.
which was a work only of mercy: considering the large extent of our
miseries, which seem to ouerpoyse all the rest of our blessings, contrary to
the rule of justice, if punishment do not first presuppose an offense; and
contrary to the nature of the Deity, which being nothing but happiness,
should therefore impart nothing but happiness, unless our deserts shall
otherwise require: considering (I say) how many miseries do befall man, common
to other creatures, man, who is exempted from the ordinary rank, and condition
of other creatures: considering again, how many punishments are proper and
peculiar to man (as if nature were more merciful to other creatures then unto
man) notwithstanding the high dignity, and prerogative of his state and
condition: I hope the fall and corruption of man, shall hereby sufficiently
appear, even to the blindness and darkness of our natural reason, without any
further revelation of grace; man's own reason shall discover his fall, being no
way taught or instructed herein, by the light and direction of Gods spirit.

These are the three grounds, which seem rather as several degrees of one and
the same foundation, which is laid up and buried in the tomb of our miseries:
and therefore I pray' pardon me, if I be not over strict and curious in my
method, He excuses his method.
though I speak promiscuously, and confound them together: for misery
betokens confusion. A confused style, and a disturbed method, is fittest to
discourse of our misery, which cannot consist with the right use of our
reason, or understanding. In stead of an eloquent phrase, or a learned
discourse, if I shall use sighs, tears, sobbes and complaints, thereby to
move your compassion, this would prove the best lecture of misery. And if I
shall lay open your selves to your selves, and that my tongue shall serve, as a
glass to discover your misery; in stead of the foot and burden of my
speech, at the clause of a sentence, I pray' use this short eiaculation and
prayer, Jesus fili David miserere nostri: According to our misery extend thy
mercy (sweet Jesus), clothe our nakedness, cover our shame, heal our
infirmities; for thou art our house of defense and our castle.

In the numbering of our miseries, I must here exclude such as are especially
and principally related in Scripture, for I will reserve my self to speak
severally of them in the third part. Now if I shall twice repeat any onething,
then you must conceive that it is proper to misery, and to miserable men, to
spend their whole time in telling and retelling one and the same ill accident.
For their heart is replenished with sorrow, and out of the abundance of the
heart, the mouth speaks; considering that my condition is the same with
others, and speaking of them, I speak of my self: yet here in deed I am but
a bare reporter; neither would I bethought to be a counterfeit, the more to
move your pity and compassion; nor do I desire long to detain you with vain
and needless repetitions: May it therefore please you, to consider the
difference in handling each misery, and you shall likewise easily observe the
different narration.

Speaking of man's miseries, I will begin with man's first beginning or birth.
Man only (besides his natural birth) is conceived in sin, and death is the
wages of sin; The misery of his birth.
sometimes the womb proves likewise his tomb; and sometimes in his birth
(being of a viperous kind) he proves a murderer, and causes her death,
which first gave him life: coming out of the wombs prison, occisipotius quam
nati imaginem gerit, he carries the image rather of a flaine and a murdered
man, then of a man newly borne, for he is borne with the effusion of blood. And
being thus borne, he is not set at liberty, but forthwith carried to the
place of his torments, and execution; and as he came, so shall he return,
borne with sorrow and grief, he shall dye with pain and lamentation. He is
carried (I confess) not on the hurdle, but first in the arms, then in the
cradle, it may be in a coach, sometimes in a chariot; but certainly at length
it will be a coffin: sleeping or waking, be the ways never so many, never so
different, never so crooked, yet still he is carried on his journey; howsoever
the wind blows, the tide will carry his vessel. Our life is a kind of
dying; for when it is gone, then we are dead: the wine is in spending, when
first it is broached; then we begin to dye, when f^^st we begin to live.
Look upon me, look upon me (beloved), I am more then half dead; in truth, in
truth, I am more then half dead.

Me thinks I see some compassionate men calling for hot waters, fearing lest I
should suddenly faint. I do humbly thank them for their loves; but I will
spare them that labor, for I am not wounded, I confess; I hope, I am not
poyso^ed; I know no dangerous disease that lurkes in my body, Li^^ing we dye.
unless you will suppose mine own nature, which indeed is corrupted, and
therefore tends to corruption; yet in truth I am more then half dead. Others
conceive this, as spoken in regard of the great difference, between my dull
and dea^ flesh, and my quickening spirit; or else in regard of the diversity of
elements, whereof some are active and betoken life; others passive and betoken
death. Alas, alas, I do not love that any one, with his subtilty and tricks of
Logic, should play with my miseries; in truth, in truth, I am more then half
dead: for here is my death, my infancy is dead unto me; my youth is dead unto
me; the ripeness and fullness of my age is dead unto me; that which remains,
it is the worst part of my age, the dregs of my age, wherein I can expect
nothing, but sorrow, grief, and vexation.

Thus man at his first coming into this world, incurres the penalty of a
flatute, statutum est hominibus mori; no sooner he comes, but presently he
must prepare to return. He is the sole pilgrim and stranger, and all other
creatures are the native inhabitants; he has no term of years assigned him
by lease, and if he lives out the full scope of his time, yet when he has
once attained old age, The account of his life.
and then can best judge of the time past, as having had it once in possession;
all his whole life seems like the dream of a shadow, as a tale that is told,
as yesterday; though to others it may seem a long time, as all things seem
great in expectation. And of his age, let him cast up his accounts, and deduct
the time of his infancy, the times of his sleep, the times of his sickness,
and other times of his sorrow and grief; and he shall find, that the least
part of his age has past with any contentment.

But why should I speak of the course of his life, when seldom or never he
attaines to that period which nature has appointed; rising by degrees, The
shortness and uncertainty of his life.
and falling again by the same steps and degrees, according to a just rule and
proportion? And this is most common and usual, as in plants, and in trees, so
in the dumb beasts, if you will exempt them from man's cruelty and slaughter.
But for the life of man, here is the greatest uncertainty; we are outwardly
and inwardly every way assaulted, and sometimes our life is dissolved with a
poisonous breath, without any thunderbolt, or cannon-shot: and marvel not,
for we consist of the earth, and the earth is soon scattered and easily
dissolved with the wind. Clockes and instruments of iron are always out of
square, and still want mending. I do much wonder, how man's body lasts so
long, were not the same mercy and goodness of God in the continuance, which
did first appear in the creation: and yet upon so weak a foundation, as is
the life of man, we build up huge towers, and conceive great mountains in our
imagination.

As Soon as man comes into the world, he begins to discover his nakedness and
impotencie; he is not able to go, not able to speak, he can neither help
himself, nor desire the help of another: only his trade is, not to sing, His
weakness in his birth.
but to cry, thereby to testify his miserable state and condition. Whereas
all other creatures are no sooner brought forth, but are likewise apparelled
by nature: as she gives them their food, so likewise she prouides them a
liuerie; some a strong hide, others a warm fleece; the fowls of the air she
deckes with soft feathers, wrought about with diverse colors: to the plants and
the trees she gives a rind and beautiful leaves. These are all apparelled by
nature, and that in a much more sumptuous manner then man; for Solomon in all
his roabes, was not to be compared to one of the lilies of the field.

All other creatures are borne with weapons, both offensive, as horns,
hooffes, tuskes, claws; or defensive, as swift slight, a skill and subtlety
to hide it self, a strong hide; Man is weaponlesse,
only man, though most obnoxious to dangers, yet wants both. Which undoubtedly
argues a guiltiness in us, an innocence in them: for howsoever the dumb
creatures groan under the burden of sin, yet is it under the burden of man's
sin.

All other creatures are fed from above, God feeds the Ravens from heaven, and
nature makes their provision; in the first hour of their birth, they seek
their portion of victual; without any guide or direction they know the way to
the teate, and thus they are able to help themselves. He wants more help then
the beasts.
Only man wants a keeper, or a nurse, to hold him up in her arms, left he
should be stricken dead with his first fall; then must he be held to the
breast, wrapped up in swaddling clouts, laid in a cradle: for of himself he has
no means to preserve himself, but would undoubtedly perish, if the same
mercy of God, which first appeared in the womb, did not stir up pity and
compassion in our tender hearted parents, to take the care and charge over us.
And thus is man, in his birth impotent, and in his age he seems to be the day
labourer; a very drudge upon earth, in s^dore vultus eating the bread of
carfulness, and drinking the cup of sorrow.

All other creatures, if they have a sufficient quantity of food, will
undoubtedly thrive, their profit will be answerable to their keeping. The
Shepherd or the Grazier will almost assure himself, that against such a day,
his sheep or his oxen will be fit for the shambles; only man seems not to
live by bread alone. Beasts thrive better with their food then man.
For notwithstanding a good diet, a hungry appetite, a large meal; yet
sometimes the body pines for want of nourishment. A good complexion, and a
strong constitution, are not always the undoubted tokens of the largest and
best diet: the rich men of this world, can testify this, though they have
choice of good meats, multitudes of dishes, and variety of exquisite sauces
to provoke their appetite; yet for the most part, they have not the strongest
bodies, the ablest constitutions, the longest lives, or the greatest succession
of issue: it is not bread alone that nourishes, but the virtue and power which
God imparts unto bread. And howsoever God does ordinarily concur with his
second causes; yet in man, in whom Gods providence does most eminently appear,
sometimes to the wonder and astonishment of the Physician and Naturalist, God
denies his influence, that notwithstanding the application of outward means
and remedies; yet the success, beyond all probability, proves contrary to
man's expectation.

Other creatures excel man in every sense, in every corporeal quality, as
length of years, strength, soundnes of constitution, The beasts excel man.
quicknes, actiuitie; man cannot be so subtle and ingenuous to ensnare the^,
but they are as cunning and witty to prevent us; you may as soon surprise and
conquer a State, as prevail against them in this kind. Witness many
kingdoms and provinces, wherein the form of government has often been
changed and altered, yet could they never prevail against the cruelty of
wild beasts: though the English forces have often put to flight the incursions
and rebellions of the Irish nation, yet for their Wolves we could never
prevail. I speak not of their aptness in learning, which I have seen
wonderful in horses, and in other creatures, for this I might ascribe in some
sort to their teacher: but I speak of their natural works; the birds in
building their nests, with straw in their bills, water in their wings and earth
in their claws, may serve to teach and instruct us in our architecture, in the
plotforme and contriuing of our houses.

No creature so much loathes uncleanness as man, and yet no creature, whose
flesh is so apt to be tainted, with ulcers, botches, and sores, as is the
skin of man; what kembing? what trimming? what ointments? what washings? what
sweet perfumes? what linen? what change of garments? and yet all will not
serve: sometimes the food breaks out into sores; The uncleanness of man.
sometimes the moisture or fleame is dissolved into issues. By the seaside,
you shall not fail to have lepers; and in the inland-countries men are
troubled with botches and scurfe. Ireland is plentiful of vermin, and the
least neglect of our bodies will make them noisome and unclean. Old age proves
balde, without the beauty and comeliness of hair; neither coughing, nor
sneezing can free them from filth. Quibene ol^:, non bent ^let, he that has
the sweetest smell, has not the sweete^t body: of all the noisome sents,
there is none so rammish, and so intolerable, as is that which proceeds from
man's body: whereas the poor shepherd, without any other remedies of art,
only with his Tarre-boxe, is able to preserve a huge flock of s^eepe; and the
Farrier with his drink, and his letting of blood, cures all the diseases of
beasts.

Many herbs, many beasts, many trees, are in themselves odoriferous, The
sweet odors of the creatures.
and yield a sweet savor; for God has ordained them to be natures sacrifice
to himself: But I think, if man were thoroughly ^earcht, ^earch the very
entrails and bowels, and you shall hardly endure the sent. I will not speak of
his filth iss^^ng from his ears, his eyes, nostrils, mouth, nauill, and the
unclean parts; take his very flesh, his bones, and his sinews, burn and
consume them with fire: O the sweet smelling sacrifice, as loathed of God, so
hateful and distartfull to man himself! for what should we expect of flesh
and blood, but corruption?

From the altar of sweet odours, let us come to their quier: Hark, hark,
the excellent notes of singing birds, The music of the creatures.
what variety of voices? how are they fitted to every passion? The little
chirping birds (the Wren, and the Robin) they sing a mean; the Gold^inch, the
Nightingall, they join in the treble; the Black bird, the Thrush, they bear
the tenor; while the four footed beasts with their bleating and bellowing
they sing a base. How other birds sing in their order, I refer you to the
skillful Musicians: some of them keep their due times; others have their
continued notes, that al might please with variety: while the woods, the
groves, and the rocks, with a hollownesse of their sound, like a musical
instrument, sends forth an echo, and seems to unite their song. Only man, as
being a wild and a fierce creature, has no certain note or tune; his
painfulnes in learning shall recompense his delight in the hearing; his
instruments are the guts of dead creatures, a token of his cruelty, and the
remainder of his riot. With these instruments he must please himself in his
melancholy fits, take his recreation, temper his passions, and use the^ as a
means to kindle his devotion: O praise God upon the Lute and Harp, prais^ him
in the sound of the Trumpet, praise him in the Cymbals and pipes; let every
thing that has breath praise the Lord. And thus man seems to be defective and
destitute above all other creatures, even in that, which was the first end and
scope of his creation.

If you regard neither sweet odours, nor heavenly music, nor beautiful
colors; yet consider the creatures in themselves: The temperance of the
creatures.
all other creatures (yea the most ravenous) seem to be much more temperate in
their diet, or food, then is man. Sometimes, indeed, these homebred
creatures, through man's ill usage, either in their excessive labor, or through
their distempered food or waters, are subject to surfeits: but for those wild
beasts, which do not commit themselves to man's custody, they are privileged,
and exempted as from all riots, so from all surfeits; notwithstanding the
abundance and plenty of their food, especially at some seasons. And here
appears our corruption, no creature so inclined and apt for a riot; no
creature so subject to a surfeit, and all our diseases, for the most part,
arising from a surfeit: intimating the first gluttony and surfeit of mankind,
in eating the forbidden fruit. Herein appears our corruption above theirs:
either nature should have dieted us, as she does the rest of the creatures; or
else she should have prescribed us a measure, and given us that providence to
moderate our selves.

As it is in their diet, so in all other actions of the flesh. Other creatures,
though hotter in constitution, yet are they not so much inclined to their lust,
as is man. And sometimes the more impotent man, the more inclined to the sin;
Man more inclined to his lust.
the sin it self not arising from the strong constitution, or the abundance
of seed: but from some outward temptation, or by a strong inward apprehension
in the pha^^^e. So that seeblenes, which in all other creatures, gives them
some respi^e; yet in man, through a continual ill habit, though it weaken the
body, it does not abate the lust. Insomuch that for the remedy and cure of
this sin, there is not only prescribed unto us, fasting, but prayer; not
only the flesh is to be tempered and allaied with abstinence, but the mind
distracted with worldly thoughts, must converse with God and his Angels; that
so inamoured with their beauty, we might forsake our first love, the love of
this world, the love of the flesh, the love of our selves, Sponsabo tem^h^ in
et^rnu^ delectus (...), and ego illi. If thou will offer up thy heart upon Gods
altar, as a whole burnt offering, nothing shall remain for any secular use or
employment.

To speak of the ^oode both of man and of beasts, how nature has supplied
their necessities with the daintiness and delicacie of meats; I will not
compar^ the best of the one with the meanest of the other: The food both of man
and beast.
for undoubtedly a Ladies whelpe, or a singing bird in the cage, are more
daintily kept then a poor man's child. The Hounds eat up the best part of the
venison, and the Hawks feed upon Partridge, while the poor Dutch men, like
swine, dig up the roots; and the gentleman-like Italian (notwithstanding his
bravery, and his picking of teeth) feeds upon Sallads. The poor people of
England are usually kept with their oats, which here we give to our horses;
and if their means will reach, they feed upon milch-meates (which indeed is
their ordinary food), do not calves and lambs do the like? Does not the Be
feed upon the sweet honeycombe? Or is there any delicious tree in our
gardens, whereof the fowls of the air do not share in the fruit? The Kite
preyes upon Chickens, the Wolf upon the tender Lamb, and the Kid; the Fox
upon poultrie: and I think that Purueiours could hardly make better provision
for a Prince his diet. If there were any difference, yet certainly their food
is as agreeable to their nature, as pleasant and delicious to them, as ours is
to us; we reject theirs, they reject ours. All men are not delighted with
sweet meats, the same taste is not alike pleasing to every palate; nature
makes their provision agreeable to their state and condition, and therein
seems to be alike bountiful both to man and to beast: Aperis tu manum tuam,
and impl^s (...) animal benedictione; Thou openest thy hand, O Lord, and
fillest every living thing with thy blessings.

Having received their food, assuredly their digestion is much better then
ours: nature seems less to complain in them, then in us, and more rarely
commits an error. For as it is in trees and in plants, which drawing sap by
the root, do yearly in the spring time send forth a blossom, then a leaf,
then the fruit, and at length brings all to full ripenes, observing the just
time and seasons for every action. The concoctions of the beasts are more
perfect the^ ours.
So is it in the feeding of dumb creatures; they seem to keep the same
station, the same course; at the same hours they always approach to the same
places, either for water, or shade, or for ease; just at the same time they
always betake themselves to their rest, or their sleep. See here an excellent
diet, these are singular means to preserve health; nature seems to have set
up a clock, and in an equal distance by even paces, to perform her office and
duty. Do you yet require some further experiment? I will sooner break your
sleep, then that you should rest unsatisfied. Hark, hark, in the dead
night the Cock crows, and points out the time; Gallus negantes arguit; gallus
iacentes excitat: He calls the husbandman to his labor, the scholar to his
study, and always serves for a watch to give an alarm. Philosophy can
assign no other reason of his crying, but only the several degrees and the
strict order observed in his concoction; nature having finished her task,
presently he awakens, then immediately out of his brave courage, having received
strength from his rest, he begins to insult, while others will answer his
challenge, and here seems to be a peale of ordinance; while the cold night,
and some raw humors yet undigested, shall bring them to a second rest, and
enforce a silence. And thus it falls out, thorough the whole course of the
night; gallicinium, the Cock crowing seldom deceiues us, only in the change
of weather, you shall observe a change in their natural actions.

Being thus temperate in their diet, and their food agreeable to their nature,
and their nature performing her task, no marvel if they be less subject
(...) distempers, then man; The dumb beasts less subject to distempers then
man.
distempers, I say, which are the forerunners to diseases (for as yet I will
not extend my speech to diseases) from whence arises all this distemper of our
bodies, especially of ours, more then of all the rest of the creatures? You
will say, from the excellency of our constitution. But how does this appear?
Other creatures have their senses more exquisite, for they can discern the
change and alteration of weather; if any one man can do the like, it is to his
pain and his torment: some old ach, or bruised sore, or crazie bones may make
him provident and wise to his sorrow. You will say, that man cannot so well
intend the actions of his sense, as they, in regard of his other employments,
being taken up with the weightier affairs of his reasonable soul. But suppose
that man should turn beast, and prove an hireling only for the service of his
senses: suppose him an idiot, or a lunaticke; could he then attain to the
least part of this knowledge? No certainly, the old shepherd (after long
observation) cannot inform himself in this kind, but still must be
instructed and taught by his flock: this should argue, as perfect a temper in
them, as in us.

But suppose man's temper to be the best, then there appears the corruption of
nature, to make the best the most brittle. Suppose this best temper did consist
in a mediocritie, as indeed it does, then should it be less obnoxious to any
extreme; Man's temper.
it should be able to resist as the biting frost, so the melting heat,
moderata durant; as in factions and parts taking, the safest and surest course
is, not to intermeddle with either side, unless necessity inforceth us, but
to stand indifferently affected to both. The moderate mixture of gold, gives it
the greatest and longest continuance, while other bodies approaching nearer the
extremes, are either nipt with the frost, or scorched with the heat, or
suddenly dissolved by the application of some contrary quality.

I cannot yet be resolved, from whence come all these distempers more incident
to man, then to all other creatures: the parts of man are the same, for number,
quality, figure, situation, with other creatures. Man's food, The means for
ma^s health cannot preserve him.
clothing, habitation, places of rest, and recreation, seem to be much better
then theirs, being all in man's own choice, who will undoubtedly make choice of
the best: the means for preserving his health, are much greater then theirs; in
heat he can use the shade, the grove, and the sellar; in cold, the fire, the
lambe-skinne, the warm broths, besides all the helps of physic, the studies
of many learned men, the practice and experience of all ages, the far fetched
Indian drugges, and all the remedies of art; yet all will not serve; no
creature so subject, no state so obnoxious to all distempers, as man. It should
seem we live upon the borders, between God and the creatures, and therefore
these maladies, by God inflicted on nature, must first seize and light upon us:
or we alone having tasted the forbidden fruit, the raw humors are still
indigested, they lie heavy on the stomach; the stomach which serves for our
kitchen, and is the wellspring of all our diseases.

The many distempers which happen to man, seem to shorten his age, which
indeed carries not the same proportion with the age and life of the creatures.
One and twenty years pass, The course of man's age.
when we live under the custody, and tuition of others, not able to dispose
of our selves. Hitherto we are in the cradle: now triple this time, and it
will amount to sixty three years, not one of a hundred does arrive to that
age. As you walk in the streets, observe the number of passengers, judge of
their years by their complections; or look into the Register book of your
Churches, and you shall find more living under the age of thirty, then above.
Now from this age to sixty three, there remains thirty three years; a long
time, I confess, in respect of man's age: for the wisdom of the law, the
common course and practice of these times, does proportion one and twenty
years to three lives: before man comes to the age of fifteen, most commonly
he has lost the greatest number of his kinsmen and friends. And hence it is,
that every man desires to free his lands from wardship, though otherwise they
are the eldest sons of such men, who are usually matched very young, and do
no way endanger their lives. If man comes unto forty years, then all his
acquaintance is among the dead: he scorns to converse with young men, to take
their counsel or advice, whom he knew boys without understanding, and are
still boys, in respect of himself. Whereas all other creatures do attain to
their full perfection of growth, and strength, long before they attain unto
the third part of their age; and for all other their works of nature, their
breeding, the soundnes of their bodies, the continuance of their lives, you
shall find a far greater certainty in them, then in the condition of man.

For the length of man's age, as some other creatures exceed man, so man exceeds
the most of the creatures; for after the fall and corruption of man, yet still
the mercy of God has appeared in the preservation of man's life, The length of
man's age.
to assure us of that immortality, which we should have enjoyed in our
integrity; and to be the earnest of that eternity, which hereafter we shall
receive in our flesh. It stood with the power of God, and with the honor of
our creation, that creatures should decline by degrees, hereafter as they were
more or less distant from that first mould, made by the immediate hands of
God, and his own workmanship. And therefore the Patriarchs, with their ma^y
hundred years, far exceeded their posterity; but at the deluge, it should
seem that God appointed a new computation of years for man's age, that he
might be the more terrified from attempting of sin, by considering the
frailty of his own life; and that God might never be enforced to punish man's
sin, with the like heavy judgment of waters, whereby he might incur the
breach of his promise.

Considering all the infirmities of man's nature, and the weakness which
seems to be proper and incident to his condition, the life of man is far
shorter, then is the life of the creatures: for here in this world, by the
course of Gods providence, there ought to be a lineall succession; the father
should live, and take protection of his son, until his son should be able
to provide for himself: and herein, if you shall compare man with the beasts,
you shall find him far short, and very much defective.

Considering again the difficulty of many trades, of many professions, which
are necessarily required for the upholding of man's life, the learning whereof
takes up the greatest part of his age; The comparison of man's age with the
creatures.
for we have not our works by a natural instinct, like the creatures, neither
are we fit to serve, fit to learn, until we come to the age of sixteen
years, and then we must stay out our prentiship. Suppose I were to undertake
the profession of a Scholar; almost twenty years would run over, before I
could learn the rudiments of Grammar, and then not thirty years will suffice
to attain to any perfection of Arts. We can make no addition of our own, we
can add no new invention, until a longer time be expired: and therefore it
stood with the divine goodness, that the father might be able to instruct his
own son in Gods law; that seeing the motion of the heavens (the revolution
whereof cannot be discerned within less then the compass of man's age) he
might worship the power of the Deity: and having a long time of misery, and
great variety of accidents, his time might likewise be prolonged, and the
occasions often renewed, for his true repentance and sorrow; and yet in his
whole time, he should not be able to secure himself, the respite of one hour.

The age makes not for the happiness of a creature: for we must consider, not
how long we have lived, but how well we have lived: and therefore I will speak
of the delights of this life, The delights of the creatures are greater then
man's.
wherein the dumb beasts seem far to exceed man. For these are not to be
proportioned according to their number, but according to the capacity of their
nature. They have no apparel (I confess) they have no houses, no furniture,
for they want none, here is their greatest comfort and happiness. Man only,
that is the stranger and pilgrim, he must pitch up his tent, set up a house,
or habitation for himself; the proper and native inhabitants, are sufficiently
provided for by nature her self. It would be a disparagement for us to set up
our seeled houses, if our weakness and tenderness would permit us to live in
the open air, under the fair covering of the heavens, bespangled with
glorious stars; upon the pauement of the earth matted, or rather fringed with
green blades. Whether would you judge him that is already satisfied with
food; or the hungry and ravenous cormorant, that still requires more and more
food, to be the happier? Whether would ye prefer him, that has all the
helps of physic, being sick, or him that in perfect health requires no
physic at all? and this is the condition of dumb beasts, in respect of man.

For the pleasures and sports belonging to brute beasts, you see that Princes
and Nobles take their greatest pastime, in those royal games of Hawking, and
Hunting. I would gladly know, The pleasures of the beasts.
whether the Faulcon receives more delight in the sport, or the Faulconer? the
one being an actor in the business, it being more agreeable to the nature
thereof; the other a bare spectator in the game. Here is no violence, no
coaction, but a free and a voluntary flight, and commonly without resistance,
without danger or peril. When the sport is ended, then is the Hawke carried
upon the hand, as it were in triumph, an honor well befitting the state of a
Prince: neither will she entertain into her service men of the meanest
condition and place; but such as expect other men's attendance, and take unto
themselves the highest titles of dignity, do notwithstanding make themselves
servants and slaves to their Hawks. As much may be said for the Hounds, who
sometimes (besides the benefit of their sports) share in the best part of the
Venison.

I would not here willingly have you suppose, that I were a Proctor,
entertained to speak in the behalf of dumb beasts: neither do I here
purpose to acquit or excuse them from their miseries; The dangers of both.
but only to lessen theirs in proportion to ours; give me therefore leave
further to compare them together, in such heavy accidents and dangers as
happen to both. First from the elements themselves, the ouerwhelming
inundations of water; the irresistable violence of fire; the air with anoysome
and infectious breath bringing a pestilence; the earth not yielding her
fruits, causing a famine; the inward diseases which are common to both; the
outward wrongs and grieuances, which they sustain from each other; the
services and slaueries whereunto they are subject: and lastly their slaughter.

Suppose that man, together with a dumb beast, should fall into any danger of
waters; all the beasts of the field, of what condition soever, do naturally
swim to save themselves: Man is more subject to the danger of waters then the
beasts.
only man, who seems to be better disposed for it, then any other land
creature, in regard of his upright and straight figure (as it were) resembling
the form of a vessel, a broad and spacious breastplate, that so the greater
quantity of water supporting it, might uphold it the better, extended arms
and legs, together with the palms of his hands, and the soles of his feet
(as it were) in stead of oars; his bones not so massy or weighty as theirs,
the rest of his body being like unto theirs: yet only man is defective herein,
and must learn that by art, practice and experience, which they have by a
natural instinct; though otherwise man, of all other creatures, is only
enforced to commit himself to the danger of waters. But observe and you shall
find it in a far greater wonder; as long as heat continued in the body,
which by all likelihood should eleuate and lift it up, to preserve the body
together with life; then behold, the waves and the deep strive against nature,
the one swallowing, the other ouerwhelming man's body: but when his dead
carcass for a few days has rested in the waters, whether it be to disgorge
him, lest otherwise he might taint the sweet savor; or desiring to make some
recompense for his death, that he might have a Christian burial, whom the sea
thought unworthy of life; at length she returns him, and sends him to the
shore, when his body is breathless and cold, much heavier then it was wont;
and therefore with the stocks and the stones might well have sunk to the
bottom, and there have continued in a tomb of waters, were it not, that the
living should receive some instructions from the dead, and be admonished by the
fear and terror of death.

Having diued into the waters, now give me leave to approach, and to dry my
self by the fire; only man, of all other creatures, Man only subject to the
danger of fire.
finds use of this element, for his food, and for his warmth: other creatures
seem to live in a temperate zoane, clothed sufficiently against the winters
cold blast, and shaded sufficiently against the scorching heat of the summer.
They have their dens and their caves without any chimneyes or stoues; only
man stands in want of fire: and therefore if we look to receive the benefit,
first let us acknowledge the infirmity to be proper and peculiar to us; and
especially to the weakest of us, to women, children, and old age: and as we
receive the benefit, so must we stand to the danger; sometimes the loss and
consuming of all our substance and goods; sometimes the burning of our own
flesh, neither members nor lives are always secured; sometimes contraries
together conspire against man, the water serves to carry the violence of
heat, and scaldeth our hands and our shinnes; sometimes the very food or
sustenance of man being over rashly taken, in stead of a delicious taste,
burns the tongue and the palate. O happy other creatures, that are exempted,
as from the use, so from the danger of fire!

When I consider these accidencies of water and fire, I must necessarily
conclude, that both the deluge of water, and the future d^ssolution by fire;
both of them are first and principally directed for man, as the fruits of his
offense, so the effects of his punishment: though secondarily they might intend
the dumb creatures, as they serve for man's use and ministry,

To come to the nearer elements, which are more familiar unto us, and wherewith
we are better acquainted. First for the contagious air, no creature is so
subject to a general infection and pestilence, as is man. In this one City we
have buried three thousand a week, Plagues and infections incident to man.
and so for many weeks together much about that number, when the plague has
continued within the kingdom for many years. This plague, it does not arise
from the food or any distemper of our bodies, but from the air; it is a poison
which works upon the vital spirits, and seeming to neglect other baser and
inferior parts first sets upon the heart, striking at the root of life, and
suddenly in a moment it brings us to ruin. If the party himself shall
happily escape, yet still the infection continues, though the garment be
worn out with use, consumed with the moath, yet in the bare threads the poison
will privily lurk: the open air cannot sufficiently pearce, the fire cannot
cleanse, man's providence cannot prevent; but it finds out some lurking hole,
some shelter or covering to hide it self, until at length it bursts into
vengeance, to the wonder and astonishment of nature. Summer and winter both
serve alike to harbor such an unkind ghest; it will inhabit the bare walls
rather then it will be excluded; the dumb creatures, the dogs and the mice
shall serve to scatter it; especially fruit shall nourish it, for it was the
forbidden fruit, which gave it the first entrance and occasion. Marvel not
how man's sin, like an hereditarie disease, should be together propagated
with his seed, when the breath of his nostrils may thus work upon thousands
at once, upon the strongest and ablest bodies, to their utter dissolution and
ruin.

But plagues are rare, and seldom befall us, they sollow either the opening of
the earth; when a poisonous and putrified breath, enclosed in the bowels of the
earth, does find out some vent, and infects the plants and the fruits; or
else they are caused by some strange conjunction or opposition of stars. For
I will not dispute of Gods immediate and extraordinary actions, these I will
pass over with silence, and reverence, trembling at his judgments: but sure I
am that God is the God of nature, and he can use natural means, for the
punishment of man's sin: thus plagues are sometimes foreseen and foretold.
But to come to those infections which are usual and ordinary; how many places
are there, where Physicians forbid our habitation? the hundreds of Essex,
Rumney in Kent, the Fennes of Ely, the Marshes of Lincoln, the Woulds in the
North, the Moors in the South, the Downs in the West. These are all
uninhabitable places, and cannot agree with man's health, as if God had not given
the whole earth for man's use. They are wealthy (I confess) if they were
healthie; the soil is rich and fat, it agrees with the nature of all other
creatures, makes them plumbe and in good liking (man only excepted).

Let us leave those noisome and pestilent countries, and come we to the
pleasant and healthful foil. Take this one City, which certainly is seated
as well for health, Noisome places in Cities.
being a sandy dry ground, and as convenient for merchandise, in regard of
this kingdom, as any City is, or can be in the world: yet in regard of
comers, their close buildings, the societies of men, for want of fresh air,
sometimes for the noisome trades, sometimes for the ditches and vaults; how
many streets, alleyes, lanes, are made inhabitable? All the Wha^ffes of
London, Stepney, and S. Ptooleys will testify as much in effect. Marvel not,
that the Gentry make choice of the Suburbs, and begin to build in the fields,
they are wise in their own generation; they desire the provision and
conueniencie of the City, but the air and the breath of the Country.

Me thinks I am like the Dove, which flew out of Noas Atke: for having been
tossed with the waters having scorched my wings with the fire, The famine of
man in respect of the creatures.
not able long to subsist or to houer in the pestilent air, I must search for
some resting place here upon earth, our mother earth. For we are made of the
earth, we are nourisht by the earth, and we shall be dissolved to the earth;
and yet notwithstanding, this earth, sometimes for want of other fruits, will
afford us the fruits of a famine, as leanness, feebleness, palenesse,
wanness, etc. In the famine of the creatures, we share with them, but they no
way partake with us; their sorrow makes for our sorrow, for they are directed
to our use; but whatsoever grief or want is ours, is properly our own, and no
way concerns them. If God punish the earth with a great drought, as it causes
a barrenness in nature; so it argues the barrenness of our nature, in respect
of good works. And as the earth opens and gapes for rain, so man's guts and
bowels (like Horsleaches) shall suck and not be satisfied, for want of due
nourishment; then the dumb creatures want sustenance and food, which they
testify with their cries, and their groans. And the time shall succeed, when
man shall find a want of the creatures; and notwithstanding his cries, and
complaints, though he could never be persuaded to a religious fast, yet at
length (maugre his appetite and riotous disposition) he shall be enforced to
an abstinence.

The creatures undoubtedly, are not so subject to famine, as is man; some of
them cause a dearth amongst us, when God gives the labors of our hands (the
fruits of the earth) to be devoured of the Grasshopper and Catterpiller, as
much better deserving them, then we wretched and sinful men: to others (as it
appears in the Ant) God has given a greater forecast and providence, to make
her provision in due season out of our plenty, then man has or can have,
notwithstanding his reasonable soul. The beasts not so subject to a famine as
man.
Some creatures there are, which feed upon the bare elements, or other common
food, and have always a like plenty. Bears being hungry will eat earth
and stones, until convenient time serve, to replenish themselves with better
food: the Eastridge will devour Iron, and therefore she lends her feathers to
the Camp for their beauty and ornament, as being the excrement of their
weapons. Sometimes the claws of beasts yields nourishment to the stomach,
until the stomach again return it with great thankfulness, thorough the
liver, by the veins, to the parts from whence it was borrowed: As in nature
there seems a kind of circular conversion, the fruits of the earth do fatten
beasts, and the dung of beasts does fructify the earth: and thus it befalles
some of them, in case of necessity.

Creatures there are which sleep all winter, and are committed to the safe
custody and protection of nature, returning with the Suns return, and freed
from the sorrow, Their famine is ours.
partake only in the joy of his presence. Others following (as it should
seem) the course and direction of the heavens, do alter and change their
climate, and affoording us their company only in the plentiful times, they
never share in our wants. Many of the^ in the hardest times, seem to be in the
best plight; the white frost fattens the birds, and the Rabbets, while poor
man creepes to the fire, and complains of the weather. To conclude, if any one
of them smart, and be pined in their food, it is man that shall taste of that
judgment, who feeds on their flesh; their punishment lights upon us, and ours
no way concerns them: any one of them will serve for our smart, the rot of
sheep, the murraine of beasts, the tainting of fishes, and here is our
unhappy condition.

Leaving the elements, let us come to our bodies consisting of elements. Why
should man be more subject to diseases, How man is subject to diseases.
then all other creatures? Not any part of man without several and special
diseases; not any moment of his age wherein sicknesses and infirmities do not
watch and attend their opportunity, arising from the very constitution of his
body; the small pox and the measles creep in his cradle; the worms, the
scabbes, and the botches attend him to school; in his youth, hot agues and
plurisies, like burning seas with their ebbings and flowings going and
returning according to their fits and their seasons, to the wonder of nature,
and the astonishment of the Physician; in his elder years, the stone, the
gowte, the strangullion; then ruptures, aches, and coughes; at length the dead
palsy, the apoplexy, the lethargy gives him his deadly wound. Thus man
stands to be baited, while all the diseases, like so many furies, some gnaw at
his throat, others th^ust at his liver, some dart at the kidneys, others aim
at the heart; all nature cannot supply the like president. And therefore give
me leave (though I offend much against the rules of art) to compare man to man
himself, the general state of man, to the picture of that man which stands in
the forefront of an Almanac; the Lion strikes at the heart, and the back,
while Cancer nips the breast and the stomach, Sagittarius shootes at the
thighs, Capricorn buts at the knees: and here you have the lively
representation of man.

Every time and season has his proper and peculiar diseases. In the spring
time, when nature seems to make restitution for the cold winter, that as we
were formerly exiled from a garden, so now a garden should be brought unto us,
The diseases of the season.
(which indeed is an excellent emblem and figure of man's resurrection, and his
restitution to Paradise) then begins the cold winter in our bodies, a time of
storms and of tempests, then begin the lurking and hidden diseases first to
appear, together with the fruits of the earth, as a principal fruit of the
earth, here is work and employment for the Physician: then the Summer
approaches, which seems to draw all heat out of our bodies, and leaves them
impotent and weak; we are weary and sweat with our idleness, and while the
little Be labors, and whole nature is busied in making her provision, then
we desire immoderate sleep, as if the work did little concern us.

But when we awaken, and see nature in her full beauty and prime, how she is
crowned with garlands and variety of flowers, how she boasts of the
fruitfulness of her own womb, The whole year serves for our continual fits.
in producing so many such excellent and delicious fruits: then forthwith
begins our sorrow, for with the fall of the leaf, we begin to complain of old
aches. See then, we cannot cover our nakedness with leaves, but here is the
fruit of the first fruit that ever we tasted. Autumn is the time of the
greatest mortality, and this proceeds especially by eating of fruits, an
undoubted token and remembrance of that first forbidden fruit. Thus is poor
man always sick with continual fits, he begins with the spring, for in the
spring the world had his beginning; he finds some abatement in summer, for
then he is smothered and choked up with heat; but in Autumn his fits are
renewed, until winter approach, which has resemblance not to old age (as some
suppose, and this were sufficient) for old age is a continual sickness, and
infirmity; but to death it self, consisting of barrenness, making no
difference between the fruitful vine, and the unprofitable sallow: all woods
must then serve alike for the fuel, as all the whole world shall at length be
consumed in a general combustion.

From the diseases, let us come to the cure: and first for the dumb beasts.
All the beasts of the field know what is profitable for their food, The easy
cure of dumb beasts.
their sight, their sent, their own knowledge sufficiently informs them;
according to the season and time, thereafter they proportion their diet; as is
most befitting their nature, you shall find their habitation and dwelling; if
sickness attach them, they seek no further help, but only their own
natural instinct; they begin the cure with forbearance and abstinence, that so
nature might strengthen her self; then they seek some physical herb, they
know where it grows, they know in what dosis to take it, and the manner of
application: here is short work, I confess. But come we to man, and I fear
I shall prove tedious in my discourse. Man alone (notwithstanding the diseases
whereunto he is subject) does infinitely exceed theirs, both for number and
danger, yet wants he all those helps, which nature has supplied to all other
creatures in a plentiful manner: and therefore man must intend a long course
of study, very harsh and very difficult to supply his defects, ars longa est
and vita breuis. When I consider those large volumes of Galen, The difficulty
in man's cure.
Hippocrates, Auicen, etc. me thinks it would ask a man's whole life to peruse
them. It were well, if the Physician might be privileged and dispensed withal
for his health, until he had finished the course of his studies; but commonly
in the midst of them, sickness preuents him; setting the nature of diseases
before his own eyes, they sease upon his flesh, notwithstanding his great
learning, and the strong bulwark of his physic. Is it possible that all
these huge and large volumes, far exceeding man's body in largeness and
weight, should not be able sufficiently to describe it, but that every year
should find out some place and part of man's body for a new incroaching
disease, unknown to the Ancients, and wondered at by the professors?

In prescribing their physic, observe how curious they are, it appears by
their dosis, their waights, ounces, dragmes, scruples, grains, as if they were
able to square out, and to proportion nature to a just rule and level, to
poyse and to balance her to the inch: consider their innumerable Recipe's, Our
physic not so certain as theirs.
their compositions co^s^sting of vario^s and infinite ingredients; whereas
certain it is, that there are but four first qualities, and every one of them
may be allaied by his contrary. Wherefore, I pray', serves so great variety? I
had thought that it had been to hide and cover the mysteries and secrets of
their art, to make it seem wonderful and incomprehensible; or else to raise
the price of their physic, to make their own wares sale-able. But shall I
tell you the reason? In truth I fear they do but guess at their physic:
Philosophy, whose search is deeper in nature, seems ingeniously to confess
as much, when as in every creature she places certain hidden and secret
qualities, which the reason of man cannot find out, as likewise not the
degrees of those qualities: and therefore every Physician is an empirick, his
learning is gotten by experience, and not by reason or discourse; though
otherwise Scripture can give him this testimony, that the profession it self
is very honorable, as being the appointed means under God, for recovering and
retaining our health.

From the Physician let us come to the Apothecaries: When I see their shops so
well stored and furnished with their painted boxes and pots, in stead of
commending the owner, or taking delight and pleasure in the shop, I begin to
pity poor miserable and wretched man, that should be subject to so many
diseases, and should want so many helps for his cure, I could wish yt his pots
were only for ornament, or naked and empty, or that they did but only serve
for his credit, for he is the happy man that can live without them. But here I
can do no less, Our distasteful physic.
then take some notice of their physic; most commonly the medicines are more
fearful then the disease it self, I call the sick patient to witness, who
has the trial and experience of both. As for example, long fastings and
abstinence; a whole pint of bitter potion, pills that cannot be swallowed,
noisome distastefull and unsavory vomits, the cutting of veins, the launcing
of sores, the fearing up of members, the pulling out of teeth: here are strange
cures, to teach a man cruelty; the Surgeon shall never be of my Jury.

In fetching this physic (these Indian drugs) thousands do yearly endanger
their lives, through the diversity of the Climate, going to a new found world,
they go indeed to another world: The Indian drugges do not agree with our
bodies.
where (as I suppose) that the physical herb of every country is most
proper and fit for the inhabitants of that country, according to the course of
Gods providence; and according to the Physicians own aphorism, that a cure
gently performed according to natural degrees, is always most commendable.
Their herbs do not agree with our constitution; yet such is our wantonness,
that sometimes with taking their physic, we overthrow the state of our
bodies; and in stead of natural, we make our selves artificial stomachs,
when our English bodies must prove the storehouses of Indian drugges. There is
a great distance in the Climat, and therefore we should not rashly undertake
such a journey, to join together things so far separated in nature.
Sometimes again with taking too little physic, we do but only provoke and
stir up those humors, which we cannot expel: sometimes the curing of one
disease, is an inducement to another; lest there should be an emptiness or
vacuitie in nature, there must be a succession of diseases in man's body.

The diseases of our body come to us in post, or on horseback, but they
depart from us on foot, very leisurely and softly; and in our cures, nothing
so easy as to commit an error, The errors of physic.
and being once committed, nothing so dangerous. If the body be scalded with
the heat of thy blood in a fever, and that thou desire to give it some
vent; take heed, for if thou do it not, in a just measure, it will straight
turn to a Dropsy. Is thy stomach ouerloaded with ill humors, and that thou
desire a vomit? sometimes it will draw on a frenzy. Do thou desire to
purge thy distempered body? take heed of crampes and conuulsions.

Notwithstanding all physic, and all other means, which God has appointed
for the recovery of our health, yet is it generally acknowledged, that there
are certain incurable diseases. Some diseases are incurable.
Here the Art discouers the weakness of her strength, and yet does seem to
boast of the foresight of her skill: being able to effect nothing, not able to
rouse up nature, she seems to complain of nature, and by incurable diseases,
concludes, that the wound and corruption of nature, by ye strength of nature,
is incurable. For if there were such a state of man's health, as could not be
annoyed with sickness, this were some recompense; but now all things seem to
sound corruption. We judge of the state of our bodies by the excrements, and
when our bodies are at the best, they must needs be defiled; since of the best
nourishment, they make the worst excrement, and thereby do give a sufficient
token of their own corruption. What a miserable comfort is it to the sick
patient, to hear his Apothecarie, Surgeon, or Empirick very learnedly to
discourse in the commendation of health; to tell of their former cures, of
their sovereign medicines? And yet at length forsaking their patients, to will
them to prepare themselves, for it lies not in the power of Art always to
prescribe a remedy.

From the inward diseases, let us come to the outward wrongs and injuries,
which we sustain from each other, and these seem to proceed for want of good
order and government. The good government among the beasts.
But for the absolute government among the dumb creatures, he that shall well
consider the commonwealth of the Bees, how strict they are within the
territories of their own Hiues; how just they are in putting those statutes in
execution, concerning idle persons and vagabonds, and likewise the employment
of day laborers; what an excellent order there appears between them, how
great the obedience is from the inferior to the superior! he will easily
confess, that the greatest temporal happiness of man, which consists in a
good government, whereby he is secured of his person and state, is much more
eminently discerned amongst beasts, then amongst men. I will not only insist
in the Be, who seems to teach us a platform and president of a perfect
Monarchy: it is long since agreed and concluded in Philosophy, that such
disorder, such difference and disagreement, such hate and enmity, as is
between man and man, cannot be found in the rest of the creatures, nisi inter
dispares feras, unless it be in beasts of a different kind; and in the
deserts and wilderness, where ravenous creatures do together inhabit. Such
is the providence and government of nature, that they live as peaceably as we
do, in our best walled fortresses and towns: the City gates though shut, yet
sometimes threaten as dangerous homebred conspiracies, as they do secure us
of outward foreign invasions.

Howsoever, I would not tax any law or kingdom in the world, with a
conniuencie and toleration of injustice; yet certain it is, that as in the
natural body of man, the parts nearest the heart are aptest for inflammation,
and in the remote parts, nature seems to exclude and expel all excrements and
filth: so is it in the government of kingdoms, The ill government amongst men.
it is not always safest to live nearest the heart, nor is it secure to live
in the furthest distance. For every kingdom has his skirts and his borders,
where the poor and petty governors, living out of the sight of the world,
and making some counterfeit show of their own greatness, do so purloinc and
press upon the poor commons, that indeed their life seems to be a thraldom
most intolerable: which to a generous and brave mind, that truly values the
natural right of his own liberty, is a yoke insufferable. For to live under
a Monarchy, is no thraldom but liberty; for in this corrupted state, of the
creature, there must be a government, and this government inforceth a
subjection: when this subjection is only to one, it admits of the least
inconvenience, and therefore is to be admitted as in nature, so likewise in
reason.

But I may speak it to Gods glory, and to our own comfort, there is no
nation under the Sun, wherein justice has a more free and current passage
then here amongst us. The good government of this nation.
Our Commons have their voices and suffrages in making their own laws;
matters of fact do pass by the verdict of a Jury; we are not acquainted with
the taxes and pillages which are used in other nations, and indeed we are
wholly unacquainted with our own happiness, bonum carendo magis quam fruendo
agnoscimus. If we did but see the daily practice of the Princes in Italy, and
elsewhere, we could not possibly be unthankful, to the present government in
which we live, under the safe protection of our most gracious Sovereign King
James, whose reign God long continue over us, etc.

Now at length to speak of the services and slaueries both of man and of
beast, if the dumb creatures seem to perform any duty or service to man, as
man himself is not freed from the like or the same service, The services of
man and beast.
so is he tied unto them in a very large measure, to recompense their labors
abundantly. As for example, is the horse appointed for the service of war,
for labor and carriage? there are likewise footmen and pikemen, as well as
horsemen in Camps, and both of them adventure alike, the horse and the rider
both of them share in the danger. Now for his hire or reward in the field, he
shall have his trappings and furniture very rich and costly, as the goodness
of his metal and courage requires: when he returns, his lodging or stable
room was first built by man's labor, his food was prepared by the harvest man,
he must have continual service and attendance by man; the Black Smith must
wait on his heels; and so for the rest; there is a plough man and carter, as
well as there is a plough or a teame; and he that looks to receive any profit
by the creature, must first perform his duty and service to that creature.
And therefore no marvel, if he takes as his own fee belonging to his place,
their castaway garments, as skins, wool, feathers, and silk from the poor
worm, which he fits and prepares for himself, not without great labor and
industry, which he wears rather as a liuerie to betoken the base condition
of a servant, then as a badge or a token of his regal sovereignty.

Not only our service, our care and charge over them, but generally the
slavery of man, seems to be much greater then theirs. First that it is in
the same kind: for if we were to attend Angels, The services of man in
general.
or some higher powers, assuredly our condition would be more tolerable; but
here homo homini lupus, one man proves a slave to an other, and must submit
himself to the will of a tyrant. It is not unknown to all travelers, that in
other countries there are captives and slaves, sold in their markets, they
bear a certain price and rate, and commonly are valued under the price of a
horse: see what account and estimation man does here make of himself; and
surely he justly deserves this punishment to fall upon his whole kind, when
as the Son of God was bought and sold for a price, who was indeed the price of
our redemption. To leave the barbarous nations, and to draw nearer home, it is
not long since the tenure of villenage was here abolisht amongst us (thanks to
the Clergy, for it was by their intercession); and at this day we have
prentises for years, servants in covenant, which are in the nature of slaves,
poor tenants must drudge for their Landlords. And whereas it is commanded in
the law of Moses, that thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads
out the corn, the intent of the law was, that we should be merciful to the
dumb beast, that he should take some profit by his own labors: but I fear
we are more merciless to men. The old shepherd lame and feeble, who watches
all night with his flock, and indures all the storms and the tempests, yet I
fear he never tastes any part of his fat weathers: the poor old country
housewife never sees the spending of her own crambd Capons: and thus how
unequally and unfitly has nature disposed of us? some live in their
wantonness and superfluity, others in their wants and their misery, and in
both you may discern the corruption.

Suppose the creatures were in subjection to man, and did require no mutual
service from man, then might it be said unto man, Adeone es ferox, quia habes
imperium in belluas: Is this the greatest point of your glory, The wrongs
which man sustaines from the creatures.
that you are a shepherd, a swineheard, or an heardsman? But I pray' what
subjection might this be, when all of them seem to conspire against man? All
against one, here is no proportion of justice. Who was ever able to prevent all
dangers from the creatures? Do not the fowls of the air take the first
fruits of his crop? Do not the vermin purloyne his substance at home? the
moth abates the pride of his garments, the fly must taste of his best dish.
Do not those house-creatures, the Be, the Waspe, and the Spider, threaten his
person? and if he comes forth, then the Bear, the Woolfe, and the Lion,
stand ready pressed to set upon him with open violence. We cannot use any
creature with sufficient safety and security of our lives: the Horse, though
he wants horns, yet he has hoofes; though by him we find some ease in our
travel, yet we must take heed of his tripping. Me thinks I see a number of
tennants conspiring and laying their purses together, ready to be deposed
against the just privileges and customs of their Lord, or the ancient rights
of the Church (if you please) for the case is alike, it is general and
concerns them all; they are to intend their own public and common good,
before the particular benefit of their Parson or Lord: and this is the
condition of all the bruit beasts in respect of man.

But lies it not in the power of the Star chamber, to prevent all such
conspiracies and combinations of the creatures? The creatures may justly
conspire against man.
Cannot the heavens keep all things in a more uniform and strict order and
government? No certainly, for it stands with the course of justice, that since
man has forsaken his own rank, cast off his majesty, and feeding on the
carcasses of creatures, clothed with their skins, and their garments, does
together put on their qualities and beastly conditions, in so much that now in
the time of darkness, he walks disguised in a strange habit; no marvel if
he be set upon and taken by the watch, every one suspecting him for some
fugitive: and as in particular he abuses them and himself in an immoderate
use of the creatures; so in general, all of them conspire against him, and
work their own malice.

If any thing seems to detract from the happiness of beasts, in respect of
man, it is because they are continually subject to slaughter. But are men
exempted from this peril? Man is subject to slaughter as well as the beasts.
are there not as many snares to entrap us, through the malicious practice of
our enemies, either by the high way side, or in the secret and close night,
sometimes with an Italian fig, sometimes by a false information in a legal
proceeding, when our substance draws on our confusion, if all this fail? Yet
I pray resolve me: were it not better in the course of our lives, to be fed and
pampered with the beast, yt others should take care and charge over us, and at
length (before the miseries of old age overtake us) to end our lives with a
thrust or a blow, when in an instant we are bereaved of sense, of life, and of
motion, then to stay and expect natures best time and leisure, when with long
lingering and tedious diseases, we should be first wrackt and tormented with
most exquisite torments, (for assuredly the torments of tyrants, are not so
cruel, as are the torments of nature, being indeed in the more sensitive
parts) and yet after these torments, at length we shall not fail to receive
the sentence of execution?

In regard of my profession, I would not willingly intermeddle in causes of
blood, rather let all penitent sinners and offenders against law, freely escape
by the benefit of their Clergy; for we preach mercy, and nothing but mercy,
and all the mercy of the law ought to be ascribed unto the Clergy. Yet here I
can do no less then relate a truth: I do therefore call you Sergeants,
Bailiffes, Tortures prepared for man.
Constables, and Iaylers to witness, how many prisons are there in this one
City? what variety of chains, of fetters, of bolts? what dungeons and places
of torments? what wrackes and strapadoes? what stocks, pillories, and houses
of correction? how many kinds of death? hanging, pressing, burning, quartering.
Weapons and instruments of war.
Wherefore serves your office, or the office of Sheriffs, but only for the
execution of these laws? Wherefore carries the Magistrate, either sword or
faggots before him? it is not to keep away flies or gnats, but that he is the
instrument of God unto vengeance: for who^ are all these prepared? but only for
man: by whom are all these prepared? but only by man, besides the hanging and
watchful rod of Gods anger, and the seething pot of Gods wrath.

You Captains and Soldiers; wherefore serves your plenty of Artillery? such
roaring Canons, battering Pieces, Muskets, Petronels, Caliuers, and Pistols;
these are not pot-guns for children, or haile-shot to kill a wren, or a
sparrow, or birding-peeces for young men; wherefore serve so many Black-bils,
Polaxes, Pikes, Lances, such Swords, Daggers, Rapiers, Poinadoes, such variety
of weapons, (and the ancient glory of England) the Bows, and the Arrows; for
I will not speak of undermining the earth, the opening of sluices, when the
earth and the water seem to devour whole armies at once. I will not speak of
other stratagems and snares in war, or the great Massacres in peace; I pray'
can all the shambles afford so many knives, beetles, axes, as there are tools
and instruments prepared for man. Julius Caesar alone, who certainly cannot be
branded with any note of the greatest cruelty, yet in his battles, he is
said, to vanquish and kill an eleven hundred thousand fighting men, besides his
own soldiers, who were slain in the conquest.

From the death of man and beast, which seems to be incident and common both
to man and to beast, give me leave to speak one word of their funerals. When I
remember how the young chickins, The funerals of both.
though continually fed in the channel, without respect, should now at length
be served up in a silver dish, upon a Damask tablecloth, with much pomp and
solemnity, to be food for their masters; neatly handled, curiously carved,
and safely laid up in their bowels; certainly I commend their funerals before
man's, who is wrapped in a sheet, buried in a pit, where his carcass corrupts,
and is made meat for the worms. Thus behold the glory of the world, the
mirror of nature, man for whom the whole fabric was created, to whose use
and service all creatures were directed, who is a little world epitomized, an
abridgement of nature; man (I say) so far exceeding all other creatures in
that high prerogative of a reasonable and immortal soul, yet in regard of the
corruption of his flesh, his condition is equal, if not inferior to the
beasts of the field. It should much detract from the wisdom of nature, and
almost imply a contradiction in the works of nature, if it were not a
punishment justly inflicted on man for his sin, that man so far exceeding
all other creatures, should notwithstanding in his end be accounted and
numbered with the basest: for so says the Wise man, I have said to the grave,
thou art my mother, and to the worm thou art my brother, my sister, my kinsman.

To conclude, strange it is, that in the dumb creatures, there should be no
misery proper and peculiar to them, wherein we do not share with them alike,
and partake in their misfortunes: but many ill accidents do daily befall us,
not only in regard of our reasonable soul, Man's miseries are either of body
or mind.
which is proper to our selves, but likewise for our bodies, consisting of the
same elements with theirs, and yet therein they have neither part nor portion
with us, and in those miseries which both sustain alike, man's are much greater
in the same kind. And hitherto I have only spoken of such things, which
concern man properly in respect of his body, and in comparison with other
creatures: now I will single him severally by himself, and in regard of the
difference of his parts the soul and the flesh, I cannot fitter resemble him,
then to the University and town of Cambridge; for in one and the same person,
as likewise in one and the same circuit of place, you shall find two several
Corporations, two distinct Charters, different statutes, and laws, each
opposing other, each accusing other, when both may want reformation.

Now let me come to the more noble part, to speak of the diseases of the
mind: Is it not a sufficient misery, The miseries of the mind.
to be thus molested above measure, by the weakness and infirmities of the
flesh, not any one creature being subject to the like afflictions, but that
there should be sorrows and grieuances which are proper and peculiar to the
mind, first begun in the mind, and therefore only competent to man, and from
the mind at length bursting forth in the body, either by melancholy fits,
forbearance of meat, neglect of his natural rest, as poisons inwardly taken
break out into sores. And these are much more dangerous then the diseases of
the flesh; insomuch that sometimes man turns desperate, and commits the most
cruel, bloody, and unnatural action, that possibly heart can imagine; his
own hands shed his own blood, all his parts conspire against nature, he is
the offender, and the party offended, the Judge, the witness, the Jury, the
executioner, and the sole beholder, to arraigne and condemn himself,
Selfe-homicide the most unnatural sin.
and in an instant bereaved both of life and of sense, he makes himself wholly
incapable of repentance: Contrary to all form of justice, and most contrary
to all right of nature, which abhorring and detesting blood, as in all others,
so most especially in it self, as having this principle rooted and grounded in
the heart, that charity should begin with it self: and as man does not give
himself life, nor cannot continue his life, so is he not Lord of his life, or
his death, but must patiently expect a time for his dissolution, as there was a
just time appointed for his birth and nativity.

The only comfort in all bodily afflictions, is the comfort of the soul to the
members, the patient forbearance and hope of amendment: but if the soul her
self be once distressed or distracted, The flesh increases the miseries of
the mind.
it lies not in the power of the dull and heavy flesh, to assuage her, but she
will rather increase her pain, vpbraid her, move her to impatience, as the
righteous Job was strongly tempted by his wife to curse and forsake God.

Speaking of the diseases of the mind, I cannot forget, that I have already
proved the eternity and immortality of the soul, and therefore am tied (as it
were) by promise to justify my former assertions, to excuse the same soul
from all sicknesses inclining to death. See here the wonderful providence of
God, The diseases of the mind may consist together with the immortality of
the soul.
the natural man by force of his own reason, acknowledges the immortality
of the soul, as touching the life and continuance; and by the same reason, he
likewise acknowledges the sicknesses and diseases of the soul, morbi animi,
languores animi, nothing is so common and triuiall among the heathen
Philosopher; as if I should say in effect, that nature discernes a second
death, a death of sin, though not a second birth, a generation to
righteousness; to the one, nature is inclined, and very fitly disposed, and
therefore sets it before her own eyes; in the other, nature is defective, and
no way prepares man, and therefore as blindfold, she cannot behold it; our
inward corruption leads us to sin, only sanctifying grace recalles us from
sin: man here rests upon the face of the earth, heaven is above, hell is
beneath; set up a ladder, and he shall hardly climb; give him wings, it will
not avail him; d^^ but open a pit, and he shall fall with great ease, though
he find little ease in his fall.

In discovering the diseases of the mind, I will tell you a greater misery:
Suppose that any one man should turn frantic in a hot burning fever, and
should persuade himself, The diseases of the mind are not easily discovered.
that his violent and unnatural heat, did only proceed from his own strength
of nature; then he begins to buffet his keepers, and will not lie still in his
bed; here is a double cause of grief, not so much for his sickness, as for his
error and impatiencie. Thus it befalls many, that are sick in their mind, who
glory and boast in their vices, making their own shame, their commendation,
either supposing ^^others to be like unto them, and sanctity to consist only
in the outward appearance; or else condemning all others, they will maintain
their own practice, Populus me sibilet, at mihi plaudo: I care not what the
poor people say of me, (quoth the Usurer) my substance shall uphold me, when
they go a begging. The adulterous man pleases himself with uncleanness, and
begins to doubt, whether a natural act can be a sin against nature. The
glutton will make strong arguments in defense of his riot: Wherefore should
nature supply such plentiful provision, if he might not take it in abundance.
If he cannot wholly excuse himself, yet he will lessen his sin, nihil non
mentitur iniquitas sibi. Whereas virtue is placed between the extremes, vices
do now cluster together in such multitudes and throngs, that virtue is either
pressed to death, or wholly excluded; virtue no longer appearing, vices sit in
the throne, and usurp the chair of estate.

On the contrary, virtue is sometimes reputed for vice, and so loses a great
part of her happiness, which consists in due esteem and reputation, besides
her attractiue power, to draw all others to the imitation of her self. Virtue
is sometimes reputed for vice.
The most reverend Fathers of the Church have been ^axed with ambition, by the
rude and base multitude; the most strict, mortified and severe men, have been
charged with a deep hypocrisy and dissimulation; the most magnificent and
bountiful, with popularitie and wastfulnes; the most upright and sincere in
justice, with vain glory and pride. Herein as I do excuse the innocence of
one, so I do condemn the corruption of many, they looking thorough painted
glasses, their own hearts being defiled, cannot rightly judge of the colors.

Hitherto we seem to doubt of the diseases: now at length if we conclude in
general that virtue is virtue, that sin is sin, and vice is vice; then
here is a second misery, No man will confess himself vicious.
that whereas all bodily diseases do suddenly discover themselves by their
symptoms, and signs, and enforce the sick patient to confess his own
grief; only the diseases of the mind (as are the inward thoughts of the
heart) they are secret, they have learned the language of equivocation, they
walk disguised, and will never acknowledge themselves to be themselves: for
that evil spirit, which has taken away shame in the sin, has put a shame
in the confession of sin. The proud man fears nothing so much, as left he
should abase himself with too much humility; charge him with pride, and he
will make bitter inuectiues against it; then he begins to apologize for
himself, how courteous and kind he is in his entertainment, how affable; thus
still he deceives himself, for therein consists his pride. And so for all
others the diseases of the mind, they are not open assaults, but privy
conspiracies, and therefore are secret, such as will endure the wrack, before
they will discover themselves, or their own ends. If the diseases once appear
and are made manifest, sometimes there falls out a pitiful and a lamentable
accident. I have seen many virtues resident in one heart, Many virtues are
spoiled with one vice.
like many Jewels, all contained in one casket, and yet all of them tainted,
dejected and clean cast down with one vice. An excellent wit, accompanied
with honest and fair conditions, attended on with comeliness and beauty of
members; yet through a tractable nature, is easily led away with ill company,
and all his good parts are overwhelmed with a deluge of drunkenness. The brave
courage and resolution, which leaves nothing unattempted that may tend to the
service and honor of his country; yet sometimes is enraged, set on fire, and
all his good qualities are burnt and consumed with the fury of his own lust.
The great Clerk with his night-watchings and studies, pining himself, not
unlike his own taper, where the head wastes the whole body, in lightning
others, he consumes himself, who indeed does best deserve both of Church and
of State; laying the foundations of truth and piety in the Church, and
building up the walls of civility and obedience in the State; yet sometimes
with a fond affectation of singularity, he makes himself ridiculous. Not to
speak of any single encounter of virtue to vice, many virtues knit and
combined together, may be foiled, dejected, and clean cast down with one
vice: sometimes they are choked up with gluttony, incombred with
covetousness, grow rustie and dustie, with sloth swollen and puffed up with
pride, cancard with envy, stretched upon the rack of ambition, ensnared with
the hook of blind fancy, and selfe-conceited opinion; if but a spark of
choler or fury fall on the stubble, it will inflame all: and thus one fly
serves to infect a whole pot of sweet ointment.

For the several diseases of the mind, compare them to the sicknesses of the
body: Pride seems to be an inordinate swelling, like a dropsy, which with
wind, waters, or ill humors, puffes up the flesh; for good blood, which serves
for our strength, and our nourishment, will contain it self within his own
bounds. The diseases of the mind are compared to the diseases of the body.
Wrath is like a plurisie, when the heart and the lites are all on a fire,
nothing can quench it, nothing can assuage it, but the effusion of blood; then
we begin to be merciless and cruel, and if the Sun go down in our wrath,
then is our case desperate; the critical hour is dangerous, for if it will
endure the light, it will never fly in the darkness. Lust is like a burning
fever, which with shaking fits, puts man into diverse inordinate passions, and
gives him the shape of a beast; for beasts do naturally desire the propagation
of their own kind, and in their kind the eternising of themselves: but man
should look to the immortality of his soul, the resurrection of his flesh;
which together with Gods law, his own conscience, and the uncleanness of
sin, should serve to bridle his lust. Envy is as a corrosiue, or as a worm
bred in the spleen, which consumes it self, in maligning others; it feeds
not on the best, but on the worst things in nature, and so at length bursteth
it self with his own poison. Sloth seems as a lethargy, which brings man to
a dead sleep; it buries him up quick and alive, it consists only of earth,
stands immovable, without any spark of fire; here is the dullness of the
flesh, without the agilitie of the spirit; here is a carcass of man, without
any use of his limbs or his members.

Suppose there were some innocent men not tainted with these vices; then must
you conceive that I do not speak of the persons, but of the nature in
general: for I will not dispute how powerful in the heart of man, All men
inclined to vice.
is the working of Gods spirit; but sure it is, that such vices there are, some
in some persons, and al in the whole kind; for otherwise we could not have
known them, we could not have discovered them: the suspicious mind of man
could not have raised such slanderous and false accusations against himself,
without some groundwork of truth. These are no exotic or foreign drugges,
but weeds growing in our own gardens, issuing from the corrupted root of our
nature: sometimes in one man you shall observe them in full number and plenty,
the mystery of iniquity shadowed in the veil of our flesh; and in the most
sanctified man, you shall discern an inclination to sin.

If there were no other punishment of vice, but vice it self, this were
sufficient; for nature has imprinted in every man a hate and detestation of
sin: but God in his justice, The punishment of vice.
as he has framed man of a soul and of a body, and both of them do mutually
receive together their portion of joy, or of sorrow; so by an especial
ordinance God has decreed, that the vices of the one, should burst forth to
the miseries of the other. The young drunkard shall in time lament, the dropsy
and palsy to prevent his age; surfeits shall follow riots, the gowte shall
overtake idleness: the lustful gallant shall in time perceive, that a French
disease has disfigured his beauty, and weakened his bones. Every disease of
the mind has a proportionable disease of the body: if thou regardest not the
stains in the soul, yet thou shall find the smart in thy flesh, and
therefore in both acknowledge the corruption of thy nature.

Notwithstanding the punishment of sin, and the uncleanness of sin, yet I
will spare my self this labor, to speak of man's several vices. For
howsoever they are generally acknowledged, as the diseases of the mind, seeing
that man's own reason, and his natural instinct, will therein testify against
himself, and therefore they should be the greatest torments to nature: All will
not acknowledge the miseri^ of sin.
for corrupted nature cannot sleep securely, but for her own punishment
discernes her own corruption. Yet some there are, who delight in uncleanness,
like swine, wallowing in the mire; and here is a misery of all miseries the
greatest, that I should now at length be enforced, to make a difference
between the disease and the misery. I will therefore pass over all the
diseases of ye mind, the whole number and rabble of vices, which are the
strongest, the most forcible and pregnant arguments to prove our inbred
corruption. For as it is in trees and in plants, so likewise in man, if any one
leaf do miscarry, assuredly the root is unsound; the least vice argues
nature corrupted, but I will generally tie my self to those qualities which
are common to all, wherein there is no appearance of delight, and therein shall
appear our wretched condition.

It has pleased God for the continual memory of man's first offense, still to
permit in man, an inordinate desire of knowledge, notwithstanding his natural
ignorance. The torture of ignorance in the understanding.
The first thing which the statesman requires, not without his great labor,
his charge and his peril, is to have just notice and true intelligence; the
vulgar people run wandering after news, they will not forbear to speak;
though they forfeit their long ears, they will abuse their licentious tongues:
the young Student will make tapers of his own m^rrow, and together with his
oil spend his own flesh, and pine himself with his night-labours, to pry
into the secrecies and mysteries of nature. Thus is the understanding perplexed
and tormented with his own error; and assuredly to a generous and brave mind,
the bondage of Egypt is not so intolerable, as is the captivity of
ignorance. Who can patiently endure, that the soul being quick sighted and
piercing, for want of perspectiue glasses, should be imprisoned within the
bounds of our sense, mewed up in a dark dungeon of blindness; here is the
torture of error: but if once we escape, if once we approach to the light, then
follows the curiosity of knowledge, we are dazzled with too much light; and
being not able to behold the Sun, still we fasten our eyes, till at length
the spirits are dissolved, and we fall again into darkness.

From the error in the understanding, let us come to the will in the actions.
Strange it is, that there should be no co^formity in man, The torture of
expectation in the will.
the understanding or thoughts do not always accompany the speech, or the
gesture. The will most commonly ouertakes the actions, and then are we tortured
with long lingering hope, and expectation; we know not how to proceed by
degrees, as nature prescribes us a rule in all her actions: but we must have
our leaps and our skippings, and cannot observe an equality in our
proceedings. The young heir will not endure to stay the respite and leisure of
others, for his inheritance, but he will sell his state in reuersion. The
Student no sooner looks on the title, but presently turns to the Index: we
seem like posts in our journey, and expect a like speedy passage for our
sight and our flight. Thus in attaining perfection, the mind is stretched out
upon the rack of expectation, and sometimes the heat of our desire is abated,
before things come to the ripeness. As if in the spring we should long for
the fruits of the harvest, when in the summer season, either we forget our
own longing, or having tasted the fruits, the sweetness seems to be
already past, and spent in the expectation.

Suppose that the understanding either not possessed with error, or not hastening
to be resolved, should not torment it self with expectation; nor the will
should be disquieted by prolonging her hopes, but that the one were enlightened
with true wisdom, The preuision of evil.
and the other settled with constant and quiet affections; then behold the
foresight and knowledge of such evils, as may daily befall us, strikes us with
terror and fearfulness. Have I escaped one danger? I confess mine own
merits, I acknowledge thy mercy sweet Jesus; what has thy wisdom reserved in
the second place to assault me?

Me thinks, I see the state and condition of every man, That we stand in
danger of many evils.
lively set forth in the first Chapter of Job: Wheresoever, or howsoever the
wind blows, from any quarter of the world, it still serves to bring us some
heavy tidings, concerning our selves, our health, our children, our kindred,
our substance, our servants: all are subject to shipwreck, every thing falls
to decay; and must be repaired, not with restitution, but with patience and
long suffering. See you not the Merchant, how careful he is, twice every day
to meet at the Burse? It is to enquire what ill news has befallen him: poor
wretched man, that should be thus subject to so many ill accidents! The very
thought and fear of many evils do perplexe the mind as much in effect, as
does the sustaining of any one in particular: for neither of them do
immediately touch the reasonable soul, and both of them are alike apprehended
in the understanding; and it is the understanding, which is only capable of
joy, or of sorrow.

Suppose a man to be careless and dissolute of his worldly estate; The
fearfulness of death.
or suppose his estate to be such, and so great, that he fears no casualties
or dangers, Extra fortunae iactum. If the Sun and the Moon do arise (quoth
the Usurer) my days of payment will come; if the Common Law of England stand
in force, I have him fast bound in a statute or recognizance. Here is good
security I confess: but thou fool, this night thy soul shall be taken from
thee; where are thy goods, where is thy substance? Suppose thy honor or wealth
should increase, yet thy life (which is the foundation to support all the rest,
whereby thou art made capable of the rest of thy blessings) daily decreaseth;
every day thou leesest a day of thine age; and in every moment, thou stand
in fear of a sudden death: O mors, quam amara est memoria tua homini pacem
habenti in substantijs suis? O death, how bitter is thy memory, to him that
reposeth trust in his own wealth?

If man were sufficiently prepared to die, and that he did not respect the
shortness of his own days, in hope of a better world to succeed; The Good of
others depending upon our life.
yet the very thought and commiseration of others (whose standing or falling,
depends upon his life or his death) would greatly perplexe him. The poor
husband sitting at meat, accompanied with his loving and beautiful wife, (who
indeed is the ornament of his table, and like a fruitful vine upon the walls
of his house, together with all his hopeful children, like Olive branches
round about his table) in the midst of his mirth and feasting, begins to
consider, what if God should suddenly take me away, as the least crumme here
is able to choke me? what should become of my fatherless children? who should
take thought of my desolate wife? Alas poor widow; alas poor orphants! I have
here brought you into a miserable world; and if I should now forsake you,
better it were that the same earth should together intumbe us. Men are
deceitful, kindred are negligent, friends are forgetful; I know not to whose
custody and charge I might safely commit you. My state is very unsettled, my
Testament not made, for I know not how God may increase my charge, or daily
alter my state; I know not whether a posthumous child may succeed me: alas
poor widow, alas poor orphants! to God I commit my soul, to the earth of his
sanctuary, I commit mine own body; and for the remainder of my flesh, part of
my self, my dear wife, together with the fruits of my loins, my sons and
my daughters, as branches budding from a decayed root, I leave you to Gods safe
custody and protection. He that brought us together, coupled us in marriage,
and shall then separate us by my natural death, be an husband to my desolate
and forsaken wife: he that gave me my children, and then shall take me from
them, be a father to the fatherless. Here indeed is joy to the Christian man,
but a cold comfort to the natural man, whose heart is full of distrust and
infidelity.

I know not how other men may stand affected to death; but in truth this very
thought does more perplexe me, The fear of hell and damnation.
then death it self (which thought I should reserve as my daily meditation,
upon my first approach into my naked bed) poor wretched man that I am! when at
length, without strength, without reason or sense, having no power of my self,
no use of my limbs or my members, when I shall lie in the pangs and agony of
death; when my friends and acquaintance shall leave me, my little substance
forsake me; when mine own flesh shall be spent and consumed, and nothing
shall remain but skin and the bones; when every part is tortured with
grief, the soft bed seems hard to my wearisome limbs; when mine eyes grow
heavy, my breath noisome, my heart faint; then behold I shall enter a combat
(an impotent soldier I confess) and yet not a single combat; but here shall
stand the ugliness and multitude of my sins, together with an exact
remembrance, and the ripping up of the whole course of my life, there the
palenesse of death, the uncertainty of my future abode and habitation; then the
fear of Gods judgments shall terrify me; the thought of hell fire and
damnation shall ^amaze me, to see my self thus forsaken and destitute. And
notwithstanding my natural inclination and desire of life, yet to be hurried
and carried away with the stream of the time; no respite or leisure shall be
allowed me; my houre-glasse is run, and of all my lives labor and travel I
shall receive no portion, only my sin shall accompany me, and shall attend
me to Judgment; what shall it profit me to win the whole world, if I lose
mine own soul? or who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Of whom should
I expect comfort and succor, but of thee (O Lord) thou that died'st for my
sins, and rose again for my justification? Jesus thou son of Mary, Jesus
thou son of David, Jesus thou son of God; thou Lamb of God that take away
the sins of the world, have mercy upon me; for thou art my God, my Savior,
my Judge in whom I do trust; thou art my Advocate with the Father, not to
plead my right, but in thy pleading to purchase my right; for thou art the
propitiation for my sins.

If there were any joy or contentment here in this life, the dumb creatures,
The creatures look only to the present.
who only look to the present, should receive a far greater measure and
portion then man. Who having a presaging mind, and well considering that
sorrows shall overtake the greatest mirth, extrema gaudij luctus occupat:
setting before his own eyes the frailty, shortness, and uncertainty of his
life; and that in death his honor, his wealth, and all his delights must
forsake him, torments himself with thought and expectation hereof, before the
sentence be past, or the blow stricken: like poor prisoners, who are more then
half dead, before the Judges approach. And hitherto has appeared our torments
consisting only in the foresight, the fearfulness and prevention of evil:
now in the present sustaining thereof, I shall not need to speak of the torture.

It may seem to make for natures perfection, Man reflects upon his own
actions.
that a man knows not how to forget; the more he strives to forget, the
faster it sticks in the brain; the more he desires to blot out, it makes the
greater impression; like the bird which is ensnared with the lime-twigges, the
more it struggles, the surer it is held. And this truly I do ascribe to the
infinite mercy of God: for seeing man is by condition sinful; therefore
according to the condition of his nature, he should suruay and view his own
actions, both for his repentance, and for his amendment. And being not able to
forget, he might much better conceive, that there is no forgetfulness with
God; and therefore still he stands accountable, he is not discharged, nor
cannot procure his quietus est, out of Gods Exchequer; and therefore must
always be ready to give an account of his stewardship.

From this tenacitie of memory, The remembrance of evil.
together with his discoursiue reason, proceeds such a sorrow, that still he
thinks he is tortured; he cannot endure to see the place of his torment, he
hates the instruments, together with their first occasion; and his memory
serves him much better for sorrow, then for any other subject of what nature
soever. The scholar when he has forgotten all his lessons, together with his
play-daies, and sports at school, yet still he remembers the least
correction: as the vessel longest retains an ill savor; so you shall not
easily release the mind of sorrow, though the torture be past.

It should seem, that the soul being eternal in her self, The application.
desires to make all things eternal, or at least to prolong their continuance;
and being naturally more inclined unto sorrow then unto joy, according to her
just merits and deserts, being therein convinced by the evident proof of her
own conscience, she lays up here for her self, a treasure of sorrow, as
willingly undertaking a state of mortification and penance, that seeing and
feeling the heavy rod of Gods anger, she might safely and securely escape the
seething pot of his wrath.

Thus our daily calamities seem to have the nature of serpents, Calamities are
like Serpents.
whose poison consists in the fore parts, and in the hinder parts they spit out
poison before they can creep; and this appears by our fearfulness and
expectation of evil: they carry poison in their tail and leave it behind
them; and this appears by the strong apprehension of the sorrow past, which
renewes man's grief, when the grief is declining. In so much that I have
known diverse suddenly to faint, and to be much perplexed, calling to mind
those dangers, which they have already safely and securely escaped, and this is
as proper and peculiar to man, as is his reasonable soul.

From the powers and faculties of man's mind, His passions tend to his sorrow.
I will come to his passions; do not all these tend to his sorrow? Love is
accompanied with ielousies, suspicions, and hate; hope breeds envy, fears and
vexations; every delight leaves grief and remorse behind it. If a tragedy
were made of all the several passions of man, which indeed are like so many
factions or furies in the State; all banding and trouping, having both their
favorites and their opposites; assuredly it would prove the most cruel and
bloody tragedy that ever past between tyrants, especially considering, that
they are the household servants of man: and in a private family (much more in one
person) there should be the most perfect and best Monarchical government.

Not to speak, how easily man is moved to these passions, or how these
passions stand in opposition to each other: how they do degenerate between
themselves, look to the fruits and effects of each passion, How the passions
do degenerate.
and you shall easily discern the torment. As for example, immoderate love
always begets the greatest neglect and contempt; and being once provoked, it
turns to the deadliest hate. As out of the most wholesome herbs you may
extract the worst poison: so in love, if the spirits begin once to euaporate,
and the fire decline by degrees, there will follow such a coldness, such a
petrification, as that the immoderate love will turn to immoderate hate. And
herein I do acknowledge the wonderful works of Gods providence; for seeing
that this total and excessive love, with all our heart, with all our mind,
with all our soul, is only due unto God, fecisticor nostrum (domine) propter
te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec veniat ad te: if therefore man shall
divert the course, turn the stream of his love, and wholly surrender it unto
the creature; then has God ordained, that such love being unjustly imparted,
should be justly recompensed with hate.

I shall not here need to insist in the variety of passions; take any one of
the^ severally by it self: Does not choler exceedingly disquiet man, shortens
his days, How every passion torments it self.
occasioneth many diseases, and sometimes prouokes man to attempt such a rash
and headie action, as that in the whole course of his life following, he shall
never be able to make any due recompense or satisfaction? Take the melancholy
man, do not his own thoughts, dreams and fantasies exceedingly torment him?
can he contain his own imaginations? but as if we had not sufficient outward
cause of sorrow, he frames monsters to himself, and these prove fearful and
horrid; in so much, that his hair stands upright, and a cold sweat possesses
his limbs; when no outward danger appears, then he is frighted with his own
thoughts; he sees armies fighting together, and thinks he is haunted with
spirits, and then he cries out for help; we are willing and ready to afford
it, but we know not where to apply it, for ye disease consists in the
fantasy. Good counsel is the best help, but alas he is incapable of
counsel! he complains that his head is all made of glass, that he feels
his heart now melting away like wax, that mice are now eating and consuming
his bowels. Not much unlike the simple pure sectaries of our age, who in the
point of the Eucharist, believe things to be, because they believe them: Creed
quod est, and est; creed quod habes, and habes: the body is there truly and
really present, because they apprehend it so by faith. O the wonderful power
of their faith! O the excellent curiosity of their wits, which has almost
brought them to a fit of a frenzy!.

And it is the more to be lamented, that the best wits should be most subject
to these fits; and in the most noble and deepest understandings, you shall most
easily discern some tokens and signs of melancholy. But you will say, that
these are therefore the less, because they consist in the fancy: nay rather
much greater, Melancholy fits.
for it is not the flesh, but the mind which is capable of grief and of
sorrow; the mind conceiving them as true, she is alike affected therewith, as
if they were true indeed. For all contentment consists in the mind, and
according to the apprehension, thereafter follows the contentment: but the
judgment, together with the dignity of the reasonable soul, seems to be
exceedingly disparaged; as boasting of light, and yet afraid of her shadow. So
that if with much labor, and good persuasion, you shall recall this wandering
man; it is to be feared, that for ever he will be ashamed of himself to
think of his error; and will hide himself in sobriety, having laid himself
open with his madness and folly.

Not in himself alone shall man find the fruits of these turbulent passions;
but being a sociable creature, you shall observe how they daily burst forth in
his actions and conversation among men. How passions are, in respect of others.
If two choleric men should converse together, you might think that fire and
brimstone consuming all others, would likewise at length devour themselves.
Suppose that the choleric and melancholy should enter a league, you might as
well conceive that the two extreme elements, the fire and the earth, should
move together in one sphere. The melancholy with the sanguine can have no more
affinity between themselves, then dancing with mourning, or feasting with
fasting. If melancholy be coupled with melancholy, assuredly at length there
will follow a gangraena, they will putrify with sorrow and coffeehouse.
From this variety of temper and passions, you would wonder at the great hate
and enmity between men; sometimes between Nations. The Spanish gravity and
staidness, seems to neglect and contemn the French le^ity and complements;
the fine and witty Italian, cannot endure the dullness and homeliness of the
Dutch Nation: sometimes natural affection cannot assuage these passions. From
hence arises the disagreement and iarres between the old father, and the young
Gallant his son; for there are different inclinations, proper to men's
different complections, and ages.

Youth strong in body, The several dispositions of men.
wanting true wisdom and discretion to guide his own strength; age ripe in
judgment and true wisdom, but having neither power nor ability to put her
own proiects in execution. From hence observe the different inclination of
both; the young man (not considering the blessing and plenty of peace, or the
necessary provision for war, or the danger and casualtie of battle),
desires nothing more then the noise of the drum, or the sound of the trumpet;
whereas the old counselor that intends nothing but safety, and values other
men's labors, according to the weakness of his own crasie body, will accept
of peace upon any the basest conditions. Thus has God set a distance or
difference, between the powers of the body, and the faculties of the soul:
whether it were to deny all men an absolute perfection in both, so to abate
the pride of our nature; or else to tie al men together in a mutual bond of
love, by a necessity of each others help, that the blind might carry the
lame, and the lame might direct the blind in his passage. Well, howsoever, sure
it does argue, that there is some antipathie and disproportion between the
flesh and the spirit, which being coupled together in marriage, and neither of
them well able to subsist and live of himself, and both of them adding luster
and beauty to each other; assuredly this enmity has fallen, since the first
contract or solemnization of marriage.

Man being a sociable creature, what is there in this world, which he should
esteem more then his credit and reputation among men. Pride was the first
sin of man, and every man is naturally inclined unto pride, as well knowing
the dignity of his condition, and his height above other creatures; Man must
sustain reproaches.
and truly in right reason a generous and noble mind, without spot of
baseness is most commendable. For there are degrees of men, and every man in
his own place should be most respective of his same and report; then what a
corrosiue were it to a virtuous and noble mind, to sustain wrongs, injuries,
reproaches, contumelies most undeservedly. Notwithstanding many men's great
deserts and endeauours, yet shall they never attain the love and good will of
the people; for the multitude, bellua multorum capitum, like one unreasonable
creature with many heads, has herein the condition of dogs, always to bark
at those whom they know not; and where one whelpe begins, all the rest will
follow the cry: Seldom shall you see any man dejected and cast down, whom
they do not instantly persecute and tread under their feet, insulting upon
those who cannot resist; and being like patient Asses, to those who scourge,
abuse, and delude them, and thus they are justly recompensed for their malice
and folly.

Man being a sociable creature, he carries a greater reference and relation to
others: and therefore not in our selves alone, not in our selves, are the
causes of our grief; Man's sorrow and misery for others.
but as if we were stubble, very apt for combustion, every outward spark
serves to inflame us. See, how the poor mother laments for her graceless and
dissolute child! how the father bewailes the loss of his daughter, which
without his counsel or priuitie has matched her self (by the practice of his
own servants) to a knave and an unthrift! how the parents mourn for the death
of their eldest and most hopeful son! how the uncle is perplexed with
thought of the poor orphants committed to his trust! how the children find
want of their parents, forsaken and desolate, left to the wide world, and to
Gods only protection! the comfortless widow tears her own hair, when she
thinks of her dear husband! the whole kindred and family groan to see the
waste of woods, and the ruins of that ancient house, from whence they are all
descended; but now fallen into decay by wardship, or ill husbandry; if any one
of the stock do miscarrie, the shame shall be impured to all. Not unlike the
state of the Citizens, if one breaks, others must crack; there must be a
fellow-feeling of the blow: how happy are they whose state is whole, entire and
absolute within themselves? and this is the condition of dumb creatures, in
respect of man.

Suppose any man were freed from these annoyances, as indeed few there are,
whom neither kindred, nor friends, nor followers did any way grieve or molest;
yet in the streets or high way side, The grief of compassion.
(we shall not need to visit the Spittles, or Hospitals) how many lame, how
many blind, some upon crutches, some upon pallets? what broken bones, maimed
limbs, seared arms, mangled legs, vlcerous heads, scortched flesh; some
without chinnes, some without noses, some without hands to receive, or feet to
follow, yet still begging your alms: Will you not vouchsafe to behold them?
Behold they shall wait and attend upon you, at your own door; eseither you
must put on hardness, and despise your own flesh, or otherwise you must melt
in compassion.

You may think that I am driven to some great exigent, that now at length I
should speak of the outcast of men; as if I were to visit some Hospitals, or
to make a diligent search or inquisition for all those miserable creatures, A
passage from the miseries of the creatures to the vanities.
in whom the frailties and infirmities of our flesh do most eminently appear.
But in truth I have here only spoken of them, as the present occasion did
offer it self; I met them in the street, or by the high way side, and
therefore I will slightly pass by them, and I will hasten to overtake whole
mankind; whom I will entangle in one common depth of our miseries, I will
acquit none from the highest to the lowest. And because hitherto I might seem
to have sunk to the bottom, I will therefore now recall my self, and leaving
such miserable states of men, I will run over all those actions, and
qualities, wherein our pleasure may seem to consist; or wherein there may
seem to be any appearance of happiness, and therein shall appear our misery
and wretched condition.

The qualities I will thus divide: They are such as either are in our selves:
1. as are the gifts of the body, the beauty and comeliness of parts: 2.
Wherein joy may seem to consist.
or the gifts of the mind, as profound learning and true wisdom; or else
they are such as stand in relation to others, and outwardly concern us, 3.
either in our possessions, wherein I will speak of our wealth and abundance,
4. or in our esteem and reputation among men, wherein I will speak of our
honor: 5. or in our actions, our pastimes and sports, wherein I will speak of
our pleasures.

First for beauty, for it appears first to the sight, and carries the best
gloss: the fairest beauty and complexion, though proudest of her self, yet
she never enioyes her self; A looking glass for beauty.
and if in a glass only by way of reflection, yet she presently forgets her
self: it serves as a white garment aptest for soil, and in old age proves the
most wrinkled and withered. If a Fever (but for a few days) possess a fair
Lady, then you shall best judge of her complexion; a pale countenance, hollow
eyes, lean ch^^^es, fur'd mouth, panting breath, slow speech, weak and
trembling joints; all which could hardly allure or entice her fond wooer. When
beauty is at the best, yet if it be not adorned and set forth with Jewels,
with silks, with colors, which rich and costly attires; if it were naked and
desolate, clad in homely weeds, it would hardly move thy affection; and when
thou beholdest it at the best, thou see but only the outside, for beauty is
but skinne-deepe: if thou could discern the unclean maw, the noisome
bowels, the unsavory parts, thou would find it a painted sepulcher. But
suppose the face were besmeared with blood, thou could not endure the sight:
suppose it lay rotten in the grave, as one day it shall, and then, go young
man, please thine own fancy, rejoice with the wife of thy youth, see how
loving and amiable she looks. This was the Hermites practice to abate the
heat of his lust, and let it serve for thy example and imitation.

In truth I do much pity many, who seem neither to regard their own ease,
nor their warm'th, so that they may adorn their own beauty; Beauty is
troublesome.
which beauty might as well be adorned with their ease, with their warm'th,
not indangering their health, not indamaging their bodies, if it stood with the
fashion and condition of the times. How costly, how chargeable, how troublesome
is their beauty unto them? dum comu^tur dum pectuntur, annus est: all their
whole time must be spent in their dressing. You may as soon furnish an army,
as supply all their trickets and toys; there are more fashions extant, then
there is variety in nature; the French attire, the Spanish band, the Dutch
collar, the Flemish bodies, you would wonder of what country or nation they
were, etc. What an excellent sight it is, to see the old mother Matron-like,
full of wrinckles and withered, leading the way, (as it (...) to the grave) but
the young daughter following her, a fair damsel of a fresh and a beautiful
color, and yet both of them consisting of the same flesh; like one and the
same tree, rugged and harsh in the rind or the bark, but fair and delicious
in the fruit, and both take sap from the same root, and both together tend
to corruption?

From the beauty and comeliness of members, let us come to the inward light
and beams of the understanding: The world is a Sophister, and frames a
fallacy, a been compositis ad mal^ diuisa, making a strange difference and
separation between true wisdom and learning: whereas indeed there is no
difference at all, but they are one and the same faculty; wisdom is
learning, Learning and wisdom can admit no difference between themselves.
and learning is wisdom; and he that found out this distinction between them,
was indeed an enemy to learning, and in himself the son of ignorance.
Learning (I confess) of it self is eleu^ted above the vulgar capacity,
otherwise it should not require men's studies and labors; but being tempered
with discretion, and experience, may well be accommodated, and applied to many
good uses, even in the meanest capacity. For certain it is, that there is no
true learning, which is not grounded in nature; neither can it receive any just
rule and direction, but only from nature (for Grammar is only a step or an
entrance to learning): he that shall doubt of the wisdom of nature, must
needs confess himself an ignorant fool. I confess, that the great Clerk
may be ignorant of the meanest and basest things; or happily of their price,
their use or valuation: does this any way disparage his wisdom, his learning,
his judgment? As if a privy Counselor should therefore be reputed an unwise
man, because he has no skill in husbandry and tillage; when his leisure will
not serve him to intend such drudgerie. But for this time, rather then I would
any way hinder my intent, I will willingly grant it; let there be a difference,
and such a difference as Scripture reports; a wisdom in their own generation,
a worldly wisdom, a serpentine wisdom, differing from the wisdom of
schools. Now for this wisdom, see how she is defective in her own kind,
and there wanting, wherein she desires to be most perfect.

Great wits breed melancholy thoughts, and serve rather to stir up ielousies
and fears, then to give courage and resolution: the multiplicitie of their
proiects hinders their actions, and sometimes the wit contents ^t self with a
vain speculation of his own plots, together with an idle discourse, what
would be done, or could be done, The misery of great wits.
or should be done, when nothing is done to the purpose. And this I conceive
to be the cause, why men of the deepest understanding, have not always the
best success in the State; not only because they are suppressed by an higher
power, which having already attained to the top, desires by all possible means
to secure it self: but in their actions intending and desiring to avoid all
casualtie and chance (which is so necessary and incident to ou^ frail
condition, as that it cannot be avoided) desiring to build upon sure grounds,
they spend their whole time, in deliberation, and consultation, and choose
rather to manage their own private estates, then to commit themselves to the
stage of this world, to the fortune and variety of times. And hence it is,
that seldom or never they perform or attempt any great and honorable work;
and the wits themselves are so dangerous, as that they give men occasion rather
to fear and to distrust their practices, then to rely upon their counsels and
directions. In so much that sometimes it is a special point of wisdom to
conceal it self; as he that acts the fool in a Comedy, is commonly the
wisest fellow in the company: for you shall observe, that the mean capacity
gives greater hearts ease, more contentment, lives more plentifully, and
increases his means much better, then the deep understanding; who either will
attempt nothing, or not taking the ordinary course, most usually fails in his
purposes. Where there is a little want of brain, there you shall find the
truest joy; for it is a great point of happiness not to understand his own
grief. To dance about May-poles, to skip over bon-fires, here was the old
country sport; and here is the truest mirth, for there is no true mirth,
without some mixture of folly. Serious and weighty thoughts are a great
hindrance to mirth; and great wits as they are always ingendring, so stand
they always in fear and in ieopardie, the battle and combat of wits being
no less bloody, then that of the sword: whereas honest plain men protect
themselves with their own harmless innocence, neither fearing, nor
fearful to others.

Great learning seems to transport a man to an element above himself, The
coffeehouse of Learning.
and being of little use in this lower region, the great Clerk has his own
learning for his own reward, and is permitted quietly to enjoy himself,
together with all his swee^e and heavenly meditations. Honor or wealth would
distract him, and interrupt the course of his studies; the noise of this world
would awaken him out of his extasis: thus sitting aloft in a Doctors Chair,
and wanting the earths foundation, at length he must fall, unless he be
miraculously supported from above. The coffeehouse of learning in these
days, proceeds not only for want of preferment, but even the credit of
learning in her own kind, is now called in question. All other trades are
able to keep^ their own wares in their due valuation; only learning in these
days, is grown so common and triuiall, such are the helps of (...),
translations, abridgements and Indexes, so many, so plentiful, that me thinks a
natural and mother wit seems to ou^face learning, and to call it pedantisme,
making a far greater show and ostentation of learning, then learning can do
of her self; as things counterfeit, make always the best outward appearance;
like bold and presumptuous liers, who seem to be most confident in their
reports. These gentle Clerks cannot be content to kindle and enlighten their
own lamps, but now they desire to put out the light, and to raise up their
buildings with the ruins of learning, persuading the world that it is not of
that necessity and use in the State: whereas all our religion seems to adorn
and support learning, and together with it, is infused into the hearts of men,
all our ciuility, all our customs, our manner and form of speech, all our
laws, and whatsoever else makes man sociable: all was first borrowed from the
wellspring and fountain of learning; though now by habit, practice, and
continuance of time, we may seem to enjoy them. When learning was once exiled,
nations turned barbarous, without the service of God, or the fear of the
Magistrate.

I dare excuse nothing from vanity, and therefore I must truly confess, that
learning seems to be defective in her self. For as the whole world is
circular, and as whole nature consists in alteration and change, the night
succeeding the day, and the day the night: so learning seems to run in a
circle or maze, Learning is defective in her end, yet superfluous in her parts.
not attaining that height which it aims at; where it ends, there it begins,
reading much, and forgetting much, and never comes to a period. Learning has
likewise her superfluous lops, which in time may well admit incision. I do not
like an ouer-great curiosity in the knowledge of languages, or a fond
affectation of style; I do not commend too much nicitie in the rules of
Logi^ke, to be ouer-strict in the terms of Art, to fight about shadows, to
insist too much in the precepts, when as the perfection consists in the use.
Poetry and Critics they are young men's delights, and lothed in age: a ripe
and stayed judgment will not admit the tricks and subtilties of Schools.
Whereas the best learning consists in the discovery of the truth, and truth
delights in plainness, and in a homely attire. Ars est dissimul^re artem: we
must not always be precise in observing the rules of an Art; we must not
stand strictly upon the forms of our Syllogismes; as if the reasonable soul
were not capable of a reasonable discourse, but she must spell out the sense,
by knitting and uniting the propositions according to mood and to figure. Here
are the excrements I confess, not unlike the wings or skirts of a garment, or
the warts or spots of the flesh, which serve for luster and ornament of the
rest, and not for any special use and commodity: whereas true learning does
wonderfully enlighten the understanding, quickens the invention, directs the
judgment, makes a dissection of nature, opens the entrails, and seeing the
wisdom of the Creator, contents the curiosity of our minds, prepares the
way to religion, guides and directs us in our actions.

Give me leave in one word to speak in defense of the Schools: This is an
infirmity, which is not only incident to University learning, An Apology for
learning.
but to all other professions in general; for the nicities and tricks of law,
are as foolish in their own kind, as are the subtilties of Schools, were it
not that a Writ, directed to the Sheriff for the execution of their laws,
does mitigate their folly. When the pen and the sword do meet together,
then who dare stand in defiance, but make a separation between both, and then
strength will prove brutish, and wit ridiculous; not unlike him that should
dart a goose quill, (as learning is figured out by the pen) of it self it will
neither pierce, nor make any long flight; but if the Archer shall cunningly
take the least part of it, and glue it to his shaft, then it will prove a very
fearful and dangerous instrument in war; but thanks to the iron, and not
to the feather. We can discourse of the heavens and the earth, when as yet we
know no^ how to alter the propriety: they can transport the inheritance, when
as yet they know not the substance, conceive the happiness of the one, in
respect of the other: and here you have the difference.

The benefit which all professions seem to receive from schoole-learning is
such* and so great, as that they being not able with due thankfulness, to make
any kind of recompense, The use and excellency of Schoole-learning.
they requite it with injuries, reproaches and wrongs: or seeking to conceal
what they have borrowed, that it might seem to be their own, they say with
the tenants in the Gospel, Here is the heir, come let us slay him, and the
inheritance shall be ours. To let go all other meaner professions, and to
insist in the wisdom of the law; it were a foul disparagement to compare the
learning of all ages, the learning of the whole world, the knowledge of God and
nature, with any private or provincial laws, but I do here generally insist
in all the laws of the world. Assuredly all their wisdom is only borrowed
from schoole-learning; they have indeed proper and peculiar to themselves,
their particular customs, the forms of their writs, the manner of their
proceedings, the nature of their Courts, the extent, and signification of their
words, all which are framed as well as possibly the wisdom of man could
invent; but the ground and reason of their law, is only taken from
schoole-learning. Whereas our temporal laws are squared and proportioned
according to that eternal law (which makes much for the dignity and certainty
of our laws) I would gladly ask who should take notice of that ^ternall law?
to whose profession does the knowledge thereof most properly belong, but to the
Philosopher? who by the inspection of nature, viewing the course of Gods
providence, considering the souls actions, and thereby judging of her
inclination, is able to make a large volume, and treatise of that subject. If
question be made, what circumstances do alter the action? here presently we
enter the lists of Moral Philosophi^, which is able to direct us for our
selves in the Ethics, for our household and families in the Economickes; for
the kingdom or Empire in the Politickes* Now in regard that the Church and the
State are together combined, and therefore must necessarily symbolize; if any
doubt be made in regard of a Christian Commonwealth, here the Casuist Divines
take place, and must give his direction accordingly. To conclude, our
schoole-learning does as far exceed all the laws in the world, in the
excellency of their wisdom and knowledge, as the laws of God and nature,
are much wiser then the laws of men.

From the person and inward gifts of man, let us come to his substance, which
does most move the common sort of men, Of wealth and abundance.
as being most sensible, and therefore I cannot but take notice of it. Wealth
gives no manner of contentment, but rather like the dropsy, prouokes the
appetite; for the mind still continues empty, and therefore still may desire,
when the purse or the coffer swallows up the treasure. If this wealth be
excessive in some, then is the poverty of others as excessive; for the
enriching of one, is the impouerishing of another: there is no new creation of
nothing, we do but rob and purloine from each other, and so at length make
our selves a fit and a fat booty. In the greatest abundance* yet natural
temperance prescribes a moderation, and a sober use of the creature^: No^ t^us
hic capiet venture, plusquam men's: Nature has not given thee a broad back, and
an empty belly, according to the measure and proportion of thy wealth; thou
can take no more of thy great wealth, then we can do of our little: here is
thy comfort indeed, that thou tak^st it from a greater heap, and please thy
self with a conceit of thine own ple^tie. But Christi^n religion, whose God
appeared in baseness and poverty, descends much lower, both for the imitation
of Christ, that God beholding us, he might discern in us, not only his own
im^ge, but likewis^ the image of his dear son, who sustained our infirmities
and wants; as likewise for penance, it prescribes a more strict mortification;
in the midst of our plenty and abundance, we are enjoined our fastings, our
sackcloth, our ashes: and wherefore serves thy great wealth, unless thou will,
with the superfluity of thy wealth, as it were with the hair of thy head,
wipe the feet of thy Savior, comfort the comfortless, and help the
distressed members of Christ? If thou had nothing, then if thou can learn
to contemn and despise wealth, thy state is much more glorious and happy,
then if thou enioyedst all the treasures the whole earth could afford thee.
Poverty in spirit, Go and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, it
is a state Angelical, best befitting Christ and his Apostles.

The richest man upon some occasion, All men want at some times.
at one time or other, shall stand in need of some necessary commodity; either
the year will not serve for his plenty, or the season will not afford it, or
the market cannot furnish him; sometimes his provision for his own priuat^
household and family may fail him, though otherwise he may have it in store.
If a Prince were at sea, he must content himself with a mariners food; and
in our (...) by land; sometimes we light upon cottages, where all things are
wanting; and what is this but to be poor in effect, and in very deed, when we
lack all these necessaries which our nature requires? I have known a great
man in this kingdom, who might have spent many thousand pounds by the year,
and yet the report goes (which I do easily believe, for I was not far
absent) that he died for want of a peniworth of Aquauitae, which at that time
might have bin a great means under God, to have preserved him from such a
sudden death.

There is a generation of men, who notwithstanding their own abundance, yet
deny unto themselves necessary provision for this life; The misery of wealth.
who do not choke, but sta^ue themselves with their plenty. It is not for
temperance, or Christian discipline, but they spare, that they may spare, and
in the possession of their wealth they make themselves slaves, they place them
above themselves, and not beneath themselves; they are not frank and free of
them, but entangled in them; their wealth possesses them, and they do not
possess their wealth; for it is the property of a master to say to his
servants, go, and they go, come, and they come; but here they themselves are
the drudges, while their treasure is safely laid up in their clossets, and
sometimes their minds are as griple, and as much disquieted, as if they did live
in the greatest penury and wants. I have known a man, who had not so little as
twenty thousand pounds of his own getting, besides otherways a very large and
plentiful estate, being no way indebted; yet this man died with the very
thought and perple^itie of his own wants: alas poor man, it should s^^me he
died to sau^cha^ges.

Many men have labored much, What is wealth, or what it is to be rich.
and traveled far, to get wealth; suppose I should accompany them, I should
not think my labor or travel ill spent, if I might but only and barely know
what is wealth: for as yet I could never be resolved what it was to be rich, or
what competent estate were requisite, which might proper^y be called wealth.
For here in the country with us, if a man's stock of a few beasts be his
own, and that he lives out of debt and paies his rent duly and quarterly, we
hold him a very rich and a sufficient man; one that is able to do the King and
the country good service; we make him a Constable, a Sides-man, a
Head-borough, and at length a Churchwarden: thus we raise him by degrees, we
prolong his ambitious hopes, and at last we heap all our honors upon him.
Here is the great governor amongst us, and we wonder that all others do not
respect him accordingly: but it should seem, that since the dissolution of
Abbeys, all wealth is flowne to the towns: the husbandman (...) at a rackt
rent, he fights with distracted forces, and knows not how to raise the price
of the market: only the Tradesman has his Corporation, he can join his wits
and his labors together, and professing the one, he thriues by the other; and
therefore they are not unfitly called Handi-crafts. Now in the next market
town there are great rich men indeed: for I hear it r^orpted, (but I dare not
speak it for a truth) that there are certain Tanners, Chandlers, and other
tradesmen, some worth 50. pounds, some 60. pounds, some a 100. pounds a piece:
this is wonderful, for we cannot possibly conceive, how men, by honest and
direct means, should attain to such sums. Indeed the poor people say, that
one got his wealth by the black art, another found a pot of money in a garden,
which did sometimes belong to a Priorie; and the third grew rich, by burying
many wives, for here are all the possible means, which we can imagine of
enriching our selves.

But now we are in the rode, we have but a few (...) riding; I pray' let us
hasten to London, there is the Mart, Wealth consists only in comparison.
there is the mint; all waters flow from the sea, all waters return to the
sea: there dwell our Landlords, the country se^ds up their provision, the
country must send up their rents to buy their provision: Now here in London,
unless a man's credit be go^d upon the Exchange, to take up five hundred
pounds upon his own bond; and that he be of the Liuerie, and has borne
office in his Company, we do not estee^e him. If an Alderman be worth but
twelve thousand pounds, we pity him for a very poor man, and begin to suspect
and to fear his estate, lest this ouer-hastie aspiring to honor, may break
his back. If a Nobleman have great royalties, and may dispend ten thousand
pounds by the year, yet we hold him no body in respect of the ancient rents
of the Duchy. The Duchy notwithstanding the augmentation, yet is far
inferior to the revenues of the Crown: these Northern kingdoms come short
of the Southern; the Southern Princes are stark beggars, in respect of the
Indian: Whether shall I fly, in the pursuit of wealth? I am now far from
home, and it is not safe for me to travel among Infidels. I will rather thus
conclude in reason, if there be wealth in this world, it is either upon the
face of the earth, or else in the bowels of the earth, like treasure conceald
and safely locked up in natures coffers. I will therefore here stay my self,
and fall flat on the earth; and here I will solemnly proclaim it, that the
whole earth is an indivisible point, and carries no sensible quantity in
respect of the heavens. Thus at length I will return home, not loaded with
oar; but being much pacified in mind, and fully resolved, that all wealth
consists only in comparison. Now if it shall please God, to supply the
necessities of my nature, as he in his mercy already has done, (God make me
thankful unto him) neither do I despair of his providence; I will not
compare my self with others, but deem my self sufficiently rich; and if I
should strive to be rich in comparison, I should never be able to attain mine
own ends.

Lay up these money bags; from wealth I will come unto honor, as others by
wealth come unto honor: The glittering and gingling of gold seems to resemble
honor; which is a pretty noise, a sound, a kind of fame or report: if it want
means to support it, it is like saleable stuff, Honor has a weak foundation.
which at first seems beautiful to the eye, but has no substance to
continue: if any one be raised without merit, he shall be sure to fall again
without desert. As are the minds of men (of a mutable and changeable
condition) so is the foundation of honor weak and changeable; especially in
the multitude, who always judge according to shows and appearance: and as
they are soon gained with a cap, so are they as easily lost with a frown;
their loves follow not the honest ^^tent, but the happy success of the
action. Times and fit occasions give the first beginning to honor, and as it
has a sudden rising, so it proceeds not by degrees, but commonly men do
outliue their good fortunes, and seldom or never do extraordinary honors
mourn at their funerals.

Especially in a subject, living under a Monarchy, gracious with his Prince,
beloved of the people: this double reference to the Prince, to the people,
makes his state dangerous and almost desperate; the one fearing and suspecting
him, the other laying to his charge all the distasteful actions of State: for
this man long to continue, to hold fast with both hands, taking his honor from
above, his love and reputation from beneath, and thus to hang in the air
between heaven and earth, is a work very difficult, almost impossible. When
honor is at the best, The vain ceremonies of Honor.
yet it seems to be nothing, unless it be set forth with ceremonies, with
rich and costly apparel, the Harold^ attending with bannors, scut^heons, and
arms, counterfeit and supposed titles, many Pages, Vshers and officers of
honor appointed; such chaires and clothes of estate, cups of grace served on
the knee, the servants rankt in their order, such strict and precise forms of
salutation; and if all this will not serve, then open and plain flattery, and
all manner of lying and gross cos'ynage. But I pra'y look to their persons,
and you shall find them some old crasie bodies, troubled with gowtes and with
palsies, who take little joy or contentment in all their honor, and would very
willingly exchange it for a little health. Here then I see, that a poor man's
condition is far better then theirs, and much to be preferred before theirs:
little would you think, that men of such account, so much talked of, should be
of such a stature and personage.

Thus it should seem, that the Ceremonial law is no way abolisht, but only
translated from the Temple of the Jews to the palaces of our Nobles. All their
honor consists in shows, and in ceremonies; and therefore we may well fear,
that they have but only the show of honor. The true Honor of Christ.
For there was true honor indeed, which appeared in the baseness of this
world, and imparted honor to the most dishonorable creatures; God and man,
power and weakness, Majesty and humility together subsisting; the homely
manger was a fit subject for the song of Angels; and the most ignominious
cross must be the only sign of victory and triumph: for ^ee wanted no
thrones to set forth his greatness, being all glorious in himself, though
shadowed in the veil of our flesh; he wanted not the help of the creatures,
though otherwise he might have commanded many legions of Angels to attend him;
his honor was in himself, and not in him that ascribed the honor. And
therefore being not able to look up to his Throne, I will here fall down at
his foote-stoole, here I will worship: for I had rather be a doore-keeper in
the house of my God, then to dwell in the Tents of ungodliness. Thus setting
true honor before mine own eyes, I will yet a little further discover the
vanities of our worldly and temporal honor.

Suppose that a stranger, or one unacquainted with these honorable courses,
should be admitted in the time of some great feast, (as the manner is) to see
the fashions and conditions of the place, I pra'y, observe, The feast of honor.
with what state and formalitie their meat is served up, what exquisite
dishes, variety of sauces, how many courses, how well it is ordered, what
banketting stuff, and plenty of sweet meats! The English foul embalmed
with the Indian spice, the delicious Carp swimming in a sea of sweet broth,
the red Dear harbored in a nut-browne coffin, the Phesant only commendable
for her price; here are the creatures (I confess) in abundance. But now, where
is the use of these creatures? See how this honorable Lord sitting in all his
state, calls at length to his Caruer, for the leg of a Lark, or the wing of
a Partridge, and so rests satisfied; complains of his weak stomach, uses
his hot waters, etc. How much are we bound unto God, whose condition though
mean and inferior, yet we have a sufficient plenty of Gods creatures; in
stead of their sauces, we have our hunger and good appetite; and to these
creatures God has given that hidden quality, as that they are fit to nourish
our bodies; a strange wonder in nature, that dead creatures should preserve
life: and having thus both substance and quality, God has given us the free
use of these creatures, that we may take them in full measure with moderation,
while he himself sanctifies both them and us, and gives a blessing to both.

As it is in their feasts, so it is in their funerals; as it is in their lives,
The funerals of honor.
so it is in their deaths: nothing but dumb shows. I never see Sir
Christopher Hattons tomb (because I have named the Gentleman, and that I
desire that all things may be spoken without offense, I will give him his due
praise and commendation; in his time he was a very honorable minded man, no
practicing statesman, first contriuing, and then very wisely discovering his
own plots: but of fair and ingenious conditions, highly favored of his
Prince, and generally beloved of the people; and one to whom the present Church
of England, is as much indebted in true love and thankfulness, as to any lay
subject that ever lived in this kingdom): when I see his tomb, me thinks he
should not be like the ordinary sort of our men, such huge commendations,
such titles, such pillars, such gilding, such caruing, such a huge monument, to
cover so small a body as ours it cannot be. Send for the Mazons, will them to
bring hither their instruments and tools, their mattocks, spades, hammers,
etc. let us pull down this tomb, see his excellency and greatness, let us
take his proportion: But stay your hands, I will save you all that labor, for
I will tell you in brief (if my tale were worth the telling) what you shall
find, a few rotten bones, and a handful of dust; some crawling worms, which
have devoured this great little man, whom we supposed to have bin as great
under ye earth, as we see his monument stately mounted above ground. Is there
deceit and cosonage among the dead? or rather do the living heirs and
suruiuors intend their own glory in the tomb of their ancestors? Well,
howsoever living or dead, man is altogether vanity, deluding the world with
shows; and making great appearance of things, which are small in themselves.

Thus we deceive, and we are deceived, the world is grown old, her ^ight
begins to fail her, she has put on spectacles, and the things of this world
seem far greater, then they are in verity and truth, and greater to us then
they seemed to the ancients. We carry (I confess) a greater gloss and
varnish then they did, The decay of Honor.
but certainly for true honor and nobleness of mind, they did far exceed
us; not descending to those base offices, and pillages, which have been since
practiced; not so wholly intending their own lucre, as now we do. Our honor
seems to add nothing to our carriage, our port or expense; a Lord with his
page, a Knight with his lackie, here is sufficient attendance: pity it were
that a house should stand empty, when a chamber will serve; a set table, and
an ordinary diet were over troublesome, some Tavern or common Ordinary shall
make their provision: to run in debt with the Mercers, and to undo the poor
tradesmen, it is now grown to be the fashion of the times; to carry an high
mind, and yet to stoop low, and to bite at every bait, these are the fruits
of our honor, and herein we dishonor our selves, I reverence true honor,
acknowledging it a thing only proper to man, the special and principal
outward image of God; but (I fear) it is now bleered either with ^pish toys,
(...) counterfeite shows, seeming wholly to rely upon genealogies and
descents, having lost the true ground and foundation in the heart.

I do not doubt, but as there are several kinds of creatures, so in the same
kind there may be a great difference, A due respect unto honor.
for the virtues and good qualities: and therefore as in the earth, there are
mines and veins of ^^^tall, a difference of mould. And as it is most manifest
in all other kinds of dumb creatures; so in the bodies of men, there may be a
difference of blood: fortes cre^^tur fortibus and bonis, not only in regard
that the posterity does naturally affect to follow the steps of their
ancestors; as likewise in regard of Gods promise, who will be a father of his
elect and of their seed; and according to the truth and certainty of his own
nature, will continue his gracious mercies from generation to generation; but
likewise in regard of the natural and inbred qualities, arising from the
temper and consti^^tion of the seed. Thus God intending to take our manhood
upon himself, he made choice of his own stock and family, even the tribe of
I^da, the royal race for his parentage: and this does make much for the
dignity and honor of noble descents; though otherwise we must not herein
presume too far, for the tribes are now confounded, and we are all the sons
of Abraham. The fathers virtues are not always intaild to his seed, the blood
full often is tainted; and Gods mercy in these days is enlarged, making no
difference or acceptance of persons: for the last age brought forth a
butchers son, of as brave and as magnificent a spirit, as if he had been the
son of Caesar.

Having lost the nobleness of our minds, and discovered the counterfeit
shows of our honor; give me leave in the last place, to hunt after our
sports, and our pleasures. For the delights of men, I would gladly know wherein
they consist; if in the actions of sense, or of body, Our pastimes and sports.
take the most pleasing and the most natural actions, and they do always end
with dist^ste and coffeehouse: the beasts are more sensual then man, and
therefore should have a greater measure of sensual delights then man. Now in
our pastimes and games, you shall observe as great labor in them, though
otherwise it pass under the name of an honest recreation or exercise, as you
shall find in the ordinary callings and vocations of men: and as soon you
shall attain to the learning and perfection of their trades, as you shall grow
cun^ing and skillful in these sports. To set aside all other pleasures, I will
only insist in Hawking and Hunting.

Consider (I pray') their great trouble and pains; such violent labor, such
dangerous riding; the high ways cannot always contain them, but over the
hedges and ditches; here begins the cry and the curse of the poor t^nant, who
sits at a hard rent, and sees his corn spoiled; The supposed pleasure in
Hunting.
then immediately follows the renting of garments, the tearing of flesh, the
breaking of legs, the cracking of bones, their lives are not always secured,
and thus they continue the whole day; sometimes thorough storms and tempests,
sometimes enforced to wade thorough rivers and brooks, fasting sweating, and
wearied only with a conceit of their booty (here is excellent sport indeed):
if they were to be hired, they would never undertake such troublesome and
dangerous courses; then it would seem to be a mere slavery, as indeed it
does to their servants and followers, who must attend their Lordships, and
partake with them in their whole sport, but not in any part of their pleasure.
In truth according to right reason, I should prefer the life of a Carrier or
a Post, far before theirs; with what speed do they gallop? I could wish
they would g^ue me leave to ask them one question, wherein consists the sport
and delight in hunting? some say in the noise and cry of the Hounds; others in
their careful curiosity and search in the pursuit; others in the exercise of
their own bodies, and in their hope of the booty. I do not like this variety
of opinions; shall I resolve you this one point? the pleasure which you so
hotly and eagerly pursue in the chase, consists in the fancy and in your own
apprehension; what a vain thing is it to seek for that in the woods, which
indeed consists in your brain? ye carry it about you, and run to overtake
your own shadow. This is a pleasure, because you conceive it so; persuade your
selves alike of any labor or travail, and you shall find a like ease and
contentment. If the world were so persuaded, if it were the course and fashion
of the times, to delight in religious exercises, and in the actions of piety
and devotion, to lift up our hearts and our voices to God in a melodious quier,
to temper our passions according to the sweet harmony of the organ-pipe, to
practice the works of charity; and in stead of the cry of the hounds, to
hearken to the cries, to the blessings and prayers of poor people: assuredly
we should find far greater joy and contentment, (I speak according to the
carnal and natural man, without reference to the inward comfort of Gods
spirit, which is a benefit invaluable) then now we reap in these outrageous,
troublesome, dangerous and bloody sports, which wholly savor of cruelty.

As we are deluded in their sports, so likewise in their persons: I had thought
that Huntsmen and Faulconers had been in the nature of our Heardsmen; but in
truth, they are well mounted and horst, Of Huntsmen.
as if they were appointed for some service of war, all apparelled in green,
like the sons of May; they can talk and discourse of their forest laws, of
state matters, and news at Court; they have their words of Art, their rules,
and certain notions belonging to their profession: and were it not for such
formalitie and ceremonies, the sport would be little respected.

Thus briefly in effect, Beauty is as a fading flower, and serves to incense
lust: Honor increases pride, the height makes greater the downfall: Wealth
breeds carefulnes, deiects the mind, and makes man a slave: Learning tends to
confusion, great wisdom rather breeds a distaste, and a dislike in nature,
then gives any contentment: All pleasures consist in the fancy, according to
man's own apprehension. Now proportion these five several qualities, to the
five several senses of man's body; wisdom to the sent, beauty to the sight,
honor to the ear, wealth to the touch, pleasures to the taste. Suppose a man
to consist of five senses, and to have the full measure of these five several
objects; yet certain it is, that all the joys in the world can give his heart
no true contentment; but the least sorrow and grief deiects the high mind,
and brings down his courage. If thou had wealth, more wealth thou
requirest, and in every action an excess is distasteful; but if in the midst
of all thy joys, the least grief should assault thee; The least sorrow
spoils all our joy.
suppose thou were an absolute Monarch, and had the government of the whole
world; that thou did ride upon the shoulders of men, carried in triumph,
treading upon thy captives and slaves; that thou had all carnal and al
possible pleasures, which nature could afford thee: yet if thy tooth did but
ache, if thy nail were but sore, if thy little finger were scorcht with the
fire, (for I will not speak of those more noble parts, the eye, the heart, the
brain, the liver, and the rest), assuredly thou would judge thy self a
most miserable man, and should take little joy or conten^ment in all those
sports and delights.

Suppose thou could distill all thy pleasures, and free them from sorrow, as
it were separating their dross, so that many whole and entire perfections
should be linckt in thy person; One joy suppres^eth another.
yet observe, how one joy seems to prevent, overtake, and to extinguish the
other. When thou sit at table to meat, then farewell the delight, which
thou tookest in thy morning exercises and sports; now thou must intend to
please thy dainty and delicious palate: at length, for fear of a surfeit,
farewell the sweet sin of gluttony; the afternoon will serve to visit to
thy friends, but as thou come, so there must be a time of departure; as was
thy joy, so must be thy sorrow, the one will easily recompense the other. Upon
thy return thou call to thy stewards and clerks, to see the accounts of
thy house; the overplus and surplusage of thy rents and estate* this indeed
rejoices thy heart, and thus thou passest from joy unto joy, the whole time of
thy pilgrimage. Suppose thou were confinde to any one of these delights, thou
would think thy life but a slavery; so then thy delight consists only in
the variety. Suppose any man's mind were not so straggling, and extrauagant as
thine, but that he could tie himself and limit his own thoughts; certainly
he should receive as much contentment in one, as thou do in many. What does
this argue, but only that man (forsaking the fountain of all true goodness, in
whom all joys are together knit and united, that enjoying him alone, we might
have all fullness of joy and contentment, not by degrees, not in variety, not
in succession, but altogether in every moment of eternity) Man having lost
this only one good, seeks again for the same good, in the shadow thereof,
thorough many chaunges and alterations, and not finding the same good, desires
to please himself with variety?

Suppose the whole day were spent in iolitie and mirth, All joys are nothing
without the nights rest.
yet if thou did but want thy nights rest, al were nothing. Lord, how thine
own thoughts would torment thee! how long and tedious would the time seem!
how often would thou wish and expect the light of the morning! then thou
beginnest to acknowledge, that of all the joys in the world, there is none
comparable to a sweet sleep; sleep, which refreshes the wearisome limbs,
renewes and quickens the faculties of the mind, restores the body to her
wonted strength, (it seems as an excellent embleame of the last resurrection),
for in the day time our sports do proceed with consuming of our spirits, the
decay of our strength, the weakening of our parts; but sleep must recompense
all. Have I wrung out a confession? Now give me leave to work upon it. What is
sleep, but the image of death? a want of sense and of motion, not capable
either of joy or of sorrow. If our greatest contentment rest in our rest, and
sleep be our greatest bliss; then our greatest joy consists in the privation
of all joy, and in the want and absence of delights, consists the perfection of
delights. As-much in effect, as if I should say, it were better to have no
joys at all, then to be fraught and filled with joys; for our joys are but
toys, and the delights of this life are as the dreams of a shadow without
stayednesse, foundation or consistencie.

If there be any joys in the creature, O the wonderful joys of him that
created! The ascent of the mind unto God, by the ladder of the creatures.
he is the fountain of joy, and these are but drops: he is the sun of joy*
and these are the rays, or the beams which he imparts unto nature. If I love
beauty, I will first love him, and fasten mine eyes upon him, that is the
fountain of beauty, and beauty it self: if I love honor or wealth, I will
look upon him, who sits above in majesty, heaven is his throne, the earth is
his footstool, whose treasures are infinite, who makes all things of nothing,
he can enlarge his own Empire, create many infinite worlds for his own
government. He that is proud of his own wealth or his honor, is indeed base
minded, to content himself with so base an element as the earth; our pride and
ambition looks much higher, above the stars, where God sits in perfect
glory; where all the hallowes of heaven are clothed with happiness and honor;
here is the mark and scope of our desires, here we may claim our right by
inheritance: for here we have our part and portion with them; there is but
little joy in the creature, all an infinity to that little joy: and so thou
shall worship God in the creature, let it not hinder our search or our hope,
for it is but an earnest or forerunner of that future joy to secure us of
happiness; non ancillam ament, qui dominam ambiunt, if we come as suitors to the
Mistress, let us scorn to fall in love with the handmaide.

This I speak, supposing there were some joy in the creature, which if there
were any, thy mind might be transported and carried, by the ladder or bridge
of the creatures, to the love of thy creator. For as it pleased God to ordain
a ceremonial law, differing from the natural law, according to the wisdom of
his own institution: so assuredly the mind of man, which delights in nothing
so much as in mysteries, may make whole nature a ceremony, and all the
creatures tipes and resemblances of spiritual things; for thus the land of
promise did figure out the heavenly Jerusalem, and this I cannot dislike in the
practice of any man's private devotion.

But I must call to mind my first intention, which was to prove that the joy of
the creature was only vanity, and this shall appear by these three
circumstances. 1. The variety of men's judgments in the choice of their own
happiness, which certainly proceeds from the fancy; for right reason has but
one only foundation, and God will not admit any difference. 2. This their
conceited or supposed happiness never consists in the present; insomuch that man
can never say unto himself now I am happy: but his happiness is always either
past, gone and already spent, or else coming in expectation; like some desperate
debt, when fair promises serve for our payment. 3. 3. Grounds to prove that
there is no happiness in this world.
Few or none will ever acknowledge themselves to have bin happy, but yet still
are verily persuaded, that there is some happiness, though not in the state and
condition of life, which they themselves do profess: as if there were some
common fame or report of some new wonder, that should be, which indeed never
was; and inquisition being made, for the trial of the truth, every man lays
it to an other man's charge, and no man dares stand to justify it.

He that shall peruse Aristotle's Ethickes, will wonder how it is possible, that
there should be so many several opinions concerning happiness; 1. The variety
of opinions concerning happiness.
when as the end of man, whereunto every man is ordained seems to be that
happiness. And strange it is, that man alone should so much mistake himself in
his own end; and yet Saint Austen sets down a far greater number of different
opinions concerning happiness. To let pass the heathen Philosophers, and to
suffer them to oppose each other* that so being mutually weakened, the Christian
man may with more ease carry the triumph: Consider I pra'y the daily actions of
men, some intend nothing but their pleasures and sports; others their greatness
and honor; some drudge for their wealth, others desire to seem valiant: Many
men whose pride exceedes their wit, will boast of those things in themselves,
which notwithstanding in others they hold very mean, base and contemptible.
If they have no good parts of their own to commend them, then they will boast
of their blood and their parentage; while others flatter themselves with this
conceit, that although they carry no great outward show in the world, nor are
not much regarded, yet their wealth is greater then it is usually taken for,
etc. Some know how to make themselves (...) and trim, and are proud of their
beauty and comlines, and do expect wonders in their marriage: and sometimes
they are proud of their clothes and apparel, and therein they commit a point
of injustice, to seize upon that glory, which belongs to another: for the worm
should brag of his silk as of his own excrement; and the tailor should boast
of his fashions. And some there are, who wanting all these, yet supposing
themselves to have a good natural wit, begin to condemn nature, that has not
proportioned all her gi^ts accordingly. I could be infinite in this kind of
vanity, but Poets and Players daily discover it; and therefore I will ease my
self of that labor.

Suppose we did agree for the quality, what it were to be happy, then let us
search for the person; 2. No man accounts himself happy for the present.
where is this happy man, who might be said for the present to enjoy this
happiness? It is a common proverb, that young men live in their hopes, old
men in their memories; it should seem that young men have not (as yet)
strength to shoot so far as the mark; (for all aim at happiness): and it
should seem that old men shoot beyond the mark; for they can discourse what
they have been with their bows and their arrows, at the siege of Bullen. Thus
young men, and old men, are generally excluded from happiness: and speaking of
young and old, I must needs include the middle age, or the middle sort of men,
as according to our natural course, so according to the course of our misery.
For happiness is the end of man; now if any should attain his own end, or
his own proper place, assuredly he would rest satisfied, and contented
therein. But it is as proper to man, as is the nature of man, to be full of
change and variety; he never rest, but is altering his buildings, changing his
garments, intending new courses; as if he were to find out some new passage, a
shorter cut unto happiness, whereof the ancients were ignorant. Lord, how he
flatters himself with vain hopes! sometimes of himself, sometimes of the
young child in the cradle; if his debts were but paid, he would live very
happily and well; if his mother in law were gone, his estate would be great;
though now he lives in some poverty and want, yet he has an old kinsman that
intends to make him his heir: mundus vult decipi, men desire to be flattered,
and for want of parasites, they will flatter themselves. I have seen the gray
beard, gape after the death of his young nenephew, and to expect the
inheritance for want of issue male to succeed: thus waking we dream, and can
discourse of the shortness of man's life, expect the departure of others, but for
our selves we find little change or alteration in our bodies: we deceive our
selves with our own years, our constitution, or calling to mind the long
lives of some of our parents: others sickned indeed and died by accident,
casualty, and chance, but we will prevent that in our selves.

Thus is the world deluded with hopes, and men go a whoring after their own
inventions; the person is as uncertain as is the quality, for we cannot
resolve what happiness is, nor do we know where to find out that happy man (I
speak only of such a happiness as may be competent and agreeable to our
present condition): 3. Denying happiness in our selves, do suppose it in
others.
for as yet I never hard any man account himself happy, but still something
was wanting, and yet we are well persuaded, that there is some happiness in
nature, and therefore we would charge others to be happy in respect of our
selves; vberior seges est alienis semper in agris, always thy neighbors
ground is better then thine, he is the hapyy man, and thou art the wretch.
Sometimes this preiudicat opinion is not sufficient, and therefore the world is
full of complaints: Princes must erect Courts of request, as if therein men did
seem to accuse their own condition, to lay the whole burden of their grief
upon others, and therefore did fly unto mercy, for succor and relief. If
neither opinions nor complaints will suffice, then in others you shall observe,
a more malicious and treacherous nature; for they are apt to envy and malign
other men's good fortunes, and envy does always accompany greatness: our
corrupted nature seems to stir up a kind of emulation, for all things here
stand in reference to others, the height and greatness of the one, makes for the
baseness and poverty of the other; no prince can subsist without subjects, no
Lord without slaves, no master without servants; the one is apt to wrong and
oppress, the other to envy and revolt, and in both you shall discern natures
corruption.

Still we desire to comfort our selves that there is some happiness, that so we
might receive joy though not in the present possession, yet in the hope or
expectation. And to this end, see the cunning and subtle ^ua^^on of this
world, ante obitum nemo supremaque funera foelix. Happiness it should seem is
buried, no man is happy before his death: as if a man should then account him
self happy, when he is past his account, and lies in the grave, (I speak
according to the natural man); and this procrastination of happiness, I suppose
to be an absolute denial of happiness, for indeed nature cannot supply it. And
this appears, not only in the several persons of men, who^ you may tax with
affections, and who might mistake in their ends; but consider whole mankind,
and you shall observe, yt some nations think other nations to be happy, in
respect of themselves: stocks, families and kindreds do the like, and
generally all the states of men, seeing no just cause in themselves, wherein
they might glory, begin to commend and desire an other state and condition of
life, Every man d^slikes his own state of life.
nemo sua sort contentus. The Merchant commends the life of a scholar, a
scholar desiring some practical employments in his speculatiue studies,
desires the life of a soldier; the soldier crie^, dulce bellum in expertis,
and he desires the lawyers gown, and that his combat might only consist in
words, and his quarrel be tried at the bar. T^us we find a dislike in our
own, and suppose some contentment in theirs; like sick men, who sometimes
turn on the one side, sometimes on the other; now in the cha^^e* then in the
bed, straight in this room, immediately in that room, seeking ease and rest,
but fail in their purposes.

Seeing we are thus well persuaded of other men's states and courses of life,
(though otherwise we are in some dislike with our own), I cannot sufficiently
discharge mine own duty and conscience, unless I shall speak of those
miseries, which are proper and peculiar to every state in particular. Miseries
in all the states of men.
As I hope I shall not prouok whole mankind against me, when I discover their
fall and corruption; so (without exception) I may speak of the vices and
miseries of each state in particular. For it is proper to misery, to groan;
proper to sin, for to cry for vengeance; neither misery nor sin can long be
concealed: and it is our greatest misery, that we think it a shame and a
disparagement to our selves to have them discovered. We are not ashamed of the
corruption, but that it should be made manifest, here is our grief; whereas
the first degree to the cure, is the right knowledge of the disease.

Heaven and earth standing in opposition to each other, the deeper you sink in
the one, the more remote you are from the other. Suppose these worldly joys to
be the shadows of true joys, (as indeed they are no more then the shadows),
if I set the shadow before me, then the light is behind me; if the light be
before me, the shadow is behind me; respecting the one, I neglect the other:
the love of heaven and of earth cannot together subsist, The love of heaven and
earth cannot together subsist.
no man can serve two masters. The shadow of the earth causes the eclipse of
the Moon; and the Moon very fitly resembles the state of man, as being the
lowest of the celestial Orbs, and in regard of her mutable and changeable
condition. If I desire to prepare man for a heavenly bliss, needs I must
first weane him from the moderate love of his own flesh, laying open the
miseries which are incident to whole mankind, from which no state is exempted;
herein I shall follow the example of God himself, who mixeth all our joys
with the spice of sorrow: and in the last clause of our lives before our death,
(desiring then especially to draw us to himself), his providence has so
appointed, that long diseases should better instruct us of the true state of
this world, then all our experience in the whole course of this world. Then we
see our weakness, our miseries, and what we are in our selves; then we see the
vanity of all our worldly joys, that so detesting and abhorring them,
(esteeming them no otherwise then indeed they are), our whole comfort might
reside in the only hope of his mercy, and we be as willing to forsake this
world, as ever we were to enjoy it.

Thus necessity may seem to enforce me, that I leave nothing unsearched, where
happiness might be concealed or hid; consider likewise the principal intent of
this Treatise, for I did propose unto my self four things in this second
part. 1. The author proposed four things to himself in this second part.
That in discovering our miseries, both in our selves and in respect of the
creatures, we might truly confess them to be the punishments of sin. 2. That
our miseries being once discovered, and we our selves being truly acquainted
with the state of our nature, we might take some dislike and distaste in
nature; whereby from the depth of our sorrow, we might have safe refuge to the
depth of Gods mercy. 3. Least there should be any obstacle in the way to
hinder our approach unto God, I thought fit, to set our own tents and
Tabernacles on fire, to make our homebred joys and delights vanish in smoke:
for they are but vanities, such as should not with^hold us from the pursuit of
our happiness. 4. That being touched with the miseries, and no way puffed up
with the vanities, we might acknowledge God in both, expecting a time of
liberty and freedom; when God shall wipe away the tears from our eyes, and
according to his mercy, in stead of this shadow, shall impart the truth of his
happiness.

Intending to speak of the s^u^r^ll states of men, to search where I might
find out true ^oy and contentment in nature, I must confess, that as in all
other things, so here especially I shall be most defective; least an offense
should be taken where an offense is not given. God forbid, that I should so far
wrong mine own soul, The particular miseries of man, are greater then the
general.
and mine own conscience, as that I should justly offend the least of my
brethren: though true it is, that sore backs must not be touched; yet if I
shall intend the cure, needs I must lance the impostume. Suppose I should
speak of their miseries, with great diligence and good observation; yet
certain it is, that as the actual sin of every man in particular, is much
more grievous then his original: so assuredly the judgments, which befall
every private man in particular, are much greater then these, which are incident
to the whole nature in general. And of these particular punishments, I cannot
take any due knowledge, but must leave them tanquam terram remotam incognitam,
to be searched out by the godly and daily meditation of every religious and
devout man; who in the clause and latter end of the day, calling himself to
the account of his forepassed life, together with the actions of that present
day, shall therein find the undoubted fruit o^ Gods justice; and if our sins
have past without remorse of conscience, then this examination (wherein we call
our selves to account) shall serve as a sufficient occasion, to stir us up to
repentance and sorrow, vna cum nube testi^^^* with a cloud of witnesses, all
our distilling tears, all our sobs and our sighs confessing our sins.

For the common sort of men, I might well reckon them among beasts, vulgus
hominum, inter vulgus animalium, The poorer sort of men.
they are always carried with shows and never apprehend ye truth, their
delights are al beastly, they seem not to have the least spark of a spirit;
this common sort is likewise the poorest sort, so that generally man is very
needy and poor, though otherwise he is ashamed of his poverty; and seeing that
man requires more helps, then the rest of the creatures, as clothes for his
nakedness, physic for his health, a house for his habitation, therefore the
wants of men are far greater then the wants of the creatures. For I have often
seen and observed in the streets, an old blind decrepit man full of sores,
and inward grief; hungry, naked, cold, comfortless and harbourlesse, without
patience to sustain his grief, without any help to releive him, without any
counsel to comfort him, without fear of Gods justice, without hope of Gods
mercy, which as at all times, so most especially in such distress should be
the sole comfort of a christian man. I protest before God that were it not, for
the hope of my happiness, and that I did truly believe the miseries of this
life, to be the just punishments of sin, I should much prefer the condition
of dumb creatures, before the state of man.

For the better sort of men (for so the world accounts them) I mean the rich
men of this world, if borne to great fortunes, then they never understand their
own happiness, for contraries are best known by their contraries; The better
sort of men.
they are right miserable men, because they never tasted of misery, they know
not plenty, because they know not penury. Lands of our own purchase, houses of
our own building, are always best pleasing unto us; what has descended by
inheritance, vix ea nostra voco: as we know not the pains in the getting, so
commonly we do not taste the sweetness in the enjoying; if otherwise from
base and mean condition they be raised, they shall find it a great difficulty
with the change of their fortunes, to change their own minds, and to forget
their first selves; they shall hardly learn the art of magnificence. And
generally in the rich men of this world, when I consider the largenes of their
means, how it serves to many of them, as fuel to their luxury and riot,
insomuch that they do not number half their days, but in the middle course
of their age, they are tormented with coughes, with aches, with gouts, with
dropsies and stones; and that which I have observed in some of them, the
greatness of their estate entaild and descending upon them, cannot
counteruaile some hereditary disease, which they likewise receive from their
parents: in truth I do not envy their estate, for I am verily persuaded, that
there may be as much contentme^t and happiness in the poorest cottage, as in
the greatest palace. But I will descend more particularly to the states of
men, only insisting in the more noble professions of men, which seem to be the
happy callings here upon earth, and wherein they place their happiness, I will
show their misery.

Iudicium incipiat a domo Dei, I should first begin with the house of God; but
I pray' pardon me, if I forbear to speak of the grieuances and complaints of
the Clergy: The Clergy.
they are many, in stead of the ancient privileges, and liberties of the
Church, which seem to be grounded in nature, in regard of the high excellency
of their profession, and therefore have bin practiced among all nations, but
principally expressed in the Leuiticall law; and so translated from the
Synagogue to the Church, observed in all ancient times, in the Primitive age.
It were to be wished that they had but the common liberty of subjects; for all
others, they have their voices and suffrages in making their own laws* the
husbandmen in the choice of their Knights; the Tradesmen in the choice of
their Burgesses; it were to be wished that the Clergy were not wholly excluded;
being indeed more subject to penal laws, then any other state in the kingdom.

Pannormitan says* Laici semper sunt infensi clericis; it should seem, that
together with the head, the members are crucified* crucified not always in
blood, but with shame and with contempt; while soldiers cast lots for our
garments, the revenues of the Church made a prey for the infidel: yet I do
not doubt of Gods mercy, but they shall receive the full benefit of our
labors, notwithstanding they hate our persons, and despise our profession; for
so we our selves have justly deserved. Their comfort.
Do they contemn us? God forbid, but we should more contemn our selves, for
we preach and profess mortification; dust we are, and therefore fit to be
trodden on, to sustain all injuries and wrongs; dust we are, and therefore fit
to be scattered with every wind, subject to the blastes and reproaches of
every foul mouth. But least our enemies should herein rejoice; let them know,
that it is a part of our duty, to despise their despite, to neglect their
neglect, to contemn their contempt. And therefore here is our comfort, (a
comfort only proper and peculiar to priesthood), though we are encompassed with
thorns, yet we can so wind and twist these thorns, as that we can make them
a crown of thorns; we can extract an oil of gladness and joy, out of the
midst of affliction and sorrow: if thorns tend to our pain, yet our glory
shall consist in a crown, in a crown of thorns: I will now come to the
gentry, which is generally reputed, as one of the happy states in the
kingdom.

A strange judgment has lately befallen them; while they continued in their
own countries, kept great houses, The Gentry.
much hospitality, attended on with troops and numbers of servants, their
tenants living happily under their shadow, certainly they lived in great honor
and plenty. But now, since they have so much improued their estates, ra'ckt
their poor tenants, given over housekeeping, and live retiredlie, scarce any
of them, that live within the compass of their own means; but every man
outstrips his own fortunes, carrying a sail too great for the burden of his
vessel; in so much that foreign nations do justly wonder at the dissolute
gentry of England.

The truth is, that this retired life of the gentry; draws with it far
greater charge and expense, then was formerly spent in hospitallity: not only
because it gives occasion, Their miseries.
to their dissolute gaming, and riot: but many houses being kept, for the
several seasons of the year, prove very chargeable; the furniture belonging
to the house, never so curious and exquisit; such cubbords of plate, such
hangings, cushions, and needleworke; the apparel so costly and chargeable, the
diet so delicat, as rejecting meat of the shambles, and feeding on outlandish
fruits, spices, and wines: all their other attempts seasoned with vain glory,
and a fond opinion of their own reputation and honor; together with an
affectation of titles, prove the more chargeable: in so much, that the fourth
part of that charge, being spent in home-bread and country provision, would in
a far more ample manner suffice. And surely it would be more agreeable to our
nature, for if these outlandish commodities had bin so befitting our bodies,
certainly God in his wisdom and providence, would have disposed our climat
accordingly; what a madness or folly were it in us, to seek to equal other
nations in their own wa^es? We must conform our selves to the soil, and not
think to reduce nature to our wills and appetites: or if in the times of war,
when force, violence, and bloodshed served for the payment, some might have
their commodities in a more plentiful manner; yet in peaceable times, when
things are bought at a valuable price, and wares exchanged for wares, there
being such a difference in the valuation of both, it seems to be intolerable.
The ancient glory of England did consist in the strength of our Country, in
the multitudes of our servants, and in the most abounding and plentiful
provision; and herein we do as far exceed them, as they do us, in their
silks, their spices, their oils, or their wines.

A second vanity in our Gentry, is, their needless and unprofitable
buildings, especially when Citizens turn Gentlemen, Their needless buildings.
they will not endure any longer to be incaged within their own shops; they
must have full elbow-roome, and their buildings must raise their names, and
continue their memories, being (as it should seem) otherwise somewhat mean
and obscure in themselves. Thus they build great houses, and keep small
houses; which seems to imply a contradiction, were there not an inside, and an
outside; for an house does not only consist of walls and foundations. And
sometimes they build, when they cannot keep, and commonly they are overtaken
with their own buildings; the imperfect work standing at a stay, for want of
money to pay the workmen; while the neighbors, and passengers smile at their
indiscretion and improuidence. But suppose these buildings were finished,
whereas the delight should consist in the use, it falls out far otherwise;
and argues rather a giddie mind, desiring employment, together with a dream
of joy, conceived in the imagination, then any sufficient means to give them
contentment: for seldom or never do they enjoy their own labors, but either
tenants suffer them forthwith to decay, or else their charge is continued
(being absent) in maintaining their buildings. The unthrifty and prodigal
heir is sooner allured to the sale; and in his sale, has seldom relation to
their charge in the building.

In their estate of land, how exceedingly do they perplexe themselves with
their continual purchases? if they could but procure a more competent demaine,
they would rest satisfied: when they have gotten this demaine, yet still there
will remain a desire to purchase all that lies in one leauell, all that holds
by one tenure, Their fond purchases.
they must enlarge their parkes. And being by these means always bare and
needy, wanting for the present, (though otherwise they may inte^d the plenty
and good of their posterity), they must strain themselves to take up money
upon hard terms, to purchase their neighbors ground, for there is but a hedge
that parts it. Assuredly, unless we shall first enclose our own thoughts,
and hedge up our wills, and our appetites, the whole earth can give us little
contentment; the triangle heart cannot be filled up and replenished with the
circular earth.

Not only in their continual purchases, but likewise in their present
possessions, how are they troubled and disquieted in thoughts? For as the mind
of man is griple and needy, Their many writings.
and therefore desires to enlarge his own substance: so is the same mind
doubtful, suspicious, and fearful of any ill accident; and therefore desires
by all possible means, to secure her self of her own. And hence it is, that
they so exceedingly entangle and inueagle themselves, with many writings, and
conueyances, the Scriueners and Clerks are always employed; and yet the truth
is, that in stead of securing themselves, through the multiplicity of writings,
they cause starting holes, and give occasion of strife. O happy was the old
world! when all things past by word of mouth, or else a few lines subscribed
with the mark of a cross, and the seal of a tooth did suffice: when in these
days (I am verily persuaded) that, what with writings, conueyances, bills of
Chancery, proceedings of Court, the whole land (which we inhabit) might be
spread over and covered, as with a garment; yet all will not serve for our
security.

In their conueyances observe how curious they are, the possession is given to
one, to the use of another; the reuersion to a third, in the behalf of a
fourth; with such nice clauses and conditions, Their nice conueiances.
so many prouisoes, such feoffees of trust; that if a boy, or a Sophister in
Cambridge should propose such notions and ends to himself, we should presently
condemn them, as being the fruits of an idle brain: for speculations must not
always be reduced to practice; things cannot so well square outwardly in the
actions, as they do inwardly in the thoughts. Strange it is to separate the
use from the thing; as if you would suppose a fruit without a root: the
creatures are ordained only for our use, and more we cannot partake of them
then the use; so that it is a fallacy in nature, to distinguish one from the
other. Again, whole nature is corrupted; the more you entangle your self, the
more you shall find the corruption; the more feoffees of trust, always the
worser dealing; the more executors, the slower execution. Let your yea, be yea,
and your nay, nay; nature contents her self with the fewest instruments, and
works by the easiest and plainest manner; and this should be a president for
their practice.

Lastly, how do they trouble and busy themselves with entailes? as if they
would alter the state and condition of this world; which being a world of
change and alteration, ex generatione vnius, fit corruption alterius: They lay
deep foundations, and desire a settled state of continuance and perpetuity
here upon earth; but it is already resolved, that it is easier to dissolve,
then to co^pose. Their needless entailes.
Nothing can be done by law, which by the same law cannot be dissolved: and
thus their intailes are either needless, or indeed do cause and stir up
such fears and ielousies between kinsmen and brethren, as that they prove to
be the only causes, both of the breach of their love, and of the sale of their
inheritance. As for example, the least action of the younger brother, sometimes
his absence, or supposed neglect, is taken so unkindly, as it is thought to be
done in regard of the intaile; but (says the eldest brother) it lies in my
power to cut that short. These words are carried to the younger; here begins
the practice of servants, and other kinsmen, who hope to gain by his loss.
Words multiplying, give way to distasteful actions; first, the wasting of
woods, the impouerishing of the grounds, decay of the buildings; at length it
breaks forth to the cutting off of the intaile: though it be chargeable in the
doing, yet he will not forbear it. Thus the intaile cannot secure it from
selling, but makes the sale the more chargeable. And thus God laughs at the
counsels of men, who desiring to erect a tower of Babel here upon earth, God
confounds their tongues, and brings their work to confusion.

The best kind of intaile is, to have his goods honestly gotten; to bring up
his children in Gods fear; The best entaile.
not to acquaint them with any wastfull course of expense; to leave a good
report behind him, the good wishes, and furtherance of all his bordering
neighbors, and kinsmen; to leave his estate not entangled, nor to ouer-trouble
himself with these new and strange conueiances; to leave it to the sole
protection and providence of God; Domini est terra and plenitudo eius: Lord I
give thee humble thanks for mine own use and employment; and if my sons,
according to the flesh, shall not succeed me; then let thy sons, according
to the spirit, be heirs of thy promised land, etc.

Me thinks I see our Lawyers hold fast to the gentry; and therefore I must
speak of them in the next place. If the earth it self were stable and
constant, The Lawyers.
assuredly they have laid a very strong and sure foundation. For as long as
hedges and Cottages endure; so long seis^^es, tenures, and trespasses shall
continue. But here is the misery, lex terrae simul cum terra ruet: at the
general earthquake and dissolution of this world, when all hedges and
Cottages shall fall, then where shall we sue for a trespass?

Notwithstanding that I am verily persuaded, that they are as just, as upright,
as free from briberie and extortion, Their slanders.
and every way as sufficient and painful in their own profession, as any
other state in the kingdom. For generally I can excuse none, (we must not
expect a state of innocence in a world of corruption) yet assuredly, no state
is more envied, or maligned, then theirs: which I cannot altogether ascribe to
the corruption, and ill disposition of others, but even their profession it
self seems (in some sort) to produce it. As God speaks, Vae Assure virgae
furocis mei: the instruments of justice, are always fearful, but seldom do
stir up true love, and affection. This envy and hate to their persons, has
raised up many malicious slanders, and has laid many false imputations upon
the profession. For thus it has been the complaint of all ages, leges esse
telas aranearum, vel quia iuridici sunt araneae, vel quia muscas capiunt, and
vespas dimittunt. But I am not of their mind; for I think, that God in his
providence has so fitly ordained it, as prophesying, or prescribing a lesson;
that the timber in Westminster Hall, should neither admit cobweb, nor spider:
and God make us thankful for the free course of our justice.

God forbid that other men's reproaches and slanders should make them miserable.
Envy may follow, but shall never be able to suppress, or to overtake the
virtuous and innocent. Then let us consider them in themselves, Their harsh
study.
in their persons, and in their profession. The nicities and subtilties of Law,
as they do infinitely exceed for number; so they come near, even for the
difficulty of knowledge, to the highest and profoundest mysteries of our
Christian faith, and religion. The study it self is very difficult and harsh;
for the actions of men, together with the circumstances, being both infinite,
needs the course of their studies must likewise be infinite. And as the ^^ions
of men are voluntary, casual, and on the one side ^^oceed from an error; so
this infinite course of their studies, can never admit a right order or method,
which in all our natural knowledge, gives us the greatest ease and
contentment: but here, only the method of time, according to the variety of
accidents, as things have fallen out, as cases have been adjudged, so their
books of reports must serve to inform them. Sometimes again, the judgments of
those great Sages do much differ; and the Law does altar and vary, as it were
ebbing and flowing, according to the condition of the times and the seasons:
notwithstanding the root and foundation still continue the same in the heart.
Whereas nature can admit no such variety, but is the same from her first
infancy and institution; and therefore our natural knowledge, our
Philosophy, has descended to us, through a continual succession of all ages,
without impeachment or contradiction.

Their practice may truly be called practice, and nothing but practice; for no
state of life is so troublesome and laborious as theirs: Their troublesome
practice.
such days of essoyne, such days of appearance; so many writs, so many
actions, so many offices, so many courts, so many motions; such judgments,
such orders, that I protest before God, if there were such trouble in
purchasing heaven, and procuring my eternal happiness, as there is sometimes
in the recovering but of a rood of ground, I should half despair to attain
it. What throngs and multitudes of Clients daily attend them? I commend the
wisdom of our forefathers, who close by the hall, erected a Church, where
they might take the open air, and find it as empty, as they left the other
peopled, and furnished. How are they continually busied? I could heartily wish
that there were more minutes in the hour, more hours in the day, more days
in the week, more weeks in the year, more years in their age, that at length
they might find out some spare time to serve God, to intend the actions of
nature, to take their own ease and recreation. For now they are over busied in
their brickes, and their straw, to lay the foundation of their own names and
gentility; that teaching other men their land-markes and bounds, they may
likewise intend their own private enclosures. Welfare the Scholars
contentme^t, who if he enjoy nothing else, yet surely he does enjoy himself;
valuing himself above the price of the whole world: and therein consists the
greatness of his wealth, using the turbulent waves of his own passions, and
the sweet calm of his intellectual faculties, not distracted with any
wandering employments, besides himself.

Before I can be dismissed the Court, I pra'y give me leave to make one motion
to the Judges. When they ride to their Assizes, all the whole country attends
them, (for they bear the Kings person): the Sheriffs, the vnder-Sheriffes,
The Judges.
Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs; all must wait upon them, with Halbards,
Pikes, Bills, while all the people stand gazing, and beholding them. As Soon
as the great Assizes are ended, and their Lordships gone and departed, then all
this goodly retinue does presently attend the condemned prisoners, to guard
them, and to see the execution. When I viewed and considered this, me thought,
the Judges were either like the condemned prisoners, or the prisoners like
them; for both are attended alike, we gaze and look upon both, and both are
alike carried to the place of execution. The Judges (I confess) have somewhat
the greater distance, and this distance is the sole difference; for certainly
they are carried, the further they go, the nearer they approach to the place of
execution: notwithstanding they ride in their circuits, yet they shall come to
a period. In every great vacation, some of them drop, and here the Judges like
condemned men, are now brought to the place of execution; they that can give
life to others, in sparing their lives, cannot add a days respite to their
own: Judges they are, and yet like poor delinquents, they shall stand at Gods
bar, where no appeal shall be allowed them, and therein their condition is
no more then equal to ours.

From the suburbs, where I will leave the Lawyers, let us come to the rich
Citizens: If now they live in plenty and wealth, it is well known that (in
their younger years) their wealth has been gotten by sparing, thriftinesse
and wants; The Citizens.
if they please to cast up accounts, they shall find themselves so much
indebted to themselves, as that besides the interest, they shall hardly be
able to make restitution for the principal. Now that their stomachs begin to
fail them, no marvel if they be served up with full dishes, and a
plentiful table; for if they would suppose the meat to be painted, it would
as well suffice their appetites. Now that they are troubled with gowtes, with
palsies, and the weakness of old age, they begin to keep a stable well
furnished with horses, as if they were to grow young again, and did intend to
become horsemen or ti^ters; they conceive as much joy to see their servants use
them, as if their own crasie bodies were thereby exercised.

In telling over great sums of money our fingers grow black: as yet I never
knew any man, that by his husbandry and honest manual labor could ever
attain to an Aldermans wealth. The Citizens know how to estimate the laying out
of their money, their freedom and trade, their skill in buying and selling,
playing upon advantage with other men's ignorance, and to undervalue poor men's
labors: yet they must not take it unkindly, if sometimes their Charters be
called in question; for the Church has lost al her privileges, Their wealth.
which certainly were grounded upon a far greater right. Neither will I
examine, whether Companies and Corporations be prejudicial to a public
state; sure I am, that such societies of men never made laws or orders amongst
themselves, prejudicial to themselves. God send that the secrets and mysteries
of trades, (whereof I am wholly ignorant, and which are best known to
themselves), may well stand with upright and just dealing. Indeed being once
made Magistrates, then they begin to look unto measures, and weights; and
therein we commend their justice, and do well hope, and do heartily wish,
that their own wealth had been gotten with like measure. But if by engrossing
of wares, and monopolizing of commodities, they have exceedingly enriched
themselves, let them not think with a small sum of money, bestowed upon
Hospitals, to make restitution; for the punishment must always be answerable
to the offense.

Their dainty living makes them the more tender; being well fed, and warmely
clothed, yet they cannot prevent all unseasonable weather; and therefore
sometimes they are overtaken, Their miseries.
they sicken and dye, with a little wet, or a small cold: according to the
fashion of the old world, every man ought to accustom himself to endure some
hardness. The greatness of their wealth is not always for the safety of their
persons; sometimes it serves to stir up ielousies and fears; full often have
I seen it scattered by heirs and executors. I commend their wisdom in
getting of wealth, if it be by honest and just means; but I do not commend
many of their judgments, who know not, that the happiness of wealth consists
in the use. Or rather I will prove charitable, to think them very just in all
their dealings; just (I say) if not to all others, yet to themselves: for
knowing that they deserve little, they desire to bestow little upon themselves,
but to leave it to others, who happily may better deserve it. And as it is
gotten, so it is spent; we must pass our inheritance with the same right and
title, wherewith it was purchased: if it were gotten with dishonestie,
assuredly it will be spent with dishonestie, res transit cum suo onere. When
all their whole life is past, me thinks it is like one of their shows,
wherein Pageants are gazed upon in the day time, and in the night are
dissolved; the day following some little remnant is hung up in their Halles,
and the rest passes away like a shadow, without any further mention or memory.

Suppose me to be a wandering pilgrim now in the state of the way, directing my
course unto happiness. I should lose my self in these thickers and groves,
and should prove very tedious to ye reader, He recals himself.
unless I should have often recourse to my Card, consider my first intended
scope, and give an account of my travel. Hitherto I have made a diligent
search, where in this world I might find out contentment, and happiness; or
where any true joy might seem to inhabit. First I began with the Church,
where I found nothing but ruins, all in decay, spoiled of her substance. From
thence I went to the fruitful and pleasant soiles, where I found that the
Gentry were likewise very miserable in their own kind. At length I made bold
to speak of the Law, as if I had been served up with a Process, to appear at
the bar, where I found no rest, no peace, no contentment. Then I went to the
City walls, where in every street, I made inquiry for happiness, at what
sign this happiness might dwell, in what trade, course and condition of life.
And receiving no manner of satisfaction, yet hearing much talk and news of
the Court, and of the greatness of our Nobles, I will presume to go, and knock
at the Court gates, there to enquire, whether true joy and happiness be a
follower and attendant of theirs; to what stock or family, to what state or
faction, she is chained and united; whether she keeps her certain lodging, or
sometimes undertakes a progress; yet still resides, and is conversant with
them, or at least with some of them, as the favor and fortune of the times
shall best serve for their greatness.

When I look up to the Nobles, they seem at first sight, to be like stars
in the firmament, all clothed with happiness and honor; but when I come
nearer, The Nobles.
I see that no state of men is so dangerous. Some of the^ in their own proud
and ambitiou^ desires, preventing and supplanting each other; in so much that
in stead of noble blood, they seem to consist of quicke-siluer, or some spirit
of blood: either they must build castles in the air, or else they will pull
down upon their own heads the tower of confusion: they know not the state of
consistencie, that things may exceed as well in their greatness and growth, as
in their smalnes and diminution. Look to the framing and constitution of man's
body, all other parts, excepting the head, must have their fellows and their
associates in like proportion with themselves; feet, legs, thighs, arms,
ribs, al of them have others equal to themselves: to exceed and to swell up,
were as great a deformity and as dangerous, as to pine and to be diminished;
they must all of them keep the same proportion, and all come under the head, by
the length of a whole neck.

Be their estate never so great, their revenues never so large, yet still
their charge and expense seems to balance them, if not to exceed them: and
all things deducted, little remains; which in effect is as much, as if I had
little substance, Their miseries.
and less use and employment for my little substance. The last age has much
eclipsed their greatness, reducing as all waters to one fountain, all light to
one Sun, so all power and obedience to one stock, observing an equality of
justice to all the several members under one head: for you shall observe, that
the great offices of the kingdom have failed, whose power did seem to exceed
the fit and due bounds of subjection. The highest titles of dignity and honor
have failed: for as in the natural body, so in the political body, there
should be a certain distance between the head and the members; yet still they
continue the spectacles of the world, and sometimes (to their great charge)
they purchase the love of the people, which they shall find, if not dangerous,
yet fruitless and wholly unprofitable. But most commonly they are subject to
hate, and therefore servants must be appointed, as to carry up their trains
behind them, so to support their hate, that they themselves might be secured
from fear, and that the least aspersion of words might not touch their honors.
And sometimes these servants though innocent in themselves, and very well
deserving, (but Lords must not be over much indebted for great services) they
must be made a public example of justice; for thus it falls out with nobles,
even from the time of their infancy, being taught and instructed by their
schoolemasters; others whom they love, shall smart and be corrected for their
negligence.

From nobles, I must ascend by degrees unto Princes, and if there were any true
joy in the creature, I do suppose it would be found in their persons: for so
the world esteems them happy and great. And no marvel, for they bear the
person of us all, and therefore great reason, that as we receive from them our
plenty, our peace, and our happiness; so we should again return and restore
unto them with due thankfulness, Princes.
as part of our plenty in our subsidies, our labors and services in performing
our homage, to recompense their care and watchfulnes: so likewise part of our
happiness (for nothing should be excluded from the royal prerogative). And
thus we should conceive, that as the princely estate contains all other
states of men within the Sphere of his government; so it should pa^^ake in a
large measure all their happiness. And as it is the highest estate here upon
earth, so it should most freely escape from these earthly contagions; while the
whole burden and weight of the miseries do fall and light upon others. And
thus in their persons, I might consider all the happiness, which is incident
to whole mankind: not presuming to speak of Gods anointed, without due
reverence, I will briefly touch their miseries.

First for their persons, notwithstanding their continual intelligence, their
watchfulnes and care for the security of their own persons and states: Their
danger.
yet certainly the poor man in his homely cottage lives with far greater
safety, and sometimes with much more contentment, then they do in their royal
palaces. They have a guard I confess, many servants and officers appointed
for defense of themselves: but here is the mischief, quis custodiet ipsos
custodes, who shall guard them from their own guard? or who knows, whether
their servants receive any pensions from their enemies? As they sit highest,
and in the greatest view and appearance, so they serve as the fairest marks to
be aimed at. And therefore in regard of the eminency of their estate, and the
greatness of their personage, amiddest the throng and multitudes of dangers
and perils, many things may be allowed and tolerated in them, for securing
themselves, which to a man of a private condition were mere injustice, wrong
and oppression. Suppose the imprisonment or punishment of any one of his
subjects, by way of prevention or caution to an ensuing mischief: this is
tolerable I confess, but herein I fear, least many Princes have exceeded the
bounds of honesty, and justice. Yet I may speak it to Gods glory and to our
own comfort, the days here in England were never so free from fear and
suspicion, as they are at this present, under the happy government of our most
gracious King James: who herein seems to excel all other princes, that so
great learning and such a deep understanding, should be accompanied with such
a harmeles and innocent disposition. And this serves for his best shield of
defense, against all foreign invasions, or homebred conspiracies: God make us
thankful for these blessings, and long preserve his reign over us, etc.

In the times of their wars, the common practice and desire of Princes is, to
ad kingdoms to kingdoms; which if they should effect, In their wars.
with much bloodshed and slaughter of their people, yet therein they should not
any way increase their own wealth; they should not strengthen their power, but
should fight with distracted forces, and make themselves less secure of their
own: imperia mole ruunt sua, kingdoms must have their bounds, and I hope (by
Gods grace) I shall see the Turkish Empire fall with his own weight. Again in
peaceable times, In peace.
and at their own homes, as all men desire to observe and to please them; so
sometimes they desire as much, and shall find it a work of far greater
difficulty, to give contentment to the whole commons in general, as their
subjects do to them in particular: and here is some part of requital, some
kind of recompense, as all to one, so one to all.

If their happiness consists in their government and rule, for in all other
things their servants do share with them, in their diet, their garments, their
gardens, their palaces, their pleasures: yet all men have not the like
practical disposition to delight in government; Wherein their happiness
consists.
sometimes it is committed to others; and there may be an angelical
contemplation, full of sweet comfort, without this worldly and troublesome
employment: The last Roman Emperor was more addicted to his private studies,
then to the managing of his own public state. But suppose, that as Princes
are the fountains of power, and cannot bereave themselves of their power, nor
cannot impart an independent power unto others, they should therefore take the
sole government into their own hands; yet sometimes (through a tractable and
good nature) they are easily entreated, I will not say ouer-ruled, (which is
the same in effect) by others; especially considering, that it cannot stand
with their own greatness, to search all things themselves, and therefore they
must of necessity borrow their information from others: now here is an
excellent point of wisdom, when under color of advise and good counsel,
wherein they shall have thanks for their labor, and rewards for their good
service; their servants shall so cunningly overrule an action, as that they
may work their own ends.

No marvel, if Princes be very tender in the point of their prerogative; which
indeed is so necessary, and so essential to government, as that without it,
government cannot subsist: and therefore it were high presumption to examine
this prerogative; Their Prerogative.
for as it is in the government of nature, so should it be in man's government.
God indeed has prescribed certain bounds to the creatures, datur maximu^ and
minimum in vnoquoque genere; but what these bounds should be, for the just
measure and limitation, we are wholly ignorant: there are giants, there are
dwarffs, the Ocean sometimes incroacheth upon the land, and sometimes the land
wins ground of the Ocean. And thus it is in man's government, there are arcana
imperij, certain hidden secrets of state, which ought not to be discussed or
expostulated: to prescribe a limitation of power, would argue a kind of
subjection in a free Monarch. If ever question be made of their power, I will
fall down on my knees, and desire God to prevent the first occasion; that
Princes in their government, may intend Gods glory, the good of his Church, the
comfort of his people; and that subjects knowing whose power and authority they
have, may worship God in the Magistrate, with all humility and obedience. For
if the parts should oppose themselves to the head, if the hand or the foot
should contend with the eye, what a miserable distraction should you find in
the whole man? Government should rather tend to unity, then be an occasion of
strife and disagreement: let all parts rather strive to gain each other, and
to prevent each other with mutual kind offices of love, then contending with
needless questions, to disquiet themselves before any just cause be offered.

I say, not to examine the prerogative of Princes, or to what laws they are
subject; for I will easily yield, that where they are not expressly mentioned,
and do bind themselves by their own royal assent, there they are to be
excluded: Their melancholy death.
according to the president and plotforme of nature, semper excipiendum est
primum in vnoquoque genere. Yet sure I am, that they are not exempted from the
miseries and sorrows of our nature, which seem to be incident and common to
flesh and blood; for nature in making her laws requires no royal assent, and
this shall appear by this one instance. I have observed this in my reading,
that most of the Princes, and especially the greatest, if they escaped the
cursed attempts of cruel murderers and traitors; I say, in most of them you
shall find, that their death has bin seasoned or rather hastened with a
grief of mind, a deep melancholy, and a great coffeehouse. That God might
make it appear, that there is no true joy in nature; that God might let them
understand their own pride, who being flattered by their servants and slaves,
did expect that the wind and the sea should obey them. Having never learned
true christian patience and humility, though they conquered their enemies, yet
the least grief did vanquish them; though they subdued great nations, and
ruled great kingdoms yet could they not rule their own passions. It is
impossible that a mortal man should be freed from all cause^ of grief, though
he were an absolute Monarch of the whole world; Princes must learn patience,
for amongst all their prerogatives, they shall find none, whereby they are
exempted and excluded from sorrow, which indeed is incident to the whole nature
of man.

Thus here I have briefly run thorough all the happy states of men, that so
I might say with the Apostle, omnia factus sum omnibus, vt aliquos lucrarer;
and truly I do find, that God has enclosed all men in one common depth of
misery. For if joy (and true joy) could be competent to this our corrupted
nature, then certainly God would never have expelled man paradise: for here
was the wisdom of God, Wherefore serve our miseries.
that whereas blessings and happiness could not contain man within the bounds
of obedience, therefore man being thrust into a veil of misery, his own
sorrow might enforce him to cry for succor and releife. That so the justice
of God might appear in the just punishment of sin, that so it might serve as
a more forcible means for man's repentance and conversion; for in this sinful
state, man is more moved with fear and sorrow, then with thankfulness or
hope. Though I cannot pierce the clouds, and open the heavens to show the
majesty and glory of God, for no man could ever see God and live: though I
cannot allure and entice man with a true relation and discovery of those
heavenly joys; though I cannot oblige and bind man unto God, in the chains
and linkes of true love and thankfulne^, by a serious and weighty meditation of
all the blessings received from God, which might concern either body or soul,
this life or a better life, his creation* preservation, redemption,
sanctification, etc. Yet am I able in some sort to anatomize the state of man,
to lay open his miseries and grief, that being once out of the arc, and
seeing these turbulent waves, he might find no resting place, but again
return to the arc; taking a dislike and a distaste in nature, he might be
think himself of his flight, and so find safe refuge and shelter in Gods
only protection, and comfort himself in the hope and expectation of a better
world to succeed; as all those run-agates which were discontented with the
government of Saul, were very apt and easily inclined to fly unto David's camp.

From the several states of men, let us come to the several dispositions of
man in himself; observe the changes and reuolutions of our minds, The
several delights of our age.
for (if you please) we will trace them by degrees, from the time of our
in^ancy, how they alter with the course of our age. First we begin to delight
in crackers and toys, some little babble hung about the neck, some coral with
silver bells, or a little Crystal: but these seem to be the proper implements
belonging to the cradle; they are indeed the Nurses ornaments, and together
with the cradle they must be left for succession.

We are no sooner hatched, but presently we must have a feather in the cap, a
dagger at the back; then in stead of a true paradise, The delights of our
childhood.
we are brought into a fools paradise; we are made to believe, that all is
ours; the land is ours, the house is ours, the goods, possessions, all are
ours: seem to take away any thing, and the whole house shall not be able to
contain us; exclude but any one fruit, it shall grieve us more, then the
enjoying of all the fruits of the garden can assuage us. Now at length begins
our sports; for our recreation we run puffing, blowing, sweating, and wea^ied
in hunting after butterflyes, (here is excellent sport indeed); for our
callings and courses of life, we purchase pinnes, points, and cherie-stones;
these we adventure at several games, that so very profitably we might increase
our stock, our wealth and our treasure: this is our trade and course of life,
and here is thrift and frugalitie from the cradle. But in the mean time give
me leave to complain of a point of injustice, I protest it is mere injustice;
their parents and schoolemasters whip them for idleness; idleness? what
idleness? I would they were no more idle themselves: in truth they do them
great wrong, for they are as painful, as earnest, as attentive to their own
gain, as possibly any man can be in his ordinary vocation; there is as great
sorrow in the loss of a point, and as true joy in the winning of a few pinnes,
as if they were far better merchandise. If you tell me of the baseness of
the commodity; my answer is, that the whole world is but a point, all is but
vanity, and all consists in the fancy.

When our stock after a few years is increased, then we desire to trade with
the merchant-pedler; his pack is opened, we come to the mart, here we buy
lases and glasses, The delights of our elder years.
bugles and bracelets, ribons and roses; O the most profitablest member of the
Commonwealth! nothing grieves us so much, as that we have not credit, to take
up money at interest, to buy these rare and excellent commodities: as for the
Schools, we cannot yet be resolved, nor cannot possibly conceive, why there
should be such places of torments appointed for so little purpose. At length
we are conducted to the University, where we begin to admire, the rare and
incomparable learning of a Sophister, who can so punctually discourse of the
elements; though he wants money to buy books, yet he can dispute of the
tincture of gold. And thus, if I shall run thorough all the several degrees
of Schools, from the Lamb-skinne to the Skarlet; or if I should divert my
course, and consider any other state and condition of life, the profession of
Law, their Magistrates and officers; the Citizens with their Companies and
Corporations; the Courtiers with their honors and dignities; I might conclude
all with this one axiom in policy, that things, which consist in appearance,
are greater furthest off, then nearest at hand.

But I cannot content my self, thus to run through the courses of our lives,
you shall then observe, the strange different judgments in one and the same
man, according to the periods of his age, as concerning the delights of his
age: for as we grow elder and elder, so we dislike our former condition, The
degrees of our age according to decads.
and therein seem to accuse it of folly. Before we come to ten years of
age, we have no judgment at al, and therefore we cannot pass our judgment;
but being come to those years, we will not be handled and dallied like
children, we will not be so easily led with fair promises, but we grow
headstrong, and think our selves wiser then our teachers. If once we attain
unto twenty, then we make choice of the course of our lives; if any one shall
tell us of our childishnes, or call us by the most opprobrious name of boys,
we hold it a great disgrace, a foul shame and disparagement to our selves;
for we seem so far to dislike their sports, that we scorn to converse
with them. Coming once unto thirty, then we bethink our selves, that the
time is come, when we might do the King and the country some service, that
the world might take notice of our sufficiency; we do likewise think of our
marriage, to what stock and family we might join our selves; and we affect
nothing so much as wisdom and discretion, that leaving the riotous and
dissolute courses of young men, we might be reputed Sages. When once we arrive
unto forty, then we begin to fear and distrust, lest all our former vain
hopes will fail us; we will not so much rely upon others, but look to our
selves, be careful to provide for our wives and our children; enquire after
purchases, and desire to enlarge our own means. When fifty years are
expired, then we take thought of placing our daughters in marriage, taking
order to provide for our youngest sons, and here we begin to affect
government; experience has made us wise, we find the loss of our former
errors, and if we were to begin the world again, we would alter our course,
etc. At length six^^e draws on, when all our care is to settle our estate,
that no occasion be left to the wrangling contention of posterity; and here we
talk much of the Cl^mactericall year, and begin to distrust our own lives.
If seventy years do pass over, then we expect the reverence of fathers, we
are froward and testie and hard to be pleased; the inward grief makes every
outward object, seem to be a just occasion of grief; we condemn of folly
and vanity, all the courses of life, all the states in the world, all the
actions of men, accusing the times, when as indeed the alteration consists in
our selves; until a length we bid adieu to all worldly joys, and betake our
selves to our ease, expecting our dissolution.

Suppose a rich man of this world, were now upon the point of death, how often
should this man be moved to make his last Will and Testament, The censure of a
dead man.
to leave all things in quiet and peaceable possession? what writings, what
sealings, what witnesses, how many Scriueners, how many Lawyers should be
employed? when all this time they seem to neglect that vnum necessarium, the
preparation of his soul for God; that in his death he might be a true
Christian sacrifice, an oblation f^eely offered up unto God. Suppose (I pray')
that a few hours were past, and this rich man dead; and that I could by some
strange enchantment raise up his spirit, or make this dead man speak: then I
would demand of him, what he thought of the greatness and glory of this
world. Assuredly he would less esteem of all the kingdoms, empires, wealth,
and worldly honor, then we do at this time of the toys and trifles of
children: and certainly as it is with the dead, in respect of us* so shall it
be with us in respect of our posterity; we forget them, and our posterity
shall forget us; we look only to the present, and therein losing the
dignity of the reasonable soul, which consists in the foresight, we are
carried like beasts in the strength of our own apprehension.

Thus I have labored, to show the greatness of man's misery in the truth of
his sorrow, while all his supposed joys and delights, Wherein man's greatest
contentment consists.
seem to be mere vanities, and to consist in the fancy, and in his own
apprehension; if you doubt of this, I will allege certain instances, that so
it may appear by experience I would here gladly ask, wherein man receives
his greatest contentment? I suppose either 1. in his sweet convenient dwelling
and habitation, 2. or in his apparel and clothing, 3. or in his diet and
food, 4. or in his goods and his substance, 5. or lastly, in the comeliness
of his own person. These are the things, wherein the mind of man seems to
delight; which if you please to observe, you shall find that the fancy does
ouerrule all: and as men do persuade themselves, according to those ends which
men do propose unto themselves; thereafter they frame and fashion to
themselves some kind of contentment, supposing that in the creature, which
indeed is bred in their fancy.

Certainly of al worldly contentments, there is none like to the
home-contentment, wherein the Master disposes all things to his best liking;
The home-contentment.
nothing can displease him, all his servants are bound to obey him; he is as a
Prince in his family, it were petty treason to offer violence to his person,
his house is his castle; if he takes the refuge of his house, and his enemy
pursues him, he may lawfully kill him in his own defense, for here is his
last refuge. This not only our law allows, but nature seems to imprint it;
the least bird in his own nest; the weakest creature at his own den, and in
his own home, will set upon the greatest and strongest, and put him to flight.
There is no contentment to the home-contentment; and therefore those creatures
which carry their tents or houses about them, these are supposed to be the
happy creatures, as Snailes, Tortoyes, Oysters, etc.

But suppose, that the Magistrate should enforce me to keep mine own home,
that mine own house should prove mine own prison; Lord how I should be
perplexed to lose mine own liberty! all my places of pleasure should give me no
contentme^t, Our houses are sometimes our prisons.
my servants would seem to be my keepers and iaylors, and mine own doors
would seem to be the prison gates: then I should want elbow-roome, complain
for want of fresh air: what a torment it is to be incaged, and what a
happiness it is to converse and to live in the societies of men! See here,
there is no change or alteration in nature, the house is the same, the
furniture the same, the lodging and dwelling the same; only the difference is
in the mind, and the fancy: before we conceived our state to be a liberty,
and now we think it a thraldom and slavery; here is the difference, and all
consists in the fancy. Again, if I were a merciless Usurer, and that any one
of my debtors (for fear of an arrest) should keep his own house, I would
gladly ask, what difference there is between his condition and his
imprisonment? and truly this very thought should move my hard heart to
compassion. Why should the laity so much oppose themselves to
Church-Sanctuaries? which might still have continued in a tolerable sort: for
what were the Sanctuaries but religious prisons? where true penitentiaries in
the thraldom of their bodies, with mortification and sorrow, might exercise
the actions of piety and devotion.

On the contrary side, leaving the thraldom of prisons, let us come to the
sumptuous and magnificent buildings. The pleasure of the house is according to
man's own apprehension.
If a King or a Nobleman shall commit the keeping of one of his best and
fairest houses, to the trust of his servant; the house cost many thousands in
the building, the servant makes choice of his own rooms, and takes all the
delight that the house can afford him; the gardens well dressed, the houses
repaired, all at his Masters charge, and himself well paid for the keeping:
yet all this will not serve, his life is a slavery, he holds himself a
drudge for another man's service, and looks upon this beautiful building, as
his charge or his trouble, but not as his pleasure. Whereas the good old
Master, that lives in the City, fancies to himself a pleasure in his
countrie-dwelling: and being merrily disposed, loves to discourse of the
convenient walks, and of the neate-contriued buildings; it should seem he
sees it with some strange opticke glasses, for his gowte will not permit him to
travel, and to enjoy these pleasures; or rather he conceiues the platform,
and builds in his own fancy and imagination. It were to be wished, that rather
he would look up to heaven, and there conceive an earnest of that joy, which
by the special mercy of God, shall be imparted unto him, in a full measure
and consummation.

For our apparel, see how the whole world runs Our delight in our apparel.
which always alter and change, lest I my self might prove out of fashion.
Let us search out for some new stuff; every nation, though proud of her self,
and boasts of her self, and esteems her self above others, yet she scorns to
wear her own native and homebred commodities. The English cloth, which here
we neglect at home, when it has enriched the Merchant, discharged the custom,
and paid for the carriage, then the Dutchman esteems it at a high price;
while we on the other side desire to clothe our selves with the Naple silk,
with far fetched and dear bought outlandish wares. Thus other Countries like
ours, and we like theirs; it may be, we intend to deceive each other in the
sale: sure I am, though we differ in judgment, yet we agree in the vanity,
and all of us grow wanton in our own dispositions.

Our vanity in our diet.
as is the scarsitie and price, so is our longing and desire; where there is
plenty, there we neglect it. Me thinks the Colchester Oysters never taste so
well, as when they are bought in Northampton: fresh Salmon at Newcastle is
meat for servants and colliers, for no man of worth will respect it; the
Phesant in Wales eats no better then a Pulle^; in London we desire to feed
upon poultrie, and in our country houses we thirst for a cup of neat wine;
we temper our sweet meats with sour sauces: and thus we are grown wanton.
Sometimes when we have not whereof to complain, we will long for fruits out
of season; a few cherries in May shall be sold for their weight silver, when in
the latter end of June, they shall not be worth the gathering. And thus we
desire a new course of nature, and will not conform our selves to Gods
appointed good order.

Man's different valuation of his own wealth.
Sometimes the silver is raised, sometimes the gold is inhaunced; and both of
them, though otherwise the principal treasures, yet they follow man's own
valuation: if money were made of leather, it would be as current, as if it were
made of the most refined gold. As in numbering, we use counters sometimes for
digets, sometimes for hundreds, sometimes for thousands; so is it in man's
valuation of his own wealth. In some parts of India copper is respected before
gold; and sometimes steel for their weapons and armor, cannot be bought with
the weight in silver. What strange difference and variety have I known in our
estimation of Jewels and gemmes? sometimes the Rubie, sometimes the Pearl,
as well as the Diamond, grows in request; for these must follow the course of
the times. And therefore generally he is reputed the wise man, not who frames
and fashions himself according to right reason, but he that can square
himself according to ye condition of those times wherein he lives; for things
are not accounted according to the truth and goodness of their nature, neither
are all things as they appear, but as they are esteemed among men. And herein
especially consists the regal power of man, that as it is proper to Princes,
to make their own coins, and to proclaim them; so, as man himself accounts
of the creatures, or stands in want of the creatures, thereafter they carry
their due valuation.

It is no marvel, if we do so much differ in our The beauty of different
complexions.
for I do much more wonder, how it is possible, that man should so far
mistake himself in his own person, I mean concerning his comeliness and
beauty; for I will not extend my speech at this time, but only to the
sensible and material parts of man. As for example, with us the sanguine and
clear complexion, the soft flaxen or brown hair, the smooth skin, the
black and quick eye, are most commendable, for the comeliness of our parts:
but it should seem, that the greatest part of the world is not of our
judgment; for the Aethiopians or Moors do not esteem him beautiful, that
has not a black and sooty skin, a grisly hard-twisted and curld black
hair, great lips, and albugineous eye: from the Aethiopians, if we should
visit the Indians, there it should seem the tawnie color is most in request;
and the hard skin tand with the Suns heat, seems to be the fair and
beautiful complexion. And thus we cannot agree upon our own colors: the
same favor is not alike pleasing to all nations; if we should with a general
consent borrow our beauty from one common box, then happily there would be
some kind of agreement: but now in our natural constitution, see the great
difference, when every man must fancy a set form of beauty to himself, and
please himself with that beauty.

Thus (I hope) it has appeared, that whatsoever is best pleasing to man, it is
therefore best pleasing, because man himself conceiues the greatest pleasure
therein: not because he is so naturally inclined, not because he is moved with
the truth of things, according to their goodness, for so all men should be
alike affected; reason is the same in all, and every other thing does naturally
incline to the best; only man having a free will to make his own choice, We
must condemn nature, if we justify our selves.
the liberty of his choice is not guided by nature, or by reason, but by his
affection. Otherwise we should not disagree in our favor and comeliness: for
the Owl will not boast of her beauty, but is ashamed of her self. We should
not differ or vary in our goods, or our substance, but should judge and esteem
all things, according to the inbred and natural goodness: for there are
degrees in the creatures, both in themselves, and as they are fitted for man's
present use and occasions. We should be all clothed alike, as flowers and
fruits of the same kind, have always the same colors: our diet and food
should be alike, as it is to all other creatures, whose nature is the same:
neither should we so much dissent in our dwellings and habitations; for birds
in building their nests, and beasts in making their caves, seem to observe the
same rules of art and proportion. And therefore we must either accuse nature
of folly, to justify our selves, or else we must truly acknowledge, that we
our selves are not carried, according to the truth of things, but in the strong
apprehension of our own fancy.

But here is all the difficulty, How hardly men are weaned from these fancies.
how I should weane man from these fancies; I could wish that in all my
dealings with men, I might meet with reasonable creatures; for then I should
know, upon what grounds I might deal; I might guess how far by all
likelihood and probability I should prevail; for we are both squared to one
rule, the same reason would direct us both. But if I meet with unreasonable
men, I know not what course to take; being once out of the rodeway, lost in the
woods, I know not where to make search for them: and if by great chance I
should overtake them, yet I cannot accompany them thorough thickets and
bushes; but must reduce them again to a great rode, make them first capable of
reason, that so I might softly and leisurely proceed upon my own grounds. To
dissuade the whole world from the pursuit of these vanities, were a work
impossible; for if I should speak with the tongue of men and Angels, I should
never prevail, they are so far besotted, inamoured, made drunken with the
immoderate love of the creatures. As, if their stomachs were ouerlaid with new
wine; the fumes, vapors, and spirits ascending, would choke up the brain,
and hinder the right use of their understanding: so is it outwardly with the
creatures; flesh and blood is wholly corrupted, ye world does seduce them, they
behold nothing but vanity: but to him that shall recall himself, I would use
these motives.

First the meditation of God and his kingdom, The ^oue of God, swallows up
the love of this world.
where God himself sits in perfect majesty, lucem inhabitat inaccessibilem,
gloriosus ante secula, trinus and vnus, where all the hallowes of heaven sit
upon thrones, clothed with glory; hither send up thy mind and thy spirit, as
Joshua sent forth his spies to discover the promised land; or as the Queen of
Saba made a long journey to see the magnificence of Salomons Court. But herein
thou can not be ignorant of thine own condition, being indeed a pilgrim
here upon earth, in statu viae, not in statu patriae; thou may well mistake
thy self in the means, though otherwise thou desire to attain thine own
proper end. If it were possible for man to behold God, and truly to know him,
being indeed the very end of man's creation, assuredly nothing should withhould
him from the love of his maker; if the eye could behold the sun, we should
never cast our eyes from the sun, as being the most beautiful object, but
this cannot stand with our weakness; for now God is concealed as in the veil
of his manhood, so thou see not his hinder parts, but only his shadow in the
creatures.

Secondly, The vanity of the creatures, should keep us from the love of the
creatures.
if for want of sufficient light, being left to thy self, thou still continue
in darkness; and that the meditation of God, together with all thy blessings
received from God, in the whole course of thy life, with all the promises of
joy to succeed, have not such an attractiue power, as that they can draw thee
to God; then consider thine own proper misery, and all thy supposed joys, and
pleasures to be but mere vanities, and delusions, such as can give thee no
true contentment or joy. For a Postiller brings forth this instance, (very
fitly to this purpose); A raw bone, wherein there was neither moisture nor
sap, was cast to a hungry dog for his pray; the dog very greedily bites and
gnawes on it, and finding the hardness to be such, as that it would not easily
yield to his teeth, yet he forsakes it not, but at length bites his own lip,
and finding the warmth and sweetness of his own blood, therein begins to
delight, and thinks it comes from the bone: and thus it is with all our
worldly pleasures, we esteem them for pleasures, the world houldes them for
pleasures, men do generally repute them for pleasures; and I protest, here is
all the pleasure I find in them. Voluptates non venientes sed abeuntes
respice, be rightly informed of thy pleasures, do not esteem of them, as
they come unto thee, in the greedines of thy mind, and thy passion: but as
they leave and forsake thee, then remember thy pleasures, and judge of them
accordingly; and let the meditation hereof give thee occasion to dislike and
distaste nature, and to hasten thy approach unto God.

Thirdly, Never man found contentment in the creatures.
if neither meditation of God, nor the view of these vanities can sufficiently
instruct thee; then I could wish, that thou had a glut and surfeit of thy
delights, and that trial were made, what contentment nature could yield thee.
Certain it is, that if there may be a surfeit, then the creatures are to be
taken in moderation; and that they are not the scope of man's happiness. As (for
example) suppose I were sick, I would desire health without limitation;
health, health, and nothing but health; but for my physic be it never so
sovereign and precious, yet still I would take it in a certain dozis and
measure (as it were) to be fitted for the recovery of my health. Now certain
it is, that there may be a surfeit, for otherwise why should thou delight in
the variety and succession of thy pleasures and sports? but suppose thou had
all possible contentment, which nature could assoord thee; yet grow wise by
experience, judge of thy self by others, run over all former examples,
consider all states, callings and professions of men, and as it is with them,
so conceive it would be with thy self. Alexander having gotten the whole
world, began to enquire, whether there were any more worlds to be conquered;
for it is not this world that can give us contentment: we must lay seige to
another world, heaven must suffer violence; and therefore the spouse in the
Canticles is compared to an army and host of fighting men, fighting for
victory and triumph.

To give thee some ease and recreation, in this my long tedious discourse; I
will here tell thee a tale, to this purpose. The tale of a religious man.
A certain religious man, having often dissuaded some worldlings from the
immoderat love of the creatures, and being never able to prevail; at length
bethought himself how he might satisfy their desires, and resolved on this
course; that if he could but give them a glut and surfeit of the creatures,
then they would the more easily forbear. And calling them together, making his
complaint that he could no more move them, with his earnest and continual
persuasions; in the end ^ould them, that now it had pleased God, to deal so
graciously both with him and with them, as that he had sufficient plenty,
whereby he might satisfy all their requests; and to this end, wished them to
ad^ise, what one thing in this world might give them all contentment. Here
began a wise and a serious consultation amongst them, what they should ask;
some desired all their portion in silver and gould, but others seemed to refuse
that motion, for the same coin is not every where current* and it only
follows man's valuation; they did likewise fear and suspect his chimicall
gould, which (as they had heard) was only counterfeit, and had not the
natural and true properties of gould, and was not physical, and would not
endure the touch: others therefore thought fit, to beg silks, wares, and
household stuff: but here was a great doubt; for if they should have them in
such plenty, they would bear no rate, neither could they long be continued,
for the moth would consume them: a third sort thought fit to have cattle and
beasts, but then here grew the mischief, how they should keep them for want
of fodder and stuble: many others had their several plots and their proiects,
but at length all agreed, and the foreman of the jury in the name of the rest,
gave in this verdit; that above all, lands and grounds were to be sought, for
it was the mother earth which was the foundation, and brings forth all other
commodities; and therefore all of them did desire a competent demaine, a large
park, sufficient meadow, good arable and pasture, and wood-land for timber and
fuel; this was the sum of their petition.

The religious man replied, He satisfies their request.
that although it were much easier for him, to supply any other commodity then
this, yet herein he would not be wanting: but promised upon his honesty and
credit, to give them their full contentment; and yet I will not (quoth he)
remove the land-markes of my neighbors, I will not unjustly intrude upon other
men's possessions, I will not tempt God to desire a new creation, or that God
would enlarge the earth, and give it a greater circumference. But here is my
intent, some two acres of ground were left me by inheritance, these I purpose
to give, and am content to part with amongst you: bring hither your carts, and
your waynes; dig it, delue it, carry it, all is yours, I will give you the free
and frank possession of it. Do you answer me, that it is not worth the
digging and carriage? then assuredly you are much mistake^ in judgment, that
have made so bad a choice, as first to demand it. Do you ask, me where you
shall lay it? even where you please, in your hearts, in you will mouths, in your
purses, in your coffers, the world is spacious and wide, fill up the huge
Ocean, and make it champion; if you make it a bottom, there you shall have the
rich meadow: if you raise it and make it a leuel, here is the fruitful corn
ground: if you give it some ^igher ascent, then you shall have it in wood-land
and pasture. O how happy are the rich men of this world! but wherefore do ye
thus prolong the time? bring hither your spades, here is earth enough, here is
land enough: if my plenty fails, let me bear the blame* whatsoever is wanting
in the latitude and extension, you shall find it in the depth and profunditie.
I pray' dig, I pray' dig, and when ye are once gone 3500. miles hence, (for all
is mine,) then you shall come to the center of the earth, here you shall try
admirable conclusions of nature, how after so great a descent, the earth shall
still be above you, (still be above you, for indeed it is always above you,
and you are slaves to the earth) where it shall fall of it own accord, and so
shall ease you of a great part of your labors. Here if Archimedes were living,
he would apply his engines and tools for moving the earth; but stay your
hands, hold, hold, let us not unjustly incroach upon the bounds of our
neighbors, the Antipodes; if we should contend in suite, I fear it would
prove a leading case, and I would not willingly spend my self in their
demurres. But now I call to mind, we shall not need to trespass upon them,
when their own bounds shall fall of themselves. Here thorough a hollownes of
the earth, you may with some labor creep into another world, a new sound and
unknown world, happily unpeopled and uninhabited; but if otherwise furnished and
stockt with people, yet like sons of the earth terrae filij, having past
thorough the womb and bowels of the earth, you may well claim your right of
inheritance.

Here one began to enquire of this religious man, who should keep them, and
how they should live in the mean time? Our worldly appetites are satisfied in
death.
whereunto he replied, that it was prouidently spoken; and yet he doubted
not, but in their digging they should find out a mine of silver or gold, which
might well pay for their labors. As yet he never made trial, and therefore
could say nothing to the contrary, only in conscience he was bound to suppose
and to believe the best: but it should seem, that the concourse of people was
great, for every man came to the mart, expecting large possessions in this
frank distribution, the time was likewise prolonged, and many meetings were
appointed, for every man hoped, that this man generally reputed religious,
should be as good as his word, and perform his promise. Now in the mean time,
one of them died; here this religious man took just occasion, to show them
the vanity of their desires: and first he points at the breathless carcass,
vncouers it; how pale and horrid it looks! can you behold it without
fearfulnes? Where is the blood? where is the fresh color? the curled locks,
the proud looks, the aspiring thoughts, the soft cheeks, the cherrie lips, the
gripple hands, the greedy heart? What shall you need to desire such large
possessions, when the length of a few feet shall serve to contain and enclose
you? Here I will stop his mouth with earth, that he shall not be able once to
ask or to cry for more earth. Here let us open a pit; see how the creeping
and the crawling worms come forth to expect their booty: his mouth shall be
filled with earth, his belly with earth; all is earth, and nothing but earth.
For it is the property of true love, to unite and couple together: His love to
the earth, shall convert his whole body to earth. Here let us bury him, and
here is the end of all your vain hopes; only our comfort is, that he is
gone to another world. where we shall follow him; there he does now rest from
his labors; and here we must only labor for that rest; and so my tale is
ended.

Now recalling my self, The Authors intent in this second part.
I will draw to a conclusion: my intent in this second part of my Treatise was;
first, to open man's miseries to himself, that seeing his condition, he might
fly to his maker, to change or relieve his condition. For certainly, as the
state now stands, creatures are only subject to sorrow; no creature so
wretched as man; no man so miserable, as is the Christian man with his
fastings, repentance, and passions, were it not for the hope of his happiness.
Secondly, lest man might flatter himself and be deluded, with a fond conceited
opinion of his own joys, I discovered all our worldly pleasures to be but
fancies; that having no true ground of happiness in our selves, we might cast
up our anchor of hope unto heaven, and so stay our selves from falling;
expecting Jacobs ladder, and Angels descending and ascending, that Christ being
once exalted in power, might draw all unto himself. Here was the scope of my
intent; for I did observe the strange actiuity of man's soul, which could not
be contained within it self, but must be necessarily diffused; if not to the
Creator, then to the creature. And I did persuade my self, that if I could but
sufficiently repair the banks, and hinder the violent intrusion of waters;
that then the river would keep it own channel, and run to the Ocean: for
thus man is only directed to God. And therefore (as at all times) we ought to
detest the immoderate and excessive love, or abuse of the creatures; so
sometimes we should forbear the tolerable and lawful use. Though God may be
worshipped in them; yet lest they should steal our selves from our selves, and
cast a mist upon our sacrifice (the frailty of our nature being so easily led
and carried away with the outward allurements of the world, and with the inward
strong temptations of the flesh); lest being associates, they might bereave God
of his honor; and though in themselves they are means to stir up love and
thankfulness to God; yet through our abuse, they might be an occasion of our
fall: and therefore it were to be wished, that they might not come nearer
within the compass of our sacrifice, then is befitting the natural
ceremonies, to set forth the honor and dignity of the service.

This shall appear by the counsel of God himself, though otherwise he
allows, and approues the honest callings and professions of men; How apt the
creatures are to obscure Gods glory.
yet he appointed a day, free from all worldly labors, to the memory and
service of himself. So for the place of his worship, he appointed a Temple,
separated from all worldly employments: to make it a house of Merchandise
(though Merchandise be an honest calling) were to make it a den of thieves;
to exchange money there, though otherwise it be for the use of the Temple, were
to rob God of his honor. Yet this was not in sancto sanctorum; in the holiest
of holies, where no man had access but only the high Priest, and that but
once in the year: this was not in the Temple, but in atrio templi, in the court
of the Temple. As much in effect, as if I should say; to sell things in the
Churchyard, which are for the use of the Temple, were a great profanation of
the Temple. So God requires the whole and entire heart, and no part thereof
must be left for the creature: primogenitum, the first begotten must be
consecrated to God; and the heart of man is the first begotten in man. The
practice of the Church, does follow the counsel of God: in our prayers we are
called upon, sursum corda, to lift up our hearts. Notwithstanding that God is
every where, yet for fear of annoyance, which might redound unto us from the
creatures, we are admonished to worship God above the sphere of the creatures:
our Church men and Priests, as being a whole burnt offering, consecrated to
God, are separated from the secular condition of men. And in confessing our
sins, lest there should be some kind of delight, in the remembrance of some
sin, we are therefore enjoined a silence; though otherwise confession seems
to be necessary to repentance.

To conclude, the truth of our misery shall speak and discover it self, with
our cries, How all our joys are counterfeit.
our groans, and complaints; and the vanity of al our worldly pleasures herein
appears; when we purpose to be most merry and iouiall, then must we lay
aside our own persons, and gravity; we must alter and change our own shapes,
to make our selves capable of pleasures and delights. We use masking, mumming,
enterludes, Plays, some strange and anticke daunces; all which I commend, as
being honest, harmless, and lawful sports; though otherwise it may appear,
that using these shows, we have but the show of true joy, and are very
miserable and wretched in our selves; that are enforced thus to transform our
selves, to find out some pleasures. Again, suppose that a man's whole life were
spent in a continued show: suppose, that man wanted neither food, nor
raiment, and persuaded himself, that he were none of the ordinary sort of
men, none of the common rank and condition; but some great honorable Peer;
some grandchild, descended from the great Oneale; that Princes, and Ladies
have died with their modesty for love of him; that all men do either admire,
or envy his virtues; that with his wisdom he is able to settle and establish
the government of kingdoms. I would gladly know, what difference there were
between this counterfeit, and a true Peer? All honor consists only in
reputation and esteem, and has little groundwork in nature; the one is as
confident of his honor, as the other, and both alike are persuaded: animus
cuiusque est quisque, it is the mind, which (according to her own
apprehension) gives all the contentment. Now where is the difference? There is
as much (I confess) as there is between error and truth; but all consists in
the imagination; and were there not some difficulty in a man, thus to
persuade, and to flatter himself, it were an excellent kind of delusion.

Thus truly acknowledging our miseries, we are likewise enforced to confess
the rewards of our sin, Why all our delights should consist in the fancy.
and the fruits of Gods justice: yet calling to mind the mercies of God, which
ouerflow all his works: miserationes domini super omnia opera eius: in this
our wavering and slipperie state, being fallen into the depth of sin, we
erect and lift up a pillar of faith and hope, which laying hold and
apprehending the mercies of God, does assure our own souls, that there is a
better world to succeed: where true happiness, and a crown of glory is
reserved for Gods Saints. And therefore these worldly pleasures being but
shadows, and all our delight consisting only in the fancy, should not
withhold us in the pursuit of that true happiness. Herein I do magnify and
acknowledge the goodness and providence of God; that as man in his condition is
rather spiritual, then carnal; for his mind (according to right reason)
should govern his flesh: and as the last end of man, the happiness whereunto
man is ordained, and directed, is wholly spiritual; as is the knowledge, the
love, and the uniting with the Godhead: so, lest man should prove too much a
slave to his sense, and his carcass; it has pleased God still to permit, that
all man's delights and pleasures should reside in the fancy, which is but only
a shadow of our true understanding, rather then any earthly joy or contentment
should truly and really possess us.

And that you might not conceive, that this is my private opinion; I will
therefore (in one word) take a view, what the Gentiles, the Jews, and the
Christians, have thought of this truth; and what effects the meditation here of
has wrought upon the^. You shall then observe, yt the consideration of man's
present state and condition, moved the ancient Heathen Philosophers to take
whole nature, and to set it in a limbecke, so to distill it; wherein they found
by the force of fire, the irresistable power of reason; that all nature did
either euaporate to a fume, or a smoke, which indeed is the vanity of the
creatures; or else did settle down, as the gross and earthly part in the
bottom; and this is the misery of the creatures: and from hence proceeded two
several sects of Philosophers, of different and contrary dispositions; the one
laughing at the vanity, Democritus, and Heraclitus.
the other weeping at the misery; and both of them esteemed very wise in their
own generation.

But when the natural light of reason is left to it self, it is but a kind
of darkness; for nature is partial to her self, and out of her own love,
to her self, cannot wholly condemn herself. I will therefore come to the
Jews, whose eyes were better enlightened with Gods Law, though they had but
shadows of mysteries, and only types and figures of a true sacrifice, yet were
they sufficiently instructed how to condemn nature: and they proceeded further
then the Heathen Philosophers; drawing nature to a greater height, and making
some better extraction; and therefore they do not content themselves with
vanities; but they acknowledge that there is a vanity of vanities, Salomons
censure of this world.
when man does please himself with his own vanities. So likewise there is not
only misery, and vexation, but vexation of spirit, when man considers that
these miseries here upon earth, are the forerunners of Gods heavy judgments
to come; and therefore Solomon, their great, wise, and potent King concludes; I
viewed mine own works, to take some contentment in mine own actions, yet I
found none, but all was vanity of vanities, and vexation of mind.

I am a Christian man, and therein I do humbly, heartily, and daily thank God,
who (of his mercy) has called me to this state of salvation. And here I do
constantly affirm, The conclusion of a Christian man.
that there is no joy or comfort to man, unless it be to the Christian man;
whose God appeared in baseness and misery. And therefore for example and
imitatton of that miserable God, (being all parts and members under such a
mystical head,) that there might be a conformity between the head, and the
members ( ne sit membrum delicatum sub capite spinoso) he desires the like
miseries, and would willingly and readily embrace the same passions; as being
the holy relics of his God; and in the course of his misery, acknowledges a
divine providence, Gods holy hand, correction and permission. He is well
assured, that he is the miserable man, who offers wrong and injustice to his
innocent brother; who has just cause to rejoice, if he suffers the greatest
misery undeservedly: and considering that all miseries are tending, and ending
in death; desiring death as a passage or gate to a better life, cupio dissolui
and esse cum Christo, he will be thus faithfully resolved; non sunt passiones
huius vitae condignae ad futuram gloriam, etc. The miseries and passions of
this life are not to be respected, in regard of that crown of glory, which God
has prepared for his Saints.

Deo gratias.
THE FALL OF MAN.
THE THIRD PART.
OVt of the deep have I cried unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my voice; one deep
calls up an other, the depth of my sin, A Prayer.
calls for the depth of thy goodness; the depth of my misery, calls for the depth
of thy mercy: in stead of all my worldly vanities, give me (O Lord) the sweet
comfort of thy spirit, and the solid foundation of thy joy, guide me in these
my dark and slippery ways, by the assistance of thy power. Open my lips, and
my mouth shall speak forth thy praise, kindle my heart, that I may enlighten
and inflame others; convert and confirm me, that I may strengthen my brethren:
forsake me not O Lord in mine old age when I am gray headed, until I have
showed forth thy glory and praise to succeeding generations; hear me O Lord,
for thou art my God and my savior in whom I do trust, thou art the strength
and horn of my salvation.

If there were no other argument, to persuade me of the natural corruption of
man, but only the implicit and secret confession of man himself, concerning
himself, together with the daily practice of his actions, Man is vic^^is and
corrupted in every state and course of life.
this were sufficient. For in what course or condition of life would you
suppose man, wherein you should not find an evident proof of his corruption?
If man be solitary and alone; then you shall find him melancholy,
discontented, and in some dislike with himself, as it were (for want of
others) picking quarrels, and fighting with himself? now place him in the
company and society of others, and presently he falls to banding and
factions. Wherefore serves such a number of fencing-schooles, or the nature of
combats and duels, now at length reduced to the rules and form of an Art? and
such as will not adventure their blood in a quarrel, they must contend in
suites of law, to the impairlng of their substance. Histories are daily
written, which discover the subtilties and tricks of state; but sure it is,
that there is as much false dealing, close practices, cunning suggestions,
dissimulation, breach of promises, and every way as much dishonesty in a petty,
poor, base, paultry Corporatio^, for the choice of their towne-Clearke, their
Bailiffe, or some such officer, as you shall find among the great Bashawes for
the upholding and supporting of the Turkish Empire. The whole world is
distracted with factions, and therefore surely the old time was much to be
commended, in tolerating, or rather giving occasion to some country may-games
and sportes, as dancing, piping, pageants, all which did serve to assuage the
cruelty of man's nature; that giving him some little ease and recreation, they
might with-hould him from worser attempts, and so preserve amity between men.
Upon the abolishing of these, you could not conceive in reason, were it not
that we find it true by experience, (for sometimes things which are small in
the consideration, are great in the practice) what dissolute and riotous
courses? what unlawful games? what drunkenness? what envy, hatred, malice, and
quarelling have succeeded in lieue of these harmless sports? and these are the
fruits, which our strict professors have brought into the world; I know not how
they may boast of their faith (for indeed they are pure professors) but sure I
am, they have banished all charity.

In our dealings and contracts with men, sometimes we blame the complections
and looks of others, solemnly protesting that we dislike their visage, and
will admit no dealings with them; How we accuse each other.
sometimes we dislike their names, sometimes the whole kindred, the stock,
and the family; sometimes the whole nation is condemned. Whereas all this time
we are much mistaken and deceived, for either the hate and dislike should be
extended, and generally comprehend whole nature, whole mankind, for God saw
all the counsels of men, that they were full of impiety and wickedness; or
else we should contract our hate, and begin first and principally to hate our
selves, as consisting equally with them of the same corruption. But behold, for
our selves we have found out some lurking holes, some retiring places, some
special privilege and indulgence proper to us: if all other goodly and godly
pretenses do fail, then we can boast of our ancestors, that we are descended
from honest and noble parents. Which (certainly) we would never do, were it
not, (that implicitly) we confess the baseness and vileness of our own
nature in general, and therefore we seek to cover and conceal our own shame
in particular. Here we use scutchions and arms, beasts forsooth must discover
our conditions and qualities, they must show our parentage; whereas indeed the
Prophet has better described it, radix tua, and generatio tua ex terra Canaan,
pater tuus Amoreus, matter tua Cethea, tuque ex corrupto semine: thy father was
an Amorite, thy mother was a Cethit, and thou art borne and conceived in sin,
all thy other coats are but counterfeit, sometimes bought with a price; let
thy armory consist of a Lion and of a Lamb: the Lion of the tribe of Judah, to
enable thee with fortitude and courage; and let the lamb of God teach thee
true humility and meekness.

Now in our actions, consider the envy and malignitie of our nature; how apt
we are to offend each other, and being once provoked, Man out of his evil
disposition, returns evil for evil.
how readily we return evil for evil? how irreconcilable is our hate, we
cry for nothing but revenge? to preach of mercy and forgiveness, durus hic
sermo, this seems to be a hard saying, though indeed it should soften our
hard hearts; habet and musca splenem, the meanest and basest vassal will
meditate and think of revenge, if he sustaines the least supposed wrong from
his master and Lord. It should seem^, that our nature being wholly inclind unto
evil, we cannot forbear to do evil, and in the suffering of evil, we must
needs repay evil, according to the similitude and likeness of our nature,
when both action and passion are performed by one and the same quality: for
heat working upon heat, the greater will allure and draw forth the less; and
it is only christian religion, which takes away the corruption of our nature,
and gives us this precept, to overcome an other man's evil with our own good.
But you will say, that common justice requires (as much in effect) to return
evil for evil, that the reward might be agreeable to the desert: heerin
consists your error, that you suppose justice, which is a commendable virtue,
that it can reside between vices There is a proportion I confess, but an evil
proportion, in things that are wholly evil; justice would rather square out
malum culpae, to malum poenae, the evil of punishment to the evil of
transgression, but sin to be recompensed with sin, here is no justice; I
will therefore make a second instance, which shall be beyond all exception.

It is proper to the corrupt nature of man, to turn all the best qualities
into the worst part, Man out of his evil disposition, tu^neth good things into
^uill.
like a spider that turns the best substance into poison, as if an Alchimist
should break his own glasses, waste his oil, and lay up only the dross.
Thus great learning tends to confusion, the best courage is tainted with
rashness; but in our actions between men, suppose we receive great benefits
from our benefactors, such as cannot easily be recompensed, certainly nothing
is so proper to man, nothing so commendable in man as thankfulness: for nature
prescribes it in every creature, the earth according to thy labor shall yield
thee a crop, here is her thankfulness; the beasts according to thy keeping
shall bring thee a profit, here is their thankfulness. God likewise commands
it, and seems to be principally engaged in our thankfulness, for it is God that
has given us all ours, our selves, and more then our selves, the means of our
redemption (the son of God incarnat) is more then our selves, our expected
happiness is more then our present possession. Thus man though finite in
himself, yet is infinitely indebted to God, and is to be tied to his
thankfulness accordingly; but God as by himself, so likewise by others imparts
these his blessings. Now for our thankfulness and recompense, will ye hear the
course of the world? O the cursed and corrupted course of this world! we must
not be indebted for such kindness, which cannot easily be recompensed; and
therefore our manner is, not only to suppress them, to forget or deny them,
but to reward them with all reproach and dishonor, as desiring to free our
selves, from the bondage and captivity of thankfulness, whereby we stand
obliged to others.

The best actions of man, do they not argue the corruption of man? Our good
actions proceed from an evil intent.
I will not descend to that question in Theology, whether the moral virtues of
the heathen, were not splendida peccata, varnisht and glorious sins; but among
us Christians, do not many religious and charitable works proceed from vain
glory? Sometimes the good and pre^erment which we intend to an other, proceeds
not from our love toward him, but in the course of our faction, out of the
hate and enmity which we bear to our adversaries, well hoping that his
advancement may serve to abate their pride. Thus the condition of man being
wholly sinful and corrupted, we seek to prevent sin with sin; we can be
content to do ill offices to our superiors, to set them at iar and
contention, thereby to secure our selves and to purchase our own peace. And
thus the corrupted dealings of men seem in some sort, best to agree with their
corrupted nature: seldom or never shall you find any action, which does not
fail, either in substance or circumstance; and where there is the least spice
of evil, there the whole action is evil; a little sour and corrupted leaven
seasons the whole mass. For as it is in our understanding, the conclusion of
syllogismes must always follow the worser part, so is it in our moral
actions, the least evil changes the whole nature of the action; and this
proceeds from the strong inclination of our nature unto evil.

If it lies not in our power to return evil for evil, We delight in other
men's evils.
or to recompense good with evil, or to do good with an evil intent, yet are
we still delighted with evil, we rejoice to see the hard chances and
misfortunes of others. O what a pleasant thing it is, to stand on the sea
shore, and to see the poor ^^riners tossed up and down with the waves, always
in danger of ship-wrackellow many men do continually attend and wai^e upon the
execution of poor prisoners? Thus are we delighted with evil, out of the
sympathy of our nature inclining to evil: little joy shall ye find, upon
relation of other men's good, but sometimes great triumphs in the downe-fall of
others.

Whereas a feeling of one and the same grief, should teach us compassion to
others, and the right knowledge of our selves: it falls out far otherwise, our
joys we desire to be whole and entire to our selves, We desire companions in
our own euil^.
that none should part or share with us in our happy adventures; but in our
sorrows and grief it is our greatest comfort to have companions, solamen
miseris socios habuisse doloris: the sick man when he can be no otherwise
eased, yet if an other shall complain of the same grief, here is his
comfort. An other man's grief does not ease the grief of his body, but
thorough the evil and corruption of his own mind in the torments of others,
he fancies to himself a kind of ease and contentment, not looking to the
distemper of his own body, and senses, which, as they come nearest, so they
should more immediately concern him, but sporting himself with other men's wo^,
etc.

Take the particular actions of man, I would gladly know, what is the ground of
al^ Machiau^lian policy, but only this; that s^pp^sing the inward corruption
of man's nature, The ground of policy supposes our inbred corruption.
it suspects and preuents the worst (for the best will easily help and rel^iue
it self) desiring to secure it self, though by the worst means; and to
purchase her own safety, though it must be enforced to wade thorough a bath
of man's blood: and proposing certain ends to it self, answerable to the
c^rrupt inclination thereof, as honor, wealth, pleasure, etc. it respects not
the goodness or the lawfulnes of the means to attain it, but only how they
are fitted and accommodated to the present use and occasion. In the actions one
thing is intended, an other pretended; what glorious shows of piety? what
color of religion, freedom of conscience, the liberty of the subject, the
good of the commons, the profit of the state, the reformation of abuses and
grieuances? verba audio, we are weary and hoarse in speaking of these
excellent delusions; how in all ages proiects have bin found out, to serve for
the present turn and at a dead li^t, these are now grown so threadbare,
common and triuial, that the poor tradesmen can discourse of them. Thus
certainly being inwardly corrupted, therein we discover our nature, and making
some fair outward gloss, we seem implicitly to acknowledge the corruption;
though otherwise like bold liers, we desire to varnish and paint over our
rottenness.

But policy is a Secret of state, which must be hidden and concealed like a
mystery; the rules must not be diuulged, least they give way to the practice;
the actions cannot be justified, non laudantur nisi peracta, they will not
dispute of them, but being once performed, then they will find out some
probable color to excuse the offense: they will drop down their favors, that
so distilling their gifts, the memory of their former cruelty may be abolisht,
until they find some fit opportunity for a second massacre. Let us leave the
policies of men, the extent whereof I will leave to Gods permission and
providence, and to their own consciences. Do not the laws of men, made by
the whole body of the kingdom, wherein every man seems to have his voice and
free suffrage, do they not suppose man's nature, to be wholly corrupted?
wherefore should they prevent murder, treason, thef^, Sodomie? wherefore serve
so many penal laws, The Laws of men suppose our natural corruption.
so many prouisoes? were it not, that man's nature is generally esteemed to be
wholly corrupted; and that men might well be suspected for heathen, paganes, and
infidels, who would attempt sins against God, against nature, against the
state, and therefore there must be a punishment for every offense; and in
enacting our statutes, are not the law makers enforced to use their best wits,
all their cunning and skill, with multitudes of words, and long repetitions,
least the crochets of man's brain being apt to cavil, should find out some
starting holes?

I forget my self, I forget my self, for, speaking of man's corruption, I am
so far entangled, that I cannot easily release my self; The scope of (...)
third part.
being corrupted as well as others, me thinks whatsoever I see, whatsoever I
hear, all things seem to sound corruption. But recalling my self, I cannot
forget that I have allotted this third part, to treat only of those
punishments, which are generally related in Scripture, to be the punishments of
the first sin; neither can I speak of all the punishments, for so I should
undertake an infinite task. I must therefore tie my self to a certain number,
and considering that the state of this life is a sinful state, I will resemble
it to the state of the Israe^^tes in Egypt, where they were borne in slavery,
and could not be delivered but by their passage thorough the red sea: which is
a figure either of our baptism by water, or of our baptism by blood; either
of our entrance to grace, or of our entrance to glory. Now answerable to the
plagues of Egypt, I will proportion the number of our punishments; ten plagues
of Egypt, according to the breach of Gods ten Commandments; this number of
ten being the most perfect number observed in our punishments, shall
sufficiently argue the perfection of Gods justice, and our imperfection in
sin.

And first for the Serpent, which was the first cause of our sin, The Serpent.
and therefore was first accursed of God; consider how the serpent only, and
the serpentine kind feed more immediately upon the earth, and lie groueling on
the belly: which certainly would much detract from the beauty and perfection
of nature, were it not that a judgment and a sentence past, super pectus
gradieris, terram comedes, seems to excuse the baseness of the serpent, in
respect of the worlds perfection; see how the antipathi^ still continues
between both, vir conterit caput, serpe^s insidiatur calcaneo, the one strikes
at the head, and the other bites at the heel; and thus between mortal
creatures, there is an immortal enmity.

But I must not thus run over the punishments; I will therefore desire you to
observe in the serpent: first, her baseness in her self: secondly, the enmity
toward man, super pectus gradieris. The punishment of the Serpent.
Genesis 3. 14. Then the Lord God said to the serpent, because thou have done
this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field,
upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat^ all the days of thy
life, etc. Will nature give it a head, the perfect use of all senses, a swift
and able motion, exquisite variety of colors; and will nature refuse to supply
the meanest and basest parts, feet to support this body? Especially
considering that in three extraordinary privileges, above all other beasts of
the field, she may best glory in the indulgency of nature. 1. A great subtilty
and wisdom for her own defense, against all charms and enchantments. 2. The
most dangerous offe^siue poisonous weapon. 3. Every year a new coat, while
other creatures with their wrinckled skins carry their scars to the grave, and
never have change of their rayments. Has nature repented her self, and does
she now begin to repine at these blessings? and for the vpshot, leaves it
vnfinisht, or dismembers and cuts of the feet? can it consist of four
elements, and yet three of them should carry no proportion, but all the whole
body should lie on the earth? Or if the breast be the noblest part, in regard of
the residencie of the heart, must it needs sustain the burden and poyse of
the whole^body? and can no other part be assigned for that office?

It is a maine difference between the sensitive, and the vegetative creatures,
that trees have their mouths or their stomach fastened in the earth, The
Serpent creepes on the earth.
but sensitive creatures, if they have sight, fit it is, that their watchtower
should be erected aloft, to view and behold their own ways, to order their
steps, then why is it not thus in the serpent; shall I tell you the reason? It
stood with the justice of God, in the form, figure, and shape of this serpent,
to intimate first the enmity to man; that as man alone above all other
creatures has an upright figure, and looks up to heaven: so the serpent alone
of all other creatures, lies creeping and groueling on the earth. 2. This
serpent has bin the instrument of Satan, and therefore observe still the
conformity; hell is supposed to be in the heart of the earth, and the serpent
lies with her heart to the earth. 3. The state of the earth procured by the
serpent; the earth is round, somewhat in the form of an egg: if it produce
evil, assure your self that the serpent has hatched it, and is the sole
nurse of the brood. Higher then the earth, to the state of Angels and Saints,
the poison of this serpent cannot ascend, for it lies and incompasseth the
earth; the serpent is already cast down, down to the earth, here she is
permitted to inhabit, and to bite at the heel, but her principal strength is
abated; and at length, as she has no feet to support her, so she may be
easily vanquished and cast into darkness, where notwithstanding her gliding and
slippery condition, she shall be tied up in chains, etc.

From the baseness of her person, let us come to the baseness of her food: is
it possible that any creature of such wisdom and prudency, Her^e^d^ng on the
earth.
should search for the most noble things to hurt and annoy them, and yet should
make choice of the meanest and basest, for her own food and sustenance? This
is an excellent emblem of envy, and worthily describes the malicious accuser
of his brethren: but what a league of friendship and amity has past between
the earth and the serpent; how dearly and tenderly does the serpent love and
embrace the earth, she lays her breast to the earth, feeds on the earth,
lays up the earth in her bowels, inhabits the earth, that so she might bind
her self to the earth, and the earth might wholly possess her. And thus it
befalls men of the serpentine kind, or rather seduced by the serpent, their
mouth is full of earth, they talk of nothing but lands, goods, purchases,
demeanes, possessions, inheritances, leases; of bonds, contracts, bargains,
sales, commodities, marchandises, wares, etc. now the mouth speaks out of the
abundance of the heart, their heart is full of earth and earthly cogitations,
their nails and their hands are full of earth, their hands are griple and
hold fast, and are not so easily, either opened in charity, or lifted up in
piety, and thus is the punishment every way accomplished.

Here I would desire you to observe, that as the dumb creatures, are only (in
the nature of instruments) ordained and directed for the use and service of
man: How the dumb creatures are punished.
so undoubtedly, it might well stand with the justice of God to punish them in
the nature of instruments. For alas, what is the whole world, or the perfection
of all the creatures in respect of Gods glory, and the manifestation of his
justice? neither was this world intended for dumb beasts, but only for man;
and therefore as their slaughter is ordained for man, so if their punishment
might serve for man's admonition, and be a remembrancer of his sin, this were
sufficient for the exercise of Gods justice, and to excuse his works of
imperfection. The punishment of the serpent, may likewise serve to instruct us,
that as the glory and beauty of the creatures sets forth the absolute
happiness, together with the commendation and praise of their maker: so the
baseness and vileness of the creature might betoken his wretched state and
condition, who was the first cause and occasion of sin; assuring us of Gods
justice, that if he did not spare the dumb instruments, much less would he
pardon the first agents. Now to square and to proportion these one to another,
the punishment of the serpent, to the punishment of the evil spirit, I will
forbear to do it at this time, in regard that it exceeds the bounds of our
natural reason; hereafter I may take some fitter occasion to discover it, and
in the mean time I leave it to every man's private meditation.

The enmity between Man and the Serpent.
being that the whole world is only ordained for man) I will therefore come to
the second punishment, which more immediately concerns him, and may serve for a
caution: Insidiabitur calcaneo, Genesis 3. 15. I will also put enmity between
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, he shall break thine
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The principal enmity consists between
man and the devil, who is therefore fitly said to bite at his heel; as
chiefly assaulting man in the last clause of his age, in the agony of death,
and principally intending to detain him from the final vpshot and conclusion
of his happiness. In permitting this enmity, did appear the fruit of Gods
justice, as setting his own enemies at enmity among themselves; and likewise
the fruit of Gods mercy, that man being thus molested and maligned by Satan,
and the rather for Gods cause, man bearing the image of God, and Satan Gods
pro^est enemy, being not able to obscure or eclipse Gods glory, seeks to
undermine and supplant Gods image. Hereby it falls out, that man is now become
an associate, of the same league and amity with God, and therefore God is now
tied for man's protection, and may at length without any breach of law or
justice, fight in man's quarrel, against the powers of darkness, the gates of
hell, the kingdom of sin, Satan, and damnation.

As was the conspiracy between man and the serpent for the breach of Gods
law, A general opposition between reason and sense.
so was the combination between the flesh and the spirit, both guilty of high
treason; and therefore it stood with the same rule of justice, to set an
enmity between reason and sense, and between the reasonable and the
sensitive creatures. First in man himself, in the very parts of man, a
rebellion of his members, here is an ill example and president for all the rest
of the creatures to follow; for behold, the dumb creatures, who were made
only for man's use and service, cast off their yoke, and are now become
dangerous and obnoxious to man, from the greatest to the least. We stand not
only in fear of fierce Lions, cruel Tigers, ravening Wolves, devouring
Bears, but G^ats, Flies, and the least worms do serve to molest us: let not
the plagues of Egypt seem so incredible, when as within our memory, in the
year 1580. at Southminster in Essex, the Mice so swarmed and abounded, that
their corn was spoiled, their houses annoyed their grass taynted, and the
place made almost inhabitable; until God in his mercy sent thither great
numbers and multitudes of Owls, which were never seen there either before or
since, and these devoured and did eat up their Mice, and the Mice ^ayling,
they took again their flight, and so the plague ceased. Now it cannot be,
that the government of man over the creatures should so far be impeached,
were it not, that there is some conniuencie and toleration from above,
contrary to the first institution of nature: neither could equity tolerate in
them so foul an abuse, if man still retained in them the same right of
inheritance, and might plead his title thereunto without forfeiture,
impeachment or waste.

It is not sufficient, that man should be subject to the danger of creatures in
general, for his life, his limbs, and his substance; but some there are which
seem to mock and to scoff man, the Parat for his speech, the Ape for his
actions, and others for his gesture. Some though they are impotent and cannot
hurt, yet seem to threaten man; for there are certain ominous creatures in
their own kind, which without any spice of superstition or vain fear,
Ominous creatures.
do prognosticate evil: Others though familiar to man, yet with some
extraordinary and unnatural act, seem to portend evil. Many will condemn
me of sollie in this kind, but I am very confident herein: for whereas in
nature we confess a pr^uidence in every the least natural action, otherwise
it would disparage the government of this universe: and Christian religion
affirms, that the Sparrowes of the air fall down by Gods appointment and
ordinance; so sometimes, for a further terrifying and certifying of the sense,
as likewise for the assuring and example of others, God uses outward and more
manifest signs and tokens. And as the dumb creatures are the instruments of
Gods justice, which did well appear in the plagues of Egypt: so sometimes
they are the Prophets and denouncers of judgments, as in Balams ass, etc.
thoug^ it cannot be denied, but many such accidents do arise from natural
causes; the Ravens feeding on carcasses, no marvel if their sent do direct
them, and that a smell inclining to death do allure them, and provoke them to
cry.

But I will only insist in the Serpent; for the enmity seems greatest
between the most noble and basest creatures, Man and the Serpent, The Serpent
assaulting Man.
and that for the continual remembrance of the first tentation. Howsoever I
doubt not, but that it better appears in those eastern countries, wherein
Paradise was first planted, and wherein the kinds of Serpents do much differ
from ours, yet I will now speak according to our Climate and Meridian. Behold,
when in the pleasant month of May, thou desire to take the fresh air, and
to delight thy senses with the odoriferous breath of sweet flowers; when the
beauty of the Lilies, and the pleasant variety of colors shall allure thy
sight, as thou walk securely by the way side; or when thou do solace thy
self in the grove or the shade, and there crownest thy self with the garlands
of nature; see see a stratagem, a stratagem! treason, treason against thine
own person, the base Serpent, which never durst once appear in thy sight to
encounter thee, now begins to trace out thy paths, and to bite at thy heels,
(a part which thou least suspectedst), where thy hands cannot stoop down to
help thee, yet therein the strength and poyse of thy whole body consists; if
thou touchest or treadest, thou defilest thine own flesh. And thus is every
man now become Jacob, before he can be Israel, first his thighbone must be
broken, to acknowledge his own weakness, before he can partake of the
blessing.

Will thou set upon this Serpent, and by opposing her, seek to defend thy
self? thou shall find it a very dangerous and difficult combat; for see the
guile and subti^tie of thine adversary, think thou to ensnare and entrap
her with thy charms and enchantments, as birds and wild beasts are taken with
several notes and cries? Mins encounter with the Serpent.
she has this property, one ear she stops with her tail the other with the
earth: O the deaf Adder, that will not harken to the voice of the cha^mer,
charm he never so wisely! Do thou expect, that this poisonous creature
should at length burst with her own poison? she is privileged, for her poison
serves to offend thee, and not to annoy her, venenum exp^it vt bibat, in the
taking of her food and her sustenance, she first disgorgeth her own poison,
and then again resumes it, as being provided against man. Will thou draw out
thy sword and hew her in pieces? see how she will stand in her own defense,
totum corpus in orbem circumuol^it, vt caput occultet, her whole body must
serve as a buckler to protect her head, wherein life does principally reside;
suppose she were cut and dismembered, yet is she no way dis-inabled or impotent,
she may well leese part of her length and yet be no creeple. If thou put
her to flight, habet viam tort^osam, she will make such indentures in her
passage, that thou know not which way to follow; and wheresoever she goes,
if she can make the least entrance with her head, she will wind in her whole
body, the earth is her castle, the hedges her buiwarkes; take heed of thy self
in the chase, danger does every way appear, and yet no hope of a booty; if
thou have the conquest, sometimes the sprinkling of her blood will infect thee,
but thou shall never receive any the least price of thy labor.

If time and leisure would s^rue me, I could proportion these several
properties of the serpent, to the qualities of sin and the devil, which
first made choice of the serpent to be his agent and instrument against man;
but I will leave this to every man's private meditation: as likewise on the
contrary, The brazon Serpent.
(wherein our comfort consists) that this serpent lu^king about the heels, we
shall one day tread on the head. It may well feed upon imp^re and poisoned
blood, but when it shall taste the pure and innocent blood, which shall issue
forth from the seed of the woman: then behold! biting at the frailty of our
flesh, she shall be ensnared with the hook of the Godhead; when both
Godhead and manhood shall be linckt together by an inseparable union in the
person of Christ, who is that brazen serpent prefigured out to the Jews. A
serpent appearing in the true shape and condition of sinful man, and yet a
brazen serpent without sting, without poison, reserved for continuance and
perpetuity; the looking and beholding whereof, being once raised up in the
wilderness (faith apprehending Christ crucified) shall cure all those, which
have bin stung by the serpent.

Thus you see the great encounter between man and the creatures, the strange
antipathie and discord between both. Now let us examine how the earth and the
elements stand affected to man in this great diffention, and to what party they
incline: not to speak of the burning and consuming fire, the boisterous and
irresistable wind or air, the roaring and ouer-whelming seas, or the earth,
which seems to be the foundation of the rest, to support this reeling world,
yet sometimes is strangely moved and toffed, whole cities are swallowed, great
foundations shaken, nothing untouched; the fruits, the herbs, and the
flowers are tainted, as if hell (which consists in the bosom of the earth)
sent forth a flash of brimstone to infect this world; I will pass over all
these great general judgments, but (me thinks) in my passage I am detaind,
encompassed, and apprehended by thorns, that I cannot wind my self out of
the snare, The earth brings forth briars and thorns.
or the briars, and therefore in the ne^t place I must speak of the third
punishment of man's corruption, terra^ariet tribulos and spinas.

Genesis 3. 17. and 18. Cursed is the earth for thy sa^e, in sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life, thorns also and thistles shall it bring
forth to thee, etc. Why should the earth bring forth br^ars and b^ambles,
unprofitable thistles, Briars seem to be wholly unprofitable.
pr^cking and hurtful thorns, noisome and unsavory weeds? are these the
fruits of the garden, do the heavens sow no better seed, or is this crop
worth the reaping? to what use has nature ordained them? suppose ^here were
any use, yet could not nature furnish the earth with better provision? And this
use (whatsoever it be) is wholly unknown, and therefore they seem needless and
unprofitable to us, and certainly would much detract from the divine wisdom
and goodness, were it not that they are rooted in that earth, that earth which
is accursed for sin, and therefore brings forth briars and brambles, as
tortures and torments for the just punishment of sin.

The earth was first created of nothing* and as the earth was nothing in her
production, so if God had left the earth to it self it should have produced
nothing; Their production.
there should have ^ollowed a privative judgment, but no positive pun^shment,
poenadamni but not sensus. It should have bin like the fruitless sands, or the
barren rocks, as not apt for grain, so not plentiful of weeds or of
thistles; nothing should have bin the fruit of that, which is nothing in it
self* and was nothing in his first production. But whence I pray', proceed the
thistles and thorns, the weeds and the briars? where is that blessing, that
every thing should multiply and increase according to his own kind? was this
blessing equally imparted to all, or else where is the kind, where is the
seed, that it should thus exceedingly engender of it self? Take the rich
meadow, the fruitful corne-ground, the wood-land, the pasture, the clay, the
chalk, or the sand, all serve alike for the briars and thorns, the difference
of mould or complexion, hinders not their production. No marvel, when the
woods meet to choose them a King, that they easily agree in their choice, for
the briar and thorn seem to have vanquished the whole earth, and therefore
may well claim the government and rule by right of their conquest: But
wherefore serves seed to engender and multiply, if things without seed increase
more abundantly? nature should save her self that labor, whereas her longest
time, and greatest worke-manship, appears in producing the seed.

Is it not sufficient to produce them in such a plentiful manner, but for
their saftie and protection, to indue them with pricks and thorns? insomuch
that their very names are derived from their offensive weapons, Nature seems
to be more careful of thorns, then of the best fruits.
as if they stood upon their guard, and were at open defiance with man,
offering violence to his person, laying hold on his garments, as it were
apprehending him, and arresting him of high treason, pearcing his flesh,
desiring to be bewatered and moystned with man's blood, as it were torturing
him, to wring out some confession; or seasing on man as a prey, intending to
fasten the root, or at least threatening to do it in the dissolution of his
body: or do these thorns serve in defense of the earth? that man should not
presume to touch the earth, as being without the compass of his ancient
inheritance, first placed in the garden, he has no right to the chase or the
wilderness; being first made Lord of the creatures, he should not now descend
to be a hedger or ditcher. I cannot persuade my self, that these thorns serve
only for defense of themselves, seeing their own baseness would sufficiently
protect them: what these did ever set upon a beggar? or who ever hung up nets
in the air to catch butter-flies? or how falls it our, that nature has not
sensed alike, the more delicious fruits, the vine, the peach, the po^egrannet?
but the wild boar out of the wood may root them up, and the wild beasts of
the field may devour them. Has nature taken the charge of the least, and
seems she to be so negligent in the greatest and best? where is the
indulgencie and goodness of nature, especially considering that with so great
ease, she is able to preserve her self, making her self a hedge to her self?
but leaving the rest, that is the best of the fruits, and therefore best
worthy of the keeping to man's providence, Lord! what labor and watchfulnes is
required, not only in the planting, but likewise the same labor is continued
in the preserving.

Shall I tell you the reason? As the mind of man is ouergrowne with briars and
brambles, pricked with her thoughts, The weeds of the earth argue the weeds of
man's mind.
and stung with a sting of conscience: so the body by a rule of justice and
equality, must likewise be outwardly tormented. And as man in the pride of his
heart, presumed to eat the forbidden fruit: so on the contrary, that it might
appear, that he had no right to the least fruit of the garden, to the meanest
thing in nature, but only by the divine permission, therefore the meanest
thing in nature shall revenge that high presumption and violent intrusion of
man. But now that I am pricked with the thorns, or bitten with the serpent, me
thinks my wound cancars; alas alas I am poisoned, I am poisoned, and
therefore no marvel, if at length I burst forth and lay open my poison, and
speak a little of the nature of poison. I speak not improperly, for nature
has hatched this poison, and therefore there is a nature of poison: I will
only speak of plants and of beasts, and I will not here dig up the earth to
search for the minerals, I will reserve them for some better occasion.

The Philosophers, who were the best spokes-men in natures defense, do assign
this reason, that necessary it was, Of poisons.
that of the poison of the earth, serp^^ts and plants (both poisonous) should
be produced; and being once produced, they should likewise feed and consume
the remainder of that poison, that so the herbs and the plants, the air,
earth, and the water* might be the more wholesome and sauoury. But here I will
enter the lists with Philosophy; I confess indeed, that if you will
necessarily suppose a poisonous matter, then God has ordained them for the
best, who being all good in himself, can change and alter the nature of evil,
and turn it to good; but here is the question, why should nature admit any
poisons? for poisons consists in the extremity of qualities, especially of the
first qualities: Ca^ compound bodies, consisting of diverse and contrary
elements, proceed t^ such an excess in their qualities? when the elements
themselves are not poisonous in their own native and proper qualities: or
suppose, that this might, happen in regard of the mixture and concoction, as it
were drawing out a quintessence, pressing and including much quality in a
little quantity; yet that it should be the end and scope of nature, in
effecting whereof, nature should rest contented, as having attained her own
end, and not rather a passage or a degree of nature directed to some better
purpose, as (for example) (...) or crudity may well stand with natures intent,
as it is directed to ripeness and some further concoction; but to give poisons
that consistencie, as if they were essential parts belonging to natures
perfection, it must needs argue that nature her self is poisoned, and justly
punished for man's contempt, in seasing upon the forbidden fruit, the
deliciousnes whereof, is justly recompensed with a poysonoussa^^e.

But cannot the application of any contrary quality mitigate the vehemence of
this poison? is it possible, that it should f^nd^ ^ot such a lurking place,
(...). lie stars of the same influence and quality should find out the nea^^,
How poisons should be generated or produced.
and conceal it as close and secret, while the rest are otherwise busily
employed? that Cancer and Leo should divide the spoil, while Pisces and
Aquarius should not share in the booty? that the Sun in the heat and drought
of the day, should find no opposition by the Moon in the moisture and
couldnesse of the night? The fabulous Poets say as much in effect, that Mars
committed adultry in the absence of Saturn; but how can nature excuse her
self? especially considering, that the seasons of the year mutually
succeeding each other, are contrary to each other; why should they not then
undo that, which others have done? confess, confess, that nature her self
is poisoned, poisoned with sin, poisoned with corruption, she offers man a
cup of deadly wine, a cup of poison, conc^^iscentiam carnis, conc^piscentiam
oculorum, and superbia^ vitae. And thus nature proves every way to be a
fruitful mother of poison, and in token hereof, even in the bodies of some
men, of some complections, she has laid up poison for her treasure; for
certainly there is a natural witchcraft, arising from the very constitution,
in so much that the touch, the breath, the fight of diverse is infectiou^. (...)

That there is no necessity of poisons, consider, that there are great
kingdoms in the world, which are exempted and privileged from any poisonous
herb or beast, All countries do not bring forth poisons.
suppose Ireland; and least you might ascribe it to their bogs or their vermin,
which seem to consume and to swallow up that seed, which should engender the
poison, I would gladly ask, why should not nature be as wise and as provident
in other nations, to prevent the like mischief, though by the same means?
others not sticking in their bogs, nor eaten up with their lice, fly to their
climate; but do not other countries adjoining and bordering, stand in the same
climate? I will therefore make a second instance here in England, the Roodings
of Essex (a very handful of ground) are freed from all poisonous matter, here
are no bogs nor no vermin; or how will you suppose any difference of climate?
not any part of this kingdom is generally more annoyed with venomous
creatures, then is the country adjoining, being a wood-land, a deep could
clay, and heretofore the whole country was forest. I confess indeed, that
any forged or supposed reason framed and fashioned upon all occasions, within
the minte of man's brain, may serve to excuse his own ignorance, mundu^
tradidit disputationi eoru^. My opinion is, that as poisons do argue the
corruption of nature in general: so nature in particular, is sometimes
privileged by an especial warrant and protection under Gods own signet,
(though otherwise I doubt not, but it is by natural means, for God does not
exclude nature, but rather include her, as being his own appointed ordinance,
the course, rule and law of the creatures). And thus God permits nature
both to show her integrity, and to boast of her perfection, that although she
be corrupted, yet is it only some accidental corruption; and being thus
corrupted, she seems to make some recompense with the pleasant change of
variety.

That the punishment of nature may further appear; I would gladly ask, that
if there be poison so horrid, as that in an instant it can suddenly kill: All
poisons do not immediately work, but after a certain time.
why should there not be a right contrary quality, which might preserve in an
instant, and be as beneficial to nature, as the other is dreadful and horrid?
I have heard much speech of Auru^potabile, but I see it confuted by a whole
College of physicians. Now I will begin to tell you a mystery, it seems as
impossible to prescribe a just time and period of death, as it is to p^eserue
life; the hour of man's death being as uncertain, as is the frail course of
his life. Yet such is the nature^ and working of poisons, that being taken,
they shall not discover themselves, they shall not bewray their own
treachery, but as if they were confederate with the nature of our bodies, they
shall lie hidden and secret, until they may work their own ends; Posuit sibi
iniquitas gradus, as if they were part of our nourishment, part of our bodies,
or had entered a league of amity and friendship with us, they shall work at
leisure, and by degrees undermine the foundation of life; so that poisons now
taken, after many months or many years shall appear in effect and operation.

Because this may seem strange to diverse, therefore I will lay open the
reason; certain it is, that there are medicines appropriated only for
certain parts, The reason why poisons should so long conceal their
conspiracy.
which notwithstanding their passage and conueyance thorough the trunk of the
whole body, yet will stay their operation, until they meet with that fit
object, whereunto they are directed by nature, and helped by the cunning and
skill of the Physician. This is the ground and foundation of all Physic; for
otherwise all the recei^s should work only and immediately on the stomach and
liver, without any further relation to the parts or disease: now as it is in
medicines, so is it in poisons, which have their antipathie to certain parts
of man's body; Cantharides to the bladder, the Diamonds to the Lungs, several
purgations (which are remissiuely poisons) to the several humors. Now
considering that there is a great difference in the parts of man's body, some
are more ignoble and base than others, such as we may best spare, and are of
the least use, and therefore may daily consume, and yet the decay not appear
in the vital faculties (suppose the lungs or the sple^ne) and yet the poison
being once harbored in those parts, shall carry in it self an irresistable
power, and by degrees obtain the victory and conquest. Some thing likewise
may be ascribed to the remoteness of the parts, in regard of the great
distance and hard access of the poison; thus is man subject to the outward and
inward annoyance of the creatures, as was the abuse, so is the punishment. Of
whom shall we expect for redress, but of thee (O Lord)? thou that were crowned
with a garland of thorns, and fed with vinegar and gaul upon the holy altar
of thy cross; thou that did take upon thee the person of whole mankind,
take away this cup of our poison, feed us with thine own flesh, refresh us
with thine own blood, and being made lively members of thy mystical body,
let this cup pass from us, this cup of bitterness and sorrow; take away the
poison of our nature, the poison of sin, and sow in our hearts the seed of
eternity, that so we may rise again with bodies immortal, incorruptible
freed as from the poison of sin, so from the poison of the creatures, the one
being the undoubted token and punishment of the other.

Now let us come to man, and consider man in himself, The punishment of
nakedness.
seeing the creatures do thus combine against him, let us see how fitly man is
disposed to resist, and to encounter their assaults; let us see his armor, his
weapons, his furniture. What Prince warring against another, does not first
consider his own strength, and the power of his adversary? Behold then, this
great champion how he enters into the combat: Nudus egreditur de vtero matris
sue, and nudus illuc reuertitur, Naked he comes out of his mothers womb, and
naked he shall return again; Here you see the whole course of his passage, so
that his nakedness is his punishment: Genesis 3. 10. and 11. Because I was naked,
therefore I hid my self; and God said, who told thee that thou wast naked?
etc. For in the time of his innocence, though he should have been naked
without clothing, yet shame should not have accompanied his nakedness; as he
should have bin without vesture or garment, so there should have bin no use
either of vesture or garment. He should not have been subject to the annoyance
of the creatures, for his innocence should have protected him; there his
nakedness should have bin his beauty and perfection; as the child in the
womb, though naked, yet neither feels the scorching heat, or the nipping
frost; but lives in a temperat zoane: but the state and condition of those
times being now altered and changed, why should not nature make her provision
accordingly? Why should she not work her own proper effects, and be as
beneficial to man, as to all other creatures in general?

For it is natural to all creatures, that receiving fit nourishment, part of
it should be turned to the flesh, and part to the fleece; Man's clothing should
proceed from his food, as well as his nourishment.
some should renew the decayed spirits, some repair the bones, some plaster
the flesh; and for the remainder, it should serve for the outward covering and
beauty, as hair, feathers, wool, etc. Now for man's food, assuredly it is much
better then theirs, why should it not every way be alike beneficial? shall
nature leese that in man's nourishment, which she can so profitably employ in
all other creatures, to adorn the proud peacock, to beautify the phesant;
shall this be vainly spent or cast away in man's concoction? Not only in the
sensitive, but likewise in the vegetative creatures, the same food gives them
both nourishment to preserve them, beauty to adorn them, and strength to
enable them, and garments to shelter them against any outward violence. The
trees, which are of strongest constitution, and longest continuance; yet has
it pleased God to cover them with a stiff hide, (the bark) which from the
root, still follows the trunk unto the branches, and fruit; the sap and
juice whereof strengthens and fastens our leather. Thus in all creatures nature
desires to ingraft this opinion, that her perfection est ab intra, appears in
her most hidden works, and in her secret pauilion; and therefore whatsoever
appears to the outward show, is but the fruit of her excrements.

Or why should nature be partial in man, to adorn the head, the brows, and
the chin, with a covering of soft hair, Why some pars should be covered and
not all.
and to leave the rest of the members naked and comfortless; as if there were
not the like use and necessity in all? here we see what she was able to do in
the rest, that thou might ascribe this to the indulgencie of nature, and not
to the earth, which should deck and adorn all parts alike, and should begin
with the lowest: or rather God himself has ordained it, that one part should
remain covered, which man himsefe might uncover in the honor and service of
his God; and thereby acknowledge the nakedness and impotency of the whole. For
(doubtless) it stood with the bounty and goodness of nature, either to make
man not wanting any such shelter of excrements, thorough multitudes of hot and
vital spirits, suppose the eyes and the face, which find little annoyance by
any unseasonable weather; or if man's feebleness shall require them, then upon
the same conditions to supply them in man, as well as in all the rest of the
creatures.

You will say, that nature has left him destitute of garments, as having
provided for him, a large and sufficient wardrop, Nature is heerin more
beneficial to other creatures then unto man.
even all the skins of the creaturs, etc. It should seem then, that man is
their servant to wear their castaway garments; but I pray' has not man a
strength of his own, though otherwise he can use the strength of horses to
perform his own labor? It were to be wished, that for want of others (suppose
a case of necessity), man might have some clothing and garments of his own, to
cover his nakedness. If the dissolute riot of man were such, that he should
make waste of all and sell all to the bare skin; if his improuidence were such,
that he would never prepare for the could winter, or old age; yet shall nature
seem to neglect man, which clothes the Lilies of the field? In every well
ordered state, besides the private possessions of every man in particular, there
should be something in common, whereof it should not lie in the power of the
unthrift to bereave himself; and hereof no man should have the propriety, but
it should be the Lords waste foil for the use of his tenants. Now suppose,
that man had any such proper garment, yet he might exchange it, or adorn it
at his pleasure; the head though covered with hair, yet the harbor might trim
it, it might be decked with the cap and the feather, with the hood, the jewels
and costly attire; to have of thine own, it does not disparage thy right and
title to theirs.

According to the diversity of man's parts, give me leave to make a double
nakedness of man, inward and outward; The inward and outward nakedness.
the soul is naked and empty, she has lost all her ornaments of grace, of
sanctity and knowledge, and seems to be much defective in her natural powers:
for in the dead embers of man's fall, you shall find very few, and those very
obscure sparks of our reason. All her knowledge is gotten by learning, and
having once attained knowledge she cannot easily retain it; as if learning
(like a garment) did grow old and did wear out with use. But observe a
greater difficulty, seldom or never shall you find, that the mind inwardly,
and the body outwardly are decked and garnisht alike; it should seem, that
there is an opposition between both, or that God has concluded by a law of
necessity, that there should be a nakedness: the more nice, curious and
costly the Gallant seems in his outward habit and garments, the more his mind
is neglected with inward good qualities and virtues; for his time and
disposition can not suffice him, to intend both alike; and therefore there must
be a nakedness. Consider again, that in every dumb creature there is some
strange instinct of nature, both for defense and preservation of it self, as
likewise for the use and service of man: whereat the poor silly Philosopher
stands wondering and is astonished, can say little to the purpose, only
concludes, that it is a certain notion, imprinted in the fancy, etc. Then why
should nature be so destitute in respect of grace, being only directed to
grace? yet there is an emptiness or a nakedness in the unbelieving heart of
man, to the high mysteries of Gods kingdom; we are blind, and by the
weakness of our natural light, we cannot discern the sunshine of grace.
And thus we strive and contend with the powers of darkness and ignorance, and
thus the life of man is a warfare here upon earth: Behold, O Lord God of
hoasts, fighting thy battles, we do expect thy wages and pay, for no man
wageth war at his own charge: give us the brestplate of Faith, the sword of
thy Spirit, the helmet of Salvation; that as this war is a spiritual war,
against the powers of sin, hell and damnation; so grant, that the carnal
man being naked and destitute of himself, may receive fit weapons from thy
armorie to fight in thy battles.

For the outward nakedness of his body, it should seem that man is dismissed
of Gods service, having now lost his liuerie, his badge, and his cognizance; or
naked he is, The outward nakedness of man.
that thou (O Lord) might entertain him to thy service; naked he is, that
he might wholly distrust in his own strength, and having no shelter of
himself, he might desire the protection and shadow of thy wings; naked he is,
to show his condition, that whatsoever he has, he has it by begging; and
therefore naked he is, to move thy pity and compassion; he is a pilgrim here
upon earth, and has no permanent city, and therefore naked he is, and must
hasten to run his race, and in another world must expect the change and
variety of his garments; for here naked he is, he is fallen among theefes, and
is robbed of his garments, as he descended from Jerusalem to Ierico; naked he is,
and therefore cannot conceal the spots of his nature: naked he is, and
therefore fit to be washed, fit to be dipped in the lauer of Baptism; or if he
shall offend thee (O Lord), naked he is, and may easily be scourged with the
rod of thy vengeance; naked he is, that being clad with the garments of dead
creatures, feeding on the carcasses of dead creatures, he might call to mind
his own death, and run a course of mortification and sorrow. For naked he is,
and thus nature has disposed him, and yet he is ashamed of his own
nakedness, and therefore he must be ashamed of his own nature, and so
consequently accuse the corruption of his nature.

Will you yet hear some further corruption, which appears in our nakedness?
in stead of confessing our crimes, The abuse of apparel.
lo! hear our abuse: whereas apparel was only ordained for the necessity of
our bodies, and for the decency of our members, now it serves as an occasion
of our wantonness and pride. Nature her self makes a difference between
creatures of diverse regions and places; but our curiosity is such, that we must
borrow from several nations, the variety and form of their attires. So nature
has fitted every nation with garments best for their use: The English cloth is
the only good shelter, against the could Northern blast; and the Camels hair
yields a better shade in Sowthern regions: but we cannot thus content our
selves with natures appointment; and whereas by the orderly course of nature,
there should appear some difference of men's conditions in their outward
habits, for so the horse appointed for the service of war, is better shaped
then the hackney or cart-horse: yet the abuse of man is such, that whereas his
clothing should only cover his shame, now it must serve to discover his pride,
and be a token of his bravery and boasting; so that considering the old
world, and their homely attyres, you would suppose in these days, all men to
be Princes, were it not, that if there be Princes, then must there be slaves,
by a necessity of relation.

Nature has appointed two several features, differing in quantity,
lineaments, beauty, and proportion to the two several sexes; The wantonness and
pride in apparel.
but strange it is among men, how the one does incroach upon the other, much
against the leuitical law, which forbad the like garments to both: you shall
find viros molles and effoeminatos, as likewise women Viragines like Amazons;
men in their pouders, perfumes, false hairs and paintings, exceeding the
wantonness of women; and women in their habits and vestures seem to exceed
their own sex, to the strange confusion of nature. Again the garments should
suppose a congruity to the foundation of man's body, but I fear nature is
sometimes enforced, (for here she is pend up and encaged) to make the body
seem fine and straight; and by and by with loose sails, we seem to make
waste in the blessings of nature. I shall not need to spend much time in
speaking of our abuse in this kind; it has bin the common complaint of all
ages, but especially of ours, which exceedes all former times, and shows her
own vanity from the costly attire of the head, to the golden rose on the
shoe: though we can neither eat nor drink gould with Midas, yet we can
wastfully spend it in wearing, and sometimes our whole treasure appears on the
back; and thus man out of the poison of his own nature, turns that
punishment which God inflicted for man's correction and amendment, to be a
further occasion of his sin. I will only put him in mind, that of himself
he is naked, his clothes are but borrowed, mo^eat cornicula risum furtinis
^udata coloribus; will he be proud of the feathers, the silk, or the wool of
dead creatures? can he find nothing in himself better, then these dead
relics wherein he might glory? if his plenty and abundance be such, if his
change of rayments be such, then when he sees the naked poor man, let him
acknowledge his own condition, and learn pity and compassion to others, by
the weakness and nakedness of his own flesh?

Every man is a labourer.
for naked he is, and therefore you cannot expect any high dignity and
calling; some plowman or day-labourer, here is his profession. That the same
judgments of God might appear in all his works, whereas the earth according
to his first institution, should bring forth every hear be that seedeth seed
according to her kinds, Genesis 1. 11. but now thorough the course it seems to be
ouergrowne with thorns and with thistles. Genesis 3. 18. therefore Gods sentence
is likewise past upon man, i^ sudore vultus tui comedes p^ne^ tuum, In the
sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, Genesis 3. 19. Here it should
seem, that all trades and honest courses of life are erected, for every man is
a labourer, and should intend some course of life: if his hand be not fitted to
the plowe, yet he must ouerlooke his own servants, command them their task,
and manage his own private estate. Here is his carfulness, here is his
husbandry and tillage: and assuredly the seru^nt lives sometimes more at
harts-ease then the master, who s^emes to be employed in every man's labor,
and to yield strength and virtue to their hands and actions. Thus to be man, it
is to enter a service, and to bind himself prentise to all drudgery; while
other creatures live at hearts ease, they neither sow not mow, but keep a
continual holy day; they sit down to eat and to drink, and rise up to play:
only man must take care and thought both for them and himself; and therein must
give an account of his steward-ship.

Not only the body must be clothed and fed, but the mind must likewise be
taught and instructed: and here we seem to run through an infinite course of
our studies. Man's continual labors, both for the maintenance of his body, and
for the instructing of his mind.
The Philosopher, though his body rest, though he sits in his study by a candle
light, yet his mind is in continual motion, climing up from earth unto
heaven; a strange and violent ascent (I confess) whereunto he shall not attain
without great labor and difficulty, not without great peril and danger. For
his body is dried up and withered before the approach of his age, as if he had
passed through the element of fire; now at length having fast hold on the sun,
and the heavens; he is carried round about the world with their motion, viewing
whole nature, sed ca^eat pr^cipitium, let him take heed least with the violent
turning, he bring himself to a gidinesse, and leese himself in his general
search of the whole world. Thus that profession, which the tradesman and
plowman suppose to be the idle and loytering profession, assuredly it is the
most painful and laborious. The Lawyer, in opening the cause and deciding the
right, as it were appointing the just bounds of every man's possession, shall
find it a more difficult labor, then does the husbandman in hedging and
ditching his senses. The magistrate in his government is not excluded from
toil; no man can be freed from the curse, in sud^re vultus: nature her self
seems to teach us this principle, and to infuse it in the heart of man, for in
our idleness we are always most employed, but it is in ill doing, Nihil
agendo male agere discimus: (...) seems to rouse and enforce us to action, in
so much that all our sports and pastimes are in verity and truth, labors,
howsoever we may repute the^ for recreations and sports. And therefore our
natural rest or sleep, we must esteem it a death, we are laid in our winding
sheets, our senses fail us, somno sepulti, we are covered with darkness,
here is our death; and after death, behold our resurrection, we were sown in
weakness, we shall rise again in power, the decayed spirits renewed, our
bodies strengthened, and then we return to our several callings and
professions: and thus our rest tends to our labors, nature is defined to be
the mother of motion, motion is the companion of life, and an inseparable
accident to the creatures in general.

But I will tie my self more strictly to speak of the curse; see then the
correspondencie of Gods judgments to the creatures in general, but especially
to man in particular, for the whole curse must fall upon man; and therefore God
has appointed, that the earth should bring forth briers and brambles, that so
man might be tied to use his own labor for his sustenance and food; see here
the same wisdom and providence of God appears in both: Why should not the
earth bring forth corn, is well as other fruits?
now I would gladly ask, why should the earth bring forth naturally fruit,
fit for the nourishment of beasts, and yet man's body consisting of like flesh,
should be destitute of like food? Why should not the earth as well bring
forth of her self, grain, corn, wheat, barlie, rye, without the yearly
labor, tillage and husbandry of man; as grass, Apricocks, Pomegranates,
Cherries, which seem to be as rare in nature, and as difficult in production?
how shall man only intend the glory of his Maker, and return due
thankfulness to his God and Creator for all his blessings, which was the
scope and end of his creation, if these base offices* this kitchen-businesse
and service shall give him a sufficient task, and take up his time with
employments? certainly Gods service was the end of man's making, and this
after-drugerie proceeds from the corruption of nature, an accessarie
punishment accompaning our sin.

But I pray' let us examine, why should not the earth be as beneficial to
man, No such difficulty in the production.
for his food, as to the rest of the creatures? at first the earth (without
plowshare or harrow) brought forth these grains, suppose Barlie or Wheat; why
should not the benevolence of nature appear as well in the preservation of
them, as in other fruits? You will say, that it proceeds from the excellency
of the grain; this is your error, for at first, there was no greater
difficulty in their production, for there was nothing, and therefore there
could be no resistance of Gods power, as not in the least, so not in the
greatest; as it was in the production, so should it be in the preservation,
the blessing was equally imparted to all, crescite and multiplicamini, if more
be required, nature as she affoords the excellency, so she should supply the
defects, and in their own proper places and wombes, you shall find as easy
generation of the sweet Almond, the delicious Date, the wholesome Nutmeg, as
you see in our common hedges of Crabs, Slowes, Blackberies and the like; if all
places serve not for their plantation, acknowledge natures defect, which is the
scope and mark that we shoot at?

That a perfect drugerie might appear in man, suppose that a poor man's child
were now borne into the world; at first, either with his fathers labor, or at
the parish charge, together with the charity of well disposed people, The
progress and degrees of man's labor.
he must be kept and sustained: now he is in the form of a Beads-man, in his
blew coat, and his blew cap, holding up his innocent hands unto Heaven, to
pull down a blessing upon the heads of all his good benefactors and founders:
(O all ye rich men of the world, if ever pity and compassion could move
your hearts, look upon these silly poor innocent babes; who never offended
either God or man, but only in the sin of their conception: here your
charity bestowed, shall be without exception, for they cannot counterfeite;
they are young beginners, give them a stock, and like seed sown upon good
ground, it shall again return unto you with full measure and thankfulness)
when at length he comes to the age of ten years, then he begins his task,
he must work to purchase his own food, to buy his rayments, to get his
strength, his growth, and his nourishment; for nature only supplies life, she
lays only the foundation, and this life must be continued and prolonged by
such means, which he himself has bought with his own labors: now no man can
work without tools, (the plough, the mattocke, the spade), and these tools
must first be provided with his own labors; having both strength and tools,
there must be a skill and cunning to work, and this skill is gotten by
experience, learning, and his own labors; now he is sufficiently prepared of
himself, but where will he work? either he must first purchase his timber,
his stuff or his ground, or else he must drudge for another, to work in his
vineyard, as if he were to create a new world for himself, before he could
take the possession of this world.

Let us (with compassion) descend to the lowest degree and state of men; that a
man might be a drudge, not only to other men of the same kind, in the nature
of a servant; that he might have work to employ himself, that with his own
honest labors he might get his own living; Man is a druge to the dumb
creatures.
but (I say) that he might be a drudge to the dumb creatures, that he might
be admitted to keep another man's horses, to feed his dogs, to attend his
sheep, to wait on his swine, here is his suite, here is a great point of his
happiness: it should seem he wants letters of recommendation for such a high
preferment. It were to be wished, that the rich men of this world, would employ
some part of their wastefull expense, in setting poor laborers on work; that
they would take some pleasure to try conclusions in nature, and that our
laws, which provide in this case, were better executed, as they were in former
times, and as at this day is practiced in other nations.

But suppose him to be thus set on work, yet he cannot secure himself of his
own health, His poverty, notwithstanding his drudgery.
and of the use of his limbs and his members (though I acknowledge that by
Gods providence, his labor may serve as an excellent means to preserve
health, which indeed sweetens his labor, and makes his condition equal to
the rich men of this world; for I had rather employ my limbs and my joints in
an outward work, then inwardly to suffer the conuulsion of mine own bowels; I
had rather sweat outwardly, then that a violent unnatural heat should
distemper my body) all his days gettings shall only serve him from hand unto
mouth; if sickness attach him, he shall feel his own wants; if wife and
children prove troublesome, he shall be enforced to crave alms and
benevolence; if fire or water do trespass him, then he must have a
collection; and in his old age, when his work begins to fail him, then
means must be wrought, that he may be put in an hospital: every thing runs
in a circle, he began with the spittle, and he must end in an hospital, where
he shall find the uncharitable disposition of this world to exceed the cold
distemper of his weak and crasie body; hui quam miserum est nasci! If I were
in such case as I conceive the young child, and could foresee the whole course
of mine own miseries, it should be a principal point in my prayers, that God
having once shown me this world, he would in his mercy lead me from the womb
to the grave, and take me to his own protection, before my life were tainted
with sorrow, or my understanding corrupted with the wickedness of this world.

Leaving the persons of men, I will consider their labors, and setting aside
all other trades and professions, I will only choose the most ordinary calling
of men, Men's continual labors in husbandry and tillage.
which indeed is the best and the most necessary, I will instance in husbandry
and tillage; the sower goes forth to his labor, some falls upon rocks, some
upon sands, some upon thorns, the least part falls on the good ground, here is
the loss of his seed, the loss of his labor: now this good ground, it was
first made good, it was mealowed and mended, and had many tilths; here is a
continual task for man and for beast, they run in a circle, according to the
seasons of the year, they have their times for their different labors, in
sowing, and mowing, in keeping and reaping the seed and the weed, the least
drought in the sowing, the least moisture in the reaping, any unseasonable
weather spoils their whole harvest; every second or third year the ground
must lie fallow, and here is nothing but barennesse, nature seems wholly
unprofitable; alas how shall the poor tennant discharge his rent? for here is
only hope and expectation of a future crop, which the good husband some two
years hence, may take as the fruits of his labor, and in the interim may
bequeath it to the unborn, and unbegotten child for a legacy. But suppose him
now at length, to have the quiet and peaceable possession of his own crop, a
fifth part of his corn shall be spent again in his seed, an other part shall
be spent to hearten the poor beasts in their travel, very little will remain
for the household provision, or the market commodity; and being thus safely
lodged, yet he shall not be excused of his labor, the thresher, the miller,
the baker, all of them very painful and laborious trades will testify as
much.

I know not, how far I may presume upon man's patience, but truly I am very
fearful in speaking of those things, Gods mercy and providence appears in
our labors.
which might any way concern our thankfulness to God; and therefore give me
here leave to make some recompense, least man's labor might seem to detract
from Gods goodness and providence, the one serves as a just punishment of sin,
the other as an earnest of Gods mercy and our redemption. It is the goodness
of God, that first gave man his seed, and teaches him to know the times and
the seasons, inables him to work, gives him the grace to follow his calling,
preserues nature in her own kind, and concurr's with the second causes in
their effects and operations. It is the providence of God, that the seed being
once dissolved should send down a root, should send up a blade, that it
should be moystned with the first and the latter rain, that by degrees
according to the funnes heat, it should gather strength; that the morning dew
should preserve it from withering, that the white snow like a warm fleece
should keep it from freesing, while with the hard frost the ground should be
mealowed, the worms killed, and the weeds nipt and consumed. It is the mercy
of God, that the seed coming forth should return again (with great
thankfulness and usury) straw and chafe for the use of beasts, and corn for
the food of man; this corn to be enclosed in an ear, fortified with pikes,
least the fowls of the air should seize upon it, laid up in a husk, least
the wind should scatter it, or the water should rot it; and that within the
compass of one month, all the whole years provision might be brought into
the barn; and whatsoever remains in the field should first serve, as
gleanings for the poor, the^ feed the fowls of the air and the beasts of the
field, nothing is lost, the very stuble shall serve to enrich the ground; and
as the fruits of the earth do satin the beasts, so the dung of beasts does
satin the earth. Thus every way you see the providence of God, which
providence is most especially directed to man, and therefore acknowledge, that
man's labor and drudgerie is the fruit of his sin, the fruit of his fall, and
not to be numbered among the fruits of the garden. God that feeds the ravens
from heaven, who opens his hands and fills every living thing with his
blessings, as he made man without man, preserues man's life without his
priuitiue, so (with the same ease) he might have fed him as one of his sons,
or one of his household servants and family; were it not, that man with his own
sin has made himself a stranger, and an alien to his God and Creator.

As I have noted out the curse, so give me leave for our instruction to point
at our abuse; the punishment was the labor of man, All honest callings
appointed by God.
now man in stead of patience in bearing this yoke, and obedience in
undertaking the task, and conforming himself to Gods law, desires nothing so
much as to frustrate the sentence of God, and to avoid the punishment;
especially in these last days, which is the old age of the world, we intend
nothing more then our idleness and sloth, sometimes under the fair show of
sanctity. Whereas certain it is, that all honest callings and vocations of men
they are Gods own ordinance, in performing them we do God service, bis orat
qui been laborat, the works have the form of a prayer, as implicitly desiring
God to concur with his own me^nes; they are likewise in the nature of
sacrifices, as being actions well pleasing and commanded by God himself:
think them not base, do not neglect them with any foolish ^ansie and conceit
of thine own purity, for God has appointed them, and be shall one day take
the accounts of thy labor in this kind. But the general practice of this
world, is to give over all painful, manual, and laborious professions, and
to desire to live by their wits; as if the state of man were wholly angelical,
Men must live by their labors and not by their wits.
and that his h^nger^o^ld be satisfied with knowledge, his thirst quenched
with sweet meditation, and his back clothed with good precepts: or as if every
part should ambitiously aspire to the perfection of an eye; for scholars are
in^^^it, Lawyers innumerable, Ci^ies swarm and abound with multitudes, and
every company complains of company; but trillage, husbandry, and manual
labor, was never more neglected. We do not desire to gain from nature, so to
benefit our selves and to enrich the whole kingdom: but we desire (with the
finenesse and quiddities of our own wits) to gain from others, new offices
must be erected, and we must breed up our children as Clearkes in some office:
and hence it is, that our wants were never so great, the tricks and shifts of
many were never so shameful and dishonest, for they that know best to live
^io^ously in a wastfull course of expense, know least, what belongs to the
labor and difficulty in getting; if nature were as prodigal in her gifts, as
is their minds la^ish and profuse, I should commend their magnificence; but it
falls out far otherwise, etc.

To leave the professions of men, I will only t^xe one of their actions; a
practice which is now grown common and usual, and has bin ha^ched in these
days altogether unknown, or else utterly detested and abhorred, The great hurt
and the shameful abuse of enclosures.
by the former and better times of our forefathers, namely the enclosing of
common fields, when the land leeseth his own proper and natural use, God
having ordained it for tillage, we must convert it to pasture: whereas corn
is such a sovereign and precious commodity, being indeed the groundwork of
a kingdom, whereupon all our plenty consists; in so much that other wise and
politic states, (as the Florentines) will suffer no corn to be at any time
transported; shall kingdoms bereave themselves of their weapons and sell them
to strangers? here is the staff of life, the staff of bread, Leuit. 26. 26.
Here is our best weapon, shall we leave our selves destitute of this weapon,
only thorough our own sloth? wherefore serve the enclosures, but only to the
inhauncing of the Lords rent, and for the idleness of the tenant? whereas
certain it is, that better it were in a state, for men to be wholly
unprofitably employed, then for want of employment they should be left to
their own disposing; wherein you shall find not only the loss of their time,
but other vicious and dissolute courses, as drinking, gaming, riot, quarelling,
and sometimes seditious tumults. Most certain it is, that the kingdom is
heerby greatly impouerished; for those lands enclosed are not able to maintain
such numbers of men, so many horses fit for the service of war, such provision
for our plenty, in a fourfold proportion, as formerlie they did, lying open
and in tillage. Where is the ancient strength of England, how easily may we be
vanquished? if in the best soil, towns shall be thus unpeopled: why does our
law so much intend tillage? why does our law prevent inmates and cottages? if
on the other side, notwithstanding the increase and multiplying of people, yet
villages shall be ruinated, and all must serve for the shepherd; infinite are
the inconveniences which I could speak of enclosures, but I will conclude all
with this one rule in law, interest reipublicae, vt ne quis re sua male vtatur.

Many and great are the judgments of God, which from time to time have
followed the first authors and first beginners of enclosures; but you shall
give me leave to prophecy a judgment. A prophecy against our enclosures.
That I may speak for this climat of England, give me leave to compare this
great kingdom to a body: as in the midst of a body the heart is only the
fountain of all vital blood, which it sends forth and conuayes in her
conduit-pipes, to all the several parts of the body; so me thinks, God has
ordained this kingdom, that in the midst of it there should be the heart,
the richest and fa^^est soil, which might send forth plenty of corn to all
the bordering skirts, which as they have the benefit of waters for the carriage
of their commodities, so are they not in themselves such fruitful corn
grounds; yet if any part of the world be sufficiently provided with grain, for
the most part our sea-cost towns do share in their plenty; whereas our inland
countries must only rely upon their own provision, and to that end, God has
given them a soil fit for that purpose: Now seeing that they have such
enclosures, and that they have wholly betaken themselves to their idleness and
floth, assuredly whenever it shall please God to send amongst us, a
punishment of hunger and famine, there the death and penury shall be greatest,
from whence heretofore we have received our greatest supply. Thus man
desiring to escape the punishment of God in his labor, incurr's a far greater
judgment of God in his famine; if he will not sweat in his work, he shall
starve in his wants. Give us grace O Lord, strengthen and enable us, that we
may labor according to thine ^rdina^ce, and i^ thy mercy (O Lord) give a
blessing to our labo^rs, that we may r^ceiue from thee the* fruits of our
labor, and (...) us (O Lord) from that he^^y punishment of ^^nger and f^mine.

The disagreeing between man and wife.
which appears in his government, having lost his absolute (...) over the
creat^^es, and they no longer tied to his service, but assaulting and
despitefully using their master and governor; behold, God laughes at the
counsel^ of men, instead of governing the dumb beasts, the rule and tyranny of
man must appear upon the same kind, Genesis ^. ^. 16. Sub virip^test ^teeris,
and vir (...) tui; Thou shall be under the power of thy husband, and he shall
bear rule over thee: It stood with the justice of God, that the woman first
entising and abusing her husband, should now incur a (...), and be made a
capti^e to the will of her great Lord and master, (her husband). I know not
whether I should call this i^st decree of God, either a curse or a blessing;
sure I am, that God did never so we any feeds of di^^e^tion between those,
whom he himself has co^pled together, and made one flesh: rather I conceive,
that God supposing man's corruption, does here prescribe a remedy and means
to reconcile this married couple; appointing a dictator for the time being,
making choice of him, that should bear an absolute rule; but alas what needs
a government and rule, if their hearts were united and made one, as their flesh
is coupled and made one? give me therefore leave to reckon this, as a special
punishment of man's fall, (the (...) and dissen^ing in marriage).

To show the large e^tent of this punishment, here I conceive, that all those
things, which by natures first erection and institution were linckt and coupled
together, The large extent of this punishment.
do now admit a separation through their own enmity, that therein might
appear the justice of God, combining themsel^es together against him, now they
fall a^ variance among themselves: for thus it is the property of all evils and
of all sins, that they do not only oppose themselves against virtues; but
likewise m^ligne each other, (...) creatures, which prey as well upon their
own kind, as upon others; yea they do admit the greatest contrariety between
themselves, for the extremes are more opposite to each other, then to the
mean. Now supposing the enmity, God in his wisdom and goodness prescribes a
subjection, that the justice of government might preserve that, which otherwise
would fall to confusion: first it appears in the parts of man, the soul and
the body, in regard the sin was a carnal sin, and that man was thereunto
allured by his senses, and ^rat pom^m visu (...)* and gustu delectabile,
therefore is the flesh tightly and lawfully subjected to the spirit; though
herein especially, as in all other governments, you shall not fail to find
opposition; and in the flesh it self, the ^ame flesh, only cut in two parts,
will disagree with it self, and therefore there must be some government
appointed, for the wife must submit her self to her husband.

How would ye expect, that bre^hren like branches of one tree, should be bound
up together, when man and wife are separated, The branches cannot couple if the
root be divided.
and the stocks cannot agree? that kindred should be together fastened in love,
when the root is divided? or generally how should we expect, that in whole
mankind there should be a firm league of amity, when the first parents do thus
nourish and harbor enmity between themselves? par^us error i^ initio, ^rit
maximus in fine, he that shall go a-stray in the beginning, shall greatly
wander, and with much difficulty arrive to the end of his journey. From this
enmity between man and man, when as all things were distracted, when wisdom
was separated from power, and strength was severed from charity, considering
that disorder is more perilous then bondage, and confusion more detested then
slavery: that order might keep all things within their own bounds, there did
appear a necessity of government, and government inforceth a subjection and
thraldom; thus the punishment is not only to be tied to the sex, (for it is a
rule in law, partus sequitur ventrem, if our mothers be in bondage, we
appearing in their wombes, must likewise acknowledge our just imprisonment).
But it does generally comprehend whole mankind, that in regard homo homini
lupus, one man is a wolf to another, the strongest oppressing the weakest, Man
is sometimes subject to the tyranny and oppression of others.
some imposing a slavery upon others, and there is a generation of men which
feed upon nothing but man's flesh; therefore (with one joint and common consent)
we must submit our selves to a government; which government, if it contain it
self within his own just limits and bounds, it is the greatest and most
sovereign blessing, which can happen to man here in this life. But for man's
sin, he must likewise be subject to the tyranny of others: seeking
protection he falls into the den of a Lion, into the hands of a tyrant, who
delights in cruelty, and has his rewards appointed for all such as shall
invent new torments, with roaring Bulls, fierce Tigers, devouring Bears, and
whatsoever else either fire or sword can execute; and yet we must patiently
endure this tyranny, rather then admit a disorder and confusion: howsoever in
particular, those laws which tend to bondage and captivity, shall have all
possible favorable construction, yet when as the necessity of government, and
the welfare of man shall enforce a subjection, needs we must bring all men
under some yoke, and enforce an obedience; for the dissolute riot of one is
rather to be admitted, then the disorder of many; the cruelty of one must be
suffered, rather then all should be bloody; when in regard of man's corruption,
we cannot avoid all inconvenience, then reason will admit and tolerat the least.

Here appears the necessity, together with the first original of government,
when as between man and wife there must be a superior, a magistrate, a
governor; here appears the excellency, the sacred and inviolable majesty of
government, and that especially of a Monarchy: notwithstanding that Princes be
of the same kind, Princes have their authority from God.
subsisting of the same flesh and blood with others, yet ought their power to
be respected, though sometimes for gifts and good qualities, they may be
inferior to others; for thus between man and wife, though she be made of the
ribs, and every way equal as touching her condition, but for her beauty and
comeliness far excelling man, yet in government she is inferior and subject to
man. Subjection must keep us from slavery, think not thy life base or a
thraldom, when as marriage (which certainly is a very honorable estate) must
admit a subjection: and as the wife does first willingly undertake that state,
and undergo the yoke of her husband, (their being such a permission or rather
iniunction from God), it lies not in her power afterward to make the breach of
her wedlock; so certainly subjects at first, either enforced by conquest, or
voh^ntarily of themselves submitting themselves to their Princes, and now it
lies not in their power to revolt, for who should take knowledge of causes
depending between a Prince and his subjects? And here observe the degrees and
proceedings of government, the foundations whereof were laid in marriage, but
an one after it brake forth to paternitie, The degrees of government.
which contains in it self the greatest and most undoubted right of nature,
bringing children into the world, he might safely conduct them; taking charge
of their infancy, he might direct them in their age: this government was
defective through love, parents did only use soft weapons, compassionat
persuasions, little able to suppress sin. Not long after issued forth
primo-genitura, as being accompanied with the greatest number of years for
discretion; so claiming the greatest part of inheritance, and the highest honor
for government, in memory hereof still we retain these words, elders,
seniors for governors, Senat^s the counsel table; and the Italian has his
Signior and Signiori. Then as families increased, so cities were builded,
countries adjoined, and a^ length we came to Kingdoms and Empires; that God
might show us some token of his own and only government, when an entire nation
shall unite and join it self together, that being men of the same kind, they
might be members of the same body, going hand in hand by even paces, whereby
they might receive the fruits of obedience, the blessings of peace, sustaining
all burdens and grieuances alike, and ready to fight in defense of each other.

But to return to the punishment it self, which primarily and especially
appears in marriage; is it not sufficient that all the creatures should
conspire against man, How strange it is that there should be enmity in marriage.
and the earth it self should discover her own hate, and seem to nourish this
enmity, but even flesh of our own flesh, two Persons in one body, man and wife
should be severed in their love and affections? for you shall observe factions
and distaste in marriage, not between strangers, not between neighbors, not
between servants, not between brethren, but in the married couple, living
under the same roof, fed at the same table, resting in the same bed, that
sleeping and waking they might be a help to each other, having first made the
free and voluntary choice of themselves, their possessions alike imparted to
both, their bodies made one, the weaker vessel laid up in the bosom, and yet
their minds are distracted, they cannot be joined in affections.

Of all other passions, love as it is the first and most natural, so is it the
strongest and most violent; me thinks all little and slight offenses, The
motives to preserve love.
should be hindered and overwhelmed with the stream and current of love; me
thinks the mutual kind offices and helps received from each other, should
not long harbor the dis^ention: what should I speak of the sweet comfort of
young children and babes, the fruitfulnes in their own kind? which indeed is
the highest perfection of nature, and to a christian man, the mysteriall union
and excellency of marriage; elevated from a natural contract to the height of
a mystery, solemnized in the Church, made a religious action, God and his
officers knitting both their hands and their hearts, signifying the strong and
indivisible bonds between Christ and his Church, the Godhead and manhood in
the person of Christ, the soul and the body in the nature of man, the matter
and form in the creatures; and thus the whole world consists of marriage and
the uniting of couples.

Do any other creatures of the same kind, differing only in sex, How
unnatural is this enmity in marriage.
stand in such enmity to each other? especially such creatures, in whom nature
seems to observe the laws of marriage, and makes them presidents and examples
for us, as doves, and the like; is man alone so quarellous that he falls out
with his own flesh, not the flesh with the spirit, for here were some
disparitie; but the flesh with the flesh, ipse ante se positus contrariatur
sibi, is this his entertainment to her, that was first ordained for his help?
like a mad man who strikes and buffets his keepers; but cannot all the motives
and allurements of nature serve to appease him, she is the weaker vessel, and
therefore forbear all violence and wrong, she deserves rather pity and
compassion; thou were once borne of a woman to her great sorrow and grief,
learn now to commiserat and to use them respectively: She is the mother of thy
children, make her no servant; in dishonouring her, thou do disparage thy
self and thy issue; thou did first ^ake suite to her with many protestations
of thy love and kind usage; since thou have made a covenant before God and his
holy congregation, that forsaking all others, thou should cleave only unto
her, giving her a bodily worship, and endowing her with all thy worldly goods,
so that God and the congregation are both engaged in th^s cause, they shall
witness against thee, take heed least thou make a breach of thy promise.

Hard hearted man, cannot all the prouocations of nature* and the necessary
duties of marriage soften thy stony heart? The allurement of beauty should
assuage man.
cannot her beauty allure thee, the tender flesh, smooth skin, clear visage,
fair complexion, flaxen hair, soft voice, quick eye, smiling countenance?
m^ndis omnia munda, I need not be ashamed to speak of this subject, (for God
has sanctified marriage, and therein has taken away the uncleanness of lust, and
the filth of sin) behold the mirror of nature, the most beautifullest
creature under the degree of Angels; whereas thou art vnhewen, ha^sh, and ill
favored, all hayrie like the beasts of the forest; in thy health she is the
only ornament of thy house, to give thy friends the best entertainment, to
furnish, adorn, and beautify thy table, like a fruitful and pleasant vine,
together with her olive branches, that neither wine not oil might be wanting
to thy promised land; and in thy absence she lays up thy store, and keeps it
in safe custody, prepares thy food, washes thy linen, and makes thy house
sweet and neat against thy return; in thy sickness she makes thy bed, she
mournes and laments together, shows her compassion, s^ekes for all possible
helps of physic, to give thee some ease; thus being abroad, thou art at
home; being sick thou art in perfect health, by virtue of this happy union.

Hitherto I have counseld the husband, now give me leave to inform the wife in
her duty, for both may be faulty; has God made her the weaker vessel? then
she wants the protection of her husband; The wife is informed in her duty.
is she more impotent and weak of counsel? then ought she to be instructed
and taught by her husband; has she committed her own person to his custody
and charge? then certainly the disposing of her estate, the managing of her
business of right belo^gs unto him. The wife receives her honor from her
husband, let her honor the stock, and she shall be found more honorable; she
receives her plenty and means of living from him, for he is liable for the
payment of her debts, then certainly she ought to follow his example, for the
course of her ^^^rge and expense: but nature has made the woman gentle,
flexible, and compassionat, I shall not need long to instruct her; only I
fear, when I see strife and differences between the married couple, least
there were never any perfect union; sometimes (indeed) their wealth is heapt up
together, their substance united, when matrimony becomes only a matter of
money; and hee^e they seem to be in the nature of partners or factors, joining
only their stocks or their treasures: sometimes again in the blindness and
sudden assault of their lust, when their bodies are happily united, yet their
minds are separated and distracted, there is no agreement in their
disposition; and this seems rather a linking together of dead carcasses or
beasts, then an honorable estate of marriage, elevated to the hight of a
mystery in our christian religion.

There is nothing which breeds that distaste in marriage, (setting only
jealousy aside) as when either of them do in^ermedle with the proper duties
belonging to each other, In the house there are several duties belonging to
the husband and to the wife.
either to the distrust of the honesty, or to the great disparagement of the
wit and judgment of each other; both which must utterly be abandoned and
avoided in marriage. For man and wife live in an excellent society, they have
all things in common, as we should have had in the state of our innocence; and
therefore no marvel though marriage were first instituted in paradise: and yet
notwithstanding this community, the offices of the house ought to be divided
between both, and neither of them should intermedle with the others affairs
(to the prejudice of either). Which if we should admit, we should not have a
perfect union according to order, but the one should be swallowed up, and both
be confounded: as the parts of a man's natural body, they have their peculiar
offices and duties, notwithstanding they are parts of one man; and as in the
law there were diverse and distinct garments belonging to both, and a sin it
was for a man to put on the woman's attire; whereby is signified the several
offices of both, that there being a necessity of each other, receiving mutual
helps from each other, it might serve as a surer bond of their love. Thus in
nature, the man has strength of limbs for his labor, the woman has weakness,
yet cleanlines; whereby is signified the several duties of both, whereunto
nature has disposed them, which ought to be reserved whole and entire to
themselves: thou (that art a husband) make thy self no Hermaphrodite, to busy
thy self and to pry into every action; do thou distrust the honest and just
dealing of thine own wife, then blame thy self for thine own choice?
remember that thou have made a solemn act before God, and the congregation,
(which now thou can not revoke, or reca^l), wherein thou have endowed her with
all thy worldly goods.

For jealousy, which so much disquiets and sets such a difference between the
married couple, I have full often observed, The fond jealousy of the husband.
that the loosenes of the husbands life, gives him occasion to suspect his
innocent wife, as being guilty to himself, and fearing least by the course of
justice, his own sin should be recompensed with his own shame in the same
kind; supposing his own uncleanness to be a natural in-undation, which has
overwhelmed whole mankind: others though chaste, thorough the impotency and
weakness of their own bodies, yet their mind is impure, and therefore they
fear that in others, which they do not find in themselves. Now for their
punishment, it ^^ood with the just judgments of God, that according to their
adultery and fornication conceived in their own mind, so they should perplex
and torment themselves with their own thoughts. There is yet a third sort of
men, who out of the immoderat love of their own wifes, doting upon their
beauty, being totally carnal, vxorissimi, neither regarding the brightness and
glory of the heavens, nor yet the shame and reproach of this world, they begin
to be fond and jealous of their wises; the excess of their love, turns unto
jealousy; their greatest comfort, proves their deepest coffeehouse: and
thus God laughes at the counsels of men, who being the only true Good, in whom
and to whom ^ll our love and affections should be tending and ending; we
diuerting the stream of our love, forsaking this only one good, as we are
distracted in the truth of our love, so sometimes we are distracted in the
soundnes of our own minds, and leese our selves in our own love, when the
fruits of our love, prove the fits of our frenzy; but O blessed Lord God, who
art the joy and love of our hearts, leave us not to our selves; for here we
offer up our selves unto thee, take us away from our selves into thy most holy
protection; let thy love be with our whole heart, and without measure, as thou
thy self art good without measure; and let the love of the creature, be guided
by rule and proportion still to thy love, etc.

If this jealousy be conceived upon just grounds, yet still I cannot excuse the
husband, for certain it is (whereof we have examples in Scripture), The abuse of
marriage may breed an ill disposition.
that there may be a foul abuse in marriage; notwithstanding the holiness
and sanctity of that high and excellent state, yet there may be uncleanness;
adulterous thoughts and actions may pass between the married couple, and it
is already concluded among the casuists, that plures mariti abutuntur, and
magis abutuntur statu suo, quam coelibes suo, I f^are least the wantonness of
marriage, may breed an ill disposition; if thy wife be somewhat light and of
evil report, then I fear she has bin brought up in thy school, she has
learned it of thee, thou have taught her this lesson. I would not willingly
defile my speech with this subject, only give me leave to tax an ill custom
of this world, that in the seeking of our wives, we use such speeches, such
gestures, such actions, such ribaldrie letters, etc. that it is to be feared,
least young women do hereby first learn to be harlots, before they are wives;
and therefore no marvel, if in the course of their lives, they give some
cause of jealousy, for here the husbands have given a bad example, and laid
an ill foundation, etc.

Thus assuredly the greatest cause of complaint is in the husband, who has the
government of his wife, who might in wisdom prevent his own shame, and should
teach her a modest and chaste carriage; but I know not what ill spirit has set
them at enmity, A bitter inuectiue against marriage after divorce.
whom God has coupled together: sometimes indeed the stream of the husbands
love, being carried another way, is apt to cast any aspersion upon his wives
honesty; and then he begins to practice with heretics, and to commend the law
of liberty, that after a divorce it should be lawful to marry again, and
again. Here you shall see large expositions written in defense thereof, and
the opinions of certain Divines, Ministers, Pastors, Superinte^dents of ye
separated co^gregations, or the new Churches from beyond the seas, (thus they
would seem to have a Catholic consent) together with such bitter inuectiues
against all superstitious fasts, calling all chastisements of the flesh, sins
against the body. Here are their wholesome and sound doctrines, their manifold
and good uses, their learned and excellent applications: thus because God was
incarnat, appearing in the baseness and frailty of our flesh, though free
from the sinfulnes and pollution of our nature, therefore do these men desire
to make religion not incarnat, that is, fitted to man's capacity and
apprehension; but a religion carnal, professing a sanctity of spirit, in the
uncleanness of the flesh, admitting the looseness and sensuality of Turkisme,
into the strict and austere profession of christianity, and here is pure,
impure carnalitie. But O thou monster of men, how many wives will thou abuse in
thy lust? changing thine own flesh, as if thou were to change thine own
garments! notwithstanding the heat and fury of thy lust, yet God may so
dispose it, that a could and chaste blood, which thou supposest to be frozen up
with some Northern blast, yet this blood may succeed thee, and possess thy
seat and habitation, when thy memory shall be clean forgotten, thy name
accursed, and thy seed rooted out in the next generation.

Man is accursed of God.
not consisting in the labor or service of man, but primarilie incident to the
very person of man, setting a breach not between the married couple, but
between God and man, maledictus homo, Genesis 4. verse. 11. Man is accursed, he is
made a runn agate and fugitive from the face of God and man, habitabit in Nod,
Genesis 4. 16. feare^ullnesse shall be his habitation, and he shall least appear
in sight: here I might speak whatsoever has been spoken concerning the
miserable and sinful condition of man, for this is the abridgement and
epitomie of all; to forsake God, is to leave the fountain of all good, and to
make himself subject to all miseries and woe. And therefore the righteous
David cries unto God forsake me not in thine anger, for whereas the absence or
separation of friends, might be a means to assuage their hate, and to
reconcile their enmity: only in God, the greatest fruit of his anger is to
leave and forsake man, and thereby man is wholly destitute of all possible
means, to re-obtaine his favor.

Here now at length I see the reason why, all other creatures received their
approbation from God in the beginning, immediately upon their creation, Et vidit
Deus and erant omnia vald^ bona, and God saw all things that were, and they
were very good in their own kind; and God blessed them, etc. only man is
excluded, The limitation of this curse.
and never received any such approbation, for it lay in the power of his free
will and election to make himself accursed and miserable, and therefore the
sentence of his approbation was deferred unto a day of judgment to come,
venite benedicti, ite maledicti, etc. The rest of the creatures they may be
punished and accursed indeed, but it is only for man's sake, as they are
ordained for man's use, while man himself is the end of the curse; for nothing
can be accursed, but that which is simply evil, and nothing is simply evil,
but only sin; and no creature in nature is capable of sin, but only man, so
that man of all other creatures is the most accursed; only with this
difference, Cain was accursed but not Adam: Adam being the root of mankind, did
therefore represent the nature, Cain being a branch of mankind, did limit the
curse to a certain condition of men, to the state of the reprobates. So that a
curse is in^ident to the nature, though not to the whole nature of man, which
shall appear by this one instance; Balaam was not able to curse the children
of Israel, seeing that he was then in their loins, who was indeed the
fountain of blessing, this blessing we must not only tie to the generation of
Christ according to the flesh, but still we may claim the enlarging of Gods
mercy, according to the promise made unto Abraham, in semine tuo benedicentur
omnes generationes: so that generally God has proposed unto man a blessing, a
curse, life or death, the one as the fruit of man's sin, the other as the
effect of Gods mercy; the one he incurr's by his own transg^essions, the other
he attaines by his blood and passion, who was the atonement and propitiation
for our sins.

Cain bearing the person of all reprobates, and being accursed for the blood of
the innocent Abel, you might here expect, The causes of reprobation.
that I should describe the nature and first causes of reprobation, together
with the heavy fruits of Gods vengeance; how God of himself may limit and
bound his own mercy, to re^use, or assist him, who is now ready to fall: and
yet like a gracious God, remembering himself, together with the scope and end
of our creation, desiring to perfect and accomplish that image, which he
himself has already begun, as he has given the outward means for man's
happy conversion, ite, praedicate, baptizate, omnes singulos, vniuersos: As the
price of our redemption is infinite, able to satisfy for the infinite sins, of
infinite worlds: so undoubtedly the same God according to the truth of his own
nature, will not be wanting in the inward means. He will not feed us with
shows, and appearance of things that are not, but with his preventing,
assisting, and subs^quent graces, he will enable our weakness in such things,
as do necessarily concern our salvation; raising nature to such an height,
that she may be able to transcend her own natural power; yet God shall so
move us, as may be most agreeable to our condition. The kingdom of grace does
not overthrow our natural rights, and therefore God shall still leave unto us,
whol^, sound, and entire, without violence or coaction, the free choice, and
election of our own wills: so that if in his eternal praesci^nce he shall
foresee, that man shall refuse to be the vessel and instrument of grace, to
concur with him in the action; but shall prefer the creature before the
creator, and so shall continue wilful and disobedient in the whole course of
his life, with a final impenitency; here is the sole cause and first motive
of Gods eternal reprobation, which consists of the foresight of our sins,
and of the due intended punishment of Gods justice.

The second curse which I will observe in Cain, is the guiltiness of crying
sins; for he slew his brother Abell, whose blood cried up to heaven for
vengeance; The gui^tines of crying sins.
strange it is, that man by nature should not be able to eleuat and lift
himself above nature, to do any work or action belonging to grace, not so
much as to believe any principle of faith, which to a beleiuing man seems to
be a point of small difficulty; and yet man should easily descend beneath
nature, to commit sins, whereunto his nature is no way inclined; such as the
light of reason, dictamen rationis, common honesty, equity, and conscience
utterly condemns: we receive not this learning from the Preacher, but nature
her self has imprinted and ingrafted it in the heart of man; these actions we
abhor and detest of our selves, and yet these actions we daily practice our
selves; and therefore having once committed them, we prove our own tormentors:
for as nature takes cognizance of the sin, so it leaves it not unpunished,
omnis qui inuenerit me, occidet me, Genesis 4. verse. 14. Here is our fear, and
notwithstanding, that we prove runnagates, that we shelter and hide our own
looks, yet we carry a worm in our bosoms, that accuses us, and lays these
sins to our charge, disquiets the thoughts, and will not permit the souls
rest; and having thus committed, and being thus tormented, whereas reason
should teach them, that the only way to recompense for the sin, were to be
sorrowful and contrite, to ask pardon and forgiveness, even for his sake who
died for our sins; yet they will rather continue in their own filth, and sin
against the holy Ghost with a final impenitency, and say with that cursed
Cain, ma^us est delictum meum quam vt possit remitti, my sin is greater then
it can be forgiven. And thus whereas before they sinned against the rule of Gods
justice, now they begin to sin against the measure of his mercy; to despair of
his mercy, as if his mercy were not infinite, as well as their sins are
infinite: as if the price of our redemption were not sufficient to recompense
for their sins; though they have lost all possible means, whereby they might
be saved, yet God has not lost that absolute power, wherewith he might save a
penitent sinner.

This curse of man is so general, that whatsoever is or can be spoken for the
misery, and punishment of man, may well be included within the compass of this
curse, pe^ty Princes may well boast in the number and multiplicity of their
dignities and styles, whereas the great Roman Emperor could content himself
with the bare title of Caesar Augustus. Man's curse appears in his reason and
in his religion.
Sometimes a plenty breeds want; and diversity of matter, (when men seem to
be distracted with multitudes of thoughts), imposes a silence: many dishes,
and much variety of good cheer, rather chokes then prouokes the appetite; I
must therefore limit my speech, and setting a side all other fruits of this
cu^se, I will only insist in those two qualities, which are proper and peculiar
to man; his reason, which sets him above creatures; his religion, which makes
him equal to Angels: the one guiding nature, the other sanctifying nature,
man's excellency consisting in both; and if in both man's frailty and corruption
shall appear, then needs you must acknowledge the curse, and such a curse as
cannot descend to the dumb creatures, nor cannot ascend to the Angelical
state, and therefore must needs be proper and peculiar to man.

For reason, God has given it man for these two uses, first for discourse,
that men grounded upon the same principles of reason, The strange different
judgments of men.
should concur in judgment, and discer^e better, see more, and search further,
the^ (for the instant) appears to the outward sight; and therefore it is a
shadow of Gods eternal providence and prescience, wherewith God creating man,
made him according to his own Image: but now see the curse, that has befallen
our reason, quot homines tot sententia, so many men, so many minds; as if
reason were not the same in all, but that there were different and distinct
rules, and grounds of our reason. As their are five senses, according to the
five several objects in our sensible nature: so our reason (forsooth) must be
infinitely multiplied, according to the number of men's brains, and the capacity
of each understanding; our reason serves rather to discover the diuersiti^ of
our opinions and judgments, then to enforce an unity of consent; whereas all
the rest of the creatures they have senses alike, they see alike, feel alike,
taste alike; and for their outward actions, they are all carried with one and
the same instinct of nature, only in men their ways are in^init, their
judgments infinite; in so much that you might well doubt, whether they all
consist of the same reasonable soul; and for the dumb creatures, if you will
take their whole kind, together with their natural actions, they are much
more reasonable, more wise and provident in their own kind, then is man,
notwithstanding his reasonable soul.

You will suppose, that I speak only of the promiscuous multitude, and of such
only, whose wit will serve them to stir up a difference or doubt, but whose
judgment is too weak to reconcile the controversy: The different sects of
Philosophers.
or you will think that I speak only of neighbors and women, always
iarring and dissenting out of their envy; or of friends and kindred always in
suites of law in a point of their profit: No verily, but I will instance in the
thrice renowned profession of learning; how many sects of Philosophers have the
schools afforded, what infinite variety and contrariety of opinions? as among
the ancients, according to the number of elements, there were Aristotelians;
who out of their purity, their light, and eminency above the rest, did seem
to resemble fire, which has now at length consumed the rest: then followed the
Platonists, who (like the element of air) enclose all their light in the
clouds, or rather indeed do obscure and conceal it: then comes the Stoicke,
who with the stricktnesse of his life, seems like a sea-^aring man, lies upon
boards, and feeds upon water and fish: at length up starts the Epicure, who,
(like a glutton) runs over the face of the whole earth, from market to market,
to make his best provision, to offer up a fat sacrifice upon the all-deuouring
altar of his belly-god. Here are the four first elements, and from hence
proceeds as great a difference in the opinions of men, as there is variety in
nature; in so much that in the ancient monasteries, what iars have past between
the Sco^ists and Thomists; between the Reals and Nominals, etc. And at this
time it is not unknown, Petrus Ramus censured.
how Petrus Ramus, a man of mean knowledge, without any ordinary parts either
of nature or learning; yet through his own impudency and pride, (desiring an
innovation of all Arts, to cast all things in a new mould, to build his own
fame in the ruins of others), has opposed himself, not against any particular
opinion, but against the whole stream and current of all ancient learning;
overthrowing the grounds, principles, and rules of that most illustrious and
thrice renowned Aristotle, whom all ages do reverence and acknowledge to have
bin natures chief secretary, or best counselor of estate, the father of all
humane knowledge: and that which is yet more strange, this Ramus has left
followers and Disciples behind him, who seem to be like affected to the
ancient learning, reducing all things, (even the very scope and foundation of
arts), to their own fond invention, and barbarous innovation. A shame it is,
that Colleges and ancient foundations, should give harbor to such a wretched
brood; who as they are first nourished up in obstinacy and wilfulnes, so they
will prove to be firebrarnds in the Church; who neglecting the fathers, and
all ancient orders and decency, shall with their own furious and witles
conceits, set the whole world in combustion.

The second use of reason is, according to the nature of the reasonable soul
(which is spiritual), to raise man from the visible creatures, to the invisible
Deity: and here I cannot but be wail the great curse which has befalne man;
for some there are, who in their studi^s of natural Philosophy, Second causes
do not detract from the first agent.
have had strange flashes of infidelity, considering in the Meteors the causes
of earthquakes, thunders, lightnings, whirl-winds, tempests and the like,
together with the symptoms, signs, and forerunners, they begin to doubt of
Gods providence, whether these things befall us as judgments, or as natural
effects; and how powerful our prayers are, for the hindering or hastening of
such events; as if the second causes could subsist without their first mouers,
that parents could engender without the concurrence of the Sun; Deus in sole
te illuminat, in igne te calefacit, thou take the free use of Gods creatures,
but it is the power of God in the creatures, and by the creatures that feeds
thee; the natural causes do not exclude Gods action, but rather include it,
who has so ordained nature, to work his own purpose: the prognosticall and
undoubted signs do argue a far greater providence of God, who before the
creation of the world, could so dispose of nature, as that in his due time, he
might work his own ends; thou see these signs, and behouldest his
judgments a far of; if thou should pray, thou would think it a vain
thing, and here is thy error; though God works by nature, and has in some
sort tied himself, not to make any new creature, yet God has not so bound
himself to work only by nature, but that sometimes he will interpose his own
extraordinary power, which is a prerogative inseparable from the deity,
otherwise there should be a far greater certainty, in the whole course of
natural and judicial Astrology. But suppose, that man knew Gods full
resolution and determinat will, yet are not the prayers of the faithful
ineffectual; for we are to pray for the fulfilling of that will, fiat vol^^t
as tua; and the reason is given by the divines, vt nos possimus capere quod
ille praeparat dare, that we may not be found most unworthy of those
blessings, which he himself intends freely to bestow: if with my prayers I
could not prevent his judgments, yet my prayers would alter the nature of
those judgments, from judgments to be fatherly corrections and chastisements;
and would likewise enable us with patience and humility to bear our burden,
to stay his leisure, and to expect our happy deliverance.

Others, considering the little change and alteration of this world, There is a
great difference between the birth of things, and their continuance.
doubt of Gods providence and his act of creation; whether this world had any
beginning: but how unfit are they to judge of the creation, according to the
present condition of things in the same state, wherein they now stand? for all
their knowledge is borrowed from the course of nature, and not from the birth
of nature; as if they should consider the river Nilus, the stream, the banks,
the ^bbing, the flowing, yet in regard of the large circuit, passing thorough
many Provinces and nations, they should never be able to search out the spring
or the fountain: but does not reason inform them, that there must be a
different condition between the beginning of things and their continuance,
their preservation, nourishment, and growth? Man is not now daily fed, as he
was at first in the womb, there is not the like use of the nauill, which at
this time seems to be almost needles and unprofitable, and serves only to
fasten the liver and bowels; there is a great difference between the hatching
of eggs, and the keeping of chickens; least man should presume to judge of the
creation, by the preservation of nature, therefore has God taught in every the
least creature, a great disparity between both.

Surely to a right judgment, Gods providence and actions do more manifestly
appear by the little and small alteration in nature; Gods power does
wonderfully appear in the continuance of the world.
for I would gladly ask, if a clock or instrument of iron were made, which
should daily want mending, would ye commend the worke-man? but suppose this
clock should continue for ^any years perfect and sound, without reparation,
then certainly the workman should have his due praise and commendation: so is
it in the frame of this world, which has now continued for many thousand
years without alteration and change; and therefore therein Gods providence,
power, and protection, does more eminently appear, then if God should daily
creat new forms of creatures, and should alter and change the present
condition, and state of this world, which he himself in his great wisdom has
already contrived, supporting and preserving it by the same power, wherewith he
created it. For otherwise creatures should be dissolved, the earth should have
no stable foundation, amidst the air and the waters; the whole world should
reele and tumble in the wast deserts of an infinite vacuum: and as nature was
made of nothing, so it should have a power to return again to the same
nothing, as being the first matrix or proper place, whereunto of it self,
being left to it self, it is naturally inclined: for it is a work of as great
difficulty, and of as high excellency to preserve, as at first to create, non
minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri, to establish and continue the
government, is a work of no less glory, then at first to obtain the conquest.

But alas, woe is me that ever I was borne, I could heartily wish, that my
tongue did clea^e to the roof of my mouth, Man's greatest curse in the point of
his religion.
so that I had not just occasion to make my complaint in this sort; for now I
will speak of a curse, which has befallen man in the point of his religion, a
curse of al other curses the greatest; that religion, which is the sole comfort
and solace of man, Man's greatest curse in the point of his religion.
which erects our hopes, and in the midst of misery gives us true joy of
heart, and peace of conscience; religion I say, which proclaims a new heaven
and a new earth, consisting only of happiness; where Princes shall be without
subjects, and the great^esse of the one, shall not enforce a necessity or
relation in the other; where all shall be great, and all shall be called the
sons of the highest: Religion, religion (I say), through the diversity of
sects of schisms, and of heresies, proceeding from the malignitie and curse of
man's nature, and from that first father of enmity, qui super seminauit zizania,
who will not fear to approach even to the highest pinnacles of the temple; that
religion (I say) should now at length disquiet men's thoughts, molest their
minds, and almost distract them; in so much that they know not which way to
take, but stand very doubtful even in the necessary points of their salvation;
Christ is become a stumbling block, the truth of religion (by the corruption
of our nature) giving occasion to the falsehood of religion, as in ancient times
the sacrifice of beasts among the Jews, was an occasion of the idolatrous
worshipping of beasts among the Gentiles. Alas, how many are perplexed with the
variety, and diversity of sects, not knowing how to resolve themselves? whereas
in truth and verity, there can be no greater certainty or infallibility, then
in the immovable foundations and grounds of religion; if we shall detract from
the wavering uncertainty of our own fancies, and rely upon the divine
testimonies; the exposition and true meaning whereof, by the daily practice of
the Church, consent of Fathers, verdit of counsels, has continually, visibly
and successively from Christ and his Apostles descended to us. O happy, happy,
thrice happy are the beasts of the field, that are exempted from all these
differences! I will from henceforth betake my self to the woods, and the
groves, and when I hear the chirping birds sing, in stead of the communion of
Saints, I will join with them in their quier, they shall sing their notes, and
I will frame this dittie, to the father to the son and to the holy Ghost, three
persons in Tri^ity, one God in unity, be honor and glory now and for ever.

This difference in religion, I suppose to be shadowed forth in the different
and distinct sacrifices of Abell and Caine, The persecution of true Religion.
the one received, the other refused; and hence proceeds the enmity between
both, as between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent: the truth
of religion, the more it is pleasing to God, the more it is unpleasing to man;
in so much that no cruelty, torments, or persecutions shall be omitted in the
cause of religion. Abel the first that died or was slain, suffered martyrdom
for religion, because his gift was acceptable to God; he himself was more
acceptable then his gift, the one being accepted for the others sake, and
therefore he himself was to be offered up in sacrifice, to be the figure and
type of him, who was the propitiato^ie sacrifice for our sins; whose blood
speaks better things then the blood of Abel, who as he was the head of the
Church, so opened he the way as to heaven, so to tribulation and persecution,
thorough which he ascended up to heaven; and if we look to climb thither, we
must pass the same way, there must be some conformity between the head and
the members; and thus God in his goodness and secret wisdom permits, that his
vineyard which his own right hand has planted, and is bewatred with his own
blood, yet the wild-boare out of the wood does root it up, and the wild beasts
of the field do de^o^re it.

Here you have seen religion died in her own blood; but now I will tell you a
greater mischief, religion not persecuted, which makes for her honor; but
maskt, disguised and counterfeited, The cloakes and pretenses of Religion.
which discouers her shame. For many there are, who color all their sins and
impieties under the fair cloak of religion; thus not only our souls and our
consciences, our faith, our hope, our salvation; but our lives, our bodies, our
freedom, our goods, and whatsoever else may concern us, all are subject to
ship-wracke under this religious tempest. What murders, thefts, treasons,
treacheries, gunpowder plots, massacres, have past among men for commendable
actions, under the veil of religion? what breaking of leagues among Princes,
what dispensing with oaths, what alteration of governments, and last of all,
what infidelity has past between men, under the color of faith? Caesar,
Tacitus, Macchi^uel, they were but babes and fools in policy; for they never
learned this lesson, how to lay the foundations of policy, and to build up the
tower of iniquity with Church-stones. To ground all factions in religion, this
is a monster newly hatched in our days, in this last and worst age of the
world; as if the kingdom of grace did clean ouer-throwe all natural rights;
as if heaven could not subsist with the earth; as if the Moral law, were
together abrogated with the Ceremonial: But O blessed Lord God, keep thy
sheep, keep thy shepherds, keep them as the aple of thine own eye; let
Cain be accursed, let him answer for his brother Abels blood, let him be a
runnagate, and never dare to approach near thy vineyard; protect (O Lord) the
tribe of Judah, and let not any violent, blo^dy, and traiterous hand, touch
thine anointed.

My intention here is only to speak of the curse, the undoubted token of man's
fall and corruption; but I cannot stay my self, needs I must crave pardon,
having opened the wound, if I apply the salve, while it is fresh and green, I
may with great ease keep it from festering; here I will give thee some little
taste of that, The Author makes a small digression.
which hereafter I may discover more largely. For if it shall please God, that
together with our most happy forefathers (the great Magi), I shall once safely
arrive at Bethelem, where I may but hear the child Jesus cry in the manger* I
will never leave or forsake him, but instead of the st^r, which first conducted
me to the place of his birth, I will then follow him as my ruler, my guide, and
protector: I will attend him in his flight unto Egypt, thorough places of
darkness and ignorance; and in the midst of persecution, from thence I will
return again unto Galile; where I will wait upon him, and set him before mine
eyes to order my ways, and my footsteps: and if in any solemn feast, or great
assembly I shall leese him, then presently I will make inquisition, I will go
back again to Jerusalem, where I will make search for him in the temple; and
there undoubtedly I shall find him, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, in
medio Doctorum, having his casting voice, and directing the Catholic concent
of many; let me not therefore here prevent this happy occasion.

Only in a word, the controversies of religion assuredly they are such, that if
a man be of the least understanding (setting the fear of God before his own
eyes, The controversies of Religion.
and that he has no turbulent spirit, but intends charity, piety, and
devotion), they do not any way frigh^en or molest him; for necessary it is,
that there should be scandals, and woe be to him by whom there are scandals.
Let it suffice, that the faith of the Church of England, which here we
profess, was not framed yeasterday, to serve the present turn and occasion,
by new vpstart and heathenish innouators; when as Clearkes did seem very
learnedly to dispute, yet a secret close policy did overrule the conclusion;
but such a faith as all the Fathers embraced, all the councels approved, all
the learned Divines confirmed, in the Greek Church, in the Latin Church; which
all the Martyrs have sealed with their blood, all the Confessors witnessed with
their torments; a faith confirmed by so many miracles, taught by the Apostles,
first opened and revealed by Christ, qui erat splendour patris, who was a light
to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel. This faith was
prefigured in the law, with sacrifices and types foretold by the Prophets, and
shadowed forth in nature by the undoubted promises of God, semen mulieris
conteret serpentis caput: so that my faith and religion, whereby I look to be
saved, was the faith and religion of Adam, which I can derive by a lineall
descent from age unto age, showing the express footsteps, and where the
Church has always resided; like a hungry dog thirsting after my salvation. I
can follow the sent and pursue the chase, from the first day of the worlds
birth, (for together with the creation of man, was the end of man's creation,
and the means to obtain this end, Truth is most ancient, as being of the
nature of God, and God himself is the ancient of days; and in all our doubts
of religion, we must still fly to the first institution, an sic fuit ab
initio), unto this present day, being the 28. of February, in the year of our
Lord God 1615. dies dierum, the beginning of our septuagessima, wherein we
remember the first fall of Adam, and the birth of a sinner.

For the controversies in general, some there are which cannot be reconciled;
and for these we will mourn and lament, and daily beseech God for their happy
conversion: There are seeming controversies which may be reconciled.
but I fear that a great part of the dissension proceeds from our selves, who
being now settled in a peaceable Church, without persecution, the truth of
religion sufficiently appearing without any great opposition of Turks, of
Jews, or of Heathen, having now gotten respit and ease, we do not so much
intend the actions of zeal and devotion, as the point of our learning, and the
sufficiency of our knowledge; which notwithstanding is not so proper and
peculiar to Priesthood, as is the practice of Piety, wherein consists the
height and perfection of a christian life; some (I say) rather intending their
studies then their prayers, desiring to show the strength of their learning,
they must enter the combat of wits, and here they must seem to dissent and to
be irreconcilable; while closly and underhand, they send forth their agents,
and messengers to treat of a peace; and with a nice and quaint distinction,
can take up the difference among themselves, without shedding one drop of
blood; while the world takes notice of their disagreement, and being not able
to judge of their words of art, and the tricks of their wit, still conceaues
them to be at deadly enmity. I know not what to say of their learning, but I
do much condemn their dishonesty, to make show of difference, when indeed
there is none; and the school learning it self, which makes all things
disputable, howsoever I do highly commend it, for wisdom, learning and
judgment, yet I fear it has not proved so profitable and beneficial to the
Church; as having stird up those iars, which it could never assuage, like the
action of the moon in our bodies in respect of il humors; for man is easily
prouokt, but not so easily reconciled; out of the frowardnes of our minds,
disputations do rather conceal, then open a truth; but it were to be wished
rather, that the vulgar should never be acquainted with the controversies, then
that thou should think to make them such perfect and good clearkes, as that
they might truly judge of the differences: of them and of our selves I may
truly say with the wise man, Deus fecit hominem simplic^^, ipse se immiscuit
innumerabilibus quaestionibus.

In these differences of religion, I do acknowledges wonderful and unspeakable
providence of God, for some of them seem to make more for Gods glory, and for
man^s^l^ation; Gods providence and goodness appears in these controversies of
religion.
if they proceed without any great breach of christian charity, the difference
not consisting in any fundamental, and essential point of religion, but such
as may well stand with the text of Scripture, the three Creeds, all ancient
counsels, and the continual practice and tenent of the Church; so that herein
we shall not need to fear any shipwreck of faith, we shall not need to
endanger our goods, our limbs, or our lives, but rather to leave them as
disputable at schools: but now s^e the profit which redounds to the Church by
these differences; they teach man his own weakness* and how imperfect he is,
in things of highest perfection; they have raised up many excellent wits,
profound learning, and wonderful industry in all manner of knowledge; they
have made all more cauti^nat and (...) in their own ways, least the adversary
should take any lust occasion of reproach: not only our catholic reformed
Churches, but even the present Abbeys and Monasteries, now extant in other
notio^s, have bin much reformed, since the dissolution of ours; they have laid
open the maine strength, the rock, the foundation, the pillars of our
Christian religion* so^h at men never had the like means, for the increase and
strengthening of their says, as they have at this day; the factions of each
party do kindle the heat of their zeal in their own profession, and of their
charity one toward another; as the intolerable hate of one common foe, will
knit together a firm league of amity, which otherwise of it self would easily
dissolve.

And therefore I will conclude, that the Church at this present, inregard of the
many differences, may fitly be shadowed forth in Saint Peter's calling, Saint
Peter's calling and reprehension.
and in S. Peter's reprehension; Saint Peter who was called from fishing, to be
a fisher of men, let his net resemble the Church, the conversion and taking of
souls: upon the calling of Saint Peter his net brake, but as the Divines do
observe, it was to let in fish, and not to let out fish, and so the event
proved accordingly: make I beseech you the application; sometimes a schism in
the Church opens a wider gap to salvation; that others may enter in, who before
d^^st never approach for fear of the Cherubin, which keeps the gate of
Paradise with a fiery sword, (that is) with fire, and with sword: Secondly,
Peter's reprehension was, that when many came to apprehend Christ, all of them
were not his enemies, some came to behold him, some to hear him, some to
compassionat him, while others betrayed and apprehended him; yet Saint Peter, I
will not judge of his intention, in the heat of his zeal draws out his sword,
which he could not lawfully do, and strikes off the ear of Malchus: the ear
is the instrument of hearing, and betokens the sole means of man's conversion;
but Christ heales up the wound, restores his ear, rebukes Peter and threatens
him; he that draws out the sword shall perish by the sword, he that abuses
the sword, and often prouokes the secular power, shall at length smart by the
sword, etc.

For the persecutions of the Church, it is no marvel though God does permit
them, seeing that Christian religion inioyning man penance for his finne,
seems to be a kind of persecution* such fastings, Persecutions of the Church.
such weeping, such mortificaton, such a strict and austere life, that tyranny
itself could hardly impose a greater torment, were it not, that Gods holy and
sanctifying spirit seems to abate the sorrow; besides the promises of God, and
the conformity of this building, for the foundations of the Church were laid in
the blood of Christ; and therefore necessary it is, that in the rearing up of
the walls and the roof, the mortar should likewise be tempered with the
blood of his Saints, and they appearing in their own blood, as it were clothed
with scarlet, should at length sit upon thrones, judging and condemning the
world of impiety.

For the cloakes and pretenses of religion, what should I say, the best things
are soonest abused, and this argues our corruption; if thou find desperate
attempts covered with a religious habit? Pretenses of religion how they should
instruct us.
then acknowledge in thy self how powerful religion should be, for guiding
and directing thee in the whole course of thy life, when a counterfeit show of
religion, shall move others to undertake such dangerous and horrible cruelties,
not without the loss of their limbs, substance, life, the utter undoing of
poor widows and orphants; the exposing of themselves to all manner of
tortures, fearful to the behoulders, and therefore much more terrible to the
offenders and malefactors, who suffer for their evil doing, etc. Whatsoever
else may concern religion, I shall hereafter speak of it more largely to your
further satisfaction.

As man was corrupted, and all the creatures forsaking their first and natural
use, did serve for man's punishment, and rebelled against him; so it stood with
the uniformity of Gods judgments, The general deluge.
that nothing should remain untouched, no not the elements themselves, being
the first principles, seeds and foundations of nature, for as man was totally
defaced, and had lost the image of God, so this world though coming far short
of that most excellent state of Paradise, yet being Gods own immediate
work-man-ship, and so still continuing, God at length in his wisdom for our
sins, thought fit to deface it; and behold the rule of his justice, when as the
children of God were mixed with the children of men, God sends a deluge of
waters to confound them together. Death is the punishment of sin, that we might
herein acknowledge Gods own handy work, the judgment fell from above, their
graves were fashioned in the clouds, and the elements did for a time change
their situation, and these were likewise confounded together: and as in the
creation the waters did flow upon the face of the earth; so now again the
whole world did seem to go backward, and to return to the first nothing.
Hence began a great alteration in nature, and all things were changed to the
worst; the earth did decay in plenty and goodness of fruits, for immediately
after the deluge, God did enlarge Noahs-commission, and gave him free power to
feed on the flesh of the creatures; Losses sustained by the deluge.
the water likewise lost her natural property of goodness, and therefore
Noah immediately began to plant a vineyard; the air was more subject to
vapors, foggy mists, and dark clouds; the fire with hot ^umes and exhalations
ascending and turning to meteors, was made more imperfect and impure; the
heavens themselves have not freely escaped, though these sublunary contagions
could not infect the stars, yet were they able much to hinder the goodness of
their actions and operations, as likewise to eclipse and obscure their beauty;
some of them never appearing unto us, as are those stars in via lactea; others
seem twinkling, titillantes, through the thickness, opacity, and gloominesse
of our air, not giving passage to their beams; and all of them appear short
in beauty, less in quantity then indeed they are, and assuredly are much
hindered in their operations.

So that this general deluge was indeed the general confusion of nature; and
as it was the death of nature, so nature her self could neither hinder nor
hasten her own death; and being once fallen, The natural means were not
sufficient to cause a deluge.
she could not raise her self by her own natural power, for howsoever the God
of nature might well use natural means (the watery constellations) for the
effecting of his good will and purpose; yet surely these in themselves were not
sufficient, unless you will thereunto add Gods infinite power, and his absolut
authority; for certain it is, that there was the l^ke conjunction of stars,
within our memory, in the years 1524. and 1588. If we should suppose that God
did herein use natural means, they might be numberless, as the power of God
is infinite, and his wisdom unsearchable; yet such as reason and the school of
Philosophy do most approve, are these: First, that before the deluge the earth
was more level, and framed according to a better rule of a Globe or a Center,
and therefore the water might with more ease cover the whole earth 15. cubits
deep; this being supposed, there might follow a transmutation and change of
elements among themselves, where the earth might be turned into water, and
carry according to the rule of Philosophy, decuplam proportionem, that every
ounce of earth might be turned into ten ounces of water; the water likewise
might be summoned to appear out of the deep, to change her situation, to
possess the face of the earth, according to her natural course; the whole
element of water might be ra^ified, that it might take up a larger compass,
and still retayning her nature might serve for our punishment; the bordering
region of the air, might be condensed and thickened, that it might serve in
stead of choking waters, and these might be raised and puffed up with hot fumes,
proceeding from the bowels of the earth, which might make the boiling or
scalding seas to swell above measure. Thus infinite are the ways and means,
which God might use in this deluge; I will here impose my self silence, rather
trembling at his judgments, then presuming to search into the depth of his
counsels.

I do much more wonder at the staying of this deluge, how the flood should
cease, considering the nature of water is to flow upon the ^ace of the earth*
for us to conceive that the sea is a sink or a bottom, The wonder was greater
in the ceasing of the flood.
and that the waters are lower then the earth, it is much against reason, which
denies the water and earth to make one perfect globe; much against common
experience, when in the highest parts of their ships they see furthest, and
first discover the shore; th^ugh I confess, that the inequality of the earth,
is a special means to reduce all waters to one proper place, yet I suppose,
that the wonders of God do manifestly appear in every element. First, in the
earth subsisting in a center, like an immovable stock, carrying the same
distance to every part of the circumference; then the waters, notwithstanding
their roaring, their continual and strange motion, wherein they seem to
threaten the earth, yet are kept within their own bounds, not encompassed with
a wall of iron or brass, The wonders of God in every element.
but with a border of sands, a weak bulwark (I confess) were it not, that
Gods power had first prescribed the bounds; then follows the air, strangely
and miraculously supporting a weighty burden of clouds; at length we come to
the fire, which being kindled and preser^ed by the swift and continual motion
of the heavens, as it draws nearer and nearer the poles, so is it more and
more lessened, and gives place to the middle region of the air, which is
therefore ^^iled from the burning and scalding zoanes; whe^^ (instead of
shewers) they have their morning (...) and the sweet springs, to bewater their
dry and scorehed soil.

For the truth and certainty of this deluge, see how God did dispose in his
providence, that the Arc should rest upon the mountains of Ararat, amongst
which (as I find it reported) there are the highest mountains in the world,
and the most in number; which was an undoubted argument, Proofs of the deluge
from the resting of the Arc.
that this flood did ouerwhelme the whole earth: and likewise these mountains
were furthest distant from the sea shore, that so it might appear to after
ages, and succeeding generations, finding the reninant of this Arc, that the
labor and industry of man, neither would nor could transport the Arc thither,
but upon sight thereof, they might acknowledge and remember the great
in-undation of waters; for thus Nicholaus Damascenus, an heathen man writes,
that in a general deluge, one was carried in an Arc, and rested upon the top
of these mountains, whereon there continued a long time after, certain pieces
and fragments of the Arc; and this might be the same, which Moses the
Lawgiver of the Jews does mention.

Many signs and tokens do likewise appear in nature, which as they are the
relics, so they serve as most undoubted arguments and proofs of the deluge;
Relics of the deluge in nature.
at this day there are found, both in other nations, and (as I am informed) in
the I Will of Man certain trees, which serve both for timber and fuel, in such
plenty and quantity, so many fadomes under the earth, as that by all probable
conjecture they were there buried and covered in the time of the deluge; God
foreseeing the wastfulnes which man would commit in the spoil of his woods,
like a provident master of a family lays up his store, makes his provision,
and keeps his wood-yard safe locked and conceald, until a time of necessity;
sometimes likewise in the bottomes of seas and waters, Trees.
where assuredly according to the coast and situation of the country, there
has bin always a flux of waters, (supposing the world in the state, wherein
now the world stands) yet therein there has bin discovered foundations of
buildings, Buildings.
which assuredly were ouerthrown in the general deluge; upon the face of the
earth I have observed rocks and stones seeming to hang in the air, without
any circumiacent earth, whereas I did conceive in reason, that these having no
certain growth, but only per iuxta positionem, and agglutinationem, Rocks.
as the schools speak, the bosom of the earth was the fit womb to engender
them; and standing thus they did daily decay and decline, and therefore
certainly were not thus from the first creation, but the conflux of waters has
uncovered them of earth, and has left them there naked and bare, to be the
immovable marks of the great deluge.

When I consider the barrenness of the earth for many leagues together,
Barrenness.
I cannot conceive that it should be thus from the beginning, being Gods own
immediate workmanship, but that the salt waters have caused this barrenness,
and when I consider the strange different mould of one and the same earth, as I
have often observed, The different mould.
sand upon clay, clay upon grauel, grauel upon chalk, chalk upon sand, etc.
Assuredly this diversity never was in the first creation, neither has it since
been effected by any influence or operation of stars, but some general
ouerflowing of waters, has caused this variety of mould and complexion; The
veins of the earth.
observe how the goodness or barrenness of grounds follows certain veins of
the earth, not according to the coasts of the heavens, from East to West, from
South to North, least you might ascribe it to the motion of the stars, but
commonly by a wreathed and crooked form, that you might rather ascribe it, to
the current streams of the waters; but let us dig up the barren soyles, and
sometimes we shall find out marle-pits, Marle-pits.
which do undoubtedly assure us, that God having first created the earth, gave
it a fatnes in the upper crust thereof, but in the great in-undation of waters,
being spread and covered over with sand, it is now baked and grown to a kind
of ripenes and melownes; so that (man using his labor and industry) God has
now ordained it, to be the compost of the earth, to supply the barennesse of
nature, in this last and old age of the world: Cole-pits.
let us yet dig deeper, and happily we may come to some cole-pits, which
consist of the oily and unctuous substance of the earth, which is laid and
buried so deep by the ouerflowing of waters, in the time of the deluge, as not
being able to supply ^ap for the root of trees (whereunto it was first ordained
by nature) it gathers it self to it self, and having a long time of
concoction, without any great annoyance of waterie sap, God has ordained it,
as a fit subject for fuel, which in these last days, (our wood failing,
especially in these cold Northern countries) God has very plentifully
discovered; and that which gives credit to this truth, I have observed this in
the cole-pits, that where there has been a moderate fall, and descent of
water, there the cole has been much weightier, brighter, and better; as for
metals there is not the like reason in them, for assuredly they follow the
course of the heavens, as they are framed by a special influence of Stars;
wherein appears the goodness of God, that in so painful and such a
dangerous work, poor man might observe a greater certainty in his labors.

I suppose likewise, that the vn-euennes of the earth (the hills and the vales)
were much caused by this general deluge; for ye shall observe, that the
highest mountains upon earth, carry some proportion to the lowest bottom at
Sea: Mountains are shelues, valleys are the channels.
for as the greatest height is supposed to be six and twenty or seven and
twenty miles upright, so is the greatest deapth, that God might observe some
kind of proportion in the inequality, seeing that both earth and water should
make one perfect globe, (thus the fish of the Sea resemble in feature and ^orme
the beasts of the field, that so thou might acknowledge the same providence
of God in both); for certain it is, that all the terrible tokens, and signs
of Gods anger and wrath, did accompany the deluge; and as the waters did swell
above measure, so the billows and waves of the Sea did arise in a wonderful
and fearful manner; and these (surely) might well cause a great inequality
in the earth; and therefore you shall observe, that the hills stand not alone,
but are contiguous and adjoining together, as it were shelues raised up with
the waves, and carried with the stream; that it might appear, that God in the
midst of judgment, remembers mercy; for even these hills did serve as a
special means (by Gods own appointment) to allay the raging of the waters;
and again to gather them into one common storehouse, where they might be
hedged, and kept within their ow^e bounds.

The truth of this deluge to the Jews and the Christians, Proofs amongst the
Jews.
is sufficiently warranted by the divine testimony, which is beyond all
exception. We are likewise able to trace the continued succession of times,
the descent of tribes and families from Noah and his Sons, as likewise the
plantation of nations, the establishing of kingdoms and governments; so that
nothing is defective in this kind, to him that has made but a small entrance
in the study of Chronology; as likewise the attempts of men soon after the
deluge, for preventing the like in-undation, as namely the building of Babell,
etc. many things as yet appear in their laws and their customs; especially
places (reserved for keeping of their ancient records) so built, as that they
might be free from the annoyance of waters.

For the Gentiles, their Philosophers considering that the world was vpheld by
opposition and combat of elements, and that the elements were not equally
matched, but do fight upon disadvantage; for two of them are active and two
passive, the active qualities far exceeding the passive in virtue, power and
operation; hereby they did conceive that there might be an overthrow and
dissolution in nature, either by water or fire, which were therefore not
improperly called the dreadful and destroying elements; whereby the opinion
concerning the general deluge, was made the more credible, which deluge was
known unto them by the name of Ogiges or Deucalions flood: not, but that I
acknowledge there was a flood which happened in the time of Ogiges, and another
in the time of Deucalion; but assuredly such things are reported of these two
floods, which could not be competent or agreeable, but only to the universal
deluge; and therefore I suppose that the deluge was called by the name of
Ogiges or Deucalions flood, because these gave occasion, and did rippe up and
renew the memory thereof; this I conceive, because certain it is, that Noah
was called among the Gentiles, the first Ogiges, speaking of the flood which
happened, sub prisco Ogige, and things which were past remembrance were called
Ogigia; Testimonies of the Gentiles concerning the deluge.
this deluge is likewise mentioned, by diverse most ancient heathen writers, as
by Berosus Chaldaeus, Hieronimus Aegyptius, Nicholaus Damascenus, Abydenus and
others, according as both Josephus and Eusebius do prove; Plato in Timaeo,
seems to remember it; and Berosus, who was the most ancient writer among the
heathen, begins his history from the flood in these words: Ante aquarum
cladem famosam, qua vniuersus perijt orbis, etc. beyond which course of time no
history, no author, no monument is extant; and that you may not think, that
this truth was fastened upon the ancients, or that their works should herein
admit a favorable construction; the Heathen and Pagans at this day in Bresill,
and other countries of the West Indies, lately discovered in our age, where
never any Christian professors were known to teach; yet they talk of the
drowning of the world, which happened in times past; and they say, that this
was left unto them by tradition, time out of mind, by the inhabitants of those
places.

But why do I thus trouble my ^^lfe with the deluge? behold I see a waterie
sign in the clouds, containing in it self a great variety of glittering
colors, as it were resembling the beauty of Nature, which by a special
indulgence of God, shall preserve us from the like in-undation of waters. Of
the Rainebow.
It proceeds (I confess) from waterie and natural causes, and was before the
deluge; but not as a sacramental sign, or the earnest of Gods promise and
covenant: for the (...) is a ring* before it becomes a marriage ring, as things
which consist in relation, first presuppose an entitie in themselves. Behold (I
say) here is a bow; but here is our comfort, an empty and a naked bow: Where
is the shaft? it is already shot, and spent; we shall never need to fear
any further danger by this bow; for to my sight, and to my understanding, it is
rather bent against heaven, then against earth. I pray' observe it aright; it
should seem that God has so disposed it, that it might serve rather as a
memorial for God, to put him in mind of his promise, then as a terror to man,
to strike us with fear of Gods vengeance. And therefore this bow shall serve
as a bridge, as a bow-bridge, by which I will pass over this great in-undation
of waters, humbly praising and magnifying God, that as the old world was
overwhelmed by waters; so God in his mercy has appointed, that there should
be a regeneration by waters, that the old Adam being washed and cleansed from
sin, we might be received into the arc of Christ's Church, through the
sanctifying waters of the holy stood of Jordan.

Having spoken of the first overthrow of the world by waters, I cannot but in a
word, (for similitude of argument, though otherwise the judgments shall be
wrought by different and contrary means), speak of the second overthrow,
which shall be by fire, in a general combustion. Behold then, the earnest of
this last judgment, when as Sodom and Gomorrha were consumed with fire from
heaven, that it might serve for ever as a remarkable token, The burning of
Sodom and Gomorrha is an earnest of the last general combustion.
or the first beginning of a general combustion, which threatens the whole
world. Unto this day the place is uninhabitable, fire and brimstone having left
such a strong sent, as might well argue the strange ebullition of their
unnatural lust: and as it was a lust, which did not intend generation; so was
it the most unnatural act, without any president or example of the brute
beasts, for none of them are tainted with such uncleanness. And therefore
(behold) their punishment, carries a proportion and correspondencie to the
offense: whereas they should have intended by an orderly course of nature, the
preservation of their seed, in the fruits of their loins; the propagation of
their kind, and the continuance of their names and memories; themselves taking
a clean contrary course, etc. (the remembrance hereof is most hateful,
detestable, and abominable to every chaste and Christian mind). Therefore by
the just judgments of God, these Cities were turned, by their destruction,
into a strange lake; which unto this day, is known by the name of mare
mortuum, the dead Sea, wherein nothing can live: for proof and certainty
whereof, as travelers at this time can testify as much, so many Gentiles,
Heathen and foreign writers do witness the same truth; as Galen, Pausanias,
Solinus, Tacitus, and Strabo, all of them testifying and showing the particular
wonders thereof.

But you will say, that this judgment is only proper and private to the
inhabitants of those parts; and that little trust or credit is to be given to
travelers in this kind: Thunder and lightning, tokens of the last combustion.
though herein I could easily convince you, for things shall speak for
themselves, and in every nation, there are many eyewitnesses of this truth;
yet behold, for your further satisfaction, in the dark and thick clouds, how
the thunder and lightnings are together encompassed, as if we could not
separate these judgments, but that the one did carry and portend the other,
and (as it were) give place to the other. For when the Sun shall have
gathered out of the bowels of the earth, a sulfureous matter, fit and apt for
combustion; as much in effect, as if I should say, when our iniquities are come
to a full height, and ripeness, and that our sins are climed up to heaven,
and there cry for vengeance, cum calls obdurarint; then behold, he that sits
upon the clouds, does together send forth a lightning and a thunder, for the
decrees of God are inseparable, though there may be degrees in their execution.
First the lightning astonisheth us, like an admonition, or preparatiue to the
subsequent judgment, ac si dicat ca^e, ne te fulmen interimat; then follows
the judgment, which is irresistable. Now if you please to consider this
thunder and lightning as tokens and forerunners of the last general
combustion; you shall find the one a figure of the other, and very fitly to
resemble it, by way of comparison.

But how am I fallen at length, to speak of water and fire? as if the Deluge,
or the burning of Sodom, could betoken the general fall and corruption; when
as (in deed) they were the particular punishments of actual sins, The author
recalles himself.
proper and peculiar to the place, to the times, to the persons: unless what
has befalne them, might serve as threatenings to us; and that the whole nature
in general cannot be excused from that, which has befallen any one in
particular: but I will not stand to justify my self; indeed I was carried
with the course and stream of the times, considering things as they fell out,
according to their several accidencies. If herein I have erred, it is no great
marvel, for behold my tongue is confounded, my tongue is confounded: and
therefore in the next place, I will come to the next general judgment, which
concerns whole mankind, namely the confusion of tongues.

Come on, The confusion of tongues.
let us go down, and there confound their language, that every one perceive
not another speech, etc. This confusion of tongues first began at Babell, and
is now generally spread over the face of the whole world: common and daily
experience can witness the truth of the success, and the divine testimony
shows the first original. Eusebius likewise cites at large the testimonies
both of Abydenus, who lived about King Alexander time, and of Sibylla, as also
the words of Hestieus, concerning the land of Senaar, where it was builded: and
these Gentiles do show by reason, that if there had not been some such miracle
in the division of tongues; no doubt but that all tongues being derived of one
(as all men are descended of one father) the same tongues would have retained
the same roots, and principles, as in all dialects or deriuation of tongues,
we see that it comes to pass: but now (say they) in many tongues, at this
day, we see that there is no likelihood or affinity among the^, but are al
different the one from the other: and thereby it appears, that they were made
diverse and distinct by some special miracle.

Herein the justice of God appears, that seeing man desired to continue his
own memory, by the works of his own hands, without any reference to the
divine power; therefore God confounds their tongues, How agreeable the
punishment was to the offense.
that their speech and their language might fail them, to record their own
acts: and that they might never be able to conspire or take counsel together;
when the one calls up for timber, the other breaks his back in carrying up
stones; one calls for his instruments and tools, but another brings mortar to
stop his mouth: thus every man either suspecteth himself to be in a dream or
else accuses all others of madness and folly; and thus there is a dumb
silence of prattling creatures, there is a noise or a sound without sense or
signification, for want of one known and common tongue to interpret. Thus the
punishment was agreeable to the divine justice, and very conformable to man's
present state and condition: for whereas our minds are distracted with
variety of opinions, The punishment is agreeable to man's condition.
and our hearts carried headlong to diverse inordinate lusts; so the tongue
should likewise be confounded with many base and barbarous languages, some of
them very harsh in pronunciation, that a man must wrong his own visage, and
disfigure himself to speak them: others without gravity or wisdom in their
first imposition, consisting only of many bare, and simple terms, not reduced
to any certain fountains, or heads, which best resembles nature: Many of
them hindering man's thoughts, and wanting a sufficient plenty of words, cannot
significantly express the quicknes of invention* or liuelily express an
action: some giving way to fallacies and sophistry, through Tautologies,
ambiguous words, dark sentences; others inclining to ribaldrie, and luxurious
speech: all of them daily enlarged, and refined, as having not yet attained any
perfection, but still requiring the help of the pencill; insomuch that within
the compass of a few years, you shall not know them to be the same languages.
Thus is man no counterfeit, for he is inwardly, and outwardly, totally
confounded.

For the large extent of this punishment, it may well appear by a due
consideration, either of place, or time. For all nations in the world seem
more to be divided with tongues, The extent of this punishment.
then with seas, with rivers, with banks, or with governments; and in the same
tongue you shall observe a great diversity of dialects, the Grecians speak
diversely their own language, Attice, Ionice, Dorice. Take this one kingdom,
and you shall find that Seuerne and Trent do moysten the several tongues of
our people, and make a great difference, in one and the same language;
notwithstanding the pr^eminency of the one above the other, yet the meanest
will not conform it self to the best: the Welsh suppose their own tongue to
be as honorable, in regard of the antiquity, as the English do daily seem
curious in filing and refiling of theirs. Now in the succession of times it
appears, that all the ancient languages, which indeed were ye fittest caskets
to contain ye Jewels of mysteries, have already failed, either in the use and
speech of men, as the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Syriacke, Chaldaick, etc. or else
are wholly extinct, and abolished. As here in England, the Saxon tongue; and
the language of the Picts in Italy; what tongues the Goths and Vandols did
speak: and he that shall peruse our English Chaucer, shall find more
difficulty in his words, then in his sense. And thus the confusion of tongues
serves to bereave us of each others help; we cannot partake with other nations
in their counsel and experience. Our own forefathers committing their works
to writings, they seem aliens and strangers unto us; we cannot understand
them, without the use of Dictionaries, and Commentaries.

To let pass, how nations have issued out of nations, and all men descended
from one, whereby they might retain the same speech and language, The
strangenes of this judgment.
for the learning and perfection of the reasonable soul; as they do the like
food for preservation of their bodies, and the same seed for propagation of
their kind. But for this variety of tongues, I would gladly ask, Do not all
other creatures of the same kind, agree in one and the same language of
nature, whereby they testify to each other, either their joy, or their sorrow?
Have not many birds as much variety in their notes and tunes, and yet all are
the same in the same kind; as there are words and syllables which pass
between men? I pray', does it not appear, in all other works of nature, that
the inward form does naturally of her self discover her self, by some
outward property? and why should not the reasonable soul make her self
known by a natural speech and language, that we might see the inward man as
well as the outward feature? for speech is the only companion, and witness of
reason.

Consider the instruments of speech, the throat, the tongue, the teeth, The
strangenes appea^es by way of comparison.
the lips, and the pallat; are they not the same, and alike in all men? Is not
the air and breath the same, which frames the sound of this voice? Take all
instruments of music, and being fashioned alike, you shall find a like sound,
they consist of a mean, a treble, a tenor, a base, etc. they have so many
strings, so many stops, they give the same music; that is, the same language
in effect, though the lessons do vary, that is, the difference consists in
the diversity of their speech, or their conference. Are there not many
natural notes, which are alike common to all languages? (our laughter, our
sighing, our sobbing, our sneesing); ca^ the passions of the body thus
naturally discover themselves* and yet cannot the mind naturally disclose her
own secrets? Is there any thing so proper and peculiar to man, as society and
fellowship; and yet for want of one common language, the kind cannot converse
with it self? and yet you may observe in all languages, how there is a
necessity of the same alphabet; for there are but five vowels, and more or
less there cannot be, which proceeds from the opening or contraction of the
mouth: will Nature lay the foundation, and yet God in his wisdom forbid to
finish this building? then is it evident, that contrary to the first intent of
nature, we are changed and altered by sin; God confounding our tongues,
brings our works to confusion.

But (I pray') consider the occasions which might serve ^or the retaining of
the same language: Are not all men derived from the loins of one, Means to
retain the same language.
and the same man? have not nations issued forth out of nations? and is it
possible, that they should retain the same seed, remember their beginnings,
observe the same rites, customs and manners, and yet forget their own
language? In Pembroke-shire certain Dutchmen being anciently permitted to
inhabit, their posterity unto this day retains the luxury and riot (proper
to that nation), and yet they have forgotten their language. Thus the tongue
serves to be instrumentum gustus and loquelae, the instrument of taste, the
instrument of speech; the one she still practices, the other she has clean
forgotten; and in both you may acknowledge the corruption of man's nature, and
the just punishment of man's sin.

If our beginning be forgotten, and that we have learned a strange language;
yet (me thinks) the noble and brave conquest of Princes, The Monarchies and
conquests.
especially the great Monarchs of the world, should have reduced all things; as
to the uniformity of government, so to the uniformity of tongues: that all
being ruled and guided by one law, having recourse to the Emperors court,
doing their homage and service to his person; this might be an excellent means
to avoid barbarism, and to reunite the tongues of men in one speech, as the
bodies of men are knit together under one yoke of subjection. But all will not
serve against the divine providence, for he confounded their tongues, who has
likewise confounded their Monarchies; sooner you may suppress a state, and put
them all to the sword; then that you can bridle their mouths, bring them to
school, and teach them a new tongue.

If the sword cannot prevail, yet (me thinks) the necessity of trading, The
necessity of trading and commerce.
and commerce should enforce a necessity of the same language: especially
considering that there are certain fruits proper to nations; and as their
soil yields them, as their country affoords them, so the inhabitants first
impose the name, and this name should accompany the fruits, and be together
transported to those nations, to whom these fruits are imparted; for
(assuredly,) the name would no way increase the burden, or price of the
commodities: but it should seem, that together with the change of our winds,
and our sails in the passage, we must alter these names; or else we have
forgotten the old names, and remembering only the v^e and valuation, we do well
hope, that a new name may make a new price; supposing that it lies in our
power, being now masters of the commodity, to give it a name at our pleasure,
and thus you see the confusion of tongues.

But of all other means to reduce the world to one language, (me thinks) the
greatest consists either in the necessity of the same laws, The uniformity of
laws and of religion.
which in ancient times have governed the whole world; or else from the
uniformity and concent of religion, which unites and knits together the hearts
of all men in one league of faith, the tongues of all men in one confession of
faith, the actions of all men in one service of faith, and in the same bonds of
charity and devotion. So that there is notwithstanding the separation of
persons, time, and place, a perfect communion of Gods Saints. If general
counsels should meet and assemble together, necessary it is, that they should
confer in one common language, concerning such things as may generally tend to
the good of the whole Church; or if we should be enforced to travel, it were
to be wished that we might not be destitute of the means for our souls health,
but that we might be fit to join with all congregations in prayer; yet God
forbid, that we should pray in an unknown tongue, which in effect were, to
offer up unto God, the calves of our lips ( vitulos labioru^), without the
burning incense of the heart, which should set on fire the sacrifice, and make
it acceptable; and here you may well observe the curse of God in the confusion
of tongues.

This punishment does not only argue how tongues are confounded among
themselves, that from one natural and isntrumental tongue, The punishment
appears not only in the variety of tongues, but likewise in the distraction.
there should proceed infinite notes and numberless tongues and languages; but
likewise how the tongues are distracted, from all other man's faculties; how
hard it is, to keep the heart and the tongue in an equal pace, that neither of
them should run before, and leave the other behind it: in our dearest prayers,
does not the mouth run over the service, when the heart is wandering in the
fields about our ordinary vocation, and sometimes is stained with unclean
thoughts? has not the tongue learned her lesson without book, speaks like a
Parrat, and seems to excuse man's negligence, and to conspire with the world
and the flesh, for the covering and concealing of sin; that without a first
mouer, without the hearts direction or consent, she is able to play her own
part, and to set a difference between the outward and the inward man in one and
the same person.

Suppose the heart and the tongue should join their forces together, and both
labor and join in one action; yet what a difficulty appears in respect of
the subject, A difficulty for a man to express his own thoughts.
as if they could not discover their own inventions or notions? how hard is it
to describe an action to the full life? there must be as great wisdom and
policy in the relation, as there was in the first assault and attempt; there
must be the same spirit, life, courage and resolution: here you shall find
words of defiance, as it were spit out in blood; anon nothing but mildenes and
terms of compassion: now to temper and square out a speech for men of all
sorts, of all degrees, upon all occasions, it is a very high point of wisdom;
and therefore the Historian deserves great commendation, almost as much as the
actors; and it were to be wished, that he which holds up his spear, should at
length take up his pen, and describe his own acts: Caesar has written
Commentaries, Cominaeus the actions of his master, Tacitus the government of
the Romans, and Machiauel the state of the Florentins: if difficulty appears
in the relation, if the most natural action of man, his speech be troublesome
or defective; acknowledge the curse of man, in the confusion of tongues.

Especially I conceive, that it is a great difficulty for a wiseman to express
his own meaning, A wise man can hardly be a good speaker.
conceiving all in an instant, after an angelical manner; for him to descend
lower then himself, and cutting out his meaning by pieces, to square it by the
rules of a method, to the meanest capacity; neither his patience will permit
him, nor the height of his understanding elevated above the vulgar reach, can
admit such a downfall: in so much that you shall find few of the wisest men,
to have the best utterance and delivery. Again, multitudes of words betokens a
great want of substance, and therefore desires to make recompense with leaves,
for want of the fruit and kernel of understanding; for assuredly the greatest
number and multiplying of words, argues the least weight and poyse in the
substance. But dumb beasts are not therefore dumb beasts, because they are not
heard, for their sound and noise is far greater then ours; but they are
therefore dumb beasts, because they spoke not distinctly to our understanding:
and so many men and many women may be called dumb, notwithstanding their
verbositie and multitudes of words. The sweetness of music appears as well in
the pause, the respit and keeping of time; as in the notes, the tune, or the
voice: sometimes a silence is as fit, and as commendable in man, as at other
times his speech, or his utterance.

How great a part of our age is taken up in learning of languages, from ten to
twenty, from twenty to thirty, The difficulty in learning tongues.
scarce the whole life of man will suffice? In all our Universities, you shall
find the Greek and Hebrew professors, to be the most ancient and the most
painful students; and yet they teach nothing in effect, but only the bare
language: how many Grammars, what infinite rules, what dictionaries, and phrases
of speech are required for the help of our studies? Grammar is the entrance,
which leads to the mart of all sciences; if thou mistakest thy self in the
entrance, thou shall greatly wander in the whole course of thy travel: suppose
thou have laid a good foundation, and have proved an excellent Grammarian; yet
their seems to be a kind of opposition between the study of nature, and the
knowledge of tongues: the one grounding it self, upon the settled foundation of
a good memory, the other quickened by the speedy discourse and apprehension of a
ripe and forward wit: Defects in Grammar.
neither do tongues follow the order and course of nature, for in many things
which nature has rankt in one kind, and given them the same properties, yet
in grammar you shall find them infinitely to differ in their genders, their
numbers, declensions; whereas indeed there should be some kind of affinity
between Logic and Grammar, the one directing his understanding, the other
framing his speech, and both of them should rank things in serie
praedicamentali: as things are joined or differ in nature, so they should
observe the like agreement or distance in man's conceit or utterance; and yet
the art it self is to be excused, loquendum vt vulgus, such was the necessity
of Grammar, that it proceeded not by degrees like other arts, not cannot admit
a reformation, as being promiscuously dispersed through the mouths of the
multitude; yet such has bin the painful attempts of the learned, that herein
they have left nothing undone, which might make for the perfection of the art.

The greatest confusion (in my judgment) does herein especially appear, when
the parts do wilfully and maliciously oppose each other: that notwithstanding
the hearts priuitie and knowledge, Perjury and lying proceed from this
confusion.
together with the inward and undoubted testimony of his own conscience; yet
the tongue and the outward man shall swear and depose the contrary: and
therein shall take God to be the witness of falsehood, as if they did desire
God to alter and change his own nature, rather then these miscreants will
conform themselves to the truth of his nature. Here you see the corruption of
man in the confusion of tongues, here is the height and top of all misery; now
as steps and degrees hereunto, are lying, equivocation, mental reseruatio^,
ambiguous, doubtful and dark speeches; all which have their degrees of access
unto perjury, according to substance or circumstance. And hence it is, that
the casuist Divine desiring truth, and nothing but truth, obliges the
conscience, and inforceth the speaker, to speak according to the understanding
of another, and not of himself; so that he must be inwardly persuaded in his
own conscience, that the other did conceive him, in the same manner, as he
himself understood his own words; otherwise at the bar of his conscience
he shall be justly condemned for falsehood and lying.

To leave the great and crying sin of perjury, it stood with the justice of
God (the heart and the tongue being thus divided) to set a difference between
the ear and the understanding: The very tongues do sometimes obscure and
hinder our knowledge.
that as man deals with God, and deals with man deceitfully; so God frames
out his justice according to measure and rule, that man might bewail his own
punishment, for committing the like offense; for assuredly many tongues do
much hinder the diligent search of the truth. It were to be wished, that we
might speak the language of Adam, where names were imposed according to the
nature of things; but now it should seem, there is a great difference, for the
most pleasing speech adorned with Metaphors, and Figures, is not the fittest
for the discovery of a truth: and on the contrary, all the school learning,
which indeed is the very touchstone of all truth, and in it self is most
wise, and far transcending the ordinary capacity, yet suffers the
shameless and malicious reproach of barbarism, for want of the elegancie of
style; and all the first parents and authors thereof, who indeed were the
lights and lamps of all true learning, as Lumbard, Sanctus Thomas, Scotus,
Occam, yet are contemned and neglected by this poetical and fantastical age,
which delights more in words then in substance.

To give an evident proof of this confusion of tongues, how plentiful are the
schools, and how do they abound with multitudes of distinctions? all answers
must end with distinctions, which assuredly well argues, that if the branches
must necessarily be divided, to serve the present turn and occasion, yet still
the root is confounded: a great judgment of God, that man having forsaken the
first fruit, and having associated himself to the beasts of the field;
therefore he proves a stranger to himself, to his brethren, and forgets his
own mother tongue. Whether man should speak naturally Hebrew.
Indeed I have heard it reported by authors, that if a man were taught no
other language, then he should speak Hebrew, the same language which Adam
spoke in the beginning: but I should as easily believe, that if a man wanted
all possible means to sustain life, that then he should instantly recover
Jerusalem, from the hands of the Turks, and that God should there call all the
tribes together, or raise up Adam, there to converse and talk with him in the
Hebrew tongue; as that he should speak naturally Hebrew, for the curse was
general in the confusion of tongues: though speech be proper and natural to
man, yet this, or that language, follows the frank and free imposition of
man, and has no groundwork in nature.

That which gave occasion to this opinion, was this, what language men should
speak in Paradise, or after the last resurrection, supposing that language to
be natural to man; and certainly of all the tongues extant, Hebrew is the
likeliest, Whether we shall speak Hebrew after the last resurrection.
for it was of Gods own imposition and framing, before sin had defiled man;
it contained the greatest and highest mysteries, and of all other tongues,
seems to be the fittest arc to contain them* Christ and his Apostles were
Hebrews, first sent to the Jews, and then to the Gentiles. Upon the Cross
Christ used his own tongue, Eloi eloi lamasabacthani, notwithstanding the
tongue was unknown to the soldiers. And in the Apocalypse, although the book
was first written in Greek, yet the Angels song in heaven is there recorded in
Hebrew: but when I consider, that man shall have a higher state, then was the
state of Paradise, and that his body shall be much more spiritual, and his
understanding more illuminated, then ever before; for we shall then be like the
Angels of heaven, who speak to each other, by directing the edge of their
understanding to each other, as it were opening the glasses, and casting forth
a light to each other: Considering (I say) the different condition of renewing
to a better state, and continuance in the same state, they must pardon me, if I
do not affirm this, as an undoubted truth in mine own private opinion.

From this diversity and variety of tongues, you shall observe a great
disorder both in the State and in the Church; whence proceeds the enmity
between nations, The inconveniences proceeding from this confusion of tongues.
and the first occasion of reproach? where do they first begin to discover
themselves, but only from the diversity of the garb and the language? To see
a poor Northern man, with his gaping and wide mouth using his broad and flat
speech, brought upon the stage, here is a subject of laughter for the
multitude: but I fear, that this hate and enmity between nations, does
nourish and add fuel to the hot strife and contention of the Church, in the
point of her controversies; or at least I may truly say, that infinite are the
contentions of the Church about words; all which proceed from that curse of
man, the confusion of tongues; which we cannot avoid, but seem rather daily
to increase our own shame: we fight about shadows, we contend about words;
many doubts in Christian religion seem to be grounded upon the signification
of words, and terms of art; how many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his
Church? a question of words: do Sacraments confer grace, ex opere operato? a
question of words; is honor due to the Saints? a question of words, and such
like infinite questions.

Sometimes in the very exposition, or interpretation of words, being simple and
first notions, (as the school speaks) and no terms of art: there are many
and great controversies in Christian religion, whether Christ in his sole and
humane nature did really and truly descend into hell; Great controversies about
words.
if we could agree upon the exposition of the word, it would sufficiently
resolve the controversy: or will you see an infernal state here upon earth,
whether presbyteri should signify lay elders, or not; it has been much
disputed by some men, whose zeal is not according to knowledge. Thus the holy
Ghost being the pen ^ man of Scripture, giving the style, the words, the
method, as well as the sense: if any one of these be altered or changed, it
loses the strength of the Canon; and therefore he that shall take upon him to
interpret Scripture, does only give his own exposition of Scripture; which
exposition being private and proper to himself, I will regard it no more, then
the opinion of one private man; so that, if in my reading of the Fathers, I
shall observe some general agreement, together with their learned judgments,
though Scripture be not instantly quoted to that purpose, yet I will respect it
as much, as I will the Geneua translation. Lest other professions should think
much of our iarres, I will therefore in the second place instance in the
wisdom of the Law: what infinite suites are daily commenced, when as the
whole doubt arises from the extent and signification of words? A Lordship
having fair demaines, a beautiful house, many tenants, great services and
homage, sold at a valuable price; yet now recald again, ca^t upon the heir at
common law for want of sufficient words to convey it.

As I have remembered the just punishment for our sins, so give me leave in
thankfulness of mind to consider Gods providence, in this our confusion of
tongues. Gods mercy in the union of these kingdoms of England and Scotland.
And that especially to us, for God in his mercy intending to unite and knit
together these 2. kingdoms of England, and Scotland: He so ordained it from
the beginning of the world, that (like twins) they should both speak one
tongue, and one language; until in his due time he should give the promised
Land to Jacob, and to his posterity for ever. Notwithstanding that the truth of
their beginning does not certainly appear in Histories, notwithstanding some
little enmity which passed between both (for neighbor kingdoms are not
always the greatest friends), and that little means of trading or commerce
passed between both; yet God preserved their tongues, intending to unite their
hearts under the happy government, of one entire and absolute Monarch. So that
now the seas are our walls on the right hand, and on the left hand, we need
not fear the Egyptians, we are built as a City, Pacem habens ad inuicem,
which is at unity within it self: Deus nobis haec otia fecit; fecit nos in
gentem vnam, and quos Deus coniunxit, homo ne separet; God has made us one
Nation, and one people, and whom God has joined, let no man set a sunder.

Secondly, whereas the confusion of tongues seems to make for the difficulty
and obscurity of knowledge; behold the great providence of God, Ancient and
strange tongues add luster to Sciences.
for supposing the state of man to be (such as it is) wholly corrupted; such is
the neglect of man, that if Arts and Sciences were not kept secret, as
Mysteries concealed in the habit of unknown tongues, assuredly they would
never be esteemed in that high account and reputation. If gold were not dug
out of Mines, with great labor, the loss of men's lives, and far transported;
if it lay naked and open, as common as stones, assuredly we should never
regard it. Nouelty and strangeness moves the mind of man, more then the true
worth and perfection of things; the ancient tongues are fittest to discover
knowledge, they are like rich garments, or old roabes, kept for the honor and
memory of our Ancestors, to show our descent and first original. They are
like chaires of estate, to give honor and majesty to Sciences, that thou
should not suddenly approach unto them, without some ripeness and
stayednesse in judgment; and having once attained them, thou should retain
them in a more magnificent manner. Against translations.
Now he that discouers them, lays open their nakedness, makes them known to
the vulgar eye, and clothes them with a homely attire of a common and barbarous
tongue; as he offers great wrong and injury to all students in general, so he
does much abase that Art whereof he writes, which is his principal subject,
and whereof he should principally intend the praise and commendation; and
likewise he loses the fruit and end of his labor, for it is impossible to
teach any man perfectly an Art, whereof he shall not make the profession.

In this confusion of tongues, the same providence of God does likewise
appear, as concerning the point of our religion, That the title of Christ and
Scripture should continue unchangeable.
and the manifestation of his own glory; (not to speak of the wisdom and
power of God, who understands all tongues, and searches the hidden secrets
of the heart); it shall appear by these two instances, first in the
humiliation and passion of Christ, notwithstanding that all the powers of man,
together with the malice of the devil, did conspire against Christ; though
they put him to a shameful death, yet could they never alter his
superscriptio^, Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum: which was written in three
several Languages, as it were proclayming him to the whole world the king of
the Jews; though Pylate might be enforced to crucify him, yet he could never
be enforced to alter or change the title, which was less in effect, Quod
scripsi, scripsi, for so the wisdom of God has decreed; and impossible it
was, that one jot or tittle of the law should miscarry, which law whole and
entire, together with the superscription and kingdom of Christ, has still
been continued, maugre the attempts of men, the slanders and reproaches of the
Jews, when they themselves were scattered* the malicious practices of the
Gentiles, when they themselves are confounded; the many persecutions, and
great effusion of blood in the Church, which indeed did serve as seed to
engender, that so the blessing of God might appear in this our confusion of
tongues.

Secondly, after his exaltation, he took occasion by this diversity of
tongues, to send into the world his holy and blessed Spirit; which came to the
Apostles in the form of fiery and cloven tongues, The gift of tongues.
Linguas attulit, qui pro verbo venit, he yt came to bear record to the word,
brought with him multitudes of tongues: by virtue of these tongues ye Apostles
received in an instant (without further teaching, only by the infusion of Gods
spirit, all manner of languages); whereby it should seem, that God intended to
restore the ruins of Babell; and to enable them for their message to all
Nations, for every man's conversion; which sudden gift of tongues, was a seal
of their embassage, and did serve as a miracle to confirm the truth of their
doctrine. See how God laughes at the counsails of men; men intending to build
up a tower unto Heaven, for the continuance of their memory, God confounds
their tongues, and brings their works to confusion. Now God on the other side,
(as it were to make some recompense and satisfaction, desiring to build Heaven
upon earth, to erect a state of happiness, and salvation in the midst of
misery and sin), lays a better foundation, and gives his Apostles the gift
of all tongues; he sends down fiery tongues, that being like burning Lamps,
they might serve to enlighten and inflame others: these fiery tongues were
cloven, that the benefit might be imparted and redound unto others, and not be
reserved whole and entire to themselves; Habuerunt dissectas linguas, bilingues
non erant, The holy Ghost came in fiery tongues.
they knew not (though they knew all languages) the language of Equivocation;
they knew not how to propose words consisting only of dead letters, and bare
syllables, having stolen away the sense and true meaning, by (a trick of
cousonage) some secret mental reservation. Nay rather their great Lord and
Master, whose servants and vessels they were, to carry his name and his title
to all Nations; he was verbu^ in intellectu, a word first begotten in the
understanding of God, borne again (as I may so say) in the heart of every
believing man by faith, and from the heart issuing forth at the tongue; where
he seems to be again incarnate, clothed with the baseness of our words, as he
was formerly clothed with ye vildnesse of our flesh. Thus ye Apostles preached
nothing but Jesus, their works were all wrought by the power and name of
Jesus, all their thoughts were sanctified by the spirit of Jesus; as they
appeared outwardly, such was their inward substance, ( Holocaustu^) a whole
burnt sacrifice, set on fire with these fiery tongs, kindling and enlightening
the whole world, and leaving sparks of this fire to their successors, (for
the lamps must always burn in the Temple, Exodus 27. verse. 20). The Church
must always be visible, that men may know where to repair for their souls
health) by virtue of the most holy imposition of hands.

I will not stay my time, The Author here humbly craves pardon for all his
errors.
and in the latter end of my speech crave pardon for all my offenses, here
rather I will now snatch at the present occasion, so fitly offered: if I have
spoken any thing, or shall hereafter speak in this Pamphlet, unadvisedly,
illiterately, without good order or method; acknowledge (I beseech thee) the
general punishment of whole mankind, which more especially discouers it self
in my weakness, the confusion of tongues. I am confounded, I am confounded,
poor silly wretch that I am, I am confounded, my mind is distracted, my
tongue is confounded, and my whole nature corrupted; in me, in me alone, see
the punishment of whole mankind, learn now to be compassionate, and pitiful,
for I cannot altogether (...) Nihil humani a te alienum putes, here is thy
benefit indeed, my weakness appears, the press has proclaimed it, this
Pamphlet can witness it; and thine is yet undiscovered.

Now in this general confusion, He recals himself.
I know not where to betake my self, or what to speak in the next place, for
my tongue is confounded: I will therefore suppose my self to be lost in the
woods, and that at length after much wandering I should recall my self; and
finding no way for my passage, I should have recourse to my Card, and consider
the intended scope of my journey, from whence I came, Natus ex muliere; my
present state and condition, I am a soiourner and stranger, as all my
forefathers were; the scope and end of my travel, Puluis in puluerem, from
dust to dust, that so (at length) I might safely arrive to mine own native
Country, a statu viae ad statum patriae. Now certainly right reason would thus
inform and instruct me, Vt secundum rectam lin^am incedam, that borne of the
dust, and tending to the dust, I should keep my straight way, neither puffed up
with pride above my natural state, nor sinking down with despair beneath my
condition; that I should not upon any occasion start out of the way, but
remembering my beginning, remembering my end, I should square out my course and
travail accordingly. Intending therefore to speak of the Fall of Man, the
corruption of nature, and the punishment of the first sin, I will lay aside
all other slighter punishments, all chastisements and corrections of sin,
which were infinite to repeat; and I will only insist in those two general
judgments, being indeed the extremes, the first and the last, including all
other punishments within their bounds, 1. In dolor paries, thou shall bring
forth with pain and sorrow, being spoken to the woman; 2. Morte morieris, thou
shall dye the death, pronounced indifferently against both: and thus his
corruption shall appear by his first welcome and salutation into this world,
and by his last adue and farewell out of his world; you shall better judge of
the whole course of his entertainment in this world.

In dolor paries, The punishment in women's conception and delivery.
Genesis 3. verse. 16. Unto the woman God said, I will greatly increase thy
sorrows and thy conceptions: in sorrow shall thou bring forth children, etc.
As the woman first sinned in tasting the forbidden fruit, so she is punished
in the fruit of her own womb; here is the fruit of Gods justice. But is it
possible, that the most natural action, which indeed intends the highest
perfection of nature, generare sibi simile, should notwithstanding proceed
with such difficulty, danger, and torment? In all other actions and works of
nature, you shall easily observe, how they flow with the greatest ease and
delight of the subject. O how sweet and acceptable is sleep to the wearisome
body, meat to the hungry, drink to the thirsty! and so for all other
natural works! I will not insist in them; take death it self, as it is
natural to man, so undoubtedly it is without sorrow or grief: for the
punishment was, morte morieris, but not, in dolor morieris: if you will
suppose man to rise by steps and degrees, and to fall again by the same steps
and degrees; suppose him (I say) growing unto 25. years, when the moisture
seems to bridle his heat; then increasing in strength unto 33. years, there
to come to a state of consistencie, until 50. years be expired; then by the
same degrees declining and decaying, so that his moisture and heat gives place
to his coldness and dryness; coming at length to the disease of old age,
without any unnatural distemper, assuredly his life shall end as does a lamp
for want of oil, fire for want of fuel, without any pain or torment: but as
the breath proceeds from his nostrels, so shall the soul take her flight, and
leave the carkase behind her; for herein consists the difference between
natural and unnatural actions, the one performed with the greatest ease and
facility, the other being wrung out with violence, carry in themselves
torture and sorrow. Thus all diseases prove therefore our torments, because
they are unnatural; then why should nature be defective in her highest work,
that conception and delivery should be with such sorrow? whereas the
principal intent of nature is to preserve her self, and to propagate her
seed: behold the punishment and corruption of nature, when she cannot perform
the one, without the great hazard and danger of the other; this certainly
cannot consist with the first institution, and integrity of nature, but is a
subsequent punishment accompanying our sin.

Consider all other creatures, and you shall find that by the seat and
disposition of their wombes; by the form, figure, and members of the embrion;
by the proportion and quantity between both; Other creatures are compared
with man in his birth.
there should be as great, if not a far greater difficulty in their
production, then in the generation of man: And yet you shall find it far
otherwise, notwithstanding the numbers which many creatures bring forth at
once, and every one of the^ carrying the like proportion to the damme, as the
child does to the mother; yet are they able to work, and continue in their
full strength, until the instant time of their delivery, they know the just
time of their bearing, and do prepare themselves accordingly; they can hasten
or prolong the time of their bringing forth; which well argues their strength
of nature, and the action without pain; they are never so perfectly sound,
unless they are bearing, some of them bringing forth by great numbers at
once; others bring forth every day, as our common hens; and all of them seem
to promise a kind of certainty in their bearing, and yet in all of them the
proportion, whether for weight, quantity, or figure appears to be the same
with us; and therefore should enforce the like sorrow, and difficulty in them
as in the woman. Yet they cry for no help of midwiues, they want no keepers,
or nurses; they are delivered without pain, or sorrow, they have forthwith
strength to make their own provision, for themselves, for their brood; yea
their courage seems much to be increased, that upon any slight occasion they
are so ready to fight in defense of their young ones. Will you see their joy
immediately upon their delivery? hark, hark (the prattling gossip) the
cackling hen, as soon as an egg is laid, (though at all other times she
seems to be mute) yet now she sings, and disquiets the whole house; either to
boast of the fruitfulnes of her womb, or to discover her hidden treasure: lest
the goodwife should think her barley and corn ill spent, behold a free
oblation and profit, to recompense the loss; or to be a president and example
to us, to teach women their manner in Churching, which ought to be with a song
of joy and thankfulness to God, for the fruits of their womb, and for their
happy delivery.

If some other creatures seem to labor in the birth, then acknowledge, that
for man's sin the whole earth was accursed, How this punishment is to be
understood.
and the dumb creatures groan under the burden of our sin; and therefore no
marvel, if sometimes they share with us in the punishment: for thence we
conclude the great offense, the malignitie and infection of sin, but I speak
vt plurimum, for the most part, it falls out among them not in one of a hundred;
but in man's kind it does most eminently appear, and therefore acknowledge us
to be the principals, and them only as the accessaries in sin. Again, if
some women be of that strong constitution, so made and fashioned by nature, so
helped and furthered by art, that they are easily delivered; yet still are they
delivered with some pain, and I speak vt plurimum, for the most part;
generally in the whole kind, you shall observe it a punishment, if some do
better escape then others, it is Gods mercy to them, not one of a hundred but
suffers a great torment: more or less grief alters not the truth of Gods
judgments, when sorrow it self was the punishment. As likewise in that other
punishment of death, some die without pain; as many in their old age, when
their body is not so sensible, the least stopping of their breath puts out
their candle; whereas the young man sick of the stone or the pluri^ie, dies in
great tortures, for here the pains and torments of death were not the
punishment, but death it self: so likewise in childbearing, more or less
sorrow was not appointed, the measure of sorrow was not prescribed, but sorrow
in general here was the punishment; though Scripture and all ancient writers,
do number it amongst the greatest torments: sometimes indeed Gods justice is
allayed with his mercy, and his wisdom permits the works of nature to pass
uncontrollable; that so it might appear, that our sorrows and infirmities
proceed not from the necessity of our nature, but from the incident malignity
of our sin.

Reasons (I know) there are alleged in Physic and Philosophy, for this great
pain in the birth and generation of man: suppose it did proceed from natural
causes, Natural causes cannot demonstrate the pain.
yet would it then argue a great corruption of nature, that should thus ordain
the beginning of man with the great sorrow and grief of his mother; as if man
were of a viperous kind and brood, gnawing the bowels that first hatched and
conceived him: but I do assure you, that if you shall well weigh all those
causes, which seem to produce the torments, you shall find them very much
defective, and such as cannot give you any satisfaction; but herein I must be
sparing in regard of my profession, and speaking in a common and vulgar tongue;
these are secrecies proper to woman, yet I may boldly say it, that nature
herein seems to outstrip her self, and to torment the poor woman beyond all
natural causes. For the trees in producing their fruit, seem then to be most
beautiful, and do yearly afford it; all the beasts of the field do the like
in the time of their greatest growth, and best perfection: only the the woman
notwithstanding her strength and ableness of body, it will not excuse her;
notwithstanding her good complexion, and sound constitution, it will not
avail her, for she is only subject to sorrow.

Sorrow I say, for there is no sorrow comparable to the sorrow of a woman in
the time of her travail; from their first quickening or conception you shall
observe them, with pale looks, heavy eyes, apt to faint upon every occasion,
The continual danger and pain in conception.
they are a burden to themselves, their stomachs fail them, and the night
gives them no rest; all the devouring and ravenous wild beasts are aptest to
seize upon them; the least knock or blow, the least ill savor or bad sight,
the least sorrow conceived in the fancy, is able to endanger all; to hazard
the life both of the mother, and of the child in her womb. Not to speak of
the natural grief arising from natural causes, sometimes nature seems with
too much expedition to hasten her woe, and then ye have an untimely brood, as
if Autum should fall out in the spring; sometimes the womb proves likewise the
tomb, and the place of conception, serves for his burial; after seven or
nine months expectation, behold he comes, carrying the form of a slain and
a murthred man, and so he presents himself to his sad mother, to comfort her
heavy heart; being once thus delivered, the danger is not past, but she must
be attended on with safe keeping and good diet; and thousands daily miscarry,
when in man's expectation they seem to have ouerpassed al danger of childbirth.

But here I will acquaint you with a strange point of cruelty, men must
become wives, men among wives, men-midwiues I mean; Men-midwiues.
who with the strength of their limbs, and in the hardness of their hearts,
must execute that, which the weaker sex (compassionat women) durst never
attempt: pity it were that there should be such a profession of men, were it
not, that necessity inforceth it; before I can speak of them with patience, I
will first fall down on my knees, hold up my hands, lift up mine eyes, and
(if I can) I will shed forth a few t^ar^s, and humbly desire God to help, and
comfort all those poor silly women, which shall have occasion to use their
help: here you shall see sometimes the bellies opened, the flesh rent, the
tunicles cut in sunder, to find out a new passage for the poor infant, who
must come into this world through the bowels of his dead mother, and upon his
first approach, may be justly accused, and arraigned for a murderer; if his
mother escape, then sometimes you may see the poor innocent child mangled,
executed and quartered in the womb: there was no great offense (I confess),
unless it were the sin of his first father; but indeed I am afraid to speak
any longer of these bloody cruelties, I will not lay open my nakedness, I will
not defile mine own neast, the punishment sufficiently appears, and well
betokens the corruption.

As I have made man the instrument of cruelty, so I cannot always and
altogether excuse him, Men bearing their own children.
from the pain in her travel; and therefore here in the midst of sorrow, I
will bring forth a subject of laughter; I will set him upon the stage, I pray'
observe him aright: Did you never hear of fathers, which breed and bear their
own children? their wives conceive, and the husbands, who should be the only
comfort in the time of their weakness, first begin to complain of the sorrow;
Juno Lucina fer opem, I pray' send for the midwiues, and let us see what this
great mountain will bring forth: forsooth his teeth ache, his bones are crasie,
his eyesight fayles him, he is troubled with rheumes, sometimes with the
megrime; Physic will not help him, the times of the year will not avail
him, but the poor man must expect his wives delivery. Has God ordained this
to show the entire league, and compassionat heart, that should pass between
man and wife, and how they are both equally engaged in the issue? has God
appointed this to teach man and wife, that the end of their love should tend to
procreation? strange it were and wonderful in nature, were it not, that the
husband is the son of a woman, and therefore partakes of her weakness and
imperfection, partus sequitur ventrem, and is in some sort liable to her curse.

Here you would expect of me, that I should assign and point out the causes
of this fellow-feeling, Why God so punishes the husband.
and strange affection between man and wife; happily I could guess at some of
them, but for certainty I know none: rather I would fly to the divine
providence, beyond the reach and compass of nature; who for assuring man, that
he himself has coupled them together, and that both persons are but one
flesh, therefore he has given them but one sense and feeling of the same
sorrow. That as in their estate one and the same calamity does equally befall
them; so in their persons, one and the same misery does equally attach them,
which God has ordained by secret, and hidden causes best known to himself;
that, as many diseases are infectious, and spread themselves by the company and
society of others; so here the same handie work of God appears, to the
astonishment of natural Philosophy.

Will you yet press me further, to lay open the secret causes, Why there are
secret qualities which cannot be known.
and hidden qualities of things: suppose the sympathy and antipathie of
creatures; my answer is, that these arise from the great conformity, or
contrariety of temper in the inbred qualities, and natural constitution: in so
much that you shall observe, that in such living creatures, in whom there is an
antipathie (suppose them to be dead), yet in their very carkases, in the bones
and the flesh, as long as any spice of their temper remains, the contrariety
will appear in the different and contrary operations. Now this contrariety
appears, not in the contrary qualities alone, but in the degrees of these
qualities, and in such degrees, as they are best fitted and proportioned to
each other: nature it should seem has balanced them, and squared them out
fit for the combat. Now the degrees of things are infinite, as time is divided
into infinite moments, quantity into infinite points; so quality into infinite
degrees, and things infinite do not fall within the reach of man's comprehension;
neither are the forms of things subject to our knowledge, propter nimiam
actiuitatem, for as things are in nature compounded, so in the understanding of
man they cannot be found simple: the influence of the heavens is wholly
unknown, propter spiritualitatem, as being no way material or sensible;
whereas all man's knowledge must presuppose the foundation and information of
sense. And thus it is no marvel, if many things in nature be wholly unknown;
when as the form is unknown, the influence unknown, the degrees of qualities
unknown: that so the first curiosity of man's knowledge, might be justly
recompensed with blindness and ignorance.

Philosophy (as likewise all other arts and sciences), treates only of things
general, and cannot descend to things in particular, The extent of Philosophy
concerning her subjects.
with their par^^^ular degrees: as for example, we divide this sublunary world,
into four elements, every element into three regions; here we consider two
qualities, one in extremity, the other remiss; these qualities we divide into
four several degrees: the Physician he descends somewhat lower, and doubles
his fyles, deuides them into eight, as may be best fitting for his purpose,
and here he stands and cannot march any further. For compound bodies, we
consider their kinds, their forms, their constitution, their properties,
their differences, and common accidents: we reduce nature (which appears
confused to man's understanding) into a certain method, appointing the bounds
of sciences, to be the meares for our government, and direction in the course
of our studies; and in every science we consider the principles, the subject,
and the affections; as far as God has enabled man, so far has the industry
of man transported his knowledge; yet we cannot descend to particulars, God
has denied this perfection, as it appears; for the objects of the sense are
singulars, the objects of the understanding are universals: as the sense cannot
exceed his own bounds, and eleuate it self to the height of the understanding;
so neither can the understanding stoop down to the sense: God has given us
an inspection of nature, but no absolute and perfect knowledge of nature,
having reserved that for himself.

He that shall desire to be better informed in these hidden and secret
qualities, I would refer him to those learned authors, from whom (I suppose)
he should receive good contentment, and satisfaction: as namely, Aristotle,
Albertus Magnus, Zimara, Fracastorius and others. Now for this present
instance, Why the husband partakes in the wifes passions.
why the husband should be thus affected in his wives conception; it is not
unknown to al skillful Musicians, the great concord which is between the
eights; not only for the sweet harmony of music, but if the Instrument
shall be thus set, and disposed for the purpose, the one string being easily
touched, the other will likewise move for company: assuredly between man and
wife, their love and their affections concurring together, there is likewise a
greater sympathy, and agreement in their natural temper and constitution, and
therefore are fitter disposed to work upon each others body; as kindred
descending from one stock, are apter to infect and annoy each other in a
pestilent disease. Besides their constitution, man and wife living together,
feeding on the same meats, resting together, and conuersing together, as at
all times, so sometimes, when their bodies are more apt to be tainted; no
marvel if some husbands, (and yet but a few, for God gave man his wife for
his help, and not for his sorrow) do partake in their passions.

Lest the enemies of learning, the enemies of religion should here condemn us;
and for this one defect (being not able to make plain demonstration of all
secrets and hidden qualities) should therefore think our knowledge
unprofitable; A defense of Philosophy.
I would gladly ask, what invention in the world was ever more beneficial to
man, then was the Mariners Card, to direct him in his passage through the huge
wilderness of the vaste Ocean? yet can you conceive, that the world could be
exquisitely divided by 32. parts (for so many winds are assigned)? shall
acres, miles, leagues, whole Countries, huge Nations, make no sensible
difference in this Card, and yet is the Card so exquisite, and of such
necessary use? Or take an Almanacke, though it fail in prognostication of
weather, is it therefore not of excellent use? Learning it is, which opens man's
eyes to all humane knowledge; though it cannot, or will not vouchsafe to look
upon the basest things of this life, yet it contains the grounds, the roots,
the causes of every the meanest profession, and is able to direct every man in
his own Trade, course, and vocation: and I may boldly speak it ( absit
inuidia verbo) all other professions whatsoever, if they be not spiced and
seasoned with learning, they are base and barbarous; if they be not sanctified
and hallowed with Religion, they are profane and heathenish.

I have forgotten my self, and whether out of the love of Philosophy, or out
of mine own modesty, desiring to conceal these points of secrecy (the
pains and labors in childbirth), I am fallen into this discourse? I will now
again retire my self, and I will instance in the two sexes. This punishment
was not only inflicted on the woman in the time of her travail, but it is
further extended, The strange diseases of the womb.
and generally comprehends all the diseases and griefs of the womb; so that
the maid and the widow shall not freely escape; for infinite are the diseases,
and those strange and wonderful, beyond the common course of nature, which the
womb of a woman does make her subject unto; what strange pangs, and
conuulsions does it suffer, as if it had no stable foundation in the body?
such rising* such falling, sometimes provoked with a sent, so strange and
miraculous to nature that the ignorant ^ort (not considering the natural
causes) cry, A possession, a possession; then straight some poor old woman is
had in suspicion, brought before a Iust^ce, accused for a Witch, etc. whereas
in all other creatures, the womb does no way offend, or annoy them; for then
certainly it would appear in their cries, their groans, their complaints,
their feeding, their thriuing in flesh, something at length would easily
discover it, but indeed there is none. I would I could say as much for the
woman; but alas, here are too many, I cannot reckon all, some shall appear,
and those I will conceal in the habit of an unknown tongue; Phlegmone,
abscessus, vlcus, canc^r, scir^hus, mola, inflatio, hydrops, calculus,
rhagad^s, c^ndylomata, haemorrhoides: Will you see the symptoms, signs and
proper passions; mensium suppressio, mensium profluuium atque stillicidium,
albus fluor vterinus, gonorrhaea duplex, vteri strangulatus, ascensus,
descensus, prolapsio, conuulsio sterilitas, abortus, etc. To conclude, the
Physician, as well as the Clergy man, is sometimes tied to his secrecy and
silence.

Yet give me leave to instance in those parts, which appear to the sight. The
sweet paps, which serve to allure the husband, The diseases of the paps.
and to put the children in mind of their duty; how apt are they to be
tormented with grief? being spungious parts, some ill humors s^ttle there,
and the softnes is turned to a stony hardness, the fresh and beautiful color,
is changed to palenesse and wanness; in stead of sweet and delicious milk,
the filth breaks out into issues and sores; and therein assures man, that he
is not only conceived in sin, and corruption, but likewise feeds upon
corruption: for what is milk it self, but only impure blood, the color
changed? Now if these parts, which border so near upon the heart, be
corrupted; then assuredly the heart it self is full of corruption, the root
of life, and nature her self is wholly corrupted: and therefore those parts,
which were ordained for the nourishment of poor sucking babes, together with
life together with food for the continuance of life, do by a law of
necessity, impart their own corruption.

For the males, they are not excused from the like sorrow; what strange and
noisome diseases do befall the generatiue parts? lues venerea, priapismus,
gonorrhaea; I am ashamed of my self, and me thinks my mouth is defiled with
speaking of them: only give me leave to reckon up one among the miseries
proper to this time, among the inventions and monsters of this last age, for
the ancients never heard of it. There is a disease begotten amongst us, The
French or Neapoli^an disease.
and no nation will father it, all are ashamed of it; we cast it on the French,
the French on the Italian, the Italian on the Spaniard, the Spaniard on the
Indian, as if it were some excellent treasure, brought from a newfound world;
a disease which arises from im^oderate lust* noisome, infectious* corrupting
the bones, rotting the flesh, loosing and dissoluing the ligaments. A just
punishment for man's lust, that since beauty allured him, and his own natural
strength provoked him, therefore God will punish him with the loss of his
beauty, his favor shall fail him, hi^ eyesight shall leave him, his color
forsake him, his nose shall drop off, his lips shall be eaten, his palate shall
be cankerd, and his strength shall be like a broken staff; he shall go like a
criple, shame and reproach shall attend him. Fully to describe this disease, I
will leave it to the skillful Physician; let it suffice for me to observe, that
although some other creatures seem to be as much inclining to their lust, as
is man; yet none are tainted with such a noisome disease, save only man: as
likewise in all former times, among the Heathen and Pagans, there is no mention
of any such disease, much less of the cure; only amongst us Christians, who
profess a more strict, austere and mortified life, this disease first took
her beginning. That seeing God had given us a greater knowledge of his truth,
of the foulness of sin, together with a larger measure of his grace;
therefore God punishes the uncleanness and incontinencie of these times, with a
greater judgment, and vengeance: and as the woman partakes in the man's
punishment, both of them sweating in their labors, both of them made subject
to death; so man (as far forth as it will stand with the condition of his
sex) partakes in her sorrow.

These things being duly considered, (if I were worthy) I would give this
advice to Ladies, and Gentle women, who now labor in the pains and peril of
childbirth; that during this time, An advice to women.
they would better bethink themselves of the occasion; that their danger and
sorrow is the just punishment of sin, for the first offense of the woman: and
that they would give God most humble and hearty thanks, for that greatest
blessing of all other temporal blessings, the fruitfulnes of the womb;
whereby it pleases God, to enlarge his own kingdom, to accomplish the whole
number of his elect; whereby they might continue their names, and their
memories, and find some comfort in their old age; leave their posterity
behind them, to give them a Christian burial, and to perform all other
duties of children to parents. This I could heartily wish, but see the
corruption of these times! they turn this punishment, to a point of their own
pride, vainglory, and solemnity; their lying-in, or bedding being performed
in such state, with such pomp, so excessiuely, costly, and chargeable; that I
fear they have little thought either of thankfulness to God, or of the
punishment of sin.

Now give me leave to relate some few accidencies, which do accompany our
conception, whereof I may speak without offense: Consider (I pray') how du^^ng
the time of their conception, Women's longing.
while our parents are yet great, what a longing and hungry appetite
possesses them of things hard to be gotten, most commonly untimely and
unseasonable fruits, sometimes of things unclean and impure. Is not this an
undoubted token and testimony of that insolent, and unbridled appetite of the
woman, which first contrary to Gods own precept and ordinance, seized upon
the forbidden fruit? But observe (I beseech you) how this appetite and
longing, consisting only in the fancy and imagination of the mother, An
impression upon the child in the womb.
yet sometimes, to the great wonder, and astonishment of reason, works upon
the child in the womb, and makes an impression answerable to the thing
conceived in the fancy: the fancy can neither give sex, nor beauty, nor
strength to the members, yet does it imprint a character answerable to the
strong apprehension. See here a lively pattern of the propagation of sin;
there are hereditarie diseases of the body, there are wants and defects proper
to the mind, there are infirmities and sins of both: sin is intailed to our
nature, though it proceed from the free will and consent of man, yet is it
grounded in nature, and therefore all the natural actions of man, are branded
with sin.

In the time of their delivery, I have heard it credibly reported, and so I
may affirm it upon tradition, that nothing so much asswageth their pain, and
gives them that ease, The skin of a Serpent.
as the castaway skin of a Serpent, being fitly applied for that purpose: I
will not dispute of the natural reason, which assuredly consists in the
strange antipathie between both; only I do here bless God, that has so
ordained nature, as it might best serve for a supernatural end; when all
natural means shall fail, and cannot prevent a natural grief, yet the
remembrance and thought of the Serpent, which was the first occasion of this
grief, should mitigate this pain. Here is a kind of magical inchauntment,
to heal wounds by the application of that sword which first gave the blow;
like the Israelites in the wilderness wounded by the Serpent, they are
likewise cured by the brazen Serpent. It serves also as a memorial of Gods
great bounty and goodness, that if God in this miraculous manner by changing
the skin, renewes the age of the Serpent; then certainly man in his issue,
has some kind of eternity, for the young child seems to renew the age of
his parents. And the poor mother calling to mind Gods mercy to the Serpent,
who was the first seducer and greatest offender, may well hope for a greater
measure of that mercy; and in her greatest torments and grief, acknowledging
the just punishment of sin, may expect a better state and condition, when God
shall renew al things, change their old habits, and restore them to their first
perfection. Thus are the present miseries of this life, seasoned with the
assured hope, and expectation of a better world to succeed.

I cannot thus leave the punishment in the mother, but I must likewise trace it
in the infant. Coming into the world, Observations in the birth of man.
we come with our heads forwards, as it were stumbling into life, which
undoubtedly argues our fall, for our birth is praecipitium, a break-necke, as
if we were cast headlong down from some mount. Being thus borne, we carry
the image and representation rather of slain men, then of men beginning to
live; such effusion of blood, such uncleanness, as could not possibly stand
with the integrity of our first nature, as if we were borne under that law
and condition, that needs we must dye, and therefore we came into the world
that indeed we might go out of the world. Many are borne with caules on their
faces, which betokens their modesty and shame, as if Adam should cover his
nakedness with leaves: here we are fast bound up with swadling-cloutes, for
we are captives and prisoners, borne under the slavery and bondage of Egypt,
and for a time we can do nothing but cry, to move pity and compassion: all
our rest consists in motion, we sleep while the cradle is rockt, and so in
the succeeding course of our lives, we seem to flatter our s^lues, with ease
and security, when as indeed all things are in an uproar.

At length we begin to open our eyes, and to look about us, and here we
wonder and admire all things, as being strangers arrived in a newfound world;
we are apt to place our love on every object, Observations in the infancy of
man.
and cannot direct our selves aright; there is nothing which seems pleasant to
the sight, nor any pretty toy, but straight we must cry for it, it must be
ours, we must possess it, otherwise the whole house shall not be able to
contain us, no fruit of the garden must be excluded. See here whether that
fruit, which was gustu suaue, and visu delectabile, would not again serve to
allure man? Not long after our hearing and speech will serve us, then we begin
to hearken after old wives tales, and fables; we cannot be content with our
food, and our raiment, but we must hear some stories of Li^^s, of Bears, and
the like; old women and nurses (forsooth) they must relate them: Lord, what
skillful teachers we have gotten! as if Adam were again to be instructed by
Eve, and that we should all learn our lesson, and take advice from the
Serpent; see how this curiosity of knowledge possesses young children, as
much as ever it did ye first Adam, but more immediately and especially resides
in the womankinde: whereas a maid should be mute, she is not afraid to
dispute; The curiosity of women taxed.
she should be a cook for her sex, she would buy a book for her sects; in
liew of a mate, she must illuminate; if once she proves gossip, then she
proceeds to a Doctorship, and she can be no mistress, unless she know
mysteries. Thus they have degrees of schools among them, and therefore may
lawfully wear their hoods and their habits: they are not content to follow
their several callings and professions, wherein they might serve God, since it
was God that ordained them; not content with our ordinary Catechism, which
they in their wisdom call beggarly rudiments, or some, implicit faith; but
as if every part were ordained to be an eye, and that women should prove
teachers in the Church, they begin to enquire of predestination, reprobation,
prelection, free will, the state of innocence, the time of the general
judgment, etc. Here are excellent wits indeed, that cannot admit any bounds of
their knowledge; if there were a tree of knowledge in the midst of Paradise,
for the trial of their obedience, you should easily discover in them the same
disposition. And hence follow such monsters of opinions, such misshapen
conceits, together with such neglect, contempt* and such a base respect of
their ordinary Pastor; as that you would not imagine such disobedience, were it
not, that the same corruption and curiosity of knowledge did first appear in
the root, which now buds forth in the branches.

How credulous and easy of belief are the young children, as if they were fit
subjects to be again seduced by the serpent? how do they rather incline unto
hate then unto love, The corruption of young children.
out of the malignitie and corruption of their own nature, as it were laying
the foundation of that Machiauelian policy, that Friendship is uncertain, but
hate is irreconcilable? see their obstinacy and wilfulness, if you forbid
them any thing, the more you forbid it, the sooner they will attempt it,
^itimur in vetitum! see how we follow the footsteps of our forefathers* we
need not be taught this lesson, aspis a vipera, disobedience is now become
natural unto us! see how these little children will always attempt the most
dangerous actions, as clyming up of ladders, sliding upon the ice, running over
bridges, playing with edged tools, skipping over benches! to show that the
same nature still continues in those little impes, which under color of
bouldnes and courage, proves indeed to be rash and desperate: suppose them to
be weak and faint, not able to undertake such great exployts; see then (of all
other places) how they make choice of the basest! the sink, the channel, the
chymnie, wallowing in the mire, all daubde on with dirt; that were it not to
signify the uncleanness of man's conception and birth, I should much marvel
at natures intent herein.

See, see these little children, how apt they are to learn all lewdness and
naughtiness! if there be but a nicke-name, How exceedingly children do love
fruits.
or a lewd song, or some libellous rhyme, you shall find them so inquisitiue,
so desi^ous to learn, so retentiue of memory, as that you would think it
wonderful; whereas in all good learning, there is such a dullness, such a
backwardness, such forgetfulness, as that you would not suppose them to be the
same wits. Now the first offense for which our parents correct us, it is (for
the most part) the eating of raw and untimely fruits; see how these children
do naturally symbolize with their parents! and as of nature, so there is a
conformity of wills; as soon as our strength serves us, then we begin to rob
orchards, to rifle aple-lofts, ceasing upon forbidden fruits, as if we could
not leave our old ^aunt, or that we did claim a bad custom by prescription;
but I pray' mark the event, this eating of fruits ingendreth worms in their
mawe, their stomachs, and bowels, their tender young bodies become quick
sepulchers, a womb for the worms to feed upon their living carkases; see here
the eating of this fruit, gives them the first token and assurance of their
mortality, morte morieris.

But I forget my self; unless I should here stay (I fear) I should again and
again run through the whole course of his life, neither indeed dare I far
proceed in this subject, for I know what some will say, that bachelors children
are ever well taught; give me therefore leave retiring far back, to make the
longer leap, from the cradle to the coffin; being fast bound up with swaddling
cloutes, I will exchange them for my winding sheet, and so in the last place I
come to the last punishment of the first sin; morte morieris, thou shall die
the death, Genesis 3. v. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till
thou return to the earth, for out of it wast thou taken, because thou art
dust, and to dust shall thou return. I confess indeed, I shall incur a
disorderly method, if you consider the course and order of nature, for nature
passes by degrees, natura non facit saltum, she takes no leap; but when I
consider the necessity of death, together with the casualtie and uncertainty of
all other accidents which may befall man ( statutum est hominibus mori, there
is a statute past that al men must die; but peradventure I shall be rich, I
shall be poor; peradventure I shall grow old, I shall be blind; peradventure
I shall be lame, I shall be a criple; but without all peradventure I shall die;
thus there being a necessity of death, together with a great uncertainty of
the time) I do appeal to the strictness and rigor of law, The author
justifies his method by law.
that if a debt must be discharged and no due time be appointed, then we must
prepare for a present payment; so that it cannot seem much against method,
though I speak of death, immediately upon our first receiving of breath.

If all other creatures were subject to death, yet (me thinks) observing the
course and providence of nature, Man's death is compared with the death of dumb
beasts.
man should be exempted from death: consider the high prerogative of man; in
all restringent and penal laws, the Prince is excluded, to show his high
estate above the rank and condition of subjects: now man is the king of the
creatures, let other creatures be liable to ^laughter, for they were ordained
and directed to man; let other creatures die of themselves, for in them there
is nothing but nature, nature which has a certain course and period, a time
of rising and a time of setting: but the first fountain of life in man, is the
invisible and immortal soul free from corruption, free from all change and
alteration, as in her own substance, so in her actions; she cannot be
enforced or determinated, but is beyond the Precincts of nature, and therefore
no way tied to follow the ordinary course of nature. Yet some beasts do far
exceed man in life and continuance of being, which is the foundation and ground
work of nature, to support all other blessings; and therefore seems to be the
highest prerogative of nature, wherein notwithstanding man is defective: other
creatures (indeed) seem to attain their perfection in their ends, or their
death; the herbs serve for the food of beasts, and in their bodies and
carkases they have a more excellent being, then they had in their green
blades; the flesh of beasts becomes the nourishment of man, and being made part
o^ man's own flesh, here is the height of all their preferment; now in man, you
shall observe it far otherwise, who (of the mirror and miracle of nature) by
his own death, is suffered to putrify and to be devoured of the basest worms;
as if his body were ordained to be the compost of the earth, and did only serve
to make the Churchyard fat with the oil of his flesh, and to paue the high
ways with the sculs and bones of dead men.

Consider this inferior world, consisting of the same different and contrary
elements, yet still continuing in the same state; assuredly it is no greater
difficulty to preserve man from death, Man's death in respect of the elements.
then to preserve the whole world from corruption: for the same causes appear
in both, the elements and the elementarie qualities, and once in every man's age
they are equally tempered, as it were the Equinoctial of his age. Then why
should there not be a state of consistencie in man, as well as in the whole
world? or at least, why should not the periods and times of his age, the spring
of his infancy, the summer of his youth, the harvest of his riper years, the
winter of his old age, go and return according to the revolution of times,
seasons, and changes of the year; which seem to be therefore only allotted,
for the continuance and preservation of mankind?

Not to insist alone in this sublunarie world; strange it is, that the heavens
themselves which were only ordained for man's use, Man's death in respect of the
heavens and the Angels.
should so long continue without change or alteration, and man himself in the
whole course of his life, should not be able to see a revolution: that the
superior causes preserving man's life, should move by a most certain and
unchangeable rule, as the divine providence has appointed them; and yet man's
life to which all is ordained, should be most subject and liable to the
greatest hazard, chance, and vnc^rtainty. But most strange it is, that the
heavens being Gods blessed instruments to continue life, quicken sense, stir up
motion, yet with their malignant and dis-astrous aspects, should cause the
overthrow of man, yea sometimes of whole nations and kingdoms: consider the
end of man's creation, which was the praise and glory of his maker, which end is
eternal, as God himself is eternal; then why should not those things, which
are ordained only to this end, be of like eternity and continuance? God is not
like man, that he should be altered and changed, that he should repent himself
of his own works, and restore again that unto nothing, which he himself has
once made according to his own image: neither is God the God of the dead but
of the living, being life in himself; shall the dust rise up and praise him,
shall his justice appear in the grave? or rather shall the prayers, the voices
and harmony of men, joined with the quire and sweet melody of Angels, sing
praises unto him and magnify his holy name, which indeed was the scope and end
of our creation? thus not only Christian religion, but even reason it self,
and man's own knowledge seem to preach this lesson, that the end of nature
(man) to whom all nature is ordained and directed, should not end in nature;
and therefore death it self especially to man, is a punishment of nature, and
in it self is most unnatural to man.

Especially when I consider, how the better part of man (the soul) is immortal
and unchangeable; The soul receives a kind of perfection from the body.
as in her self and in her own substance, so in her qualities and actions:
now the life of man, being only the work of his soul, and the sweet influence
of his quickening spirit, into the dull flesh; I do much marvel, how this
immortal spirit should be the cause of our mortality? for it cannot be
denied, but that the soul receives some kind of perfection from the flesh;
for without the ministry of the body, were not our members the souls vessels
and instruments, she could never exercise those excellent powers of sense and
vegetation; and therefore in her separation, though her state may seem to be
more perfect then it was, during the time of her marriage, or couerture with our
flesh, our corrupted flesh, wherein iars and contentions did daily arise to the
great disquieting of both; yet certainly the soul having these faculties,
desires the free use and exercise of them. Which desire, that it might not be
frustrat and vain, does in some sort (by a natural sequel) enforce a last
resurrection; when the soul shall be reunited to a spiritual body better
befitting it self: and in the interim concludes, that either man is
unnaturally compounded, or that the separation of his parts, must be wholly
unnatural, which I rather suppose; seeing it makes much for man's dignity and
natures perfection, the soul no way desiring a separation; for as the state
now stands, there is a kind of correspondencie, if the flesh be corrupted, the
soul is likewise tainted with sin; here is a proportion, though an evil
proportion between both.

The ^oule desiring the continuance of this union, why should she not be able
to effect it; she frames and fashions in the womb, all the members of man's
body for her own use and service, The soul^ builds the frame of our body.
anima fabricatur sibi domicilium: though Gods power appears in our making,
yet God uses means, and these means can be none other, then the actions of
the soul it self; a baser agent God would never employ in such an excellent
work, and a greater worke-man all nature could not afford him. Now the soul
having thus framed the body, if she dislikes any thing, she must blame none but
her self; if all things be perfect and sound in the first fabric and
architecture of man, then in the succeeding actions of life, the soul is the
first fountain, and the only acti^^ principle of all several operations: for
I receive my temper, my constitution, my color, my digestion, my nourishment,
my strength, my growth, and all from my soul. If there be an error or fault, I
must blame and cast the aspersion upon my soul; that notwithstanding her own
eternity; yet she should lead me to the paths of mortality: for herein I dare
bouldly excuse mine own flesh, my flesh is innocent, if not of my sin yet of
my blood; and the soul is the sole murderer, for the body is only subject to
passion, as it please the soul to work, so it must suffer: as the soul
receives the praise and commendation in the goodness of her actions; so let
her take unto her self, the shame and reproach in the defects and imperfections.

Though there may be (I confess) some little difference in the appetites and
inclinations of both, The immortal soul is the cause of corruption.
proceeding from the different natures; yet is there no opposition between
both, in regard of destroying qualities, both of them being substances of a
diverse kind, not capable of contrariety; and therefore a wonder it is, how
they should be joined together, or being once coupled how they should be set a
^under. Can the ^oule first build this goodly tabernacle of our bodies, and can
she not repair and renew the workmanship decayed? seems it not a work of
less difficulty to repair then to lay the first foundation? Can she bring
forth a seed to propagate her own kind, and so give l^fe unto others, yet
cannot preserve her own life? is she so prodigal of her best substance and
treasure, that imp^rting it to others, she leaves her self destitute? or how
falls i^ out contrary to the course and stream of nature, that the better part
of man being privileged, and having a charter for eternity; yet man himself
should see and taste corruption? as if the whole did not incl^de the parts, or
that there were a different condition of the whole from the parts, contrary to
the whole course of nature, and the wisdom of her first institution.

Suppose the soul should be defective in her actions; as that for want of a
full and perfect concoction, the stomach should be filled up with raw humors,
which at length should seize upon the liver, and there break forth like a
spring or a fountain, and so be conuayed in the conduit-pipes of our veins,
thorough the trunk of the whole body; yet cannot the soul instantly recall
her self, and correct her own error? cannot heat be allayed with
couldnesse, moisture with drought, and every distemper be cured with the
application of his contrary? I cannot conceive the reasonable soul to be a
fool, and therefore needs she must be a Physician; How easily the soul may
preserve life by a natural course.
you will say that there is a great difficulty in the receiptes, and therefore
the life of man would hardly suffice to learn the remedy and cure: but I pray'
mark the art and industry of man, I am verily persuaded, and I speak it by
experience, that man's body, by the help of feare-clothes, powders, balmes, and
ointments, may be preserved for the space of two hundred or three hundred
years, in the same state and consistencie wherein now it is, at least to the
outward show and appearance; then why should not the like medicines inwardly
taken, preserve life for such a term of years? why should not physic grow
to that ripeness and perfection, that knowing the nature of diseases, the
course and inclination of humors, by application of co^traries, as it were
using the tree of life in Paradise, it might prolong man's age, if not for ever
give him eternity? But see, see corruption consists in the root, in nature her
self! for physic cannot work, but must first presuppose the strength and
furtherance of nature: left thou should blame the Physician, or think the
means which God has appointed for thy health, to be wholly unprofitable;
behold thine own nature is wanting and defective to her self.

If nature might fail in her particular ends, yet (me thinks) the whole scope
and general intent of nature should not be frustrate and made void. There is
nothing so common and triuiall in Schools (wherein nature is best discovered,
How the death of man is against the whole scope of nature in general.
as is this known and palpable truth) Corruption vnius est generatio alterius,
the death of one is the birth of another, for nature consists in alteration and
change; and it would much disparage nature, if there were such a death, as did
wholly make for her loss, and no way redound to her increase. In all other
creatures you shall observe this truth: Suppose a beast were slain, his body
should be dissolved into the bodies of the elements, his form into the forms
of the elements, as both of them were first composed of the elements, nothing
should be lost through the negligence of nature, but all should be gleaned up,
and very safely reserved for a new succeeding generation. Now in the death of
man, the body is the sole booty of nature, she cannot seize upon the soul,
she cannot retain such an inestimable treasure, the soul is escaped: as long
as life continued in man, the soul was under the jurisdiction and power of
nature; but the body being once dissolved, nature has lost her own right, and
cannot intend any new generation by virtue of that soul. A foul error of
nature, that having the soul once committed to her custody and charge, she
should open the gates, or break down the prison walls to lose such a jewel,
which was never gotten by her own purchase, nor cannot be recalled again
with all her might and power: so then in the death of man, and so man alone,
the corruption, and nothing but the corruption of nature sufficiently appears.

I would not willingly speak of a punishment, wherein the mercy and goodness
of God should not together appear with his justice: but when I have once
spoken of death, How death serves to instruct us.
me thinks I am then come to the vpshot and conclusion of all, beyond which I
cannot extend any blessing, I mean any natural blessing, for death is the end
and period of nature; yet give me leave to make these four good uses of death:
1. To reprove sins: 2. To strengthen and fortify the bulwarks of Religion.
3. As to give comfort, courage, and resolution to the true Christian man; 4. so
to discomfort, discourage and put to flight the infidel and heathen.

First, death seems to instruct man, to preach unto him the reformation of his
life, and thereby does witness his natural and inbred corruption: the
covetous man, Death is a very powerful means to recall a sinner.
whose heart could never be touched, or moved to take pity or compassion by
the cries and prayers of a poor wretch, yet at length will howl and lament,
when he considers that he shall dye in the midst of his treasure, and all
his substance shall leave him: the oppressing tyrant, stained with the blood of
poor innocents, shall knock his own breast, tear his own hair, ready to
shed his own blood, when he sees the pale and liuelesse carkase of his
persecuted foe, to show him his own state, and condition, and being dead, to
threaten his death: but it were to be wished (if it might be spoken without
offense) that one might arise from the dead, who might relate unto us the state
of the dead, and of the vanities of this life, which pass like a shadow. And
to this end, I have heard it as a tradition of the Church, that Christ having
told the parable of Dives and Lazarus, and the Jews little regarding it (to
stir up faith in them, as likewise in some sort to satisfy the request of
Dives, that one from the dead might instruct his brethren), God raised up
Lazarus, the brother of Mary Magdalen, who might witness and testify as much
as Christ had reported: I will not stand upon the truth of this traditon;
though certain it is, that both these accidents fell out much about the same
time. The very bones of the dead, being served up at a banquet, will be a fit
sauce to season our immoderate mirth: the tombs of the dead are for the
instruction of the living, monumenta monent mentem, we tread upon the flesh of
our forefathers, which is now become the dust of the Temple. Death is an
excellent means to stir up piety, and devotion: the mariners in guiding
their ships, must sit in the end, to hold and govern the stearne; and the end
of euerything, is the first in intension, though the last in execution. Hence
it is, that the religious persons in all ages, were frequentes in cemiterijs,
always busily employed about the tombs of the dead: their cloisters of
recreation were places of burials for their meditation; if they found
themselves given to immoderate joy, their delight was abated with the sight and
smell of dead bones. Thus living they were dead, their mind was among the dead,
they conuersed with the dead: and thus the meditation of death, did prescribe
unto them (answerable to a vale of misery, befitting a sinful state) a course
of life in mortification and sorrow.

O death, which do astonish man with thy sight, how fearful is thy blow!
when we shall go and never return, or recover our own strength; Soles
occidere and redire possunt, at nobis nox perpetua dormienda est. O death,
which in this last age of the world, (wherein sin and iniquity do abound,
and religion seems to have taken up wings, and every where to be put to
flight, and indeed to have gone up to heaven, from whence she descended) yet
death stands like a stout champion to fight in defense of religion; death
stands at the back of religion, Death ^ights in defense of religion.
assuring us that there must be an end of this sinful state, and of these
worldly vanities, and death is this end, assuring us, that there must be a time
for the manifestation of Gods justice, and death seems to summon us, to
appear at his judgment seat; assuring us, that there is another world to
succeed, and death is the passage to that other world: for otherwise in vain
should we preach the mercy of God, together with his promises; in vain
should we teach the law of nature, the instinct of nature, the moral precepts,
the mysteries of grace, the majesty of God; in vain should we preach
humility, to sustain injuries with patience, to forgive all offenses, to make
restitution for wrongs; in vain should we persuade men, to spend whole nights
in watchings, fastings, and prayers, to repent in sackcloth and ashes: alas,
alas, these are all unprofitable lessons to the worldlings, let us therefore
leaving the force of Church discipline, Ecclesiastical censures,
Excommunications, etc. let us implore brachium seculare, the help of the
temporal power to restrain sin. Remember thine own death, remember thine
own death; if thou will not forsake the world, the world shall at length
forsake thee; here is our last refuge, to serve at a dead lift, for the
conversion of a sinner; here is no faith of things invisible, here are no
strict rules of mortification, here are no precepts, which seem to oppose the
practice of man's natural inclination: but consider the state of thine own
body, and the degrees of thine age, how thou do daily decline, and learn to
dye by the daily precedent, experience, and example of others: Filimi memorare
nouissima and in aeternum non peribis; My son, remember thy last end, and
thou shall never perish everlastingly.

As it serves for a means of our conversion, so is it no less cause of great
joy and comfort to a well resolved Christian; The Christian man desires death
as the mean of his happiness.
Cupio dissolui, and esse cum Christo: Life is the only hinderance of our
coupling with Christ; this old house must first be taken down, before the new
building can be erected: now death serves as a bridge or a passage to a better
life; it is a holy relic, which first seized upon Christ's body, and at
length shall befall us; we must dye with him, that we may reign with him;
where the head has already entered, the whole body must follow. But here is
our comfort, he that stood in the forefront, has now abated the strength of
our adversary; he that sanctified all other creatures, the earth with his
blood, the air purified with his breath, the water washed with his washing, the
fire purged with his spirit in fiery tongues, he has likewise sanctified
death it self by his own death. Death is now made a safe harbor unto us,
which before was the terror of nature: for as it was truly prophesied of
Christ, so is it verified in the members of Christ, He shall not leave his
soul in hell, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption. Thus is death now
become the sole sacrifice of a Christian man, Death is the sacrifice of our
selves.
a free oblation at Gods altar, wherein whole man is bequeathed unto God; we
commit our souls to his safe custody and keeping, we leave our bodies to be
the dust of his Temple: all our goods we dispose as he shall direct us, some by
the course of nature, which he himself has appointed; some to pious and
religious uses, which he himself has commanded; some to almes-deedes and
charitable benevolence, according to that natural compassionate instinct, which
God has imprinted in our hearts, and as the present necessity of these times
seems to require: and what is so left, we leave it not behind us, but it
follows us, and ouertakes us at heaven gates. And thus is man become a whole
burnt offering unto God, and that by the means of his death: and therefore we
may now securely triumph over death, O death where is thy sting! O hell where
is thy victory! the sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the law:
but thanks be unto God who has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Death is the sole comfort in all my worldly miseries, for it seems to be the
vpshot and period of my woe: which if I shall once attain (as needs I must
attain), then shall I be like the sea faring man, who being arrived in the
Haven, has safely escaped the troublesome waves of this turbulent world; the
assurance and expectation whereof, Death is our comfort in all our worldly
miseri^s.
does enable me with patience, and forti^ude. For what can befall me? Suppose
loss of senses, loss of limbs, loss of substance, loss of honor; yet one
thing remains, I shall dye, I shall dye; here is my comfort, for here is the
end of my woe. What if the bloody Tyrant shall sport himself, in the shedding
of my innocent blood? what if the great statesman shall pick out some flawes,
and find out some nice errors in my estate, and thereby under the fair show
of concealements, shall make me a booty? Sentiat hoc, moriar, mors vltima
linea rerum. My life is a pilgrimage, the quicker my expedition is, I shall
sustain the less sorrow. Now this contempt of death, gives the true Christian
man such an excellent spirit, such a brave courage and resolution, Death gives
the Chris^^a^ man an excellent resolution.
as that indeed he proves the only good soldier; thou may repose
confidence in him, for he will never revolt, or forsake a just cause; in his
attempts thou shall find him valiant above measure, for this resolution of
death is his armor of proof, for conquer he will, and conquer he must,
though with his own passion; fearful and terrible he is to his enemies, for
he that regards not his own life, is Lord of another man's life. Whereas the
worldling, who has placed all his happiness here in the course of this life,
is indeed a base coward, fearful, unfaithful, performing his service only
to the outward show, carrying a heart full of infidelity; upon all fit
occasions he is ready to revolt, and dares undertake nothing for fear of his
death, which he holds for his greatest woe.

Thus I have proportioned the several punishments of the first sin, to the
ten plagues of Egypt: I have contracted them to the number of ten, though
further happily I could have extended them; were it not that I desire to speak
al things, according to some rule and proportion. But now I call to mind, the
last punishment in Egypt was, mors primogeniti, The first and second death.
the death of their first begotten; and this has likewise some reference to
the last punishment of sin, mors primogeniti, the death of the soul, which
is the first begotten in man: and Scripture does intimate as much in effect,
for this very phrase, morte morieris, thou shall dye the death, might seem to
include a needless repetition, or tautologie; were there not a first death,
and a second death, and both of them bruised, brayed and beaten together in this
one mortar, morte morieris, thou shall dye the death. Which words ^ound to my
ears, as if they did intimate the truth of a double death, both proposed to
man, and man himself made subject and liable to both; yet the necessity
seems to be imposed, only for one. The first judgment has relation to the
first death, thou shall dye the death: if you tell me of the Hebrew phrase, and
the manner of their speech, then I do much more magnify God, who has so
ordained the tongues and languages of men, to express such a mystery.

If you please to consider the circumstances and ^orerunners of the last and
general judgment, they cannot but greatly astonish man: The fearful
circumstances of the last judgment.
when the world shall now be grown to that old age, as that her sight shall
begin to fail her; or sick of a dangerous and desperate disease, undoubtedly
approaching to death, her light shall be put out, (which was the first token and
sign of life, and therefore was created in the first place), when the Sun
and the Moon shall be darkened; and in this darkness, as if nature were
poisoned with man's sin, not any part thereof shall be able to perform her
own office and duty, but all shall stand in an uproar, the heavens with the
elements, the elements with the heavens, and all together confounded. Luke 21.
verse. 25. Then there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the
Stars, and upon the earth trouble among the nations with perplexity, the Sea
and the waters shall roar, etc. These things might seem strange and terrible
to the carnal man, but here is the least part of his terror; for when he
shall see the wrath of God hanging over his head, hell opened beneath him,
damnation before him, his persecuting foes behind him, on his right hand the
whole number of his sins accusing him, on the left hand all the creatures
witnessing against him, within him nothing but fear, tormenting himself with
the sting of his own conscience, without him nothing but torture, and the cry
of his own sins, together with Gods justice calling for vengeance: O what a
fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the ever living God! When as all the plagues of Egypt, which certainly were strange and wonderful; yet by the
confession of the Egyptians, and by the testimony of Scripture it self, were
only wrought by the finger of God, digitus dei hic est: alas what proportion
is there between the whole hand, and the little finger. But shall I tell you
how to to avoid the hands of this everliving God; How we should prevent Gods
wrath.
then let us first fall into the hands of a dead God, amor meus crucifixus est,
Christus meus crucifixus est: his blood is shed, and therefore he will not
require our blood; he is weakened, and cannot hurt; his hands are nailed, and
cannot strike, he is not fit to punish, but to commi^erate; here we may safely
approach without fear, and under the shadow of his wings we shall find
protection. Hebr. 4. verse. 15. 16. We have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in
like sort, yet without sin: let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help us in this time of
our necessity.

Let us call to mind, What effects the meditation of the last judgment has
wrought upon many.
what effects the preuision and premeditation of this last and great judgment,
has wrought upon the dearest Saints of God: the righteous Job can testify in
the 21. Chapter; What shall I do? how shall I escape, when God shall come unto
judgment? The beloved Disciple, though otherwise he had leaned upon the bosom
of Christ; yet seeing Christ coming in judgment, he fell down under his
feet, Apocal. 1. S. Jerome sets up a stage, and makes a lively representation
of this judgment, supposing himself always to hear the noise of the trumpet
sounding in his ears, Surgite mortui, venite ad iudieiu^: Arise ye dead, come
unto judgment. S. Basil lets forth this judgment, in place of a
schoolmasters to teach us our selves, and our own wretched condition. S.
Chrysostom makes it a bridle to keep us from sin, within the lists of
obedience. Cyprian makes it a remembrancer of sin, for our repentance*
Vaepeccatis meis, cum monti dicturus sum, etc. Woe be unto my sins, when I
shall say to the mountains, cover me; and to the deep waters, hide and
conceal me; to the earth, swallow and ouerwhelme me, that I may find some
refuge in the day of Gods wrath. Whither shall I go from Gods presence? if I
fly up to heaven, he is there; if I go down into hell, he is there also; if
I take up the wings of a Dove, and fly to the uttermost parts of the earth,
even there also shall his power follow me, and his justice pursue me: whither
shall I fly from Gods presence? I will fly from God to God, from the
tribunal of his justice, to the seat of his mercy; here is my appeal, Call
to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercy and thy loving kindness, which have
been ever of old: O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth, but
according to thy mercy, think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

Thus much for the expectation: but I dare not proceed to the tortures and
torments of hell; S. Austine excuses himself, in speaking of that subject,
and for my self, I am afraid to think of them: and therefore I pray' bear
with me, if I follow S. Austins example, I had rather sound forth the trumpets
of Gods mercy, then pour down the viols of his wrath: God prevent that in
mercy, which otherwise in justice he might and should inflict upon us. If I
should enter into this subject, I know not ho^ (...) disquiet, and perplexe the
thoughts and conscienc^^ (...) ^^^nners, quorum ego sum maximus, of whom I am
the chiefest and the greatest sinner: But here is my comfort, the merits of
Christ, the ransom and price of my redemption is infinite; The author
comfort himself against the fear of damnation.
and do as far exceed the number and weight of my sins, as the goodness
and power of God exceeds my weakness and frailty: the mercy of God is
infinite, able to cover the whole multitude of my sins; the hate of God unto
sin is infinite, and therefore he will leave nothing unattempted, which may
serve to cut down the body of sin: the desire which God has of my
salvation, far exceeds mine own desire of salvation; seeing his glory and
the manifestation of his mercy, (which was the scope and end of my creation)
is a far greater good, then my particular souls health. The greater my sins
are, the greater occasion may God take to manifest his mercy, for God himself
has appointed my salvation, not to consist in not sinning, or to be free and
innocent from all sins; but in the repentance for sin, and in the
satisfaction of his dear Son: and therefore to assure me of this mercy, it
is one of the Articles of my Creed (which not to believe were not to be saved),
that I should boldly and confidently believe the remission and forgiveness
of sins. Yet conceive me aright, for some there are who laying hold to soon
on Gods mercy, as it were snatching at his mercy, do indeed loose the fruits of
his mercy; when (laying the whole burden of their sins upon Christ, as it were
making long and deep furrows in his back) themselves continuing in their
own sins, in the impenitency and hardness of their own hearts, do indeed
dream of salvation.

My sins are innumerable, yet before I was borne, before they could be
committed, God did foresee them; notwithstanding his foresight, Antidotes
against desperation.
when he might have prevented my sins, and left me to my first nothing, yet
in his gracious goodness and mercy, he made and created me: he has given me
my life, my strength, my health, my senses, my wit, and al my temporal
blessings, together with the knowledge of himself, the plentiful and powerful
means of my salvation; notwithstanding my sins, be they never so great, yet
these are the tokens of his favor, the pledges of his love, the assurances of
his promises, and the earnest of my future happiness. Why should I then despair
of Gods mercy? though I have lost that sanctity and holiness, wherewith I
might be saved, yet God has not lost that virtue and powe, ^ wherewith he
might save a penitent sinner; and behold the fruit of this power, if I do but
speak or name God, it is God that speaks in my heart, ipse praesens facit se
quaeri, I had thought I had lost him, but behold he is present, and inuites me
to a banquet, where he himself is the feast, conui^a and conuinium; Lord I am
not worthy with the dogs, to lick up the crummes under thy table; yet give me
O Lord that property of dogs, that licking mine own wounds, I might heal
mine own sores, that my tongue may serve to cleanse my uncleanness; confessing
my sins, I may disgorge and cast out my sins, where they shall lie as a
heavy burden upon thy son, for he has taken up my sins, and borne mine
iniquities; my sins are no longer mine, Mea sunt per perpetrationem, Christ^
sunt, quoad obligatione^ satisfactionis: indeed I committed them, and so they
are mine, but Christ alone has entered into bands for the discharge of them; he
has canceld the hand writing of the law, he has satisfied the rigor of thy
justice, by the shedding of his blood, by his death and passion; and therefore
O Lord, thou will not demand a second payment of us; he has imputed his
righteousness to us, and thus every true penitent, stands rectus in curia,
acquitted in thy consist^ry.

Give me leave to compare my self, that am the meanest of all men, to
Alexander the great; and this my present treatise, A transition from the death
of man, to the death of the whole world.
wherein I labor to show the fall and corruption of man, to the conquest of
nature; me thinks I have subdued the little world, and brought man as a captive
or sl^ue, through much misery and sorrow, at length to the place of his
execution; and having now possessed my self of the fairest fortress, or tower
in nature (man that is a little world), I cannot here content my self, but I
begin to enquire, whether there are as yet more worlds to be conquered? and
behold in the second place, I will fall upon the great world, and I will
attempt with Archimedes, to shake her foundations, to threaten her ruin, in
this general corruption and dissolution of man: for this punishment ( morte
morieris) though it principally concerns man, yet the whole world cannot be
exempted from it, being directed and ordained only for man's use, containing in
it self the very same seeds, and causes of death and destruction; and as it
is most fit and agreeable to our present condition, that being corruptible in
our selves, we should likewise dwell in houses of corruption.

For proof and demonstration whereof, I must ascend from the indiuiduals and
singulars, to the species and kinds of the creatures; and among all other
kinds, The kinds and species of creatures do decay.
assuredly man is the most noble, and therefore best deserves to be the subject
of our knowledge: we should be best acquainted with our selves, which makes
for the certainty of our knowledge; and speaking of things which so nearly
concerns our selves, we should much desire to be better informed, in our own
state and condition: now if the whole kind and species of man seems daily to
decline and decay, which shall appear by the comparison of times past with
times present; of our selves, with our ancestors; then assuredly the whole
world cannot be excused from corruption; but as it dies daily in the singulars,
so at length it shall fail in the universals, and in the kinds of the
creatures.

This truth seems to rely upon these three foundations: 1. Man (as all other
creatures) being immediately created by God, Three reasons why all the
creatures do decline.
as he comes nearer and nearer the first mould, so is he more and more perfect,
and according to the degrees of his distance, so he incurres the more
imperfection and weakness; as the streams of a fountain, the further they
run through unclean passages, the more they contract the corruption. 2. It
would implie a contradiction in nature, if the parts and the whole were not of
like condition; but how wonderful is the difference, if you will suppose a
corruption of the singulars, and an eternity of the kind? for whereas the
recompense should be made by succession or equiualencie, we must consider, that
succession may well prolong the corruption, adding more degrees, proceeding
more leasurely, but cannot wholly exclude the corruption. 3. The general
intent and scope of nature wholly ^ends to corruption; for I would gladly ask,
why should not nature, either renew man's age, or preserve him in a state of
consistencie? the answer is, because the juice and sap which we receive from
our food, or our nourishment, is not so agreeable to the state of our bodies,
as is that humor, and calor radicalis, which we receive from our first birth;
here I will reply, how falls it out, that our bodies should impart semen ad
procreandum, wherein that radical humor is resident? and (both seed and humor
arising from our food and our nourishment) yet nature should seem in the
preservation of our bodies, to refuse the best, making it an excrement of the
third concoction, and taking for her own food and sustenance, the worst part
of the substance. See then, the general intent and scope of nature tending to
corruption, must likewise argue that nature her self in general, shall at
length be tainted with the same corruption.

First for the apparel of the Ancients, if you please to observe the fashion
of their garments, you shall find them to be such, The clothing and apparel
of the Ancients compared with ours.
as (no way enforcing nature, nor made only for comeliness) they might best
serve for the exercise of the agilitie of their bodies: which well argues a
greater actiuity in them then in us, though I suppose they would not suffer
any, to practice for danger, much less to get a dishonest living, by vaulting,
tumbling, or any such apish toys; yet generally they were more active, and had
less use of horses, then we have in these days. For the substance of their
garments, our clothing is much more gentle, and soft then theirs, for they had
not that use of linen which we have; which well argues the weakness and
tenderness of our flesh, in respect of theirs; their garments being courser,
were likewise much weightier and heavier then ours, which b^ t^kens the strong
foundation of their bodies, for in these days we could hardly endure their
burden or weight; it should seem, they did accustom themselves to much
hardness, for amongst the common sort of men, stockings and shoes were not
then grown into fashion: indeed for the trunk or bulk of their bodies, they
were more warmely clothed then we are, as committing themselves more to the
weather; and as the heat of a man's own body, being kept in with warm
clothes, is much more natural, more healthful and cordial to man, then is
the burning, scorching and consuming heat of the fire; therefore the Ancients
did more desire warm clothes and apparel, then the use of fire; for among
them you shall find little preparation for fire, their houses built with very
few chymnies, they were very sparing and thriftie in their woods, their
chambers very close and warm, desiring rather to keep out the cold wind,
then to let in the fresh air; whereas our wantonness appears in large windows
and high roofes, as if we made no difference of being without doors, and being
within doors; or that we did never purpose to use our limbs, to go and take
the fresh air, but that the fresh air should be brought unto us; their lying
or bedding was very hard, few of them knew what feather-beds meant, and
assuredly their bodies would better endure it then ours; The Ancients more
given to their sports then now we are.
as likewise for their lodging in camps, or professing a strict and austere
life, as many religious men did; and as they were more apt for their labors,
so were they more given to their pastimes, their sports and their games then we
are; which I suppose did neither argue lightness in them, nor any counterfeit
gravity in us, but the state of their bodies were such as did require them,
and the weaknenesse of our bodies is such, as we dare not attempt them, for
according to the disposition of the body the mind is affected.

From the apparel let us come to the food, now it should seem is the old
age of the world, which appears by the pampering of our selves; for take our
ordinary food, it was never heretofore so delicat, so dainty, so tender, Our
food compared with the food of the Ancients.
as it is at this day, the usual, old, and accustomed food not agreeing with
our weak stomachs: we must have warm and delicious brothes to comfort our
decayed nature, exquisite sauces to provoke our appetite, such purboyling, such
helps and remedies of art to prepare our meats for digestion; which assuredly
do well argue, that the world is either dangerously sick, or come to her old
age, that she should be enforced to use, or indeed can admit such a physical
diet. For during the strength of nature, while things were in their perfection,
a stronger food did better be fit them, and did more agree with their bodies;
cookerie was then wholly unknown, they could be content with the bare use of
the creatures, without any further delicacy or preparation; water did then
serve for their drink, and they did feed much upon herbs, milch-meates and
course bread; as the world grew elder, so they did daily more and more decline
in the strength of their nature; fasting and eating of fish in succeeding ages,
did not so well agree with the state of their bodies, and therefore you shall
find even in Church Discipline, a greater conniuencie, toleration, and
dispensation upon any reasonable cause; and we, that are now fallen in this last
period of times, we are now grown to that faintness, that hot waters, and
strong drinks, were never so much used, hot spices were never brought over in
such plenty, as may well appear in the custom house: yea such is the
continual weakness of our stomachs, The use of Tobacco in these days.
that for remedy and help thereof, this last age has found out an Indian drug
(the use of Tobacco) which at all times, upon all occasions, to all
complexions, the full stomach, the empty stomach, in any measure or
quantity taken, must serve to cure the rawnesse of the stomach; to extenuate
and exhale the ill humors, to help the undigested food; but you will say, that
the use, or at least the immoderat use of this herb, proceeds from the
wantonness of these times, which truly I do easily confess; yet assuredly
the temper and constitution of our bodies, would never admit such a wantonness,
were it not, that it proceeds from the weakness of our nature: for if we
should presume as far upon herbs in the extremity of coldness, suppose the
juice of Oranges or Limons (which by the art and cunning of man, might be made
every way as delicious and delicate), certainly we should feel the smart of
our own folly.

The clothing and food do much betoken the soundness and constitution of our
bodies, yet I cannot content my self with them, but I will descend to speak
more immediately of our bodies: Heretofore the constitution of men's bodies was
better the^ now it is.
it should seem that death is not only competent to every person in
particular, but even the whole world, and all the several kinds of creatures
tend to confusion; there is a great decay in every species, men come not to
that strength, nor to that growth, nor to that ripeness of wit, nor to that
fullness of years which they did in former times; the world has his period
and his determinate course of years: now is the old age or decay of this
world. The growth and strength of men seem to proceed from the same causes,
and to rely upon the same foundation (the bones), which according to their
massinesse, their weight, or their length give the proportion and strength to
the whole body; these bones are yet extant, and are daily taken up in
sepulchers, whereof I have often been an eyewitness, and having duly
considered them according to measure and weight, I find by most undoubted
experience, that they did far exceed ours; their weapons will likewise
testify as much, for these are yet extant, and are reserved as relikes and
trophies of their valor, which the strength of man in these days cannot
manage or rule; many things there are likewise, wherein I could instance,
which were (in former times) trialls for their strength, but now seem very
impossible to our weakness. Consider all their actions which they did
undertake, for therein they did as far exceed us, as their strength did
exceed ours; observe their attempts in erecting stately Cathedral Churches
for the exercise of Religion, in building huge Castles for defense of their
people, in contriuing high ways, caus-waies, bridges, and such like, which
well betoken noble and brave spirits: whereas our wits in these days make
their employments in things of less moment, some pretty toys and trifles,
some new fashion and attire; our buildings are paper-buildings, made only to
serve the present use and occasion. I am ashamed of our selves, we doat, we
doat; though herein I do acknowledge a wonderful providence of God, while
the world had some time of continuance, Gods providence in man's actions.
when the years were not fully expired, then God gave man a mind and
disposition to intend the good of posterity: but now in these latter days,
when the world is almost come to an vpshot, when the period of time is now
approaching; no marvel if God leave man to himself, that out of his own
immoderate love of himself, neglecting the common good, and the good of
succession, he should only intend, in his buildings, in the waste of his
woods, and in all other his actions, his own private and present commodity.

Very credible it is, that their grear labors and actions were more performed
by their own only strength, A great change does appear in man's own
disposition.
for they had less use of instruments, and craines in their buildings,
notwithstanding their huge foundations, then we have at this day. But I will
not insist in the particular actions; rather this decay of nature, shall
appear in the general disposition and inclination of men, together with the
diseases whereunto they are subject: that a change should appear in the very
nature, and instinct of man, after so great a change in his temper and
constitution, I am the rather persuaded to believe; when I consider how many
titles, paragraphes, what large discourses, and judgments have past in the
Civil laws, concerning the adoption of sons; whereof at this day we find
little, or no use, being laws which seldom or never come to the practice.
Certainly as the children of Israel were most careful, to preserve their
tribes whole and entire, until the coming of their Messiah; and as the
Patriarchs were most careful, as of their succession and seed, so of their
dead bones; for Jacob gave charge, that his dead body should be carried out of
Egypt (as it were going to Jerusalem in pilgrimage), there to be laid and rest,
near the holy Sepulcher: but since the coming of Christ, you shall find that
their tribes are confounded, and in themselves you shall find no such
inclination. So was it in the ancient Romans, as long as this world had any
time to continue, how careful were they of succession, The adoption of sons.
if not from their own loins, yet by their own adoption, for the continuance
of their names and memories? but now the world is almost come to an vpshot, see
the strange change and alteration, a change in our nature! for nature will
never fail in her ends and purposes: and therefore to desire a continuance of
memory, when the world it self shall have no time of continuance, it cannot
stand with the wisdom and providence of nature, which has ingrafted in us
our natural inclination.

To show the change of men's minds, let us change our profession, a togis ad
arma, from the pen to the spear, from the bar to the camp: Where is that
ancient resolution of the Romans, who desired nothing more, The resolution of
the Ancie^ts.
then to sow the seed of their own blood in defense of their country,
thereby expecting the eternity of their names and memories? Infinite are the
examples which may be brought to this purpose: but we on the contrary
supposing (as it were by an implicit faith) some natural instinct, that the
world shall not continue the full age of a man; we think our blood better
saved, and reserved within the vessels of our own bodies, then wastfully spent
in a vain expectation of honor and fame, after our deaths. And this I
conceive to be the reason, that cowardice and fear has now at leng^h
poss^ssed our minds, in stead of the brave resolution and courage of former
times; it was the^ thought fit by the wisdom of our laws, to permit a trial
by combats and duels, Trial by combats.
as well befitting a warlike nation, which notwithstanding at this day, if they
be not wholly abolished (not knowing how things may hereafter succeed, or what
use there might be of such combats upon some occasions), yet assuredly they
cease in the practice.

Let not this change of our minds seem strange unto you; for see you not, how
the little chickens stand fearful of the Kite, whereas the valiant Cock
desires nothing more then the combat? In young men and old men you shall not
find a like inclination: and men of diverse nations you shall find them
severed, as in their climates, so in their dispositions. Suppose a change
should appear in the natural inclination of man; it is no more then you may
discene in other creatures: hereafter as man shall find out new snares to
entrap them, There may be a change in the natural instinct.
assuredly nature gives the^ an instinct accordingly for their own
preservation, as desiring to continue the same kind which was created from the
beginning. As for example, Gunpowder is a late invention of man's, a cruel and
merciless instrument; therefore has God given them a sent and a smell, for
their own safety and defense: and as the making and use of it, is a late
invention of ours, so the avoiding and discovering of it, is a late invention
of theirs, that so there might appear as great a providence, goodness, and
power of God in their preservation, as there was in their first creation.

From the change in our minds, let us come to the change in the soundness and
constitution of our bodies: Considering their strength in former times, The
Ancients were not so subject to diseases, as we are.
certainly they were less subject to diseases, then now we are; for thus the
old age of the world, as it is a weakness in it self, so is it accompanied with
many infirmities. This may well appear by their little use of physic; for in
ancient times, the common sort of men being wholly unacquainted with physical
receipts, they suffered nature to work her own will, and did not ouerloade
their stomachs, with drugges and potions: not a hundred years since, the
Physician, the Apothecarie and the Surgion, did seem to belong to one and the
same calling and profession of men; but now the necessity of the times
enforcing us, the Physician contains himself within the bounds of his
knowledge, prescribes his receipts, and gives his direction; the Druggist he
turns an Apothecarie, distills his waters, and makes his confections; the
Barber he proves a Surgion, with his plasters and salues, searching the
wounds, and the bones. Here are three distinct and several courses of life,
all set on work, and all sufficiently employed: the Physicians have their
College, the Surgions their Hall, ( Henry the 8. gave the first Charters to
both, and that within our memory); and the Apothecaries are now very earnest
and busy to make themselves a whole entire Company, forsooth a new
Corporation, the more is our misery and sorrow.

For the difference of diseases; the Ancients were more inclined to hot
diseases, such as proceed from the strength of nature, and do accompany
youth, then we are; as plagues, sweating-sicknesses, plurisies, and all other
infectious diseases arising from heat, wherein the blood is inflamed: so
likewise the inclination of men to their lusts, arising from the constitution
of their bodies, was then much greater then now, (though I do easily yield,
that the wantonness of these days far exceeds theirs), The Ancients more
apt to engender.
this appears by the number of Salomons Concubines; for then the world was to
be peopled, and their disposition to their lusts was so strong, as that God
out of the idulgencie of his own mercy, did permit a polygamie. This appears
likewise in the dumb creatures; for the alteration of so many kinds, such
numbers and variety of different creatures did only proceed out of the
immoderate heat, which causes the ingendring and coupling together of
contrary kinds: for assuredly in the Arc al those several kinds were not
contained, but since have sprung up from the mixture of kinds. So at this day
the Southern people, propter ftatum and calorem, are more inclined to their
lust, though the Northern people, propter abundantiam seminis, may se^me to
equal them; yet of both, the Southern are more vicious, because the vice it
self arises rathe^ from heat and wantonness, then from necessity. But
generally, as was their strength greater in former times, so were their
infirmities less, especially such as proceed from the weakness and coldness
of nature, and herein we seem most to abound: for proof whereof, there are
many diseases only proper to these times, such as were unknown to the
Ancients; I could name many, but I will only iusist in the French or
Neapolitane disease, which though it be accompanied sometimes with a great
unnatural heat, New diseases proceeding from coldness and weakness.
yet certainly it resides in pituita crassa; it may be long harbored in the
body before it discouers it self, and works so leisurely by degrees, as
cannot stand with the efficacy of hea^e; and therefore it must be a cold
disease, and argue a great measure of natural coldness and weakness, such
as their bodies in former times could never admit.

From the diseases and infirmities arising out of the natural constitution of
our bodies, let us come to the cure: The difference between the Ancients and
us, in the cures of our diseases.
The physic of former times agrees with ours, as in the receipts, so for the
dosis and quantity; thus we have the practice, and experience of al ages: and
though (I suppose) that their drugges in former times were of far greater
strength and efficacy then ours, (for so I conceive that the world is in the
declining); yet must it follow, that in all things it should carry a like
proportion, as far forth as possibly it could, the difference should appear
alike; as in the drugges, so in man's body. Now in this confusion, how shall we
discern the variety of times? I will therefore prescribe this course for our
direction: Certain it is, that we have the same dosis, the same measures and
weights, for so they agree in all our receipts: now take our bodies with the
physic jointly together, and then they will keep their proportion; but sever
them, and them, shall appear the disparitie. Most sure it is, that in the
^etting of blood, which is done according to measure, the Ancients did usually
take six or seven times as much, as they do in these days: a strange
difference, I confess, and yet undoubtedly a truth, for Galen relates it, etc.

From the diseases I will come to the death of both, if you please to give me
first leave to speak a word or two, concerning the inward gifts of our minds;
The wits of former times did exceed ours.
for the wits of former times, certainly they did far exceed ours, their
bodies were better tempered, as being nearer the first mould, and the mind
follows the temper and disposition of the body; though I confess, that this
our age being most proud, arrogant and vaineglorious, does most unjustly claim
unto it self the name and title of the learned age; shall we ascribe no more
to the first founders and inuentors of Arts? Was it a work of small
difficulty to hew and square out nature, allotting to every Science her proper
subject, her due limitation? to reduce all the several stars into
constellations, to observe their motion, their quality, their influence?
Grammar, which is the first entrance, and the meanest of all Arts, seems to
be most excellent in her invention; that all the several words, how different
soever, in sound and signification, should be comprehended in an alphabet of
four and twenty letters; that cases, declensions, numbers, tenses, and the
like, should figure out the variety of nature. For all Arts whatsoever, the
best authors are the most ancient, even unto this day: I could instance in
every one in particular, though we building upon their foundations, have added
some ornaments, yet such as are not necessary to perfect the Art: and generally
for the Ancients, whatsoever you shall observe in practice amongst them, you
shall find that it stood with great wisdom and providence, if you please to
have relation to the times and occasions. And wherein they seem to be
defective, you may ascribe it to the happiness of their times; for their
plenty was such, as that they were not enforced to try all conclusions in
husbandry, whereas our wants seem to require our best inventions; their
honest plain and charitable meaning was such, as that they were unacquainted,
or at least thought it not fit, to discover the guile and subtlety of a
serpentine generation; the hardness of their bodies, their fear of God, and
the joy of his service was such, as that utterly detesting all carnalitie,
(searing least the glory and pomp of this world, might steal away themselves
from themselves, and that they might be carried with an immoderat love to the
creatures), they thought it fitter to prevent this mischief in the root, to
profess a more homely and strict kind of life, and therein to give themselves
contentment; that so their time and leisure might better serve them, for the
practice of zeal and devotion.

But this great learned age has found out a comparison, wherein we might seem
to magnify the Ancients, but indeed very cunningly do press them down, A
foolish comparison answered.
making them our foote-stooles; preferring our selves before them, extolling
and exalting our selves above measure; for thus it is said, that we are like
dwarfes set upon shoulders of Giants, discerning little of our selves, but
supposing the learning and groundwork of the Ancients, we see much further
then they, (which in effect is as much, as that we prefer our own judgments,
before theirs): in truth, in truth, a very witty comparison, certainly it is
either a dwarf or a Giant, for it will admit no mediocrity. But I pray' let us
examine it, though (I confess) that comparisons are not always the best
proofs; first how these dwarfes should be exhaled and drawn up to the
shoulders of the giants; here is a point of great difficulty as yet not thought
upon, ^or I must tell you my judgment: as in digging the earth some metals
are found, and some are undiscovered, so is it in reading and perusing the
works of the fathers; we may continually learn, and daily find out new mines
in their writings; suppose these dwarfes to be now set upon the shoulders; it
is to be feared, least seeing so steep a descent, they will rather fall to a
giddines, then be able rightly to judge of the objects, least they should be
confounded with the multiplicity of learning in the fathers, not able to fadome
the depth of their grounds; for will you suppose, that these Giants should so
infinitely exceed the dwarfes in length and in strength, and yet will you equal
them for goodness and quicknes of sight? I cannot stay long upon the shoulders
of Giants, for here is but slippery hold; nor yet upon the feet of
comparisons, for these are but weak grounds and proofs; let this one reason
suffice, it is a difference between actions voluntary and natural; that in
voluntary (such as are the actions of the understanding) no man can work
according to the uttermost of his power, but when he has once spoken, he may
speak again and again as much to the purpose; so that he which shall make
himself perfect in an other man's work, The small account which some make of
the Fathers.
yet can never therein so fully inform himself as the Author. This difference
likewise appears in God, whose understanding being natural and essential, he
understanding and comprehending himself, does beget a word every way equal to
himself: but suppose (I pray') that these giants should stumble or fall, take
heed of the dwarf, take heed of the dwarf, nay rather cries out the dwarf,
I will guide and direct them, and keep them from falling; if they will not
uphold me, then I will uphold them. Here is presumption in deed; here you
shall see some expurgatorie index, apostasia patrum, errores conciliorum,
lapsus ecclesiae; see here what great account they make of the Fathers, and
thus they can use arguments to serve all turns and occasions.

I am the more strict to justify the wits and learning of the ancient Fathers,
because (I suppose) it maks much for the certainty and dignity of Christian
religion; It cannot stand with the dignity of Christian religion to forsake the
Fathers.
that our faith took no advantage by other men's ignorance, to spread it self,
and to get growth in the blindness of error: but at the time of Christ's birth,
all the liberal Arts did most flourish, there was a general peace thorough the
whole world, the Roman Empire fully settled, and established, Poets, Orators,
Philosophers, Historians never more excellent. For thus it stood with the
providence of God, that their wits and qualities might serve as trials and
touch-stones of his truth, to examine the several miracles, the mysteries and
moral precepts of his law, that both in themselves and in others they might be
for confirmation of the says; that the power of God might likewise discover it
self, for the greater the adversary and opposition is, the more noble is the
conquest: and therefore God by the weakness and foolishness of preaching,
confounding the strength and wisdom of this world, did therein manifest a
miracle, to continue for all succeeding ages. Now this faith, as finding a
strong opposition by learning and humane knowledge, so in the Apostles it could
not be accompanied with ignorance: and therefore as God gave the^ the gift of
tongues, so undoubtedly the knowledge of nature (the same God being the God
both of nature and grace); for they could not demonstrate the one, without some
reference and relation to the other; here you see the Church planted. Now in
the great world, as men came nearer the first mould, so were they more perfect,
both for strength of bodies, and continuance of years, that so they might
intend a propagation of their kind. So was it in the growth of the Church, the
first Fathers which did nearer approach to the times of the Apostles, had a
greater measure of knowledge by the imposition of their hands, that so they
might be better enabled and instructed for the conversion of nations. The
Prophets confirm the doctrine of the Fathers.
Thus the Prophets in the old law* speaking of the flourishing kingdom of
Christ, seem to point at the times of the Fathers, and as it were to seal
them before hand, and to proclaim them to the whole world as Orthodoxall; and
therefore as fit precedents and examples, for all future ages and successions
to follow; so that to detract from the Fathers and the primitive age, were to
detract from Gods providence, and under color of a naked text (which may w^ll
admit diverse expositions), to draw all things to innovation and uncertainty.

In the last place, I will speak of the life, and of the death, both of our
selves and of the Ancients: As man comes not to that strength and growth, which
heretofore he did; The length of our lives compared with the Ancients.
so undoubtedly he is sooner ripened, and comes to that weakness, which
nature has appointed him, the^ heretofore he did: and being not of that sound
constitution, as the Ancients were, he has not that certainty in the course
of his life, but upon all occasions, out of his weakness, he is apt and ready
to fall. This I conceive to be the reason, why our Gentry in these days
should desire to match their children so young, and that the children
themselves should in the spring or morning of their age, be so fit to engender:
now for the length of our lives, some have been much mistaken, supposing that
it might be fitly gathered by the reigns of Princes in former times, whereas
indeed there is little heed to be taken unto them; seeing the time of their
government, has no relation to the years of their age, but to the death of
their ancestors, or to the time of their election; so that if you will suppose,
the predecessor to live long, the successor may likewise live long, yet reign
but a short time. And heretofore Princes did more adventure themselves in the
danger of their wars, then now they do, and therefore more did miscarrie;
but if you please to consider their lives together, most certain it is, that
before the deluge, men lived many hundred years, and the birth of their
children carried a just proportion to their age: since the deluge, (assuredly)
the decay has proceeded by degrees. David in his time, who lived much about
the year after the worlds creation 2890, which was twelve hundred years after
the deluge, or thereabouts, confesses, that the age of man was threescore and
ten years; for then it should seem they came to that age with full strength:
but in these times, few men (I will not speak of Princes, such as David was,
whose dainty and delicate fare does certainly shorten the course of their
lives) do attain with much sorrow and grief to threescore and ten years;
though I confess that this alteration, as all other natural alterations
whatsoever, does not so easily appear to the sense, but is more fitly gathered
by the observation of reason; for I think that seventy years then, had the
same proportion that fifty years have now at this time.

From man I will come to the elements, and I will insist in the nearest
elements (the generatiue elements), the water and earth; for this change and
alteration appears not in man alone, but the very elements themselves are much
decayed in their wonted perfection: fo^^our seas are grown fruitless and
barraine, The seas do not afford the like quantity of fish, as heretofore
they have done.
as it appears upon records in our Haven towns, that a far greater
quantity of fish has formerly been taken and brought into this land, then
there is in these days. If you answer me, yt it proceeds from the loosenes of
these times, as neglecting all fasts, I do easily confess our abuse; yet I
think it not sufficient to cause this scarcity; for our sails at this time
are more in number then ever they were, our skill is much better, our wants and
necessities are far greater, and so our labor and industry should be
proportioned accordingly. I rather think it proceeds from the decay of the
elements; or indeed do esteem it as a punishment of God upon us, as he
sometimes punished the Egyptians with their fleshpots in the death of their
fish, Exodus 7. 18. I might he^e likewise justly complain of the wrong and
injury, which we daily sustain from the incroching Hollander, or
low-countriman; who desires to unite seas, as he has already united Provinces,
and to make himself the great Lord of the Ocean: for as in ancient times their
golden fleece was made of our English wool, so now their great Fleet must
incroach upon our seas (for kingdoms have a propriety, as in their towns and
their soil, so in their coasts, and their seas, which they cannot neglect,
with their own profit or safety). But I may speak it with greater hearts
grief, I fear lest their seas and in-undations, do not only reach to our
Haven towns, but have generally overwhelmed this whole Island: for as my most
dear and loving schoolmasters, Mr Camden.
Mr. William Camden, now Clarenceux, ye famous and most renowned Antiquarie of
our age, has truly and wisely observed in his Chronicle, in the time of our
service in their wars (in the Low Countries, our Englishmen, which of all
other Northern people, were ever held the most temperate), we have gotten such
an habit and custom of drunkenness, that no other nation at this day seems
to be more tainted with that vice, then our selves. And thus their
unthankfulness, together with those ill customs, which we have borrowed from
them, seem to be the rewards of our service.

From the seas, I will come to the land: The earth is grown barraine and
fruitless in her own kind; I speak not only of that earth, which has long
tasted the plow-share and harrow, The earth is grown barraine.
and must have a time of respite and ease, to recover her own strength; but,
the whole earth in general does not bear the like burden and crop, which it
did in the days of our forefathers: for as it is in a part, so it is in the
whole. Suppose, that any quantity of ground were yearly employed to meadow,
arable, or pasture, and that the whole crop of this ground should be yearly
spent upon it self, and so should return again in compost; certainly this
ground would much decay in goodness, for in vain shall we expect the good
seasons of the year, unless the earth carry in it self a kind of fatness.
Yet I confess that some grounds there are, either rich of themselves, or made
rich by water-floods, that they do not only preserve themselves, but likewise
serve to help others; yet every husbandman cannot be so happy to have them,
and where they are in greatest abundance, yet they cannot supply the
barrenness of the neighbor and bordering grounds: for nature more abounds in
the one, then in the other, so that this must argue a barrennes in general, As
in the parts so in ye whole.
though not in particular. Whereunto I will add the weakness of the
elements, decay of the heavens, and a general imperfection in all things now,
in this la^t old and cold age of the world; and therefore those countries, which
were first inhabited (suppose the Eastern countries), are very much
impouerished at this time; the weakness of nature discovering it self, not
able to supply those mines and metals, which formerly they did; not able to
bring forth or to ripen those excellent delicious fruits, which heretofore
they had in great plenty.

To draw nearer home, for this kingdom wherein we live; it is not only the
complaint of all old men, and our own experience, but likewise many reasons
drawn from husbandry, A particular instance for this kingdom.
not so fit to be alleged in this place, do undoubtedly persuade me, that
our land is grown barraine, and yields not that profit, which formerly it did,
in the days of our forefathers: I will make one or two instances, following
the counsel of the wise man, Eccles. 39. 31. The fruitfulness of a land
especially appears in the honey and wine; the one proceeds from the dew of the
flower* the other takes a deeper foundation in the earth; the one argues the
sweetness of the grass or the pasture, the other the goodness and depth of
the mould; the one is the work only of nature* the other requires the help
and furtherance of husbandry and art; and in both of them it shall
sufficiently appear, how this land has declined. When I consider the great
use of honey in former times, We have not the like quantity of honey now, as
heretofore.
for their drinks, for their food; and likewise the great quantity of
waxelights, which were anciently spent in their divine service; assuredly our
country at this day cannot afford the one half of that which formerly it
did, it is apparent; for there was never so great scarcity, and yet it is not
transported, and here at home we have little use to employ it. Is it because
men neglect ye keeping of Bees? No certainly, the price would allure them, for
there is no such profit, with so little charge; but certainly nature in
general is weakened, the creatures begin to decay and God denies his blessing
for the increase.

Secondly, it is very credibly reported, that in this our Northern climate we
have had heretofore a vintage in Wostershire; and it appears upon record, that
tith has bin paid for wine pressed out of grapes, growing in the little Park
at Winsor, Our grapes come not to that ripenes now, as heretofore.
in the time and being then in the possession of King Edw. 1. But at this time,
whether thorough the cold mould of the earth, or thorough the weakness and
swift declining of the sun, as being not able to bring our grapes to ripeness
and perf^ction (the grapes being a very lateward fruit, containing a great
natural heat, which appears by the strength of our wines, and their long
continuance, and therefore require a hot soil); yet at this time it is thought
to be a work impossible: the like may be said for Wales, and the North parts
of this kingdom in many places, where fruits and saffron did anciently grow,
(the places still carrying the names of those fruits), within these late
years, trial being made, and all possible diligence and good husbandry
observed, yet they faild in their purposes.

It may be objected against me, that if nature did thus decline, yet still the
fruits should continue the same, though not the same in their strength and
their power; for wine here in England, if ever we had, then still we should
have, though more imperfect and weak; but Philosophy is well able to answer
this objection, datur in rebus maximum and minimum: nature has appointed
certain limits and bounds to every kind of the creatures, beyond which, or
beneath which, the creature cannot subsist. Now in the general declining, far
be it, that she should appoint new bounds to the vndeterminated essence of
the creatures; An objection answered in Philosophy.
rather she should preserve them as long as it lies in her power, and being
defective, not able to produce them, there should follow a cessation of their
being, and no new qualification of their nature: and in this declining, some
things are more limited then others, and therefore will admit fewer degrees in
their qualities and will sooner perish; so that notwithstanding the decay does
equally concern all, yet some things may wholly cease, while others shall still
be continued, out of the large extent of their own bounds.

That a general scarcity and penury may appear, consider the prices of
things, how excessive they are in these our latter days, and how they are
raised above measure beyond all expectation: heretofore (I confess) they have
had as great famins as we have, The excessive prices of things, and the
scarcity of these times.
but I suppose not so usually; and commonly these famins did not arise from any
unseasonable weather, or barrenness of the earth, but rather from civil
war^es within themselves, making havoc and waste of natures blessings, and of
poor men's labors; for if you would suppose (which God forbid) a Camp
subsisting of 20000. men to be lodged within the heart of our kingdom,
assuredly it would cause an extraordinary great dearth amongst us: but now we
seem to sustain a continual famine, notwithstanding our peaceable times, and
our great labors (necessity so enforcing us); and therefore we can blame none
but nature, nor can we think that she is casually distempered, for then I
would gladly ask, when at length (in Gods name) will she return to her first
temper and constitution? for we see no tokens, signs, or appearance of any
recovery; and therefore we fear, that she daily more and more decays in her
old age, and in vain may we expect reformation: for whereas some suppose the
causes of this scarcity, to be either the wonderful increase of people, or
the great plenty of coin, wherewith we abound in respect of our Ancestors;
these reas^ns which do so much ouer-sway many, I will briefly examine.

For the number of men, we are not able to send forth such huge armies, as we
read of in former times; we dare not undertake such taskes, A comparison
between our times and the former, for the number and multitude of men.
and infinite labors as they did: I confess indeed, that the Cities and towns
do now swarm with people, and therefore they make the greater show of a
number; but the country (which truly and indeed did afford it) in a scattered
and dispersed Multitude (I think) was never more naked and desolat then it is
at this day. Such depopulation of towns, enclosing of villages; a shepherd
with his dog their inhabiting, where formerly many hundred men were maintained,
many good horses kept for defense of our land, and much provision for our
plenty. He that shall well consider our lawe-bookes, the exact measuring of
lands in those days, the largenes and capacity of their Churches, the old
foundations, which now are daily raked up by the plow; shall (by all probable
conjecture) conceive, that the world was then as well peopled as it is in these
times. The Church-bookes indeed are not extant, which might serve for our
evidence; Bangor in Wales near Wre^am.
yet this I can say for a truth, that in Bangor (which is a small village in
Wales) 800. years ago, there were abiding and daily resident there, two and
twenty hundred Monks, besides servants and others which did attend them: at
this day I could see no relics thereof, only some few closes did bear the
name of porches and gates; and I think at this time, that both our
Universities can hardly equal that number. Since (it should seem) that our
land did surfeit with people, and therefore it was to be let blood, in the wars
between the two houses of Lancaster and York: and he that will conceive, how
infinitely the people of Israel did multiply in a short time, living under the
bondage of Egypt, will never doubt but that this land might have bin
sufficiently stockt and stored with people, long since the first plantation.

Now for the plenty of our coin, because we have it not from our selves, I
will therefore first speak of the fountains before I come to the streams,
that so according to the ouerflowing of the one, you may judge of the other. If
the West Indies have now at length bin discovered, the Eastern have failed;
otherwise our Merchants should never be so much enforced, Gods providence in
^^e Turkish ^o^minions.
to trade with their coin: and herein I do acknowledge a special providence
of God, who foreseeing in his wisdom, that the carnal Mahumetans (his own
professed enemies) should possess the land of Promise: and as their
forefathers the Jews and the Heathen, were guilty of the blood of Christ; so
they should seize upon the holy sepulcher, in token of the bloody persecution
of his Church (all which God did permit in his justice for our sins), yet he
in his wisdom, first suffered it to be worn out with use, or to decay of it
self, before the cursed Ottomans should conquer it: for notwithstanding the
large circuit of his territories and provinces, yet in wealth and treasure,
yea in the power of his country, and most especially in the strength of his
Navy, the Turk is inferior to some Christian Princes. But let us consider
the plenty of coin, as Scripture reports it; Abraham gave unto Ephron (as it
may appear, Genesis 23. verse. 16.) The great plenty of coin and of silver and
gold* among the Jews.
four hundred silver shekels for a field to bury his dead: Now the common
shekell is accounted twenty pence, which if it shall please you to multiply,
four hundred shekels will amount to three and thritie pound six shillings,
eight pence; supposing five shillings sterling the ounce (a very large price to
purchase a burial). The plenty of their silver and gold did likewise appear
in those times, by their wearing of rings, bracelets, abilimentss, etc. of the
magnificence of Salomons Court, of the wealth and treasure of the Temple, where
all the vessels were of a wonderful price; and of the custom in those times,
to send out shipping, and to return home loaded with oar, Scripture makes
mention. Whereunto profane and heathen writers, do likewise bear witness,
for Eupolenus, Polyhistor, and Hecateus Abderita, that lived and served in
war with King Alexander the Great, make mention (amongst other things) of the
inestimable riches of Solomon, and of the treasures which he did hide and bury
(according to the fashion of that time) in the Sepulcher of his father David:
which to be no fable, (though not mentioned by the Scripture) Josephus well
proves, for that Hircanus the high Priest, and King of Jury, being besieged
in Jerusalem by Antiochus, surnamed Pius, not many years before Christ's
nativity, to redeem himself and the City, and to pay for his peace, opened
the said Sepulcher of David, and fetched out of one part thereof, three thousand
talents in ready money, which amount to 600000. pounds English, if we account
the talents but at the least size of talentum Haebraicum.

But let us draw to our selves, and come to this climate wherein we live, and
compare our wealth in coin with our ancestors: first therefore I must acquaint
you, that our coin is much fallen, How the coin here amongst us, has daily
decayed in weight.
and bears not that weight which formerly it did; for it appears among the
statutes of Edward the 2, that twenty pence sterling, then waied an ounce: in
the ninth year of Edward the 3, 26. pence waied an ounce: in the second of
Hen. the 6. 32. pence waied an ounce: in the 5. of Edward the 4. 40. pence
waied an ounce: in the 31. of Henry the 8. 45. pence waied the ounce: in the
second of Elizabeth 60. pence waied the ounce: and so it continues unto this
day; so that an hundred pounds heretofore, was as much as three hundred pounds
now, besides the finesse of their coin: wherein, as I take it, they did far
exceed us. I will not dispute, how it may stand with the wisdom and policy
of States, to raise or inhaunce coins: but certain it is, that the prices of
all things will immediately follow the coins, according to the weight,
finenesse and goodness of the metal; though things may be done to serve the
present turn, yet they shall find a great abatement in their ancient rents:
The great wealth of the Ancients.
where a little innovation is once begun, it is wonderful to see the abuses
which do usually accompany it, etc. Now if we shall observe the shrines and
guilding of Temples in former times; if we consider the rich Copes, the
ornaments, vestiments, and vessels of the Church; or the robes and hangings of
Princes, which are yet extant; or the moneys and coin which at this day is
found in great plenty, in those places where the Romans have formerly
encamped; if we consider their massy and most substantial old plate, their
extraordinary cunning, in cutting, caruing, and curious workmanship of stones,
and metals, far surpassing us; their borders, wiers, and other ornaments
made of beaten gold or silver, more then in use, then they are in these days:
and that our ancestors have found out mines at their own homes, that
undoubtedly for all other metals, as Lead, Iron, Tin, Copper, Brass, and
the like, it appears by their buildings, and their other employments, that
they had them in a far greater plenty, then we have in these days: and
metals are so interchangeably mixed together (which is the ground of all
Chimistrie), that the plenty of the one, cannot possibly subsist with any
great scarcity of the other.

Now at this time I fear there is more silver and gold wastfully spent and
transported, then is yearly brought into this land, notwithstanding the prices
of things do daily arise, though not in such an excessive manner, as formerly
they have done.

As for some base coins which they had in ancient times, I may well doubt,
whether it stood not with the wisdom and policy of the State to admit them,
seeing the richest nations do the like at this day.

To speak with more certainty of things, which appear upon record; he that
shall peruse our Law Books, shall find, that three hundred years ago and
above, before the wars began between the two Houses, The ^osts, charges and
fines were very large heretofore.
the costs and charges at law, were very great and large, almost as much as at
this day: speaking now out of the course of mine own studies, I may seem to
be a stranger, wholly ignorant therein; yet give me leave (with your good
patience) to make one or two instances to this purpose. William Wickam
recovered of his predecessor Bishop Edendon of Winchester, in the year 1366,
for dilapidations of his house, 1662. pounds, ten shillings: and lest you
might conceive that such a large sum of money might be allowed for some
other loss and detriment sustained, he recovered likewise 1556. head of
Neat, 3876. Weathers, 4717. Ewes, 3521. Lambs, and 127. Swine; all which
stock belonged to the Bishopric. Because we cannot take a perfect survey of
the buildings, how they were left; and generally because all trespasses are
very uncertain, whereof we cannot take due notice; let us therefore come to
the fines, which certainly were very large in those days: In the time of Henry
the 6, the Duke of Holland (being then high Admiral) was fined at ten
thousand pou^ds, for holding plea in a cause determinable at the Common law; it
was very much for such an offense, if you please to have relation to the rates
of coin, which before I have prefixed.

Not to speak of the ransomes of Princes, which were very great in former
times; not to speak of any particular man's wealth, though I could name many;
for Thomas Ruthall, whose means of getting were not over great, neither could
he justly be taxed with greediness or sparing, The great housekeeping of the
Ancients.
living in the time of Henry the 7, his wealth in present coin did amount to
above one hundred thousand pounds, which was discovered by Cardinal Wolsey. I
pray' consider their housekeeping, such huge gates, and open doors, spacious
halles, long tables, great kitchins, large chimneys; their sellars, ouens,
vessels, pots, and powdring tubs, deep, profound, and bottomless: all their
other provision made in a bountiful manner, as may appear by the rents of
their tenants, their barnes, granaries, granges, slaughter-houses; the
multitudes of mouths in their numberless feruants; the ringing of bells to
call all to their feasts; their infinite holy days, which were the times for
their meeting. These things duly considered, you shall find their expense was
very excessive. Now take these with their prices, and first for those things
which were brought over into this kingdom; Henry Bowet, Archbishop of York in
the time of Henry the 5, spent in his house yearly of Claret wine only, four
score tons: this might seem incredible, were it not that it appears by such
evidence, as cannot be denied. Now let us examine the price of this wine: I
find among the slatutes of Edw. the 2. (which was long before that time), that
Vintners were appointed to sell their wine at twelve pence the gallon, and not
above; we cannot read, nor cannot conceive that since that time wine should
fall in the price, Wine was dearer in ancient times, then it is.
being none of our own commodities; so then supposing wine at twelve pence the
gallon, and considering that 26 pence then waied an ounce, whereas now 60 pence
go to the ounce; he then spent only in Claret wine (if I do not mistake in my
reckonings) 9304. ounces 8/13, which did the^ amount to 1008 pou^ds: which
foresaid number of ounces, would now amount to 2326 pounds, three shillings,
one penny: at this time supposing wine to be at two shillings ye gallon, as now
it is sold* you may buy as much for 8064 ounces, which would be worth 2016
pounds of our current money; so that you shall save 1240. ounces 8/13, which
heretofore the same wine would have cost; which number of ounces, being reduced
into pounds, it will amount to 310 pounds, three shillings, one penny: so that
it appears, that wine is now sold cheaper, by a seventh part, then heretofore
it has been, which makes much to show the plenty of their coin.

To speak of our own country provision, assuredly the prices of things do
not hold proportion, and correspondencie to the weight and valuation of coins;
as may appear by that most excellent statute of rentcorne, made in the behalf
of our Universities, which has proved so beneficial to Colleges. And if you
please to consider the almes-deedes, The plenty of their coin appeared in
their alms.
and charitable benevolence of former times, as well in their money, as in
their victuals, you may truly affirm, that as they far exceeded us in the
one, so they came not much short in the other. It shall appear by this one
instance: Richard de Bury, sometimes Bishop of Durrham in the year 1333,
bestowed weekly, for the relief of the poor, eight quarters of wheat, made
into bread, besides the fragme^ts of his house, the offals of his
slaughterhouse, and yearly much clothing: In his journey between New Castle
and Durrham, he gave always by his own appointed order, eight pounds in alms;
from Durrham to Stocton, five pounds; from Durrham to Aukland, five marks; from
Durrham to Middleham, five pounds. They that succeeded these old Bishops in
their wealth and abundance, I hope will excuse our new and now Bishops, if they
be not so plentiful in their alms, when as indeed they seem to succeed them
only in the Cure, the Pastoral charge, and imposition of hands.

To conclude, these excessive prices of things do well argue a great scarcity,
The corrupt dealings of this age, in respect of former times.
that the whole world is turned bankrupt, though we to save our own credit,
can make the best show for our honor and reputations sake; we can name huge
sums of money, but we borrow upon such base terms, we set our lands upon
such a racktrent, that if the tenant pays one year, he runs away the next:
and therefore I am persuaded, that men in letting out their lands in such
manner, do not so much regard the present rent, as a future intended sale of
those lands, after twenty, or two and twenty years purchase; for otherwise
they would never be fed with words in effect, and neglect their present
security. An other cause of our scarcity may be (besides the heavy
judgments of God, whereof I will not dispute) our immoderate use of the
creatures; men were never so delicate and curious in their diet or food, as
they are at this day, never so wastfull in their expense, the world did never
so much abound with surfeits and drunkenness: heretofore they had their
fastings as well as their feastings, but this is superstitious (forsooth). Thus
while some prove infinitely lavish, dissolute, and riotous, the poor people of
our land never sustained the like scarcity and wants. I might likewise accuse
the evil disposition of men, for in ancient times, they knew not the art of
monopolizing, their meaning was honest and plain; but we are our
crafts-masters, the Landlord never ceasing from racking his poor tenants, and
the tenants must set an answerable price on their wares: heretofore it was
thought a point of conscience, that every man should sell his commodities
according to such reasonable rate, We dissent from the Ancients in a case of
conscience.
as he himself could afford them; but now our conscience is enlarged, and
therefore we must enlarge our price, supposing that it is lawful for every
man to make the most of his own, and to sell his own wares to the greatest
advantage. Thus every man ^^riues to raise. the market; and thus things are
inhaunced to the great prejudice of many Lords, who cannot alter their
quitrents; and to the utter undoing of the poor Commonaltie, when the labors
of men, and the drudgerie of poor people is not, nor cannot be inhaunced
accordingly.

Now since the fruitfulness, or barrenness of the earth, proceeds from the
influence and disposition of the heavens; in the last place I dare accuse the
material heavens, as being guilty, conspiring, and together jointly tending
to corruption; Scripture shall warrant me, The material heaven; tend to
corruption.
the heavens shall wax old as does a garment, Psalm 102. verse. 26. Reason and
all humane learning shall back me, for certain it is, that the Sun has
descended much lower by many degrees, then he was in the time of King Ptolemie;
the same Mathematical instruments, which agree together in all other
dimensions, do undoubtedly prove the diversity; by virtue of perspectiue
glasses, we have lately discerned spots and shadows in the Moon; and within
our memory, in the year 1572. a true Comet did appear in the eighth Heaven,
which as it had a time of beginning, so had it a period, and time of
dissoluing. And thus being mortal of our selves, we dwell in houses of clay,
the roof of this world, as well as the foundations shall together be moved;
for wherefore serves the diversity of seasons, the day and the night
succeeding each other, Summer and Winter, the rising and setting of Stars,
the different and contrary motions, the various aspects and oppositions? but
that in some sort they partake of our nature, and shall have their part and
portion with ours.

For proof of this truth, let us compare times with times, and so it shall
better appear; the hot Zones heretofore adjudged by all the Ancients to be
uninhabitable, The hot Zones made habitable.
we know that now they are habitable, and furnished with people; let us think
reverently of the Ancients, they were very wise, and as I suppose far exceeding
us. Can we conceive them to be such simple men, so fondly mistaken at their
own homes, being neighbors, and bordering upon these hot climates, where a
few days sailing, would discover the truth? a truth so manifest and palpable,
as that they could not pretend any gross ignorance; let us do them no wrong,
but so esteem of them, as we desire our po^^^ritie may regard us. What a
shame and dishonor were it to us, if future ages shall condemn us for fools
and liars; and that our testimony should be rejected in such things as
concern our times, whereof trial and experience might inform us, without
further reason or discourse? Rather let us wonder at the providence of God,
when the world was yet in her infancy and youth, no marvel if heat did
abound, the earth as yet was unpeopled, and therefore men in those days had
room enough, to make choice of their habitation and dwelling; but now the
world groans under the multitude and number of people, the heavens do likewise
decay in their wonted strength. And therefore now at length, new Islands appear
in the Ocean, The wonderful work of Gods providence.
which before never were extant; other Islands and Continents are daily
discovered, which were concealed from antiquity; places formerlie known to be
excessive in heat, are made habitable by the weakness and old age of the
heavens; the cold Zones are tempered either thorough thick misty air, or the
stipation of coldness, God preparing their bodies, and giving them food and
clothing accordingly. Thus God in the beginning of the world, out of his own
foresight and goodness, did fit and temper himself according to the times and
occasions (give me leave to speak after the manner of men, though otherwise I
know the immutabilitie of Gods nature), as long as there was use of Paradise,
so long it continued in state and perfection, being once forsaken and
destitute, then followed the dissolution.

If the Ancients were strangers abroad, and might easily mistake, yet in
their own dwellings and habitations, their sense for want of reason would
serve to inform them; The burning of Phaeton.
certain it is, that there was a great burning in Phaetons time, though
grounded I confess upon a fabulous history; yet for the truth of it, signs
and tokens thereof did appear for many subsequent ages: and strange it is
among the heathen, what prevention of fire did hereby ensue; inuenting a kind
of slate which might resist the violence of fire, and therein reserving and
laying up the hidden treasure of their writings and records, against such a
general combustion; whereas in these days we never found the heat of the
sun to be such, we never sustained any such damage, but that the coldness
and moisture of the winter could easily recompense our loss; nay rather we
have just cause to complain of the suns weakness, and that he is defective
in heat: notwithstanding that in this time of his old age, God has appointed
that the sun should enter into the hot signs, yet both sun and signs are
defective in their power, and cannot ripen our fruits in that manner, which
formerly the sun alone did in the waterie constellations. What a strange
difference appears in our seasons, more then in ancient times; we can not
promise unto our selves the like certainty, neither in our seed time, nor in
our harvest, nor in the whole course of the year, which they did: for a wonder
it is, to hear the relation of old men in this kind, how they all seem to
agree in one complainte, which certainly betokens a truth. If you tell me of
our corrupt computation of the year, my answer is, that the change is so
insensible (not a day in an age) as that it makes no sensible difference; yet
herein I cannot excuse our selves, for if the world should continue many ages,
our Christmas would fall out in harvest: whereas certain it is, that the day
was first appointed according to Christ's birth, and Christ was borne near
solstitium brumale, when the days were the shortest, and then began to
increase; as John Baptist was borne at Midsommer, when the days were at the
longest, and then began to shorten; to be a figure (as Saint Ambrose observes)
that Christ should increase, as John Baptist decreased; but now in these times,
our days are increased a full hour in length, before the Nativity.

If still thou proouest wilful, and wilt not believe the Ancients, but talkest
only of thine own experience and particular knowledge; it were to be wished,
that thou should try all conclusions in Physic upon thine own body,
that so thou might see only with thine own eyes, and take nothing by
relation from others: if thou iudgest of times past by thine own little
experience, thou can not truly judge of the works of nature, Natural
alterations are insensible.
which have in themselves insensible changes and alterations; thou can not
see thy self growing, yet at length thou perceiuest thine own growth. Suppose
there were little alteration in this world, it would then argue the newness of
this world, that it was created but this morning, for as yet the Heavens have
not once seen their own reuolutions: it would likewise argue the excellency
of the workman, as in the framing, so in the continuance of his work; for if
the heavens should always want some repayring and mending, we might well
think, that the state of the Church triumphant, were not unlike the state of
the Church militant, always requiring, and calling for dilapidations; yet in
reason, you shall easily discern the undoubted tokens of the worlds ruin.

Now that I am fallen to the general dissolution of this world, which shall be
performed by the rage and violence of fire, according to the received tradition
of the Ancients; whereunto Scripture agrees, and according to the opinion of
the best learned Philosophers, who ascribe the greatest actiuitie to fire: and
were it not for the situation, as being above the rest of the elements, and for
that natural inclination which it has in it self (arising out of an inbred
pride, as knowing his excellency above the rest), that being once out of his
own proper place, it will not thus be suppressed, but will ascend with the
greatest swiftness, and expedition, carrying the form of a pyramise, for the
more easy penetration; assuredly all the rest of the elements together
conspiring, Fire does resemble the last judgment.
could not encounter the fire. Now fire has this property, congregare
homegenea and segregare heterogenea, and therein does figure out the last and
final judgment, wherein a separation shall be made of the Goats from the
Lambs, of the corn from the chafe, of the just from the reprobate: I cannot
nor dare not prescribe the day and hour of that judgment, rather with
patience I will wait on Gods leisure, and with my assured hope, will expect to
see my Redeemer in his flesh, and in my flesh, so descending as he ascended;
for herein we have the testimony of Angels, This Jesus which is taken up from
you into Heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him go into Heaven, The last
judgment approaches.
Acts 1. 11; the same in nature, the same in power, the same in mercy, the same
in true love and affection: Jesus the son of David, Jesus the son of Marie,
who was the propitiation for our sins, and shall come again in glory to
judge both the quick and the dead. Yet sure I am, that the time cannot be
long absent, for all the signs of his coming do already appear: when the
hangings and furniture are taken down, it is a token that the King and the
Court are remoouing; The general decay of nature hastens the judgment.
nature now beginning to dacay, seems to hasten Christ's coming: to let pass
many strong presumptions of our Divines, concerning the approach of that day;
these three proofs, drawn from natural reason, do easily induce me to
believe it.

First, looking to the general decay of this world, which argues the approach
of this judgment: secondly, to the great preparation for f^^e, which must then
serve for the execution of Gods wrath: thirdly, the fit occasions seeming to
hasten this judgment, etc. Most certain it is, that if the world should
continue many thousand years, and that we should suppose that nature would
decay in such sort, as we are able to prove by demonstratiue evidence, already
she has done; assuredly nature of her self, thorough her own weakness
would come to nothing; and the world should not be able to supply men's
necessities. Suppose this one kingdom, besides the general barrenness which
has befalne us, whereof we may justly complain; if we should commit the like
waste in our woods, as formerly we have done, in this last forepassed age;
assuredly we should be left so destitute of fuel, of houses, of shipping,
that within a short time, our land would prove almost inhabitable, for such
things as require a great growth, wherein man cannot see the present fruits of
his providence; husbandry and labor, for the most part, they are always
neglected, and it lies not in the power of one age to recover her self: thus
out of the decay of nature we may almost expect a dissolution, as by the signs
and symptoms we judge of a dangerous and desperate disease. Thus you may
observe almost a like distance, from the creation to the deluge, from the
deluge to Christ, An equal distance of time in Gods judgments.
from Christ unto us; as God ordaines every thing according to rule, order and
measure: after fifteen generations ^xpired, you shall always note in
Scripture, some great alteration and change. Saint Matthew was therefore called
from the receite of custom, to cast up this account in the genealogy of
Christ, as it appears in his first chapter: now at length in Gods name what
may we expect should befall us? Whatsoever concerns the kingdom of Shilo,
consummatum est, it is already perfited, we must not look for any further
addition; that which remains, it is the sound of the trumpet, vt consummetur
seculum, that the world may be destroyed by fire.

Secondly, fire shall be the second overthrow, this Scripture and reason
confirms; now certain it is, that God who has first instituted nature, has
so ordained her, The last judgment shall be, while the fiery constellations
do rule.
as she may best serve to be an instrument to work his own ends and purposes;
to show a conformity of the effects with the cause, thereby to manifest his
own empire and rule which still he retains in the creatures: as likewise the
obedientiall power, whereunto the creatures are subject; that so may appear
how absolute and powerful he is, first to appoint the creatures, then how
gracious and merciful he is, to impart himself, and to join with the
creatures in the same action. Thus the waterie constellations did then govern
and rule, when the world was overwhelmed with waters, now at this time, and for
a few hundred years yet to continue, the fiery constellations shall have the
predominancie; and therefore credible it is, that within the compass of this
time, there shall happen the general combustion.

Thirdly, the dissolution of this world betokens a general punishment, the
judgment accompaning has reference to our transgressions: The necessity of
justice, in regard of our sins, seems to hasten th^s judgment.
as in the first permission of sin appears the goodness of God, who can
turn our sins to his glory, either for the manifestation of his mercy or
justice; so in this great tolerating of sin appears Gods patience and long
suffering. But now our sins are come to a full ripeness, now is the harvest,
and the weeds choke up the wheat; and therefore necessity seems to
enforce, and to hasten the approach of this judgment, that at length there
might be a separation of both, though hitherto they have grown up together.
Thus Christ's first coming in the flesh was to restore the decayed state of the
Jews, for then he was borne into this world, when charity was grown cold,
the Priesthood bought and sold for a price, the Kings office extinguished, the
tribe of Judah neglected, the synagogue divided into sects and schis^es; and
this is in some sort resembled by the bar^^^ of the earth, for he came in the
winter season, and he was borne at midnight, to argue the worlds universal
darkness and ignorance. So must it be for his second coming, he has given
us a watchword, that the son of man will come at an hour, when he is not
expected, Luke 12. verse. 40. Now is that time when we do not expect him, we
never think of judgment, of hell, of fire, of damnation; Religion has taken
up wings, and is returned to heaven, from whence she descended: Men are now
grown careless in their profession, and live after a sensual manner like
beasts; we are now grown to the height and top of all sin; our sins, our
crying sins now cry for vengeance; and therefore the time of his coming
cannot be far absent, he will take the best opportunity, like a thief in
the night; we may then expect him, when we do least expect him. But I will
leave this, as being not so pertinent to my purpose, and grounded only upon
conjectures, etc.

Now I have brought man to his grave, and together with man the whole fabric
of nature, you would think, that at length I should discharge him: I have
buried him deep enough (I confess), Our fall is examined by Philosoph^e.
for I have cast the heavens and the earth upon him, and together with man
intombed the whole world. Yet give me leave in the last place, to prevent one
objection; for some will say, that if the fall of man should appear by the
light of nature, how should those great Sages and Secretaries of nature (the
ancient Philosophers) be so much mistaken? for the Schools, and all our
Divines hold, that they were deceived in the state of man, supposing man to be
in puris naturalibus, without any thought of his fall, without any hope of his
recovery.

I confess indeed, that the ancient Philosophers have not mentioned the fall
of man, for they did only look to the present course and order of nature; as,
living in the midst of Egypt, they considered Nilus, the depth of the waters,
the violence of the stream, the ebbings and flowings, but they regarded not
the passage into the sea, nor yet could trace the head of the fountain: they
might consider man, though not in the womb, A Science may presuppose her own
subject.
nor yet in the grave, for every knowledge may presuppose her own subject, and
every Science has her proper bounds and limitations; the knowledge of nature
might presuppose the existencie of nature, and not intermeddle or be over
curious to pry into the first composition, or dissolution of nature; their
silence or neglect herein, can be no error, though an imperfection.

Suppose man to be borne in a prison, where he should never receive the
sweet light of the Sun, or the free liberty of himself, but lived in
continual darkness and slavery; could this man possibly conceive the happy
state and condition of those, who live at their freedom? No certainly, for
priuations are only known in relation to their habits. The Philosophers were
not unlike the dwellers of Sodom, whose darkness was such, that being abroad
in the streets, they could not find their own houses: The fall of man is
intimated in Philosophy.
and yet I will do them no wrong, for howsoever they could not expressly and
punctually speak of man's fall, yet many opinions in Philosophy seem to
intimate as much in effect.

The Platonikes, who were the more ancient Philosophers, and borrowed certain
mysteries from the Hebrews, which they kept sacred and secret to themselves;
though otherwise they knew neither sense nor meaning of those mysteries, held
these three positions inuiolably, all which do necessarily enforce the fall of
man. First, that there were, Id^^ae, abstracted and separated forms, The
^^parated Idea of the Platonikes.
according to whose image and likeness, things were ordained here upon earth:
the ground of this opinion, is taken out of Genesis 1. where God in ye framing of
man, speaks these words; Let us make man according to our own image. Now
supposing man to be made according to Gods image, according to such a
separated Idea, he should be wholly spiritual, incorruptible, conformable to
God. But considering man to be carnal, sensual, an enemy and stranger to
God, following the inclination of his flesh, and wholly tending to corruption;
assuredly he is fallen, and much degenerated from that high state and dignity,
wherein he was first created from the beginning.

After the framing and constitution of man, the Platonikes did consider in the
next place, the transmigration of souls from bodies to bodies, The
transmigration of souls.
not from man unto beast; for here the different kinds do betoken different
souls, which require different organes and instruments, that so they might be
fitted and proportioned for the right use and exercise of their faculties. This
transmigration has undoubtedly some reference to the first infusion of man's
soul, and inspirauit deus spiraculum vitae: and this opinion does necessarily
presuppose, and is grounded upon man's fall; yt seeing there is no proportion,
or agreement between the flesh and the spirit, (as the case now stands),
therefore there was a body in the state of innocence, more capable of this
reasonable soul; the body changing, the soul did likewise change her
habitation and dwelling; one and the same body being altered, one and the same
soul did find her place of abode to be altered, here was a transmigration; and
at the last day, when this body sown in corruption, shall rise again in
incorruption, and be made a spiritual body, better befitting the dignity and
state of the soul, here shall be a new transmigration, still of one and the
self same soul; and therefore acknowledge the present condition of man to be
the fall of man, some punishment or imprisonment of man, that the soul should
be enforced to take her flight, to use a transmigration, and to change the
place of her dwelling.

Now for the principal action of the soul, it is our knowledge or
understanding: The Platonikes held, that cognitio nostra est reminiscentia, Our
learning is a kind of remembrance.
our learning or knowledge is only a kind of remembrance; supposing that man
had formerly some natural knowledge, as all other creatures have, thought it
was lost by some ill accident, and therefore must be renewed again, as it were
called to mind, or better remembered by learning; yet certainly we had it, for
otherwise we should find far greater difficulty in regaining and retaining
such an inestimable jewel: and though this may seem very displeasing to
Aristotle, who desired to build up his fame, in the ruins of Plato (the
scholar treads on his schoolmasters); yet do not his followers say as much
in effect, anima est rasa tabula? rasa est, ergo insculpta fuit: Who shaued it?
who scrapte it? what image is lost? See here the providence of God, lest we
should deny, or forget our own fall and corruption: therefore the fall and
corruption of man, appears in the forgetfulness of man.

From the Platonikes, I will come to the Schools of the famous and thrice
renowned Aristotle, and here I do ingeniously, and truly confess, Proofs
out of Aristotle's Philosophy.
that whatsoever I have spoken, for the proof of man's fall, and of natures
corruption, I have only borrowed it from the grounds and foundations of his
learning; so that this whole treatise, may not improperly be ascribed to him,
only the errors excepted, which I claim as being due unto my self. To prove
man's fall out of his grounds, were to repeat all; I will therefore here
insist in those things, which seem to be most general, and therein Aristotle
shall speak for himself. First for the Metaphysics, speaking of things most
general, which the Philosophers call transcendentia; bonum, Bonum est
transcendens.
the goodness of a creature is numbered and accounted with the rest: and
looking to the first institution of nature, nothing is so common and triuiall
in Philosophy, as is this axiom, ens and bonum conuertuntur; whatsoever is,
is good, according to the approbation of God, in the first of Genesis and vidit
deus, and erant omnia valde bona: and yet notwithstanding, the Philosophers did
acknowledge, that there was malum, malitia, defectus, deformitas, monstru^, and
the like, and these to be incident to nature her self; and these to be known
only in relation to the goodness, according to the distance or access,
having no entitie in themselves, and therefore not able to be the grounds of
our knowledge, which presupposes a natural being: Romans 7. 7. I had not known
sin, but by the law. These evils (I say) being no transcendentia, they could
not be so general, or equal in time to nature, and therefore they are the
punishments of nature, and have crept into nature, since the first institution
thereof.

From the Metaphysics I will come to natural Philosophy, where I will only
in a word touch the first principles. I would gladly demand, why priuatio
should be numbered as one of the three first principles of nature? for privation
has reference to the act, and first presupposes the act; Why privation should
be one of the first pr^nciples.
how then can it be one of the first principles? there should have been (I
confess) an absolute negation, according to the condition of a creature, as
being made of nothing, and nothing includes a negation; but a privation is,
when a thing is capable to be, and ought to be, but is not. Therefore privation
being numbered among the principles, supposes that all things should have been,
and should have much sooner attained the height of their perfection, and not so
leisurely have proceeded by degrees, as now they do; were it not that some
curse had altered the course of nature, whereby that, which formerly was only
a bare negation, should now be conceived to be a natural privation.

From the huge Continent of nature, let us draw nearer home, and discover the
unknown region of the reasonable soul: alas how few sparks of reason do
appear in this reasonable soul? The Philosophers think it to be a
table-booke, wherein nothing is written; and looking more narrowly, they find
indeed some blind characters, certain obscure, dark, hidden, secret
notions, which are the principles of al our knowledge: As for example,
Contradictoria non possunt esse simul vera: Omne totum est mains sua part, and
such like palpable verities, which in my judgment seem rather to belong to
the cognizance of common sense, then of the reasonable soul. And hence it is,
that there is much more difficulty in adorning the inward mind, and covering
the nakedness of the soul, then in the outward members, and shame of the
body. Thus at length all Arts and Sciences in general, All Arts and Sciences
take their beginnings by occasion of man's fall.
seem to suppose this for their groundwork and foundation; that in regard of
man's fall, and his ignorance, contracted by his fall, therefore necessity
enforced the occasion of their births and beginnings. And hence it is, that
those long courses of study, those night-watchings and great labors in the
Universities, are only undertaken to supply natures defects.

We have no natural voice, no natural tongue, we cannot speak to the
understanding of each other, but Grammar must direct us and teach us
construction; Grammar.
our soul, though reasonable and discoursiue, yet wants she the help of
Logic, Logic.
to rank things in their several order, to knit them together in a
proposition, and thence to draw the inference or conclusion. Man, as if he were
a savage and wild creature, cannot speak pleasingly with a smooth phrase, and
gracious delivery, as is befitting the sociable nature of man, without the
help and use of Rhetoric. Rhetoric.
Mathematickes must teach him, Mathematikes.
how God has framed his works in number, in weight, and in measure; the
consideration whereof, seems to have been the principal intent and scope of
our creation. The Metaphysics will attempt to discourse of first mouers,
Metaphysics.
intelligences, and separated souls; yet in truth and verity, they do but
only point at them, and so leave them with a Supersedeas, acknowledging
natures infirmity, and that the due cognizance of them, does not properly
belong to that Court,

And whereas God has given all things, for our use and service, certainly it
stood with the same wisdom and goodness of God, to discover and lay open the
use: The study of natural Philosophy supposes our natural ignorance.
let us not conceive God like an unwise and negligent father, who left indeed
behind him great quantity of treasure, but so buried and concealed, that it
never turned to the profit of his heir; to give an unknown jewel, though it
be a sufficient argument of bounty, yet it seems to detract from the wisdom
of the giver. Suppose an Apothecaries shop were furnished with exquisite
drugges, yet if the boxes want names for direction, or there want a Physician
to prescribe the medicine; it is to be feared, that in such a confusion, poison
should be taken for cordials. The principal propriety and substance of every
thing consists in the use, without due knowledge of the thing, there can be no
use: and therefore it stood with the same divine wisdom, as to give the
creatures outwardly to supply our necessity and delight; so inwardly in the
mind, to imprint a due knowledge, how man should use and dispose them. Every
other faculty has this knowledge and instinct toward his object; the eye
easily conceiueth all colors, and in a moment, without further advice, judges
of them by their outward appearance: all other creatures know what is
profitable to themselves, only the reasonable man is the fool, he is
defective, and therefore must intend a long course of Philosophy, to supply
his own wants. Howsoever, I do commend natural Philosophy, The imperfection
of Philosophy.
above all other humane Arts and Sciences; yet I have often wondered, that after
so long a time of study, (six thousand years experience, for so long the
world has continued), that there should be such imperfection, such want of
knowledge, such contrariety of opinions, in such a noble and most excellent
Science.

But if we shut our eyes, not looking to other creatures, but returning to our
selves, we shall find far greater cause to complain and lament; the soul,
though otherwise an understanding nature, yet she knows not her self, but by
reflection; she knows not her own beginning, nor her faculties and actions,
nor the extent and bounds of her essence. Blessed God, were it not sufficient,
that all other creatures should be unknown, but that the soul must be
covered, and concealed from her self? Herein appears an admirable guile and
subtlety, which well argues the high wisdom and justice of God: for as the
first sin was the immoderate and presumptuous desire of knowledge, eritis
sicut dij scientes bonum and malum; so God in revenge of this sin, contraria
curans contrarijs, punishes man with the heavy yoke of ignorance, The
reasonable and understanding soul knows not her self.
yea, of the ignorance of himself; which herein seems to be more
intolerable, considering that man still retains, as the same corrupt nature,
so the same immoderate desire of knowledge. Let the naturalist here confess,
that since God has herein been more merciful to other creatures, then unto
man, therefore this has befallen man since the first institution of his
nature, as a punishment for some offense: and since every faculty has
reference and some knowledge of his object, undoubtedly our blindness and
ignorance is a particular case, contrary to the general current and course of
nature; and nature will not vary her course, without great and just occasion:
the believing man will easily acknowledge this, considering that Adam before
his fall, was able to give a name to every creature, answerable to his
property; and the unbelieving man, by the light of his own reason, shall be
enforced to the same confession.

Give me yet leave to insist in one thing; Nature has made man above all other
creatures, the most sociable, (as appears) in that man cannot subsist without
a commonwealth, without laws, without government, and the like; and yet in
this one point of association, you shall find man, above all other creatures
the most intractable: hence it is, that he must frame and square out his life
by art, Moral Philosophy supposes man's fall.
moral Philosophy must guide and direct him; for if ye look into the soul,
ye shall only find one general and obscure principle, which is this in
effect, quod tibi non vis fieri* alterine feceris, do not that to another,
which thou would not have done to thy self; whereas all other creatures do
accompany together, without any teaching or precepts of arts, only by their
own natural inclination. Thus then you see, that the foundation of all arts
and sciences seems to lay this for a groundwork, the fall and corruption of
man; that notwithstanding his birthright, the dignity of his nature, the high
prerogative of his state; yet in most of his actions, you shall find him much
defective, far inferior to the condition of all other creatures, clean
contrary to the common course and current of nature, and therefore you cannot
conceive, but that his corruption has crept into nature since the first
institution thereof.

Not only the occasion and first grounds of all sciences and arts do testify
man's fall, but likewise many particular opinions do point out this truth
(whereof I will forbear to speak); assuredly they had an implicit knowledge
concealed as a mystery, The complaint of Philosophers against nature.
though not openly known in express terms: for otherwise you should never
hear such complaints and accusations made against nature; that she was a
stepmother, and rather intended the destruction of man, then to commiserate
the poor wretched estate of man. You should never have seen them so much
abhor the actions of nature, as it were ashamed of their own nature; for not
only the faithful and believing men have hated and detested their own flesh,
struggling and contending with nature* even here in her own den* denying unto
themselves all the pleasures and delights of this world; but likewise Heathen,
Pagans, Infidels, they have been in some sort (as I may so say) very mortified
men, and God has rewarded them accordingly: whether it were for our example,
the rather to stir us up to the like actions; or God loving the thing, he
did likewise love the shadow of it, and reward it with temporal happiness,
which is the shadow of our true happiness. Thus it pleases God to require
moral virtues with moral blessings; the Midwiues of Egypt for sparing the
Israelites, they shall find favor, etc. If some there were who did delight in
uncleanness, and would deny the corruption, then here acknowledge the
corruption of man, in this denial of his corruption; that he is borne in a
prison, borne in darkness, that as yet he has never seen light, or tasted
any true happiness; and therefore supposes his own slavish and base
condition, to be the height and scope of his birthright: and surely God for
the punishment of man's curiosity, has so fitly ordained it, that the
knowledge of nature should be fully and exactly perfited by some higher
knowledge (sacred Theology) which he himself would reveal. The Metaphysics
are very imperfect.
As you see, there is an order in arts, the principles of one are here
presupposed, yet confirmed by the strength of a superior art, which as a Lady
or mistres directs the inferior; for it cannot be denied, but that of all
other parts of Philosophy, the Metaphysics (wherein the fall of man together
with the institution of his nature, might fitly have been handled) are the most
imperfect; in so much, that in reading the Metaphysics, we seem to leese
Aristotle in Aristotle's own works; and since his time, not any man (to my
knowledge) was ever able to reduce the Metaphysics, to the strict form of a
Science.

From the theorie of Philosophy, let us come to the practical part; it is not
unknown to the Chimicks in their distillations (whose office it is, secornere
purum ab impuro, validum ab inualid^, How nature is corrupted appears by
Chimicall operations.
to make a separation of such things as corrupted nature has already united,
either of the good substance from the dross^, or of the wholesome and sound
medicine from the poisonous infection) that all malignitie and poison consists
only in the upper crust of things, in rerum superficie; the deeper you diue
into the substance of any creature, the more you shall acknowledge the
goodness and perfection of the creature: as if they did discern in nature,
that all things in their own proper essence were good, not only as they are
creatures, but as they are ordained for man's use and service; in their own
root, and in their first ground of nature they are freed and priueledged from
all poison and infection; only some afterchance, some ill husbandman came, who
after the sowing of the good wheat, did sow his own cockle. Thus the evil in
nature, could not together subsist with the first ordination of nature: for
proof whereof you shall observe, that the first thing which euaporates, and
cannot by any means endure the trial of the fire, is that poisonous matter,
which flies at first sight, at the first approach and encounter, as being
guilty to it self, harbored in another nest, and therefore dares not
justify it self; desiring to avoid the pursuit and chase, and to save it
self with his own slight. And hence it is, that all the preparation of our
meat, not only for the rawnesse, but likewise for the poison and infection,
is to be performed by the use and ministry of fire; as it were prefiguring,
that at the general combustion of this world, there should be the purifying
and cleansing of all the elements, every thing shall be refined, fire it self
shall be purged by fire, and nature shall be restored to her first perfection
and integrity.

Thus by the Chimicall operations it appears, that the evil and poison of
creatures has polluted nature, since the first institution thereof; now if you
please to compare these good and evil qualities together, Chi^istrie shows
the ouerflowing of evil.
it will be manifest, that the evil has far surpassed the good by many
degrees; and therefore do undoubtedly conclude, that whole nature is
corrupted, for in their extractions, their best and purest substance has only
a limited goodness, and serves only for some use and purposes; but for the
dross, or ill substance, they deem it wholly unprofitable: and had it not
been a former subject, to uphold the better qualities; were it not, as a
stock, reserved to fill up some place and room in nature, they would judge it
to be simply evil. And thus by their Chimicall works they do easily
discern that this evil has crept into* nature; and being once admitted and
harbored in nature, this evil seems in a large measure, to ouerflowe and
surpass the better qualities of nature; yet here is our comfort, that as we
are able by the force and violence of fire, to separate the dross from the
good substance, so this evil which has now corrupted nature, is not of the
essence of nature, but nature shall at length subsist, by virtue of Gods
powerful and quickening spirit, without this her malignitie.

As the Philosophers afforded some proofs of this fall, derived from the
reasonable soul, her faculties, and all the works of nature; Proofs of the
fall of Man borrowed from Poetry.
so for the body and sense, I will make bold to borrow some arguments from the
Poets; who were indeed their ancient and first divines, such as were best
acquainted with the religion of the Heathen, and hence they are called, diuini
Poetae: many of their fables had some reference to the truth of a history in
scripture; for as truth is most ancient, so falsehood would seem to be the
shadow of truth, and to accompany her; thus all their sacrifices and rites
carried some show and resemblance of the sacrifices and ceremonies ordained by
Moses. As for example, among the Jews themselves, you shall find some spice
of this corruption; a brazen serpent was appointed as a means to cure their
wounds, and they fell at length to worship this Serpent; a Calfe was slain in
sacrifice to pacify God, and in token hereof, they set up a golden Calfe for
idolatry: now if this happened to the Jews (Gods chosen people), who had the
custody of the law, together with a continued succession of Prophets; then
what might be thought of the Gentiles? let us therefore search among their
Poets, what proofs and evidences there are yet extant of man's fall and
corruption.

Certain it is that they derived their lineage from the Gods, and they
generally held that the soul was diuinae particulaaurae; and yet immediately
they forbear not to speak of the wars, which past between the gods and the
giants, which well argues the opposition and defiance between the heaven and
the earth; as likewise of the strange opposition between the flesh and the
spirit, wherein the flesh seems to conquer and vanquish, (having the stronger
faction, and being more powerful over the will and inclination of man), --
video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor. And generally for the whole state of
man, it was the common complaint of those times, that the world did daily
degenerate, Aetas parentum peior auis, tulit nos nequiores mox daturos
progeniem vitiosiorem: when the Poets so often mention the golden age, The
golden age did signify Paradise.
what do they else, but point out the state of man's first happiness,
integrity, and innocence? there they did converse with their gods, for their
gods did inhabit in groves, gardens, and fountains, as if man did then leese
God, when he left the garden of Paradise; quorum nascuntur in hortis numina,
this is not to be understood of garlike or onions, but whose gods are as
ancient, as was their state in the garden; then men were numbered among the
gods, to show the conformity of their wills, or as our divines hold, there
should have been no death in Paradise, but some happy translation: then men
lived free from the sweat of their brows, contentique cibis nullo cogente
creat is; there was a sweet contentment and quietness of mind, free from the
disturbance of the body, the fruits of the earth were not gotten with labor,
nature was not enforced, the creation did still seem to be continued in the
production of creatures.

Would ye see the first sin of the first man, shadowed forth in a fable?
Daeda^us would needs be flying, but his wings were melted with heat, The
first sin is shadowed forth in many of their fables.
and great was his fall: man in the pride of his own heart, would eleuate and
raise himself above the state and condition wherein he was first created;
^ritis sicut dij, ye shall be like Gods, here is the height or exaltation
which he aims at; now mark his downfall, praecipitium, the breakenecke of
man, ye shall not dij, but die like the beasts of the field; here is the
fruit of his pride, but where is the curiosity of his knowledge? Prometheus
steals fire from Heaven, fire may fitly be resembled to knowledge, it
kindles, it lighteneth, it purges, and is the highest and purest element;
these properties may well be agreeable to knowledge, though not to the
curiosity of knowledge, but mark the event, Hinc noua febrium terris incubuit
cohors, as if the sentence were past, morte morieris, thou shall die the death,
here you see man in himself. Now for the rebellion of the creatures, Actaeon
having seen Diana, the goddess of wisdom naked with her nymphs, straight he
becomes a prey to his own dogs; now for the nature of man, how it is altered
and changed, Deucalion is said to have made men of the stones; here you may see
a new mould, a hard and flintie complexion: to conclude, observe their
pleasures in the Elisian fields, and you shall find some reference to the
garden of Paradise; observe their pains in hell, and you shall see the
punishment of sin set sorth in a glass: wherefore should this be assigned
unto Tantalus, vt poma fugacia captet? were it not for the justice and
satisfaction of some offense, committed in the unjust usurpation of some
forbidden fruit.

Thus I hope by the light of our corrupted reason, it has already sufficiently
appeared, not only to us Christians, to whom our undoubted belief, which
first we received by faith, The conclusion of this third part.
might in process of time seem a natural knowledge, and so wholly possess
man, as if it were imprinted in man's own heart; but likewise to the ancient
Philosophers, who were without the knowledge of the true God, by the force of
their own reason; as likewise to the ancient Poets, in their fables and
shadows, having first received it by tradition; that many things do daily
befall man, which could not happen in the first integrity and institution of
his nature: and were they not inflicted on man, as the just punishments of sin,
it could not stand with the goodness and justice of the Deity, to impose
them. The consideration whereof may fitly inform us, first, of the state
wherein we are fixed, a miserable and sinful state; and the hope of our
happiness whereunto every man should aspire, not to consist within the
pre^incts of this earthly tabernacle; but to extend it self to a more eminent
state of a higher nature and condition: secondly, reason discerning man's fall,
it may serve as an abatement to our pride, that we might not presume too far
to pry into the high mysteries of Christian religion; considering that
corruption has overwhelmed the whole man, together with all his faculties both
sensual and intellectual; and therefore he cannot raise himself of
himself, when as the groundwork and foundation which sustaines the whole
building, is wholly corrupted: thirdly, as the first fall of man gave way and
occasion to the whole course of Christian religion; so reason discerning this
fall, gives some testimony to our Christian faith, and as far forth as she
can, lays the foundation, prepares the way to religion; that so the truth of
nature might bear witness to the truth of grace, the one supporting the
other, the one tending and ending in the other.

Here I can do no less, then magnify the wonderful providence and goodness
of God: for as the knowledge of a disease is the first degree to the cure; How
this corruption of nature serves to instruct us.
so man by his own nature, seeing and discerning the corruption of his nature,
loathing, abhorring, and detesting this corruption, might take some dislike
with himself; seek for some help, search for remedy and ease, enquire for
the Physician. He that opened our eyes to see the corruption, certainly
intended our cure: can we conceive in reason that we should be thus left to
our selves, left destitute of all possible means to relieve us? that God in
his mercy (having first made us of nothing) should, notwithstanding that mercy,
suffer us again to fall unto nothing? it cannot be, it cannot be, here then I
will first conceive hope, and rousing up my spirits, I will say with the
Prophet, Jeremy 8. 22. Nonne est resina in Gilead? Is there not balm at
Gilead? Though I am inwardly sick at the heart (for all the faculties and
powers of my soul are corrupted); though I am outwardly sore wounded (for all
the actions of my body are tainted); yet here is my comfort, there is balm in
Gilead, there is balm in Gilead, and balm has this property, that it may
be taken both inwardly as a sovereign medicine to heal my maladies, and
outwardly it may be poured into my wounds, as an excellent salve, to cure my
infirmities; here then I see there are sufficient means for my recovery, why
should I perish? But where at length shall I find the Physician? Me thinks I
am borne blind, conceived in sin and iniq^itie: and I may truly say with the
Jews, John 9. 32. Since the beginning of the world it was never heard, that
any man did ever open the eyes of him that was borne blind. I must therefore
ascend to some higher power, and if I look up to the Angels, they cannot
justify themselves, In angelis suis inuenit malitiam, God spared not the
Angels which had si^ned, 2. Pet. 2. 4; and even the best of them are but
mess^ngers, and ministering spirits: I will rather go to the fountain, For
where should I find refuge, but under the shadow of thy wings, (O blessed Lord
God)? now in this time of darkness, this time of corruption, wash me with
bysope and I shall be whiter then snow; cleanse me from all my sins, my
secret sins, the sins of my youth, the sins of my nature, which together
have increased with the hayres of my head, with the minutes of my age: lead me
forth in thy ways, let thy word be a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto
my paths, and with thy powerful assistance keep me from falling. O blessed
Lord God write thy laws in the tables of my heart; bind them as chains to my
neck, as bracelets to my arms: stir up and strengthen my weak faith, that
I may know thee to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ (whom thou have
sent) to be the only propitiation for our sins; he is the word of thy
truth, the word begotten in thy understanding, from all eternity; thy only
begotten Son, the wisdom and power of the Godhead: now at length, in the
fullness of time, become the son of man; God in our flesh, made like unto us
in all things (sin only excepted), whom thou have appointed* whom thou have
prepared, before the face of all people, to be a light to enlighten the
Gentiles, and to be the glory of the people Israel.

Deo gratias.
AA


The Corollarie.
IN the former treatise I did not only tie my self to speak of the Subject,
which was ye fall of Man, the general corruption of nature, how creatures have
declined by degrees since their first beginning, and institution; but likewise
to proceed in such manner and form, Why the Author adjoined this Corollary.
as that my proofs might serve to enforce the natural man by the light of his
own reason, to confess his own corruption. Now lest I might seem to be
wanting, or defective to my intended scope; lest I might seem to confound the
fall of man, with the manner, circumstances, and accidencies of his fall and
tentation; therefore I thought fit to join this present Corollarie to the
Treatise, making it to differ from the rest of the parts: for here I must
ingeniously and truly confess; though man's knowledge discerns his fall, yet
by the same knowledge he cannot possibly conceive the manner of his fall. For
in Christian religion, such things as belong to our knowledge, I will rank in
three several orders: First, some things there are wherein nature her self
may inform us, viz. to condemn the corruption of our own flesh, to practice
the Moral law, etc. Secondly, some things there are, which though not
appearing to reason at first sight, yet being supposed, and examined by reason,
they shall be found most probable, and most agreeable to the grounds of reason.
Thirdly, some things are of a higher degree, much above the reach or
comprehension of reason, as are the secret and hidden mysteries of faith; and
herein reason being naturally taught to humble her self, shall acknowledge her
own darkness, and these things infinitely to transcend her natural power.

To the second rank and condition of things, I will refer the manner of man's
fall, which reason cannot apprehend of her self, for it supposes matter of
history; and this we receive not by our own discoursiue reason, but only by
report and tradition from others. In this historical narration of man's fall,
we must conceive the free will and election of God; which being no way
determinated, Why by our reason we can not conceive the manner of man's fall.
might impose laws at his pleasure; then the free consent of man's will, which
according to the circumstances, and present occasions, might incur the breach
of those laws; for punishment whereof, the justice of God might be allaied
and tempered with mercy, according to Gods own appointment, without any
certain measure or rule. Thus many ways supposing the free will, and
election, both in the lawgiver, and in the offender, in the invisible God, and
in the visible creature; we can no more judge of our selves, or (as I may so
say) prophecy of their forepassed actions, then others can now probably guess
or conjecture at our future contingent events; for things which are not limited
in nature, reason cannot prescribe a certain determinate course, for their
limitation.

As in general for the whole scope and truth of Christian religion, so in
particular for this, and all other accidents, notwithstanding our ignorance,
How we may be assured of the manner o^ man's ^all.
yet the unconstant and wavering mind of man, may find staiednes, and be
safely built upon a sure rock and foundation; examining those grounds and
assurances, which we have for our Christian faith, whereby the natural and
distrustful man, is fully resolved and persuaded by signs, working of
miracles, events of prophecies, truth of histories, succession of times, the
immediate and special providence of God, whereby his Church has continually
been preserved, and all other sects and schisms scattered and dissolved, and
could never endure the touchstone; insomuch that I may well say with Gamaliel,
Act. 5. 39. If this truth be of God, then who can resist it? Whereunto I will
add the general consent and verdict of the whole world, of Jews, Gentiles,
Turks* etc. when as religion her self, makes but one body of faith; the
several parts and mysteries whereof, as they are directed to each other, so
they serve to strengthen each other. I shall not need to bring miracles to
confirm every point of our faith; much less must we expect miracles upon all
occasions, How we must expect miracles.
for this were to tempt and provoke God; we must make a difference between
laying the first foundations, and the continuance of the building: the needle
must first pass through, that the thread may follow after, and the^ there is no
further use of the needle. Miracles must first introduce faith, and lay the
foundation; then must the building be perfected, by the practice of piety and
devotion; if we should continually expect miracles, then faith should lose her
reward, as S. Gregory says, Fides non habet meritum, cui humana ratio indies
praebet experimentum. Do thou still desire to be an eyewitness of
miracles, and yeeldest nothing to the report and relation of others? herein
thou must condemn thine own falsehood, when thou can not require that others
should give more credit to thee, then thou do to others; though miracles
have failed, yet wonders are still extant; for a wonder it is to see thy
infidelity, as Saint Augustine says, Si quis adhuc prodigia (vt credat)
inquirit, magnum prodigium est qui mundo cred^ate non credit.

For the manner of man's fall, as I purpose to give full contentment to the
natural man, as far forth as it lies in my power; so it shall appear that
nothing therein is related by Moses, which might any way seem absurd or
improbable; and in many things, I will use the same weapons of reason, which
formerly I have done; that so by demonstratiue arguments, I might satisfy the
unbelieving man. First for the undoubted truth of our creation, that the world
was created of nothing, which in effect is to prove that there is a God, and a
Maker: as every thing in nature will necessarily enforce a creation, so every
argument and proof in man's brain, will easily convince this truth. I do
heartily wish, that my tongue may cleave to the roof of my mouth, if ever I be
found destitute of arguments in this kind; and let my right hand forget her
cunning, if I be not able in every creature to point out the footsteps of the
Deity. Proofs of the Deity and the creation.
In this infinite number of arguments, I will only make choice of these four,
which I suppose to be invincible, to confirm this truth: First, if it seems
strange to man's understanding (which as it is a natural understanding, so does
it only respect the present course and order of nature) that a thing should be
the cause of his own being, and having no beginning of existencie, should
derive his root from eternity. Then certainly in things which are
inconvenient, the least inconvenience is to be admitted in reason: either every
thing in his own kind, must be the cause and author of his own being; or
only one thing, which being infinite, and all sufficient in it self, must
give a nature and essence to all other existing creatures. Now as is the
difference between many and one, so is the inconvenience less, and therefore
to be admitted in reason.

Secondly, Reason in unreasonable creatures.
things only sensible seem to work according to reason: The birds in
building their nests, in making their provision, against the hard season; the
wild beasts in their dens and their caves, in the choice of their food, and
in a subtlety and craft for defense of themselves; the stocks and the stones
in desiring and seeking their proper places, as being fittest for their
preservation; and generally in the dumb creatures there is a natural
providence and instinct for the protection and government of themselves: here
you see the actions of reason, in unreasonable creatures, which therefore
cannot proceed from themselves; neither are these in themselves alone, but
likewise in relation to others. Thus one thing seems to be ordained for
another, every faculty has his several object proportioned to it self; and
in every kind there is a difference of sex, the one being fitted and referred
to the other. The Sun is in continual motion, yet not for his own use,
neither knows he the use of his motion, being a bare and a dumb instrument,
yet still he moves, for the good of this inferior world: and therefore these
things subsist not of themselves severally, but were thus constituted, and
appointed by some higher supereminent and intellectiue Agent, who did foresee
and ordain the power of each other, and had the perfect knowledge of both, that
so the invisible Deity might appear by the visible creatures.

Thirdly, supposing that the world had no beginning, but that all things were
from eternity; Impossibilities in the worlds eternity.
then must it follow, that whereas the course of the Sun contains thirteen
reuolutions of the Moon, yet the Sun should have as often finished his
course, as the Moon has changed her countenance; for both should be infinite,
which indeed implies such a contradiction and impossibility in nature, such as
cannot be admitted. Again, in this inferior world, supposing the eternity,
no reason can be assigned of that difference, which appears in neighbor and
bordering countries, lying under the same climate; that one part should abound
with mines, more then another; or should be fitter to nourish wild and fierce
beasts, more then another; the temper and mould of the earth should be the
same, the properties the same, the qualities the same, as lying in the same
situation and distance from the heavens; and yet notwithstanding there appears
a great diversity, which we cannot ascribe to any other subordinate cause,
but only to the root and first institution of nature, that things were thus
created different from the beginning.

Fourthly, every thing giving it self his own being, should consequently give
unto it self the best being: thus if the creatures should subsist of
themselves, there should be no further comparison among themselves, but all
should be best; this comparison should not only be abolished in respect of
other creatures, but likewise in respect of their own parts, some parts should
not be inferior to others, but all should be best. Again, the qualities of
creatures must be all alike bounded: for if you will suppose that any one
should be infinite, then al must be infinite; if any one finite, then all must
be finite; for they must go together hand in hand by equal paces, and carry
a just proportion. As for example, suppose that a creature weak and faint in
self, Accidents which would follow the worlds eternity.
should have an infinite continuance, then certainly would it purchase and get
unto it self, by infinite degrees, an infinite strength, and all other
qualities should likewise be infinite: but reason, and daily experience can
testify, that every creature is bounded in all other qualities, finite in
extension, finite in power, finite in goodness, and therefore why not finite in
continuance? though we in the shortness of our own lives, cannot discern the
first and last of the creatures. We see likewise, that they have diversity of
parts, some more ignoble then others, they cannot add to their growth, nor
help their own imperfections; and in the creatures in general, there is a
center, there is a circumference, there is a prioritie, and posterioritie; and
therefore the creatures cannot thus subsist of themselves, nor cannot subsist
from eternity.

I know not how far I may presume upon mine own weakness in all other
things, but truly (I do persuade my self) I could be infinite in this kind of
arguments; after these reasons, The creation of the world proved by an instance.
I will bring forth one instance to this purpose. True it is, that there are
certain places here appointed by nature, for the generation and preservation
of things: now if you shall find any thing (as many things there are out of
their own proper wombs) which you cannot conceive, that the art and industry
of man, could ever displace or transport; then assuredly these things were thus
created from the beginning: for by the natural course, every thing should
contain it self within his own natural habitation and dwelling. Again,
certain it is in mines, that where silver and gold have anciently been found,
in the same place nature was never able to recover her own strength, and to
raise up new mines, notwithstanding the same disposition of ye place, the same
climate and every thing alike: and therefore undoubtedly these metals were not
only engendered by a natural course; but either the metals, or at least a fit
seed to bring forth these metals, was there created from the beginning: and
this I conceive to be the reason, why the East country, which was first
inhabited, should be so much impouerished in these days.

If we suppose this world to have a beginning, that it should be made by blind
chance, that creatures should casually meet, and by good fortune fall into
such an excellent order, as now we see things are disposed; for mine own part,
I do not think this opinion deserves the confutation. Supposing then the
truth of the creation, I will come to the truth of that creation which is
recorded by Moses; The proof of Moses his creation.
and this shall appear besides all the miracles and wonders, wrought for the
confirmation thereof, by the just time appointed for the creation, and by the
course and order observed in the creation. If I shall reduce all things to a
general deluge, it is the same in effect, as if I should bring them to the
first creation; for the same author relates both, he deserves a like credit in
both, signs were wrought in testimony of both, the same omnipotent power did
equally appear in both. Now for the time, we must come to the concent of
histories, if you please to remember the most ancient and first languages, The
time of Moses his creation.
as Hebrew, Chaldaike, etc. and how other tongues do borrow some propriety
from the^: if you will consider the first Monarchies and governments, how
nations have issued out of nations, and have derived their customs and
manners; if you will observe where the world first began to be inhabited, and
how upon the multiplying of people, men were enforced to se^ke out foreign
habitations; together with the inventions of all Arts and Sciences, which we
are able to point out, and their first authors; the building of Cities, Towns,
and such other monuments and memorials, which seem to serve for eternity; the
just computation of years, and times; the first great battles and wars
between nations; the first Histories, Philosophers, and Poets which are
extant, and such other remarkable accidents; you may undoubtedly conclude, that
all these do point out one and the same instant time, which serves for the
birth and nativity of this world; beyond whose circuit and comprehension, no
author, no monument, no memory is extant; and to this just period of time, all
Histories, sacred and profane, do together jointly conspire, and witness one
and the same truth of the creation, here described by Moses.

There are likewise relics in nature, which may seem in some measure to
point out the same time of the creation; if ye consider the daily decay of
nature, and have relation to the several degrees of this decay, An instance to
prove the time of the creation.
you may in some sort guess at the birth and beginning of nature. Suppose we
were upon the highest mountains, then thus I would argue; that mountains
undoubtedly were from the beginning, or at least from the deluge, for since
that time the face of the earth was never changed or altered. Here I would make
a diligent search and inquisition for fountains, and springs; for so it
pleases God to moysten the dry and high hills with sweet waters. Now
fountains (I confess) may both begin and cease in one age; for as many things
may cause their production, so many things may stop or hinder their passage; as
immoderate drought, great earthquakes, boisterous winds, trenches made by man's
labor, the growing up of young springs, woods, and the like: I would not
therefore much insist in the fountains, but thus I might conclude in reason,
that from the beginning, there has bin always the same fall and descent of
waters; then let us conceive what surrowes and gutters the fall of waters has
made, and looking to the difference which might happen in any one age, we
cannot suppose, but that the world was created much about that time, which is
related by Moses.

From the time, I come to the manner of this creation, and Gods order in
framing; wherein if I should not impose my self silence, I think my whole
life would hardly suffice to speak of this Subject; for here is seminarium
Philosophiae, some things ought to be referred to the honesty, credit, and
truth of the reporter. It is not unknown to those, who are acquainted with the
course of our Universities, that before we profess Theology, Three uses of
Phi^losophie.
there is more then a prentiship spent in the study of humane arts and
sciences; especially of Philosophy, for the vpshot and conclusion whereof, we
propose unto our selves these three several uses: first, to acknowledge the
invisible God, in the visible creatures; to behold the wisdom, goodness, and
power of the maker, in the framing and disposing of nature; the workmanship
gives testimony of the workman, O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the
Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever: Secondly, to consider how God has
laid the foundations of nature to support the beautiful buildings of grace;
wherein consists the agreement, and wherein the opposition; how the dumb
creatures (without change or alteration of their natural propriety) are
sanctified, and sometimes made the means and conduit-pipes of grace, by Gods
own institution, and the powerful assistance of his spirit: Thirdly, as we
desire to confirm the grounds and principles of Philosophy, by the rule and
square of Divinity: so we examine all the several miracles of Scripture
(which serve for the confirmation of our faith, together with all the mysteries
of our faith), by the touchstone of our humane knowledge, to see how far they
are transcendent above our natural reason, and therein to acknowledge the
height, breadth, and deapth of Gods unsearchable wisdom.

Hereupon we take occasion to examine this great work of our creation, by the
rules and principles of reason; we do not speak of the absolute power of
God, whereby all things were created of nothing; we do not dispute of the
absolute will of God, The order observed in Moses his creation.
who might have used many infinite means, and might have appointed many
infinite kinds and infinite degrees of the creatures; but of the conformity
which creatures had in the beginning, to the following and succeeding course of
their nature: as for example, that the heavens and the earth should first
severally be created; how the confused elements were divided; wherefore was
light first ordained, and in the fourth day the celestial bodies appointed,
and such like. Upon due deliberation and examination hereof, I dare confidently
avouch, that to the judgment of an heathen man, who has any knowledge of
Philosophy, there could not possibly be a more orderly and methodicall course
observed in the creation (such as might well argue one and the same wisdom,
power, providence in the producing, or birth, which now appears in the
continuance, and preservation of nature), then is here recorded by Moses.

Supposing the necessity of a creation, there can be but one Creator, for all
nature is directed to one end: the World is circular, which best resembles the
figure of one; There can be but one Creator.
all the streams are reduced to one head, all the degrees of things still tend
to the highest (there being in nature a prioritie and posteriority), every
government tends and ends in a Monarchy. Nature will not endure many
Competitors; order and decency requires as much in effect, all heat is
reduced to one first heat, all bodies to one first body. Philosophy beats
upon this axiom, that nature desires to work with the fewest instruments; and
therefore every thing is to be reduced to the fewest principles: in the
constitution of any thing she requires but a couple, for the effecting of any
thing one will suffice; to admit of more would rather hinder and distract the
work, then any way further or help the action. Thus to acknowledge one God,
the workmanship and fabric of the whole world will testify as much in
effect; wherein the footesteps and impression of one and the same God, do most
eminently appear: all of them giving sufficient demonstration of one and the
same wisdom and providence, which appears alike in all, The same wisdom
appears in all the creatures.
grounding all his works, and all his actions, upon the same principles and
rules of his own wisdom. There are not gods of the mountains, and gods of
the valleys, gods of the Land, and gods of the Ocean; for the fishes of the
sea, the birds of the air, the beasts of the field have alike fashion and
form for their outward feature, and a like inward instinct and providence for
their course and direction: which similitude of nature must needs proceed
from the same grounds of wisdom, the voice and verdict of nature will likewise
testify as much; which (being to admit some infinite power, transcending
reason, and the course of all creatures), will therefore tie it self to admit
of the least inconvenience; rather of one, then of a multitude.

From the general creation of all things, I come unto man: that he was created
in a more excellent manner, then now he is, it shall not here need any proof;
for it was the principal intent and scope of my whole speech. I will forbear
to speak of original grace, until I come to our sanctifying grace, which
supplies her want: I will pass over the degrees of his sin, until I come to
the steps in his regeneration: I will not open the wound, until I have already
provided the salve; and this I have reserved for the third branch of of my
text. Here let us consider the wisdom of God, that having given an undoubted
token of his mercy in the creation of man, imparting himself according to the
nature of goodness, calling those things which were not, as if they were, The
end of man's creation.
inlightening their darkness, ^with the infinite lamp of his own light; it
stood with the same wisdom to appoint a law, (since his glory and our
obedience, was the end and scope of our creation; for himself being the chief
and greatest good, all must be directed to him; neither could he bereave
himself of that honor, no more then he could alter or change his own
nature); and thorough the observance of that law, either to multiply and
increase his own mercies, in a further confirmation of our bliss and
happiness; or by the breach of that law, to give us some taste of his
justice, yet so, that the misery of our fall, might be some further occasion,
to manifest his goodness. And to this end some things were adjoined, as
necessary and essential to our nature, whereof God in his mercy, and in the
constancy of his own will, would never bereave us; some things again were
added only as gifts and as ornaments, without which our nature might subsist,
and these we hold durante been placito, during his good pleasure and liking;
that as our sins or deserts should require, we might have them enlarged or
diminished, or indeed might be wholly deprived. Again, the condition of man
is such, that being a creature he could not be independent, The condition of
man.
as not in his beginning, so not in his continuance (for God cannot impart this
his own royal prerogative); and being a creature made of nothing, there still
remained in this creature, a power to return unto nothing: being made a
reasonable creature, and having a spiritual soul, he had likewise a liberty
and freedom in his own choice, either to stand or to fall. And thus the
wisdom of the maker, and the state of man, did require as much in effect, that
man might have a mutable and changeable condition: whereas all other creatures
which were at first determinated by God, as they are only carried by a natural
instinct, so in themselves they are of an inferior degree, directed for the use
and service of others, and are therefore wholly incapable of any further
bliss. Herein did appear the rule of Gods mercy, lest man in the pride and
presumption of his own heart, might object against God, that he was created
indeed, but only created for Gods service, and therein God might seem to
intend only his own honor; therefore God has appointed all other creatures
to serve man, that so there might be some kind of recompense or restitution
made unto man, Other creatures ordained for man, as man was for God.
while he himself, with his continual providence and power, intends the
protection and preservation of man; and that it might for ever appear, that
the service of God is more honorable to man, then was the first appointment of
his state and condition, for herein consists the height of man's happiness.

Trial being thus made of man's obedience, before I come to the sin, I must
first speak of the tentation: the nature of man was innocent and incorrupt, as
being Gods own immediate workmanship, There can be no God of Evil.
his condition was great, his understanding perfect and pure; where then shall
we find the first root, seed, and occasion of this corruption? to make two
different gods of good and of evil (with the Manichees), were to overthrow
both, for who should set them at difference, or who should appoint them their
bounds and limitations? Evil wants no positive cause, being in it self a
mere defect and privation, want of light causes darkness, etc. or if you
will suppose a fountain of evil, then it should suddenly dissolve it self,
as consisting of such contrarieties, which could never be reconciled: as for
example, while partiality and oppression, should strive to encounter each
other in judgment, and to make themselves strong in their factions; falsehood
and lying should interpose it self as an vmpire, or an advocate, and so
cunningly corrupt and suborne witnesses and euidencies on both sides, as
neither of them should attain to their purposes, (lo here sin does
overthrow the kingdom of sin, and cannot together subsist with it self),
now both of them failing, justice takes place. Whereas all the virtues are tied
together in one golden chain, idem volumus, idem nolumus, proceeding from one
fountain, and not able severally to subsist, directed to one end, supporting
and upholding each other, to the uttermost of their power; Truth will depose in
the behalf of a right; Justice will stand in defense of that right; Wisdom
will guide and direct justice, and send out her Commission to Strength, for the
due execution of her laws; Jerusalem adificatur vt ci^itas, pacem habens ad
inuicem.

Man therefore being totally sanctified; inwardly in the faculties of his
soul, outwardly in the right rule of his senses, and the government of his
flesh; being thus sanctified in the womb, sealed up with original grace, Man
though innocent, yet capable of evil.
yet still he had the freedom of his will, according to the condition of his
nature; the will being immateriall, not chained up with any natural instinct,
but such as did follow the direction and information of his understanding; his
understanding likewise though sufficiently perfect, yet had it a certain
measure and bounds in her perfection, (as all things finite may well admit
infinite degrees). Thus all were created good; the will had a liberty and free
election, whereby making choice of the better part, she might deserve at Gods
hands her further confirmation in bliffe; the understanding having degrees,
which are necessarily incident to all creatures in general, might in the
humble submission of her self, serve and please God, expecting a further
illumination, by Gods holy grace, direction and providence; both will and
understanding were good in themselves, yet capable of evil, and such as might
be the occasion of our fall.

Hitherto you see in man a power to stand, or to fall; posse malum per velle
bonum, cum vinceret Adam, posse bonum per velle malum, sibi perdidit: There was
only a capacity in his mind, but for the inferior nature of his flesh, That
God might justly suffer man to be tempted.
it was wholly sanctified; no ill fancy could appear in his brain, no
inordinate motion in his members, his senses not dissolute, straggling and
wandering; only according to the condition of a creature, he was capable of a
fall, capable of transgression: which capacity was good in it self, the mind
being not indifferently affected to both, but rather inclining to good,
especially Gods assisting grace, helping and furthering the better part. And
therefore it might well stand with Gods decree, and the course of his justice,
to suffer man to be tempted; tempted, I say, not by his own flesh, or that the
inward parts should conspire against man, but to be outwardly tempted, a long,
a far off; for hitherto the devil had no power over the body, or substance
of man* so as man might easily have resisted, either with his own natural
strength, or by the furtherance of his original grace, God having forewarned
him, given him a caution, and threatened his punishment, in quocunque die
comed^s, morte morieris. Thus Christ himself having a reasonable soul, and
the freedom of his will, was likewise subject to an outward tentation.

For proof hereof, that man should be outwardly tempted, observe the
diversity of tentations, in this corrupted state of man: How we may discern an
outward ten^ation.
sometimes against the rule of reason, and the inward light of his own
conscience, man is provoked to some unclean and carnal ^inne; here flesh and
blood* and the concupiscence thereof, are the sole actors: sometimes when
neither flesh nor spirit are inclined, yet the pomp and pride of this world,
allures man to sin; and sometimes when nothing in nature (I say nothing in
corrupted nature) can move, yet an evil spirit, observing the souls actions,
and thereby judging of her disposition, considering the course and inclination
of humors, does stir up fit notions in the fancy, and thereby persuades us to
sin. As for example, many there have been, whom we may well remember with
sorrow and grief, as having been the most accursed of all men, who have
offered violence to themselves, and have proved selfe-homicides: now let us
search, where is the first root of this tentation? not in flesh and blood, for
there in we find no such inclination: not in the pride and vanity of this
world, which rather desires to retain us as slaves in her service, then to
manumit, or to set us at liberty; not in whole nature, which though never so
much corrupted, yet she desires life, and the preservation of her self: and
therefore this tentation proceeds from some spirit, that is maleuolent and
opposite to nature, and intends nothing more then the corruption of nature;
which being not able to effect in the whole, seeks to undermine and supplant
each one in particular.

Man being outwardly tempted, could not be the first cause of sin; by the
streams then I will trace out the fountain; and here I will make a diligent
search for that, Where we might find the first fountain of sin.
which I could wish had never been found, I mean the first root and occasion
of sin, where sin should take the beginning; lower then the state of man I
cannot descend, for wherein there is no freedom of will, (that creatures may
in some sort be left to themselves), there can be no power or ability to
sin: and as waters cannot ascend higher, then are the heads of the
fountains; so earthly contagions arising from dumb creatures, cannot deface
Gods image. Now this is strange, that I should look up, and above man for
that, which brings man down, and beneath himself; yet this I must do, for
thus sin may alter and change our condition. I have already proved that
there could be no God of sin, no God of evil, which is evident by
considering the properties of evil in it self: I must therefore come to those
creatures, which seem to be placed in degree between God and man; and these
are the angelical spirits, whom I do the rather accuse, considering that in
man himself (though body and soul, are both tainted with sin), yet the sin
it self seems first to proceed from the soul and spirit of man, as being
more capable, and therefore more culpable: here then I must blame and charge
the created spirits to have been the first fountains of evil, and first to
have infected the world with corruption.

Here we must consider the different condition of creatures, some bodies, some
spirits, as every thing is compounded of matter and form, and the form it is
which gives the existencie, and indiuiduation: these several degrees of
creatures make much for the absolute perfection of nature; especially when as
all bodies seem to be contained and continued within the circumference of the
first body: what should we think, is above the conuexitie of the heavens? an
infinite vacuum? rather acknowledge a want in man's understanding, then that
there should want inhabitants in such an excellent region; where the heavens
are their footstooles, to tread and walk over our heads, where they are freed
from all annoyance of creatures, and partake only of happiness. As in great
buildings, the meanest and basest offices are always beneath, (suppose the
Kitchen, the Seller, the Buttrie, the Pantrie); but for the stately and
magnificent rooms for entertainment (suppose the dining Chamber, the
Galleries, the Turrets), and places of pleasure, these are above: and thus it
is with us in respect of the Angels, the truth and certainty whereof I have
already proved in the first part. Now supposing these spirits, their condition
must be alike with ours, who are in some sort, and in the better part
spiritual: as they were made of nothing, so they must ^aue a determinate
goodness in their nature, faculties, and actions; The Angels might fa^l.
being spirits, they had a freedom of will: God did herein make them like unto
himself, as he was able to create of nothing, so they might will, when as
nothing should move them to will; and having a limited understanding, which
might admit error and darkness, through their own pride, they might will
nothing, that is, they might will sin; for sin is a defect, a privation, a
kind of nothing: in this their willing, although they could not will
themselves, to be nothing, to destroy their own condition, for this were to
undo that, which God already has done; yet they could will, or rather
bewitch themselves, to be worse then nothing, for sin is nothing, and to be
the servant of sin, it is to be worse then nothing. Thus in the Angels, as
well as in man, in regard of their limited goodness, and the freedom of their
wills, there was a power, and capacity (or rather a weakness and
impotencie) to sin, and to fall.

And many of them sinned accordingly, God in his wisdom permitting the sin,
and thereby teaching all creatures what they are in themselves: The fall of the
Angels.
for as in the same kind of spirits, the best creatures are extant, so the
worst and most accursed should likewise be found, that no creature might boast
of an absolute perfection; that every one might know himself, and suspect his
own fall, and that all our righteousn^sse, is tanquam pannus menstruatus, like
a spotted and defiled garment. Nothing can endure Gods trial and touchstone,
for the Angels are not acquitted in his sight, etc. Now their sin was a dislike
of their present condition, and the aspiring to be equal, and like to their
Maker; made of nothing, having nothing of themselves, yet they must contest
with their infinite Maker, for dignity and superiority: whether it were that
they did consider, that there were three persons in one most holy, blessed, and
undivided Trinity, Conjectures what might move the Angels to sin.
which being a mystery far transcending the reach of all creatures, they
could not comprehend (for fully to comprehend God, is indeed to be God); but
might happily conceive, that the Deity would admit of more persons: or whether
by ^he excellency of their own knowledge they did fitly ga^ther, that as the
creation was a work of Gods infinite love, and as God was existent every
where, according to the infinite extent of his own nature; so as an infinite
effect of that infinite love, God should tie unto himself some creature, by an
infinite band, namely by an hypostaticall union; and therefore some of them did
claim and challenge this high prerogative above other creatures, by virtue of
their birthright. But herein did appear their ignorance and pride, for the
creature was not to aspire to the height and dignity of the Creator, but the
Creator was to descend to the humility and baseness of the creature; neither
was God to be united to the angelical nature (though otherwise highest in
order and condition), but to descend lower, to give a more undoubted token of
that infinite love, even to the humane nature and manhood. Man's nature being the
center in the midst of the circumference; a little Microcosme, in whom all
the creatures are united, things sensible partake in his body, the intelligent
spirits are combinde in his soul: and thus God taking the nature of man, sits
in the very midst of his creatures, imparting himself infinitely to all, so
far forth as it may well stand with the truth of his Godhead, and with the
state and condition of the creature.

Thus they might mistake in judgment, supposing there might be some
probability to effect it: but I must chiefly and principally condemn their
unthankfulness, The sin of the Angels was unpardonable.
their pride, their presumption, which gave way and occasion to this their
error: but having once committed so great a contempt, such a foul indignity
against God, it could not stand with his justice freely to pardon their sin,
or to intend the means of their redemption, as in his mercy he has
performed to man; for the Angels were the first creatures, highest in dignity
and condition; the great measure of their knowledge and graces was such, as
that we do not read that God did ever appoint them laws, but that it might
be supposed that they of themselves should be wholly conformable to God.
Again, they were not tempted by others, and therefore as the sin could no
way be cast upon others; so being impotent of themselves to make any
recompense, they could no way receive benefit by the satisfaction of others:
the state of the Angels was created such, as that they were not capable of
repentance, they cannot change their minds, or their wills; whatsoever they
see, they see in an instant, whatsoever they desire, their will is confinde to
the first motion, that they cannot alter or change their desire; so that, if
once they shall make choice of the worser part, in vain may we expect, that
ever they should return to the better. Man may repent, but the Angels can not.
Whereas the condition of man is mutable and changeable, as capable of sin,
so capable of repentance; as he falls of himself, so he may rise again by
the assistance of grace; for God has given him a discoursiue reason,
proceeding by degrees; if now he mistakes himself, hereafter he may be
better informed. As the inconstancy of his nature may cause the alteration of
his will, so God fitly using this his inconstancy (as it were working in every
thing, according to that manner which is most proper and natural to the
thing), may make it a means for the amendment and conversion of man;
especially being tempted by others, laying hold on Gods mercy, he might
receive the full satisfaction for his sins, by the means and passion of
another.

I do not here purpose to speak of the creation of Angels, their nature,
their office, their blessings, their cursings, I will only speak of them so
far forth as they concern man. Supposing then that some of them fell, and
some of them stood, some reprobated and cast into darkness, some sealed and
confirmed in goodness; most certain it is, that all creatures in general, as
they have, what they have, only from God, so are they tied to his service and
ministry: now in the good Angels, God requires not only the free oblation of
themselves, The office and ministry of Angels.
but likewise as they are vessels of mercy in themselves, so they should be
Gods instruments of mercy to others; but in the evil Angels, as the power of
Gods justice appears in their reprobation, so he ordaines them, to be the
firebrarnds of his justice: only with this difference, God stirs up the good
Angels, ioynes with them in the action, and gives them the high dignity to be
his fellow-workemen and laborers; but in the evil Angels, there is sometimes
only a bare permission of God, sometimes a power enforcing the execution of
justice; but always a providence, so to limit and bound the actions, that it
might appear, that the justice proceeds from God, the malignitie from
themselves. Thus the execution of justice, the torturing of others, discouers
their own cruelty, their vncompassionate heart, their malice, their envy
against God and his creatures; and these are sins which must be punished
again in the instruments, and therefore according to the rule of Gods justice,
these evil spirits in tormenting others, themselves are likewise tormented.

This diversity of Angels, some good and some bad, the general consent of the
whole world seems to confirm; which has always acknowledged, and put a
difference between bonus genius, The difference of good and bad Angels.
and malus genius. But hark, do you not hear the Oracles speaking so
doubtfully; yea sometimes so maliciously, as may well argue the truth of a
spirit, though otherwise the spirit of untruth, falsehood, and wrong? If your
hearing fail you, then behold the strange delusions and strong apparitions,
which from time to time have been discovered to all nations; whereof the
natural Philosopher can assign no reason, and therefore must undoubtedly fly
to causes beyond the precincts of nature. If sight and hearing fail, yet life
cannot subsist without touch, neither is there any sense of that certainty: I
pray' let us try this truth by this touchstone, let us have a feeling of
other men's miseries: some there are which are possessed with devils, others
bewitched: if any one doubt of this truth, let him know that Scripture does
warrant it, reason and experience confirms it; how is it possible that the
body of man should be heavier, then if it did only consist of pure lead? can
the spirits be so dull, the heat so allaied, and that only by the ordinary
course of nature? how should the mind presage evil to come, without the help
of some divining spirit? how should they speak languages, wherein they were
never instructed? All nations in the world can testify this; all the laws in
the world, whether amongst Jews, Gentiles, or Christians, do witness it;
daily experience confirms it: and for any man to embrace his own private and
particular opinion, before the general received truth of the whole world, it
is to play the pure Sectary, etc.

Thus by the meditation of Gods judgment, as likewise by outward and more
manifest signs and tokens, appears the truth and certainty of these evil
spirits. Now for the tentation, I will first lay down this for a groundwork;
that as all bodies are contained within the circumference of one first body;
all the elements adjacent and contiguous together, the fire it self next and
immediately under the sphere of the Moon, (and therefore this world carries a
round figure, the form of a Globe, that all things might be better pressed and
compacted together): so it stood with the unity and identitie of one and the
same God, that all his creatures should be linckt and tied together, How all
the creatures are knit together.
to betoken and point out one workman. Thus he himself sitting above, and
insfinitly transcending all creatures, the holy Angels as they draw nearer and
nearer his throne, so do they admit degrees in their order, and make one
perfect Hierarchy. The Angels are knit to this visible world, by the mediation
of man, who consists of spirit and flesh; man here conuerseth with the dumb
creatures, takes them for his food, uses them for his labor. Now beneath all
these creatures (as it is credibly supposed), in the heart or center of the
earth there is the place of Hell, where the evil spirits are tormented, as in
their own habitation and dwelling; God having excommunicated the^, he
appointed a place best befitting their pride, most remote, and in the furthest
distance from himself; to teach all the creatures, that notwithstanding their
natural right and dignity, yet it lies in his power to cast them down, to
deiect them, and to make them the basest in degree and condition. Here then you
see all the creatures knit together: now this order appears, not only in
place and precedencie, (as I may so say) but likewise in the mutual actions
received from each other. Why God did suffer man to be tempted.
In the visible world it sufficiently appears, for all are directed to man; now
in respect of the Angels, as it has pleased God to appoint the good Angels to
be our guardians and protectors; so in his justice, he permits the evil
Angels, to be the tempters and tormenters of man; for thus it stood with the
wisdom of God being dishonored by the Angels, to make a new trial of man's
obedience, whom he created in place of the Angels (to accomplish the number of
his elect), to see whether man would grow wise by their fall; and for default
of man's strength, he purposed to engage himself in the quarrel. Thus he
suffers man to be tempted, until in his due time, he shall set a wall of
separation between both (by a definitive sentence, or a judgment past) for
the settling and establishing of his creatures.

Here you see a commission granted, and a power given unto Satan to tempt man,
and that in the time of his innocence, (for innocence is best discovered by
the trial of tentation): thus Christ was likewise tempted in the wilderness,
but Satan had not such an absolute power as was given him over Job 1. 12. Lo,
all that he has is in thine hand; or as it follows in the next chapter, verse
6. where his commission is renewed and enlarged, and power is given him over
the body and person of Job, Lo he is in thine hand, but save his life. Here
rather, we may admire the wonderful goodness of God, that had set such a
separation between man and the devil, that they could not outwardly converse
together, The great separation between man and the devil.
as being creatures of a different kind and condition: the devil could not
immediately seduce his understanding, delude his senses, stir up a commotion
in his flesh, for all things were sanctified, herein his power was limited; he
could not use the ministry and help of the most noble and best creatures, as
being sunk to the bottom under the degree of all creatures. Thus being
destitute of all means, which in probability might well succeed, having no
right or interest to enter upon man's body, or to stir up in man's fancy the
least tentation to sin; yet he could not forbear to tempt, out of his envy
to man, as being heir of that happiness, which at first did belong unto him.
Out of the malice to God, man bearing Gods image, and God taking a special
care and charge over man; and therefore no marvel, if he first makes trial
of those baser worms (as it were), giving the first onset, the first attempt
upon nature, making the first breach or entrance into nature, to see whether by
their means and procuring, he might stir up and kindle commotion. Thus as if
he were newly crept out of hell, here lately arrived, and durst not appear in
sight, but would dissemble his coming, he makes choice of the Serpent, claims
neighborhood, kindred, acquaintance, and familiarity (for both are the basest
of all creatures, and both together inhabit the bowels of the earth); here they
enter a league, The Devil and the Serpent enter a league.
that if they could but cunningly seduce man, and draw him within the compass
of high treason, make him subject to death by the breach of Gods law; then they
would beg his goods and his substance, between them, they would share all
his estate, the one should take his body, the other his soul for a booty.
Thus at length he persuades the Serpent to be his Agent and factor, desiring
to inuert and overthrow the whole course of nature, when the basest creature
shall give advice and direction to the best, in the highest point of religion;
and that the Serpent should deceive the woman, the woman her husband, (the
feet must guide and direct the head), notwithstanding Gods forewarning and
threatening to the contrary.

That this spirit should thus talk by the Serpent; do you not conceive how
pipes and musical instruments, do yield a just and fit found, being played
upon by the hands of a curious Artsman? That the Serpent should speak.
Do not the wild forests and woods yield a proportioned echo, according to
the last clause of ye sentence? Do not many birds speak perfectly and
distinctly many words very sensible and significant, being taught by the art
and industry of man? and shall we ascribe no more to the subtlety of Satan,
who being a spirit, is apt to penetrate all bodies, and well knowing the nature
and use of all instruments and parts, can fitly begin the motion? Now if any
thing seems strange in respect of our parents, you must consider, that as
things were then newly created, so their experience could not be great; as
their innocence did keep them from attempting evil, so it kept them from the
least suspicion of evil: the sin it self taking growth by degrees, first the
woman was tempted, The degrees of this first sin.
who happily might be ignorant of Gods command, for the precept was not given
unto her. This woman tempts her husband; alas what might you ascribe to the
love of a wife? she was not of his own choice, but appointed by God for his
helper, and therefore mark his excuse: Genesis 3. 12. The woman which thou gave
me, gave me the fruit: he might have supposed that both proceeded from God:
whereas all other things were made only for him, and given only to him, so
that he alone had the full possession of al, (this one fruit only excepted),
his wife now bringing, and provoking him to eat of this fruit, he might
suppose it to be part of his wives portion; that God had enlarged his
commission, that now being a couple, the use of this fruit was likewise
permitted. But I cannot excuse Adam, for his wife was given as his helper, and
therefore the sin is much greater, that she should be a means to entice him
in the breach of Gods law: though man shall leave his father and mother, and
cleave to his wife; yet of any man hate not his wife and children, yea and his
own life also, and come unto God, he shall not be accepted, Luke 14. 26. and
he that shall forsake wife, or children, or lands for his sake, shall receive
an hundredfold more, and shall inherit everlasting life: Matthew. 19. 29.

Now for the speech of dumb creatures, let us search what testimonies hereof
we shall find among the Gentiles. Plato reports in his Politico: Seculo
aur^^, regnante Saeturno homines cum bestijs sermocinaripot^isse: here is the
judgment of an heathen man, concerning the speech of dumb beasts, Testimonies
of the heathen concerning the speech of dumb beasts.
which certainly has some relation to the speech of the Serpent in Paradise;
and hence all the fictions of Poets, the metamorphosis and change of the
creatures took their original. More especially for the Serpent, let us hear
the testimony of an heathen, Pher^cides Sirus dixisse f^rtur, daemones a Jove
deturbatos e caelo, corumque principem cognaminatum esse Ophioneum (id est)
Serpentiuum: and S. Austin seems to make this instance, that Serpents are
therefore ensnared with enchantments, because they did first deceive with
enchantments, and herein seems to be some proportion of justice. Thus reason
and the experience of all ages do teach us, that there are certain ominous
creatures, which (without all superstitious conceit) though they are not the
causes of evil, yet do undoubtedly presage and foretell unfortunate events:
can you then conceive how these senseless and dumb creatures should have such
notions and fantasies, as to give some outward token; were it not that they
are guided and directed by some divining and presaging spirit?

From the manner of his tentation, I come to the sin, the tasting of the
forbidden fruit. God gave man the full possession of Paradise; all other
fruits were given for his food, The greatness of Adams sin.
only one is excluded, that it might serve for his souls food, that man might
be nourished, and strengthened, by the keeping of Gods holy laws and
Commandments. If it seems strange, that God for so small an offense, should
condemn, not only the first man, but the whole stock and posterity of man;
small indeed it may seem in man's eyes: but if you consider those many
blessings which God had imparted to man, the happiness wherein he was
created, the large measure of his knowledge, insomuch that he could not easily
be deluded; the strict command of God only excluding this one fruit,
permitting the free use of the rest: these things well weighed, will
undoubtedly lay open the sin; for the smalnes of the thing, makes the
greatness of the offense. If you think that God in his person, or in his
attributes, may any way be endamaged, or suffer eclipse through man's sin, ye
deceive your selves; for the whole world is but a point, and carries no
sensible quantity in respect of the heavens: all the mists that proceed from
the earth, cannot any way indarken the Sun, but are suddenly dissolved; it
lies not in man's power to obscure Gods glory, which either will drop down in
mercy, or break forth in justice: and therefore the greatest sin in respect
of Gods loss, may well be ranckt with the least, and the least with the
greatest; though otherwise not in respect of Gods command, his anger, his
punishment.

But I pray', what sin could Adam have committed at that time, greater then
was the tasting of the forbidden fruit? Covetousness or oppression could not
assault him, What sins Adam might then have committed.
as having the whole world in possession; there was no place for envy or
wrath, as wanting a competitor; there were no public assemblies to be blown
up with gunpowder, no Princes to be murdered, no factions to be massacred,
no Churches to be made a prey for sacrilege, no virgins to be defloured, no
places of justice which might be defiled with briberie, no legal proceedings,
wherein perjury and false information might be admitted; no widow or
fatherless to be subject of wrong and oppression; man's own knowledge, the
many blessings received, together with the fresh memory and experience of the
^re^tion, could not admit of idolatry: and yet (according to the condition of
those times) man was not wanting to his own sin; as far forth as he
could, he tempted and provoked God (there being but one precept) in the breach
of that one precept; if more had lien in his power, more he had attempted in a
higher degree: but here was the mercy of God only to permit the least, for God
deals with man as parents do with young children, first to try with the
least, that so the first sin might not at first sight be unpardonable.

We must here conceive that according to the condition of man, who consists of
body and soul, so there was both inward and outward corruption. In the minds
of our parents there was a great disobedience in the breach of Gods law; this
disobedience proceeded from a great natural pride, in so much, that as by the
enticing, so according to the example of the bad Angels, they sinned against
God in a very high point of his prerogative; namely his wisdom, ^ritis s^^ut
dij sciemes ^^num and malum: as the Angels desired in general to possess the
Throne of God, so man in this one particular point of his wisdom did aspire
to be equal with God, and therein to usurp his prerogative: and here the
necessity did seem first to be imposed upon the wisdom of God, The wisdom
of God must satisfy, for the (...) committed against it self.
that the same wisdom should satisfy for the offense committed against it
self; and therefore Jesus Christ the righteous, who was verbum in intellectu,
sapientia patris, he must interpose himself as a Mediator between God and
man, and be the propitiatory sacrifice for this sin, he must come down in
our flesh, and be like unto us, whereas we attempted to be like unto him. He
must break the veil of the Temple and Ceremonies, lay open the secrecies and
mysteries of his kingdom, and yet be accounted an unwise man, that so by the
foolishness of preaching, he might correct, or con^ound the wisdom and
subtlety of a Serpentine generation.

Now mark the conformity of our minds with our forefathers, as the
similitude of nature, so the similitude of corruption: The first sins of the
mind seem to be disobedience and pride, Pride is the first sin of the mind.
when we too highly esteem of our selves, neglecting and contemning all others;
whereunto if you please to add the natural curiosity of our minds, here is
the first step and degree to a second fall, a fall into all damnable errors and
heresies. And for our body, gluttony seems to be the wellspring of all our
carnal and bodily sins: as a surfeit is for the most part the beginning of
all our diseases, the most dangerous of all our diseases, and whereunto man is
most subject and prone; it does undoubtedly argue that the first sin was the
sin of a surfeite and gluttony, Gluttony is the first of all carnal sins.
the tasting of forbidden fruit. Marvel not, though our Divines be strict
in preaching their fasts, and mortifications, for they desire to prevent sin in
the root: open war will not easily prevail against a State, unless it be
divided in it self with parts-taking, and factions: if the flesh be pliable
and obedient to the spirit, we need not fear any outward assaults and
tentations.

If still the offense seem little, then you may well conjecture Gods wrath and
indignation for sin, which breaks into vengeance for so small an offense: if
the punishment seem over large, in respect of the crime, thou can not truly
judge of the foulness of sin, which is not to be valued according to man's
own estimation, but as it is an high presumption and contempt of the basest
worm against the infinite majesty of the divine power; yet in truth the
punishment seems not to be so dreadful and horrid, as the case now stands,
between God and man, Thanks be to the mediator of this covenant between God
and man (that God and man Christ Jesus): for now it serves rather as an
occasion of a further bliss and happiness, The punishment was the occasion of
our bliss.
then as a punishment for sin, Felix culpa quae talem habuit redemptorem. The
miseries of this life they are such, that if they be sanctified with Gods
grace, seasoned with the hope of a better life to succeed, received with
patience, acknowledged with true humblenes of mind; I doubt not but in them
we shall find sufficient comfort and consolation; in so much that we may now
safely triumph over death it self, O death where is thy sting! O hell where is
thy victory! the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
law: but thanks be unto God, who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

So much for the sin, as it was radically inherent in Adam: now how the
posterity of Adam should be liable to the guilt of this sin, together with
the manner of propagating this sin, I will speak briefly, and so conclude.
It may be questioned, whether it might stand with Gods justice to condemn
all, How it stood with justice to punish the posterity of Adam.
all the whole kind, all the whole succession, the unborn child for the
sins of one? And for answer of this question, I will extend my speech
further, that if God, for no offense committed, should reprobate and torment
all his creatures, yet could it not be any injustice in God: for how shall the
vessel say unto the potter, why made thou me thus? This I speak, having
relation to Gods infinite and unlimited power: but as the c^se now stands,
assuredly God never wrought in his creatures, according to the rigor and
extent of his justice, for the creation was a work of mercy; here all things
took their beginning from mercy; being thus created, Gods mercy does
ouerflow all his works. Hence it is, that mercy sometimes appears without
any taste of justice, as in the free distribution of Gods graces; but justice
is always seasoned with the spice of mercy, in so much that in the pains of
the damned, Gods mercy still appears: for he could by many degrees increase
their tortures and torments, as their sins and deserts do justly deserve;
and notwithstanding their pain, yet still they retain an entitatiue
perfection. Now to answer this doubt, the father is punished, sometimes in his
sons, the shame of the one redounding to the reproach of the other; as you see
it practiced in our laws, where for the fathers offense, the whole stock is
attainted: sometimes the sons do share in the sins of their parents, The
measure of Gods justice.
as furtherers and abbe^tors in his crime, being then in his loins, and part
of his substance. Thus it was with whole mankind, in respect of Adam, who was
like a politic body, and did sustain the person of us all; and therefore as
we partake of his seed, partake of his inheritance, so it might well stand
with justice, that we should partake in his punishment. The punishment being
such, as has been the occasion of a far greater bliss; such (I say) as
rather includes a privation of that original grace, which God first imparted
to man, then any great inherent malignitie in our nature, whereby God intends
our destruction; and therefore seems to be some inferior degree of our
nature, that man descending, he might ascend to a higher pitch of his
happiness.

How this sin should be conveyed to the post^ritie of Adam, I find it a very
difficult controversy, much questioned by our Divines; and the rather, because
sin in it self is originally and primarily in the soul, How the sin is
conveyed to the postcritie of Adam.
as being the fountain of all our actions, and therefore the only subject
capable of sin. Now the Divines, together with the Philosophers agree, that
the soul is immediately created of God, and therefore being Gods own work,
and nothing but Gods, it cannot be tainted with sin. Supposing this for a
truth, my answer is, that sin ought not to be tied to the several parts, to
the soul, or to the body separatly; but to the parts jointly together (that
is) to the whole man, and to the whole kind, as we are the sons of Adam;
and then in his loins actiuely, in committing the sin, so we are sinners;
Quid quaeris (says S. Augustine) latentem rimam, cum habeas apertissimam
ianuam, per vnum hominem peccatum in hunc mundum intrauit, etc. Why should we
instance in the soul, as it is created of God? Why should we stand upon the
body, as it consists of the elements? Sin is in the whole man, not so
properly in the parts.
But take this soul when it becomes the form of man, take this body when it
becomes the vessel and instrument of this form, and then both are corrupted:
actions and qualities ought not to be ascribed to parts, but to the compound,
or subject. Thus whole man is become sinful, the guilt remains in the whole
nature, and the fruits of this sin appears in the contrariety and
opposition of parts; the immoderate desires of the flesh, the rebellion of the
flesh against the good motions of the spirit, serves for an undoubted evidence,
to prove the corruption.

If it might be spoken without offense, I would further discuss this one
question; whether the soul be created, or otherwise does issue forth from
the souls of our parents, an sit ex traduce? It is a general received
opinion, that the soul is immediately created of God, as being a spirit, and
therefore admitting no feed; as being an immortal spirit, and therefore free
from generation, growth, nourishment, or corruption. Saint Augustine alone
considering the descent of this original sin, seems to doubt of the souls
first beginning, and original; and therefore shrouding my self under his
protection, I may safely say, that it is no inconvenience that there should be
a generation among the souls of men, There may be a generation among spirits.
notwithstanding their spiritual condition. Did not God the Father beget his
Son from all eternity, verbum in intellectu, a word in his own
understanding? Does not the holy Spirit proceed from the Father and the Son?
and might not the image of this Trinity, appear very lively in the creation
of man? for Adam, God made his body of the earth, and for his soul, Deus
inspirauit, etc. here was an immediate creation severally of both; for his
natural temper could not yield him a form, as it did to all other creatures,
producant aquae reptile animae viuentis, and volatile super terram: and again,
Producat terra animam viuentem in genere suo, and reptilia, and bestias, etc.
Adam thus created, and cast into a dead sleep, part of hi^ flesh, and why not
part of his soul might as well be taken for the creation of Eue^ the rather to
stir up love, and conformity between both, that they might be made one
soul and one mind, as they were made one flesh; here God ceased from his
labors, and therefore we expect no longer creation. Abel being borne,
partakes of their flesh, and why not partakes of their soul? for otherwise the
sons of men, should not be so properly sons, nor tied to those natural
duties toward their parents, as are the dumb creatures obliged to theirs.
Thus that one spirit should beget another, it is the highest mystery of our
Christian faith and religion.

And it makes much for the absolute perfection in the worlds diversity, for
God is a spirit generating his Son, and creating all creatures: the Angels
are spirits, neither creating, An anima sit ex traduce,
nor generating; but being once created, subsist alone, and leave no posterity
behind them, being all created at once, and having a state of continuance in
themselves; the souls of men are created, and being subject to change and
alteration in their state, may beget other souls, according to the condition
of man, which is to be generatiue in his own kind. And thus Christ not only in
regard of his flesh, which he borrowes from the first elements, and has his
matter common with all the rest of the creatures; but more especially, and
principally in regard of his soul, he is the Son of man, descended from
man; to this soul the Deity was first linckt and united, and in this soul
the hypostaticall union still continued, notwithstanding his natural death,
and the separation of his soul from his flesh: this soul did truly, locally
and really descend into hell; and here the prophecy was verified, Semen
mulieris conteret serpentis caput: The Son of man has conquered hell, and
damnation, and lead captivity captive; which I could wish might most properly
and literally be understood. This soul (as all other separated souls) had in
it self a natural desire and inclination to return to the body, which well
argues that they are both twins; and in the time of their separation, the
souls are still tied to their natural duties: for Dives (after his death)
could remember his brethren, and yet they were not his brethren, were it not
that they did partake of the souls of their parents; for otherwise all
natural consanguinitie and affinity should cease in a natural death.

It seems very necessary that the soul should be conuaied and diffused,
vnacum semine, rather then that the body being already squared out, and the
greatest part of the workmanship past, How the soul should together work with
the seed.
the soul should arrive (like an unexpected guest) to this harbor: and it
would greatly disparage man, first to be a plant, then a beast, then a man;
which indeed savors much of Pythagoras his transmigration. God has appointed
the several kinds of creatures, but I cannot conceive how there should be
such degrees in the kinds; the essence and form of a thing cannot be divided
within it self, facultates animae non distinguuntur ab essentia animae. I
cannot possibly imagine how vegetation and sense should be in ye embrion,
before the access of the reasonable soul; for either they are the faculties
of the succeeding soul (and here you make a division of that, which indeed
is inseparable), or else you must join those things together, which are of a
different nature; for if ever they were separated, then to compound them, were
to confound them: or lastly, being first separated, they must still continue
divided, and so in the unity of one person, cause the multiplicitie of
subjects.

As the Stars and the celestial bodies, though pure, spiritual, simple, and
incorruptible; yet all of them have not in themselves their inbred and natural
light, but do receive their light from the Sun, As in heavenly bodies, so in
spirits.
which is the fountain of light; and this appears by the eclipses, the
conjunction and opposition of stars, as likewise by the order of the
universe, that all should be reduced to one, a number to an unity. And as it
is thus in celestial and spiritual bodies and qualities, so why not in
spiritual souls? the reason is the same, and the inconveniences should be
alike in both: herein consists a difference between things spiritual and
things corporeal, the one imparts it self without his own loss, the Sun
sends forth infinite beams, inlightens the whole world, yet loses not part
of his light; whereas bodily substances, the more they engender, the more they
detract from themselves.

That generation should necessarily enforce a corruption, there is no color of
truth. A thing may be generated, and yet not be corrupted.
God the Father did beget his Son, and this Son is of equal perfection
with the Father: God created all things of nothing, therefore shall all things
return again unto nothing? This is a false consequence; for being once
produced, the same power shall uphold and continue them, which laid their first
foundation: every thing contains in it self a power, or rather an impotencie
to return unto nothing; and no creature in it self is independent, but seeing
it has stood with Gods mercy first to produce them, it cannot but stand with
the goodness and constancy of his will, still to continue them, and to
preserve his own most excellent workmanship. So that now all things rely not
on the weakness of their own foundation and pillars, but on the invincible
strength of Gods power, the most certain assurance of his promises, the most
infallible effects of his providence: so that howsoever the production was,
whether by creation, generation, It suffices that the soul was at first
created.
alteration, etc. yet we shall not need to doubt or fear the corruption. And
whereas some will suppose, that creation would make more for the dignity of
the reasonable soul, let it suffice that at first she was created, and
inspirauit, etc. she had a different beginning from the flesh or the body, she
was not brought forth by virtue of any mixture, as the forms of other
creatures were, which being not able to subsist of themselves, therefore both
matter and form were created in one lump together; so that still creation may
not improperly be ascribed to the reasonable soul, in regard of her first
birth and nativity.

But the question is for the propagation of souls in these times, me thinks I
should like an opinion which would reconcile both, that the soul should both
be created and likewise traduced. For seeing there is an action both of God
and man, and both alike are engaged in the generation of man; man in regard of
a natural birth generating a son according to nature; The authors opinion
is, that anima creatur ex traduce.
and God concurring not only as to a creature, but as to him who might
hereafter be his son by adoption and grace: therefore in respect of Gods
action, there is a creation which includes a beginning, different from the
ordinary course and stream of nature; (for the soul is beyond the precincts
of nature) and likewise excludes all subject matter, whereof it might consist;
for the soul is a spiritual substance, which without seed, and without loss
of her parts is propagated by some extraordinary power of God. To this
creation man may concur, for Eve was created, though created of part of man's
body; the Angels may minister in a work of Gods infinite power, the soul
though created, yet she may be created ex trad^ce: and as man concurres with
God in the action, so in respect both of God and of man there may be two
different actions, as in many things which proceed from our sins, yet God
has his goodness therein. Thus both the opinions may well together subsist,
The reasons which move him.
anima creatur ex traduce, in respect of God; anima generatur ex traduce, in
respect of man, whose condition is generatiue* Yet whatsoever I have herein
spoken, I have only spoken by way of disputation, referring my self wholly to
the judgment of the Church; wherein if I have sinned, or in any other words
which have past from me unadvisedly, I do here humbly desire God, to forgive
me the sins of this pamphlet. Indeed I must confess, I do rather incline
to this opinion, first for the authority of S. Augustine, whom I do reverence
above all others: secondly, that with stronger chains I might knit and unite
the Godhead to our nature in the person of Christ, than barely to clothe him
with our flesh, which is common to other creatures; when as his soul was
created, himself conceived by the holy Ghost, and only borne of a Virgin:
thirdly, to show the certainty of Gods promises to the elect, and to their
seed; and likewise to manifest the duty of children to parents, that they owe
unto them more then their flesh, (for thus if a man should give me my food,
and my nourishment, he might likewise be said to give me my flesh); whereas
Scripture affirms, that a far greater duty belongs unto parents, and
therefore it should seem it is for some greater respect.

Lastly, that I might more easily trace out the paths of this original sin;
how it is safely conuaied from the parents to the children, laid up in the
soul as the treasure, or rather the burden thereof; and from the soul how it
is derived together with life, into the flesh, the bones, and the inward marrow
of man; for the seed partakes as the strength and virtue, so the faults and
infirmities of the whole man. Sin is like an infectious disease.
There are natural and hereditarie diseases which seem to be intailed to one
stock; there are many vices proper and peculiar to one kindred: see you not
how diverse nations do differ from others, as in their form and their
lineaments, so likewise in color and properties? Does not one man sick of the
plague infect the whole City, and is not the same infection always aptest to
taint the same blood: then why should it seem strange, that the first man
corrupted with sin, should taint his whole seed? why should we not suppose
the poison and malignitie of sin, to be of as great efficacy, etc?

Thus (I hope) by the light of our natural reason the fall and corruption of
man sufficiently appears; which I take to be the first principle and
groundwork of all our Christian faith and religion, as S. Augustine says in
lib. 1. aduersus Iulianum, cap. 2. Alia sunt, in quibus inter se aliquando
etiam doctissimi, atque optimi regulae Catholicae defensores, The conclusion of
this Treatise.
salua fidei compage, non consonant, and alius alio de vna re melius dicit and
verius; sed lapsus hominis, ad ipsa fidei pertinet fundamenta; quisquis in
Christiana fide vult labefactare (quod scriptum est, per hominem mors, and per
hominem resurrectio mortuorum, and sicut in Adam omnes moriuntur, ita in
Christo omnes vinificabuntur), totum quod in Christum credimus auferre molitur.
Before I can presume to raise man, necessary it is that man should first
acknowledge his fall; and seeing his own fall, should therefore distrust in
himself, and in his own natural light; and from this diffidence in himself,
should desire to be instructed in those ways which concern his salvation. He
that is sick, wants a Physician, and if he takes his own ordinary
nourishment, it will increase his disease: he that is fallen and wallows in the
mire, the more he struggles and strives, the deeper he sinkes. Let it suffice,
that being fallen and corrupted in our selves, we may rouse up our spirits,
and looking to those few sparks of reason, which now lie raked up in the dead
embers of our nature, we may again kindle and inflame them, at the burning
and shining lamp of our faith, setting before our eyes that day star, which
springing from an high has visited us, Christ Jesus, our only dear Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus; who is the way, the truth, and the life, the way to
direct us to the truth, the truth to guide us to life, the life to give us full
contentment of happiness: who is the way, the truth, and the life, in whom we
live, we move, and have our being, by whom, for whom, and through whom, we
hope and expect our salvation; to whom with the eternal Father, and the most
holy spirit, three persons and one God, be all honor and glory, as before the
foundations of the world were laid, so in the beginning, is now, and ever shall
be world without end, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
The Author to the Reader.
GOod Reader, I must here let thee understand, that the copy was not of mine
own writing, whereby many things were defaced and omitted: and living not in
town, I could not be always present at the Press, so that I confess many
faults have escaped; especially in the first sheets, being begun in my
absence, points displaced, words mistaken, pieces of sentences omitted, which
do much obscure the sense. As for example, page 69. lin. 6. these words are
omitted, viz. For if the horse knew his own strength? then follows, but God
deals herein with other creatures, etc. and many such like. I was very sorry,
to see that, which was so mean in it self, should be made worse: but
presently I called to mind, that the subject of my book, was only to prove a
general corruption; which corruption I should in effect seem to disprove and
deny, unless it might every where appear, and therefore a necessity did
seem so to ordain it, that it should first begin in the author, then in the
pen, then in the press, and now I fear nothing so much as the evil and
corrupt exposition of the Reader, for thus there is a general corruption. How
happy was I to make choice of such a subject, which seems to excuse all the
errors of my Pamphlet? especially (good Reader) if I shall find thy loving and
kind acceptance, well hoping that all others will be charitable to me, as I am
most charitable to al others, and so I commit thee to the God of charity.

Knowells Hill, the 4. of June. 1616. G. G.


