THE CREATVRES PRAISING GOD: OR, THE RELIGION OF dumb Creatures.

An Example and Argument, For the stirring up of our devotion, and For the
confusion of Atheism.

Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino; laudate and superexaltate eum in secula.

G. G.

LONDON, Printed by FELIK KINGSTON. 1622.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader, The Author himself not vouchsafing his name, title, or preface
to this his work, and very unwilling that it should be published, I thought fit
to let thee understand, that the book it self contains no paradox,
notwithstanding the title: for the natural service of God in dumb Creatures,
when they obey God, in their own kind, and follow their own natural course,
this is it, which he calls The Religion of dumb Creatures: and as it is
frequent, and usual, to make comparisons in particular instances, so here in
general their service is compared to our Religion.

To commend the work, seeing I am so far engaged, as that against the
Authors will, it was my importunity to publish it, were in effect to commend
mine own judgment, I will here only acquaint you with the reasons that moved
me;

First, to take away gross Atheism, which denies any God, he uses no
Sophistry, no persuasion, not the testimonies either of God, or of men, but
herein craves aid of the dumb Creatures, and in effect desires them to bear
witness, who instantly acknowledge a God, and discover many excellent, and
admirable attributes in God, and this he calls their confession, or the
natural implicit faith of the Creatures, page 9.

Secondly, that this knowledge of God, which we learn from nature, is an
imperfect knowledge, though otherwise, it was the sole knowledge of the ancient
heathen Philosophers, he brands it with this imputation, that it is no more in
effect then the religion of dumb beasts; but as reason is above sense, so
faith above reason: reason points out mysteries, faith discouers them; by
virtue of which faith, we join with the Angels in their service, as the dumb
beasts do join with us in nature: and here he takes away all natural
objections against the mysteries of religion, beating down man's curiosity,
page 16.

Thirdly, how the Creatures praise God in their voices and sounds, which in
effect are their prayers; in their natural law, which is their decalogue; in
all their qualities and affections, both natural, and as they are sometimes
means and conduit-pipes of grace, whereby nature is sanctified, page 23.

Fourthly, how all natural Sciences may be reduced to Theology, suppose the
Metaphysics, natural Philosophy, moral Philosophy, which are indeed the
branches of natural Theology and are incorporated into the body of our
divinity. And hence you may as well exclude the moral law, the decalogue, and
the whole state of nature, as to exclude humane learning; which showing the
perfections and excellencies of nature, does therein show the praise and
commendations of the Maker. page 31.

Fifthly, this natural religion not only comprehends in it self all natural
sciences, but it is further a supposed ground and foundation in all religions.
Thus Iudaisme, (...), as well as Christianity, acknowledge God in nature;
though the Judicial, and Ceremonial law began with Moses, the Gospel with
Christ, yet the natural law, together with the state of nature, began with
Adam, not by any revelation, but by ingrafted and inbred principles, and
therefore is common to all nations, to all religions. Hence he gathers these
two notes, first, that different and opposite religions may notwithstanding
join together in such things as are good, and alike approueable in both: for
so we join with dumb Creatures in their natural service, and that the bounds
of the Church are not to be hedged in, according to men's private phansies and
imaginations; or according to the Provinces, and jurisdiction of Prelates, but
according to the unity and concent of faith. Secondly, that be the religions
never so opposite and contrary, yet all agree in the natural law, and
therefore are bound to perform to each other, all natural rights, suppose the
discharging of trust, where it is reposed, to use moral honesty in our
actions, obedience to our superiors, allegiance to the Prince, and the like;
thus may different religions live quietly and peaceably under one just
government. If this were observed, surely it would cause much peace in the
Christian world, so much distracted and disquieted at this day, with infinite
and innumerable sects and religions, page 34.

To conclude: What can be more glorious to God, then that his praise should be
set forth by all his Creatures? what greater charity, then to comprehend them,
not within the walls of our Christian Church (though once they were contained
in the Arc) yet within the compass and circuit of religion? what greater
devotion, then by their example to stir up thy self? though the Angels be
out of sight, and thou can not hear their hymns, yet the beasts may awaken
thy dullness; what greater humility, then to stoop to the basest worms, and
together with them, to associate thy self in Gods service?

These reasons (I confess) did move me to publish it: and as I had no other
intent, but Gods glory, so I beseech him to give a blessing to thy reading
hereof, that it may tend to the increase of thy devotion.

THE CREATVRES PRAISING GOD: OR, THE RELIGION OF dumb Creatures.
PSALM. 148. 7, 8, 9, and 10, Verses. 7. Praise the Lord upon earth, ye dragons
and all deepes:

8. Fire and hail, snow and vapors, stormy winds, fulfilling his word:

9. Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all Cedars,

10. Beasts and all cattle, worms and feathered fowls.


TWo absurdities may here seem to be committed at once, with one breath;
either that man should speak and exhort such Auditors, who are without sense,
and therefore not capeable of exhortation, or that Creatures dumb in
themselves, should be exhorted to praise God, which seems to be a thing proper
to Angels and men.

How God is praised.
Both these are easily satisfied, if we rightly consider that the praises of God
do not necessarily imply the most exact and magnificent order and form, such
as might well beseem the Majesty of a Deity (both men and Angels come short
in that excellent service) but the praises of God require no more in effect,
then the power and ability wherewith God has first enabled the Creature: for
he accepts our imperfect prayers, and descends to our weakness. Thus the
stocks and the stones in their silence, and in their natural properties; the
beasts in their sounds and their cries, in their sense and in their motions,
all serve to praise him: for God requires no more then he has first given, the
right employment of his gifts is indeed to praise him.

Now man exhorting them to this their bounden duty, ioynes with them in their
service, and as it were seems to congratulate their praises of God:
notwithstanding his own disobedience and sin, yet he rejoices in their
service, and exhorts them still to continue their praises of God.

Dumb Creatures speak, and Man is stricken dumb.
And though they seem dumb, yet in verity and truth they speak in their
silence: for obiecting, or presenting themselves to our view, showing their
excellent nature, their rare and wonderful properties, therein they speak
their Maker. Man perceiving and apprehending this, falls instantly to
admiration, which is a kind of natural trance, wherein his speech fails him,
as if he were for a time stricken dumb together with the dumb Creatures, to
show his fellow-feeling and symbolizing affection with them; at length he comes
to himself, begins to breathe, then is he tied to his utterance, as it were to
comment upon their silence, or to be their interpreter; for as God requires no
more then the ability of the Creature, so he will admit no less, but expect,
the uttermost extent of our power: In the dumb Creatures their silence did
suffice: Man having the free use of his tongue, is therefore tied to add
Speech to their silence, Reason to their sense, and persuading them not to any
impossibility above their condition, as to believe the mysteries of Grace, and
the like, but applauding them in their own natural course, therein he seems
to exhort them, and thus exhorting them, stirs up himself, and magnifies the
Divine providence, who first appointed the course: As God speaking the Word,
all things were made: God speaks to nothing, and by virtue of his words,
behold a Creation: so we speaking to the dumb Creatures, and in them
approving Gods works, we show the conformity of our wills to the Divine
institution.

For in our speech we do not always respect others, but sometimes our
selves. The end why man exhorts beasts.
The most learned Preacher speaking to the most judicious Auditory, yet cannot
promise unto himself happy success; we must look to the discharge of our
own duty, and not to the event. Man speaking to the dumb Creatures though
they understand him not, yet his own bounden duty, together with the strength
and vehemence of his affections, (that he can do no less then speak in a
cause which concerns Gods glory) this makes it no fruitless labor, and
surely some profit thereby redounds: for whereas otherwise man were a stranger
to beasts, and they serving God in their own kind, their service should no
way concern him; yet now by virtue of his exhortation, he has a part and
portion in their obedience, and thus very cunningly, what is wanting in
himself, he desires to supply it in them, to make their service seem as his
own, as if forsooth they had been rebellious, had it not been for his
persuasion; though himself be dissolute, yet it is he, that keeps all in good
order: a pretty policy.

Thus as they were ordained for his natural use, for his food, The use of the
creatures.
clothing, labor: so it should seem, they were appointed for his spiritual
use, to serve him in the nature of Chaplains, that they should honor and
praise God, while their master, sinful and wretched man, dishonours him, yet
their service might seem to be done by his appointment.

Though I will not excuse our selves, yet suffer me to speak in their
behalf, who being dumb, cannot speak for themselves, I know not how
powerful and effectual man's words are, but surely in them I can do no less
then admire their obedience; The obedience of the Creatures is set forth by a
similitude.
the most dumb and senseless Creatures, the very Rocks and the Caves, if we
speak unto them, and speak aloud; instantly they make a reuerberation of our
breath, whereby our own words are renewed, as if they understood, and did
answer us in our own speech and language; suppose I should stretch out my
voice, and cry unto them to praise God, instantly you should hear them answer,
Praise God: or if they fail in this Echo, yet sure they will not fail in
their conformity; herein they are not so properly our scholars, as presidents
and examples to us of obedience.

A corporation of all Creatures.
Then let us conceive that all the works of God make one corporation, and are
as members of one body, under one common government. As then it appears in
man, that the heart gives direction to the dull hands, to be lifted up in
devotion, and the dull hands knock the sleepy heart, to awake her out of
drowsinesse; And thus they do mutually provoke and stir up each other to
join in the service. As this befalls the parts of Man in respect of himself,
so the like befalls Man and the Creatures in respect of the Universe.

The religion of dumb Creatures.
And that it may no way seem strange, that dumb Creatures should be said to
praise God, to speak most properly and most exactly of the praises of God,
which surely consist in a religious worship and service of God; if, then I
should say, that in the stocks and in the stones, in the foure-footed beasts,
and generally in all the dumb Creatures, that there is some obscure shadow, or
some resemblance of religion, or rather indeed some proper kind of religion:
For there are diverse and several kinds of religions, religions of all sorts,
of all sizes, of all fashions (witness the diversity of religions in these our
days) If then I should say that the dumb Creatures have likewise their proper
kind of religion as well as men, and that they are very devout, godly,
zealous, strict and most religious in their own kind, even far above men;
if I should say this; I would humbly crave your patience a while. Let me bring
my reasons and labor to prove it, that the natural service of God in dumb
Creatures, howsoever we may esteem it, yet in verity and truth, it is a kind
of natural religion.

Moral virtues we may suppose to be only competent to man, The service of God
in dumb Creatures, is their religion.
as being grounded in the reasonable soul, yet therein the dumb Creatures
instruct us, Go, sluggard, learn of the Pismire; religion we may conceive to
be man's own proper inheritance, yet behold, we are stirred up by the example
of the dumb beasts, The Ox and the Ass acknowledge their Lord and Master.
The Winds and the Seas obey him. It should seem, that as there is a religion
above man, the religion of Angels, so there may be a religion beneath man, the
religion of dumb Creatures. For wheresoever there is a service of God, in
effect it is a religion. Thus according to the several degrees and difference
of states, the state of nature, grace and glory, religion may likewise admit
degrees, and difference.

Religion then, The parts of religion.
if I do not mistake, consists of these four parts, A Creed for our belief,
which is the object of our Faith; A set form of prayer for our supplication,
which is the anchor of our Hope: A decalogue or law for our practice, which is
the rule of our Charity: Sacrifice and Sacraments for the vpshot and
consummation of all, to season and sanctify all. These are in effect the
brief heads of religion, as well appears in our ordinary Catechism,
consisting of these four parts, and therein is contained the sum of
Religion. Now if all of these, or at least, if some of these can no way appear
in the Creatures, yet how great the similitude and analogy is between both, if
you please to observe with patience, and to condemn nothing unheard, I do
well hope, that many things will be for our instruction, and all for our
example and imitation.

How we come to know the Creatures.
And first, of that knowledge which we have of the Creatures, how there should
be such a mutual intelligence or correspondency between us, as that we should
truly know them and their religion, as if we understood their language, and
were thoroughly acquainted with all the secrets and mysteries of their Church and
State. The first notice then which we have of the Creatures, it is by an
information of sense, wherein the Divine providence has so fitted and
porportioned things each to other, suppose the faculty to the object, sense to
things sensible, that we instantly receive them, not with any difficulty of
learning, but by a natural instinct: Thus it is between the sensible man, and
the visible world, being Creatures of like condition, we do easily conceive
them.

Sense is the mother of Idolatry.
Thus sense first serves to inform us: but if we should here rest only in the
information of sense, this were most dangerous: from hence grew our first
error: whereas beauty was given to the Creatures, to point out the incomparable
beauty of God, many beholding them, have so doted upon them, and so far
enamoured with their beauty, that they could go no farther, but have taken the
Creatures for God, supposing that God himself could not be more glorious.

The understanding reaches beyond sense.
Thus whereas a right understanding would conclude, great is the beauty of
Creatures, therefore how great and incomparable is the beauty of God! sense, as
being of a lower strain, not able to aim at such a high pitch, rather
inferres, Such is the beauty of Creatures, that our sense cannot possibly
comprehend any greater beauty; therefore the Creatures are God. Thus sense and
sense alone, without other information, is indeed the mother and nurse of
idolatry; and if we should proceed to no further search and inquisition, then
the Creatures might seem to blaspheme, to make themselves Gods; being only
witnesses to the Deity, they might seem to assume unto themselves the right of
the Deity: yet herein let me excuse them, they are innocent, they do it not
of themselves, but through our corruption some sensual men have ascribed it:
for being not able to conceive greater perfection, it is natural to man to
acknowledge God in the highest. Thus some have worshipped the Sun, the Moon,
the Stars, diverse and several Creatures, and the like.

By the way give me leave to make some use of their error, The good use of
Idolatry.
and here to cry out, O what an excellent workman is God, that even his own
common and meanest works should be of that excellency, as that they should be
taken for God! And thus Idolatry which seems wholly to detract from God, and
to ascribe all to the creatures, yet by an ouer-ruling providence of God,
contrary to her own intent, in so much magnifying the Creatures, does in them
and by them set forth the supereminent greatness of God the Creator.

This were sufficient, if man's whole knowledge were plunged and puzzled in
sense, and that he had no other guide or direction save only sense; In reason
we cannot consider the effects without their cause.
but man has further a reasonable soul, which taking information from sense,
as it well beseemes his condition, uses degrees of discourse, and in this
reasonable soul we shall find this ingrafted, as a first ground and
principle, that in all our knowledge, we must first search out the cause of
every effect; for every effect naturally points out his cause: and there is no
relation so necessary, as is that which is between the cause and the effect.
As it is the truth of things, that nothing can subsist without a cause: so in
our apprehension, that we cannot conceive the one without relation to the
other: there is no knowledge without the knowledge of causes, and therefore we
strive and endeavor to discern the cause in the effects, and the effects in
the cause.

By virtue of this ingrafted principle, Reason as apt to discourse, so to
search and enquire.
we cannot consider the creatures alone, and by themselves, but together with
them and in them we must search out their cause. Here then Reason would feign
know, whether the Creatures be the effects of another, or causes of themselves?
This is the first proposition, or Quare.

Reasonlesnes of the dumb beasts.
Now you shall understand, that every search and inquisition, when we know not
things of our selves, but that we take our information from others, we seek
them from others, and learn them of others; this is a kind of demand: of whom
then should reason demand this? not of her self, then surely of none but the
Creatures; or who should make answer to this demand? not reason to her self,
then surely none but the Creatures Mark then the answer of the Creatures, to
this demand of reason; their answer as giving an account of their faith: faith
is the ground and foundation of religion, and without faith, religion cannot
subsist. Mark then the faith of the Creatures in their answers: their answers,
I say, not in express terms, for this is not necessary: men that are
speechless and dumb, may notwithstanding make a confession of their faith,
Digitis nu^^que loquuntur, so may the dumb and speechless Creatures, they may
likewise use outward signs and tokens, to give a confession of their faith;
their answer is answerable to their nature, their silent nature, and their
still properties give this resolution, and make this answer, and that without
any difficulty.

For their bounden nature must necessarily imply, that the limitation of their
nature proceeds from another. Here is their answer: The answer of dumb
creatures unto reason.
their composition and dissolution must necessarily presuppose first a
compounder: here is their answer: their several times of rising and setting
must argue, that there being a time, when they were not, needs they must want a
cause first to subsist; being not by themselves, or for themselves alone, but
carrying a mutual respect each to other: suppose the heavens to the earth, the
earth to the heavens, the faculty to the object, the object to the faculty:
this must needs enforce, that they could not thus severally ordain themselves,
but that there was some other extrinsecall cause, which knowing both, and
making both, appointed each for other. To conclude, that unreasonable creatures
should move, according to the rules of reason, and such as want understanding,
should be guided by the direction of an understanding; this must needs argue
that some intelligent cause did first ordain them, which now preserues them in
their natural course.

This in brief is their answer; The beasts acknowledge a God, and deny all
fortune.
for they intimate thus much, the Creatures acknowledge themselves to be no
more then effects, they pointed out a cause, an intelligent cause. Here then we
must exclude blind fortune, for that things by great chance should fall into
such an excellent order, reason it self seems to oppose it, which admits no
fortune, but deemes it as a base-borne child of ignorance: which if we should
yield, it would rather prove the cause of disorder and confusion, and it would
undoubtedly imply a contradiction, to ascribe the works of foresight and
providence unto a blind guide.

Thus then the Creatures being true, real, positive effects, they seem to
confess, or rather to challenge unto themselves a true, real, positive
efficient cause, which in effect is to acknowledge a God, and a Maker. And this
their knowledgement of God, as it is fitly gathered from the Creatures, The
natural implicit faith of beasts.
so it is in verity and in truth no less then a natural implicit faith of the
Creatures: all of them testifying the same truth, do in a sort make one common
confession of their faith: Accedentem ad Deum oportet credere quod fit Deus;
this is the first article of their Creed, that they acknowledge a God; thus
they cannot be justly taxed with infidelity. The beasts may teach the Atheists.
Herein they far exceed the Atheist, who denying his Maker, must therefore
make himself live of himself, and so consequently should preserve himself.
Surely of all others he is the greatest and the most notable Impostor, denying
the true God, he makes himself God, for he made himself. But I will as easily
believe, that man either should not be borne, or being borne, that he should
not decline in years, not be subject to sorrow, grief, or infirmity, and that
he should never taste of death or corruption, as that he should first subsist
without a Maker.

Thus then the Creatures agree that there is a God. Now let us hear what other
Testimony they give of this God; and look how many Testimonies they give of
God, in effect they rehearse so many Articles of their Creed; the first
attribute of God is, The dumb Creatures confess one God.
vt sit vnus, as God speaks of himself: Ego Deus vnus, non habebis Deos
alienos, etc. Let us then enquire of the Creatures, whether they acknowledge
one God, or will admit a plurality of gods in their service. And here upon the
first view and appearance, they seem unto me to cry and to testify one God,
one God, for all nature is directed to one end: whereas if there were many
efficients, they would undoubtedly intend their several ends. The world is
circular, which best resembles the figure of one: all the streams are reduced
to one head: all the degrees of things still tend to the highest, there being
in nature a priority and posteriority; Every government tends and ends in a
Monarchy; Nature will not endure many competitors; order and decency require
as much in effect: All heat is reduced to one first heat; all bodies to one
first body. Philosophy beats upon this Axiom, that nature desires to work
with the fewest instruments, and therefore every thing is to be reduced to the
fewest principles. In the constitution of any thing, she requires but a couple;
for the effecting of any thing, one will suffice; to admit of more, would
rather hinder and distract the work, then any way further or help the action.

The Creatures deny that there can be many gods.
Thus to acknowledge one God: the workmanship and fabrike of the whole world
will testify as much, wherein the footsteps and impression of one and the
same God do most eminently appear, all of them giving sufficient
demonstration of one and the same wisdom and providence, which appears alike
in all, grounding all his works, and all his actions, upon the selfsame
principles and rules of his own wisdom: there are not gods of the Mountains,
gods of the Valleys, gods of the Land, and gods of the Ocean: for the fishes of
the sea, the birds of the air, the beasts of the field, have a like fashion
and form for their outward feature, and a like inward instinct and providence
for their course and direction, which similitude of nature must needs proceed
from one and the same ground of wisdom; the voice and verdit of nature will
likewise testify as much, which being to admit some infinite power,
transcending reason, and the course of all Creatures, will therefore tie it
self to admit of the least inconvenience, rather of one then of a multitude.

Here is the second Article of their faith; The Creatures point out God, as
the first moouer.
as they acknowledge a God, so they acknowledge but one God, and therefore they
worship the true God. Thus the invisible God visibly appears in the visible
Creatures; their multitude altogether concurring to one end, betokens the unity
of their Maker, which Maker being the first and sole efficient cause, needs we
must conceive in him, whatsoever belongs to a first moouer; Now behold how many
excellent attributes of God do issue out of this one ground, and are hence
discovered, as we consider God to be the first cause and moouer.

Suppose for his own absolute necessity, Hence is implied Gods necessity,
that being the first, he must subsist of himself, and can do no less then
subsist, and therefore subsist from eternity. And thus subsisting of himself,
Immutability,
he must be immutable and unchangeable in himself, Eternity,
that he may likewise hold out for eternity. Being thus the cause of himself,
he must have the best and most absolute being; And this being must needs be
infinite, Bonity, Infinity,
since he is of himself, and cannot prescribe himself bounds, nor cannot
admit bounds from another, when as there is naught but himself; Being thus
one, infinite, and from eternity, he must be without mixture or composition,
Simplicity,
purus actus, most pure and simple in his own nature: for here were not
diverse ingredients, which being first simple in themselves, might afterward
compound him; And as he is without composition, so he cannot admit diversity of
parts, Without variety of parts.
which do indeed arise only from a composition, which parts in respect of
themselves should be more or less perfect, when as the whole Deity is
infinitely perfect, and cannot admit degrees of comparison.

Without diversity of faculties.
Being thus without composition, or diversity of parts, he cannot admit variety
of faculties, which seem to be tied and annexed to the diversity of parts, and
therefore those many several perfections which appear in the Creatures, they
are but one absolute perfection in God. Thus the wisdom of God is the power of
God, the power of God is the will of God, the will of God is the justice of
God, the justice of God, is the mercy of God: all these attributes can admit no
difference between themselves, and all these attributes are but one and the
selfsame God, though to us, both for our apprehension, and in respect of Gods
actions, they seem to be diverse and distinct, yet are they linked, and
together incorporated in that one and infinite nature of God, which cannot admit
a variety. Thus far of God in himself: and all this we must suppose in a
first cause or moouer: and all this, it is no less in effect, then a natural
implicit faith of the Creatures, as they do necessarily point out and
demonstrate this first cause or moouer.

Now in respect of the Creatures, nothing can be wanting to God, which was
necessarily required for the workmanship. Suppose an infinite wisdom in
contriuing the work, Gods wisdom.
which otherwise would ask an infinite time of deliberation, as I may so say, a
world of consultation were requisite for the framing of this world, were it not
supplied in an instant by the infinite wisdom of God, which wisdom more
especially and immediately appears in the comprehending and understanding of
himself. Secondly, having once laid down the plot-forme, then succeeds a most
absolute freewill in bounding and disposing his own actions. Freewill.
Thirdly, intending to create, and being resolved of the manner, Power.
then follows an infinite power to put all in execution. Fourthly, having once
finished the work, necessary it is, that there should be a continuance of the
same infinite wisdom, Providence.
will, and power, in his Providence, for the continuance and preservation of
his works. The Creatures can no more preserve themselves, then at first
subsist of themselves, and therefore they want a continual concourse, and
sweet influence of this first moouer: for as it is a property of God to be
independent, so it is a property of Creatures to be always dependent; and this
serves as a bridle to curb them, besides the ouerruling power and prerogative
which God reserues in himself, whereof I will not dispute.

See here how many excellent attributes of God are discovered by the
information and instructions which we have from the Creatures; Whereas here
are many grounds whereby we come to the knowledge of God.
these are the Articles of their faith, and all these arise out of this one
ground (as the School speaks) ratione, and necessitate causalitatis, as we
consider God to be the first cause and moouer. Alas, I should be infinite, if I
would proceed in this subject to speak of God, only so far forth as the
Creatures do testify of God, which in effect is their faith; but I will pass
this over: yet give me leave to pass my censure upon it. Audita and approbata
sunt omnia: upon due examination I find them to be sound and Orthodoxall, I
cannot tax them with Atheism or Heresy, but what they say or testify of
God, it is most true; only with this defect, that they say not enough; nature
cannot be raised above nature; the mysteries of grace fall not within the
compass of natural bounds. Natures testimony of God is defective and
insufficient.
Why, thus there are degrees of faith amongst us: we see but in part, we know
but in part, all cannot conceive mysteries alike, and the most faithful man
may truly say, Lord, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief. And thus it is with
the Creatures, what they testify of God, is most true, but they testify not
enough, yet what they testify not, it is not out of frowardness, or that they
are hard of belief, but it is for want of capacity: here then they are
sufficiently excused;

Excused I say, in respect of themselves, but whether any wrong or injury be
done unto us, this is a question; for if the Creatures propose unto us this
knowledge of God as a perfect rule of our faith, to which we should not add,
but that we should be tied to the stint of their belief: to have no more faith
then they, Whether this defect in Gods knowledge appears by the testimony of
nature.
this were dangerous; for to admit this, were to oppose and contradict all the
mysteries in religion, which are not discovered by their light; this were in
effect to seduce us, to make us of Christians, mere naturalls; Indeed they
have already too far prevailed on our passions and on our affections, that we
are almost grown sensual and beastly, like unto them, as if we were of their
commonwealth; but if they shall press further upon us, to work upon our
souls, our consciences, and our understandings, to entice us to be of their
faith, of their Church, of their religion, to make us mere naturals, like to
themselves, this were most intolerable. So then the question remains, whether
the Creatures, or nature, I mean, in the Creatures, or that which is the same
in effect, whether natural reason proceeding upon natural grounds, whether
these supposing their own ability in the fullness of Gods knowledge, seem to
exclude grace, or otherwise in the weakness of their knowledge, showing their
own insufficiency, seem only to make way, and serve as an introduction to
grace? It is a question indeed, in my judgment, of all others most worthy to
be resolved: for in effect it implies the whole ground and foundation of all
our mysteries, The ground of all the mysteries in Religion.
and it stands thus; whether by the light of our own natural reason, we are
to believe no more of God, then appears in the Creatures; or whether the same
light of our own natural reason will inform us, that there are other greater
mysteries to be received of God, more then those natural attributes, which are
discerned by his works?

For your satisfaction herein, you may be pleased to understand, that what
knowledge we have of God by the light of our natural reason, it is not
derived immediately from God himself, but by a reflection, only so far
forth as God is discerned in the glass of his Creatures; Causes are not fully
discerned by their effects.
now this is a rule in all arts, that no causes can fully, exactly and totally
appear in their effects, as having first a proper nature allotted to
themselves, before they were ordained to action: first, they are in themselves,
before they come to relation, so that for the knowledge of causes in
themselves, there must be some further search and inquisition, more then the
effects demonstrate: this shall appear, by considering the diversity of
causes, which I will suppose to be of three sorts.

First, Natural causes.
natural causes: and these are not sufficiently discerned by their own
natural effects: (E. g.) by the nature and properties of a weed, you cannot
discover the whole nature, and properties of the Sun or the earth; for the
inward nature and the outward actions, are not always of like extent, nor do
they agree in all accidents.

More especially this will appear in voluntary causes, Voluntary causes.
that they cannot totally be discerned by their works, when as the limitation
of the work, and the diversity of the work proceeds, not from the necessity
of the nature, but depends upon the free will of the Maker. Thus one and the
same voluntary cause brings forth various and different effects, and therefore
cannot imprint her whole and perfect image in all. Thus if man were known by
his works, we should never make search for malefactors, but every one should
instantly appear.

Now there are yet other causes, Supernatural causes.
and these are of a different nature, and condition: suppose the Angelical
spirits, and the material world; God and the Creatures, a spiritual Deity and
a corporeal work, haec differunt toto coelo, differunt plusquam genere: how
is it possible then, that the one should fully and perfectly discover the
other? Thus in a word to make application of all, The application.
God being a cause, a voluntary cause, a cause of another nature, surely the
whole virtue, and power of the Deity cannot be discerned or laid open by the
works of the Deity. An instance.
E. g. By the building of this house though the skill of the workman
sufficiently appears, yet you cannot inform me of his age, his name, stature,
strength, condition, complexion, the place of his birth, the place of his
dwelling, his means, his maintenance, and none of all these will ever appear
by the work: and thus it befalls the Creatures in reference to God, they set
forth indeed many excellent attributes of God, yet they do not intend to give
us full satisfaction in the knowledge of God; How nature directs unto grace.
but in humility seem to confess, that there is something in the Deity, which
appears not in the Creatures, and therefore in their own want and defect,
they refer us to Gods own revelation of himself.

For in our knowledge of God, the Creatures are not our bounds, but serve only
to point out a Deity, and then to cry, Plus vltra, plus vltra, and so to leave
to God himself, Nature will not trespass beyond her own bounds.
sending us from the outward shop of his works, to the inward school of his
words, from the theater of the Creatures, to the sanctuary of his dwelling,
there to learn a new lesson in the knowledge of God. Here is another article
of their faith, another Testimony of God, in effect they confess that God
being incomprehensible, he cannot be comprehended in his works: hence proceeds
their submission, considering their own weakness, and the infinite distance
between God and themselves, they will not dare or attempt to discover the
whole Deity, nor will they justly be taxed with curiosity, but content
themselves with such a competent measure in the discovery of Gods knowledge, as
their own nature is capeable.

Thus then the Creatures not fully revealing God, there is some place left for
a further knowledge of God, and to this end there must be some further search
and inquisition made after God; Reason gives way to mysteries.
here then is opened a gap to let in all the mysteries of our Christian faith
and religion: suppose the eternal generation of the Son, the admirable
procession of the Spirit, the glorious and indivisible Trinity, the miraculous
incarnation of the Godhead, and the like. Nature indeed cannot reveal these
mysteries, She neither reueales, nor impugnes them.
and being once revealed, nature cannot contradict them; she can neither
propose nor oppose them; for as all contrarieties are in the same kind suppose
heat to coldness, moisture to drought, and the like (these are qualities of
the same kind) so in our understanding, all opposition must be between things
of like nature; but if secrets and mysteries be of another kind, of a
different nature, of a different world, and therefore of a different
speculation; then surely one and the same ground of reason which is fitted and
proportioned to this our present state and condition, cannot equally suffice
both, much less impugn and oppose things far above and beyond her reach and
capacity. So then, for the right understanding of mysteries which are of a
different kind, The necessity of faith.
we must expect a reason of a different kind, which in effect is a sanctifying
grace, Gods holy Spirit to guide us.

And to this end consider how absurd were it, that man should have no other
teachers, or instructors in the knowledge of God, Dumb Creatures cannot be the
sole teachers of man concerning God.
but only the dumb Creatures, which must be admitted, in case we had no other
knowledge of God, but only of such attributes, as are discerned by his works;
how improbable is it, that reason should have no other information, but only
from sense and sensible objects, even concerning such things, which infinitely
transcend and are above all reason, and all sense, as if a man should stoop
down to lay hold on such things, which are indeed above him, and beyond his
reach?

Thus in humility the Creatures acknowledge their own bounds; as bounds in
their substance, bounds in their power; so bounds in their knowledge; they will
not trespass beyond their bounds, they will not incroach upon mysteries, which
standing a far off, belonging to another world, Faith is a kind of reason
elevated above a natural condition.
and therefore far remote from the view of nature. We want a sanctifying
grace, like a prospectiue glass to discern them. Thus it falls out in nature,
even in respect of natural things; the sun and the stars must first send
down a light, and without their own light, they cannot be discerned; so God
himself must first give a testimony of himself, and then inlighten our
hearts, for receiving this testimony, and without this his own testimony, he
cannot be revealed.

Thus to conclude, though the Creatures, or nature I mean in the Creatures,
Natural reason acknowledges mysteries in general.
or that which is the same in effect, though natural reason proceeding upon
natural grounds, though these do not discover our mysteries in particular,
yet in general they seem to imply that mysteries there are, nature seems to
confess that there is a power above nature, and this power did then appear in
the first institution of nature; reason seems to acknowledge that all
faculties having their own proper bounds, she her self cannot be without
bounds, and therefore many things there may be and are beyond the comprehension
of reason. Thus much in general.

Supernatural works confirm supernatural words.
Now for proof and confirmation of our mysteries in particular, we do not
require their testimony, for we have other greater proofs then theirs, and
therefore we will ease them of that labor: they have the works of nature to
testify the God of nature. We have works above nature, miracles beyond all
natural causes, to testify our mysteries above nature: they have a Creation
for their being; a providence for their preservation, etc. we have an eternal
prescience, an immutable decree, prophecies and predictions, foretelling
future events, together with the full accomplishing of these prophesies; in a
word, they have the voice of nature; we have the testimony of the God of nature.

This I speak, looking to the general nature, yet it cannot be denied, but by
a particular charge, as it were a special Commission, Reason discerning the
open miracles, cannot gain say the secret mysteries.
some Creatures may likewise be truly and properly said to give a testimony,
and to confirm our mysteries of grace; for the same God is God both of nature
and grace, he has laid the foundation of grace in the groundwork of nature:
as grace does sanctify nature, so nature supports grace; as grace works by
nature, so nature may bear witness to the working of grace. Thus all
miracles, what did they argue, but that the Creatures changing their own
nature, did therein show their obedientiall power to be at his command and
direction, who first appointed their nature, who can change and alter their
nature, and now works above and beyond nature; these works surmounting
nature, his words may likewise surpass nature. Thus mysteries above natural
apprehension, are no more incredible then works above natural power; both
carry the same stamp, and are of the same mint, they give credit and testimony
to each other. Miracles we discern by sense, we acknowledge in reason, to be
such as indeed they are, miracles beyond all natural power. Then presently our
faith not carried with a vain credulity, not seduced with sophistry, but being
truly informed of the works, presently she stoopes in humility and hearkens to
the words, and therein she acknowledges mysteries, mysteries beyond man's
reason and comprehension.

Thus it should seem, Reason,
that some Giantlike Deity, by his works, by his words has made known unto
the world, that his power and his wisdom surpasses all natural bounds, while
the Creatures showing in themselves the effects of his power, do likewise
point out the depth of his wisdom, and hereby conclude an infinite power, an
infinite wisdom, both which cannot admit man's weak opposition or disputation,
Admiration, Faith.
but rather should work in us admiration, astonishment and silence.

For as in miracles, Miracles prove mysteries.
the dumb Creatures, notwithstanding their natural inclination, yet are they
ouer-ruled by Gods power: so in mysteries, man, notwithstanding his natural
wrangling, and contentious wit, and the scrupulous curiosity of his own mind,
yet must he submit himself to Gods words. Thus the power manifested, serves as
a seal to the will revealed: miracles prove the truth of mysteries; the one
our natural reason may easily see, and discern; and these being discerned,
do prove the infallible truth of the other.

This by way of digression: for this is extraordinary unusual, and therefore
only incident to some few of them, according to times, place, and occasions.
Come we then to their general faith, which I call the natural faith of the
Creatures, which faith implies the whole knowledge of God, whereof the
Creatures inform us, how far by their direction we may proceed in Gods
knowledge, and where we must desist. This knowledge of God being fitly gathered
from the Creatures, The natural implicit faith of the Creatures.
can be no less then a natural implicit faith of the Creatures; all of them
testifying the same truth, do in a sort make one common confession of their
faith, they say their Creed together, as we do; this is enough, to save and
excuse them from the imputation of infidelity: for children do no more in
their baptism, whom notwithstanding we know to be in the number of Gods
faithful people.

The several kinds of faith.
Faith does not always imply the actual surrendering up of our wills and
consents, but sometimes an habit or form; neither is every faith, a justifying
faith: but there is a testifying faith, an historical faith, yea, sometimes an
imputative faith; and there being so many kinds and degrees of faith, I pray
be not so uncharitable, as to make the poor dumb Creatures infidels.

Dumb Creatures may as well be said to have faith as knowledge.
For there is a wisdom of nature, there is a knowledge in dumb beasts, they
know their times and their seasons, their manner of working, and what is fit
and agreeable to the state of their bodies; and why may there not be a natural
faith in them, as well as a natural wisdom and knowledge? for these seem to
be as proper to man as his faith; yet these we ascribe to dumb beasts, though
they want a reasonable discourse: and why may we not as well yield unto them a
faith, not a sanctifying, but a natural faith? for I will not exceed the
bounds of nature in them: their faith is an historical faith, or a testifying
faith; for this their natural faith serves only to give testimony to the God
of nature.

Surely they have a faith, and what is more, they preach this faith unto us,
together with many moral instructions, and many good admonitions, The dumb
Creatures preach their faith unto us:
they are, I confess, very learned preachers, and do exceedingly edify, for
they were able to strike the very heathen (who were without the knowledge of
the true God) with wonder and amazement: the most dumb and senseless
Creatures bear witness and testify of God, The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handyworke: one day tells another, and one
night certifieth another. Thus they instruct us, while they catechize each
other; and as we exhort them to praise God, so they exhort us, that what is
wanting in them, they may supply it in us: (here is their cunning:) they are
dumb, therefore they make us their Advocates, their instruments and spokesmen,
they use our tongues to set forth Gods praise, And exhorting us, they praise
God by us.
giving us occasion, and stirring us up to praise him, our praise becomes
theirs, and their praise is made ours; we are their Godfathers to make the
confession of their faith; they are our remembrancers, and serve as the seals
of our truth. And thus there is not only a communion of Saints, but a
communion of Creatures, which join together in one natural service of God; as
we partake with them in substance, so we may join with them, or rather learn
of them, the commendations of God.

Thus much of their faith: wherein if I have been somewhat obscure, I pray
remember the nature of faith, which is of things invisible, and so from their
faith and testimonies of God, come we then to their prayers, and praises of
God. As Angels, so dumb Creatures continually praise God.
It is not only proper to Angels to be continually busied in praising and
magnifying of God, singing their Halleluiah, etc. but even the most dumb
Creatures partake in this service, and bear their part in this song, though
not in such an excellent manner. This is natures daily task and employment:
for what is natural to things in general, therein nature cannot be wanting to
her self, but must first know and acknowledge her own properties, within her
self; artificem collaudat opus, that the work should praise and commend the
workman, I take it to be a service imposed, or an homage done to the Lord.
Thus wheresoever ye discern the work, you cannot exclude the workman, both
are of like extent, since to be, and to be the effects of his power, both are
alike inseparable from the Creatures; who upon the first view and appearance
do plainly show, that what they are in themselves, this they have from their
Maker; their perfection speaks his excellency; their continuance, his
eternity; if they have ought praise worthy in themselves, this makes for his
praise, who is most worthy of all praise, though we most unworthy to set forth
this praise.

Consider then in the Creatures in general: First, their proper and bounded
nature, together with so great variety and perfection in their own kind. The
perfection of the Creatures.
Secondly, in this nature, such excellent properties, affections, and accidents
which do so well agree with the nature. Thirdly, from this nature, such
strange and wonderful apparitions and effects. Fourthly, by this nature such
an excellent order, and proportion both in themselves, and to the whole
Universe. Fifthly, through this nature, such a constancy and perseverance in
keeping their due course; in performing their duty, service and ministry to man.

How Creatures praise their Maker.
O excellent Artist, that could so sweetly tune nature to make such a melody,
where there is such a concent and agreement on every side; the parts to the
whole, the whole to the parts, each to it self, all to the Maker! O excellent
melody! here is neither found, nor voice to the ear, yet a most sweet and
delectable harmony, a music of nature. Do not then harken with your ears,
but listen with your minds, and in stead of notes, conceive this ditty: We
sing the praise of our Maker.

The temple of the Creatures and their Leiturgie.
This praise and service of God seems to resemble our mental prayer: for it is
inward, secret, and consists only in Meditation. Come we then to their vocal
prayers, which in effect is our Leiturgy or Church-seruice: and first, behold
the magnificence of their Temple, which is the material world, the natural
Temple of God, a Temple made by God for himself, and by himself consecrated
to his own use, where the heavens are the roof, the earth is the footstool,
and wherein nothing is wanting, which may serve for beauty and ornament: here
all the Creatures daily attend, and are ever conversant in this Temple: For the
Sparrow has found her a house, and the Swallow a nest, where she may lay her
young ones, even thine Altars, O Lord God of Hosts, my King and my God:
Blessed are all they that dwell in thy Courts, for they will ever be praising
thee, Psalm. 84.3, 4.

Decent and comely ceremonies, which serve to stir up our dullness, and to
set forth Gods magnificence, and therefore are most commendable in us, They use
no ceremony, but substance.
yet they have none; for they want none: in stead of them, they have a truth
and syncerity in their service, without hypocrisy or dissimulation: they are
not troubled or disquieted in their own thoughts (as we are) that they should
be admonished by outward ceremonies: but they are like the Angels in heaven,
wholly intent to their service. I would I could say as much for our selves.

Now listen a while to their prayers: here every creature has his sound and
his voice, The prayers of the Creatures.
Vox naturae inclamautis Dominum naturae, The voice of nature calling upon the
God of nature. Nature is no fool, that she should babble and talk to her
self, nor is there any other nature, with whom she might have conference; she
is no more idle and superfluous in her words, then in her works: Natura
mhilfecit frustra, natura nihil dicet frustra. Then undoubtedly in these cries,
she offers up her prayers to her Maker.

Now would you know the meaning and sense of these prayers? The general intent
of prayers.
Surely I conceive them to be to this or the like purpose. Venite, iubilemus
Deo nostro, quifecit nos, exultemus and laetemur in ipso: (the very beginning
of our Morning Service) O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord,
bless him, and magnify him for ever. Do you yet require some more particular
notice, what they request in their prayers? Truly they pray in a strange
tongue, I never learnt their language; yet this I can say for a truth, in mine
own experience:

The diversity of their prayers.
That according to the diversity of occasions, you shall find a difference in
their prayers: in their joy and mirth, you may discern their pleasant notes of
thankfulness: in their grief and heaviness, you shall hear their sorrowful
sighs, and groans of complaints. Then it should seem, nature becomes a
petitioner: and to whom should she petition, but to that higher power which
sits above nature? Though the dumb Creatures have neither speech nor language
among them, yet their sound is gone out into all quarters: though their cries
be inarticulate, and vnsignificant to us, yet are they understood of their
Maker; he that sees the secrets of our hearts, can much more easily discern
the intent of their prayers.

But in this their service, or prayers, do they use no means of devotion?
have they no respect to Gods magnificence? but confusedly do mumble up, or
bellow out their prayers, as if with their crying, and roaring, God could be
praised? which were indeed more to dishonor God in the manner, then to honor
him in the service. Herein, They praise God in the best manner.
to give you full satisfaction, I say, that every thing, according to the
uttermost extent of his own ability, does offer up his service to God in the
most excellent manner. To instance only in their Quier, or in their
Church-musick, here you have a full, The Church-musicke of the Creatures.
perfect, and complete Quier; sufficient variety of voices; the little
chirping birds, the Wren and the Robin, they sing a treble; the Gold-finch, the
Nightingale, they join in the mean; the Blackbird, the Thrush, they bear
the tenor, while the foure-footed beasts, with their bleating and bellowing,
they sing a base: how other birds sing in their order, I refer you to the
skillful Musicians: here is diversity of music, some have their several
notes, as if they sung verses alone, and did pawse and keep time like
Queristers, while others use their continued songs, that all might please with
variety.

These songs are fitted for every season, as if they had some proper service,
Their variety of Anthems and Collects.
some collects appointed for the time; Thus they alter and vary according to
the quarters of the year, the hours of the day, the coasts of the world; and
as if they were in some solemn procession, and did purpose to compass and
circuit the whole earth, with their Anthemes and Letanies: some sing while they
are flying, others make choice of the woods for their standing, some in the
groves, some in the meddowes, some in the plains, some on the house top:
here are their voices. Now for their instruments; me thinks the rocks, the
caves, and the woods, with a hollownesse of their sound, like a musical
instrument, send forth an Echo, and seem to unite their songs, together with
the pleasant noise in the fall, and gliding of waters; the pretty, sharp
whistling of the wind, which serves as a ground to their music.

And what is more, Their canonical hours.
believe it, they observe their canonical hours, as if they were some
religious order, they have their lauds, their Mattens, their Vespers, in
effect, they have their Morning prayer, and their Evening song, for these are
the special and the appointed times for their devotion; neither will I
conceal that which I have so often observed; sometimes one bird prouokes
another to sing, then me thinks I hear the Churches Antiphona's, one side of
the Quier answering another, a custom which has anciently been brought into
the Church, according to the pattern and president of the Seraphims, Isa. 6.
Et clamabant alter ad alterum, and dicebant; Sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus
exercituum.

To conclude, How powerful their prayers are.
how effectual, and acceptable their prayers are, I will not demand of them,
they may chance to be foolish and partial in their own behalf; herein take
rather the testimony of God himself, and that to the poorest bird, which of
all others we might suppose to be most neglected, for it is a night-bird,
melancholy, ill presaging it has a harsh note, and it feeds upon carrion, and
yet notwithstanding the Psalmist can testify, Psalm. 147.9. Escam dat pullis
coruorum inuocantibus eum, as if God kept a watch over the nest, and did teach
the young Ravens to call upon him, and in effect to say grace, and to give him
thanks before the receiving of their food.

After their prayers follows in the next place, their decalogue or law: and
truly, for the practice of their religion in their lives and conuersations,
which appears in the keeping and fulfilling of this decalogue or natural law,
The decalogue of the Creatures.
I cannot but greatly admire them. They are still carried with the same course,
which God first appointed; the Sun keeps his just hour of rising, the Moon
observes her certain reuolutions, so all the dumb Creatures, and all the
beasts of the field do the like: you may as soon abolish their nature, as
accuse them for the breach of the law of nature; they are led by their own
instinct, they have no liberty of will to oppose, they cannot be refractory,
but are like the Angels in heaven, sealed and confirmed in their state and
condition. Here is their conformity to Gods natural law; as far forth as God
has given them a law, they are surely led by the law, and the most sanctified
man can do no more, but according to the measure of grace that is given him.
Alas! I should shame our selves, if I should speak of our disobedience, in
respect of theirs.

The moral virtues of dumb beasts.
Hear then how all those natural virtues appear in them, how they are rooted
and grounded in them, suppose temperance, justice, sobriety, industry, natural
affection and the like; I will forbear to speak, being verily persuaded that
nature has proposed them unto us, as presidents of each virtue, that having
given us a rule, some inclination in our selves to moral virtues, she might
annexe some example to that rule, the example of dumb Creatures; that if we
our selves, through the malignity of our wills, should practice to abolish the
law in our hearts (for so the custom of sin takes away the sense of sin)
yet still the law might be reserved whole and entire, together with the exact
pattern and practice of the law, as I may so say, books of reports in the
Creatures; and to this purpose I had made a long discourse, but to enter upon
it, I should prove tedious: therefore I will forbear to make any further
mention of this, which indeed is so evident and palpable, as that it cannot
admit a contradiction.

From their law, The sacrifice of dumb Creatures.
come we then to their sacrifice, which truly is as natural as is their law:
for sacrifice is a pledge of our thankfulness, which thankfulness is a branch
of common justice, this justice is naturally ingrafted in all Creatures, that
receiving our selves from God, we should offer up our selves unto God, or at
least, something in lieu of our selves, some quit-rent or fine in the
acknowledgement of our Tenure, that we hold our selves from God, and therefore
we are not at our own disposing, but must surrender up our selves unto God; so
that you might as well exclude from nature, a natural law, as to deny a
sacrifice. Thus in general, all things being ordained to Gods glory, they are
likewise ordained for his service, here is their sacrifice. More particularly:
Nothing in it self, contains in it self the use and end of it self; but
has some reference beyond it self (E. g.) Does not every thing euaporate, and
impart some part of it self, suppose the flowers of the field in their sweet
smells; many Creatures with their incense and odoriferous perfumes: and what are
these indeed but natures sacrifices?

Shall we yet come nearer, and show how they partake in a true sacrifice? What
are the stones in the Temple, but indeed offered up in sacrifice? Their various
and different sacrifices.
For it is not necessary, that all should consecrate, who attend at the Altar:
all cannot be principals; if the material temple will not suffice, come we
then to man's body, which is the Temple of Gods Spirit: and surely things
ordained for the use of this Temple, and the use consisting in their own
slaughter, they are indeed consecrated and become a sacrifice.

If hitherto you dislike the metaphorical or large signification, come we then
to the strictest sense. What were the sacrifices of the Jews, The truth of
their sacrifices.
but indeed the offering up of dumb Creatures? Then surely, these dumb
Creatures were no small part in the sacrifice, they cannot be excluded; but
these were only types and shadows of a true Sacrifice; Come we then to that
one and only true Sacrifice, the sacrifice of Christ: As we partake in his
sacrifice, in regard of our nature, the manhood of Christ, so all the Creatures
cannot be excluded in regard of one common matter, or substance, in the body of
Christ; so that in him, in him alone, the whole world, the great world in the
little world, becomes a true and real sacrifice.

How the Creatures concur in the Sacraments.
And for Sacraments: Are not all the Creatures sanctified for man's use? And what
is this in effect, but to be the visible signs of invisible grace? Suppose the
four Elements. The fire, when as God appeared like fire in a bramble-bush, and
the Holy descended in fiery tongues; The air, when as Christ together with his
own breath, breathed out his Spirit: The water, in our baptism; The earth, in
her fruits; Bread and wine in the Eucharist. Thus they share in our Sacraments,
according to the capacity of their nature: we actiuely, they passiuely, all
concur in the Sacraments.

And to proceed yet further: Lest they might seem to fail in the end, The
hope of the Creatures.
and scope of religion, I say, they are not altogether without hope; for what
may they not hope and expect from God, who is so bountiful and magnificent in
his rewards? though their service be a natural service, a service necessarily
imposed, and that they can do no less then serve him in their own kind, yet
it stands with Gods bounty to reward their service. I say then, that they are
not altogether without hope; for there is a natural hope, as Job speaks, Job
14.7. Lignum si praecisum fuerit, habet spem quod reuirescet: so if I should
extend this natural hope, as an earnest, or as an implicit hope, to a
renouation of nature; this were no inconvenience. For certain it is of all the
dumb Creatures, that at the general day of our Resurrection, they likewise,
though not in themselves, yet in their own elements and principles, shall be
renewed. For there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, that then they may be
fitted for our use, as now in the time and state of corruption, they serve our
present turns and occasions.

If this seem a strange doctrine then, What becomes of the Creatures after our
resurrection.
let this reason confirm it: Creatures were first created in Paradise. Then
surely they were not so much ordained for slaughter, and man's use, as for the
setting forth of Gods glory. Now since our fall, they groan and travel in
pain together with us under the burden of our sins, and our miseries, the
punishments of sin, Romans 8.22. yet still they continue innocent in
themselves, they are often employed in Gods service, always praising God in
their own kind, and never incur the breach of his law, but are patient,
notwithstanding our immoderate and inordinat abuse. Then surely by a course of
justice, according to their manner, and the capacity of their own nature,
though not in themselves, (that is) in the fierceness, malignity and
corruption of their nature, yet in their own first elements and principles, or
as they have now entered into man's body, and are become parts of man's flesh, all
the Creatures in general shall partake with us, in our future intended
renouation.

Thus then we will say with Ioshuah, 24.15. I and my house will serve the Lord:
we and whatsoever is ours, either inwardly in our selves, Their religion is
according to their power.
or outwardly in our substance, we are all at his service, every one according
to his power and ability does praise God, and has his religion, if a defective
religion. Then look to the power, and you shall find it likewise defective,
for both are fitted and proportioned to each other: in nature, there is a faith
of nature, there is a law of nature; and where the natural creature is
capeable of grace, there are the mysteries of grace, the precepts and counsels
of grace.

And thus without any figure or metaphore, Every thing must have a religion.
the Creatures may truly be said to praise God, in a kind of religious worship
and service; for whatsoever proceeds from God, tends to his glory: here is the
end. Now the way must be agreeable to this end: and therefore what tends to his
glory, must needs run in the course of his service, whether nature or grace.
If ye say, that religion be properly tied to a state of grace; Non est
litigandum de verbis, vbi in re conuenimus, yet I am not of that opinion, for I
think it no absurdity to say, a natural religion. Thus all nations are said to
have their religion, There is a natural religion.
and yet we know, that most of them have no more then sense, reason, and
nature; and yet notwithstanding, they have a religion: then surely they have
only a natural religion, which in effect is no more, then the religion of
dumb beasts, for nature appears alike in them as in us: that which gives man's
religion a special dignity and prerogative above the religion of dumb beasts,
is only this, that man's religion is not merely natural, Proper to beasts,
not to man.
and only natural, but there is an earnest of grace to sanctify the
corruption of nature, mysteries of grace beyond the apprehension of nature, and
a certainty of hope beyond the expectation of nature.

And thus in general, as there is a service of nature, so in general, A
natural religion has natural bounds.
we may well say that there is a kind of natural religion; which
notwithstanding proceeding only from nature, it cannot be raised above nature,
but must again return and end in nature, and being by the necessity of their
nature, it is therefore a service which requires no further reward, but only
serves as a motive and example to us.

And thus far of the natural service of God in dumb Creatures, which I call
the Religion of dumb Creatures; now briefly to conclude, three things there
are wherein I do much desire to give you contentment. First, whether this
meditation may be thought vain and needless. Secondly, how far it may seem
strange or a Paradoxe. Thirdly, what good use may be made of it: for the first,
whether this be a vain meditation, I pray trace it by degrees: the faith of
the Creatures, I did suppose to be that knowledge of God, which is gathered
from the Creatures, as much in effect, as the natural or reasonable man can
know of God. The Metaphysics.
Now whereas of all sciences, the Metaphysics have ever been held the most
excellent, this very subject is the principal part of the Metaphysics; by
consideration hereof, the heathen Philosophers have been strangely
transported, and ravished, and have burst forth into these or the like
exclamations and inuocations of God: Eus ^^tium, primus motor, prima
intelligentia, naturans natura, immensa infinitas, principium sine principio,
etc.

Secondly, Natural Philosophy.
after their faith; how the dumb Creatures do praise God in their own
nature, in their passions, in their affections; or if these be secret and
hidden from man, then according to the imitation of man, how they praise God in
their voices, in their sounds, which are the outward signs, and symptoms of
their own inward nature. This belongs to the Physickes, and is in effect, the
whole scope and intent of all natural Philosophy.

Thirdly, Moral Philosophy.
for their law which serves as a guide to direct them; which law is written in
their hearts, practiced in their actions, in so much that in them, we may
easily read the characters of this law, the very pure text of the law of nature
without any corrupt gloss: this is in effect the whole ground and foundation
of all moral Philosophy.

Fourthly, Theology.
for the sacrifice and Sacraments of Creatures, when we consider how the dumb
Creatures are sanctified, and prove to be Sacramentalia, fit to enter into the
Holiest of Holies, to be unto us as means and conduitpipes of grace, which
seem to imply, that nature and grace being now incorporated, there was surely
some Deity incarnate, by virtue whereof, the whole material nature is combined
to the Spiritual nature; not by consanguinity, but by alliance, by the
nuptials of those two natures in his one person, who was both perfect God and
perfect Man; this is a most deep and profound mystery in Theology, How all
sciences may be reduced to this natural religion.
and thus you cannot condemn this Meditation as vain and needless.

Neither can it seem so strange, or a paradox: for take the books of
Philosophers, and such as have written of the Creatures in general, and suffer
me to prefixe these words in the frontispice, A Jove principium, or In Dei
nomine; which are the same in effect. Then give me leave to turn over the
leaves, and to the last lines, in stead of Finis, or Explicit, to adioyne these
words, as a labell or codicill to the work, Ad Dei gloria^: and both these
nature implies: for first there must be a workman, then the work must be
directed to some end. Now besides the work it self, no other end appears but
the workman: things must then run in a circle, from God, to God; God in the
forefront, God in the vpshot. And thus if you consider the Creatures, between
God and God, in stead of a natural discourse, here you have a religion of
nature.

Thus in Christian Religion, if our ceremonies were first invented by Pagans,
if our prayers were first composed by Heathen, How this natural religion and
Iudaisme is reduced to Christianity.
yet still we may lawfully use them: for when we prefixe, In nomine Patris, and
Filij, and Spiritus sancti, or when we shut up our prayers with Per Christum
Dominum nostrum, then we give them the tincture of Christianity. Thus with
David's Psalms, which are indeed the Psalms of the Jews, when we cloze them
up with this period, Gloria patri and Filio and Spiritui sancto, then we make
them ours, and properly ours; in effect, we Christen them. And thus to consider
the Creatures barely in themselves, without reference to God, were a most
imperfect knowledge; but show them their descent and original, from whence
they proceed, show them their right use, and the end of their progress, and
here in effect you have composed a natural religion.

Thirdly, for the use which we may make unto our selves of this Religion of
dumb Creatures, in a word it is this:

The Creatures make man ashamed.
First, it serves to make us ashamed of our selves, that while all other
Creatures do strictly serve God in their own kind, yet we, though more
bound unto God for the many blessings received, then they; though more
especially intended for Gods service, seeing all other Creatures serve man, and
man alone is immediately ordained for Gods service; yet the poor dumb
Creatures should strictly serve God in their own kind, while we, and we
alone, and we only are the transgressors.

Secondly, The large extent of Gods Church.
it sets forth the large extent of Gods Church, and the vntouchable height of
his glory, though our sins have made a separation between God and us, though
our blasphemies be such and so great, as that feign they would obscure and
eclipse Gods glory: yet maugre our attempts, and in despite of our malice, God
shall be glorified, as of the Angels above, so of the dumb Creatures beneath:
if men shall cease to sing their Hosannah, the stones will cry, Luke 19.40.

Then in the last place let their service be some encouragement and motive to
ours, The example of Creatures, is an exhortation to us.
if we cannot attain to the perfections of Angels to offer up our selves as a
whole burnt sacrifice to God; if we cannot approve our selves, as members of
one Catholic Church, to serve God in the unity of one faith, but that as the
East has formerly been separated from the West, so is now the South from the
North, as if with sects and schisms, we were to quarter out religion according
to the coasts of the world, and to divide Christ's seamelesse garment among us,
having first crucified the Lord of life: If in the course of Christianity, we
cannot agree in the very fundamental points of religion, but are wholly
separated, so that neither one mother Church beneath, nor yet one heaven above
can contain us. Suppose that Christianity should cease, then let us come to
the terms of humanity, and desire to exceed all other Creatures, as well in
virtue and dignity, as in nature and condition. By our nature we are tied to a
natural religion.
But if all fail, if all fail (as I fear they do in some) then in the last
place I pray let me recommend unto them the religion of dumb Creatures: surely
we can do no less then join with them in their religion: for they are
sensual and beastly, like to our selves: then let not those most excellent
attributes of God, which are discovered by them, be contradicted by us: here we
shall avoid Atheism in our prayers, devotions, and service of God, let us not
be inferior to them.

But above all, let me recommend this one thing to our practice, There is but
one and the same moral law to all religions.
that the Creatures may not outstrip us, in the strict observing of the
natural Law, which to us, in effect, is, in moral honesty. This I do the
rather wish, because the moral law was never abrogated, notwithstanding the
change of Priesthood, the change of Ceremonies, the change of Religion, which
was translated from the Synagogue of the Jews, to the Church or congregation
of the Gentiles; yet still one and the same moral law was continued. So at
this day, notwithstanding our diversity of Sects, Schisms and Religions; yet
it were to be wished, that our actions might be squared out by one moral law,
which law appears in the Creatures, and is common to man and the Creatures;
and is as natural to man, as is his own nature, and should no more be
separated from man, then his own nature: for want then of religious piety and
godliness, let this moral law be our guide. Thus man shall know his duty to
man.

No differences in religion should take away moral duties.
But how miserable were our condition? what a world of mischief would follow?
if we should neglect moral duties, under cloak and pretense of religion, as
if religion did abolish nature, as if the moral law were abrogated together
with the ceremonial; Yet this is the practice and iniquity of these our most
unhappy times, that all factions, seditions and trecheries must be forsooth
rooted and grounded in religion, as if religion were the sole mother, and nurse
of all treasons; as if heaven could not subsist with the earth; as if the Tower
of Babel could not be built, but with Church stones. This is the bane and the
shame of Religion. God knows, I cannot speak of it with patience, or without
my great hearts grief: and therefore I will here end abruptly; beseeching the
Almighty God to reform it; beseeching the Almighty God reform it.

Sancte and indiuiduae Trinitati sit honor and gloria.
SOme faults have escaped the Press, either in omitting letters, as page 4.
line 21. for awake read awaken; or omitting words, as p. 25. l. 17. this word
Sanctus should be thrice repeated, as implying a mystery: or mistaking some
words, as page 22. lin. 17. for apparitions, read operations, yet the faults
are such and so few, as that thou thy self may easily correct them.

( E. g.) signifies exempli gratia, as for example.


