To the Reader.
IT is not unknown to the world, with what general applause a certain
Treatise, concerning the preservation of Eie-sight, written by Doctor Baylie,
sometimes of Oxford, hach been accepted; which by the happy experience of
many, in the doubtful cures of that kind, stands thoroughly confirmed. Being
therefore unwilling that a gemme of such worth should lie any longer hidden
under the soil of Oblivion; and withal desirous to give a more luster unto
it, as well for the ornament of it self, as for the good of the merchant: I
have now at length resolved to set it forth in the world, to the public view
and censure of the Time, newly and artificially polished with most notable
Collections, out of those renowned Doctors, Fernelius, and Riolanus, written on
the same Subject. Peruse the book, and make use of it. If thou find benefit
by it, thank God first, that has made his goodness manifest to the world by
his singular gifts bestowed on these most excellent men; next to the Authors
themselves, for their great pains and study taken for thy profit; and lastly
to me, for my goodwill and costs in the publishing of it. Farewell.

I. B.

A brief Treatise concerning the preservation of the eye sight.
THe preservation of the sight does consist, partly in good order of diet,
partly in use of Medicines.

Concerning diet: Diet.
some things hurtful are to be eschued, and some things comfortable to the
sight are to be used: wherefore they, which may chose their habitations, in
this respect, may make election of air clear, Air.
declining to moderate heat and dryness: cold and moist air, and thick,
misty, and rainy weather is hurtful: it is best therefore to abide in dry
places, from moory, marish, and watrish grounds and specially to provide, that
the site of the dwelling be not between the wet places and the sun: Winds.
Dust. Smoke.
Southern winds do hurt the sight: so do low rooms: places full of dust
and smoakie are noisome.

Meats.
Meats are best which are easy to be digested, and which do not stay long in
the stomach: amongst such a young Hen is greatly commended: so is Partridge
and Pheasant. Rasis praises the young starne, and the quail: so do all
writers the Dove both tame and wyld, but chiefly the wild Dove, which (as Zoar
writes) has especial virtue against the weakness of the sight, which
comes by defect of spirits, and the rather, if the same be sod with rape
roots, and turnep roots: for it is accorded by all writers, that the turnep
has great faculty to do good to the eyes, and to preserve the sight. Cross
and slimy meats, and all water-foule are dispraised. Of small birds, the
martin, the swallow, the iay and pie, the witwall, the specht are noted very
hurtful to the sight: and albeit these birds are seldom, or not at all used
of the better sort, yet common people happily may be compelled to eat them.
Fish.
No fish is accounted good: yet some fishes, which do skoure in
grauely-places, being sauery sodden with white wine, fenel, eiebright, sage,
perslie, etc. may at some times be eaten: and so a little salt-fish moderately
taken does no great harm. Flesh sodden with fenell, Preparat^^^ of meats
eiebright, mintes, sage, etc. is reputed best; next are roasted meats; flesh
fried with butter or oil is to be rejected, th'entrals, Intrals.
and feet of beasts are not so good, nor the brains for the most part, yet
the brains of an hare, of a cony, and of pigeons, Brains.
are said to quicken the sight.

Milk and all things made thereof are found by experience to induce dimnesse
of sight: rear roasted, rear sodden, Milk.
or poched eggs are wholesome, Eggs.
especially eaten with the powder of eiebright: fried eggs and hard are blamed.

Of sauces, veriuce, vinigar of wine, Sauces.
and the iuce of limonds, are accounted best; Pomgranats, not so good.

Of spices, Spices.
cinnamon is commended by Auicenna, as special good so the web of the eye,
and for dimnesse of the sight: so is saffron; ginger, both inwardly taken, and
outwardly applied, does singularly clear the sight: cloves, mace, and nutmegs,
and all three kinds of peppers, may be used. Sugar is convenient to condite
things, but honey is better: (...).
no oil is good, save pile olive called sallet oil, and that is better then
butter.

(...) herbs.
Albeit few raw herbs in common use for sallets are commended, except fenell,
eie-bright, young sage, terragone, which are very good: yet these are to be
avoided as most hurtful, namely lettis, coleworts, cabbages, beets, spinach,
purslane, buddes of dill, garlike, chibbols, onions, skallions, (...)
etc. Gapers may be eaten: Olives not so good: radish roots, persnep roots,
are greatly dispraised: carrot roots, the buds of asperage may be eaten, (...)
Rape (...) Turnep.
but the turnup or rape root, and the nauew root are above all other noted
for excellency to preserve the sight, and to that purpose many do preserve
with sugar these roots, and eat them as sucket.

^^uites. ^eares. ^pples.
The most kinds of fruits are hurtful to the sight: yet pears and the better
kinds of apples, may be eaten with the powder of eiebright, or with fenell
seeds thinly incrusted with fine sugar: ^igges.
figs are very good, not only for the sight, but also to open, scour, and to
cleanse the breast, liver, stomach and kidneies: ^aisons.
so are raisons, which have a special property to strengthen the liver: nuts
are very evil, Nuts.
for that they do fill the head: the walnut more tolerable then the hasell
nut, chestnuts are very windy, better friends for Venus, then for the eyes:
dates are not commended, nor mulberies. Dates. Confects


Confectes made with fine sugar and thinly incrusted about with turnep seeds,
and navew seeds, fenill seeds, anise seeds almonds, pine aple kernels, ginger,
cinnamon, the powder of eiebright, etc. are reputed as very good means to
continue the sight: likewise in the preservation of the sight, amongst other
things, such drinks, Drinks.
as are in common use and accustomed, are to be allowed: therefore he that has
used to drink beer, Beer.
may not forsake the same and so of ale.

And in this respect it is not amiss at meat to drink wine, Wine.
for them which have been accustomed to the same: although wine in some
affectes of the eyes is forbidden, yet to preserve the sight, wine is not
inconvenient, for the vapors of wine are drying, clear abstersive, and so do
consume and extenuate gross and thick humors, so it be moderately taken. In
this place I do greatly commend their councels, which do prepare medicinable
drinks with eiebright, ^edicinall ^^inkes.
and other things comfortable for the sight, to be used in the morning, and at
meats, if the patient can well endure so to drink the same: our authors
herein are very ingenious, some addressing drinks with one thing, and some
with another.

^rinke ^ade with ^^^bright.
The simplest and most written of, is with the herb called of the Arabians
Adhill, in Latin Euphragia, in English Eie-bright, of whose miraculous virtues
in preservation of the sight, ^rnoldus (...) villa no^^
Arnoldus de villa noua has written in these words: Eie-bright is good any way
taken, either with meat, ^he praise (...) eiebright (...) the sight.
drink or medicine, green and dry, against all impediments of the sight,
whereby the clearenes of the same may be obscured. And he writes thus of wine
made with Eiebright, (...)
which he calls Vinum euphragtatum. This wine (says he) is made by putting
the herb in the must or new wine, until the same wine become clear to be
drunk. By the use of this wine, old men's sights are made young, it takes away
the impediments of the sight in all men's of all ages, especially in fat men,
and such which do abound with phlegm.

One (says he) which was blind, and did see nothing in long time, by using
this wine one year, was restored to his sight. The herb is hot and dry, and
has by property of substance to remove affectes of the sight. Eiebright taken
in an egg.
And so the powder of the herb taken in an egg, or drunken in wine, does
wonderfully perform the same. And there are yet alive (says he) witnesses
of good credit, which have made proof hereof in themselves, which could not
read without spectacles, but by use hereof have recovered their sight to read
small letters. And so Arnoldus concludes, that nothing to do good to the
sight, is to be compared with wine made with eiebright. If the wine be too
strong, he counsels to allay the same with fennel water; and to that
intention, you may also add sugar.

In countries which for their common drinks do use wine and water, they always
do mingle things for the sight in wine, and not in water: for wine in truth is
a fitter liquor to receive the qualities and to carry the same to the eyes,
then water: which things they do put in the must, and so let it stand, until
the wine be ripe, and ready to be drunken, and so do use it.

Notwithstanding in other Countries which have other usual drinks, Eiebright
may be used in beer, in ale, or meade
the same things may be put in their common drinks, So some have put them in
ale, some in beer and some in meade, and no doubt but all these means are
very good according to the usage and disposition of the party. So even in this
our Country they which either by use or by constitution of body, may well bear
the drinking of wine, may well compound the same with things good for the sight
others of hot complexions and dry, not greatly accustomed to wine, may of ale,
beer, and meade make such drinks, because in the North countries, ale and
beer are the usual and common drinks, and in some places, meade also is much
used: therefore in mine opinion it is convenient for most men, to make these
drinks with ale, beer, and meade, rather then with wine: and meade assuredly
is a very convenient thing for them which can well away with honey.

How Eie^^ight wine may be used.
Touching the direction of those which have bin accustomed to drink wine, I do
nothing doubt, but that they may with out offense bear such drinks for the
sight compounded with wine, to take a draught in the morning, especially if the
allay the same with the distilled water of fenell, according to Arnoldus
counsel. And for this purpose, choice may be made of very good white wine,
and the things may be mingled in the countries where the wine does grow,
notwithstanding in that our most used drink with meat is ale, or beer, The
use of Eiebright ale, and of Eiebright beer.
these are very convenient to receive these things for the sight, and
absolutely better then wine, if ye like to drink the same with meat: as our
authors do counsel. Which ale I think better to be made with grout according
to the old order of brewing. Ale made with grout.
And so the things for the sight may be sodden in the grout, or other way put
in the drink, when it is newly cleansed, How to make Eiebright Ale and beer.
and put into the vessel in which it is tunned to be kept that in the working
of the drink in the vessel, the virtues and qualities of the things may be
drawn and received into the same. When these things are compounded in meade,
Eiebright meade.
then the same are sodden with the honey, in such order as other herbs are
sodden, when they make methegline.

I think it best to begin with the simplest order to compound ale or beer to
each man's best liking with eiebright only, taking to every gallon of the drink
a great handful of the herb, The quantity of eiebright to the drink.
and bind it together, or put it in raw and thin tinsell of silk, and so tie
the same by a string to the tap of the vessel, that the herb may hang in the
midst of the drink, not too low in the ground, neither to high in the barme,
being put into the drink when it is newly cleansed: let all work together
until the drink be clear and ripe, to be drunken according to the common
use, and then ye may drink of it at pleasure in the morning fasting, and at
meat also if you will, and can well like thereof; and most men may like to
drink it, because this herb does yield no ungrateful taste, but rather with
a pleasant sapour does commend the drink. It were not amiss, to avoid
windines, to every handful of the herb to add two drammes of fenell seeds,
Fenell seeds.
well dusted, and a little bruised. As I do put this for more proportion to
begin with-all, that the stomach be not at the first offended with the
strangeness: So after a time, ye may increase the quantity, and put to every
gallon of the drink, two handfuls of the herb, wherein ye may best be
directed by the taste, that the herb shall yield into the drink. Spices may
be added.
In the winter season ye may also add some spices, as ginger, whole mace, a
few cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon, and make as it were bragget ale: which drink,
besides that it does preserve and clear the sight, will also help digestion,
cleanse and cut phlegm, and break wind.

I can witness, The effect confirmed by examples.
that many by this simple composition of eiebright and fenell seeds, have found
great good for their sight, not only to continue in good estate, but also that
some have found remedy against the dimnes and other impediments, growing in
their sight. In truth once I met an old man in Shropshire, called M. Hoorde,
above the age of 84. years, who had at that time perfect sight, and did read
small letters very well without spectacles: he told me that about the age of
40. years, finding his sight to decay, he did use Eiebright in ale for his
drink, and did also eat the powder thereof in an egg three days in a week,
being so taught of his father, who by the like order continued his sight in
good integrity to a very long age. I have heard the same confirmed by many old
men Rowland Sherlooke an Irish man, Physician to Queen Marie, did affirm for
truth, that a Bishop in Ireland perceiving his sight to wax dim, about his
age of fifty years, by the use of eiebright taken in powder in an egg, did
live to the age of 80 years, with good integrity of sight. Drinks more
compounded for the sight.


We do read of many drinks to preserve the sight, compounded not of
eie-bright only, but many more things added: so some put to it sage, some
veruaine, some celendine, and fennel seeds, anise seeds, and the forenamed
spices: others elecampane roots, iris, galengale, and cubebs, and in truth all
these are greatly commended to preserve the sight, and may very aptly be put in
drinks for the sight: notwithstanding, for that we are now to deliver a drink
for the sight, which may be pleasing, and allowed with meats, mine opinion is,
that the same ought to be made as simple as may be. For if Gallen in his 6.
book de sanitate tuenda, does prefer the composition of the medicine termed
diatrion piperio^, which has fewest simples, because (as he writes) that is
soonest and with less trouble to nature digested: The most compound not
always best.
surely the drinks for the sight, which are compounded of fewest things, are
most to be commended, especially when we mean to use the same with meat, as
all our authors do counsel us. Wherefore, for my part at this time, I will
only advise to have for use, either wine, or ale, or beer, according to each
man's best liking, made as it is before prescribed with eiebright and fenell
seeds, and to drink of the same in the morning, or if it so like with meat, as
other drink.

It is holded better to drink often and small draughts at meat, Drink often and
small draughts.
then seldom and great draughts; for so meat and drink will better mingle,
and the meat will less swim in the stomach, Not best to begin the meal with
drink.
which gives cause of many vapors to the head. It is affirmed not good to
begin the meal with drink, but to eat somewhat before you drink.

When you drink wine if you mean to alay the same with water, When to mingle
water with wine
it is best to mingle to the wine fennel water, or eiebright water, and
Montagnana does counsel to do the same some reasonable time before you do
drink, and not presently when you drink, as commonly men do.

Bread in our intention is to be made of fine flower of chosen wheat, Bread.
always leuened and salted somewhat more then common bread, well wrought,
thoroughly baked, not new nor old, of about a day or two days old. Past with
fenil seeds.
Unleavened bread is not accounted good: and the bread is better, if fenell
seeds be wrought with the past; to which purpose some do cause cakes to be made
of some portion of the dowgh, in which they knead the powder of fenell seeds,
and the powder of eiebright, and do eat them in the morning, and after drink
the eiebright drink, and make that a breakfast.

Euacuation.
As generally in the preservation of health: so especially to continue the
sight, it is convenient that the body be obedient, and do his office for
euacuation accordingly: and if nature herein be slack, it may be procured with
brothes made of loose herbs, as mallows, violet leaves, mercury, ground sell,
great raisons the stones taken out, damask pruines and currants: and if need
be of more medicinal things, surely the same must be gentle: for as strong
medicines, which make agitation of humors are not good to be used for this
intention: so gentle medicines taken in due time, do great good to the sight:
which I do leave to the appointment and direction of a learned Physician. Of
all manner of euacuation, these which are done by vomiting are most hurtful:
so are fluxes of blood by the nose. And as belkes do ease the stomach, so
much belking gives occasion that fumes do arise to the forepart of the head,
whereby the sight may be harmed.

Nothing is more hurtful to health then fulness. Fullness hurtful.
And he that will continue his sight good, must be careful of ouer-plentifull
feeding, and therefore must end his meals with appetite: and never lay gorge
upon gorge, but so feed, that the former meat may be concocted, before he
do eat again. It is best to make light suppers, and somewhat timely. Use of
Venus.
As modest use of Venus performed in the fear of God in due time, when the
meat in the stomach is digested, and nature is desirous to be disburdened, is
to be allowed: so immoderate and unseasonable use thereof, does of all things
most hurt the sight, and soonest induce blindness: overmuch watching is not
good: very long sleeps are more hurtful: Sleep and watching.
the mean sleeps of about vij. hours, are best: yet better to abridge the
sleep and to enlarge watching, then contrariwise: sleep taken in the night is
best, as most natural, when external air does not distract natures motion,
and all external things concur to help sleep, therefore the more hours a
man does borrow of the day for sleep, the worser. It is not good especially to
this our purpose, to sleep immediately after meat: for two hours at the least
ought to be put between meat and sleep. Best to begin sleep upon the right
side, and then to turn on the left side: to sleep upright upon the back is
naught generally: to turn upon the face worser for the sight. The Moon shine
hurtful to the sight.
Care must be had that you sleep not in a chamber, or any place in which the
Moon does shine.

Exercises.
Exercises are needful: the same best, after the belly has done his office,
that the excrements are a voided: otherwise by exercise vapors are stirred,
and do ascend more plentifully to the head. Writing after meat.
All exercises must be done fasting, and none after meat. And I wish you might
after meat for bear writing by the space of three hours: but if your course
of life and calling will not so permit you, you may herein follow Montagnana
his counsel, to write either standing upright, or a little leaning and resting
your head upon your right or left cheek: in no case to write bowing your self
forward, and holding down the head. When opportunity and time will serve,
frictions with a rough linen cloth are very good, Frictions.
which are to be performed thus: first to rub the feet, the legs, then the
thighs, the hips, the buttockes, ascending to the shoulders and neck with
soft and long rubbings, even until the parts begin to wax red. Amongst orders
to remove the weakness of the sight, Auicenna writes that the combing of the
head is not of least force, Combing the head.
which ought to be done every morning fasting backwardes against the hair for
it draws the vapors out of the head, and remoueth them from the sight.
Affections of the mind.


Mirth, joy, and pleasantnes of the mind is good: a little anger does not
hurt: immoderate sorrow, fearefulnes, and all vehement affections are forbidden
in all affects, but in this our case chiefly, as most hurtful to the sight.

To preserve the sight by Medicines.
THE order to preserve the sight by medicines, does consist of things outwardly
applied, Outward Medicines.
and inwardly taken. Amongst outward medicines to preserve the sight, it is
accounted a great secret, to smell much to marierum. The smell of marieru^.
So these things following, are sound very much to comfort the sight in staying
the visible spirits from wasting: videlicet, Things comfortable to the sight.
coral, pearl, the stone called Lapis Armenius, spectacles of Christalline or
clear and pure glass, green and sky colors, to dip the eyes in cold water,
to which purpose, many have cups made in the form of an eye, Eye cups.
called eie-cups: and to wash the eyes with the waters or decoctions of
eiebright, roses, Things put into the eyes.
and veruaine. Some other things are put into the eyes to clear the sight, and
to remove impediments which do often grow there: to which purpose as approved
very good and without hurt, the juices and waters of eie-bright, of fenell, of
veruaine, of marigolds, of pearlwort are greatly commended. And Montagnana
does mention a certain kind of preparation of the juice of fenell, A
preparation of the juice of fenell.
singular good to preserve the sight from dimnesse, to take the iuce of fenell
in the month of April, and to put it in a vessel of glass, with a long and
narrow neck, and let it stand fifteen days in the sun, that it may be well
dried, then remove the glass softly, that you do not trouble the residue, or
grounds, and so power it into another vessel: and to every half pound of the
juice, put an ounce of chosen lignum aloes, beaten into fine powder, Lignum
aloes. good for the sight.
and let it stand other fifteen days in the Sun. Then strain it twice
through a thick cloth, and keep the clearest in a vessel of glass to your
use: you may drop a little hereof into your eyes to clear the sight. And some
do distill this wood in a stillatory of glass, and put the water thereof into
the eyes, and hold this for a great secret as miraculous to preserve the sight.
And the same Montagnana does compound another medicine more abstersive to
remedy the dimnes of the sight, dissoluing in an ounce of the water of
Rosemarie flowers, Sal gemma does clear the sight.
two scruples of Sal gemma very finely powdered, and filtered, and counsels
to drop the same often into the eyes; affirming by his experience, that it
does so mightily clear the sight, that suffusions are thereby wonderfully
removed, and especially moistures of the eyes.

I am here also in this place for the clensing and strenghtning of the eyes
especially to commend unto you the frequent use of old and clear white wine,
in which the Calaminar stone has been oftentimes extinguished: and likewise
the pure liquor of good sugar candy dissolved in the white of an egg, being
hard roasted and the yolke taken out.

The urine of a child.
Also our authors do commend the washing of the eyes with the vrin of a child,
and sometimes to drop the same into the eyes. A lie of fenel stalks.
And for this purpose also they do commend lie made of the ashes of fenell
stalks. We do read in all our writers great commendations, A preparation of
the liver of a Goat for the sight.
of a liquor of the liver of a goat, prepared in manner following. Take the
liver of a male goat, not diseased, nor newly killed: and after it is well
washed, prick it in many places, and fill the same with grains of pepper, and
infarce the liver with the leaves of fennel and of eiebright, then roast it
with a soft fire clear, not smoakie, until it be reasonably roasted: and in
the time of roasting, receive the liquor which does distill, in a convenient
vessel, and apply the same to your use.

Auicenna in his third fen. third book and fourth treatise, cap. de debilitate
visus, above all other things does commend the medicine called collyrium de
fellibus, Collyrium de fellibus
for that it cleanses the pores of the eyes, clears and conserueth the
spirits, mundifieth the moystures or waters of the sight: as you may read in
Auicenna in the foresaid place.

Inward Medicines.
Medicines to be taken inwardly are in number many: but I think best at this
time to mention a few, which are easy to be had, and as of great efficacy most
commended: and of such the powder following is most simple: A powder for the
sig^^
yet by experience aproued of such force that many, after their sight has bin
decayed, have by the use of it, received again the same perfectly: the powder
is thus made.

Take of the powder of eiebright four ounces, of mace one ounce, mingle them
together, and take thereof the weight of three pence before meat.

Montanus in his 92. counsel gives great praise to a sirup, A sirup for the
sight.
against the decay of the sight through the weakness and dimnes of the same,
which he compoundeth thus. Take of the juices of fennel, of each two ounces. of
veruaine, of each two ounces. of roses, of each two ounces. The leaves of the
herb eiebright of each M. S. of endive, of each M. S. of celendine. of each M.
S.
boil the herbs in two pints of water until the half be spent: then strain
it hard, and mingle the juices with the decoction, and with sugar according to
art make a sirup, which is to be kept in a glass vessel. You may take two
ounces of this sirup in the morning fasting. In windy bodies he makes the
sirup thus, Take of fenell seeds, of each iij. ounces. of anise seeds. of each
iij. ounces. of the herbs of eiebright of each M. iij. of veruaine, of each M.
iij. of rose-leaues, of each M. iij. of celendine. M. j. of rhue. M. j. S.
boil these in water until half be consumed: strain it hard, and with
sugar siruppize the decoction: both these sirups are excellent good to defend
the sight from dimnesse.

Mesue in his book called Grabadin, An excellen^ electuary (...) preserve the
fight.
writing of the diseases of the eyes, above all other medicines extolleth an
electuary under the name of Human, as having noble vettues to perserue the
eyes, and to continue the visible spirits in their clearenesse, which he
compoundeth thus.

Take the herb called Adhil, that is eiebright, ounces, ij. fenill seeds,
Drams. v. mace, of each Dra. j. cubebs, of each Dra. j. cinamom, of each Dra.
j. long-peper, of each Dra. j. cloves. of each Dra. j.
beat all into powder, searse it, then take of good honey clarified, lib. j. of
the juice of fenill boiled and clarified, one ounce. of the iuce of Rhue of
Celendine
both boiled and clarified, of each half an ounce.
boil all to the height of an electuary, and then put to it the powders
according to art, and so reserve it in glass vessels. You may take hereof the
quantity of Dra. iij, in wine as Mesue writes: If wine seem too hot, you may
allay it with fenill water, or with Eiebright water: it must be taken in the
morning fasting: and you ought to forbear the taking of other things, by the
space of three hours, and so at night, but then you must make a light supper,
and sup the more timely.

Distilled ^aters.
Where in this little Treatise mention is made of distilled waters, I wish the
same to be artificially done in stilli tories of glass, that the qualities of
the herbs may remain in the distilled waters. And therefore I do not allow
of the common manner of distilling in stillirories of lead, by the which the
watery parts only are drawn.

FINIS.
A Treatise of the principal diseases of the eyes, gathered out of Fernelius
and John Riolamus Doctors of Physic
AS the Eyes are of a delicate and soft nature, so ar they by the most light
occasion offended, as by smoke, by dust, and the Sun beams: so the north
wind, and vapors rising from minerals do hurt the eyes. But this peculiar
property the eyes have, that they congeale not because they are of a fiery
property, and do consist of an airy fatnes.

The eyes are subject to every kind of disease, Simeler, Organical, and
commune as the similer parts do labor with every distemprature, with an hot
distemprature, as often as they are offended with smoke, or dust, which
offense proceeding from an outward cause, is properly called Taraxis, rednes of
the eyes is more like unto Phlogosis, then Phlegmon because they arred without
tumor. A cold distemprature does dull the sight. A moist does dilate the
pupil: A dry distemprature does either shrink up the whole eye, or the pupil
thereof is dried or extenuated, as it happens in extreme old age, or by the
immoderate use of venerie. From thence Pthisis, and an Atrophia happens of the
eye: I call that Pthisis which is an extenuation of the pupil, or apple, and
becomes more angustior, and streyter, and more obscure: but that is an
Atrophia, when the whole eye is consumed for want of nourishment. And as the
Instrument does suffer diseases of number, of magnitude, of situation and
conformation, (I say) conformation in the figure, Meatus, and Asperitie, for it
is a disease in magnitude, as often as the eyes are more great, and more
standing forth then they should, for the lesser eyes are best, because the
visible virtue being coacted and drawn together is greater then when it is
dispersed, and is least subject to outward injuries: from whence it does
happen, that those which by nature have small balls or apples of the eye, have
their sight most sharp, I mean not those which have it so by accident, as if
they be extenuated by immoderate venerie, for then things seem to be greater
then they are: to this may be referred Enchanthis, and Rhinas, for they are the
contrary of the same kind. Encanthis is an excrescence of the same flesh which
is in the greater Cantho, but Rhinas is when the same caruncle being eroded and
eaten, does appear as it were hanging forth. To diseases of number, do
appertain Suffusio, which is commonly called the Cataracte, which is an humor
concreate between the Cornea, and the Vuea: in like manner, the web called
Pterigium and Onix or Vngula and Hipopion. The web is a neruose membrane, which
according to diverse men, does proceed from the great corner unto the apple,
and sometimes at length does cover the whole eye. Onyx or Vnguis is a Cicatrix
from some ulcer, which is referred to the likeness of a nail. Hypopion is a
certain Pus, collected under the Cornea, which does succeed a suppurated
inflammation and Chemosi, Hyposphagmati bloody and suggillat eyes, such as are
when some vein is opened, broken, or gnawne, the blood waxes blewe and lived:

To diseases of Site or situation does appertain Ecpiesmos, which is, when the
whole ball hangs forth, which happens by the Muscles relaxed, which muscles
do obuolue the opticke nerve, which disease may be called Prolapsus oculi,
although Paulus does call it Proptosin, when the Cornea being eroded or eaten,
the Vuea does hang forth, of which Proptoseos there are diverse names, for first
when the vuea does hang forth, because it appears like unto the head of a
Fly, it is called Myocephalos, but when it does increase more, and does
represent Acinum vuae, it is called Staphiloma, when it does more increase, and
the eye is stark blind and has the likeness of the head of a nail, it is
called Clauus, but either affect is Morbus in situ, but the first is of the
whole eye, the latter of one only part, that is of the vuea. Diseases of
conformation are, when the natural figure of the eye is perverted, as in
Strabismo or conuulsion, Midriasei or dilatation of the ball: also diseases in
Via, as a sudden obstruction of the Opticke nerve, which is called Hamarosis.
The Sick sees nothing at all, when notwithstanding no cause appears in the
eye, the tunicles of the eyes ought to be light, terse* and fair are sometimes
exasperated with an inward and outward cause, as with smoke and dust.

The eyes do suffer most often common diseases, as ulcers, and tumors against
nature, first phlegmon, which is called Opthalmia, that is known by tumor,
inflammation, rednes and pain.

The ulcers do manifest themselves by itch, by pain and Saines, but not also
the Adn^ta, but also the Cornea is sometimes vlcered, and whether it be
vlcered, we may easily know by this sign: There does appear a white spot in
the black of the eye, with the signs aforesaid: and when the Coniunctiua is
vlcered there does appear as it were a red spot in the white of the eye: But
first, I will set down the manner of curing of those diseases, and then I will
speak of the Symptoms.

The precept of Plato in Charmide is familiar with Galen. Even as it is in
vain to cure the diseases of the head without consideration be first had of
the whole, so rashly to prescribe remedies to the eyes, except we first
consider of the head, where is the original both of the eyes and the fountain
of all diseases which come by defluxion.

Therefore first of all the body is to be purged with pillulis lucis maioribus
in a cold cause, and in an hot cause, with pil. lucis minoribus, or with Sena
and Agarick which shall be boiled in a decoction, or with the distilled waters
of Fenel and Eyebright, with which vehicles the purgative virtue is carried to
the eyes: and consider that the Agarik does especially profit the brain, and
the Senna the eyes.

The opening of a vein in hot diseases is profitable, but not in cold, yet the
common people do hold an opinion that bloodletting does weaken the sight, for
it draws the animal spirits and so does weaken their force, because the
vapor of blood or the natural spirit is the matter of the vital spirit, as
here of the animal: for the eyes ought to be fiery and full of Animal Spirit.

Masticatoria, without doubt, do profit to the deriuation of the humor from
the brain, but your errhina are hurtful, especially the stronger sort,
because they draw to the part affected, for there is great affininity of the
nostrils with the eyes: there is also a manifest foramen, from the eye into the
nostrill, whose opercle or cover is a little lacrimall flesh. But some man may
say Aerius does prescribe errhina: I answer those are the lighter sort, neither
is the disease as yet confirmed, but now being confirmed and the humor fixed
and not flowing, Cupping glasses adplied to the shoulders does pluck back the
flux from the eyes, even as a Seton, and Cautier, in Inio John de Vigo does
apply behind the ears bloudsuckers and Vesicatorium, as

Vesicatorium. Recip. Fermenti acris one ounce. Cantharidum et Seminis Synapi,
one dram.


Mix them for a Vesicatorium.

There Fernelius wills to apply a cautier, and does give a reason that from
thence a branch from the iugular vain springs and does run through to the
Optic Nerves.

As often as the veins of the forehead do swell, they show the flux to be
external and the tumor to descend from the pericoranium from whence springs
the coniunctiua, which flux is profitably stayed with some adstringent
frontall, such as in this manner may be prepared.

Recip. Emplast. contra rupturam desiccatini rubri an. one ounce.

Malax them with oil of myrtles or roses, and spread it upon lynnen and make a
frontall, which apply all over the forehead: or,

Recep. Farinae volatilis an ounce and a half. boli armeni et Sanguinis
Draconis ana. two drammes.

Work them well together with the white of eggs and oil of roses, and make a
frontall as before. Also topicall means applied to the head are not to be
neglected.

For this is a general precept, as often as diseases come by defluxion. we
must not only respect that part that is offended but also that part that sends
it. Beside a thin humor is to be ingrost and made thicker, and the laxe
ways are to be made straiter: this last prescribed frontall is most excellent,
but first cephalicall things and such as respect the head must be remembered.

The use of Eyebright wine does confirm and strengthen weak and ill affected
eyes or the powder of Eyebright as,

Recep. Euprasiae,

Feniculi dulc. ana one ounce.

Cum duplo Saccharo, take of it after meals or, Recep. Coriandri praeparat.
one ounce. Euphrasiae et feniculi an. half an ounce. Cinamomi. one dram.
Macis. two scruples.


With the double weight of Sugar make a powder to be taken out of a spoone
after meals, if you please you may boil the iuyces of Fenel and Eyebright
with honey and make a confection: of which take morning and evening the quantity
of a Walnut.

For general things outwardly to be applied, I will prescribe two
Colliriums, the one in hot diseases to be prescribed in the beginning of the
flux, that it may be repelled, the other in the state and declination of hot
diseases, and in cold also, they may at all times be used, the first Colirium
shall be after this manner.

Recip. Muccaginis Semi. Psyl^^. et Cydoniorum, extractae in aqua Rosarum, vel
plantaginis, an. half an ounce with two ounces.

Of the same water make a liquid Colirium: it is commonly made with the white
of a new laid egg, being wrought together with Rosewater or Plantain water: a
Colirium to resolve is made in this manner.

Recip. Muccaginis faenugreci extracted with Eyebright water or Fenel water an.
one ounce make a Colirium, or with two ounces of the same water make a
Collirium liquidum: a little of the Muscilage is to be prescribed because it
does quickly grow sower.

And now I ask whether your Colliriae are to be distilled into the eyes as
hot as may be suffered? as it likes Scribonius: or cold as it pleases Mesue,
or luke warm according to Galen: But in my opinion they are to be instilled
luke warm, unless the affect do require some other thing, for in eyes that be
exceedingly inflamed and burning, we drop it in cold; but in very cold affects
we drop it in very warm, otherwise meanly warm does always serve the
turn.

Now to proceed to cure those diseases whereof we have already spoken: every
distemperature is cured by his contrary: as eyes that be inflamed and
ouer-hot, shall be cooled with the daily washing of them with cold things, or
with the waters of Roses and Plantaine: but if the distemperature be cold, we
warm the eyes with putting in the waters of Eyebright, Fennel, Rue,
Celendine, washing them often therewith: if the eyes be ouer-moist we dry
them if we macerat tutia in those waters, as for example.

Recip. Tutiae one dram.

Infuse it in eyebright water two ounces, make a Collirium if the eyes be over
dry we humect them by instilling woman's milk, or with a fotus of mallows, holy
hocks and violets: But if some matter be joined with the distemperature, let it
be resolved with a Collirium of the Muscilage of Fenugreeke extracted in the
aforesaid waters; or wash the eyes with the decoction of Fenugreeke, with a
sponge, or boil a bag being filled with Fenugreeke in water, and apply the
bag to the eye warm: hitherto we have spoken of the Similer disease, now we
will speak of organicall, and first of diseases of magnitude.

If the eyes shall be greater or lesser then they should be from their first
conformation, all remedies are unprofitable: if they happen so by accident, as
by some flux from the brain, all the body is often to be purged, the moist
eyes are to be dried, we must look to the head that is ouer-moist with
Cephalicall things. Also Cautiers must be applied to dry up the offending
humor: we must apply for Topicall, linen dipped in the water of Rue, Celendine,
or Eyebright, and the infusion of Tutia, or the bag filled with Fenugreeke,
or of the same Hydroticall Decoction of the infusion of Tutia make a Collirium.

Encanthis grows whiles the blood does more abundantly flow to the caruncle
for nourishment, which being turned into the same substance grows greater
then it ought to do: sometimes it is so great that it hinders the eye lids to
be shut: it is burnt with gold, or else with a burning iron, or else cut off, or
when it does surmount it is bound with a thread, after it is softly bound up,
and after being destitute of nourishment, the excrescence does fall away of its
own accord. Our ancient Physicians called this kind of remedy Anabronchismon,
if the sick be of a delicate constitution and shall refuse the Surgery, let
the excrescence be eaten away with burnt Alum or with oil of vitriol: but it
must be diligently corrected with rosewater or milk, for the exquisite sense
of the part. In the mean time while these things are a doing, we must defend
the eye with some defensure to avoid the offense of a flux. Rhyas does
oftentimes succeed Epiphora if the Caruncle be plainly eaten it admits no
cure: but if some part be only eaten, the flesh may be regenerated by
applying incarnatiues as tutia, aloes. thus, or infuse the same in succo
granatorum, and being strained instill it by drop meal into the greater corner
of the eye. But perhaps you will say will you mix adstringents with your
incarnatiues, such as is the juice of Pomegranets? which is altogether
forbidden by Galen: least the dry excrement should be retained in the part. But
hitherto of diseases of magnitude: now follow diseases of number.

Of the Web of the Eye. Chap. 3.
Pterigium gooweth by the defluxion of thick and gross humors, being soft and
white in the beginning. Dioscorides does commend a Collirium of Snailes, they
are to be burned whole, and the powder to be mixed with honny, the powder of
the cuttle bone or the pummis stone may be also mixed with honny as before; If
you would have it stronger, mix a little salt Ammoniac, but first foment the
eye with a decoction of Fenugreeke. Aetius uses to burn Plantaine seed, and
adds to the powder mirhe, and also the scales and flower of brass, but we
should apply no metals to the eyes, except it be first burnt and washed, for
by the burning and washing, the sharpnes and biting quality is removed, and so
it does raise no flux, of which our cheifest care should be. Also we may use
oil of vitriol, but it must be well corrected with milk: but ye shall note
that a great and inueterate web can be cured by no means but by Surgery:
such are those that cover the whole ball and black, of the eye: webs gross and
thick, black: and which do affect the temples, by consent are in no hand to be
meddled withal.

In like manner if there be suspicion of a Catarhact beginning, and there be
also a web that is white and soft, we must abstain from things eating, because
they generate and increase the Catarhact. Aetius and Celsus do show
Surgery, and especially Paulus Aegneta in his 6. book and Cha 28. where he
does show a double kind of cure; the first, that the web be stretched once with
a thread, and then with a launcet to be excoriated; the second, to make a
passage with a needle that may contain a thread or setam (which is the bristle
of an hog) and so hanging with the thread the web shall be cut with the
bristle about the apple as it were with a saw, and that which does remain
about the lachrimall, shall with the launcet be cut away.

Of the Hypopion or matter under the Cornea. Chap. 4.
Because that Hypopion follows to Hyposphagma, that is, eyes that are bloody
by means of some vein being rupted, or open, which is also called Aimalops,
because in this affect all things seem red: therefore the bloud-shotten eyes
must be quickly looked unto, least by neglect it grow into a leady color, and
then does suppurate and degenerate into Hypopion, for that happens to the eye
that happens to the skin by some blow, and grows when corrupt matter is in
great abundance, so that it does occupy half the black of the eye, or
shines through the horny coat, which covers the whole apple of the eye:
this affect may rise not only of an ulcer, but also of great pain in the
head, or inflammation in the eye that is corrupted, and besides inflammation, it
may grow from abundance of humors which do break open the mouths of the
veins: also, or stroke or falls may make the blood disperse and fly abroad,
which turns to suppuration ad Pus when it is out of their proper vessels. To
prevent the inconveniences, the patient must forthwith be let blood in the
arm, and in the temples, and in the corner of the eyes: if it be possible also
we must use cupping glasses upon the shoulders, and such medicines as may stay
inflammations: afterward, we must use such medicines as do resolve and assuage
pain, such as these.

Recip Cadmie one ounce. aeris vsti. half an ounce. Rosarum siccar. four
drammes. Croci. one dram. Folii. one dram. Lapidis Sus. one dtamme. Mirrhae
two drams. Gummi six drams.
Beat them with sweet wine, and use them with an egg. Also a Collirium ex
Thure called Diolibanum.

Recip. Thuris. Cerusae an. one ounce and a half. Cadmia Pompholigis. Terrae
sanctae. Amili. Gummi an. six dramms Opii. two drammes. Squam aeris one ounce.
Tragacanth. five dramms.
Let this be framed with rain water, Or this.

Recip. Croci, Aloes, Mirrha, an. one dram, Vini three drams, Mellis six
drams.

Let the Saffron be dissolved in wine, then let it be mixed with honey, and kept
in a glass vessel, with which, twice or thrice a day annoint the eyes.

If these medicines and remedies do not prevail, then we must try another
way: let the patient be set in a convenient place, having one to stay his head
behind, then let the Chyrurgian hold his with one hand with the instrument
called Speculum oculi, described in Parcus Surgery, and with the other hand,
with the point of a launcet he shall neatly and cunningly scarifie the horny
tunicle, until he come to the corrupted and slimy matter, which he shall make
to avoid by little and little: After this work ended, he shall use
repercussiue medicines, and medicines avoiding and ceasing pain, as the white
of an egg beaten with rose and plantain waters, and then apply the remedies
which shall be set down for ulcers in the eyes, which be clensing, increasing
flesh, and closing up: Moreover the Chyrurgian must be very careful least
flesh grow in the incision of the Membrain, which will bring both hurt, and
also deformity to the party; to prevent which, this Collyrium is much
availeable, and also commended, and does also prevent inflammation.

Recip. Gummi. Arabic. six drammes. Spodii. four drammes. Thuris. Mirrhae.
Acatiae. Spicaenard. Squamae aeris. Opii an. two drammes.
With rain water bring them to a perfect form, and then make them into small
trociskes, and when you will use them, wet them in the white of an egg with
rose and plantaine waters.

Of Strabismus.
Strabismus is an evil motion of the Muscles, moving the eyes, or a conuulsion
of the eyes, which if it be unnatural is incurable, and that which comes by
accidents, is hardly or never to be cured, unless perhaps it be in infants:
for the eye, for examples sake, being conuulsed, is reduced ad leuam Rasis, and
Auicen does commend the blood of a Turtle to be instilled: also the pie is
eaten with profit, and the powder thereof is referred into a Collyrium: some
suppose that the head of a Bat being burnt and powdered; others commend the
head of a Swallow taken by insufflation.

Of Amaurosis, or Gutta Serena, or Obfuscatio, stark blindness, or
Hallucinatio. Chap. 5.
Amaurosis is commonly an hindrance to the whole sight, without any appearance
at all in the eye, for the apple appears sound and unchanged, only the
Neruus opticus is stopped: this disease is incurable, because there are no
remedies therefore: wherefore as yet the humor being not settled as Aetius does
testify, that he saw one that did recover the sight, only with the applying
of cupping glasses with scarification. Remedies are not to be neglected, often
purgation with pills of Iod, with Trochisks of Alhandall, Hydroticks,
Masticatoria, and also vehement Errhina are not to be neglected, for in this
only affect of the eyes they do good, the brain must be dried with a cappe
fit for the same, cautiers must be applied at the root of the ear, for that
cause remembered by Fernelius, and in Inio for reuulsion, beware you forget not
to use cupping glasses. When the eye is exasperated, annoint it with fresh
butter, aed instilling therein woman's milk, also the muscilage of philium, of
quinces, of fenugreek, and of tragagant are to be applied, let the Muscilage be
drawn in the decoction of Mallows, Holy-hocks, Violets etc. Aetius does much
commend this salve.

Recip. Croci. one dram. Mirrhae one dram. Piper. gran. 15. Spicaenard. two
scruples. Succi feniculi sixteen drams. Ammoniac. Thimiamat two drams. Mellis
six ounces.
When they are all beaten finely, power into them the Juice of Fennel, then
beat them again until they be dry, afterward pur the honey unto them, and
keep this salve in a brazen box for your use,: before you use this salve, you
must have a fomentation of Sea water hot, wherein dip a sponge and often bath
the eyes, also a Cucupha or cap prepared as follows.

Recip. Flor. lauendula. Stacados. Hysopi. Beton. Camomil. an. p. 1. Ros. rub.
p. 2. Calami aromat. Ligni Aloess Ciperi an. one dram. Fol. lauri. Maioramau
p. 1. Nucis muscat. Rad. ireos. Cinamoni an. two drams and a half. Gariphil.
one dram and a half. Stiracis call. one dram. Ambrae griseae. gran. 6.
Musci gran. 4.
Beat all these to fine powder, and therewith make a cap quilted, or quilt
bags, and apply to the head.

This electuary is commended to comfort the stomach, and to prevent the
ingendring of gross phlegm in the brain.

Recip. Cinamom. opt. 1 dram, 1. scruple. Gariophil. Ligni Aloes. Maceris an.
half a dram. Zinzib. half a scruple. Anisipul. one scruple.
Make all into powder, and take the equal weight in sugar to them all, and
with wormwood water make into tables the weight of three drammes, they are to
be used in the morning three hours before dinner. I have forborne to prescribe
topicall means, which have little or no use in this case, because the
original default is not in the eye.

Of Opthalmia, or infl^mation of the aduata, or coniunctiua. Chap. 6.
Opthalmia is properly an inflammation of the Adnata or Coniunctiua, which is
known by rednes, pain, heat, and stretching out: when there is rednes without
tumor, especially by some outward cause, as by dust and smoke, it is properly
called Taraxis: when the white of the eye is so swollen upon the black, so
that a kind thereof appears to hang forth, it is then called Chemosis: some
affirm it to be Chemosis when the Membrain coniunctiua is higher lifted then
the Cotnea, as if this were in an hole, which besides the rednes and heat
causes the eyelids to be turned, so that they cannot cover the eye: contrary
to this is Phimosis, when by some great inflammation the eie-lids do stick fast
each to other, and cannot be opened, but the hurt which they receive is but an
accident in this disease. Epiphora, is generally taken for a sudden stream
of humors in any part. As Pliny calls epiphoram vteri or ventris,
notwithstanding it is properly used for the affect in the eyes: when with great
inflammation great quantity of humors flow unto them all these aforesaid affects
do accompany each other: the causes are the recourse of blood, choler, phlegm,
and melancholy, but most commonly blood and choler: the general our for this
disease does consist in bloodletting, diet, purging by the advice of a learned
Physician because Opthalmicis Diarrheam superuenire bonum est, we must not omit
to use cupping glasses upon the Shoulders with scarification which will be good
for reuulsion, also an Astringent frontall to intercept the flux, if it seem
to be outward. In the beginning a repellent Collyrium to hinder the generation
of Phlegmon which must be framed of the muscilage of phillium and of quinces,
and then a resolving Collyrium of the muscilage of fenugreek, being well washed
from its biting quality. Abstinence from wine, in the beginning is very
necessary, yet in the declination wine may be permitted even as a bath of sweet
water, to contemperate the blood, is at the beginning denied, least it should
cause the humor to shed, and increase the defluxion. If the inflammation do
continue the muscilages beforsaid shall be drawn in the water of poppy, or in a
decoction thereof, adding thereunto a little camphire or opium, and apply to
the eye this cataplasme. Take of sodden apples iiij. ounces, and with the white
of an egg and woman's milk, make a cataplasme: you must be careful to renew
these medicine least they dry over fast, and so cause heat: not long after use
this Collyrium. Recip. Gummi arabici tragogant ana one dram. cerusa lota half
a dram. opij gran, iij.
Dissolve all with the white of an egg and woman's milk that gives suck. In
the declination of this disease this may be used. Take of the muscilage of
fenugreek, and quince-seed drawn in rose water, and eiebright-water ana. one
ounce and a half, in which dissolve sarcocoll in the milk of a woman that
gives suck two drams; aloes lot. one dram; mirh half a dram: and so make an
eye-salue; and where there is any great itching, or rather where the
inflammation comes of fleagme, this is a most singular Collirium. Recip.
tutia prep. aloes lota ana. half a dram. sarcocol. myrrha ana. half a
scruple. sacchar. cand. one dram. vitriol. albi half a scruple. aqua ros. aqua
faniculi ana. two ounces.
Boil them altogether a little while in a viol-glasse, and then drop thereof
into the eye. Some commend this Collirium in all inflammations of the eyes, to
take snayle with the shells, and to beat them with a little salt, and through
an hypocras bag to let the water thereof distill, which being clear put
thereof into the eyes. It sometimes falls out by unadvised applications,
which does cool and beat back, or else by some inflammation, that the natural
heat is extinguished and choked, and thereupon ensues a worse inflammation,
then any of the aforenamed, which is a sphacelosous opthalmia, which does
deprive the eye of natural temperature, does make it corrupt and utterly
perish, which disease Galen in his introduction calls grangrena opthalmon the
gangren or mortification of the eye: when this happneth we must have recourse
to proper remedies for gangrens, changing them as the state of the disease and
the part shall require.

Of the suffusion of sight called Cataracta. Chap. 7.
Hypochyma or Cataracta is an heap of superfluous humors made thick between
the coat Cornea and the humor crystalloydes or crystallinus, directly upon the
apple of the eye, swimming above the aqueus humor in that place, which Celsus
does affirm to be void and empty: it hinders the sight, or at the least the
discerning of such things as are before our eyes. Fernelius appoints the
place of it between the membraim Vuea and the Cristallin humor: The difference
thereof is borrowed from the quantity or quality; from the quantity, when it is
whole, covering all the compass of the apple of the eye, in such sort that the
patient cannot see any thing, sometimes it does cover only half the apple of
the eye or some part of it, either above or beneath, or in the midst, in such
manner that that only part of the thing before our face can be discerned,
which is placed against the part of the eye, which is affected: Some there are
that do contend and affirm that this suffusion is no disease, but an outward
moisture collected before the pupil, or apple of the eye, which humidity seeing
that it is a substance does not seem to be a disease, because it is a
quallity, and is placed under the predicament of quality: but to leave an over
curious questioning, whether it be a disease, or quality, we will proceed to
the cure. Now to proceed in order to the cure: first you must purge the brain,
with pills that are proper for that purpose, and give them to the patient, the
day before you begin your cure: then the next day following, about nine of the
clock in the morning, the patient yet fasting, (provided that the cataract be
ripe, and confirmed) cause him to sit ouert: vhart a stool, in ryding
fashione, and sit on the same stool face to face, and make the parient to hold
his sound eye closed with his hand, and in that sort charge him to sit
steadfastly without starting, or stirring in any-wife: let another also stand
behind him, and hold his head very steadfast: this done, first with your own
hand lift up the ouer-eie-lid, and then with thy other hand put in thy needle,
made for that purpose in at the greater corner of the eye, and finely trilling
the tunicle called saluatella, or saluatrix, writh always thy finger to and
fro, till thou touch with the point of thy needle the corrupt water, which is
indeed the cataracte: and then begin by little and little, to remove that water
from before the sight, to the corner of the eye, and keep it there with the
point of your needle; the space of three minutes of an hour, and then remove
your needle easily from it, and if it happen to rise again, bring it back the
second time: but this you must beware of, that when the needle has touched the
catarract, you do not writh it about with your fingers to and fro, till it be
set in his place before named, but to draw it thither gently, and when you have
it there, trill the needle about until it has gathered the water about it,
and then pull it out: when this is done cause him to shut close his eye, and
apply thereupon a plaster of flax, and the white of an egg, and cause him to
lie in his bed nine days together, removing the plaster three times in the
day, and so many times in the night, without any other stirring of it, and
provide also that he lie in a very dark place, and let him be kept in a thin
diet, as rear eggs and white bread: and if he be young, and of strength, let
him drink Barley water, but otherwise let him drink small ale, and wine delayed
with water, for truly too much nourishment would offend, in procreating too
much blood in the eye, which is very hurtful in the beginning of the cure.
When the ninth day is past, let him arise and wash his eyes with fair cold
water, and he shall enjoy his sight by the help of GOD. even as well as he
had it before.

Of the Aegilops or the lacrimall Fistula. Chap. 8.
Between the nostrills and the greater corner of the eye rises an Aposthume,
which the Grecians do call Aegilops, that is, oculus Caprinus a Goats eye,
because that Goats are subject to this disease, we call this disease, Fistula
lacrimalis. This Aegilops may happen through every humor, yet nevertheless it
happens most often through fleagme, seldom through blood, but seldom or
never from choler or melancholy: the phlegmatic humor continually flowing by
the flesh of the lacrimall corner to the nostrils, and sometimes under the same
flesh being there detained, does putrify and breaks out into a fistulous
ulcer, from whence certain do imagine that Aegilops happens always from
fleagme; and by blood also this disease is wont to be excited, but not so
often as with fleagme: but it is sufficient to know that this lacrimall fistula
happens from some virulent humor and that which is corrosiue.

As concerning the cure, at the first beginning we must presently use
repellents, such as is rose water and the white of an egg well beaten
together, or with oil of roses mixed with vinegar: which oil must be boiled to
the consumption of the vinegar: then add thereto a little milk: we must be
careful that none of the oil stick to the eye, for to that part it is very
biting: or apply thereto Halica boiled in vinegar and beaten well together, for
it does not only help them in the beginning, but after they alter into
Apostume; and does break them and pierce even to the very bone: or a medicine
framed of these, glaucium, saffron, and the juice of Pellitory of the wall, but
the medicine must be oftentimes changed. I, says, Trallianus, have hindered
these Aegilops as yet not grown to matter by the use of these things that they
never came to suppuration: or the place is to be anointed with a Collyrium
which does vehemently stupifie; and least the matter should happen to be cold
we take bdellium dissolved in vinegar with oil of Roses which may be mixed
therewith, or Ammoniacum and the juice of fennel, or snailes with their shells;
sometime with Aloes and sometimes with Myrhe mixed, and so apply it. In the
mean time we must ordain a diet of such meat as is of good nourishment, and
containing but few superfluities, as are Chickins, Hens, Partriges, Fesants,
Doves, Larkes, new laid Eggs, Raisons and sweet Almonds: let his drink be
Hydromell or wine delayed with water: for diuersion of the humor flowing, the
humerall vein of that side in the arm must be cut, or some other diuersions
with cupping glasses, or frictions and ligatures must be used: also the humors
abounding, digested and prepared, must be avoided with hiera piera, or hiera
logodion, or with pills of cochia, or by clysters and sharp Suppositories,
neither will one purgation suffice, but diverse and often reiterated: but if the
disease do continue, we must use topicall means and such as are discussiue.
Paulus commends ruta Satiua cum lixiuio, framed of Ashes and lime: indeed in
the beginning it is somewhat biting: but afterward it is most gentle and does
penetrate unto the very bone. Alexander Trallianus does show an approved
medicine which is the inward membrain of the reed, that which we find about
the knots, and mix it with honny and apply the same, changing the same four
times a day: when the place is well cleansed and purged, dip a sponge in mulsa
and foment it: this aforesad menbrain of the reed may be applied by it self
or else.

Recip. Staphisagriae, two drammes. Ammoniaci in aceto dissoluti, half an
ounce, mix them and apply it.

An other.

Recip. Mellis puri, Aloes hepat. an. two ounces. Myrrhae, one ounce. Croci,
half a dram. Aquae. lib. 2.
Boil all at a gentle fire, to the consumption of the one half, and in that
decoction being hot infuse a new piece of sponge, and with the same cleanse the
sore, and then bind a soft piece of sponge wet in the same liquor, and it will
work a wonderful effect, as has often been proved.

An other medicine.

Recip. Succi foliorum lilii vel radicum eius. four ounces. Viridis aeris
vsti, one ounce. Mellis puri, three ounces. Olei nucum, Cerae q. s.
Boil all to the consumption of the iuyces, and make an ointment, of which put
it in cum licinio or tent, as is fit. I will describe an other medicine which
does not only cure the Lacrimall fistula, but all other Fistulas.

Recip. Centauri minoris. Aristolochiae rot. an. aur. 1. Mirrhae aur 3.
Aluminis. Gallae an. aur. half. Ireos. Sarcocollae Seif memitae an. aur. 1.
Viridis aeris. one scruple.
Mix all with honey and make an ointment. When the bone is foul, we use an
actual cautier, and touch the bone through a Canula, which cautier must be
either of brass or silver, and being artificially applied, will cure the
fistula: (I, says the Author, have wrought with the Cautier, as aforesaid, and
have had very good success.

General rules for the conservation of the sight. Chap. 9.
Whosoever does desire to preserve his sight, let him take heed of the
inequality of the air, of fire, smoke, wind, immoderate Coiture, much
labor, superfluous weeping, drunkenness, overmuch sleep, especially in the
daytime upon meat, immoderate watchings: Let them also avoid meats that do
engender vapors, such as Cabbidge, Coleworts, Onions, Garlic, all sharp
things, and Salt, sallets, beans and peason, all fat things, whether they be
of flesh, or of oil, all things of hard digestion must be avoided, and all
things that are vaporous. Medicines that do conserve the sight, some are
abstersive and clensing, and meanly temperate, such as are Fennel, and a
Collirium of the same, Succus memitae, and Eiebright of its own property: some
there are which do preserve the eyes by altering, or warming, by cooling,
moistning, or drying, some preserve the sight by lenifying the asperitie, and
other things, by other means, of which we will speak afterward.

A Collirium Democriti which does clear the sight and preserve the same.
Recip. Succi faeniculi depurati lib. half.

Boil it a little in a vessel of brass, and let it remain a while til it
have a residence, then add two ounces of pure honey, and boil it again at a
gentle fire with ten or twelve leaves of good gold, then strain it, and put it
into a violl of glass, stopping the mouth thereof very close, then set it in
the sun, pouring it from vessel into vessel, taking always away the
residence, and put thereof into the eyes: some do add thereunto the gall of a
Cock, the quantity of two drammes.

Another that does conserve the sight.
Recip. Tutiae Alexandrinae praep. Antimoniipraep. Lapidis haematitis. Ossis
sepiae marinae abluti. aeris vsti. Cortieum aeris. Aloes, folii, croci, an.
partem Vnam. Piperis. Macropiperis. Salis ammoniaci an. partem. half.
Margaritarum. Myrobal. cheb. Spumae maris. Clymiae aureae. Saccari. Musci,
caphurae an. partem quartam
1. Let it be very finely beaten and ground upon a marble diverse times, until
it be a very fine powder, of which put into the eyes.

The eyes of a Crow hung about the neck, strengthens a weak sight, and does
preserve the eyes: the root of swines grass or knot grass dried in the
decrease of the Moon, and hung about the neck, does also conserve and
strengthen the sight, neither does it suffer them to be inflamed. Also take the
leaves of Rue, of Roses, Fennel, Eiebright and Celendine, of each equal
parts, distill them all together, and put a little of this water into the eyes,
for it is the best Collirium for clearing of the eyes, for the conservation and
comfort of the sight: and it must be made in the springtime. Also long
Comings and frictions of the head does divert and turn away the vapors that
do offend the sight: also it is good to behold green things, and the skies:
Clear spectacles are also very good. Moreover fill the hollownes of the hand
in the morning with cold water, and with the same wash open the eyes: Also a
nutmeg beaten with honey and eaten in the morning does preserve the sight: also
your Mirobalans Condite do the same.

An excellent ointment for the eyes.
Take Auxungia recens two ounces, steep it in rose water for six hours space,
afterward wash it again in white wine twelve several times, for the space of
six hours more, then add thereto of Tutia praep. and in fine powder one ounce,
Lapis hematites well washed one scruple, Aloes lota et pull. gr. 12.
margaritarum gr. 3. mix it, and with a little water of fennel make an
ointment, whereof put a small quantity into the corner of the eyes.

FINIS.

