THE ARC of Noah, FOR The Londoners that remain in the City to enter in,
with their families, to be preserved from the deluge of the Plague.

Item, An Exercise for the Londoners that are departed out of the City into
the Country, to spend their time till they return.

Whereunto is annexed an Epistle sent out of the Country, to the afflicted
City of London.

Made and written by James Godskall the younger, Preacher of the word.

Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. Dan. 9. 18. O my God, incline thine ear, and hear:
open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the City whereupon thy name
is called. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed

AN EPISTLE TO the afflicted City of London.
To all you that be at London, beloved of God, called to be Saints. Grace be
with you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 7.
with all that call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, both
their Lord, and ours. 1. Cor. 1. 2.
AS Naomi (dearly beloved in the Lord) the title of honorable at this time I
do omit) spoke unto the people which saw her; Ruth. 1. 20.
Call me not Naomi, (which sounds beautiful or pleasant) but call me Mara,
for the almighty has given me much bitterness, the Lord has humbled me, and
the Almighty has brought me unto adversity. So likewise thou afflicted
London, may answer to them that see, and hear of thee: Call me not Naomi,
but Mara, for the Almighty has brought thee now unto adversity. In which
affliction I may speak with the Apostle, we are mindful of your tears. 2.
Tim. 1. 4.
And although as Paul speaks, we be absent in the flesh, yet are we with you
in the spirit, Coll. 2. 5. kept from you for a season, concerning sight, but
not in the heart. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 17. For we have you in perfect memory. Phil. 1.
3. having you in our hearts. 2. Cor. 7. 3. And thus being affectioned toward
you, 1 Thessalonians. 2* 8. without ceasing, God is my witness, (with the Apostle we
may protest) we make mention of you always in our prayers. Romans 9. 1. 10. Of
thee o London, with the Levites of Jerusalem, unfeignedly I may speak, Psalm.
137. 5. If I forget thee o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget to play: If I
do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. True it
is, by the Rivers of Babel as it were we sit in a pleasant Country; Ps. 137.
but nevertheless, here we weep, when we remember thee o London; we hang up
our harpes, and the pleasantness of the country cannot stay our tears,
remembering you that are afflicted, Heb 13. 3.
as if we were afflicted our selves, weeping for the City, as Christ did for
Jerusalem, Luke 19. and not only for you, but for our selves. Luk* 23. 28. How
could we feast, while the iron enters Joseph's soul in the City? We are not
Nero, singing and triumphing when Rome is on fire, but as Abraham prayed for
Sodom, and the Prophet for the peace of Jerusalem, so we for the peace of
London. As for the Romish Edomites, the superstitious Papists, who rejoice at
this ours and your present calamity, insulting over us in this land, and in
others, preaching it unto theirs publicly, and muttering it privately, that
this deluge of the plague is justly broken through among us, because we have
(as they speak) forsaken the religion and profession of our forefathers;
justly we do acknowledge, although it is falsely imputed to that pretended
cause. What is this their accusation else, but that old song of the
superstitious Israelits, Ier. 44. 18. 19* Since we left off to burn incense
to the Queen of heaven, we have had scarceness of things, and have been
consumed by the sword and famine. Were not also the good Christians in the time
of Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius, and others, in this manner vpbrayed by the
Heathens, who imputed to them the cause of Pestilence, War, Inundations,
Earthquakes, and other troubles? But O ye blind sons of men, what was the
cause of the flood in the time of Noah? was it the Religion of that time, or
was it Noah the preacher of righteousness? The Lord himself shows the
cause, Gene. 6. and 7. Chap. the sins of that age, and the flood of
iniquity. For which like sins, both we, and their professors also, as well
as we at diverse times have felt this rod, and also at this present time in
Flanders they do taste of this smart-whip: which gives us just occasion to
speak unto them that of the Prophet, Iere. p 18.
Thine inventions have procured thee these things. Remember O Lord the children
of Edom (these superstitious Romanists) which speak, Psalm 137. 7* 8.
raze it, raze it to the foundation thereof. O daughter of Babel worthy to be
destroyed. But from whence am I digressed? To return to the head of the race,
where I first began, I return to you my brethren with sighs, to whom, I may
use the Apostles words, 2. Cor. 2, 4.
In anguish of heart I write unto you with many tears. Of Prayer, of which
this treatise following does entreat: I may speak that which Martha said
unto Christ, If thou had been here, my brother should not have died. So
likewise, if fervent and humble prayer had been amongst us, we should not have
suffered these things. But seeing we are in the flood, and that the waters are
entered even to our souls, Psalm. 69. 1. Therefore behold, against this deluge I
send to you a delineation of the true Arc of Noah, whereunto ye and we ought
to fly to be preserved, which is the name of Jehovah, Prou. 18. 10. the little
Zoar, and the Sanctuary to hide and safeguard our selves.

Two things beloved, may put you in mind this year of two things. First, of
Noah: Secondly, of Jonas withered Gourd, unto which your present calamity for
diverse respects fitly may be compared.

Noah, Matthew. 24. Luke 17.

Noah, we are now as it were in the flood (the afflictions and troubles of the
sons of men being not unfitly compared unto waters by the Kingly Prophet
David) which prayer at this time London thou may make, Save me O God, Psalm.
69. 1.
for the waters are entered even to my soul. Seeing therefore, that thou with
Jonas may say, Lord, the floods compass me about, what remains but that
we enter into the Arc to be preserved? Give me leave beloved, by a comparison
to show you two things, the flood wherewith ye are compassed about, and the
Arc which ye ought to enter.

In the flood of Noah the holy Ghost notes four Fourthly, his decreasing. The
cause of which, was the sin of that age, which was grown up as a mighty
tree, producing diverse sower and deadly fruits. The first was, the great
security of the sons of God, that is of those which made profession of the
true Religion, eating and drinking, marrying and building, Luke 17. 27. The
second, their disobedience and contemning of Noah, the Preacher of
righteousness, and of the long suffering of God, Gene. 6. 1, 2.
1. Pet. 3. 20. The third, their fornications, and ungodly alliances with the
infidels, and with that damnable race of Cain, without respect either of family
or Religion. The fourth, their cruelty and oppression of their neighbors,
Gene. 6. 11. and 13. Lastly, the corruption of their ways, Genesis 6. 12. and
because their wickedness was great upon the earth. 2. Sam. This is also the
cause (to apply the first to our selves) which has moved the Lord to send
this deluge of the Plague into the land, because the self same sins did
reign among us: and as it was in the days of Noah, so has it been in these
last days of the son of man: Luke 27. 26.
and therefore seeing a flood of iniquity has overwhelmed us, has not this
flood of the Plague justly and suddenly overtaken us?

From the first let me lead you to the second, the 7. Chap. of Gene. ver. 11.
In the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, which was about the
beginning of May, or as others say in April, when all things did most flourish,
and when it was less expected, which suddenness has changed their joy into
sorrow. So likewise, to apply the second to us, this deluge of the Plague began
to increase about the beginning of May (as I have noted) when all things did
flourish in the Country, and in the City, when we were merry as the sons
of the old world, marrying, feasting, building, and erecting our arms
trivmphants, when we less expected it, which has turned also our joy into
sorrow.

And as Noah's flood caused them to fly upon high mountains and trees that the
waters should not reach unto them: So this deluge has it not caused thousands
to depart into the Country far and near to be preserved?

Genesis 7. 24. The waters covered, and prevailed upon the earth an hundredth and
fifty days (which is about half a year) and then, in the end of an hundredth
and fifty days the waters abated, Gene. 8. 3. which was in November, reckning
from the beginning of them. To apply the third, our deluge has not yet
prevailed an hundredth and fifty days, and I hope through the mercy of God,
that it will not so long increase and be in his full strength and force, (and
yet O Lord, by the great flood of our iniquity we have deserved a longer
increasing, But have mercy upon us O Lord according to the multitude of thy
compassions, Psalm. 51. 1.) Let me apply the fourth thing, which is the
decreasing of Noah's flood, noted Genesis 8. 5* and they decreased until the tenth
month (which was the month of December) this decreasing beginning from
November, after the hundredth and fifty days. Our flood the Lord be thanked,
has begun reasonably to decrease in the month of September, and the Lord
grant that these waters from henceforward may not be going and coming, but
that they may altogether decrease until the tenth month. And as the tops of
the mountains which were covered because of the flood, were seen in the tenth
month, Gene. 8. 5. which was in December: So the Lord grant, that the heads
of the City, the Merchants, and principal Citizens, which because of this
deluge have been covered, may be seen again in the City, the tenth month.
Further, as on the first day of the first month, Gene. 8. 13. the upper part
of the ground was wholly dry, which was in March and part of April. So the
Lord grant that this deluge may in that month wholly be dried up, and that
there remain not any relics thereof: if it please him to remember us in his
mercy as he did Noah, Gene. 8. 1. Now that he may remember us in his mercy,
let us forsake the sins of the old world, let the flood of iniquity which
is broken through among us decrease, and wholly be dried up. Great has been,
and extraordinary (I do confess) the inundation of the Plague this present
year, and therefore let our repentance be great and extraordinary. It is
reported of many of the Egyptians by Sozom, lib. 7. cap. 20. that being
terrified by the strange inundation of Nilus, higher then the wonted manner
thereof was, immediately they condemned their ancient Idolatry, and applied
themselves to the worship of the living God: So likewise, seeing that this
deluge of the Plague has been higher then the wonted manner, as the weekly
Bills do show unto us, let us be terrified, and remove our ancient
iniquities, let us apply our selves to humble and fervent prayer, a principal
part of the worship of God. And as the Arc in the flood rested upon the high
mountains of Ararat, Gene. 8. 4. So let us in this flood rest upon the Lord,
and upon the holy mountain of Heaven; the power and mercy of our God, are the
mountains whereupon the Arc may find rest; those are the holy hills whereon
Sion has her everlasting foundation.

Having showed to you the flood, I come to the Arc. The holy Ghost in the
description of the Arc into which Noah entered, Gene. 6. and 7. notes these
five things. The Arc it self. The persons entering. The cause why. The time
when. The end wherefore.

Noah, and of the righteous, the name of the Lord, that strong tower whereunto
the righteous runs by the feet of prayer, Prou. 18. 10. an immortal,
eternal, and incorruptible Arc. I know no surer refuge from the tempest, as
Esai speaks, no safer harbor, and receptacle, wherein to repose your wearied
souls.

Noah and his family. Noah the righteous, or the Preacher of righteousness as
he is called, 2. Pet. 2. 5. Noah and his little family, the remnant of the
earth, as the son of Syrach terms them. Let us with our families enter into
the aforesaid Arc, and although they consist more then of eighty and eight
souls, yea of infinite, they cannot fill this Arc, neither hinder one
another, as it happens in the bulwarks and fortresses of mortal men; but
let us be righteous Noah's: for how can we be else preserved? If we enter as
an impious Cham, perhaps we shall escape a temporal flood, but not the deluge
of Gods eternal wrath.

The cause moving Noah to enter, was the Commandment Gene. 7. 1. Enter, etc.
the same cause ought to move us to enter, it is the Commandment of the most
high, the Proclamation of the King of heaven, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me, etc.
And as in the time of the old world he ordained himself an Arc for Noah, so
he has himself prepared, appointed and ordained himself as an Arc and
refuge for the righteous Noah's.

The time when, was in the flood, Gene. 7. 7. So Noah entered, because of the
waters of the flood: Are not we in the flood? Psalm. 6. 9. 1.
Are not the waters entered even to our souls? And is it not therefore high
time to keep our selves within this Arc?

The end wherefore, (that he might be preserved, Genesis 6. 18, 19.) For the same
end let us enter beloved, to be preserved from a threefold deluge, from the
flood of iniquity wherewith our souls have been overwhelmed; from the deluge
of the Plague, that calling upon the name of the Lord, and seeking his pesence
the land may be healed, 2. Chron. 7. 14. Thirdly, from the deluge of Gods
eternal wrath. Follow therefore the obedience of Noah, Gene. 7. 6. who did
according unto all that the Lord commanded him, and was also remembered, Gene.
8. 1. Enter therefore O ye righteous souls, let your misery speak for
audience. The waves do now smite and toss your ship; and as the tempest
arose, Matthew. 8. when they were a sleep: So likewise this present tempest
wherewith we are tossed, did arise when we are a sleep, but arise, Matthew 8.
arise from the sleep of security, call unto Christ with the Disciples,
Master save us, or else we perish. Cast your eyes on high (as the Mariner in
the tempest) Ad stellam polarem, on the right North star Christ Jesus, who is
also the bright morning star, Apoc. 22. 16. And in the sea of these
afflictions, Quite you like men, 1. Cor. 16. 13.
and be strong, (it is the Apostles precept) begin you to the ores of the Spirit,
inuocations, intercessions to the living God, praying as the Apostle exhorts,
Ephe. 6. 18. With all manner of prayer and supplication in the Spirit, with all
perseverance. The arm of flesh is too weak to bear us out, and if our
strength were brass, it could not help us: These are my brethren, the only
ores which are able to row our ship through all the storms of the sea, (these
vessels of our bodies and souls I mean) and if the banks of the land do
fail us, that is temporal health, they will land us in the haven of eternal
felicity.

Noah, Ion. 4.
but also of Jonas Gourd. To enter therein, first Prophet speaks under his
vine, Mic. 4. 4.
and under his fig tree, none making us afraid; and perhaps, (what do I
add perhaps?) Without doubt many of us in this our prosperity have spoken
with David, Psalm. 30. 6.
I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved. Secondly, as Jonas Peter
was rejoiced to be upon the mountain, Matthew. 17.
saying, Master it is good to be here, let us make here three Tabernacles:
whereas he was but a stranger, and knew that there was not the permanent
City, Psalm. 119.
Heb. 13. 14. So although we know we are but strangers in this life, yet we
have said to our flesh, as Peter unto Christ, let us make here Tabernacles.
Jonas suddenly withered, and his exceeding joy was changed into sorrow: so our
joyful songs have been changed into lamentations, Lam. 1. 16.
and our pleasure has been quite dashed; the Lord has made us to say with
Jeremy, For these things I weep, and mine eye casts out water. He has
made others to say of thee, O London, as Jeremy of Jerusalem, how does the
City remain solitary that was full of people, she is a widow, she that was
great among the nations, her Priests sigh, her virgins are discomfited, and
she is in heaviness, Lam. 1. 1. And hereunto I may add that in the fifth
verse, it is for the multitude of her transgressions, for which her people is
now in diverse places scattered, living as it were in exile and banishment, and
sighing (as the Israelites did in Babel) when they remembered thee O London. But
the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, and he that had power over
the blessings, has also had power over the plagues, Apoc. 6. As Jonas little
thought of so speedy an alteration; so did we little expect such a sudden
change; but it was feared and also prophesied of many (as I my self have
heard) and behold the truth of their prophecy. Nullum violentem perpetuum.
Some have died through immoderate joy, as Diagoras of Rhodes, and others, and
we (I may say) have been sick through immoderate joy, and some dead. The
sons and daughters of England in this their exceeding joy, did little think
of this sorrow, as the sons and daughters of Job, when they were banqueting,
did not once dream of the wind that came from the wilderness and smote the
four corners of the house. Babylon which was called tender and delicate, and
the Lady of kingdoms, Ephe. 4. 7. which assumed to her self, I am, and there
is none else: I shall not sit a widow, nor know the loss of children; did not
imagine how near they were, that came with a contrary news (Thine end is
come, Iere. 51.) Neither London tender and delicate which has used the same
voice, did expect to be a widow for a time, and to see the loss of her
children by thousands. You the Edomites and Epicures of these days, ye that
have mocked your Prophets and watchmen, as they did, Ephe. 21. saying to them,
(ye speak of judgment) have ye not a time of sorrow and darkness, as ye
have had a time of light and delights?

most have pleasured him: So in the rising as it were of the City (which by
the death of our late Sovereign had been as it were laid down in the bed of
sorrow) and in the coming forth of a new Sun, whose beams were comfortable
to the whole land (and the Lord grant that he may long shine over us) even
then, when prosperity could not have pleasured the City, and all her
inhabitants, then the Gourd withered, and the worm of Gods judgment came. And
as Christ wept over Jerusalem in the midst of his triumph, when the people
cried, Blessed is the King that comes in the name of the Lord, Luke 19. 38.
when the multitudes did rejoice, and spread their clothes in the way: So the
Lord has given us cause to weep over the City, when we were almost in the
midst of our joys and triumphs, when every one was rejoicing, and made
preparations for the triumph, against the entire of him, of whom we may say, as
the Israelites of David, Psalm. 118. 26. Blessed be he that comes in the name
of the Lord. Let the conclusion of this point be, all thy judgments O Lord are
number and measure, thou knowed best the time when it is most convenient to
inflict them.

The means or the instrument (which is the fifth Jonas, and which he sent as
a messenger from heaven, to smite the Gourd, was first (a worm) sends but
one little contemptible worm to execute that business: So the Lord to beat
down the pride and immoderate joy of our City, the flourishing Gourd of our
prosperity, has not sent whole armies, devouring beasts, Earthquakes, fire or
brimstone from heaven, he sends only a pestilence, little Carbuncles, spots,
and tokens in our flesh, which seem to be nothing, or to have no force, and
yet suddenly they beat down the proudest and the strongest. Is It not strange
that a little botch or carbuncle has such admirable force? Well may they be
called Gods tokens, for thereby he shows his strength. Let this serve on the
one side, to make us to stand in awe of the mighty power of God, and on the
other side, adoring this his power, to humble our selves before his Majesty;
for how dare thou O son of Adam lift up thy self against that Lord, who
can cast thee down with a little carbuncle? Let not the pleasures of this life
make us secure, and sitting under the covert of them; let us not say, we shall
never be moved, for they are but Gourds, and the Lord has a worm of
judgment. And what is the freedom from the rod of God, our dancing to the
Tabert and Harp, but a Gourd for a time? I call to witness young men, ye
lusty gallants, Job. 12.
some of you have had your Gourd to rejoice in, Eccle. 11. the days of your
youth, the cheerfulness of your hearts, the lusts of your own eyes; but the
Lords worm, the pestilence, has smitten down some of you. Rich men, some of
you, have had your Gourd, your purple and fine linen your delicious fare every
day, Luke 16. But this is withered with your selves, and some of you lie in the
grave. The worm then which the Lord had prepared for this year, to change our
joy into sorrow, is as now experience teaches, the Pestilence, the King of
heavens Pursiphant; and therefore we may cry with the Angels, Apoc. 14. With
a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his
judgment is come. The second Jonas, the principal part of the body, wherein
is the government of the whole creature: the seat of the mind, from whence
the senses and neerenesse take their beginning. So the Lord has commanded his
Angel to infect the air, to hunt and annoy us, both good creatures, erected to
another end, to preserve and comfort us, and yet behold he has commanded them
to beat the very head, the principal part of the body of his kingdom, our
City I mean beloved, the seat and imperial Chamber of the Realm, from
whence the other members receive their maintenance, which redoundeth to the
danger of the whole body, for which the members and the daughters have smarted,
and yet do sigh for; which argues that our sins make the good creatures of
God to become our enemies. Seeing therefore the Lord has smitten you that are
the head, let not the effects which it wrought in Jonas, be seen in you.
First, faint not, although the 1. Cor. 15. 58. And I would not brethren have
you ignorant, concerning them that are a sleep, that ye sorrow not even as
they which have no hope, 1. These. 4. 13. Be not ashamed of the testimony of
our Lord, 2. Tim. 1. 8. but suffer as good soldiers of Christ, 2. Tim. 2. 3.
The Lord has not cast thee down without reuocation of his fact, he afflicts
thee not in his fury, but in his mercy, to do thee greater honor and favor
in the time to come, if this in judgment move thee. Let this heat inflame
your hearts with the fire of Gods love, that the Lord say not of us, Amos 4. I
have smitten you with blasting and burning, and you returned not. Secondly, be
not angry and impatient, wish not desperately to die, grudge not, nor repine
at the Lord, but let your patient mind be known unto all men, Phil. 4. 5. to
whom do ye rather owe the quietness and subjection of your spirits, then
unto him, who gives both his benefits unto us, to teach how easily he can
bestow them, and takes them away, that we may know how little we deserve
them: with Jonas out of the waters which did compass him, call rather upon the
name of the Lord, follow him not in his anger, but in his prayer. Romans 15. 15.
I have brethren (to use the Apostles words) somewhat boldly after a sort
written unto you, as one that puts you in remembrance thereof, through the
grace which is given me of God: but yet as Paul speaks, 2. Cor. 1 13.
We write none other things unto you, then that ye read, or else that ye
acknowledge. For this I say not by commandment, 2. Cor. 8. 8. But this say we
unto you by the word of the Lord, 1. These. 4. 15. you have already entered this
Arc, for we have heard of your fasting, prayer, and liberality to the poor,
how that ye have charged them that are rich in the world to do good, and to
be ready to distribute, 1. Tim. 6. 17, 18. And therefore, although we are
absent in the flesh, yet are we with you in the spirit, rejoicing and beholding
(it is the Apostles saying) your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ,
waiting for his appearing, 1. Cor. 1. 7. So continue in the Lord, Col. 2. 4.
Phi. 4. 1. And be not weary in well doing, 2. These. 3. 13. And I am persuaded
of this same thing, that he that has begun this good work in you, will
perform it, Phil. 1. 6. Follow the zeal of Abraham in his prayer for Sodom;
Gene. 18.
the longer he talked with God, the more he gained. And as Abraham although he
had begun to speak once, twice, and thrice unto the Lord, yet he continued:
Behold I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and am but dust and ashes, let not
my Lord be angry and I will speak again: So although ye have begun to
speak unto the Lord for London, that the fire might be quenched (ye that may
speak with Abraham, we are but dust and ashes) yet speak again, pray
continually, Romans 12. For the Lord will not be angry, as he was not angry
with Abraham's instant request, but as he gave him a patient ear and a gracious
answer, Ver. 32. so the same God will hear our prayers. It pleases the ears
of his Majesty to be long entreated; he that has twice and tentimes together
ingeminated the riches of his mercy, Exodus 34. The Lord, the Lord is
merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness and truth,
reserving mercy for thousands, forgetting iniquity and sin: what did he
mean thereby, but that twice and tentimes together we should cry for his
mercy. And as Abraham by his continuance, and ingeminating prayer, brought the
Lord from fifty to forty five: from forty five to forty: from forty to
thirty: from thirty to twenty: and lastly from twenty to ten: So continue
and ingeminate your prayer, endeavor by your continuance to diminish the
number, and to bring it from thirty four hundredth to thirty: from thirty to
two hundredth: from twenty to ten: from ten hundredth to ten persons: and yet
not then cease to speak unto the Lords as Abraham did: and what shall not your
prayer obtain? I may speak unto you that which Zedekias said to the Princes
of his land; The King can deny you nothing. Iere. 38. 5.
So the King of heaven will deny you nothing. Zedekias spoke it in a servile
and popular affection that he bare to the Princes of his land, but God
speaks it out of the abundance and riches of his mercy. And therefore O
Lord let thy mercy triumph against justice, that both great and small, the
infant and dumb beast, may sing of thy loving kindness. With this wish I will
end beseeching brethren for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the spirit, that ye would strive with us by prayers to God, Romans 15. 13.
Praying also for us, Col. 4. 3. Finally beloved, 2. Cor. 13. 11.
fare ye well (it is the Apostles farewell to the Corinthians) be of good
comfort and of one mind: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the coming of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.

Written at Springfield, the 28. of September, 1603. Your wel-wisher in the
Lord, James Godskal the younger.

THE ARC OF NOAH.
Collected out of the 18. Chapter of the Proverbs, verse 10. The name of the
Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs unto it, and is preserved.
Confirmed by the practice of King David, 1. Chron. Chap. 21. ver. 17. and 26.
And he called upon the Lord, and he answered him by fire from heaven.
THe whole College of the bodily Physicians, and the prince of them, that wise
and learned Galen, prescribe for the time of Plague, that of all remedies, to
prevent the contagion, the best is, to fly and shun the infected and
corrupted air, and to depart unto a wholesome and purer air: and that with
these three rules, Cito, long, trade. Depart speedily, far off, and return
slowly. As this is physically prescribed, so it is diligently practiced, as
daily experience teaches, of all sorts of men, yea of the Physicians
themselves; I will not contradict the prescription of the Physician, nor
disprooue the diligence of the sons of men, if they use departure lawfully,
therein not sinning, (Contra patriam, charitatem, vecationem,) against their
Country, their calling, and Christian charity. But because, by the corruption
of our nature, we suffer our selves as with maine sail to be carried away from
the Creator to the creature; fixing all our senses more upon the aeriall
corruption, then upon the inward cause of the contagion, the rottenness of our
bones, which we carry within our selves, and are more careful to depart into
the Country then unto the Lord; as if by the swiftness of our feet we could
out-runne him who rides upon the wings of the Cherubims, Psalm. 10. 4.
which causes that the Lord has a Pursiphant, which he sends to arrest
some in the pure air, (namely the Plague it self) which has arrested some in
the Country, as the experience of this year shows unto us all, verifying
the threatening of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 28. 22. This is the reason why the whole
College of the spiritual Physician of our souls have prescribed for the time
of Plague, a better flight and departure, then that which is prescribed by
Galen and the rest; namely (to the name of Jehovah) by the feet of prayer,
mentioned and storied by that wise Solomon in the words prefixed. And as it is
prescribed, so it has been practiced of the Saints of God: among the rest, of
King David in the time of Plague, as the second place adjoining unto the first
does witness. Of this place then, which is the right Arc, and the little
Zoar, whereunto our first care ought to be in the time of plague to depart,
and which is also the trusty friend and servant to aid the sick, and the
exercise for them that are departed, to spend the time till they return, give
me leave Christian Readers to discourse out of the harmony of these two places
here prefixed.

To pray well says Chrysostom, is an excellent art, which does adorn a
Christian, but it is not sufficient to know that we must pray, but also in what
manner: and therefore that we might the better be instructed in the going to
this place, and become skillful in this art, I will branch the description of
this place into these three several parts, which will store us with a cluster
of singular meditations.

The first is, the name of the place, it is (the name of the Lord.) The second
is, the quality, condition, property, and the safenesse of it, expressed in
two things: First, because it is (a strong tower): secondly, by the success of
those that run unto it (and is exalted) or delivered: which is the thing
which they receive that run to it.

The third thing is, what manner of persons they must be that fly to it, and
what househould stuff they must carry thither with them to be received, noted
in these words (the rightious runs unto it.) As for the place, let me
observe (...) things. For as in the time of plague, for our departure, first it
is necessary, that we know the name of the place whereunto we go: secondly,
that we have feet to bear and carry us thither: thirdly, that we have a
direction that we might not err: fourthly, that we have some right and
interest there, or some acquaintance, that we may be received. So likewise
these four things are necessary to be known of us, in our spiritual
departure.

Touching the name of the place whereunto David fled in The name of the place.
as it has diverse names, so in this place it is called the name of Jehovah.
Here I pertermit the five several significations of the name of the Lord used
in the book of God, taking it in this place, first for the Lord himself:
secondly, for his attributes by which he does manifest himself. Of which
Moses, Number 14. brings in a perfect catalogue: and the Lord has delivered
this his name by proclamation, Exo. 34. 5. 6. The Lord, the Lord, strong,
merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, etc.
God then the almighty, eternal, immortal invisible Lord, the judge of the
world, Psalm 94. 2. God, merciful and gracious, the supreme physician of our
souls, who heals all our iniquities, Psalm. 103. God to whom power belongs,
and whose is salvation alone, Psalm. 62. is the place it self whereunto David,
and we ought to fly from the contagion. The name of a place if it be known,
famous and renowned, has often much force to persuade us rather to go unto
such a place, then unto such or such: surely there was never name of place more
worthy to go unto, then the name of Jehovah. O ye righteous souls that thirst
by reason of the heat of the plague upon your beds, fly unto this place, to
the waters of comfort: here are wels enough to be drawn at: this is the name
which God has proclaimed to the world, and whereby he would be known to men,
that if ever they come to him, they may speak their minds in the confidence
and trust of this amiable name. Esteem it not strange beloved, that the name
of a place is attributed to the Lord: for that he is a place of refuge,
(running) here used by king Solomon. As for the Lord he does attribute unto
himself this name by the pen of the holy Ghost, calling himself a secret
place, psalm 91. 1. a throne of grace, Hebr. 4. 16. a refuge psalm. 9. 9. a
fortress, psalm. 18. 2. a David the father in diverse places, psalm. 18. 2. The
Lord is my fortress and my refuge: and in the 32. 7. Thou art my secret place*
and compas^est me about with joyful deliverance: and so Psalm 94. 22. This is
also the confession of the son in this place: and of all the Saints of God,
unto whose confessions I refer you, as they are set down (runs) implies
as much, which gives me entrance to the second point, opening unto us the
feet which we need to go unto this place, the which if ye are desirous to
know, they are two in number (Faith and Prayer). The feet to carry us thither.
Faith the first, for if by faith we stand. 2. Cor. 1. 24. by faith we may also
go to the lord who is faithful. Now how could we go unto him by the feet of
prayer, if we did not, believe in him? Rom 10. 14. The second, is prayer, a
spiritual leg to bear us thither, noted by Solomon, making mention of
running: by Jonas, speaking of coming. John. 2. ver. 7. And my prayer come
unto thee in thine holy temple By the Apostle, when he speaks of going, let
us therefore go unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16. Lastly, by the holy
Ghost, using this word Climbing. Apoc. 8. 4. Both the name of the place which
is appointed for us to go unto, and the spiritual legs which the Lord has
given us to carry us thither, do preach unto the sons of men the admirable
goodness and mercy of the Lord toward them. In this world we are as pilgrims,
Psalm. 119. having here no continuing City, Heb 13. 14 and while we are at home
in the body, we are absent from the Lord, 2. Cor. 5. 6. In which pilgrimage
Many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34. O the great goodness of the
Lord then, that he has given us feet to come unto him, and made himself a
place of refuge for us in all our troubles! which goodness is comfortable unto
the faithful: for as it is a comfort unto the pilgrim, shepherd, or soldier,
to have in the heat of the day a place of refuge to refresh their wearied
members: So likewise what a comfort is it for you O afflicted souls in the
heat of your afflictions, to have the name of Jehovah for a sacred Sanctuary!
the Lord is not like unto the princes of the earth, who desire not to be
molested with the requests of their distressed subjects. It is a joy to the
wearied student, that he may sometime come home to his fathers house and
recreate himself: Into this world the Lord has sent us as in an University,
which although it is far off from our fathers house, yet the Lord has given
us spiritual feet, by which in a moment we can ascend unto our fathers house,
and recreate there our wearied spirits. This world is a waste desert, if we
need any thing, here are the legs by which speedily we may run to this
place, and provide our selves. If the Lord has cast us down upon our beds,
and that we can not use the feet of our bodies, behold, he has given us
other feet, to use in stead of these. King Ezekias visited with the plague,
could not use the feet of the flesh, but with the feet of the spirit, went
unto this place, known unto him by the name of Jehovah. Jonas is locked up in
a prison, in the belly of the Whale, (the Lords prison) and can not stir
himself, and yet by the virtue of these feet, out of the depth, he ascends
to the holy temple of Jehovah.

Now that these feet may be able to bear us thither, The hose to put on.
and that they may not fail us in our voyage, they must put on the hose of
faith: and as the Apostle speaks, our feet must be shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace. And as the feet to that Image of Daniel were part of
iron, Ephe. 6. 15.
part of clay, which the Prophet expounds partly strong, partly weak or
broken: Dan. 2. 42.
So the feet of our prayers are, according to the hosen wherewith they are
covered; if they put on fear and distrustfulnesse, they will be shiuering and
sinking downward, of clay, weak, and impotent; if they put on faith and
confidence in the mercies of God, they will be feet of iron, strong, stable
and firm, keeping us upright, and will carry us to the very throne of grace.

Further, A direction to know the way.
as they that depart into the Country, if they know not the way to the place
whereunto they go, must have a guide, or a direction, because they should not
err; So in the going to this place, because there are so many false guides and
directions, the Lord himself has given us a card of direction to lead us
thereunto, the witness of his holy word, written and sealed, that can never
deceive us. As the fiery pillar in the desert, showed he way unto the
Israelites: So this word of the Lord is a fiery pillar unto us in the dark
desert of this world, to show us the way to that heavenly Canaan; it is the
lantern unto our feet, and a light to our paths, Psalm. 105. and therefore,
according to the direction of our Savior, Luke 12. 35.
Let our loins be girded, and let us bear in our hands this shining light.

Fourthly, 4. The right or interest which the faithful have to this place.
to go to this place, it is necessary to know what right or interest we have
in it. In the places whereunto men betake their selves in the term of plague,
either they have some right or interest there, because they are their own, or
because they have some friends or acquaintance there that will receive them; or
lastly, because they have either hired or purchased a house. So likewise unto
the name of Jehovah, the place where we ought to go in the time of plague, as
also David, 1. Chron. 21. 17. in his prayer, shows upon what right and
encouragement in the time of plague he went to this place, (O Lord my God I
beseech thee, etc.) it was then, because the Lord was his God; he had a
particular feeling of the love of God toward him, and knew him to be his God
for he had had some experience of deliverance. The reason why we must have
this right, is because being infected with the plague of sin, we should not
be received. In the Country, they will not receive those that are infected
with the plague: Neither can they also, in whose souls the plague of sin
does reign, be admitted to this place, and therefore the Lord has given us
Christ the righteous, to cover our unrighteousness, that thus as pure and
clean we might come unto him. I know by mine own experience, that in the
Country this year, they would not admit some that came from the City,
unless they had put on new apparel. To come unto that heavenly Jerusalem by
the feet of prayer, we cannot be admitted, Ephe. 4. 24.
except we put off the old man, and put on the new man which is created in
righteousness, and therefore, that we should not be hindered to go thither,
He has put on us, the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13. 14. that being adorned with
his righteousness and holiness, as Jacob was with the garment of his brother
Esau, We might with confidence approach to the throne of grace, Heb. 4. It is
only then in the name of Christ that we must go to the name of Jehovah, Ioh.
14. 14. Ioh. 5. 7. Mat. 21. 22. Ioh. 16. 14. 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. In his
name, the poor Lazarus has as much right to go unto it, as King Solomon: the
infected as the sound: the learned as the unlearned: for Christ prays for
them all: and as Augustine speaks, Christ prays with us all as our brother;
he prays in us all as our head, he is prayed unto by us all, as our Lord,
but he prays for us all, as our high Priest. Let then the Romanists in the
time of plague, run unto the name of Jehovah, in the name of Saint Sebastian;
Alas, they shall not be admitted: for Christ alone, as Ambrose speaks, is the
eye wherewith we see the father, the hand to offer up our prayers, and the
mouth to speak unto him. But as for us, with David let us go unto him by
force of this right, saying with him, O Lord our God, we beseech thee, etc.

Having understood the name of the place, The practice* of King David*
with other circumstances, let us now examine the practice of King David; unto
this place, with these feet, by the same right, following the true direction,
he runned in the time of the plague with his family, the Elders of Israel. For
he fled not to his Castle, neither departed he out of Iewrie, nor transported
his family into another place, but as it is storied, 1. Chron. 21. 26. (He
called upon the Lord.) Here is a foundation whereupon some prodigal of their
lives, uncharitable to others, proud in their conceits, build the
unlawfulness of departing out of the contagious places in the time of plague,
condemning it by the example of King David in general, Objection.
without any exception, in all manner of persons; which their uncharitable
conceit I will not here refute, I refer the Reader to that learned Treatise
of that reverend father* Theodorus Beza, written touching this matter, wherein
he learnedly, soundly and religiously refuteth their gross opinion; only let
me destroy their building which they erect upon the example of King David.
Answer.
Four particulars can hinder them to Dan to Beershebah, which left him no
place free to go unto: for whither should he fly seeing that the pestilence
was spread all over the land: 2. Sam. 24. David, that he was ready by his own
death to redeem the public calamity, praying unto the Lord, 1. Chro. 21. 17.
O Lord my God I beseech thee, let thine hand be on me, and on my fathers
house, and not on thy people for their destruction. 1. Chron. 21. 15. the Lord
repenting of the evil, when the Angel came to Jerusalem: these four
particulars are able to cast down their building, and to disprooue their
consequence: David fled not, Ergo, it is unlawful for any man to depart: the
true consequence, if we would argue out of this place, might be this: David and
the Elders departed not: Ergo, let not Magistrate forsake his City, nor the
Minister his flock. Having plucked out the weeds and the thistles, let us as
the good husbandman sow the good seed. As this then proves not the
unlawfulness of departure; so on the other side, it does commend unto us king
David's praying, The true use of the example
and his spiritual departure, teaching us that in the time of plague, our first
and principal care ought to be, as well before our departure, as in our
departure if we are so minded, (for I urge no necessity of it) to fly and
run by the feet of faith and prayer to the name of the Lord, which being
forgotten, omitted, or negligently practiced, makes our departure unlawful.
Imitate the King then O ye righteous souls in this tempest of the plague, let
your souls take (the wings of a Dove) the motion and agility of the spirit of
God, and let them fly by the strength of their prayers to the bosom of Gods
mercies where they shall be at rest. David in this his going to the name of
the Lord, has showen and manifested four things: His Conscience, Humility,
Memory, Wisdom. His Conscience, that it was good: his Humility great: his
Memory holy: his Wisdom right.

Touching the first, the spirit of prayer is a sign of a Tertullian speaks,
Lib. de cast. Oration de conscientia procedit, si conscientia erubescat,
erubescet oration. Prayer does proceed from the Conscience: if the Conscience
blush, prayer will also be ashamed. O it is an excellent thing that we can
give our selves to this holy exercise: let one have riches, honor, pleasures,
let him be adored as a little god, if he have not the spirit of prayer to
push him forward with David, in the midst of his felicity, he is most
miserable.

Secondly, his misery and humility, for a King is become (I beseech thee O
Lord) Lo here, O proud son of Adam, of thy self thou have nothing, but like
a poor suppliant beggar thou are constrained to go before the gate of that
right God, as well the king that sits upon his throne, as poor Laxarus that
siteth before the door of the rich man. Psalm. 50. Secondly the name of him,
whom we call upon, that it is Iehouoh, Lord, our God, a God not in show, but in
substance and performance: a strong God, a tower of defense, Psalm. 9. 10.
Thirdly what he is by nature, how sweet and amiable, how rich in Ephe. 2.
Fourthly, what he is by promise, how faithful 2. Tim. 1. 3. Lastly what he is
by covenant, made unto Abraham's seed, not in the blood of bulls, but in the
blood of the seed of Abraham. Further, David has shown his wisdom, and that
in the choice of the place, taking his mark aright, and directing his petition
to the true and proper periode. Imitate the wisdom of king David in his
choice, he that goes to a place, runs aright and wisely, i^ he be wise, and
not by crooked and erroneous ways: David shows us the right way, for to what
place should we go but to this, when our sorrows are multiplied? shall we
follow the ways of the wicked, and say with them, Malac. 3. It is in vain,
that I have served him, and what profit is it, that I have kept his
Commandments? Or shall we run upon the way of impatience, adding grief to
grief, living the life of Caine, or dying the death of Judas, drowning our
souls in a gulf of desperation? Shall we spend the time in bannings,
execrations, cursing the day and night, the earth that bears us, the air
that inspireth us? Not so O Christian souls, call upon the name of the Lord
with David, there was never name so worthy to be called upon, in heaven or
earth, so mighty for deliverance, so sure for protection, so gainefull for
success, so compendious to cut off unnecessary labors as the name of Jehovah.

Having understood the Conscience, The causes to move us to go to this place.
Humility, Memory, David, let me open to you the reasons to move and
persuade us to go to this place. Five things move the sons of men in the
time of plague to depart from contagious places, unto a purer air. First the
counsel of the Physicians. Secondly, the practice of others. Thirdly, the
danger or peril which they are like to fall in. Fourthly, desire of health and
life. Fifthly, the experience of success. Let the same be motives unto us in
this infection, to persuade us to run speedily unto this Arc of Noah. First,
it Psalm. 50. 15. King David's Physician; by God the son, who prescribing the
remedies which men ought to use in the last days, in which the Trinity of
punishments, famine, wars, and pestilence should reign, gives this
counsel, Luke 21. 36. Watch and pray continually; by Prophets, Apostles, and
wise men, Iam. 5. 13. Eccle. 38. 9. and 17, 23. Secondly, the practice of the
spiritual Physicians, as time of plague, has much force to make us hasten our
departure; how much more ought the practice of the spiritual physicians spur
us forward upon our spiritual voyage. (In nobis, circa nos, contra nos) In us,
round about us, against us. In us, the plague of sin: round about us, the
fire of the present plague: against us, Satan who seeks to make us curse the
Lord, and the fire of Gods wrath and anger: To avoid this threefold danger,
run to the Arc and to this blessed Zoar. The Heb. 4. 16. Math. 9. 20.
Why went that woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years
unto Christ, but that she might receive her health: Verse. 12. The sickness of
the plague is an issue of blood, which being once opened, will ever run, and
keep a course if it be not stanched by the power and mercy of God: which
mercy is only obtained, by going unto his sacred name: to obtain this double
health, David went unto this place, 1. Chron. 21. that the plague of his soul
might be healed, and the bodily plague be removed. If we are as it were dead
for sorrow, prayer will revive us, for it is Vita animae, the life of the
soul: and as Chrysostom terms it, Est anima ipsius animae. It is the soul
of the soul. If we go into the Country which cannot save us; how much more
ought we to fly to this name, which has the power to do it: this his power,
being acompanied with mercy and kindness, for thou O Lord, art good and
gracious, and of Psalm. 86. Fifthly, experience of good success, is the last
motive, they which have fled to this place, have not been stopped by the way,
but have had good speed. Go unto King Eezekias, Job, David, and the rest, and
they will preach unto you by experience, the experience

His power, I have heard it that power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62, 11. There
was never affliction or sore so great, but the hand of that Physician has
been able to master it, the least finger of his right hand being of more
puissance, then the whole arm of flesh.

His will and promise, Psalm 91. 1. Joel 2. 32. Iam. 5. 15. Eccle. 31. 9. Matthew.
77. Ioh. 14. 13. The King of heaven is not like unto the Princes of the earth,
or unto that Philip of Macedon, who answered unto the widow coming in his
Court to him, to be heard, I am not at leisure, (unto which also she answered
justly, then be not a King any longer) for seeing that he has promised it, he
is also willing, his promise being signed with the finger of the holy Ghost,
and sealed with the blood of his beloved and anointed. Neither is he like unto
him, Matthew. 7. who answered, trouble me not, my doors are shut; the gate of
heaven is always open for us. God reuoketh not his promise as King Solomon, 1.
Reg. 2. 20. 21. 23. Ask my mother, for I will not say thee nay; and yet behold
how this time is changed, Adoniah has spoken this word against his own life;
of the Lords promise we need not doubt, but with David boldly we may speak,
Psalm. 86. 7. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will
hear me.

Thirdly, His goodness, mercy, and liberality, which is so great that he
gives meat to the young ravens which call upon him, Psalm. 147. 9. Doubt not
then, but that he will hear the supplications of men, whom he has made a
little lower then the Angels, to crown them with glory above other creatures,
Psalm. 8. 5* 6. Let therefore, says Augustine, thy prayer ascend, and Gods
mercy will descend; shall we distrust his goodness, who is rich to all that
call upon him? Romans 10. 12. Or shall we suspect his bountifulness, which
powers out plentifully his blessings upon all flesh? Romans 8. 32. And although
we have offended him, yet our offenses will not stop his mercies. Men, when
they have done any good turn to any, if they be never so little offended,
they cast men in the teeth with the benefits they have done them, and vpbraide
them with the good turns they have showed; wherefore men are loath to make
request to such for any thing: If we go unto the Lord, we shall not meet with
one that is of such a disposition and nature: Iam. 1. 5.
he, as the Apostle speaks, reproacheth no man; nor keeps his anger for
ever, Psalm 103* 9. The willingness, mercy, and goodness of the Prince to
have us, makes us also willing to go to him; who more willing, then he that
is our Father, our Savior, then he that has suffered for us, scoffings,
spittings, bands, stripes, and death it self? Never lap of the mother has
been so open to her babes, as the bowels of Gods compassions are open to the
righteous. Harken to this, ye faint spirits, be strengthened ye weak hands
and feeble knees, receive this comfort, that he has delivered, he does
deliver, he yet will and can deliver. I end this point with the 13. 14* and
15. verses of the 10. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans: wherein behold a
singular and compendious gradation. As they that would come to King Solomon
sitting upon his throne, were feign to run up six stairs (for his throne
was mounted unto by six stairs) so the perfection and consummation of man
going to the throne of the true Solomon Jesus Christ ascends and arises by
six degrees: the highest and the happiest stairs being, inuocating and
saving, prayer and deliverance. These are then the five reasons, by which wise
Christians ought to be guided. I imitate King David, only resorting to the
wings of the Lords favor. And herein we should be wise, if we level our
hearts and affections at the very right center and mark of prayer (which is
the name of Jehovah alone) and the period or scope in whom our requests must
end.

But alas, Five sorts of men erring in the going to this place.
there are five sorts of men, which make choice of other places, rejecting the
wisdom of David, the counsel of the spiritual Physicians, and the practice
of the Saints of God, going a crooked, a circular, and endless way, not
toward the mark, nor with a right foot as the Apostle Gal. 2. The first
kind, fly first to the help of mortal man, and with Asa make speed to the
bodily Physician, to the confections of Art, or to the purer air, not once
mindful of this place; but when all helps fail them, and that the Lord
sends his Sergiant and heavenly Pursiphant to arrest them, then they return
to run to this place. What name shall we give you (O ye of little faith)
but the name of weak Christians? Put not your trust in the son of man, for
there is no help in him, Psalm. 146. There is a second Jehovah, yea denying
that there ever has been, or is yet at this present, such a place to be
found, whereunto the righteous is preserved, such as David describes in the
10. Psalm, 3. 4. Which seek not God, but contemn him, and think they shall
never be moved. O ye mere Atheists, what name deserve you, but that name,
which the Lord himself gives you, Psalm. 14. 1. the name of fools. If Cain
has been rejected, because he offered an unworthy sacrifice, what deserve
they that offer none at all? The third sort run to a place, Saul, a Nero, a
Julian: Return, return, O ye wretched and bewitched sons of men, with the
name of devilish idolaters. The fourth sort, seeks to dwell under the
protection and assurance Bernard writes on the 91. Psalm, are ill lodged and
have a poor Tabernacle, the devil has soon blown that away. The last sort,
are the superstitious Papists, who in the time of Sebastian, for as every
sickness and disease has his Apothecarie and Physician among them: So the
plague has Saint Sebastian, unto whom with their families they run to be
preserved. That execrable Psalter of the Virgin Marie, compiled by them,
makes her to be this secret place whereunto we ought to run: the prayer of
David which he made being visited with the plague, Psalm. 38. is abused in this
manner. O Lady rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath:
The 91. Psalm is in like manner abused, Who so dwells in the secret of the
blessed Virgin, etc. But O ye blind seducers of souls, it may be first a
challenge unto you all, that neither David, Job or Ezechias visited with the
plague went to Cherub or Seraphin, Gabriel or Raphael, Abraham or Moses: whom
have I in heaven but thee, says David: he says not, that he had a Moses or a
Samuel: Iere. 2. In the famine of Samaria, 2. Reg. 6. a woman crying to the
King, help me O King, he answered, seeing the Lord does not succor thee,
how should I help thee? Concluding secondly, that if the Lord withdraw his
helping hand, it lies not in the power of mortal man to help. So we may
answer the Papists crying in the time of plague to their Sebastian, help and
aid us Saint Sebastian. If it lies not in the power of mortal men that are
living with us to help, how much less can they that are dead? And far
less, one that perhaps David, Psalm. 115. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, etc.
they that refused a far smaller offer upon the earth, Apoc. 22. 9.
the only bowing of the knee unto them (See thou do it not) will be much
more discontented, to see the knees of the heart to stoop to them for the
ceasing of the plague: for although an Angel smote seventy thousand in the
time of David, yet he was but the instrument, God only the agent, and
therefore he only to be prayed unto. If the Papists reply that they entreat
only Saint Sebastian to speak unto God for them; Objection.
the answer is, that God needs not a Sebastian, nor any Saint so ever, to be
his Master of requests: this is a service not unmeet for the governors of
the earth, Answer.
the Lord is not like unto earthly Princes, unto the which may be said, that
which Iethro said, Exodus 18. to Moses, the things is too heavy for thee, thou
art not able to do it thy self alone: for the Almighty is able to do it
alone, neither is there any defect in his hearing, whose ears are open to the
prayers of the poor. Let us therefore hold Christ Jesus alone for the Master
of requests, it is he only that can present our requests which we make unto
the Lord for the ceasing of the plague: let others run where they will, to
sticks and stones from the name of the Lord: I do you no injury to impute
this to you, for as Hillarie writet upon the first Psalm, It is as great an
offense to make a new, as to deny the true God. The Lord annoint your eyes
with his eye-sal^^, that ye may return to fly to the name of Jehovah. As for
us, we will follow the holy Canon, and leave the broad way, whose end is
destruction, saying with David, Psalm. 11. 1. In the Lord put I my trust, Matthew.
7.
how say ye then to my soul, fly to your mountain as a bird. I end the
first branch of this discourse with that holy Epiphoneme of King David, Psalm.
146 5. Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is
in the Lord his God.

After the name of the place, The second part, the properties of the place.
and other circumstances, there follows in the two places, the condition,
properties, quality and safenesse of the place whereunto we must run in the
time of the plague. The sons of men in the time of infection, before their
departure, have a special regard of the place where they will go, of the
situation, nature, and such like, and being led by the prescription of the
Physician: Secondly, by their own mind, they make choice commonly of a place
in which they perceive these seven properties following: and although Solomon
here makes mention but of one, namely of a safe place, yet give me leave to
discourse of the rest.

First, they go where there is a good, wholesome and pure air, 1. A pure
place.
not subject to stinking euaporations, and it is the prescription of the
physicians, that we should go unto places where the air is not corrupted,
far from the infection. David fled to such a place, for such is the name of
Jehovah, a pure place, far from the corruptions of this world, for he is a
pure, and incorruptible God, in whom there is no infection of sin: the Lord,
holy, holy, holy, not admitting those in whose mortal bodies the plague of
sin does reign: to pray then and to repent, is to return and go to a
wholesome light, Eccle. 17. 24. The places whereunto the sons of men fly,
although they are for a time uncorrupted, yet they are not warranted still so
to remain, diverse alterations by sundry means may befall, as by the resort
of persons infected, and such like: but the name of Jehovah, this place of
refuge, shall never be altered, for he is the immutable and unchangeable God,
and in the gates of that City no unclean person shall enter, Apoc. 22. 14, 15.

Secondly, 2. A pleasant place.
men make choice of a pleasant and delectable place, both for their bodies and
souls, where there is good company to recreate themselves in their sorrow and
exile, food and necessaries for their bodies, further by the river side, or
where there is good water: lastly, where they may also have food for their
souls, the word of God Preached. This place of refuge, the name of Jehovah, is
a pleasant and delectable place, where can thou better recreate thy self,
then by thy Father and brother Jesus Christ in this thy exile and misery?
Comfortable is the bosom of the mother to the young infant, but more
comfortable is the name of the Lord to the righteous which are called little
babes by the Apostle. Paul makes mention in his voyage toward Rome, of a
certain place which was called (The fair havens) Act. 27. this place of
refuge better deserves this name, let us go thither, for it is a harbor and
rode for those which are tossed in the sea and deluge of the Pestilence: happy
is the soul that landeth at these havens. If we desire water, there is the
fountain of life: Iere. 2. the water of grace, Psalm. 51. If we desire the
word; there is the word it self Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1. the truth, Ioh. 14. There
is the best, the first, the ancientest Preacher, God himself that preached in
Paradise.

Thirdly, 3. A safe place.
in our choice we seek out a safe place, whither we may go without danger,
and where we may abide safe, and dwell without danger. The name of Jehovah is
a safe harbor, the secret place and shadow of the most high, Psalm. 91. 1.
under whose wings we shall abide safe and harmless. A strong t^wre, Prou. 18.
10. A secret place, Psalm. 32. 7. A rock and fortress, Psalm. 18. which is
invincible. Such are not the fortresses of mortal men, which they are
constrained to render up, being driven thereunto either by famine, or force, as
Seba in the time of David hereof is a witness. Secondly, the Lord of the
soil, which inhabiteth Jehovah: the Almighty, Psalm. 91. 1. the strong and
invincible God, who will and is able to preserve us. Thirdly, it is proved by
the success of those who run Solomon) which David acknowledges, Psalm 32. 7.
and is confirmed by the success of David's prayer, 2. Sam 24. 25. and the
plague ceased from Israel. Comfortable is the saying of David, Psalm. 91* 3. 15,
16. in which, six things prove the happy success of the righteous that
runs unto it. First, Gods ready answer: Secondly, his presence: Thirdly,
his deliverance: Fourthly, his advancement to honor: Fifthly, length of days:
Sixthly, fruition of salvation: O the excellent riches, pleasures, and joys
which the righteous there shall enjoy. As Lot there sled unto little Zoar to
be preserved from the fire of Sodom: Gene. 18.
So let us fly to the name of Jehovah, to be safe from the fire of the plague.
The earthly places whereunto men run, do want this property: they are not
warranted to be safe there, either from danger or from the plague, and the
experience of this year does declare it unto us all. Some have returned, and
some have died there, but as for the name of Jehovah, thy soul is certain to
be preserved, if thither she takes her recourse; and as they only escaped
the flood, that entered into the Arc of Noah: So likewise, they that enter into
this incorruptible and immortal Arc, shall only be safegarded from the
deluge of afflictions. The Dove of Noah at her first flight from the Arc,
although she mounted aloft, and fetched many retires, yet she could find no
resting place, until she returned again to the Arc: So the poor soul may
fly where she will, but yet she shall not have any sure footing to rest,
except she return to the heavenly Arc: let us therefore be wise as
Serpents, and simple as Doves, for as they being persecuted, fly unto the
rocks; so let us in our calamities take our recourse to the rock of David,
Psalm. 18. 2. never have there been holes in the rocks so open for the doves,
as the name of Jehovah for the righteous souls. There are two renowned places
mentioned by Pliny, Locris, and Crotone, where the plague was never, as he
writes lib 1. cap. 96. and without doubt many resorted thither: but although
we should fly at this day to Locris and Crotone, if we carry within us the
plague of sin, the inward cause of the bodily contagion, we have no warrant
to be safegarded. But me thinks I hear a controversy: Objection.
Many righteous have fled to the name of the Lord, and yet have not been safe
from the deluge of the pestilence, or from the snare of the hunter: but
thousands, and thousands are fallen, yea some of the chosen of Israel. The
answer is, that they have first obtained, either that which they prayed for;
Answer.
secondly, or that which is better; or thirdly, that which is sufficient And
the Lord hears us always, although always he grants not our petition:
this seems a Paradoxe, and yet the truth thereof is manifest: for in steed
of that we asked, he gives us a better thing, and a better place: thou ask
the earth, says Augustine, and the Lord gives thee heaven: temporal life,
and he gives thee the eternal. The Surgion that saweth off the arm or leg
of the patient, who cries for impatience and apprehension; hears him, Non
secundum voluntatem sed sanitatem, not according to his will, but according to
his health: and so the Lord deals with his patients.

Fourthly, A place where they have friends.
to proceed, men make choice of places where they have their friends: the
children resort to their parents, the parents to their children, brethren to
their brethren, and one friend to another. The name of the Lord is a place of
refuge where we have our best friends, there we have our father, our eldest
brother Christ Jesus, the holy Ghost our comforter: and therefore David in the
time of plague went to this comfortable place. In earthly places unto which the
sons of men resort, either we have no friends, or they are far off, and
therefore we seek other: or sometimes although we have friends, yet they will
not receive us for fear of infection: but in this holy temple, and upon this
holy mountain, we are sure to find at all times the aforesaid friends.

Fifthly, 5. A place accessible for all men
we have regard to choose a place which is lawful for all men to come unto,
which is not prohibited or forbidden by the Lord of the soil and magistrate of
the place, and where we know we shall be received. This place of refuge is
such, accessible for all men, for whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord,
shall be saved, Joel. 2. 32. Never a city of refuge so free for all manner of
transgressions: hither may come the King and the subject, the rich and the
poor, the learned and the unlearned, the merchant and the tradesman: the sound
and the sick, yea the infected with the plague. In the time of infection, it
is not lawful for them that dwell where the contagion reigns, to come unto
the princes court, they are forbidden by proclamation to resort thither. But
the court of heaven is open for all men, yea for the infected, for they cannot
infect the court of heaven: The King of heaven his proclamation.
the King of heaven has made a proclamation in the 50. Psalm. that we should
resort thither, and the prince of glory Jesus Christ who keeps his residence
there, will not keep us back. If the prince had made a proclamation that the
infected should resort to his court to be healed, who would not hasten thither?
It was not lawful for all men to come to the inner court of King Assuerus;
Esth 4.
none might approach but they to whom he held out his golden scepter, except
he would die the death that was appointed for such as durst come near: Heb. 4.
16.
no such kind of punishment is appointed for those that go unto the court of
the King of heaven, we may approach boldly to the throne of grace, the scepter
of our King (I mean not that iron scepter of his justice,) but the golden of
his mercy, is ever held forth to man, woman, children, bond or free, stranger
or Citizen, infected or not infected, whether they be called, or not called:
and they all may safely approach: I name not neither inward or outward court,
but even to the throne of grace, where the King himself sits: and if there
we crave of him, I say not to the half of his Kingdom (as Assuerus spoke unto
Ester) but to the whole, it shall not be denied us. Fear of punishment keeps
us from the princes court. Let not fear keep us from the court of heaven. Neh
^^.2.
Nehemias although he held the cup to the King, yet how fearful he was to
make a request unto him: But as for you O ye righteous souls, fear ye not O
you little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Luc.
12. Further in time of contagion, not only the court, but also the other
cities, towns and villages, will not often lodge them that come from
contagious places, either the Lord of the soil, or the magistrate of those
places forbidding it; but as for that heavenly Jerusalem, and the Lord of the
living, thereunto every one may resort, the Lord and magistrate of heaven does
not interdict it. David cried unto the Lord, and said, thou art my portion in
the land of the living. Psalm. 142. 5. At Room the housen of the Aediles, were
always open for all men, that they might resort thither, to have their causes
heard: and so is the house of the Lord for the afflicted souls. In some places
there are appointed (as I my self have seen) watchmenwith halbards, to ask
the passengers from whence they come, and sometimes to keep out those that
come from infected places, but in our going to this place, we need not to have
such fear, for as Chrysostom says, Hic non est miles assistens qui expellat,
here there is no Sergiant or soldier to keep thee out. If the cities of the
earth shut their gates before thee, thou can not enter. As for that heavenly
Jerusalem, it is not locked, and although it were, prayer as Augustine speaks
is a key to open heaven, and to bring thee to the presence of God. Sermon. 226.
de temp. the town and villages in times of infection although they receive
some, yet they will not harbor many: and often there is no place for
multitudes: but so is it not with the name of Jehovah, with this strong tower,
it is not like unto the bulwarks of mortal men, into the which if too many
enter, they will hinder one another; this fortress can receive millions and
millions without any impediment. Further the temple is also interdicted to the
infected, for they are commanded by the magistrate to keep their housen for a
time, or if they come, they are entreated to sit aside: but the Lords holy
temple above in heaven, is not forbidden unto the infected, nor to any man: it
is lawful for them to go thither and pray, and that with the success of
David, Psalm. 18. In my trouble I did call upon the Lord and cried unto my God,
and he heard my voice out of his Temple.

Sixthly, 6. A place near unto the City.
some make a choice in the plague time, of a place which is near, whereunto
they may easily go without any great trouble or cost: the name of the Lord is
such a place, compendious to cut off unnecessary labors, ye need not to
run far, the Lord is near as the Prophet speaks to all them that call
upon him: neither will it cost us any thing, money or merits, intercession of
friends or gifts: poor men, ye that want friends or money, and therefore
cannot provide your selves a place, be not dismaide, behold, here is a place
which will cost you nothing. It is a place whereunto we may go at all times,
at dinner time, and at supper, as Crysostome speaks, in the day time, and at
midnight, in thy health, and in thy sickness: the sick man may lie down
upon his bed and go unto it, and when with King Ezekias he cannot use the
feet of the flesh, yet may he use the feet of the spirit. In a moment we can
fly thither, for as soon as we have finished our prayer, we are already come
to this place, and to the Lord of this soil, our prayer and God meeting one
another in heaven, as Jesus Christ and the woman at the Well, Ioh* 4. As for
earthly places whereunto men resort, either they are far off, uneasy to go
unto, and that with trouble and cost, or expenses, sometimes we are stopped, we
must have warrants and certificates of the Parish and Church wardens, that our
house is not infected, before we can be admitted: all this trouble we need not
in the time of plague in our going to the name of the Lord: nothing will stop
us, the bodily plague shall be no impediment, for we have a warrant that we
may pass, the King of heaven his warrant in the 50. Psalm; The warrant of the
infected*
Call upon me, etc. and therefore this place is better then the earthly, where
the fearful sons of men dwell which fear the apparel, household stuff,
and thy letters: I know nothing then to stop our passage, but the plague of the
soul, as the Lord of this soil tells us in the; 2 Cor* 6. 17. Touch none
unclean thing, Objection.
and I will receive you. But I hear the weak conscience object, I am infected
with the plague of the soul, and therefore it is not lawful for me to call
upon the name of the Lord: it is for the righteous as Solomon speaks: but
alas, I am unrighteous, and how can I therefore go unto this strong tower?
Answer.
The answer is, for thy comfort O weak conscience, that Solomon speaks not
of them that are righteous by their own righteousness, but by the
righteousness of Christ Jesus: such are all the faithful in whose mortal bodies
the plague of sin does not remain, their infirmities being healed by David's
Physician, Psalm. 103. If ye desire a certificate thereof, you have the Gospel,
subscribed and sealed by God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. If ye
desire a witness, ye have a threefold witness, The spirit, the water, and the
blood, 1. Ioh. 58.

Lastly, 7. A place where we may have a Physician.
we make choice of such places, where if need be, we may have good
Physicians; for we esteem it a great misery, to be destitute of a good
Physician, and of means to help us in our need. The place of refuge
whereunto David fled, and we also ought to fly, following his direction, has
the best Physician which is both in heaven or earth, God the Father, King
David's Physician, who has both health and sickness, life and death in his
power, to dispose of them for our good and salvation: knock therefore boldly
with the hand of prayer and repentance at the gate of his mercy, and thrust in
his hands, both thy life and health. And thus much for the qualities and
properties of the place.

Further, To pray for others is also requisite.
we have to observe that David went not to this place of refuge alone, but
with his whole family, for he prayed with the Elders of the people, for the
people, and for the deliverance of his whole kingdom. Herein imitate King
David, remember in thy prayer thy whole family, and the Judah, and the Tribe of
Leui. There are four sorts for which we must pray: Supra nos, above us:
Secondly, Sub nobis, under us: Fourthly, for those which are Comra nos, against
us. In the going to the name of the Lord, we must not imitate the negligence
of many, who depart into the Country, and care only for themselves; as for
their families, or at least their servants, they are not once mindful of them:
but we must as well carry with us in our prayers, the servants which are
under us, as she that lies in our bosom: And the Olive plants which are
round about our tables, Psalm. 108. 3. The Athenians would offer sacrifice, but
only for their own City, and their neighbors of Chios: but we Christians
must pray, not only for the mother City, but for all the daughters: Christ
teaching us to say, Our father, etc. as if we all came from one womb. It is a
principle both of nature and policy, Vis vnita fortior, Srength united,
receives more strength. It holds likewise in Divinity. If the prayer of one
righteous person avails much, the prayer of many righteous shall auile more.
If the Syrophenician obtained for her daughter the suit she made, much more
the whole Church of England shall obtain for all her daughters: Where two or
three be gathered together in his name, he is in the midst of them: Much rather
in the midst of a people, in the midst of thousands, in whom there is Anima
vna, cor vnum: One soul, one heart, one tongue, as if they were all but one
man. Lord, heal the sores of our land, for behold, both the mother and the
daughters, the head and the members do prostrate our selves before his
Majesty. Ye of the sect of Rome, divide not at this time of the plague in
your prayers, the soul, the voice and language of the Country into two
places: Elias and his company, praying in one place and with one style: O Lord
God of Abraham, and ye in another: O Baal heal us: Some praying for the life
of David, and some for the life of Iabin. As for us, we will pray for the Lords
anointed, that God may hide him under the shadow of his wings from the noisome
pestilence, knowing that this is one of the parts of our obedience toward him,
that we (as Constantine the great taught his soldiers to show their allegiance
in nothing more then this) should pray for him, his children and posterity. I
end this point, with the saying of an ancient Father: That there is no better
guard, or Halbards to safeguard a Prince, then the prayers of the righteous.

Before I come to the third branch of this discourse, Three rules to be
observed in our going to this place.
give leave Christan Readers to the spiritual Physicians, to lay down three
rules, which are to be observed in this our spiritual departure to the name of
the Lord. The bodily Physicians touching departure prescribe three rules,
Long, cuo, tarde: Go far off, depart speedily, return slowly. The Long.
not with the prodigal and forlorn son in a far Country, far from the
fear of God and thought of death, or with Jonas from the presence of the Lord,
who rides upon the Cherubims and can overtake us: for whither shall I go
says David, Psalm* 139. 9.
from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? But far from
this world and the earth, unto the holy temple and mountain, unto heaven which
is high above the earth, as David speaks, Psalm 103. 11* unto that place which
is called the land of the living. Secondly* fly far from the plague of
sin, and the infected air of this world, and being come unto that far
Country, the Lord Cito.
and defer not your departure: which rule is not in any manner to be omitted,
it is the counsel of the wise man, Jesus Syrach, Eccle. 38* 9* My son fail
not in thy sickness but prays unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole. It Is
the commandment of the Lord to call upon him in the time of need, Psalm. 50.
Which must be performed with speed, according to the example of David, Psalm
119. I will run the ways of thy Commandments. If we make haste to fly into
the Country, and forget to go speedily unto this Sanctuary: it is as
Augustine speaks of another matter, Cursus celerrimus praeter viam: A swift
race besides the way. Haste in this matter is praise worthy, and a man can
never run too fast that runs to this place. The delay that Elizeus made, let
me go kiss my Father; and those shifts in the Gospel: Let me first go bury
my mother, or take leave of my friends, are not admitted in this business:
commune not therefore with flesh and blood. If in the time of plague, we make
such haste to depart, before we have ordained our business aright, or bad our
friends farewell: How much more ought we to hasten our spiritual voyage?
While the fal-bridge is let down, let us make speed to enter. Many, because
they went not far, not made speed to depart, have endangered their bodies,
but many more, because they fled not from the contagion of sin with speed,
have endangered their souls: and therefore as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 9.
of another matter, so I may say of this going: So run that ye may obtain.

The third rule is, Tarde.
Return slowly: that is, continue where Ephe. 6. 18. Romans 12. 1. These. 5. Pray
continually, etc. As it is prescribed, Lukk* 2^. 36.
so it has been practiced: the woman of Canaan continued in her prayer, and
returned not in haste. They which are in the Country, although there be many
things which might move them to return, yet for the safety of their bodies,
they continue till the plague be ceased: So continue in thy prayer by the Lord,
and be not weary of well doing. Although three things might have moved thy
Syrophenician to return, the silence of Christ, her back-friends, and the
odious names given unto her: yet these discouragements her poor soul
digested, obtaining both a cure for her daughters infirmity, and a
commendation for her faith. O woman thou have wrought a miracle by the
perseverance of thy prayer, and have given to thy Savior occasion to do a
memorable act, convenient to his nature: glorious to his holy name. Let us at
this time follow her perseverance, and although the Lord should seem to be
silent for a time, yet let us not draw back, that we may receive a cure both
for our souls and bodies, and deserve a commendation both by God and other
nations, and thereby give occasion unto the Lord to show his omnipotent power
in the ceasing of the plague: and to do an act in England convenient to his
nature, and glorious to his holy name. And as Jacob wrastled with the Angel and
would not let him go until he had received the blessing: So let us as it
were strive with the Lord by our prayers, and let him not go until he have
heard us, in that which we ask of him in this afflicted time. Let our prayers
be now as the showers of the rain, if the first shower fails of watering the
earth sufficiently: the second, the third or the fourth, will fulfill the thirst
thereof. Let us be like unto the widow, Luke 18. and our importunity will draw
him unto audience: but yet let us hold a better opinion of the judge of the
world, then of a common vulgar friend. It delighted his ears to hear our
redoubled obsecrations, and he suspendeth our desires in expectation, that we
should be importunate to crave. Hbak. 2. ^.
The bodily Physicians cannot away with the importunate patient: but God, King
David's Physician, loves the importunate prayer, and more acceptable is to him
the end of our prayer then the beginning. I would the children of light were
as wise in their generation, as the wodden Priests, 1. Reg. 18. who cried long
to Baal: yea cut themselves with knives that they might be heard: and what
ought not we then do to obtain our suite? Let nothing then move us to
return: but as the King of the Philistines, 1. Sam 6. though they had Calves
at home, yet they kept the straight way to Bethshemesh, and held one path:
turning neither to the right, nor to the left hand; neither ever stood still,
till they came into the field of Iosuah. So in our going to the name of
Jehovah, the affection of our souls bearing the Arc and coffer of our suites,
though it has worldly allurements to draw it back, as the Kine had Calves:
yet let it in the way to the house of God, as they to Bethshemesh, hold one
path of perseverance, turning neither to the right or left hand with wandering
cogitations, till it comes into the field and garden of God, and there let it
remain. Many having not continued in the Country, in their hasty returning
are fallen sick, The third part containing the household stuff which we must
carry unto that place.
and died: So many having not continued in this strong bulwark, have
endangered both body and soul. And thus much hitherto of the second part.

There follows now the third and the last, which opens unto us the
household stuff which we must carry with us thither noted in the word
(Righteous.) As they which go in the country in the time of plague, carry with
them their household stuff, their furniture, and those things which are
necessary for their bodies, and as Noah entering the arc carried with him
necessaries; so likewise in our going to this place, we must carry with us
those things which are necessary for our souls, that we may be received by
the Lord of that soil, and without which we can not go thither. There are
five pieces of spiritual household stuff which are necessary for us, noted in
the word Righteous.

The first is Repentance and holiness of life, 1. Repentance.
for he that is righteous gives himself to righteousness. And this furniture
carried with him David, 2. Sam. 24. 11. As they which go in the country have
their reasons why they carry with them such and such necessaries: So give me
leave in the opening of this furniture, to show you also the reasons which must
move us to carry them with us. 2. Tim. 2 19.
As for this first, the first reason is, the Psalm. 11. 7. His eyes are upon the
righteous, and his ears open to their cry, but his face is against them that
do evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth, Psalm. 34. 15. 16. If I
regard wickedness in my heart says David, Psalm. 66. 18.
the Lord will not hear me. For as Solomon testifies, the Lord is far off
from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous. Prou. 15. 29.
Draw therefore near to God, and he will draw near to you: cleanse your
hands ye sinners, Prou. 28. 9.
and purge your hearts ye wavering minded. Iam. 4. 8. 9. The third is, that the
bodily plague may cease, for how Jacob, bring into the presence of our father,
Psalm* 59.
the garment of Joseph which we our selves have beblooded. As Aaron could not
come before the Lord before he was washed, so let us not go unto him before we
have cleansed our selves from infection of the soul. And as Jacob Genesis 43.
exhorted his sons, when they were going to Joseph, carry with you the best
fruits of the land and give them him: so let us in our going to to the true
Joseph Jesus Christ, carry with us the best fruits of our hearts to offer up
the sacrifice of our prayers, our corrupt affections, as Abraham left behind
him at the foot of the hill his asses I conclude this first point with the
saying of Chrysostom, as in a garland, it is not enough that the flowers be
pure and clean, but the hand also which handles them: so it is not sufficient
that the words of our prayers be holy, but the heart also which conceiueth them.

(Faith) for the righteous is also he that believes in Christ, Faith.
and is righteous through the righteousness of Christ the righteous. This
furniture carried David with him, 1. Sam. 24.
for as he had a desire of health and remission of his sin, so he had also a
steadfast faith and confidence that it should be forgiven him. This persuasion
of deliverance, and hope of obtaining, we must have with us Iam 1. 6. Let him
ask in faith and waver not. And in the fourth to the Hebr. 16. that we should
go boldly to the throne of grace: drawing near unto him with a true heart in
assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22. casting not away that confidence which has
great recompense of reward, Ver. 35.
it is the counsel of Mar. 11. 24. Secondly, carry it with thee, that thou
may receive that, for which thou go unto him faithfully. Psalm 145. 18* And
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe ye shall receive it. Math.
21. 22. Without this, there is no going thither. Romans 10. 14. But as
righteousness and truth kiss each other, so must prayer and faith, which is
the ground of prayer: first believe, and then speak, this was the order of
David, Psalm. 116. this faith will make us acceptable to the Lord of that soil,
and make us find favor at his hands. Faith is a beautiful queen, as highly
favored of the King of Kings, as ever Esther was of King Assuerus: she shall
not be stayed without at the gate, but with an humble presumption, may approach
into the inner court, and shall receive her request: for if we shall receive a
Kingdom, Luc. 12. how much more that which is less, being asked by faith?
come not then without this advocate. Cyprian, in his treatise de Idol vanit,
says, (speaking how he and his brethren did much good in the visitation of
the sick) prout fides patientis adiuuat, aut gratia curantis aspirat, that he
prospered according as they and the patient had faith to speak unto God: the
greatest enemy to the efficacy of our prayer is distrustfulnes. And therefore
God forbid says Augustine that what we desire God to do for us with our
mouths we should deny him to be able to do in our hearts. In Hipolito.
A heathen man Seneca could say, he that asks fearfully and doubtfully,
teaches him to deny of whom he asks: and men doubting they shall not
obtain, make God unwilling to hear them. As unbelief did shut the door unto
the Jews that some of them enter not into Canaan, a tipe of heavenly
Jerusalem; so distrustfulnes is able to shut our prayer out of that heavenly
Canaan. And therefore as Jacob going to his father Isaac, to receive the
blessing, put on the garment of his eldest brother, so let us going to our
heavenly father to obtain our request, be clothed with faith through the
righteousne^^e of our eldest brother Jesus Christ. Further, this confidence
gives us entry into that place. Open the gates says the prophet, Es. 26. 2.
that the righteous nation which keeps faith, may enter in. Faith is as a key
that opens unto us the gates of the city. Thirdly, this furniture is
necessary 2. Cor. 1. It is the root that bears us, the legs and
supporters, and the strong men that hold us up that we fall not. As the Doves
nest is the cleftes of rocks that cannot be assaulted, so faith rests it
self in the wounds of Christ, it casts an anchor in knowledge of the true
God, and stands as firm, as mount Jehovah for remission of sin and
spiritual life, and for the remoouing of the effect of sin the bodily
contagion, we are desirous of it, we must not forget this furniture, for by
Faith we live, Abac. 2. It is the life of the soul, and the soul and spirit
of the new man. We may have a name that we live, but indeed we are dead to
Godward, if we believe not: doubting then neither of might, mercy, or of his
promise, because they are passed by covenant, oath, before immovable
witnesses, the best in heaven, and the best in earth, and because they are
signed with the finger of the holy Ghost, and sealed with the blood of his
anointed and beloved, let us with a holy confidence run to this place in
this afflicted time of the contagion, that we may receive mercy.

(Humility) which excludes all opinion of our own worthiness and
righteousness. Humility. 2. Sam. 24.
David carried his furniture with him, yea this royal ornament: as appears
out of two things. First, out of the term and phrase of observation (I beseech
you) a proper term of submission, and the poor surers phrase. Secondly, out
of his bodily prostrating of himself in sackecloath with the Elders of Israel,
1. Chron. 21. Herein let us in this time of plague imitate King David in our
going to the name of the Lord, carrying with us this ornament, this submission
and lowlynesse: let us use the poor suitors phrase, and not pride of speech:
saying, we are worthy O Lord: let us not go thither to brag, as many run
into the Country to dominire; but let us pray that the Lord will give us with
us this submission, that we may bow not only the knees of our bodies, but of
our hearts: yea, that we may even bow the very phrase of our words with David,
that we may utter them as if the smallest Grasshopper of the earth were to
speak with fear and reverence before that dreadful Majesty.

Three things must move us to carry it with us in this our voyage: First, the
person to whom we go, his greatness, Ieuouah. It was the counsel that Aesope
gave to Solon, enquiring what speech he should use before Craesus: either very
little, or very sweet, said he. If when we go to the Princes of the earth,
who are but smoke and vanity, we speak with humility much more does the
presence of the most high God require it. Secondly, the consideration of our
own persons which Abraham speaking to the Lord, Gene. 18.
confess that we are but dust and ashes. Let us as Lazarus with all our ulcers
(which are many in the time of plague) and withal our sores detected and laid
open: he before the gates of him who is rich in mercy, lamenting, craving, and
beseeching to be refreshed. Christians, learn of Christ to pray, who although
there was no unworthiness in him, yet he kneeled, fell upon the ground, the
footestoole of his own Majesty, and lay upon his face, which never Angel
beheld without reverence. The third is, that our coming to him, may be
acceptable, and Esa 66. 2. which he will not despise, Psalm. 51. 17. for he is
near unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as be
afflicted in spirit, Eccle. 35. 17.
Psalm. 34. 18. The prayer of him that humbles himself, goes through the
clouds: the Lords mercy can only give us the twofold health which we sue for
at this time: now this mercy to whom does he give it, but to the humble? 1.
Pet. 5. Humility is both grace it self, and a vessel to comprehend other
graces: and she emptying her self by a modest estimation of her own gifts,
is filled again by the Lord. Let us now beloved as it were strive by humility
with the Lord, according to the policy of Jacob: Let us win by yielding, and
the lower we stoop toward the ground, the more advantage we shall get to
obtain. The Lord to whom we go, if this humility be in us, will both dwell
with us and in us. O Lord, says Austine, how high art thou, and yet the humble
of heart, are thine houses to dwell in: I he proud Pharisie, Luke 18* went
unto the Lord without his furniture, praying with pride and with a skornefull
demonstration, and therefore returned not justified as the Publican. O that we
had not for the most part of us all such Pharisaicall eyebrows, whether we
talk with God or man, that we might hear that comfortable voice which was
spoken unto Daniel, Cap. 10. 12.
Fear not, for from the first day that thou did humble thy self before thy
God, thy words were heard. Let us therefore use to conclude this point: this
humble style of David, it has been the style of a King: and although it
seems inglorious, yet it has been the style of the glorious Saints of God:
it will give us the honor of Saints, and raise us from the dust, set us upon
the thrones, and if it please the Lord to take us away by the plague, it will
place us with Angels: let us not then brethren forget it, that the anger of the
Lord may cease, and that with joy hereafter we may sing with Marie in her
Canticle, Luke 2. He has regarded the lowliness of his handmaide.

Reverence, devotion, Ferfencie and zeal.
zeal and feruencie. For the noise of our lips, if it be as the ringing of
Basans: a vocal modulation, without cordial meditation, it cannot procure us
audience: for it is as the offering of the halt and the lame, a body without a
soul: it is the counsel of the wise man. Eccle 5. 1. Be not rash with thy
mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a thing before God. Our prayers
must not be a formal service only, but the sighs of our souls must be
sent with an earnest message to the ears of God: they must not be
perfunctorie and cold, rather of custom then of devotion: for a prayer from
fained lips, will return empty into the bosom that sent it up. When we go
to this place, let us not go, as if our souls and tongues were strangers, the
one not knowing what the other does: our lips babbling without, and our heart
not pricked with any inward compunction, for else it is as the altar without
fire: a perfunctorie prayer, is as the prayer of the Parret. Johannes
Fridericus the Prince of Saxonia, had a Parret who could rehearse the Latin
Pater noster. Cardinal Ascanius had another, who rejected the Creed,
representing perhaps the faith and praying of his Master. What are the
careless devotions of those, who leave their spirits as is were in a slumber
while they are a praying* but like unto those two Parrets babbling: as they
must be deuote, so must they be fervent, kindled by a burning zeal, inflamed
with fervent love: and as the Hearts bray after the water brooks, Psalm. 42.
so must our souls after the living God: For the prayer of a righteous man
avails much, etc. if it be fervent, Iam 5. 16. If we are desirous to know
the necessity of this zeal and feruencie, receive these directions following.
First, the example of Christ bids Heb. 5. he that was the mighty Lion of
the Tribe of Judah has roared in his supplications. Secondly, the spirit of
God bids us go Romans 8. Thirdly, the Majesty of

The fifth and last piece of household stuff, is Christian patience, Patience.
a submission unto his holy will and pleasure, a virtue proper unto the
righteous. David carried it with him thither, and we must not leave it behind
us, following the streams of our foolish appetites: 2. Sam. 24.
we must limit our prayer in God and his holy will, asking absolutely his
glory, and our salvation: but remitting the means unto his wisdom and
pleasure. The fountain of our heart must not power forth sweet and sour
together, praying, but with impatience: let us set him no time as the Disciples
did about the kingdom of Israel, but let us come to the resolution of David,
2. Sam. 15. Behold, here am I, let him do to me as it seems good in his
eyes. Worthy is the Oration of Judith which she made to her people of
Bethutia, Iud. 8.
who would deliver up the City into the hands of the enemy, unless within
few days the Lord should help them: Who are you that have tempted the Lord,
and set your selves in the place of God? Let us wait for salvation from him,
and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice if it please him:
thus should we exhort our selves in our prayers, when impatience does besiege
our hearts. It is safe for us to cast the ankers of all our purposes, and to
stay our wills upon his will. The reasons to Luke 21. and in the prayer which he
has taught us: of David, Psalm 37. 7. Nero, that they may do all things, and
that no body may control them. No, no, beloved, his will is always holy,
always just and equitable, although it seems unto thee unjust. Father, not
my will, but thine be fulfilled. This is then the spiritual furniture which we
must carry with us, if we will go to the name of Jehovah. Prayer with these
companions will return laden with the sheaues of comfort and bliss from the
plentifullest fields. And by these it is manifested, that the righteous only
go to this place: the name of Jehovah is not like unto the earthly places,
unto which in the time of infection resort both good and bad. The ungodly may
make a show to go unto it, but yet they can not come thither, for there is the
spirit of prayer, Zach. 12. which is given only to them that bring with them
this spiritual furniture. As for weapons to safegarde our selves, we need
none, for this household stuff are spiritual weapons, Ephesians. 6. This shall
suffice for the Arc of Noah.

Now because the Civil Magistrate appoints in every Parish trusty men to
aid the infected, A trusty friend and servant appointed by the Magistrate of
heaven, to aid the sick in the time of Plague.
and to provide them with necessaries: Give me also leave to show unto you
beloved, a trusty friend and servant to aid the sick, appointed by the
Magistrate of heaven. If ye are desirous to know who it is, prayer is his
name, Psalm. 50* Call upon me, etc. David has used this faithful friend in
the time of the plague, he has sent it as an Ambassador into the court of
heaven to sue for peace: he sent not merits, distrustfulnesse, impatience, or
blasphemies: but prayer the surest and effectuallest Ambassador, happy for
success. We are all desirous if the Lord visit us with the rod of David, to
have some trusty and faithful friend or servant to keep and aid us, to
dispatch our business, to send here and there, and to provide us, with
necessaries: and we make much of such that will assist us in such a fearful
sickness. We can have no better servant then King David's friend, who has
many good qualities: we desire in the time of plague a servant or friend, The
qualities of this friend*
in whom we find these good qualities: First, Faithfulness, for many have
been robbed by their keepers, Faithful.
as experience teaches. Prayer Quick.
Secondly, we desire one chariot of fire bearing us aloft into the presence of
God to seek his assistance; he knows to address himself in ways unknown
in the stillest silence of the night, till he come to the secrets and chamber
of the Lord, King David's Physician. Willing.
we seek one who is willing, and is not afraid, (for they are scarce to be
found) prayer is such a friend, he is not afraid to be with thee: neither the
tediousness of the way, or difficulty of the passage can hinder him from his
purpose.

Learned.


A comforter.
one that is able to comfort us in our distress, such a comforter is prayer,
it is the life of the soul: if thou art perplexed with such grief of heart,
as neither wine (according to the advice of Solomon) nor strong drink can bring
ease unto, thy spirit melting like wax, finding no comfort at all either in
light or darkness, pleasures or riches, kinsfolks or friends, wishing with Job.
4. O that thou would hide me in the grave, and keep me secret until thy
wrath is past: yet then this friend is our comfort, he will speak for us unto
the Lord, King David's Physician, by this we may fly into the bosom of Gods
mercies. If any then be afflicted amongst you, let him pray* Iam. 5. The reason
why we desire a friend with all these qualities, is that he might both aid,
and provide us with all necessaries: prayer is a friend who is able to dispatch
David's Physician with him the best comforter of the sick, the holy Ghost, it
is his name; John. 14. he will not fear to come to thee, as often the bodily
Physician. Lastly, if we desire our friends to come and 1. Bad servants.
if we be not ware of them. First if we should use the aid of merits and send
them up, the stars in heaven would disdain it, Merits.
that we which dwell at the footestoole of God dare to presume so far, Ephe.
6. 4.
when the purest creatures in heaven are impure in his sight. Fear.
Secondly, if we send up fear Blasphemies.
Thirdly, if we send up blasphemies and curses, all David. Psalm. 127. 1.
Thus I have shown you that be at London, beloved of God, called to be
Saints, the Arc of Noah, to enter in with your families.

I come now to you beloved that have left your mother city for a time, An
exercise for the Londoners that are in the Country.
which hope to return: your departure I will not disprooue, nor wiser then I,
if ye have used it lawfully, remembering in your exile the affliction of Joseph.
And spending the time in those things which make for the peace of your city.
To refesh your minds, and spend your time there because the works of your
vocation you cannot exercise: diverse other exercises I know have been used,
perhaps not so well as ye might: al of them I do not condemn: but it is to be
feared, that the exercises of some have been frivolous, and game some
quarrellers, and that carding, dicing, and that Cup challenging Profession, by
which many drinking to health, drink theirselues out of health, have been to
others as usual pastimes, as the fields to walk in. Give me leave beloved to
show you a better exercise, and another pastime, the pastime of King David, a
royal exercise, which he used in the time of plague, his prayer and invocation
with the elders of Israel: spend heerin your time beloved till ye return: when
your mother mourns, will you sport? when the head smarteth, shall the members
be senseless? pray with the prophet for the peace of your Jerusalem. It is the
Apostles precept, to pray continually, which if it ever was time to practice,
it is at this present. The praise of Prayer.
Suffer me to enter into the praise of this exercise, diverse things do add
commendation to it, which ought to It is Divine.
Not Moses or Samuel, prophet or Apostle, Patriarch or martyr, but God the
father, God the son, God the holy Ghost, the blessed trinity have been the
authors, which make it a divine and heavenly exercise. Honorable.
we delight in exercises which are accounted honorable, and which men of
credit and good account do commonly use; this exercise is honorable, yea
royal: not base and contemptible only have spent their time with it, but
Kings and princes, King David, Manasses, Exechiat, and the rest. The blessed
Prophets, Patriarks, yea the prince of glory, the son of the immortal God
Christ Jesus: It is so heavenly and honorable, that by prayer we do approach
near unto God, and do as it were conioyne our selves with him: while we are
in the body, we are absent from home: but by prayer we do ascend into heaven,
prayer being as it were the band of our internal conjunction with God.
Further, it is honorable, not only in regard of the persons which have used
it; but also, to God and us. To God, for thereby we honor and glorify him,
Psalm.

To us, for thereby we are familiar with the Lord: if it be an Solomon calls
excellent and glorious. Christian.
It is an honor to be a christian, let us therefore use the christian exercise:
two things do admonish us, our name, and the example of Christ: Christians

The pleasure of it, may be the third argument of commendation: Delectable
this exercise is pleasant and delectable. To spend the time in the Country,
diverse use pleasant and delectable exercise: this is both acceptable to God,
and pleasant to man: To God.
Apoc. 8. And as the sent of incense and Odoriferus things is pleasant to the
nostrels of mortal man: So the prayer of the righteous, says Chrysostom, is
pleasant to the immortal God. It is not then, the lamentation of men,
eiulation of women and children, mingling heaven and earth together with a
confusion of outcries, that is acceptable to God, and which can enforce him to
give us audience: but it is humble prayer, the voice of repentance: which as
Jesus Syrach speaks, Eccl. 35. 16. shall be accepted with favor, and reach
unto the To man.
Some being in the Country, spend their time in discourses, prayer is a
discourse with our beloved. If it was a pleasure to Jacob to speak unto
Rachel, and to Jonathan with David: O what a recreation is it for our souls
that they may familiarly speak with him, whose love unto us is better then
gold or pearl. If we delight to speak languages, by prayer we may speak the
excellentest language which has ever been, the language of Canaan: let us not
fear to discourse with the Lord by our prayers, for he is not like unto the
spruce and finical sons of men: fear not, says Chrysostom, he seeks not
at thy hands painted eloquence, an angelical tongue, filed phrases: but
beholds only the beauty of thy soul. Others take their pleasure while they
are in the Country, to ride up and down in their Coches and Chariots, being
carried therein betwixt heaven and earth. Let prayer be your Coache beloved:
it is as one says, as a Chariot of fire, bearing us aloft in the presence of
God, able to mount us above the Eagles of the sky to seek the Lords
assistance. In the time of plague, there is appointed a Wagon or Coache to
carry the sick to the Pesthouse, and there to be healed: there is no better
Chariot to carry our souls unto the house of heaven to be healed by that
heavenly Physician, then humble prayer. Some delight to go up and down and
see their friends; our best friends at this time, and at all times who can do
us the most good: are God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost: let us
visit them therefore continually by our prayers. Others in writing letters,
what is prayer else, but as it were a letter sent to God in which we declare
our need: and as a letter is an amiable discourse and conference of one friend
with another, as if they were both present: So is our prayer, as a friendly
letter or discourse of us which are absent from home: with our best friend the
Lord, as if we were present with him in heaven. Send this letter, and letter
upon letter: ye that are now exiled, show unto the Lord your need: pray unto
him that he will bring you home again, and remove that in his mercy which
keeps you back. Lastly, some in running of Races, or in Hunting; but ye
beloved in this afflicted time, run the way of Gods Commandments: as David,
Psalm. 119. run to the name of Jehovah with the righteous, Prou 18. run the
race which is set before you, and that with patience, looking unto Christ
Jesus, Hebr. 12. 1. and so run that ye may obtain that which you sue for.
Hunt not after the pleasures of this life, but after the living God: and as the
Heart brayeth for the ryuers of waters, so let your souls pant after the living
God, Psalm. 42. 1. That the Lords Hunter, Psalm. 91. hunt us not, but that the
Lord may deliver us from the snare of the Hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence, Psalm. 91. 3. Use therefore this comfortable exercise: the child is
never better but when it is in his fathers and mothers lap: So shall you never
be better, but when by prayer you creep as it were in your heavenly Fathers
bosom: it will kindle your love toward him, as the love of lovers is kindled,
the more they come together: and if ye remain there this Winter, fervent
prayer will be in stead of fire, to kindle in your hearts the love of God.

Fourthly, the profit of this exercise commends it much, Profitable.
but also profitable. Some which are in the Country at this time spend their
time I do confess profitably, riding up and down to buy commodities To us.
but prayer is a far profitabler exercise for this time, for it is not only
profitable to our selves, but also unto others: yea, to the whole Realm. And
as the Apostle speaks of Godliness, that it is profitable for all things; so I
may say of prayer, that it can obtain any thing: profitable for us in two
respects: First, to obtain that we have not: Iam. 1. If thy understanding be
dark, pray with David, Psalm. 119. Open mine eyes O Lord, that I may see the
mysteries of thy Law. If thou lackest zeal, pray with David, Psalm. 119. Lord
incline my heart unto thy law, etc. And because this world is a desert where we
may easily err, pray with David, Psalm. 50. Lead me in thy paths, etc. If our
souls be infected with the plague of vanity and covetousness, the means to
remove it, is prayer, Psalm 119. O Lord remove far from me vanity, and
incline not my heart to covetousness. The means to obtain a contented mind,
is also prayer, Prou 30. Poverty nor riches give me not, etc. If thou desire
to think upon thy mortality, by the subject which now is presented to thee,
pray with David, Psa. 90. Teach us O Lord to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts to wisdom. If ye desire to return, it is not your sports
or delights, but your prayers that must bring you back. 2. Sam. 24.
If ye desire the ceasing of the plague, it is your prayer that must remove
the cause, that the effect Adam: for by them you often loose that which you had
purchased ryotously (which Alexander blamed in his friends) wasting and
consuming your whole ability. There is another thing which ought to persuade
you to this exercise: 2. To others.
which is, that it is profitable to others: prayer does more good then Alms:
for by our Alms we can help but a few; but by our prayers we can help
thousands and thousands: yea those which are far off. Prayers, are the alms
of the rich as well as of the poor: for Pharao did as well beg for prayers,
as poor Lazarus for crummes. Ye rich men that are in the Country, bestow
these alms upon the poor, as well as the alms of your purses: and in this
afflicted time, seek more to profit the whole Realm by your prayers, then by
your commodities. I end this point with the saying of Augustine: Plus profeci
orando qua^ legendo, I have more profited by praying, then by reading.

Fifthly, 5. To strengthen us.
this exercise is commendable, because it is able to to strengthen us. Some in
the Country do spend their time in exercises, by which they may maintain
their health, and strengthen their bodies, that they may be able to do any
thing: the exercise of prayer is good to make us recover the health of our
souls, which was waxen weak: as this present plague, and your present exile
both do witness. Yea, it is able to make us do admirable things. Was it ever
heard that mighty Potentates, as there have been many: Alexander the great,
Julius Caesar and the rest could make the Sun or the Moon to stand still in
the firmament? And yet this has done the prayer of Joshua. Have there ever
been any armies so great and mighty, which could make the earth to tremble
under their feet? No beloved: the mighty army of Xerxes could not do it,
and yet this has done the prayer of the Apostles, Act. 4. Who has ever heard
that it has been possible to mortal man, to raise the dead and to give life
to the deceased? The Physicians do acknowledge their impotencie, Heb. 11.
and yet this has done the prayer of Elizaeur. As the Apostle then in the
commendation of faith, rehearses the wonders which they have wrought by faith:
So it may be said of prayer which is done in faith: by prayer Moses divided
the red sea: by prayer Joshua beat down thewals of Jericho: by prayer Sidrach
and Abednago quenched the fire: Daniel stopped the Lions greedy and devouring
throats: the Apostles opened the prisons and brake their bands. And I will yet
add one thing, by prayer brethren you shall be able to overcome him, who is
invincible. The Lord has besieged and taken in your City by his destroying
Angel, the only means to resist him, and to make him retire, are your humble
prayers: O the admirable force of prayer, which overcomes him who overcomes
al things! I may compare the prayers of the righteous to the hairs of Sampson:
as long as his head was adorned and covered with them, he was in a manner
invincible, he brake the cords and roapes wherewith he was bound: his
strength lying in his hair; but being shaven, his strength went from him, he
waxed weak and like other men. All your strength beloved lies in your prayer,
as long as you exercise your selves therein, you shall be able to resist, I say
not the tyrants and the devil, but the Lords Angel himself. You have another
enemy, the which to resist, it is necessary that you learn to handle the
sword of prayer, this enemy is cruel, malicious, mighty, subtle and
industrious, his name bewrays his nature; Satan by name, who is not only in
the city, but follows you in the country (for as a devouring lion he
compasses the earth) and there he seeks to make you forget the Lord, and the
affliction of Joseph: to stick to the creature, and forget the creator; to
withstand this enemy and his fiery darts, let this be your continual
exercise: Imitate the industrious wrastlers, who to cast down another, first
fall down themselves: so to overthrow this enemy who seeks in the country
to overthrow you, cast down your selves by humble prayer and fasting, that in
that place you may triumph over him who thought to triumph over you. To end
beloved, to you all I speak together, you that are in the city, enter this
Arc: you that are cast down upon your beds, use the aid of this friend:
you that are departed, let this be your pastime, that we altogether may be
preserved from the deluge, and the waters may decrease more and more, till they
be dried up, that being decreased we may offer the sacrifice of
thanksgiving; as Noah offered unto the Lord after the flood. But let us not
be like unto the sea-sicke, who only are weak, lament and cry as long as
they are in the tempest, and when they begin to smell the air, and are gone
out of the ship, they forget both their sickness and their deliverance. Gene. 28.
But rather as Jacob (ye that are departed) flying to heaven, the remembrance
of his country being sweet, made an excellent vow and prayer, that if he came
again to his fathers house in safety, the Lord should be his God, and that he
would give unto the Lord the tenth of all he had: so likewise ye that are
departed from your mother city, as Jacob from his fathers house, the
remembrance thereof being sweet to you, as I know it is, make the vow and
prayer of Jacob, that when the Lord bring you home again in safety, that he
shall be your God, and that ye will serve him with more zeal and feruencie
then ye have done before: 2. Pet. 3. 17. 18.
further, that ye will (if not the tenth) yet some part of your goods, bestow
upon the Lord in his poor members. Let the Apostles words be the conclusion,
Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye be also
plucked away with the error of the wicked, but grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to him be glory both now and
for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

