The Adultresses Funeral Day: In flaming, scorching, and consuming fire:

OR

The burning down to ashes of Alice Clarke late of Vxbridge in the County of
Middlesex, in West-smithfield, on Wensday the 20. of May, 1635. for the
unnatural poisoning of Fortune Clarke her Husband.

A breviary of whose Confession taken from her own mouth, is here unto
annexed: As also what she said at the place of her Execution.

By her daily Visiter H. G. in life and death. And now published by Authority
and Command.



LONDON

Printed by N. and I. Oaks, dwelling in Well-yard in little St. Bartholmews,
near unto the Lame Hospital gate, 1635.

MVRDER UPON MVRDER: OR, THE OLD WAY OF POISONING NEWLY REVIVED.
In the remarkable Act of Alice Clarke, performed upon her Husband Fortune
Clarke, by her, poisoned on Ascension day last past* for which being arraigned,
convicted, and condemned, she suffered by Fire in West-Smithfield, upon
Wednesday in Whitsonweeke, being the 20. day of May, 1635. with the last words
she delivered at the time and place of her Execution.

GReat and stupendous are the works and wonders of the God Almighty, who
only searches the hearts and reins, and therefore perspicuously knows the
very thoughts and strength of man: For be his vain apprehensions never so
cunning to contrive, his policy to conceal, or his boldness to outface any
nefarious act committed, yet his unsounded and incomprehensible Wisdom, which
can be no way circumscribed, is able at all times, and upon all occasions, as
well to publish, as punish it in the open eye of the world, of which, as well
those times past, as these present, have, and do afford us remarkable
Examples: I will begin with the Sin, before I proceed to the Fact.

A Murderer, the Latins call Homicida, from home and caedo, id est, Hominem
occidere, To kill a man: Now who the father of murder is, you may read in the
Gospel of St. John Chap. 8. Verse. 44. where our blessed Savior speaking to
the Pharisees, says, Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your
father ye will do: He has been a murderer from the beginning, etc. For the
punishment thereof, read Genesis 9. verse. 5. For surely I will require your blood
wherein your lives are, at the hand of every beast will I require it; and at
the hand of man, even at the hand of a man's brother, will I require the the
life of man: Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in
the image of God has he made man, etc. And Numb. 35. 31. Moreover, you shall
take no recompense for the life of the murderer, which is worthy to dye, for he
shall be put to death. That, for the punishment. Now for the execrablenesse of
the Sin: We find in Genesis 4. 11. God speaking to Caine, after the slaughter of
his Brother Abel, after this manner, Now therefore thou art cursed from the
Earth, which has opened her mouth to Receive thy brothers blood from thine
hand: As also Deutronomy 27. 24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor
secretly: And all the people shall say, so be it.

If this monstrous sin be so heinous in the sight of God, betwixt neighbor
and neighbor, or if committed by one stranger upon another, how much more
horrid appears it in his eyes; when the husband and Wife, who in the
matrimonial Contract, are no more too, but one flesh, shall barbarously and
treacherously insidiate one another life. According to that verse of the Poet:

Vivitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus,
Non socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
Immi^et exitio vir coniugis, illa mariti:
Lurida terribiles miscent aconita noverci,
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos, etc.
which I have late read thus paraphrased,

All live on spoil, the guest is not secure
In his Hosts house, nor is the Father sure
Protected by the Son: even brothers jar,
True love and friendship is amongst them rare.
The husband does insidiate the wife,
And she again seeks to subplant his life:
The rough-brow'd Step-dame her young step-son hugs,
Tempering for him (mean time) mortiferous drugs:
The Son after the Fathers years enquires,
And long before the day, his death desires, etc.
Such were the passages of those times there amongst the Heathens, when
Christianity was not known, but that they should be so familiar and conversant
with us, is the more to be pitied and lamented.

In the flourishing State of Rome, there were many temperers of poison, and
these were called Venificae, which word we apply too, and confer upon,
Effacination, Sorcery, and Witchcraft: Concerning which the Civil Laws of the
Empire thus speak, In institut. Iur. in fine in lege Cornelia, in the
Cornelian Law, Et venifeci capite damnantur, qui artibus odiosis tam veneno,
quam susurris magicis homines occiderint, vel mala mede camenta public
vendiderint, that is, Let those be held guilty of capital offense, who by
odious and abhorrid Arts, as well by poison, as by magic spells and
wisperings, shall kill any man: In which State are likewise included all such,
who shall publicly sell any evil Confections: From which Canon we may ground
three several sorts of delinquents in this kind, which pass under the name of
Venificium: the first Poysoners, the second Sorcerers, or Witches, the third
these Apothecaries or Empricks, who shall vend any mortiffarous drugs, knowing
that by them any man or woman's life, may be infidiated, and in this case now
in hand, though the seller (as he has apparently justified himself may be
excused, yet the byer as the Law has openly convicted her, so we may presume
that she is legally condemned.

Now what the reason may be conjectured in these our latest, but worst days:
that so many nefarious acts, equalling, if not far surpassing these
perpretated in former ages, should be new committed: as Catamatisme, Sodometry,
Paracidy, many headed murders and the like: I can give no other reason then
this, the contempt of the fear of God, and the neglect of his Sabbath.

But to leave off all foreign prodigious acts of the like horrid nature.
Which as they are numerous, so they are manifest, in History and Chronology,
and go no further then our own nation, and these latter days. Has not one
brother in the heat of Wine slame another in the Tavern? A son transpersed
the very womb in which he was conceived, and suffered for the fault upon the
Gibbet? A man in his drunkenness casts his knife upon his Wife, and missing
her, pointed it into the breast of his innocent child, and killed him dead in the
instant: has not the woman offered the like outtage, upon her husband in her
fury, and left him dead in the place, and suffered lately for it, for
remarkable example.

Within the compass of fourteen months or there abouts, one Enoch ap Evans,
upon a small difference betwixt his brother and him, took the advantage when
he was asleep cut his throat first, and after his head quite off with his
knife, and when the mother hearing a busling above, came into the room to
hear the cause of such a noise, he prosecuted her down the stayers, and
afterward cut of her head with an Hatchet, for which he was Apprehended,
arraigned, convicted condemned at Shrewsbury, and after, some distance from the
place executed.

Since then, these grand Malefactors, who went commonly by the name of Country
Tom and Canbery Besse, their fearful murders upon three several Gentlemen,
at three sundry times, (the discourse of whose Actions, Examinations,
Confession, and Sufferings, because they are already published to the view of
the World, I will no longer insist upon, or make any Repetition of their
heinous crimes to trouble the Reader. But to come nearer to the matter of this
fact now in Agitation, I will only remember you of Mistress Arden, who caused
her Husband to be murdered in her own House at Feversham in Kent, the
memorable Cercumstances thereof deserving places in a most approoved Chronicle,
may be very well spared in this short discourse. As also of Mistress Page of
Plymouth, who for poisoning her Husband, suffered with her sweetheart Master
George Strangwich, who had been before time betrothed unto her: her husband
being old, she young, by which may be apprehended the misery of enforced
marriage. But not to tire your patience I will only trouble you with the poor
wretched creature, who last suffered in Smithfield in this kind, much
commiserated, much lamented: give me leave a little to to insist upon her
cause, and compare it with this now in present.

Her injuries, and harsh and unmanly usage spurred on by the instigations of
the devil, almost compeld her to what she did; which, as they would be scarce
modest for me to speak, so they were almost beyond the strength of Nature for
her to suffer: she being young and tender, he old and peevish; who
notwithstanding his clownish behavior, and churlish comportment toward her,
as seldom or never affording her a smooth brow, or friendly countenance, used
not only to beat her with the next cudgel that came accidentally unto his
hand, but often tying her to his bed-post to strip her and whippe her, etc.

But enough, if not too much of that; she then weary of so wretched a life,
which she would have bin glad to be rid off, and loath in her modesty to*
acquaint any friend or neighbor with her desperate purpose, who perhaps, (nay
no doubt) by their good counsel might have diuerted her from so wicked a
resolution, and the devil with all catching hold upon so fit an opportunity to
work upon her weakness, she pondered with her self how she might end both
their lives by poison, which having provided and prepared to that end, she
first gave him part, and after resolved with her self to drink the rest: But
better motions now coming into her thoughts, and she truly repentant of what
she had done, finding the confection begun to work with him, fell down
before him upon her knees: First acknowledging the fact, then humbly desiring
from him forgiveness, with all, beseeching him to take some present Antidote
to preserve his life, which was yet recoverable: on whom he sternly looking, as
he lay in that Agony gasping betwixt life and death, returned her answer in
this manner; nay thou Strumpet and murderesse, I will receive no help at all
but I am resolvd to dye and leave the world, be it for no other cause, but to
have thee burnt at a stake for my death: which having said, and obstinate in
that Hethenish resolution, he soon after expired. And this Resa^ion I received
from those of credit, who were well acquainted with the conditions of them
both.

I know not how to parallel these two: Her of whom I made this Short
discourse, or this miserable woman, who suffered by fire in Smithfield upon
wednesday in the Whitson week last, being the twentieth of May, Anno 1635. the
passages of whose life, conviction, and death thus follows.

The free and voluntary Confession of Alice Clarke, the 18. day of May, 1635.
concerning the Death of Fortune Clarke her husband, at the time she was in
Prison.

A Just cause, all persons may conjecture, was given on her part, of great
dissensions likely to arise between her Husband and her self, unto self-will
she to be so addicted, disobediently to frequent the company of one White, of
whom oftentimes her Husband hand had interdicted her his society and
familiarity: which acquaintance of theirs was begun, before Clarke her Husband,
entered into Marriage with her, and therefore with no small difficulty could be
forgotten, or shaken off, such former ancient entertainments. No admonitions or
threats to either parties could prevail, that proceeded from Clarke unto his
wife, or unto White, of continual private meetings between them: Which Clarke
perceiving, outragiously fell from words unto blows with his wife, the smart
whereof she feeling, incontinently begot in her heart dislike, and resolution
of revenge on her Husband Clarke for the same, a fit humor for the devil to
work on, and to her old friend White, to give occasion, not of dislike, but
content to put in practice what she intended, which he might easily perceive by
many pensive declamatitions, in private uttered between themselves of her
Husbands unkind usage: The confirmation whereof appears by the words that
proceeded out of her own mouth.

First, she confessed, because she often companied with White, that stirred up
her Husbands just anger against White and her self.

Secondly, that unawares unto them both, her Husband finding her and White shut
up together privately in a Chamber in the house, on Ascension-day last in the
afternoon, was thereat so with fury enraged, that he did beat White going
out of the doors, and after that, freshly fell foul upon her, and so cruelly
added blow upon blow upon her body, that the marks thereof were very visible
on her body at this present. Her old Love, White, instantly takes this unto
heart, and in a rage (as she said) uttered these words, That it were better for
one to be hanged, then to endure so discontented a life, and presently putting
his hand into his pocket, he took out 4 Tokens, and gave them unto Alice
Clarke, saying unto her, if he had had more money, he would have given it unto
her: which 4 Tokens so given unto her, she went* unto Vxbridge forthwith, and
that, afternoon bought a pennyworth of Mercury of an Apothecary in Vxbridge,
intending the same unto her Husband, with a further reservation, that if her
Husband had not taken it, she would have administered the same unto herself,
and so put an end unto all her sorrows, as she vainly supposed.

Thirdly, she said, that she was not the cause of her Husbands death, because
she gave not unto him the poison whereof he died, but he took it himself
violently out of her pockets, which her Husband had rifled, upon hope to find
some chinke or money there: but of such hopes he altogether was disappointed
and deluded. Whether this be not a lame excuse, or strange delusion, I refer
it unto the censure of the Judicious; and no further discovery of the fact,
could I get from her at that time.

She further said, that on Ascension-day her husband violently attempted to
drown himself, which she prevented by her language upon him: but in short
space afterward dyed that Night of the Mercury, taken by himself out of her
pocket, as aforesaid.

Fourthly, she seemed to be very much afflicted in conscience, that she was a
year since gotten with Child by her Master, with whom she last dwelt withal*
who perceiving the same, with a small sum of money, matched her unto Fortune
Clarke her Husband, about Alhallontide last, whom she could not love, or have
any matter of maintenance, but relied upon her Masters former promises for the
same: and he failing of giving her means, fell into folly and wickedness. A
great clog unto such a man's conscience, if it be true; to seduce a woman unto
his will, and so leave her.

A SHORT TRACT UPON THE heinousness of Poisoning.
THough there be sundry sorts of Murder with their several degrees, as open,
or secret, acted upon a friend, a stranger, or ones self, yet in my opinion, I
know not any of them which contains so much villainy, neither including so many
deep circumstances in them, as that of poisoning: That I think is the reason
that there are so few examples of it in Holy writ, this way either being then
not known; followed, or practiced; therefore to descrbe the quality of it and
to aggravate it, I must wish you to consider these four things.

First, the Duplicem modum, secondly, the Duplicem effectum: Modus prior, the
first Manner, Deliberando, Meditando, Is an Act done by Deliberation, or
Meditation, no ways carried, and hurried by the violence either of will or of
passion, but done upon a cold blood, and not seldom upon fixed resolutions.

Modus posterior, Celando, obtegendo, by a secret intent to hide it and
conceal it from God if it were possible, so it is to the Patient under the
shadow of some Physic, or other medicine, colored with an outward show of an
honest intent, and as far as they can from the Public Magistrate; or else to
make a distance of time, either to excuse themselves, or fly away from the
hands of Justice: though, ^

Secondly, Effectus prior, sensus (...) by changing, stupifying, or absolutely
taking away the senses, and depraving the operative Organs of the soul, and
sometimes infecting all the principles of life; as the head, the heart, and the
liver, howsoever altering and overthrowing the frame and constitution of man's
body in general, and making him unfit for a prepararation of himself for
death, though it be upon him, so that without the special Mercy of God, the
party thus abused, dies without either knowledge of his sins, or repentance
for them.

Secondly, Effectus posterior, creaturarum abusus, the abusing of the
Creatures, contrary to the end of their Creation: They* being brought forth for
the use and health of Man's Body, by this means they are made deadly, nay this
manner of killing any, makes not only the prime Agent guilty, but infects, and
makes guilty others too; or at least, causes them to be examined strictly by
the Magistrate: so that howsoever their good name for the present, is blotted
and blemished, and what more is, they have but two ways to comfort themselves,
the first, is the witness of their own Consciences Integrity, the second, is
the Judges knowledge of their Innocence and Ignorance, by a prudent
examination, of the fact perpetrated by all circumstances, and suspicious
Arguments: And in this kind the Apothecary for selling, the Messengers for
buying, the Composers of it, and the deliverers of it to the party, stand in an
hazard either of their lives, or fortunes, or both.

Laying aside all these together, I hope it will easily appear what a heinous
sin it is, when it is thus committed first, with Deliberation: Secondly; with
Secrecy: Thirdly, with disabling the party to fit himself for mercy, and with
the abusing the blessings of God and their own knowledge: and lastly, for
bringing others into danger as well as themselves, yet what is more, all this
done under the Gospel; and often, as at this present, against one whose life,
credit, goods, and good name, the offender ought to cherish and maintain to
the uttermost: So I may take up that saying of Jacob to his two Sons, My
soul come not into their secrets, neither be joined with their assemblies:
nor have to do with their practices, whose conclusions are so deeply dyed
with the blood of Innocents.

The second Confession of Alice Clarke this 10. day of May, 1635. at the place
of Execution, concerning the poisoning of her husband, Fortune Clarke.

Physicians of the Soul ought to immitate those learned Physicians of the
body, frequent visitations of those sick patients, whose diseases are
desperate and inveterate; and sometimes it chances, that they must desire,
necessity so requires, the advice and sound opinions of others their
Colleagues. Even thus it happened between this obdurate Malefactor and my
self, who in Adultery was so Rooted, and insensible of the heavy burden, and
most intolerable plagues ensuing for it. That at the first and second times of
my visiting of her, little or no Repentance I found in her, or her heart to be
touched for her most horrid clamorous crimes. This is apparent, if you compare
her first confession unto this, how different in truth, how improbable the one
are unto the other; nay what she confessed on Monday, she was so far off to
proceed in a further revealing of her self, that what touched her home,
concerning her husbands death, she would have denied, though formerly confessed
by her most confidently true.

I was thereuppon enforced to hold her unto it, and to extract the truth, and
try her spirit, called two of the Keepers of the Goal, to her unknown, whom
I appointed to observe and remember the speeches that passed between us, to
verify them unto her face, which attestation both of my self, and of them,
she would outface, but could not.

Upon Wensday morning, on which she was executed, there assembled unto
Newgate multitudes of people to see her, and some conferred with her, but
little good they did on her, for she was of a stout angry disposition,
suddenly enraged, if you began to touch her to the quick of her husband
poisoning. Being that morning of her death accompanied and also assisted by
diverse of my worthy, grave, and learned brethren in the Ministry, before and
at the time of her Execution, for which I do most heartily thank them, but
that God whose work it was, their reward for it with him is laid up in store.
Like my self, they stood as men amazed, to perceive that none of theirs, or
any other serious persuasions could for a great while prevayle with her, joined
in opinion with me, that she was no fitting guest for the Table of the Lord
Jesus thereupon, I made as though I would have excluded her thence, in denying
the benefit of the holy Communion, of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
inferring the benefit of the unspeakeable bless, by the worthy receiving of it
by Repentance and Faith, and the most woeful malediction to all impenitent and
unworthy receivers. Whereupon, it pleased God, so to mollify her heart, that
tears from her eyes, and truth from her tongue proceeded, as may appear by
this her ensuing Confession at the very Stake, where she was executed, unto Mr.
Cordall, She riffe of London, relating the same with as loud and audible a
voice, as possible she could, that many others besides, there present, were
also witnesses of such her ensuing Confession.

First she confessed that Henry White, who was arraigned as a party with her,
consenting unto her Husbands death, did give unto her one Ascension day in the
after noon, four brass tokens, advising her therewith to go and buy one
penyworth of Mercury, and give it unto her Husband, saying, if that her husband
were dead, she should live more quietly and contentedly with him, and after
such his death, that he the said White would marry with her; whereupon she went
unto Vxbridge, and that afternoon bought the Mercury.

Secondly, she confessed that her Master got her with child a year since,
which was her overthrow, and mediated for the Marriage, between her and her
Husband, whom she could not love, nor no way affect. By her Masters
persuasion, who sent her up to London to be Married, and paid the costs
thereof, and further promised her maintenance during her life, if she did
condescend unto his desiers, which were most unlawful, dishonest, and
unchaste, before and after her Marriage, with Fortune Clarke her Husband.

Thirdly, she confessed, that one of Hillinden enticed her, to run away from
her Husband, with him beyond the Seas, and that she did lodge in that man's
house, and lay with him a whole fortnight, and speaking unto him of her
Husband, that she would not forsake him, he thereupon advised her to pop him
up with white bread and milk, and to put some thing else into it, to choke or
stuff up his throat.

Fourthly she confessed, for the Mercury which she bought, she intended it
unto her Husband, but having no convenient opportunity to dispose of it, she
put it into her sleeve, which her Husband as she said took it out of her hand,
and then being over charged with drink he immediately swallowed it down, which
she perceiving, was thereat so perplexed, that she uttred these words unto her
Husband, that he had undone both him self and her.

And here give me leave to note unto the World, what a deal of comfort she
found, after she had disburdned her loaded conscience by confession, being
demanded at the same instant of her death, yea, or nay; that after such her
confession, she was by it the better prepared unto death, with comfort, and
willingness to suffer the same: She thus replied with hearty thankfulness
unto God, that she had better resolutions unto death, then formerly she had,
and by her countenance, which was very ruddy confirmed her inward new begotten
cheerfulness, and that with hearty prayer, and sweet tone of voice, surrenderd
her soul into the hands of the Lord Jesus, who will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, unto whom we all stand and fall.

Here is nothing contained in her confession, but that which true, and what
she uttered with her own mouth; which I was a witness off.

H. Goodcole.

FINIS.

