AVTOMACHIA, OR The SELF-CONFLICT of a Christian.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, virtuous, and learned Lady, the Lady MARY NEVIL, One of the
Daughters of the right Honorable the Earl of DORCET, Lord High. Treasurer of
England.
Add but an A, to Romanize your Name,
ANOTHER PALLAS is your Anagram:
(videlicet)

MARIA NEVILA.
ALIA MINERVA.
MAdame, your love to learning and the learned,
(In such an Age, so full of Art's neglect)
Right worthily to your rare Self has earned
The love of learning and the learned sect;
Whereby, your Name already is eterned
In MEMORIE's fair TEMPLE hie erect:
And there, devoutly at your VERTV's Shrine,
J humbly Offer this poor MITE of mine.
Too small a Present to so great a GRACE,
And too unworthy of your Worthiness:
Save that the Matter so exceeds the Mass,
That often (perhaps) a Greater may be less:
For, you may see, within this little Glass,
The LITTLE-WORLD's Great-Little-Mindednesse.
Man's strife with Man: our Flesh and Spirit in Duel:
Couragious-Cowards, too Self-kindely-cruel.
Vouchsafe to accept then this small New-yeres-Gift,
With the humble Vows of a dis-Astred Muse,
That lauishly has sow'n her seeds of Thrift
So high and dry that yet no Fruit ensues;
Else need she not have made so hard a Shift,
Nor this Small Gift so greatly to excuse:
But, since (as yet) she cannot what she would,
Madame, accept her Zeal, and what she could.
Most devoted J. S.

AVTOMACHIA, OR The SELF-CONFLICT of a Christian.

Virtue I love, I lean to Vice: I blame
This wicked World, yet I embrace the same.
I clime to Heaven, I cleave to Earth: I both
Too-loue my Self, and yet my Self I loath:
Peacelesse, I Peace pursue: In Civil War,
With, and against my Self, I join, I jar:
I burn, I freeze: I fall down, I stand fast:
Well-ill I fare: I glory, though disgraced:
I die a-liue: I triumph put to flight:
I feed on Cares: In Tears I take delight:
My siaue (base-braue) I serve: I roame at large
In Liberty, yet lie in Gaolers charge:
I strike, and stroke my self: I kyndly keen
Work mine own woe, rub my gal, rouz my spleen:
Often in my sleep, to see rare dreams, I dream;
Waking, mine eye does scarce discern a beam:
My minde's strange Megrim whirling to and fro,
Now thrusts me hither, thither then does throw:
In diverse Factions I my Self divide;
And all I try, and fly to every side:
What I but now desired, I now disdain:
What late I weighed not, now I wish again:
Today, tomorrow; This, that; Now, anon:
All, nothing crave I (ever neuer-one).
Dull Combatant, unready for the field,
Too-tardie take I after wounds my shield:
Still hurried headlong to unlawful things,
Down-dragging Vice me downward easly dings:
But sacred Virtue climes so hard and hie,
That hardly can I her steep steps descrie.
Both Right and Wrong with me indifferent are:
My Lust is Law: what I desire, I dare:
(Is there so foul a Fault, so fond a Fact,
Which Folly asking, Fury dares not act?).
But Art-lesse-hart-lesse in Religion's cause
(To do her Lessons, and defend her Laws)
The all-proofe armor of my GOD I lose,
Fly from my Charge, and yield it to his foes.
Guilty of sin, sinn's punishment I shun,
But not the guilt, before the offense be done:
For, how could shunning of a sin, ensew
To be occasion of another new?
Often and again at the same stone I trip
(As if I learned by falling, not to slip).
Alive I perish and my Self undo,
Mine eyes (self-wise) witting and willing too.
Sick, to my Self I run for my relief,
So, sicker of my Physic than my grief:
For, while I seek my swelting Thirst to swage,
Another Thirst more ragingly does rage:
While, burnt to death, to cool me I desire,
With flames my flames, with sulphur quench I fire:
While that I strive my wauing Waves to stop,
More wauingly, they wave above my top:
Thus am I cured, this is my common ease,
My medcine still worse than my worst disease.
My sores with sores, my wounds with wounds I heal,
While, to my Self my Self I still conceal.
O what lewd Leagues! what Truces make I still
With Sin, and Satan, and my wanton Will!
What slight Occasions do I take to sin!
What sillic Trains am I entrapped in!
What idle cloaks for'crimes! What nets to hide
Notorious sins, already long descri'd!
I write in Ice, Winds witness, signed with Showrs,
I will redeem my foul Life's former howrs,
And soon the swindge of Custom (whirlwind like)
Rapting my passion (ever Fashion sick)
Transports me to the contrary: alone,
Faint Guard of Goodness; Arm-les Champion.
My morrall Taste does nothing sweeter find,
Than what is bitter to the immortal mind.
Aegypt's fat Fleshpots I am longing-for,
The Eternal Manna I do even abhor.
World's Monarch Mammon (Dropsy mystical)
Crowned round-fac't Goddess, coined Belial,
Midas Desire, the Miser's only Trust,
The sacred hunger of Pactolian dust,
Gold, Gold bewitches me, and frets accursed
My greedy throat with more than Dipsian Thirst.
My minde's a Gulf, whose gaping naught can stuff:
My heart a hell that never has enough:
The more I have, I crave, and less content:
In store most poor, in plenty indigent:
For, of these Cates how much-soe'r I cramme,
It does not stop my mouth, but stretch the same.
Sweet Vsurie's incestuous Interest,
For Dallers, dolours hoordeth in my chest:
The World's-slaue Profit, and the Minds-slut Pleasure
(Insatiat both, both boundless, both past measure,
This, Cleopatra; That, Sardanapale)
For huge Annoyes, bring Toys but short and small.
O Miracle! begot by Heaven of Earth
(Of Mind divine, of Body brute by birth)
O what a Monster am I to depaint!
Half-friend, half-fiend; half-sauage, half-a-saint.
Higher than my Fire does my gross Earth aspire:
My raging Flesh my restless Force does tire:
And, drunk with world's Must, and deep sunk in sleep,
My Spirit (the Spy that wary watch should keep)
Betraies alas (woe that I trust it so)
My Soul's dear kingdom to her deadly foe.
Through Care's Charybdis, and rough Gulfs of Grief,
Star-lar-boord run I, sailing all my life
On merrie-sorrie Seas: my Wind, my Will;
My Ship, my Flesh; my Sense, my Pilot still.
As in a most seditious Commonweal,
Within my breast I feel my best rebel:
Against their Prince my furious People rise:
Their awlesse Prince dares his own Law despise.
Mine Eue's an Outlaw, and my struggling Twins
Jacob and Esau never can be friends;
Such deadly feud, such discord, such despite
(Ever between Brethren) such continual fight.
What Is done in me, another does, not I;
Yet, both (alas) my Guest and Enemy:
My mind unkind (suborned by my foe)
Indeed, within me, but not with me tho;
Near, yet far off: in fleshly lees besoil'd,
And with the World's contagious filth defiled.
I am too narrow for mine own Desires:
My Self denies me what my Self requires:
I fear and hope: careless, in Cares I languish:
Hungry, too full: dry-drinking, sugred-anguish:
Weary of life, merry in death: I suck
Wine from the Pumice, Honey from the Rock.
On thorns my grapes: on garlik grows my rose:
From crumbs my sums: from flint my fountain flows.
In showrs of tears mine hours of fears I mourn,
My looks to brooks, my beams to streams I turn:
Yet in this Torrent of my Torment rise
I sink annoies, and drink the ioies of life.
Dim Light, brim Night, Beams wauing cloudy-cleer:
Unstable State, void Hope, vain Help, far-neer:
False-true Persuasion, Lawless Lawfulness:
Confused method; milde-wilde, Warlike Peace:
Disordered Order, Mournful merriments:
Dark-day, wrong-way; dull, double-diligence:
Infamous Fame, known Error, skillesse Skill:
Mad Mind, rude Reason, an unwilling Will:
A healthy plague, a wealthy want, poor treasure:
A pleasing Torment, a tormenting Pleasure:
An odious Love, an ougly Beauty; base
Reproachful Honor, a disgraceful Grace:
A fruitless Fruit, a dry dis-flowred Flower:
A feeble Force, a conquered Conqueror:
A sickly Health, dead Life, and restless Rest:
These are the Comforts of my Soul distressed.
O how I like! dislike! desire! disdain!
Repel! repeal! loath! and delight again!
O what! whom! whether! (neither flesh nor fish)
How weary of, the same again I wish!
I will, I nill; I nill, I will: my Mind
Persuading This, my Lust to That inclined:
My loose Affection ( Proteus-like) appeeres
In every form: at-once it frowns and fleeres,
Mine ill-good Will is vain and variable:
My ( Hydra) Flesh buds Heads innumerable:
My Minde's a Maze, a Labyrinth my Reason:
Mine Eye (false Spy) the door to Fancie's treason.
My rebel Sense (Self-soothing) still affects
What it should fly; what it should plie, neglects.
My flitting Hope with Passion-stormes is tossed
But now to Heaven, anon to Hell almost.
Concording Discord kills me, and again
Discording Concord does my life maintain.
My Self at-once I both displease and please:
Without my Self my Self I feign would sease:
For, my too-much of Me, me much annoyes;
And my Selfe's Plenty my poor Self destroys.
Who seeks me in Me in me shall not find
Me as my Self: Hermaphrodite, in mind
I am at-once Male, Female, Neuter: yet
What ever I am, I am not Mine (I weet):
I am not with my Self (as I conceive)
Wretch that I am; my Self my Self deceive:
Unto my Self, my Self my Self betray:
I from my Self banish my Self away:
My Self agree not with my Self a jot:
Know not my Self; I have my Self forgot:
Against my Self my Self move iarres unjust:
I trust my Self, and I my Self distrust:
My Self I follow, and my Self I fly:
Besides my Self, and in my Self am I:
My Self am not my Self, another Same:
Unlike my Self, and like my Self I am:
Selfe-fond, Selfe-furious: and thus, wayward Elfe,
I can not live with nor without my Self.
A comfortable Exhortation to the Christian, in his Self-Conflict.
WHy, silly Man, sick of exceeding Grief,
What boots it thee, uncertain of thy life,
Of thy Disease to make so much a-doo:
Thou coward Soldier, and untoward too?
Away with Fear: and, Death of Death and Hell,
Meet arms with arms, and darts with darts repel:
So the first Onset in this doubtful Fray,
Shall toward Heaven make thee an easy way:
And open wide those Gates (so hardly won)
Where snowie-winged Victory does wunne.
Thou must be valiant, and with dauntlesse breast,
Rush through the thickest, run upon the best
Of th'aduerse Host; and on their flight and foil,
Build noble Tropheis of triumphant spoil.
For, this world's Prince, dark Limbo's Potentate
Drists Earth's destruction; and with deadly hate
(Still strife-full) labors, and by all means seeks
To trouble all, and Heaven with Hell to mix.
Great War within there is, great War without,
With Flesh and Blood, and with the World about.
On this side, smiling Hope with smoothest brow
False-promiseth long Peace and Plenty too:
On that side, sallow Fear with fainting breath
Checks those proud thoughts, with threats of war and death;
And, weary of it Self, it Self distrusts,
It Self destroys, and to Confusion thrusts.
And ignorant of it Selfe's good (till trial)
In ielous rage it even betraies the loyal.
Here cloud-brow'd Sorrow, whirl-wind-like it hies,
Th'amatted Mind to toss and tyrannize.
There, dimpled Joy nimbly enringeth round
Her gaudie Troops that stand upon no ground;
Whose brittle gloss and glory, lasts and shines,
As stubble-fier, and dust before the winds.
What should I speak of all the snarefull Wiles,
And cunning colors of mysterious Guiles,
Wherewith death's Founder and our life's drad Foe
Improuident Mankind does overthrow?
Yet, be courageous, yield not unto Evil:
Resist beginnings, and desie the Devil.
And for defense amid these fierce Alarmes,
Quick buckle-on these aye-victorious Arms.
First, gird thy loins with Truth: thy bosom dress
With the sure Breast Plate of pure Righteousness:
Put on thy head the Helmet of Salvation:
Upon thy feet Shoes of the Preparation
Of the Glad-Newes of Peace: upon thine arm
The Shield of Faith (shot-free from every harm)
Hel's fiery darts repel thou with the same,
And through it is splendour quench their flame with flame.
Take in thy hand the bright two-edged Sword
Of God's soule-parting, marrow-piercing Word.
Thus compleat-arm'd from God's own Arcenall,
And never ceasing on his Name to call,
Thou questionless shall quickly overcome
The World, the Flesh, Sin, Death, and Hell, in sum.
And so (through CHRIST thy Captain and thy King)
Of Sin, thy Self, and Satan triumphing,
Thou shall (in fine) the happy crown obtain,
And in the eternal promised Kingdom reign.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by MELCH. BRADWOOD for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1607.


