A discourse upon the Earthquake that happened through this Realm of England,
and other places of Christendom, the sixth of April. 1580. between the hours
of five and six in the Evening.

Written by Arthur Golding, Gentleman.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Binneman dwelling in Thamis streate nere
Baynerds castle.

MAny and wonderful ways (good Christian Reader) has God in all ages most
mercifullye called all men to the knowledge of themselves, and to the
amendment of their Religion and conversation, before he have laid his heavy
hand in wrathful dyspleasure upon them. And this order of dealing he
observes, not only toward his own dear children, but also even toward
the wieked and castawayes: to the intent, that the one sort tourning from
their former sins, and becoming the warer al their life after, should
glorify him the more for his goodness in not suffering them to continue in
their sins unreformed, to their destruction: and that the other sort should
be made utterly inexcusable for their wylful persisting in the stubbornness of
the^^ hard and froward hearts, against all his friendly and fatherly
admonitions.

He called Cayne to repentance, before he punished him for shedding his
brothers blood, and gave him a long time to have bethought himself in.

He warned the old World a hundred year and more, before he brought the
flood upon the Earth.

He chastized the Children of Israel diverse ways, ere he destroyed them in the
wilderness.

He sent Hornets and wild Beasts, as foregoers of his host, into the land
of Canaan, before he rooted out the inhabiters thereof.

He punished not David for his murder and aduoutrie, until he had first
admonished him by his Prophet.

He removed not the Israelits into captivity, until all the warnings of his
Prophets, and all the former corrections which he had used in vain to reform
them, did show them to be utterly paste hope of amendment.

Before the last destruction of Jerusalem, there went innumerable signs,
tokens, and wonders.

Finally, God never powered out his grievous displeasure and wrath upon any
Nation, Realm, City, Kingdom, State, or Country, but he gave some notable
forewarning thereof by some dreadful wonder.

To let pass the examples of foreign Nations, which are many and terrible:
what plagues, pestilences, famines, diseases, tempests, ouerflowing of waters
both salt and fresh, and a number of other most prodigeous tokens happened
successively long time together, before the displacing of the Britons by the
hands of our auncetors, for their neglecting of Gods word preached and planted
many hundred years among them? Likewise, what great warnings did God give to our
forefathers, in diverse Princes reigns, before the alteration of the State,
both by the Danes, and also by William the Conqueror? Again, even in these our
days, how manifestly has God threatened, and still does threaten our contempt
of his holy Religion, and our security and sound sleeping in sin, showing us
evident tokens of his just displeasure near at hand, both abroad and at home.

I will not speak of the great civil Wars, nor of the horrible and
unnatural massacres of good men, betrayde under the holiest pretenses, which
have bin of late years in the Countries bordering upon us: because such
dealings being pleasant to such as seek blood, are taken for no wonders.
Neither will I stand upon the rehearsal of the strange things that befell in
the Realm of Naples in the year 1566. nor of the Earthquake, whereby a great
part of the City Ferrara in Italy was destroyed in the year 1570. or of the
miraculous sights that were seen in France about Mountpellier, the year 1573.
or of the like terrible sight that appeared little more than a year ago at
Prage the chief City of Boemia: nor of diverse other things which have happened
in foreign Countries within the compass of these few years: because it will
perchance be thought, that those tokens concern the Countries where they
befell, and not us.

Well, I will not say, That whatsouer things have bin written aforetimes, were
written for our learning, that we might learn to beware by other men's harms.

We have signs and tokens ynow at home, if we can use them to our benefit.

What shall we say to the sore Famine which happened in the time of our late
sovereign Lady Queen Mary, which was so great, that men were feign to make
bread of Acornes, and food of Fern roots? or to the particular Earthquake,
in the time of our most gracious sovereign Lady that now is, which transposed
the bounds of men's grounds, and turned a Church to the clean contrary
situation? or to the monstrous birthes both of Children and Cattle? or to the
unseasonableness of the seasons of some years, altering (after a sort) Summer
into Winter, and Winter into Summer? or to the wonderful new Star so long
time fixed in the heaven? or to the strange appeerings of Comets, the often
Eclipses of Sun and Moon, the great and strange fashioned lights seen in
the firmament in the night times, the sudden falling, and unwonted abiding of
unmeasurable abundance of Snow, the excessive and untimely raynes and
ouerflowing of waters, the greatness and sharp continuance of sore frostes,
and many other such wonderful things, one following in another neck? Shall
we say that none of these also do concern us? or rather more truly, that
because they be gone and past (O ouer-great security and blindness of heart)
we have clean forgotten them, or at leastwise make no great account of them,
according to our common proverb, that a wonder lasts with us but nine days.

Therefore, least we should want either proof of the certainty of Gods
irreuocable judgments, or argument of his continual merciful dealing toward
us, or matter wherewith to conuicte us of our excessive unthankfulness:
behold, he se^deth us now lastly this Earthquake ye befell ye sixth day of this
month, not so hurtful in present operation, as terrible in signification of
things to come. For the tried experience of all ages teaches us, and the
wrytings of the wise and learned (specially of holy Scripture) do assuredly
witness unto us, that such tokens are infallible fore warnings of Gods sore
displesure for sin, and of his just plagues for the same, where amendment of
life ensues not.

And although there be peradventure some, which (to keep them selves and
others from the due looking back into the time erst mysspent, and to foade
them still in the vanities of this world, least they should see their own
wretchedness, and seek to shun Gods vengeance at hand) will not stick to
deface the apparent working of God, by ascribing this miracle to some ordinary
causes in nature: Yet notwithstanding to the godly and wel-disposed which look
advisedly into the matter, pondering the manner of this Earthquake thoroughly,
and considering the manner of our dealings from the late restitution of the
Gospel unto this day, and conferring the same with the manner of Gods
favorable dealing with us, and with his ordinary dealing in cases where his
truth has bin planted and grows to be contemned: it must needs appear to
be the very finger of God, and as a messenger of the miseries due to such
deserts.

For, first of all, whereas naturally Earthquakes are said to be engendered by
wind gotten into the bowels of the earth, or by vapors bredde and enclosed
within the hollow caves of the earth, where, by their stryuing and struggling
of themselves to get out, or being haled outward by the heat and operation
of the Sun, they shake the earth for want of sufficient vent to issue out at:
If this Earthquake had risen of such causes, it could not have bin so
universal, because there are many places in this Realm, which by reason of
their substa^cial sou^dnesse and massy firmness, are not to be pierced by
any winds from without, nor have any hollowenesse wherein to conceive and
breed any such abundance of vapors, specially in places far distant from
the Sea, or from Rivers, moors, marshes, fennes, or light and open soyles.

Neither could it have been in so many places universally at one instant both
by sea and land. For the stryuing thereof within the ground, taking his
beginning at some certain place, and proceeding forward to get a vent, would
have required some space of time to have attained to so many places so far
off, or else have broken out with great fury in some place that had bin
weakest.

Again, whereas in Earthquakes that proceed of natural causes, certain
signs and tokens are reported to go before them, as, a tempestuous working and
raging of the sea, the wether being fair, temperate, and vnwindie, calmness
of the air matched with great cold: dimnesse of the Sun for certain days
^^fore: long and thin strakes of clouds appearing after the setting of the
Sun, the weather being otherwise clear: the troublednesse of water eue^ in the
deepest wells, yielding moreover an infected and stinking savor: and lastly,
great and terrible sounds in the earth, like the noise of gronings or
thunderings, as well before as after the quaking: We find not that any such
foretoken happened against the coming of this Earthquake. And* therefore we
may well conclude (though there were none other reason to move us) that this
miracle proceeded not of the course of any natural causes, but of Gods only
determinate purpose, who makes even the very foundations and pillars of the
earth to shake, the mountains to melte like war, and the seas to dry up and
to become as a dry field, when he lists to show the greatenesse of his
glorious power, in uttering his heavy displeasure against sin.

But put the case that some natural causes or secret influences had their
ordinary operations in this Earthquake, whereof notwithstanding there is not
any sufficient likelyhode: shall we so gaze upon the mean causes, that we shall
forget or let slip the chief and principal causes? Know we not (after so
long hearing and professing of the Gospel) that a sparrow lights not on the
ground with out Gods providence? That the neglecting of his loving kindness,
and the continuing in sin without amendment, provoke his vengeance? And yet
that he of his own fatherly free goodness, does ever give warning before he
stryketh? Surely we can not but know it, yea and see it too, unless the God of
this world have so blinded our eyes, that we will not see it. For it is daily
and almost hourly told us by the Ministers of his word, and the Bible lies
always open for us to read it our selves, that as the only original cause
and welspring of al plagues and punishments is sin: to the plagues and
punishments themselves, and the orderly disposing, directing, and guiding of
all causes to their due ends and effects, is the only work of God, who to
make all offenders inexcusable (as I said before) does often cause even the
very Elements and senseless creatures, to fore show in most terrible manner
even by their natural operations, the approaching of his just vengeance. And
truly, as it is said in the Psalm, their speaking and talking unto us, is not
so softly and whysperingly, as that the voices of them can not be heard: but
contrariwise, they be so loud in our ears, so manifest to our eyes, and so
sensible to our feeling: that (unless we be stony and steely hearted, or
given ^uer to a leude mind,) they can not but he grievous to our hearts, and
terrible to our consciences.

Now then, shall we think this rare and unaccustomed miracle, such as no man
living, nor none of our forefathers has ever seen or heard of, to be a thing
of no importance, as happening by chance, or grounded upon some natural causes:
and not rather as a messenger and summoner of us to the dreadful Iudgementseate
of the almighty and everliving God?

Let us enter into our selves, and examine our time paste. Since the sharp
trial which GOD made of us in the reign of Queen Marie, (at which time we
vowed all obedience to GOD, if he would voutchsafe to deliver us again from
the bondage of the Romish Antichryst, into the liberty of the Gospel of his
son Jesus Christ) he hearkening effectually to our requests, has given us
a long resting and refreshing-time, blessed with innumerable benefits both of
body and soul: For peace, health, and plenty of al things necessary for the
life of man, we have had a golden world above all the residue of our
neighbors round about us.

The word of truth has bin preached unto us early and late without let or
disturbance. And because our prosperity has made us to play the wanton
children against God, he has chastized us in the mean season with many
fatherly corrections.

We have bin taught, instructed, exhorted, encouraged, allured, entreated,
reproved, rebuked, vpbrayded, warned, threatened, nurtured, and chastized. To
be short, there is not that mean whereby we might be won to the obeying and
loving of our God, whether it were by favorable mildness or moderate rigor,
but he has ministered the same most mercifully and seasonably unto us. And what
are we the better for all this?

Have we so profited in this schole, that of Covetous we be become Liberal?
of Proud and Envious, meek and Lowly? of Leacherous, Chaste? of Gluttons,
Measurable feeders? of Drunkards, Sober? of Wrathful and testie, Mild and
patient? of Cruel and hard hearted, Pitiful and gentle? of Oppressors,
Relieuers? and of Irreligious, Seruisable to GOD?

Have we so put off the old man, and so clothed ourselves with the new, in
living sincerely according to ye doctrine we profess, that neither the enemies
of Christ's Church, nor our own consciences can reprove us? Then need we not
to be of any signs from the Heaven above, nor of any tokens from the earth
beneath: for we have builded our houses wisely upon the rock, which neither
wind, water, nor Earthquake, no nor Satan him self with all his Feends can
shake down or empaire.

But alas, it is far otherwise with us: we have grown in godliness as the
Moon does in light when she is past the full. For who sees not the emulation
that remaynes still among us for excess of apparel, fare, and building? Who
perceyueth not the dysdaine of superiors to their inferiors, the grudge and
heartburning of inferiors toward their superiors, and the want of love in all
states one toward another?

Who complayneth not of corruption in Officers, yea even in Officers of Justice
and ministers of the Law? Is it not a common byworde (but I hope not true
though common) that as a man is frended, so the law is ended?

In Youth there was never like loocenesse and untimely liberty, nor in Age
like vnstayednesse and want of dyscretion, nor the like carelessness of duty
in either toward other.

The Boy mateth the Man of aged gravity, and is commended for that which he
deserves to be beaten for.

Servants are become maysterlike, and fellows with Masters: and Masters
unable to master their own asfections, are become servants to other folks
servants, yea and to their own servants too.

Men have taken up the garish attire and nyce behauior of Women: and Women
transformed from their own kind, have gotten up the apparel and ^^omackes of
men: and as for honest and modest shamefastness the preferrer of all Uertues,
it is so highly mislyked, that it is thought of some folks scarce tolerable
in children.

Hatred, malice, dysdaine, and desire of revenge for the weighte of a feather,
are the virtues of our young Gentlemen in commendation of their manhood and
valiantness.

Deep Dissimulation and Flattery are counted Courtly behauior: Might over
comes right: and Truth is trodden under foot.

Idleness and Pride bring daily infinite numbers to that point, that they had
rather rob and be shamefully hanged, than labor and live with honesty.

Usurie, the consumer of private states, and the confounder of Commonweals,
is become a common (and in some men's opinions commendable) trade to live by.

Faithfulness is fleede into exile, and falshode vaunteth himself in his
place, til he have gotten great sums of money into his hand, that he may
play the Banker out, to the undoing of such as trust him.

The Saboth days and holy days ordained for the hearing of Gods word to the
reformation of our lives, for the administration and receiving of the
Sacraments to our comfort, for the seeking of all things behouefull for body
or soul at Gods hand by Prayer, for the mynding of his benefits, and to
yield praise and thanks unto him for the same, and finally, for the special
occupying of our selves in all spiritual exercizes: is spent full heathenishly,
in tauerning, tippling, gaming, playing, and beholding of B^arebaytings and
Stageplayes, to the utter dyshonor of GOD, impeachment of all godliness, and
unnecessary consuming of men's substances which ought to be better employed.

The want of orderly Discipline and Catechizing, has either sent great
numbers both old and young back again into Papistrie, or let them run loose
into godless Atheism.

And would God that we which call others to obedience, showing them the way,
and rebuking their vices: might not be justly charged to be as trumpets,
which with their sound encourage other men to the battle, but fight not
themselves. Nay would God that in all degrees, some such as ought to be
Lanternes of light and Ringleaders to Virtue, were not infecters of others by
their evil example.

I fear me that if the Prophet Esaias were here alive, he would tell us as he
sometime told the Jews, that from the croune of our head to the sole of our
foot, there is no whole or sound part in our body, but that al is full of
sores, blaines, and botches. Think we then that such doing shall escape
unpunished, or such buildings stand unshaken? Well may we deceive our selves
in so hoping: but God deceyueth not, neither is deceived.

It is written, that every plant which our heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be plucked up by the roots, and that every tree which bears not good
fruit, shall be cut down and cast into the fire.

The Axe is laid to the root of the tree: and the longer that Gods vengeance
is in coming the, sorer it smyteth when it is come. Terrible and most true is
this saying of his by the mouth of Solomon: For as much as I have called, and
you have refuzed: and I have stretched out my hands, and you have not
regarded it: but have despized al my counsel, and set my correction at naught:
therefore will I also laugh at your destruction, and mock ye when the thing
that ye fear comes upon you: even when the thing that ye be afraid of
breaks in upon you like a storm, and your misery like a tempest. When
trouble and heaviness come upon you on all sides: then shall ye call upon me,
but I will not answer you, ye shall seek me early, but ye shall not find me:
even because ye hated knowledge, and did not chooze the fear of the Lord.
Ye would none of my counsel, but hated my correction: and therefore shall ye eat
the fruit of your own ways, and be filled with your own inventions. Soothly it
is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. For as he is
merciful* so is he also just, and in all his determinations he is utterly
unchangeable. And (as the Prophet Jeremie says) When sentence is once gone
forth of his presence, it shall not return without performance.

Wherefore let us not be as horses and Mules which have no understanding:
neither let us tarry till Judgment be sent forth unto victory. But let us
consider the time of our visitation, and while we have time, let us use it to
our benefit.

So long as God calls unto us, so long as he entreteth us, so long as he
techeth, allureth, exhorts or warns us, yea so long as he does as yet but
threaten us: so long the gate is still open for us, so as he will hear us if we
call, and be found of us if we seek him. But if he once hold his peace, and
begin too smite, then it is too late too call back his hand, our crying will
not boot us.

Therefore while we have respite, and while it is called to day, let us not
harde^ our hearts as in the provocation, and as in the day of Temptation in the
wilderness, but let us hearken to his voice, and forsaking the lusts and the
wicked imaginations and devices of our own h^rts, let us turn to the Lord our
God with hearty repentance and unfeigned amendment of life, least (besides other
meaner plagues both of body and mind) our Candlestick be removed, our light
quenched, Christ's Gospel taken from us, and we for our unthankfulness be
cast out with our children into utter darkness: and in y^ terrible day of
Judgment hear this dreadful sentence of the just Judge pronounced against
us: Depart from me ye workers of wickedness, which hardened your hearts
against me and made your faces as hard as brass, at such time as my long
sufferaunce waited for you, provoking you by mildness and patience to
amendment.

FINIS.
The report of the said Earthquake, and how it began.
ON Easter Wednesdaye, being the sixte of April. 1580. somewhat before six of
the clock in the afternoon, happened this great Earthquake whereof this
discourse treats: I mean not great in respect of long continuauce of time,
for (God be thanked) it continued little above a minute of an hour, rather
shaking Gods rod at us, than smiting us according to our deserts: Nor yet in
respect of any great hurt done by it within this Realm: For, although it
shook all houses, castles, churches, and buildings, every where as it went,
and put them in danger of ruin: yet within this Realm (praised be our Savior
Christ for it) it ouerthrewe few or none that I have yet heard of, saving
certain stones, chimneys, walls, and Pinacles, o high buildings, both in
this City and in diverse other places: Neither do I hear of any Christen
people that received bodily hurt bo it, saving two children in London, a boy
and a girl, being at Sermon among a great number of people in Christ's church
by Newgate market, of whom the boy named Thomas Gray, was slain out of hand,
with the fall of a stone shaken down from the roof of the Church: and the
girl (whose name was Mabell Euerite) being sore hurt there at ye same present
by like casualtie, dyed within few days after: But I term it great in
respect of the vniuersalnesse thereof almost at one instant, not only
within this Realm, but also without, where it was much more violent, and did
far more harm: and in respect of the great terror which it then struck into
al men's hearts where it came, and yet still strikes into such as duly
consider how ^^tely God may be offended with all men for sin, and
specially with this Realm of England, which has most abundantly tasted of
Gods mercy, and most unthankfully neglected his goodness, which yet still
warns us by this terrible wonder, what far more terrible punishments are
like to light upon us ere long, unless we amend our sinful life and
conversation b^ times.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1580.




