SPIRITVAL MARRIAGE: OR, THE UNION between CHRIST and his CHVRCH.

As it was delivered in a Sermon at WESTMINSTER, the first of January. ANNO
DOM. 1626.

By JAMES BAILLIE, Master of Arts.

LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T. FAUCET, for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold
at his Shop, at the black Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, Marquis of HAMMILTON. WILLIAM, Earl of MORTON.
WILLIAM, Earl of LAVTHIAN. THOMAS, Earl of KELLIE. JAMES, Earl of CARLILL.
RICHARD, Earl of DESMONT. JOHN, Earl of ANNANDAILL. WILLIAM, Vice count of
AIR. GEORGE, Lord BRVCE.
And to the Right Worshipful, Sr. JAMES FVLLERTON, Groom of his May.
Stool. Sr. ROBERT CAR, Gentleman of his May. Bedchamber, and Keeper of the
Privie-purse. Mr. JAMES MAXVVELL, Mr. KIRK, Mr. WILLIAM MVRRAY, Mr. JAMES
LEVINGSTON,
and Mr. PIT CARNE, Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber. And to all other Hon:
and Worcester: Scotsmen remaining at the Court of England, that profess the true
Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic faith, all blessed Happiness in this life,
and Eternal bliss in the life to come. Right HONORABLE, and WORSHIPFVLL.
SOme perhaps may think that I have done an absurd thing in prefixing so many
illustrious Peers, prudent Nobles, and Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber,
of high and great desert, to so little and so slender a work: But from the
learned I hope for a less critic censure, and from the wise for a more
judicious sentence: first, because I know that this weak treatise has need
not only of one strong pillar, but of many to uphold it against the ruin,
which both by Papists; and false Brethren, will maliciously be threatened
against it: and against their subterranian plots, by which at every corner they
will intend to undermine it. Nevertheless, I will never deny but any one of
your Hon: or Worcester: is a prop more then sufficient enough to sustain a more
decaying edifice, if any such can be apprehended: and a book of greater worth
should have but too much honor to have any one of your names in its
frontispiece. Secondly, because I would encourage you, and rouse up your
spirits to a lively confidence, that by adoption you are the sons of Gods
right hand, members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, a
part of that chosen generation, The Church of the elect and spouse of Christ,
by marriage united unto him, and freed from that Antichristian slaverie and
Babilonian bondage, with the wine of whose fornication a great part of the
world these many ages past have been made drunk, and therefore God has made
you strong, strong for himself in this time of trial when the sons of
Antichrist breathes nothing but blood against the Church of Christ; and
against her in many places of Germany have prevailed, casten out Christ, and in
his place set up that abominable Idol, their Mass, and now threaneth our
Church, the Church within this Island with the like, to extinguish the lamp of
the glorious Gospel, which God has lighted amongst us, to remove our
candlestick, and in lieu thereof to light false lights, to set up rusty and
dark candlesticks, Their service in an unknown tongue, their Idols in stead
of instructions, and their Apostles bones, and clothes in place of the writings
of Christ's Apostles. But God has made you strong for himself, to fight in his
war, to hold the wild Boares out of his vineyard, and in his cause neither to
spare your bodies nor goods; even in his cause, which your Fathers as his
instruments did re-establish in the Monarchy of Scotland, expelling the
children of Dagon, 2. These 2.
which had come in by the effectual working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness: and
you honoring the Lord after this manner, he will multiply honors upon you,
keep you as a signet upon his hand, Ezech 34.
and upon you, and every one of you, there shall be rain of blessings, the eye
of the Lord shall watch over you for good, his mighty hand and out stretched
arm shall be ready to protect you in every danger, and to appoint most
glorious victories for you: for Babylon is now toward the falling, her sins are
come up to heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities, she must drink in
that cup, that she has filled to others, and as she has shed our blood, so
now must she be repayed and drink a double draught.

Thirdly I have presumed to dedicate this Treatise unto your Hon: and Worcester: not
only for the excellency of the subject, The union between Christ and his
Church: of which you are a part: But likewise because I am a Scotsman that have
the honor to belong to every one of you, either by blood or affinity, and to
many of you by both (whereof I hope you shall never be ashamed) and therefore I
thought it not amiss to let this Sermon go under the shadow of your Honorable
protections, that now remain at the Court of England, as an argument of my
love toward my Country, and as a pledge of my service toward you all in
general, and every one of you in particular. In the mean season continuing my
prayers that such a virtuous emulation, may always remain among you, as is to
day; that is, first of all, to advance Gods glory, secondly, to be loyal to
your King, that by innumerable predecessors has swayed your Scepter; and
lastly, some of you with Pompie to study to preserve your Dignity, others with
Crassus to augment it, and the third sort with Caesar to acquire Dignity, not
by usurpation, as he did, But in your Sovereigns service, under the banner of
CHRIST. Farewell.

Your Honors, and Worships, most humble Servant JAMES BAILLIE.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, J have not used (as many do) in this Sermon, the neat
Tenor of ISOCRATES, the ample Sublimitie of DEMOSTHENES, the Majesty of
THVCYCIDES, the Dignity of PLATO, nor that most full and copious style of
declamation which TVLLIE used before the Senate, yea I have shunned them, as by
a good Master SCILLA and CARYBDIS will be eschewed; because I know that such
garulitie, such fallible inticements of words, and such vain ostentation in
Preaching, sauoureth the flesh, and has no power, no virtue nor efficacy to
wound a proud mind and to cast it down, nor to be a balm for the curing and
raising up of the same again to a lively confidence in CHRIST: It only
tends to tickle the auditors ears for the present, to enter at the one, and
go forth at the other, but never to descend into the heart for its
circumcision and molification in time to come. A simple style without
superfluity in words, fertile in sentences, which does not so much smell of
human prudencie, as savor the virtue of the holy Spirit, is the only
eloquence that penetrates the souls of Christian men, and searches, to the
inward marrow of the same. It is truth that an Orator once persuaded CAESAR to
retreit and rescinde the sentence of LIGARIVS after that he was condemned, But
when a Minister of Gods word, a faithful Pastor must discharge his commission
unto his Flock, what Rhetoric shall make them believe that life flowed from
the Cross of CHRIST: that deaths Empire by death was subdued, that the
eternal word covered with flesh, beaten with fists, nailed to the Cross, did
bear our sins, die, rise again, that we by this benefit shall triumph over
death, and by marriage be united unto him. Here all human reason, and
adminicles of art, though thundered out by a Pericles, must be abstained from.
Here all pomp in preaching and sophistick ostentation must give place to the
efficatious Pastor, whose sermon is replenished with substance, matter, and the
riches of the Spirit, which by Saint PAVL is called, 2. Tim. 1.13. Verae
doctrinae hypotyposis, The true pattern of wholesome words.

Secondly good reader, albeit, it be barren of human eloquence, yet fear not
to read it, for it may be plentiful in substance, and if thou think that J
have stayed too much upon the two first similitudes, J think so with thee
myself, Et habes confitentem reum, ye I pray thee to pardon me, seeing it is
for thy instruction, and discovering of much obstruce and excellent Theology,
by which I hope (and J wish it from my heart) that thou shall be bettered, and
so expecting thy friendly censure, J take my leave. Farewell.

Thine, in Christ to be commanded, James Baillie.

SPIRITVALL MARRIAGE; OR, THE UNION Between CHRIST and his CHVRCH.
HOSEA. 2.19. J will marry thee to me for ever, yea I will marry thee to me.


PLATO Philosophizing upon the grace of GOD Because he was an heathen
Philosopher.
according as he was able, gave thanks unto him for three things; First,
that GOD had created him a Man and not a Beast; secondly, that he was borne a
Grecian and not a Barbarian. Thirdly, that not only so but a Philosopher also.
But we that are instructed at a better school, do otherwise destribute our
thanksgiving, and praise him for three things also. First, that amongst all his
creatures he has made us men, created in a most glorious manner, Omnino ad
imaginem suam, altogether after his own Image. Secondly that from among all
sorts of men, he has made us Christians. Thirdly, that amongst those, that
bear the name of Christians, he has made us only faithful ones; elected
and adopted us in his own Son before the foundation of the world, 2. Tim.
1.9.
and made us like a few well sighted among a throng of blind men, like the
portion of JACOB in Aegipt, Exodus 10.22.
only enlightened in the midst of that darkness which covered all the
Country, Judge. 6.38.
like the fleece of Gideon, only watered with the dew of his grace, whilst
all the rest of the earth is dry and destitute of his favor.

When I call to memory the unspeakable love of GOD, and his fatherly care in
the conduct and conservation of his Church, it is a whole web of wonders. Gen
4.11.
How he has revenged the blood of ABELL, how he has served for a pilot and
steersman to his Church enclosed within the arc; Genesis 7.
how for the love of ABRAHAM and ISAAC he has stricken and curbed Kings, Genesis
12.17.
how he has prepared lodging for his people in Aegipt, Genesis 48.11.
how he has drawn them from thence with a mighty hand and outstretched arm
having carried his people out of captivity as upon Eagles wings, Exodus 14.28.
how he has given them his law, Exodus 20.
fed them with bread from heaven, Exodus 16.15.
covered them in the day time, given them light in the night, and driven out
Nations before them, how he has chastized them, to keep them under subjection
in prosperity, and how his chastisements have ever been interlaced with
deliverances, least they should have been overwhelmed with too great
adversity: The history of the Judges, of DAVID and his successors, the
deliverance from Babylon, and the re-establishment of Jerusalem. Is not this a
whole chain of GODS mercies, and love toward his Church linked together
already: and yet to make it not only more weighty, but weight it self, he
joyneth this link unto it, I will marry thee to me for ever, yea, I will
marry thee unto me. And this last link is that which I intend to bestow upon
you this morning for a New years gift.

Mos vetus est Iani dare mutua dona calendis,
Annus vt auspicio prosperiore fluat.
It is an ancient custom among friends upon New years day mutually to give
and to receive gifts as fortunate pledges of a hopeful year, says a Poet:
Buchan*
which commonly are of silver, gold, and of precious stones.

But as Saint Peter, Acts. 3.6. said of old to the Creeple, that lay at the
gate of the Temple called beautiful, silver and gold have I none to give unto
you; Act. ^.6.
so say I now unto you, for I will bestow no such ware upon you, those are but
dross and earth, and of a rusty and an earthly worth, but such as I have I
will bestow upon you, a Spiritual gift, most liberally. And if you shall but
gratefully receive it, and lay it up close in the most inward cabine of your
hearts, I dare be bold to promise that one day it shall be helpful unto you,
minister unto you more joy and comfort, then all the silver, gold, and precious
stones which are brought from the Orient. And so I come to the bestowing of it,
I mean to the handling of my text, I will marry thee to me for ever, yea, I
will marry thee unto me.

This text is a promise of comfort, in which you shall take notice of these
four; First, of the subject, CHRIST; lurking under his word, I; secondly, of
the object, the Church, sheltred under this word, thee. Thirdly, of the thing
promised, Marriage; I will marry thee. Fourthly, of the qualities of this
marriage, which are two. First, the certainty employed in the gemination and
doubling of the promise, I will marry thee; yea, I will marry thee. Lastly,
the perpetuity of this marriage, for ever; I will marry thee unto me for
ever. This Proposition is first propounded, I will marry thee, and hereafter
explained by a twofold distinction; first, not to a base, not to a dishonorable
match, but to my self, that am Gnamith JEHOVAH, Esaias. 9.
equal to JEHOVAH * the Father of Eternity, who made the earth and spread the
heavens like a curtain, Psalm. 104.
the eternal Wisdom, the essential Word, the second person of the holy
Trinity, GOD everlastingly blessed. Secondly, not for a day, a month, or a
year, but perpetually, for ever: and so have you the parts and circumstances
of this Proposition: neither mind I to handle them severally and alone but
jointly and together, because in them jointly is only contained that most
admirable conjunction, and most strait union between CHRIST and his Church,
which no power in hell nor earth is able to sunder and infringe: neither is
there any way in nature by which two things can be made one, but from it the
Spirit of GOD borrows similitudes to express our conjunction with CHRIST:
we are one with him, as EVAH was with ADAM, flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, we are one with him, as the house and the foundation whereupon it is
built; But this union is most lively set forth in these three similitudes.
First, as is the strait conjunction between the graft and the stock, so is the
union between CHRIST and his Church. Secondly, as is the neerenesse of the
garment to the body, so is ours with CHRIST. Thirdly, as the straitness of the
bond is between the wife and the husband, such is the straitness of our union
with CHRIST.

But before I explain the similitudes, it is necessary to understand what is
signified by this word, * Church, in my text, The Church has diverse
significations.
to the end that you may know to which Church this promise is made, seeing it
is diversely taken, and has sundry significations in the old and new Testament:
for (...) the Church, is a Greek word and properly signifies an Assembly,
which belongs as well to the Heathen, and to Infidels, as to Christians and
the children of GOD, verified by DAVID, Psalm. 26.6. Psalm. 26.6.
Odini Ecclesiam malignantium, I have hated the assembly; or, the Church of the
wicked: and by the Apostle, Act. 19. Act. 19.
That calls that multitude, which cried, Great is the DIANA of the Ephesians,
Ecclesiam the assembly, or, the Church. But hereafter use obtained that
Christians called their assembly Ecclesiam, the Church, to Why Christians
called there Assemblies the Church.
distinguish it from the Synagogue of the Jews, albeit that both (...) and
(...) signifies one thing, an Assembly, or a Congregation, a meeting or a
gathering together. This word then Ecclesia the Church, being usurped by
Christians is taken by them in the new Testament The Church has five
significations among Christians.
five manner of ways. First, for the Pastors of the Church, the people being
excluded, and so it is taken St Math. 18.17. where our Savior commands, That
if a debate between neighbors cannot be quietly pacified, to tell the
Church; that is the Bishops, Prelates, and other Pastors of inferior titles
that have superiority and jurisdiction in the Church. Now it sometime belongs
to this Church arguere and increpare, 2. Tim. 4. to improve and rebuke,
sometimes, amputare, to cut off, sometimes, lapsos relevare, to raise up again
such as have slipped or fallen, sometimes, to confirm and corroberate those
that stand. In a word, In this Church as in the Arc there must be both manna
and virga, bread for refection, and a rod for correction, osculum and fraenum,
a kiss for friends and a bridle for refractarie and stubborn persons. And as
in a Vineyard there must be both planting and pruning, so in this Church must
there be both Doctrine and Discipline. Doctrine, to inctruct in the points of
Faith, to conserve, nourish and augment charity, flowing from the sincerity
of the mind, integrity of the conscience, and from a faith void of
dissimulation and hypocrisy. Discipline, to correct and reform vices and
abuses. Secondly, this word Church is taken for the People, the Pastors being
excluded, and so it is taken, Act. 20.28. Where Pastors are exhorted to feed
the Church which CHRIST has purchased with his own blood. Thirdly, it is
taken for a particular Church in which both people and pastors are
comprehended, such of old was the Church at Ephesus, at Corinth, at Rome, and
such were those seven Churches whereof we read in the 2. and 3. Chapters of
the Revelation, But now many of these Churches have much fallen from that
purity wherein the Apostles and their Disciples did institute them, and some
of them altogether made so great a defection and apostasy from the faith, as
therein a man explicitly resting on their whole Doctrine cannot be saved, such
to day is the Church at Rome, and such a one has she been these many ages
past, for in her, Idolatry is maintained, and the whole Doctrine of the benefit
of CHRIST altogether corrupted, if then a man would be saved, he must use our
Saviors counsel, Revel. 18.4. Revel. 18.4.
Go out of Babylon my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. Fourthly, this word Church is taken for
the whole assembly of those that here below upon the earth are called
Christians: and this is the universal visible Church, composed of diverse
particular Churches, called by the Apostle in the 1. of Tim. 3.15. 1. Tim. 3.15.
The pillar and ground of truth, because it is the duty thereof to underprop
and defend the truth against all those that seek by schisms, heresies, and
erroneous Doctrines to suppress and overthrow the same. Now this universal
Church subsisteth by a perpetual generation one succeeding to another, and
consists of all the converted Jews and Gentiles that are upon the face of
this earth. It is truth that this Church was once, and before CHRIST came in
the flesh only among the Jews glorious, and the Gentiles then were but dogs
or whelps; In the 15. of Math. 26. Math. 15.26.
It is not good to take the childrens bread and to cast it to whelps. But now
God persuaded IAPHETH to dwell in SHEMS tent; Now God is the God of the
Gentiles also. Romans 3.29. Yea which is more, obstinacy is come to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Romans 11.25. And amongst us God
has a more The Church is more glorious among the Christians then it was among
the Jews.
glorious Church then ever he had amongst the Jews: for this cause ABRAHAM
desired to see our days; for this cause St PAVL called Gods old ordinances,
beggarly rudiments. Gal. 4.9. and reputed of Genealogies as of fables, for this
cause the Patriarchs without us are not said to be perfect, Heb. 11.2.
Heb. 11.40. And this made SIMEON for a time to desire, that he might not see
death. The Jewish Church had but shadows and circumstances, but we have the
body and the substance, Ioh. 1.2.
The word was made flesh; he walked among his brethren, they saw him, handled
him, heard him, beheld his wounders and miracles, Math. 27.24.35. Math. 26.6.
saw him condemned, crucified, raised, and carried into heaven in a cloud. It
was this that made EZECHIELL the Prophet say, our Temple should be bigger,
then in the days of MOSES, Math. 11.11.
that made JOHN the Baptist be called the greatest of all the Prophets, and
yet the least in our Church greater then he: that made St. PAVL. 2. Cor. 3. 2.
Cor. 3.
Call the Law, the ministry of condemnation, but the Gospel, the
ministration of righteousness, the Law that which should be abolished, but the
Gospel glorious, and that which remains: that under the law the Jews did
only see but through a veil, but we in our Church under the Gospel, behold as
in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face. O unthankful Gentiles! O
ungrateful Christians, and O most ungrateful England of all the Christians in
the world, for howsoever that other Nations may pretend some excuse, yet
surely, O England, thou is inexcusable, especially these 60. years, in which
this sun of the glorious Gospel has continually without eclipse shined in
thy Horizon, and still does run his circular motion, and yet nevertheless
what is the darkness in which we do not walk? Alas, I mean, what iniquity
do we not drink in like water? What is the vanity after the which we do not
seek? And what is that grace of GOD, which we turn not into wantonness?
Especially (leaving at this time all other things) this glorious Gospel, this
spiritual Manna, this heavenly food, the plenty whereof produces nothing but
a loathing of the same, except it be most rarely cooked in, and garnished with
human conceits to satisfy your dainty appetites, and when it is cooked to
you after this manner, which is a sort of Preaching too much used in this Land,
and deserves more discommendation, yet are ye contrary to all other creatures
under the sun, that grow the fairer, the fatter, and the better too the more
choice diet they feed on; as for example, when trees are removed to a more
fertile soil, they will spread further, and be more fertile then before, when
cattle are put into a better pasture, they will be of a greater growth and
labor better too: But it is not so with us; No, for after never so learned a
sermon, there will be both disliking and liking of it, but this liking tends
not to retain the principal parts thereof in our memories and to practice the
same in our lives and conuersations. No, No, but only a liking that the
Preacher did well and that he is a good Scholar, and this is all, and, if it
be so, it is much too. But O Lord I pray thee, that gives both the will and
the deed to thy people, to bestow upon them new hearts, to renew within their
bowels a right spirit, that they may apprehend thy bountifulness toward them,
and magnify thy Name for such plentifulnesse of thy word sown amongst them,
in regard whereof many Nations, like a Forest, stands not put to tillage, and
for such light in thy glorious Gospel, in respect whereof, many, yea almost
all people are but conducted by the Moon, which I beseech the O Lord never to
extinguish, never, O Lord to let the Sun of thy Gospel in this Land set, so
long as the Sun and Moon endure. Fifthly the Church is taken among
Christians for the whole body and assembly of the Elect, and of those that GOD
by the way of sanctification has predestined to be the heirs of the
Kingdom of glory: and this Church is composed of three sorts of The Church of
the Elect composed of three sorts of men.
people; first, of such as were upon the earth; but now are not, because their
souls and their bodies are sundred; their bodies till the day of judgment are
committed to the grave, where they must return unto the earth out of which
they were taken, but their souls are conjoined with CHRIST in heaven, which
one day shall be reunited again to their bodies, and magnify God both in
body and soul, and this is called The triumphant Church, because the members
thereof have overcome by the good fight of Faith, powers, principalities, and
spiritual wickedness in this life, and now in that other life, which is much
better then this, they triumph, and have received, albeit not fully, the fruits
of their labor, and GOD has given them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness. Secondly,
this Church of the Elect is composed of men that are upon earth presently
alive, fighting against sin, Satan, the world and their own corrupt
affections, making their Election sure unto themselves by well doing, but or it
be long shall be no more, and this is the Militant Church, the members whereof
are visible as men, but not as members of this Church, and elect men, because
Election is not discerned by the eye but charitably presumed on by faith and
good works which are inseparable companions; as the Sun and light, fire and
heat, water and aliquiditie: so that if a man want good works, we may boldly
say he has no faith, but we dare not affirm for all this, that he is not a
vessel of Election, because Election is a thing which God has reserved to
himself, yea, it is altogether unknown to a man himself, it runs so
secretly, until the time that by his internal vocation God make it manifest
and known to him, so that when I see a profane man, a persecuter, an
unfruitful tree; I may say, and that with reason, that such a one has no
faith, and as yet is not internally called, but that God has not elected him,
and will not call him, it is a damnable presumption, and to diue in the
bottomless gulf of GODS vnrevealed will, and to fall within the compass of
that which our Savior expressly discharges, Math. 7.1. Judge not that ye be
not judged, for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged. Thirdly,
this Church of the Elect is composed of such as are not, but shall be, as are
not yet borne; but are in the counsel of GOD registrated and enrolled to be
borne, to fight in his war in future time; and ordained to obtain victory.

This Church of the elect Four names given to the Church of the elect.
has many names in Scripture, especially four; First, in the 1. of Pet. the
2. chapter and 9. verse. It is called a Chosen generation, and herein is
distinguished from all other Churches. Distinguished from all other Churches.
First, from the Church of the Heathen and Infidels, which is, generatio
malignantium, a Wicked generation.

Secondly, from the Church of the Papists, which is, generatio
Antichristianorum, an Antichristian generation, Revel. 17.
a great Whore arrayed in purple and scarlet, gilded with gold, precious
stones, and pearls: sitting upon many waters, people, multitudes, Nations,
tongues, and seven Mountains, which reigns over the Kings of the earth,
giving heed unto Spirits of error, teaching Doctrines of Devils, forbidding to
marry and commanding to abstain from meats which God has created to be
received with giving thanks: drunken with the blood of Saints and with the
blood of the Martyrs of JESUS, I mean with the blood of many good Christians
as Lions in France, called Waldenses from JOHN WALDVS, as they call us
Calvinists from CALVIN, whom their King to his immortal infamy and dishonor
excited by the Papacy did most cruelly butcher: with the blood of many good
Christians massacred upon St. Baltholmewes day at Paris, whose wounds are yet
fresh bleeding in the memories of men that live and saw them, at Tollouse,
Orleans, Boitiers, and many more places in France: with the blood of many a
hundred thousand butchered most beastly in west Flanders by the Duke of Alphe,
because they would not receive the mark of the Beast in their foreheads; what
shall I say of our Martyrs under Q MARY'S reign, or of that Beasts cruelty
and insatiable desire of blood that lately here most furiously in King JAMES
his time, intended to have blown up our Parliament house? I can say nothing,
but believe that that which St JOHN many years agone foretold, is fulfilled,
that is, Revel. 18.4.
that Babylon even that great City upon the seven Mountains is become the
habitation of Devils, the hold of all foul spirits, a cage of every unclean
and hateful bird.

Thirdly, this Church of the elect, this Chosen generation, is distinguished
from the Church of all other Heretics and Schismatikes, which is, generatio
reproborium, a reprobated generation, of this order are Manicheans, Arrians,
Brownists, Familists, and such like, which esteem none to be members of the
mystical Body of CHRIST, except those, that be of their most wicked and
execrable opinions: Puritans I will not deal so rigorously with you, howsoever
you are but tares among the wheat, and albeit you hold none to be professors
of the Gospel, but your seditious and Schismatike society, and therefore calls
and terms your selves Professors per (...), notwithstanding that your
profession is nothing but lip-labor, renting in the mean season the coat of
CHRIST whereupon the barbarous Soldiers did cast lottes, and spared the same,
breaking down the walls of Jerusalem which * TITUS, Joseph:
a heathen Emperor would have suffered to stand; drowning that Arc, which the
general Deluge would not drown, when it drowned all the world, burning that
bushe, whereupon the cruel raging fire had pity and compassion, and In a
word you endeavor by your ignorant and malicious Schisms, to demolish that
house which is built upon a rock against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail; for when any of the faithful servants of God takes pains for the
home bringing of a lost Papist to the true sheepefold and Church of CHRIST, It
is the first thing which he obiecteth against us, ye are divided amongst your
selves, I cannot tell whether I shall embrace the opinion of your Church, or of
your Puritan; and for is the conversion of sinners stayed by your woeful
generation, the kingdom of Satan propagated, the kingdom of CHRIST
diminished, and Christian religion exposed both to ludibrie and opprobrie both
to mockery and to shame: and yet you have eyes and ears, but will neither see
it nor hear it: I think the curse of the Gospel is upon you, and cursed be
those that prefer not Jerusalem to their chief joy: never may they prosper
that love not, that wish not peace within her sacred walls.

Fourthly and lastly, this chosen generation is distinguished from the whole
visible universal Church here below, which is generatio miscellaneorum a mixed
generation, and may be compared to a net which gathers both fish and
scorpions, to a field in which grows both wheat and tares, to a garden in
which are both weeds and flowers, because in the universal visible Church et
sanctis Ecclesiae locis are both Christ and Antichrist, Pastors and Wolves,
truth and lies; Sheep and goats, good Christians and dissembling hypocrites,
vessels of election and Children of wrath: and often greater store of the
worst then of the best.

Secondly again this Church of the elect, Heb. 12.32. Heb. 12.32.
is called the Congregation of the first borne, whose names are written in
heaven, because the names of the elect are written in the book of life.

Thirdly Ephesians. the first and last, Ephesians. 1.
it is called the body of Christ and by consequence false, hypocritical and
profane Christians are not members thereof, because such are but dead members
which can be no part of the lively body of JESUS CHRIST.

Fourthly Revel. 21.9. Revel. 21.9.
It is called the Bride and the Lambs wife, because Christ has married her
unto himself in judgment, in righteousness, in wisdom, in mercy, and in
compassion. Hos. 2. Hos. 2.
And it is to this Church of the elect this chosen generation, this assembly,
this congregation of the first borne, this body of Christ and to this Bride the
Lambs wife, to which this promise of comfort is made. Cant. 4.
I will marry thee unto me for ever. This Church is hortus conclusus an
enclosed piece of ground as the garden of Eden, and lies within a hedge or
fence. This Church and none other, is the spouse of JESUS CHRIST, to which he
has joined himself in marriage, and which he will make unto himself a
glorious Church without spot or wrinkle, holy and unreprovable; and out of
this Church their can be no salvation, in which regard says St. AUSTEN, Qui
Ecclesiam non habuit pro matre nunquam Deum habebit pro patre, who had not the
Church to his mother shall never have God to be his father, to which I will
add, nec Christum pro capite and marito, not Christ to be his head and
husband; and this made the good Emperor THEODOSIUS to conclude. Malo esse
membrum Ecclesiae quam caput Imperque. I had rather be a member of the Church
then head of the whole Empire. And thus much for this word Church in my text,
the significations and names thereof, and to which Church this promise is made
I will marry thee unto me for ever, to the Church of the (...), and so I come
to the explanation of the three similitudes by which our union with Christ is
most richly expressed, the first whereof is the similitude of the root and the
grafts.

Can there be a more straight union apprehended? can there be a more near
conjunction imagined then this between the stock and the branches, between
the root and the grafts? The similitude between the graft and the root.
it is not possible, and yet such a one is our union with Christ; In the 15. of
St. Ioh. the fifth verse, John 15.5.
I am the vine ye are the branches. This is a metaphor a borrowed speech from
planting, Three things obseruable.
in which ye shall take notice of these three. First of the root or stock,
Secondly of the grafts or branches, and Thirdly of the manner of ingrafting. As
to the first, the root or stock wherein this ingrafting is made, is CHRIST,
called by himself the true vine, by the Apostles the true olive tree, Romans
11.17.
and by the Prophets the root of Iesse. Isa. 11.10.
This true vine, this true olive and this root of Iesse JESUS CHRIST, has
that great husbandman the eternal God dressed and prepared; in which he has
ingrafted so many of Adams lost posterity, as he according to his purpose and
pleasure of his will has decreed to make partakers of the kingdom of glory
according to the election of grace before the foundation of the world, and
therefore in the fullness of time sent him into the world, and as it were
planted him in the grave, who by and by, Math. 28.
within the space of three days like a lively root sprang up, and rested not
till his top mounted up to heaven, and till his branches were spread to the
utmost ends of the earth till the Gospel was preached to the most remote
regions under the Sun, even to the Scythians, Sauromatans, Aethiophians,
Persians and Indians, and within a short space after CHRIST'S ascension, which
may seem wonderful, not only the Roman * Empire, Tertull. adversus Iudaeos.
cap. 7. 8.
Sed Brittanorum loca Romany in accessa Euangelio Christi subdita sunt, but
even those places of Britain, speaking of Scotland, which the Imperial sword
was never able to vanquish or subdue, are now vanquished and become subject
unto the Gospel of CHRIST, but this shall yet seem more wonderful if we
shall but consider those that have vanquished both the Roman Empire and those,
whom the Roman Empire could not conquer, and what sort of men they were,
SOPHRONIVS Patriarch of Jerusalem tells us, (...), our fishers says he, our
Publicanes, and that tent maker (speaking of St PAVL) has constrained all
nations, all people (...), to embrace the Laws of CHRIST crucified; and yet
the manner how this was done, how this conquest was made, is most wonderful of
all: for it was done non pugnando, not by fighting, sed patiendo, but by
suffering, suffering of tortures, of chains, of imprisonings and of death it
self, and the more their sufferings was, the greater their persecution was,
the larger was their victories, for their blood was the seed of the Church and
the more abundantly that it was sown, the Lord did reap the greater harvest
of true believers to be ingraft in him, that is their everlasting stock, and
root which never shall be consumed by time.

Two feets of grafts.
The branches or grafts are twofold; external and internal, as to the first,
all the members of the visible Church entered into a profession of Christ
externally, baptized with water, but not with the holy Ghost, may be called
external members or grafts; But this kind of graft will suffer an amputation
or cutting off, and will come within the presinke of that, Romans 11.22. If thou
remain not in his bountifulness thou shall also be cut off, for they have
not the sop of grace ministered unto them from the stock of life, but are as
dead-trees having leaves without fruit, 2. Tim. 3.5. I mean good fruit; they
have fruit indeed, but it is labrusca non vua some sower or hedge grape not
good to eat, but no sweet grape. Like that which grew in Baal-hamon, 8. Cant.
11. Howsoever it has a fair show like gawdie flowers among the corn, yet
fitly it may be compared to Sodoms apples, outwardly fair, but rotten
inwardly, to that which glisters like gold but when it is touched is found to
be but copper; but most properly to ESAV who did lie in the belly with JACOB,
borne and brought up in IZACKS house, which for the time was the Church of God
and marked with the same Sacrament of circumcision too, but, because he
proudely despised grace, was rejected, so shall it stand with all those that
shall be baptized in the true Church, and remain not in Gods bountifulness:
neither shall it avail them any thing that by an external form of ingrafting
they have been joined to the society of the visible Church. But by the
contrary it shall stand as an evidence in that black roll and register of a
bad conscience against them, and most justly shall it make them to be punished
with double stripes because they knew their masters will and did it not.

The internal grafts are of those that beside their external ingrafting and
entering in the visible Church by the Sacrament of Baptism, are also
internally ingrafted by the holy spirit, and the baptism with fire in this
root JESUS in such a firm manner and condition that Christ is in them and
they in Christ, they are ingrafted by Gods right hand, grounded in faith,
rooted in charity, watered by the word of Gods ministry, dug and manured
by the discipline of Magistrates, and in every manner of good work brings
forth a plentiful vintage of good and sweet grapes, which are pressed in a
contrite heart, raised up to a lively and confident thankefulnes. And as wine
is commonly known by the taste and color so is this too. For its taste is a
good conscience within, and its color is a holy conversation without. These
grafts may say with the Apostle, Now we live, yet not we any more, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in us. They have in them the same mind that was in JESUS,
and this is a faithful witness, an infallible argument unto them of their
union with Christ, and that they are ingrafted in him, and by the contrary,
seeing contraries must bring forth contrary sequels, those that are not ruled
and quickened by the spirit of Christ are not ingraft in this root, neither
have they as yet any union or conjunction with him, and so the Apostle Romans
8.9. Romans 8.9.
tells us, If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his: Not
assuredly, for those that are not ruled by this spirit, they cannot choose but
wander and go astraying, walking after the flesh, by which they cannot be
absolved from judgment, from Tophet, and adjudged unto everlasting life, and
thus much for the stock and grafts.

And now I come to the manner of ingrafting, which is twofold, A twofold
ingrafting.
secret and manifest, secret in Gods eternal counsel; for before the
foundation of the world was laid and long before that man was created God knew
his own children, and by inserting their names in the book of life did
eternally and before all time ingraft them in this stock and root CHRIST
JESUS their redeemer. Secondly it is manifest, and done in time, but
spiritually wrought by the holy Ghost who creating faith in our hearts makes us
to go out of our selves, transire in Christum transport our selves into
Christ, and so to rely upon him that by his spirit we are quickened, by his
light we are illuminated, and by the continual furniture of his grace we
persevere and increase in spiritual strength and courage, and so lives in him
that we die in our selves, Zach. 4.
and to the world. In the 4. of Zachar. As every lamp of the golden
Candlestick has its own pipe through which these two Olives which stand with
the ruler of the whole world, Simile.
empty themselves in the gold: so every member of the Church of CHRIST
receives grace from that fullness of grace which is in him through the secret
conduits of the spirit, How, and when this ingrafting is manifest.
by which he causes us to grow and preserves our souls in life. Now albeit
this ingrafting be manifest, and done in time, yet it is not manifest to every
one, but only to the graft and branch himself, for to him the spirit of God
bears witness with his spirit that he is the child of GOD, Romans 8.16. Romans
8.16.
But to none other, howsoever that his faith, fructifying in charity, in love,
and in every manner of good work, may make others presume that he is ingraft
in this root by the holy Spirit, after which he is, and therefore savoureth the
things of the Spirit, Romans 8.5. Romans 8.5.
And I say, it is done in time, not that all Christians are ingraft, that is,
that there ingrafting is made manifest unto them at one certain time, or in
one special year of there time: No such matter, but at such time when it
pleases that great husbandman the Eternal GOD, and in what age or year of
their life unto him it seems most fit: but sure in what time soever it be,
it is ever in due season and in good time, albeit it were not till the very
last article of aspiration, as it fell out to one of the evil doers, that was
crucified with our Savior, in the 23. of St Luke, verse 42. Luke 23.42.
But sometimes he will ingraft and sanctify his Children from their mothers
belly as he did SAMVELL, JOHN the Baptist, and others: and sometimes he will
let them alone till their middle age come, and after this manner he dealt with
St. PAVL, in the 9. of the Act. Act 9.
Obscuring from him his ingrafting and Election, till his Almond tree began to
flourish, and at such a time as when he was even breathing out Persecutions
against some of those whose ingrafting was already made known unto them, even
the Christian Church in her infancy.

O the riches of the wonderful and incomprehensible mercy of GOD declared unto
Mankind, who has for our salvation, that before were cast-awayes and the
Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.
ingrafted us in his own Son, by which he has put us in a better estate
then we were created in: for albeit that he made us before in a most glorious
manner altogether according to his own Image, illuminated our will with
Knowledge, and adorned our souls with Holiness and Justice, yet he gave us
Naturam flexibilem, a mutable and changeable Nature, creating us In potestate
standi, seu posse cadendi, in power standing or possibility of falling, and
therefore as we had a possibility of falling, so we fell indeed, and by an
apostate Angel was drawn to apostacy. But it is far otherways with us
now, by this our ingrafting in this stock, and union with CHRIST, for as the
grafts bear not the stock and root, but are borne by the same, and by
consequence our salvation depends not upon our selves, as ADAMS did, but upon
CHRIST, which is the stock in which we are ingraft, who one day shall make us
(...) propter gratiam (...) qua nobis ab illo tribuetur, unchangeable, far
above that estate, in which the Angels themselves were created, by reason of
that immutable grace which shall be given unto us by him: and in this life it
self, he will never suffer us finally and totally to be cut off from him by
sin, (nothing else can do it) albeit we fall in sin, yet God will lift us
up again, and raise up our souls to a lively confidence in our all-sufficient
Redeemer. In the 37. Psalm. 24. Psalm. 37.24.
verse, Though the Just man falls, he shall not be utterly cast down, for
the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand. And whereas other branches may be cut
off and pulled away from their stock, either by the violence of boisterous and
tempestuous winds, or by the force of men, or at least consumed by time, yet
it shall not be so with us that are ingraft in CHRIST, because we do not
keep him, but are kept by him, and so long as he is unchanged, says Malac.
3.6. Malac. 3.6.
We cannot be consumed; but the older we be in him, the more we flourish,
for those that are planted in the courts of the Lord flourish in their old age
and bring forth fruit, says DAVID, Psalm. 92.13.14. Psalm. 92.13.14
But as to those that are not ingraft in Christ, how great, how tall soever
they be, yea, albeit they were like the sons of ANAK in stature, or in
height like the Oaks of Basan, or like NABVCHADNEZZAR, that grew up like a
great tree so high that the fowls of the heaven made their nests under him,
yet they shall be pulled away from their stock, they shall not remain in
honor, they shall be brought to the grave like abominable branches. In the 40.
Chapter of Esaias, the 24. verse, Esaias 40.24.
The Princes of the earth their breath shall decay, they shall return to their
earth, and their thoughts shall perish, the Judges thereof shall be made a
vanity as though they were not planted or sown, or as if their stock took
no root in the earth, the Lord shall blow upon them and they shall wither, the
whirlwind shall take them away as stubble. O pitiful glory of worldlings!
which often dies unto them before they die themselves, at least continually
with themselves, their beauty consumes in going from the house to the grave;
neither does their pomp descend after them. Only happy is the estate of
those that are ingrafted in CHRIST, Romans 8.
Neither life nor death, principalities nor powers, things present nor things
to come shall be able to separate them from the love of God in CHRIST JESUS
their stock and root. And thus much for the first similitude of the root and
the grafts, by which the union between CHRIST and his Church is expressed.

As to the second, it is the similitude of Garments; The second similitude of
Garments.
and look what straitness, what neerenesse, and how great a conjunction is
between our bodies and our garments, which is exceeding near, yet such is the
union between Christ and us, and more strait too, which when the Apostle in
the 13. to the Romans 24. verse, desired most richly to express, and most lively
to show forth, he exhorts us to put on the Lord Jesus, to put him on as a
vesture and garment, to be so united to him, as we possess him, and have him
in us, and we in him. Now those that put on JESUS CHRIST are clothed with a
fourefold garment; Those that put in Christ are clothed with a fourefold
garment.
first, with a garment of CHRIST'S imputed Righteousness. Secondly, with a
garment of Sanctification. Thirdly, with a garment of Protection; and fourthly,
Three names given unto every one of the four garments.
with a garment of Glory. The first garment may be called a winters garment,
quia tegit because it covers us. The second may be called a summers garment,
quia ornat, because it adorneth us and makes us fine. The third may be called
a stand of armor, quia protegit, because it protecteth us. And the fourth may
be called our Wedding garment, because we must not put it on till our
Marriage day with the Lamb. The first three garments may be called our work a
day suites, because every good Christian must put them on every day so long as
he remains in this valley of tears here below. But the fourth must be
called our holidayes suite, because we must not put it on till the week of
our Pilgrimage in baca, be ended, and the day of our appearance (before GOD in
Sion, in that new Jerusalem, in which no arrow can be shot) begin.

I return to the first garment, the garment of CHRIST'S imputed Righteousness,
The first Garment, Christ's righteousness.
and our Savior himself speaks of it, Revel. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy
of me white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that thine filthy
nakedness do not appear. The Prophet Esaias speaks of this garment too, but
more plainly. GOD has clothed me with the garments of Salvation and covered
me with the robes of Righteousness. Esaias, 61.10. But what righteousness is
this? What righteousness this is.
Is it not the righteousness of his Divine nature? No, for that is not
communicable, but the glory which he will not give unto another. What then? Is
it not the righteousness of his Human nature consisting in a perfect
obedience of the moral Law? No, not that alone neither; for that alone were
perbrene, too short, non vult tegere, it will not cover us from the frostie
blasts of Gods wrath, and from the fearful winter tempests of his infinite
Justice. What righteousness then I pray you? A righteousness never imposed to
Man nor Angel, even that righteousness which he as our Mediator by
fulfilling the singular law of a Redeemer has purchased and acquired, to the
end that he might communicate it, and give it freely unto his Church for her
justification, by which she is absolved from death, whereunto by reason of
sin both original and actual, she was subject, and is adjudged unto life.
And this is CHRIST'S imputed righteousness, wherewith he first couers those
that puts him on, How it couers us.
even our winters garment, which is so perfect and so complete that it covers
all our nakedness from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, both
of body and soul; for in both our Mediator suffered; his blessed Head was
crowned with thorns, to satisfy for the proud Imaginations of our stout
brains; his sacred hands and feet which never offended, were pierced with
nails of Iron, to satisfy for the wicked deeds which we have done with our
hands, and run to with our feet, and alas! daily by our sins we draw him
again to the same torture, and crucify again to our selves the Son of God,
and make a mockery of him. Heb. 6.6. He suffered the wrath of GOD in his
soul so heavily, as that both heaven and earth did stand amazed to behold it;
The Heavens did draw their curtain, and darkness was upon the face of the
earth, that they should see their maker in such pain, the Sun for shame
would not look upon the Son of GOD in such a case, the veil of the Temple
rent it self in two for grief, to see its Lord so dishonored, the Stones in
the street did cleave a sunder for woe, to see that Stone refused of the
builders, which is the head of the corner. And finally, the Bodies of the dead
rose out of their graves, astonished to behold the Lord of life so troubled in
soul, that their souls might in joy perpetual peace with GOD, and be
clothed with the garments of his imputed righteousness.

The second garment, is a garment of Sanctification. The second garment,
Sanctification.
Now we are clothed with this garment, when like the Elect we put on tender
mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness and long suffering, Col.
3.12. But specially when we put on love, When it is put on.
1. These. 5.8. Or to say with St PETER, When we deck the hidden man of our
heart with a quiet and meek spirit, 1. Pet. 3.4. This is our summers garment
which adorneth us, and makes us fine, this is that pure, fine and shining
linen, which is the righteousness of the Saints. A garment not party
colored, as JOSEPH'S was, but made of many virtues and graces of JESUS CHRIST.
These are the badges and cognisances by which we are known to be his
servants, and the putting on thereof, is the putting on of Jesus Christ. These
are the graces by which the Holy Ghost translateth us out of nature,
transformeth us into the Image of the Son of GOD, and makes us become one
with our Redeemer. When it is given us.
This garment and the former are both given us at one time. The former garment
of CHRIST'S imputed Righteousness defends us from the fiery flames of Gods
burning wrath. This garment of Sanctification, reformeth our corrupted nature
and renueth the same; These 2. What it works.
garments both cures and couers our filthy nakedness, they turn our sickness
into health, and our darkness into light, for whosoever puts on JESUS
CHRIST for righteousness to Justification, puts him likewise on for holiness to
Sanctification. So full of grace and virtue is the Lord, that he, not only by
the merit of his sufferings pacifieth the wrath of God toward all those, in
whom he is, but likewise by this virtue sanctifies them, and by creating a
new heart within their breast, and a right spirit within their bowels, makes
them new creatures, changing them from one thing to another both in body and
soul, Act. 26.
from sin to sanctification, from darkness to light, from death to life, and
finally, from the power of Satan to the power of God. That is, to
Righteousness, Justice, and soberly to walk in this life, in which, except our
sanctified carriage, (neither is that complete, for man here is but only in a
part sanctified, otherwise he were more then a man, but is perfectly
justified, or else were he no more then a sinner) all things are not only
transitory and vain; But vanity it self.

The 3. Garment and its 3. names
The third garment, wherewith CHRIST cloatheth his Church and those that put him
on, is a suite of complete armor; hoc protegit, this protecteth the Christian
man against all the assaults of Satan, and makes him stand out against all
the invasions of his Spiritual enemies. Satan envying this union between
CHRIST and his Church, endeuoreth incessantly to defile the members of the
same, to rent them a sunder, and tear them in pieces; sometime assaulting
their Patience, Job. 1. Genesis 9.21. Genesis 19.33. 2. Sam. 11.4.
as he did JOBS; sometime their Temperancie, as he did to NOAH and LOT;
sometime their Continency, as he did to DAVID; sometime their Humility, as
he did to HEZIKIAH, 2. King. 20. And made him in the pride of his heart, which
of all vices is the first, to show the treasure of his house to the
Ambassadors of BERODACH BALADAN King of Babell, which thereafter produced a
strange effect, even that not only his treasure, but the fruits of his loins
in the reign of IEHOIACHIN, the people and all the strongest men of war were
carried unto Babell and Captivity, 2. King. 24. Sometime again Satan assaults
us in our religion and former zeal: and it is wonderful how almost he ever
preuailes once against Gods children, howsoever it be true that in the end he
is evermore repulsed and driven back again. And in this manner he besieged
SOLOMON, the ornament of the world both for knowledge and godliness, prevailed
against him, caused him commit Idolatry, and his Idolatrous wives to turn his
heart after other Gods, ASHTAROTH the god of the Zidonians, and MILCOM the
abomination of the Ammonites, 1. King. 11. 1. King 11.
And lastly, Satan labors much to steal from Gods children their honest
name, and this is one of his most subtle assaults, and uses the tongues of his
own instruments to effect his purpose, against the enemies of his kingdom, Vt
qui conscientiae suae luce clarescunt falsis rumoribus sordidentur, Nazian.
that those who through the testimony and light of their innocent consciences
shines like the sun in his meridian, may be made black like the night,
filthy as a puddle by the false reports of others. Good JOSEPH in the 39.
chapter of Genesis was after this manner set upon by one of Satan's own
instruments POTIPHARS wife, for when she could not arrive at the intended end
of her naughty thoughts, come and lie with me: she stole from him his good
name; this Hebrew servant would have mocked me, and so made him odious and
filthy in his masters eyes, and in the sight of his friends: and after this
manner are many chosen vessels set upon by the soldiers of Satan so, as it is
impossible for us to keep the whole pieces of our body together except we put
on the suite of protection, that suite of complete armor in the (...) the
Ephesians. And stand with our loins girded about with verity, having on the
breast plate of righteousness, and the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel
of peace, he must have in the one hand the shield of Faith, and in the other
the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God; upon our head we must put on
the hope of Salvation for an helmet, and the sling of Prayer must be in our
mouths, or rather in our hearts with strong cryings and inward groanings, as
MOSES had it at the red Sea, Exodus 14.15.
when PHARAOH pursued after him and his people: and to these pieces I could yet
add one further, another pair of shoes; the Prophet EZEKIEL speaks of
those shoes in his 16. Chap. and they are made ex pellibus melium of Baggets
skins. The shoes of the Baggets skin why assigned to the Church.
Elinie in the 38. chap. of his 8. book Records, that melis is a beast not
only of great innocence, but of such singular prudencie too, quod sufflatae
cutis distentione ictus hominum ac canum morsus arcere solet, that by the
extension of its skin it can shun both the strokes of men and bites of dogs,
and therefore among many more tokens of Gods favor bestowed upon his spouse the
Church, for her preservation, he likewise has assigned unto her the shoes of
this beasts skin, to teach her both innocence and prudencie, to be innocent
like a Dove, but wile like a Serpent for her protection against all her
malignant enemies whatsoever. Thus must we walk armed continually, armed so
long as we are in this life 2. Tim. 2.3. as the good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST,
Job. 7.1.
because our life, as says JOB, is a warfare, Ephesians. 6.
and we must fight against Principalities, powers, and spiritual wickedness,
and not only fight but must overcome, anquish, and subdue them; and thus much
for the three first suites of apparel, our workadayes suites, which every good
Christian must put on every day so long as he is in this life here below.

But as to the 4. and last, it is a garment of Glory, The 4 Garment, and its 3.
names.
our wedding garment and our holy days suite, but when the week of our
warfare shall end, and the day of our refreshment, Act. 3.20.
the day of our eternal peace appear and begin, which is our everlasting
Sabbath, Revel. 19.7.
our marriage day with the Lamb, after which shall never come a night, then
shall our father cause this suite, our holy days suite, our best robe to be
brought out and cover us with white raiment, 1. Cor. 15.
then shall this mortal put on immortality, and this corruptible
incorruptibilitie; then shall we be covered with brodered work, and the LORD
shall put frontlets upon our faces, ear rings in our ears, Esaias, 26.
bracelets about our arms, chains about our necks, Esaias, 61.10.
and crowns upon our heads, yea the Lord himself shall be unto us a crown of
Glory and a diadem of beauty. Thus will he deck us as a Bride attired with
Jewels, 2. Cor. 11.
as a chaste Spouse to be presented to our immortal husband without spot or
wrinkle, in whose face is the fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore, rivers of pleasure in which we shall bath our selves
for all eternity. And so have you briefly the similitudes of the Garments.

Now rests the similitude of Marriage: The similitude of Marriage.
and indeed this Spiritual union between CHRIST and his Church, is very often
expressed by Marriage in the old and new Testament. In the 45. chapter of Esaias.
fifth verse, Isay. 45.5.
he who made thee, is thy husband, whose name is the Lord of hosts. And in
the 9. of Math. 15. Can the children of the marriage chamber mourn so long as
the bridgroome is with them. Math. 9.15.
And yet more plainly in the 19. of the Revel. 17. Revel. 19.17.
The marriage of the (...) has come, and the bride has made her self ready.
And again Revel. 21.9. Revel. 21.9.
I will show thee the bride; the Lambs wife. And here in my text as plainly,
as lively, and more lively then in any other place. Hosea, 2.19.
I will marry thee unto me for ever. In all which our most gracious God
willing to express, and desirous to show forth both that love which he
bears unto us, and that too, which he looks for at our hands compares this
most strait union, this most near conjunction between CHRIST and his Church
unto the sacred bond of Marriage, by which two persons the man and the woman,
the husband and wife are so firmly conjoined by God, that none ought to presume
to sunder them, so wonderfully coupled together, that of two which they were
before, now they become but one.

It was already a great love of the Lord to have created all things for man, to
have made him Lord of them and established him over the works of his hands.
DAVID in the 8. Psalm. ravished with this contemplation breaks out in
admiration. Alas, what is man that thou are mindful of him, and the son of
man that thou visitest him. DAVID admired Gods liberality: toward man in the
creation, but how much more ought we to admire his liberality, his
incomprehensible bountifulness and love toward us in our redemption, wherein
he not only gives us his good things, But bestows his only begotten son
(...) that well-beloved son in marriage on us, and in him gives unto us
himself too? DAVID admireth the contemplation of the heavens? But how much
more ought we to admire the possession of the heavens? DAVID glorifies God for
the domination which he gives us over the creatures in the earth, But how much
more ought we to glorify God for our marriage and union with CHRIST, by which
we shall reign continually with the Angels in heaven? A marriage, I say, the
bond whereof is the spirit of God, whose trothpligth is performed here in the
militant Church, But the nuptial feast shall be hence in the tryumphant Church,
where our meat shall be the Tree of life, our drink the Water of life, our
music the song of the Saints, Halleluiah, halleluiah, honor, praise and
dominion be to him that sits upon the Throne.

It is an ancient saying, Omnis comparatio cl^^dicat vno pede, every comparison
is lame of some one or other foot. But this comparison of Marriage does so
fully set forth, so richly express our Spiritual marriage, our conjunction
with CHRIST, that if any, it goes upright and straight in all the feet, which
you shall quickly perceive by taking notice of these six things which are
required in every lawful Marriage. First, that there must be male and female,
Six Circumstances necessary in every Marriage.
Man and Woman, and this may be called conformity of natures. 2. The Marriage
must be propounded. 3. The future Spouse must be courted and wooed. 4. There
must be mutual gifts between the two lovers. 5. There must be a Matrinoniall
written and sealed. 6. There must be Procreation of children; all which, we
shall find in this Spiritual marriage, but in a more excellent manner. As to
this word must so often repeated which imports a necessity, remember that
there is a twofold necessity, A twofold necessity.
an absolute necessity, and an hypothetike; the absolute, is when a thing is
so necessary that it cannot be otherwise, Which Circumstances are absolutely
necessary, and which hypothetikely.
the hyphothetike, when a thing is so necessary that it may be otherwise but
is only profitable, decent and comely that it should be so: So some of these
circumstances are of an absolute necessity, without which a marriage cannot
be, as conformity of natures; others again only of an hypothetike necessity,
and of a decent expedencie, but not absolutely necessary as giving of mutual
gifts, writing and sealing of a matrimonial contract, or the like.

The Church represented by a Woman two manner of ways
But I return to the purpose, thus being premitted, and finds that in this
spiritual Marriage, there are male and female, man and woman, for the Church
is very often in Scripture represented by a woman, in the 4. to the Gal. 22.
The Apostle though obscurely, represents the true Church under the type of a
woman, SARAH; ABRAHAM had two sons, one by a free woman, and was borne by
Promise. But St. JOHN, Reu. 12.1. More clearly and in a more glorious manner
too; And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the
Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her head had a Crown of
twelve stars. Now to make up this perfect conformity of natures, our
bridgroome CHRIST JESUS, even as the Sun, went out of the chamber of the
highest heavens, from the bosom of the Father, the invisibilitie of the
Divinity, The word is made flesh. Gal. 4.4.
desended down to the earth and in the fullness of time takes our nature upon
him, becomes man, and was like unto man in all things sin only excepted:
The benefit we have by his conformity of nature.
and so you have Conformity of natures between CHRIST and his Church: and by
it we have this benefit, that CHRIST of one which he was before, becomes now
unto us three; first our Father in regard of our regeneration which is a new
creation, a creation of new hearts within our breasts and of clean spirits
within our bowels. Secondly, our Brother in respect of our adoption, Ephesians. 2.
without which we were but filij Irae, the children of wrath, prodigals
banished out of our fathers house, but now by our adoption we may eat of the
childrens bread, and with boldness, cry, Abba father unto God, the father of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, and acknowledge JESUS CHRIST his son to be our elder
brother. Thirdly our husband in respect that he has married us, in
righteousness, in judgment, in wisdom, in mercy, and in compassion. Hos. 2.

Secondly, The 2. Circumstance.
it is a custom that Marriage is propounded, and is it laudable; men
ordinarily conform to their quality and order, send their most trusty friends
to deal in this business, and Kings their Ambassadors of their greatest,
wisest, and fittest of their Nobility to do honor to the action, This
spiritual Marriage propounded in the most honorable form for four respects.
but never was there any marriage, either by King, or Emperor, propounded so
honorably as this Spiritual marriage; and that in four respects. First, in
respect of the propounder, God himself. Secondly in regard of the parties or
persons between whom it was propounded, which is CHRIST and his Church.
Thirdly, in regard of the persons to whom it was propounded, to ADAM and EVAH,
the only rulers and swayers of the Scepter of the whole worlds Empire, and
whose posterity is now propagated in innumerable honorable Families and
Princely diadems, upon the face of the earth. Fourthly, in regard of the place
where it was propounded, Paradise; The seed of the woman shall break down the
head of the Serpent. Genesis 3.15. reiterated to ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and JACOB, to all
the Patriarchs, and in all ages by the Prophets, and here in my text by our
HOSEA, as plainly, and more plainly, then by any of them; I will marry thee
unto me for ever.

The 3. Circumstance. Christ courteth his love.
Thirdly the King of Kings and Lord of Lords courteth, wooeth, and in a most
loving manner declares his spiritual affection to his future spouse in his
letters and longs more then sweet, penned by the direction of his blessed
spirit. In the fourth chap. of the Cantic. the first verse. Behold thee art
fair my love, behold thou art fair, thy lips are like a thread of scarlet,
and thy talk is comely, and in the seventh verse, thou art all fair my
love, and there is no spot in thee. Again in the ninth verse, my Sister, my
spouse, thou have wounded mine heart, thou have wounded mine heart with one of
thine eyes and with a chain of thine neck; and once again in the tenth verse,
my sister, my spouse, how fair is thy love, how much better is thine love then
wine, and the savor of thine ointments then all spices; and so forth thorough
the whole book of the Cantic. Christ for the love of his spouse fights a
combat with his rival.
In a most familiar manner, alluring us and persuading us to accept of him for
the love that he bears toward us, which was so great, that before his rival,
Satan should have snatched us out of his hand he will fight against him, and
all his confederates, and therefore he was made flesh, John 16.28.
he went from the father and came unto the world, he valiantly pitched a field
in the wilderness against that roaring lion, that old Serpent, Math. 4.3.
he overcame his chiefest power, he broke his wily head, overthrew him in the
desert by a scriptum est. But was this all? No, he fulfilled the Law in every
point and title, satisfied Gods Justice for us, and before he will want us, he
will give his life for us, and gave it indeed, offering himself in sacrifice to
the Lord of hosts upon the Cross for our sins, by which he vanquished hell
and conquered death; and thereafter gloriously rose again, left this world,
and went again to his Father. Ioh. 16.28. and sent unto us the holy Ghost, but
before he went to his fathers house, he told us, that there was many dwelling
places in it, and that he was going to prepare a place for us, Ioh. 14.3. and
therefore exhorts and admonishes us not to be troubled, Let not your heart
be troubled. Ioh. 14.1.


O what a love is here, the hight, the breadth, the length whereof is
incomprehensible. But O what hardness of heart on the contrary is upon our
part, more hardness then if the stones which DEVCALION and PYRHA cast over their
shoulders after the deluge had been our progenitors and the first authors of
our race, yea then the stones themselves, Ovid. Metap.
for we read that stones have been broken in pieces at the voice of the Lord
at the first, and so were the stones of the altar in Bethell at the voice of
the Prophet, and the vale of the Temple rent it self in two, when the Lord
suffered at Golgotha for our redemption and to make our marriage firm, and if
at any time stones have been disobedient, unto GODS voice, it is because of
man's disobedience and infidility, in whose mouth it was; and in this respect we
read that the rock refused to render water to MOSES at the first and second
stroke, yet rendered obedience at the third, and rendered water abundantly. But
how often is this love propounded, this marriage offered, and the Gospel
preached unto us: and which is he amongst us, that mollifieth his heart at the
first, at the second, yea, or at the the third stroke: I mean at so many
sermons or at a thousand more, loves the Lord again, and repents him of his
sins and iniquities; shall not the Altar in Bethell, and the vale of the
Temple condemn us in the day of the Lord? that at the first gave obedience;
and be faithful witness of our Induration against us without example, that
refuse most obstinately the love of our husband offered unto us every day at our
own doors, but will not leave our father, forsake his house and our own
people, will not be divorced from our adulteries, our old sins, that our
husband the King may take pleasure in our beauty: The Lioness may teach us
wisdom, for she will not company with the Lion after her commixtion with the
Leopard till she first wash her self in water, unwilling that her adultery
should be manifested by her scent. It is recorded likewise that the Viper is so
wise, that before its copulation with the fish Muraena, Basil. in his Hexamer^n
Hom.
it first vomits and casts out all the pernicious and venomous poison that is
within it, or in its teeth; O pitiful blindness of man! that by nature is
more adulterous then the Lioness, and goes a whoring after every sort of
vanity, more venomous then the Viper, and is full of hatred, malice, envy,
and debate, and will neither see it, nor do it away, but suffers strange Lords
to tyrannise over him without repugnancie and opposition, and specially such
Lords as are but cowards, which if he but resist, will flee from him, and yet
gives way unto him, not fearing that his disloyalty shall be perceived by his
righteous master, head and Lord, and that his patience will in the end be
turned into a scepter of Iron to crush him, and to break him in pieces like a
potters vessel. O horrible and thrice cursed nature! why have thou so armed
our carnal corpse with the weapons of unrighteousness to fight against the
long suffering of our most gracious God? and so long to abuse the love of our
redeemer? But let us fight against nature with the weapons of righteousness,
even with repentance, and humiliation, that the Lord may exalt us, give us the
oil of joy for mourning, and wash us in that fountain opened to the house of
Judah: and finally let us say with DAVID, Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have we in heaven but thee, and we have desired none in earth with thee.
And thus let us say in our heart, for it is the heart which the Lord craves,
My son give me thine heart, and let us say it speedily, and in this life;
speedily, because time swiftly passes, Et dies nostri sunt vel^ciores cursore,
our days are swifter then a post, says Job. 7.6. and we cannot tell how
quickly the race thereof shall be run out, and then it will be out of time: It
must be then in this life, which is tempus acceptum, the accepted time, the day
of salvation. 2. Cor. 6.2. because this life is the time in which our election
must be made sure, and sealed up to our spirits by the infallible testimony of
the good spirit of God, this life is the time wherein every man must work out
his salvation with a filial fear and trembling: this life is the time wherein
we must be admitted into the kingdom of grace, if ever we look to be admitted
into the kingdom of glory: In this life we must be matriculated into the
mystical body of the Church by obeying the injunctions and will of God, and
requiring our suitors love with true affection, if ever we will look to sit at
the bridegroomes table, and enter with oil in our lamps into his chamber into
the kingdom of heaven: and in a word we must have heaven in inchoation in this
life, if we will have it in perfection after this life.

The 4. Circumstance.
Fourthly, as there are mutual gifts between two persons to be joined in the
honorable and undefiled bed of marriage, so is there between Christ and his
Church. Christ's gifts to the Church twofold.
CHRIST gives his first, which are twofold, for his Church, and to his Church:
for his Church, he sends to his father the gifts of his righteousness and
meretorious satisfaction for her justification. To his Church he sends the
gifts of his mercy and compassion, of Election, Predestination, justification,
Vocation, Sanctification and hope of Glorification. The Church is not
ungrateful, The Churches gifts twofold.
but has her twofold gifts too. Contrition, and Thanksgiving; the first, is
a composition: the second a simple without ingredients. The ingredients whereof
Contrition is composed, The ingredients thereof Contrition is composed (...)
two.
are our sins and a godly sorrow for the same; for the child of God, a member
of this Church, and every member of the same, takes all their sins, at least
so many of them as they know, and in a sorrowful heart as in a mortar beats
them, so as they are borne down in some measure, yea in a great measure, and
never rises up so high thereafter: and thereof is Contrition composed and made:
which is sent up by devout prayer, and innumerable sighs which cannot be
uttered, whereof the Lord most willingly accepts, for the Sacrifices of the
Lord are a contrite spirit, says DAVID, Psalm. 51.17. A contrite and a broken
heart, O God, thou will not despise. The other gift, Thanksgiving,
Thanksgiving the greatest gift which we can give unto God,
is a simple and has none ingredients, But is a voluntary, a willing
retribution of one good thing for another, a sweet and a godly rejoicing in the
undeserved mercies of God, which is one of the greatest gifts which we can, or
are able to offer unto God, in which regard the Apostle exhorts us always, in
all things to give thanks, 1. These. 5.18. Prayer and Thanksgiving paralelled.
Prayer and Thanksgiving are two notable parts of divine worship, but of the
two, Thanksgiving is the most heavenly and Angelike: for in Prayer we respect
our selves and have regard unto such things as we desire to have; But by
Thanksgiving we retribute unto God what is competent unto him, and only
regards his Divine essence. Prayer again properly pertaines to us whilst we
are in baca, this valey of tears, Et est egentium ac miserorum, and belongs to
wanting and miserable people: But Thanksgiving shall pertain to us when all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, Et est angelorum ac glorificatorum, and
belongs unto us when we shall reign like Angels and be joined to the
fellowship and society of the glorified Church, the spirits of perfect and
blessed men, that sings continually, Praise be unto God, and Glory to the
Lamb that sits upon the throne for evermore.

Fifthly, there is a contract, The 5. Circumstance.
a matrimonial written and sealed, in which it is contracted, that God shall
be out God, and we shall be his people, that whosoever is weary and laden,
Math. 11.
that in coming to our redeemer he shall be eased, and refreshed, which is, he
shall be purged from all his sins in the blood of his Savior, for in the 3.
of St. John 36. The blood of Christ purges us from all sin. This contract is
written by the Apostles, the penmen of the holy Ghost, that led them in all
truth and verity, sealed with the blood of our Savior, and ratified by the
blood of many a Martyr since, both under the first and the second beast, under
the cruel Emperors, and raging antichristian Popes.

The 6. Circumstance.
Sixthly, as the procreation of children is necessary in Earthly marriage, so is
it in this spiritual marriage. In earthly marriage this was the blessing of
God in the beginning, Genesis 2.15.
Increase and multiply. Genesis 2.15. And without this, there is often but little
content in marriage, when the Lord had promised to ABRAHAM twice the land of
Canaan, to be his buckler and exceeding great reward, all was nothing, there
could be no true contentment; because, said he, I go childlesse. But when
IZACK was promised, when the Lord told him that SARAH should bear him a son,
then ABRAHAM fell upon his face and laughed. Genesis 17.17. and when he was borne
SARA confessed that the Lord had made her to rejoice. Genesis 21.6.
* RACHELL was more impatient, for in the 30. of Genesis 1. she would either have
children or die, but when JOSEPH was borne she was content that God had taken
away her rebuke. And in the 1. of Samuel, HANAH one of the wives of ELCANAH did
weep because she was barren, but when Samuel was borne she rejoiced, and brake
out in this glorious triumph; mine heart rejoices in the Lord, mine horn is
exalted in the Lord, mine mouth is enlarged over mine Enemies. 1. Sam. 2.1.
Just so there could be no peace if in this spiritual marriage the spouse
should be barren; and howsoever that in some earthly marriages for other
respects there may be peace with barrenness, and love too. Yet in this
spiritual marriage the procreation of children is of an absolute necessity,
and must not cease, nor leave off till the consummation of the world, neither
shall the world subsist any longer, then till the Church be barren, for then,
the whole and full number of those whose names are written in the book of life
are brought out, and come into the world, and then shall the world end, and not
till then. Who are our Father and mother in this spiritual Marriage.
Now our Parents in this spiritual marriage is Christ, and Jerusalem, the
Church militating here below, and the procreation is made at the preaching of
the Gospel by the operation of the holy Spirit: and after this manner, at one
Sermon made by St. PETER, Act. 2. there was 3. Thousand children procreated
unto Christ, three thousand souls turned to the faith of JESUS, and
wheresoever this Gospel is preached, or shall be preached, the Church will
never be barren, because the Lord adds daily unto his Church such as should
be saved: Act. 2.
and in whatsoever place of the world there is any of those, whose names are
written in the book of life, for their cause and conversion the Gospel shall
be preached in that same place, and that piece that is called their hearts
shall be disforested, put to tillage and turned into a fertile field or a
fruitful garden, and if there were but one elected Family in a whole City,
the Gospel will come to that City for that one families vocation, Luke 19.1.
as it did * to Ierico for the vocation of Zacheus and his family: and
wheresoever this Gospel is not preached, it is a sure argument that there is
none of Gods chosen children in that place, for where there is a harvest, God
will send reapers, and laborers where he will plant a vineyard, and when there
is but little preaching in a Parish or a City, it is a token that God has no
great harvest in that place, and where the lamp of the Gospel has been
burning once in a glorious manner, and now is extinguished, the candlestick
removed, and false lights set up in the place thereof, as in the Church of
Rome, it is evident that the Lords harvest is done in that City, place or
Parish, because the Lord will never call home the laborers otherwise in the
noone time of the day; nor remove his Ministry from his own peoples
conversion, consolation, and farther corroboration, in which regard the
Ministers of Gods word in some respect are the parents of all Christians, that
is both their father and their mother, Justified by St. 1. Cor. 4.15.
Paul. In Christ Jesus, faith he, I have begotten you, through the Gospel. And
here it is clear that they are the fathers of Christians, and Gal. 4.19.
he makes it plain that they are the mothers of all Christians too. My little
children of whom I travel again in birth till Christ be formed in you.

Gods Ministers the Parents of Christians.
And this should teach all Christians reverently to speak of their Ministers,
to honor them and maintain their reputation as their begetters to be the heirs
of the kingdom of heaven; and to supply them in their necessities as their
spiritual parents: But the omission of this duty toward the ministry,
argues that Christ is not yet formed in them, which is the forming of them to
Christ's Image and similitude by casting off the old man, which cannot be done
without sorrow and pain like a woman in her labor, whereof as yet they have
never so much as once felt the least smarting: But before Christ be formed in
them, they will be sensible of it: for if a woman cannot be delivered of her
child which she has carried but nine months in her womb without dolor and
grief? shall we think to be delivered of sin, which is a man, an old man,
and a man which we have carried about within our breasts ever since the day of
our nativity without spiritual dolor and pain. No? it is not possible, for
in a sinners conversion and forming of him according to the Image of the son
of God, there must be the broken heart, the contrite Spirit, the mourning
weed, the pale countenance, the melting eye, and the voice of lamentation: and
therefore Repentance receives these three names in Scripture, Regeneration,
Three names given to Repentance.
Circumcision, and Mortification, and as there can be no cutting of the flesh,
no death, no birth without pain, so in this spiritual birth, Wherein
consists the pain in the spiritual birth.
in this forming of sinners to the Image and similitude of Christ there is
pain; pain for their own sins past, pain for the iniquities of the wicked,
because they will not keep Gods law, pain for all the abominations in the
Land and place wherein they live, pain for to see the Church of God so
oppressed in many places of the world, and finally, pain for their absence
from their country the kingdom of heaven. Those that are after this manner in
labor and pain are the children of Christ begotten in this spiritual
marriage, not by the will of flesh and blood, but by the will of God. And thus
much for the three similitudes by which our union with Christ is expressed.

And now I come to the two qualities of this Marriage, The two qualities of
this marriage.
the certainty and the perpetuity, but because the time is spent, and I fear
that I have stayed you too long I will dispatch them in a word. The certainty
then of this marriage, as I told you, is employed in the gemination and doubling
of this Promise, I will marry thee to me, yea I will marry thee. And this is
no tautologie or vain repetition, but an infallable truth justified by Joseph
Genesis 41.32.
that tells us, that Pharaohs dream was doubled, because the thing is
established by God. It is truth that Gods promises are as sufficient when they
are but once made as when they are reiterated, as firm when they are spoken,
as being sworn and confirmed with an oath: yet for to supply our weakness and
defects, our most gracious God is not only willing to promise, but often to
double and redouble his promises, as he did to Abraham in the book of Genesis,
Genesis 12.2. Genesis 13.14.17. Genesis 15.18. Genesis 18.8.
when he promised unto him the land Canaan, not once, twice, or thrice, but
five times. And here in my text, not once or twice I will marry, I will marry
thee, but the third time; yea I will even marry thee. Not only content to
speak, but to swear, as in Psalm. 12.11. The Lord has sworn unto David, and
he will not shrink from it, that of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy
throne. The Apostle Heb. 6.
gives the reason, and tells us wherefore this is done, that thereby (says he)
he might declare to the heirs of the promise the stabilitie of his counsel.
And look how stable and how sure that our Election be, the certainty of this
Marriage is as sure, and what arguments and reasons may be, or can be brought
to prove the certainty of the one, the same will serve to prove the certainty
of the other, but at this time I will neither weary you, nor lose my self in
such a wilderness of discourse: for none can be members of this Marriage but
the Elect.

The last quality of this Marriage is perpetuity, for ever. This speech for
ever is taken 3. manner of ways This speech for ever taken three manner of
ways
in Scripture; first, for the time of a man's life only, and so it is taken
Psalm. 121.8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from
henceforth and for ever; that is, all the days of thy life, and that
notwithstanding of the speculatiue interpretations of many that has commented
this place, that can draw out quidlibet ex quolibet, gold out of dross; or
rather turn gold with their metaphysicke contemplations into dross, whose
opinions I cannot now stay to refute. Secondly, in the old Testament it is
extended, sometimes to the Messiah his coming in the flesh, so is it taken Genesis
17. Where the Sacrament of Circumcision is called a Covenant for ever,
Circumcision abolished.
and yet you know it was abolished at the institution of Baptism, and S. Paul
in dirision calls it Concision, and in 2. Gal. 4. a Bondage. Likewise in the 12.
Chap. of Exodus, the Passover is called an Ordinance of the Lord to be kept
holy for ever. The Passover abrogated.
Nevertheless it was abrogated at the institution of the sacrament of the
Lords supper; Thirdly, it is taken not only for the whole time of the worlds
enduring, but likewise for that Eternity which shall be after the consummation
of the world, and so it is taken Revel. 11.15. where it is said, That Christ
shall reign for ever; and here in my text, I will marry thee unto me for
ever. No time here, no time hence, shall repudiate, sunder, and divorce us, but
as I have loved my Church before all time, so will I continue my affection
toward my well-beloved after all time, and when there shall be no more time.

But seeing time is spent let us wind up this clew, let us see what we shall
render unto the Lord for so great favor bestowed upon us, for so great love
showed toward Mankind, above the Angels, in marrying himself unto us; making
us sure of this marriage, alluring us to constancy by loving speeches, and by
great promises persuading us, yea drawing us to embrace it: and suffering the
Angels to lie still under the heavy burden of his wrath, in the most woeful
and most miserable estate of Apostacy? What say I, shall we render unto the
Lord for so incomprehensible a benefit, and such an infinite weight of love?
ten thousand rivers of oil, and all the beasts on thousand mountains, yea in
all the forest of Libanon are nothing to the Lord. What then? hear the
Apostle? Love the Lord because he has loved us first, let our hearts melt with
kindness toward him, then shall it be unto us a faithful witness that we are a
part of his mystical body, a part of the Church of the elect his spouse; and
that the Lord loves us: for this love is the first effect of our faith, the
most express trace of Gods Image, and the most lively mark of his children;
it is the soul of other virtues, the rule of our actions, and the summarie of
the Law, it is the vpholder of Martyrs, the ladder of heaven and the peace of
conscience: yea, I dare say, that it is a taste, a beginning here of that
infinite love which hence we shall carry toward Christ our husband when we
shall be presented unto him without spot or wrinkle, a most chaste spouse,
united, and perfectly have this promise of marriage consummated and fulfilled.
To this our husband and redeemer, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, three
persons, and one Deity, be all honor, praise, and dominion, for now and
evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

