The wonderful discovery of ELIZABETH SAVVYER a Witch, late of Edmonton, her
conviction and condemnation and Death.

Together with the relation of the Devils access to her, and their conference
together.

Written by HENRY GOODCOLE Minister of the Word of God, and her continual
Visiter in the Jail of Newgate.

Published by Authority.



London, Printed for William Butler, and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint
Dunstons Churchyard, Fleetstreet, 1621.

The Authors Apology to the Christian Readers, who wishes to them all health
and happiness.
THe Publication of this subject whereof now I write, has bin by importunity
extorted from me, who would have been content to have concealed it, knowing
the diversity of opinions concerning things of this nature, and that not among
the ignorant, but among some of the learned. For my part I meddle hearewith
nothing but matter of fact, and to that end produce the Testimony of the
living and the dead, which I hope shall be Authentical for the confirmation of
this Narration, and free me from all censorious minds and mouths. It is none
of my intent here to discuss, or dispute of Witches or Witchcraft, but desire
most therein to be dispensed with all, knowing, that in such a little Treatise
as this is, no matter that can be effectual therein can pe comprised;
especially, in so short a time of deliberation, as three or four days. And
the rather do I now publish this to purchase my peace, which without it being
done, I could scarce at any time be at quiet, for many who would take no nay,
but still desired of me written Copies of this ensuing Declaration. Another
reason was to defend the truth of the cause, which in some measure, has
received a wound already, by most base and false Ballets, which were sung at
the time of our returning from the Witches execution. In them I was ashamed to
see and hear such ridiculous fictions of her bewitching Corn on the ground,
of a Ferret and an Owl daily sporting before her, of the bewitched woman
brayning her self, of the Spirits attending in the Prison: all which I knew to
be fitter for an Ale-bench then for a relation of proceeding in Court of
Justice. And thereupon I wonder that such lewd Balletmongers should be
suffered to creep into the Printers presses and peoples ears.

And so I rest at your opinions and judgments Your well-wisher in the Lord
Jesus, HENRY GOODCOLE

A true declaration of the manner of proceeding against ELIZABETH SAVVYER late
of Edmonton Spinster, and the evidence of her Conviction.
A Great, and long suspicion was held of this person to be a witch, and the eye
of Mr. Arthur Robinson, a worthy Justice of Peace, who dweleth at Totnam near
to her, was watchful over her, and her ways, and that not without just cause;
still having his former long suspicion of her, by the information of her
neighbors that dwelt about her: from suspision, to proceed to great
presumptions, seeing the death of Nurse-children and Cattle, strangely and
suddenly to happen. And to find out who should be the author of this
mischief, an old ridiculous custom was used, which was to pluck the Thatch
of her house, and to burn it, and it being so burnd, the author of such
mischief should presently then come: and it was observed and affirmed to the
Court, that Elizabeth Sawyer would presently frequent the house of them that
burnt the thatch which they plucked of her house, and come without any sending
for.

This trial, though it was slight and ridiculous, yet it settled a resolution
in those whom it concerned, to find out by all means they could endeavor,
her long, and close carried Witchery, to explain it to the world; and being
descried, to pay in the end such a worker of Iniquity, her wages, and that
which she had deserved, (namely, shame and Death) from which the Devil, that
had so long deluded her, did not come as she said, to show the least help of
his unto her to deliver her: but being descried in his ways, and works,
immediately he fled, leaving her to shift and answer for her self, with
public and private marks on her body as follows.

1 Her face was most pale and ghoast-like without any blood at all, and her
countenance was still dejected to the ground. 2 Her body was crooked and
deformed, even bending together, which so happened but a little before her
apprehension. 3 That tongue which by cursing, swearing, blaspheming, and
imprecating, as afterward she confessed, was the occasioning cause, of the
Devils access unto her, even at that time, and to claim her thereby as his
own, by it discovered her lying, swearing, and blaspheming; as also evident
proofs produced against her, to stop her mouth with Truths authority: at which
hearing, she was not able to speak a sensible or ready word for her defense,
but sends out in the hearing of the Judge, Jury, and all good people that stood
by, many most fearful imprecations for destruction against her self then to
happen, as heretofore she had wished and indeauoured to happen on diverse of her
neighbors: the which the righteous Judge of Heaven, whom she thus inuocated,
to judge then and discern her cause, did reveal.
Thus God did wonderfully overtake her in her own wickedness, to make her
tongue to be the means of her own destruction, which had destroyed many
before.

And in this manner, namely, that out of her false swearing the truth whereof,
she little thought, should be found, but by her swearing and cursing blended,
it thus far made against her, that both Judge and Jury, all of them grew
more and more suspicious of her, and not without great cause: for none that had
the fear of God, or any the least motion of Gods grace left in them, would, or
durst, to persume so impudently, with execrations and false oaths, to affront
Justice.

On Saturday, being the fourteenth day of April, Anno Dom. 1621. this
Elizabeth Sawyer late of Edmonton, in the County of Middlesex Spinster, was
arraigned, and indicted three several times at Justice Hall in the Old Baily in
London, in the Parish of Saint Sepulchers, in the Ward of Farrington without:
which Inditements were, viz.

That she the said Elizabeth Sawyer, not having the fear of God before her
eyes, but moved and seduced by the Devil, by Diabolical help, did out of her
malicious heart, (because her neighbors where she dwelt, would not buy Broomes
of her) would therefore thus revenge her self on them in this manner, namely,
witch to death their Nurse Children and Cattle. But for breuities sake I here
omit forms of Law and Informations.

She was also indicted, for that she the said Elizabeth Sawyer, by Diabolical
help, and out of her malice afore-thought, did witch unto death Agnes
Ratcleife, a neighbor of hers, dwelling in the town of Edmonton where she
did likewise dwell, and the cause that urged her thereunto was, because that
Elizabeth Ratcliefe did strike a Sow of hers in her sight, for licking up a
little Soape where she had laid it, and for that Elizabeth Sawyer would be
revenged of her, and thus threatened Agnes Ratcleife, that it should be a dear
blow unto her, which accordingly fell out, and suddenly; for that evening Agnes
Ratcleife fell very sick, and was extraordinarily vexed, and in a most strange
manner in her sickness was tormented, Oath whereof, was by this Agnes
Ratcleifes Husband, given to the Court, the time when she fell sick, and the
time when she died, which was within four days after she fell sick: and
further then related, that in the time of her sickness his wife Agnes
Ratcleife lay foaming at the mouth, and was extraordinarily distempered, which
many of his neighbors seeing, as well as himself, bred suspicion in them that
some mischief was done against her, and by none else, but alone by this
Elizabeth Sawyer it was done; concerning whom the said Agnes Ratcleife lying on
her deathbed, these words confidently spoke: namely, that if she did die at
that time she would verily take it on her death, that Elizabeth Sawyer her
neighbor, whose Sow with a washing-Beetle she had stricken, and so for that
cause her malice being great, was the occasion of her death.

To prove her innocence, she put her self to the trial of God and the
Country, and what care was taken both by the honorable Bench and Jury, the
judicious standers by can witness: and God knows, who will reward it.

The Jury hearing this Evidence given upon oath by the husband of the above
named Agnes Ratcliefe, and his wives speeches relating to them likewise an
oath, as she lay on her deathbed, to be truth, that she had said unto her
husband; Namely, that if she dyed at that time, she the said Elizabeth Sawyer
was the cause of her death; and maliciously did by her Witchery procure the
same.

This made some impression in their minds, and caused due and mature
deliberation, not trusting their own judgments, what to do, in a matter of
such great import, as life, they deemed might be conserved.

The Foreman of the Jury asked of Master Heneage Finch Recorder, his direction,
and advice, to whom he Christianlike thus replied, namely, Do in it as God
shall put in your hearts.

Master Arthur Robinson, a worshipful Justice of Peace dwelling at Totnam, had
often and diverse times, upon the complaints of the neighbors against this
Elizabeth Sawyer, laboriously and carefully examined her, and still his
suspicion was strengthened against her, that doutlesse she was a Witch. An
Information was given unto him by some of her Neighbors, that this Elizabeth
Sawyer had a private and strange mark on her body, by which their suspicion
was confirmed against her, and he sitting in the Court at that time of her
trial, informed the Bench thereof, desiring the Bench to send for women to
search her, presently before the Jury did go forth to bring in the verdict,
concerning Elizabeth Sawyer, whether that she was guilty or no: to which
motion of his, they most willingly condescended.

The Bench commanded officers appointed for those purposes, to fetch in three
women to search the body of Elizabeth Sawyer, to see if they could find any
such unwonted mark, as they were informed of: one of the women's names was
Margaret Weauer, that keeps the Sessions House for the City of London, a
widow of an honest reputation, and two other grave Matrons, brought in by the
Officer out of the street, passing by there by chance, were joined with her in
this search of the person named, who fearing and perceiving she should by that
search of theirs be then discovered, behaved her self most sluttishly and
loathsomely toward them, intending thereby to prevent their search of her,
(which my pen would forbear to write these things for modesties sake, but I
would not vary in what was delivered to the Bench, expressly and openly spoken)
yet nevertheless, niceness they laid aside, and according to the request of
the Court, and to that trust reposed in them by the Bench, they all three
severally searched her, and made severally their answer unto the Court being
sworn thereunto to deliver the truth. And they all three said, that they a
little above the Fundiment of Elizabeth Sawyer the prisoner, there indicted
before the Bench for a Witch, found a thing like a Teate the bigness of the
little finger, and the length of half a finger, which was branched at the top
like a teate, and seemed as though one had sucked it, and that the bottom
thereof was blew, and the top of it was read. This view of theirs, and answer
that she had such a thing about her, which boldly she denied, gave some
insight to the Jury, of her: who upon their consciences returned the said
Elizabeth Sawyer, to be guilty, by dibolicall help, of the death of Agnes
Ratcliefe only, and acquitted her of the other two Inditements. And thus much
of the means that brought her to her deserved death and destruction.

I will address to inform you of her preparation to death, which is alone
pertinent to my function, and declare unto you her Confession verbatim, out of
her own mouth delivered to me, the Tuseday after her conviction, though with
great labor it was extorted from her, and the same Confession I read unto her
at the place of her execution, and there she confessed to all people that were
there, the same to be most true, which I shall here relate.

And because it should not be thought that from me alone this proceeded, I
would have other testimony thereof to stop all contradictions of so palpable a
verity, that heard her deliver it from her own mouth in the Cappel of Newgate
the same time.

In testimony whereof, the persons that were then present with me at her
Confession, have hereunto put to their hands, and if it be required, further to
confirm this to be a truth, will be ready at all times to make oath thereof.

A true Relation of the confession of Elizabeth Sawyer spinster, after her
conviction of Witchery, taken on Tuesday the 17. day of April, Anno 1621. in
the Jail of Newgate, where she was prisoner, then in the presence and hearing
of diverse persons, whose names to verify the same are here subscribed to this
ensuyng confession, made unto me Henry Good-cole Minister of the word of God,
Ordinary and Visiter for the Jail of Newgate. In Dialogue manner are here
expressed the persons that she murdered, and the cattle that she destroyed by
the help of the Devil
In this manner was I enforced to speak unto her, because she might understand
me, and give unto me answer, according to my demands, for she was a very
ignorant woman.

Question.
BY what means came you to have acquaintance with the Devil, and when was the
first time that you saw him, and how did you know that it was the Devil?

Answer.
The first time that the Devil came unto me was, when I was cursing, swearing
and blaspheming; he then rushed in upon me, and never before that time did I
see him, or he me: and when he, namely the Devil, came to me, the first words
that he spoke unto me were these: Oh! have I now found you cursing, A
Gentleman by name Mr. Maddox standing by, and hearing of her say the word
blaspheming, did ask of her, three or four times, whether the Devil said
have I found you blaspheming, and she confidently said, I.
swearing, and blaspheming? now you are mine. A wonderful warning to many
whose tongues are too frequent in these abominable sins; I pray God, that
this her terrible example may deter them, to leave and distaste them, to put
their tongues to a more holy language, then the accursed language of hell. The
tongue of man is the glory of man, and it was ordained to glorify God: but
worse then brute beasts they are, who have a tongue, as well as men, that
therewith they at once both bless and curse.

Question.
What said you to the Devil, when he came unto you and spoke unto you, were
you not afraid of him? if you did fear him, what said the Devil then unto
you?

Answer.
I was in a very great fear, when I saw the Devil, but he did bid me not to
fear him at all, for he would do me no hurt at all, but would do for me
whatsoever I should require of him; and as he promised unto me, he always did
such mischiefs as I did bid him to do, both on the bodies of Christians and
beasts: if I did bid him vex them to death, as oftentimes I did so bid him,
it was then presently by him so done.

Question.
Whether would the Devil bring unto you word or no, what he had done for you,
at your command; and if he did bring you word, how long would it be, before he
would come unto you again, to tell you?

Answer.
He would always bring unto me word what he had done for me, within the space
of a week, he never failed me at that time; and would likewise do it to
Creatures and beasts two manner of ways, which was by scratching or pinching
of them.

Question.
Of what Christians and Beasts, and how many were the number that you were the
cause of their death, and what moved you to prosecute them to the death?

Answer.
I have been by the help of the Devil, the means of many Christians and
beasts death; the cause that moved me to do it, was malice and envy, for if
anybody had angered me in any manner, I would be so revenged of them, and of
their cattle. And do now further confess, that I was the cause of those two
nurse-childrens death, for the which I was now indicted and acquitted, by the
Jury.

Question.
Whether did you procure the death of Agnes Ratcliefe, for which you were found
guilty by the Jury?

Answer.
No, I did not by my means procure against her the least hurt.

Question.
How long is it since the Devil and you had acquaintance together, and how
oftentimes in the week would he come and see you, and you company with him?

Answer.
It is eight years since our first acquaintance; and three times in the week,
the Devil would come and see me, after such his acquaintance gotten of me; he
would come sometimes in the morning, and sometimes in the evening.

Question.
In what shape would the Devil come unto you?

Answer.
Always in the shape of a dog and of two collars, sometimes of black and
sometimes of white.

Question.
What talk had the Devil and you together, when that he appeared to you, and
what did he ask of you, and what did you desire of him?

Answer.
He asked of me, when he came unto me, how I did, and what he should do for
me, and demanded of me my soul and body; threatening then to tear me in
pieces, if that I did not grant unto him my soul and my body which he asked of
me.

Question.
What did you after such the Devils asking of you, to have your Soul and
Body, and after this his threatening of you, did you for fear grant unto the
Devil his desire?

Answer.
Yes, I granted for fear unto the Devil his request of my Soul and body; and
to seal this my promise made unto him, I then gave him leave to suck of my
blood, the which he asked of me.

Question.
In what place of your body did the Devil suck of your blood, I demanded this
question of her to confirm the women's search of her, concerring, that she had
such a mark about her, which they upon their oaths informed the court, that
truth it was, she had such a mark.
and whether did he himself choose the place, or did you your self appoint
him the place? tell the truth, I charge you, as your will answer unto the
Almighty God, and tell the reason if that you can, why he would suck your
blood.

Answer.
The place where the Devil sucked my blood was a little above my fundiment, and
that place chosen by himself; and in that place by continual drawing, there
is a thing in the form of a Teate, at which the devil would suck me. This I
asked of her very earnestly, and she thus answered me, without any studying
for an answer.
And I asked the Devil why he would suck my blood, and he said it was to
nourish him.

Question.
Whether did you pull up your coats or no when the Devil came to suck you?

Answer.
No I did not, but the Devil would put his head under my coats, and I did
willingly suffer him to do what he would.

Question.
How long would the time be, that the Diuill would continue sucking of you,
and whether did you endure any pain, the time that he was sucking of you?

Answer.
I asked this question because she said that the Devil did not always speak
to her
He would be suckinge of me the continuance of a quarter of an hour, and when
he sucked me, I then felt no pain at all.

Question.
What was the meaning that the Devil when he came unto you, would sometimes
speak, and sometimes bark.

Answer.
It is thus; when the Devil spoke to me, then he was ready to do for me,
what I would bid him to do: and when he came barking to me he then had done
the mischief that I did bid him to do for me.

Quest.
By what name did you call the Devil, and what promises did he make to you?

Answ.
I did call the Devil by the name of Tom, and he promised to do for me
whatsoever I should require of him.

Quest.
What were those two ferrets that you were feeding on a form with white-bread
and milk, I asked this of her, because that some children of a good bigness,
and reasonable understanding, informed the Court, that they had diverse times
seen her feed two white ferrets with white bread and milk.
when diverse children came, and saw you feeding of them?

Answ.
I never did any such thing.

Quest.
What was the white thing that did run through the thatch of your house, was it
a spirit or Devil?

Answ.
So far as I know, it was nothing else but a white Ferret.

Quest.
Did any body else know, I asked this question of her because her husband
testified to the Bench, he saw such a white thing run through the thatch of
the house, and that he caught at it, but could not get it, and he thought it
was a white ferret.
but your self alone, of the Devils coming unto you, and of your practices?
speak the truth, and tell the reason, why you did not reveal it to your
husband, or to some other friend?

Answ.
I did not tell any body thereof, that the Devil came unto me, neither I durst
not; for the Devil charged me that I should not, and said, That if I did tell
it to any body, at his next coming to me, he then would tear me in pieces.

Quest.
Upon my general suspision I asked of her this question.
Did the Devil at any time find you praying when he came unto you, and did not
the Devil forbid you to pray to Jesus Christ, but to him alone? and did not he
bid you pray to him the Devil, as he taught you?

Answ.
I do here relate the selfsame words upon this question propounded unto her,
what prayer the Devil taught her to say.
Yes, he found me once praying, and he asked of me to whom I prayed, and I
answered him, to Jesus Christ; and he charged me then to pray no more to Jesus
Christ, but to him the Devil, and he the Devil taught me this prayer,
Santibicetur nomen tuum. Amen.

Quest.
Were you ever taught these Latin words before by any person else, or did you
ever hear it before of any body, or can you say any more of it?

Answ.
No, I was not taught it by any body else, but by the Devil alone; neither do
I understand the meaning of these words, nor can speak any more Latin words.

Quest.
Did the Devil ask of you the next time he came unto you, whether that you
used to pray unto him, in that manner as he taught you?

Answ.
Yes, at his next coming to me he asked of me, if that I did pray unto him as
he had taught me; and I answered him again, that sometimes I did, and
sometimes I did not, and the Devil then thus threatened me; It is not good for
me to mock him.

Quest.
How long is it since you saw the Devil last?

Answ.
It is three weeks since I saw the Devil.

Quest.
Did the Devil never come unto you since you were in prison? I asked this
question because it was rumoured that the devil came to her since her
conviction and shamelesly printed and openly sung in a ballad, to which many
give too much credit.
speak the truth, as you will answer unto almighty God.

Answ.
The Devil never came unto me since I was in prison, nor I thank God, I have
no motion of him in my mind, since I came to prison, neither do I now fear
him at all.

Quest.
How came your eye to be put out? The reason why I asked this was because her
father and mothers eye, one of theirs was out.


Answ.
With a stick which one of my children had in the hand: that night my mother
did dye it was done; for I was stooping by the bed side, and I by chance did
hit my eye on the sharp end of the stick.

Quest.
Did you ever handle the Devil when he came unto you? I asked of her this
question because some might think this was a visible delusion of her sight
only.


Answ.
Yes, I did stroke him on the back, and then he would beck unto me, and
wagge his tail as being therewith contented.

Quest.
Would the Devil come unto you, all in one bigness?

Answ.
No; when he came unto me in the black shape, he then was biggest, and in
the white the least; and when that I was praying, he then would come unto me
in the white color.

Quest.
Why did you at your trial for swear all this, that you now do confess?

Answ.
I did it thereby hoping to avoid shame.

Quest.
Is all this truth which you have spoken here unto me, and that I have now
written?

Answ.
Yes, it is all truth, as I shall make answer unto almighty God.

Quest.
What moves you now to make this confession? did any urge you to it, or bid you
do it, is it for any hope of life you do it?

Answ.
No: I do it to clear my conscience, and now having done it, I am the more
quiet, and the better prepared, and willing thereby to suffer death; for I have
no hope at all of my life, although I must confess, I would live longer if I
might.

A Relation what she said at the place of Execution, which was at Tiborne, on
Thursday, the 19. day of April. 1621.
ALl this being by her thus freely confessed after her conviction in the Jail
of Newgate, on Tuesday, the 17. day of April, I acquainted Master Recorder of
London therewith; who thus directed me, to take that her confession with me to
the place of Execution, and to read it to her, and to ask of her whether that
was truth which she had delivered to me in the prison, on Tuesday last,
concerning what she said; and how she dyed I will relate unto you.

Elizabeth Sawyer, you are now come unto the place of Execution; is that all
true which you confessed unto me on Tuesday last, when that you were in
prison? I have it here, and will now read it unto you, as you spoke it then
unto me, out of your own mouth: and if it be true, confess it now to God, and
to all the people that are here present.

Answer.
This confession which is now read unto me, by Master Henry Goodcoale Minister,
with my own mouth I spoke it to him on Tuesday last at Newgate, and I here
do acknowledge, to all the people that are here present, that it is all truth,
disiring you all to pray unto Almighty God to forgive me my grievous sins.

Question.
By what means hope you now to be saved?

Answer.
By Jesus Christ alone.

Question.
Will you now pray unto Almighty God to forgive unto you all your misdeedes?

Answer.
I, with all my heart and mind.

This was confirmed, in the hearing of many hundreds at her last breath, what
formerly she in prison confessed to me, and at that time spoke more heartily,
then the day before of her execution, on whose body Law was justly inflicted,
but mercy in Gods power reserved, to bestow, when and where he pleases.

My labor thus ended concerning her, to testify and avouch to the world, and
all opposers hereof, this to be true; those that were present with me in the
prison, that heard her confession, I have desired here their testimonies, which
is as follows.

We whose names are here subscribed, do thereby testify, that Elizabeth
Sawyer late of Edmonton in the County of Midds. Spinster, did in our hearings,
confess on Tuesday the 17. of April, in the Jail of Newgate, to Master Henry
Goodcoale Minister of the word of God, the repeated foul crimes, and confirmed
it at her death the 19. of April following, to be true: and if we be
thereunto required, will be ready to make faith of the truth thereof, namely
that this was her confession being alive, and a little before her death;

Conclusion.
Dear Christians, lay this to heart, namely the cause, and first time, that
the Devil came unto her, then, even then when she was cursing, swearing, and
blaspheming. The Devil rages, and malice reigns in the hearts of many. O
let it not do so, for here you may see the fruits thereof, that it is a
plain way to bring you to the Devil; nay that it brings the Devil to you:
for it seemed that when she so fearfully did swear, her oaths did so
conjure him, that he must leave then his mansion place, and come at this
wretches command and will, which was by her imprecations. Stand on your guard
and watch with sobriety to resist him, the Devil your adversary, who waits
on you continually, to subvert you* that so you, that do detest her
abominable words, and ways, may never taste of the cup nor wages of shame
and destruction, of which she did in this life: from which and from whose
power, Lord Jesus save, and defend thy little flock. Amen.


