A Short Discourse of the three kinds of PEPPERS in common use, and certain
special medicines made of the same, tending to the preservation of health.

1588

AS in former years at this season I have been always careful to show my
special affection toward (...) by offering some present, appertaining to the
preservation of your health: so at this time, (...) in token of a good and
prosperous new year, (God grant you many) I have emboldened my self to
exhibit to (...) in our vulgar tongue, this short discourse of the three kinds
of Peppers, and of three medicines co^pounded of the same, greatly commended by
Galen in his books De sanitate tuenda; which being used in right order, with
discretion, will undoubtedly bring three ways commodity to the continuance of
your heath. For it is certain that most men in this our country through our
manner of feeding, do gather in the stomach and in the first veins many crude
and undigested humors, which do often occasion lack of appetite, gross
windines, distentions in the sides, and many ways grievous pains; and
sometimes unnatural vomits: which crudities carried farther into the body, do
breed obstructions, tympanies, fevers, and other dangerous diseases. The due
consideration hereof, may easily infer how necessary to health in this our
region the use of pepper is, and what commodity may accrue by convenient use of
the three medicines made thereof. For first the medicine termed diatrion
pipereon, by consent of all writers, has faculty to warm the stomach, to
dry superfluous moisture, to further concoction, to discuss wind, to ripen
crude humors, and is commended above all other medicaments, that in performing
of these actions it does no way ouerheate the liver, nor distemper the blood.
The second medicine termed diaspoliticon, keeps the belly loose, and does
carry by the stool, crude, corrupt, and naughty humors, cut gross and
thick phlegm, keeps clean the belly and guts. The third medicine termed
diacalaminthe, having more subtlety in substance does penetrate farther, and
so does concoct and expel not only the crudities of the belly and of the
first veins, but also does digest, extenuate, discuss, and by urine carries
the excrementes of the inner veins, cleanses the blood, and keeps clean the
habit of the body by sweat and perspiration through the skin. That in very
truth Galen had just cause so greatly to commend these three medicines as most
convenient to preserve health. For I do not read in all our authors of a more
convenient means to continue health, than the apt and due use of these three
medicines, which in propulsing of diseases, and in reforming of the state of
the body, may be resembled to the triumuiri in the commonwealth of Rome.
Wherefore I remain to the almighty a daily orator so to prosper the effects
of these medicines, that the same commodities may come unto your (...) which
our authors do attribute unto them, that your years may be enlarged to
extreme age. *

Of the Spice called
Pepper.
THAT kind of spice which of the Greek authors is called (...), the Latin
writers do name Piper, and the apothecaries do term the same as the Latinists.
After the Arabike speech in Auicen it is read Fulful, in Serapio Fulfel. Garcia
a physician to the viceroy of India, does write, that the Arabians in these
days do call it Fulfill: and he adds, that the greatest quantity of this
spice is now brought into Europe, out of the province of Malauar: and that the
same is in that country language named Molonga. We in English do call it
pepper: and much use of this spice with us is, in making broths, and in
conditing meats.

The kinds of Pepper.
Here it is to be noted, that many herbs of our writers are termed by the name
of pepper. For the herb called in Latin Persicaria, in English Culrage, is of
some named water pepper. The seed also of the herb called Chamelea, is known
to the herbarians by the name of hill pepper. Likewise the herb which we call
Stonecrop, is also named mouse pepper. And some do call diptander, herb pepper,
and some sauery pepperwort. So the latter writers show many other herbs under
the name of pepper, and under pepperwort. For they refer to pepper every kind
of herb which does bite the tongue as pepper does. And beside the three kinds
of pepper, which are best known by that name, we do read in the latter writers
of some other kinds under that name: and so we read of pepper out of Aethiopia,
which is of the learned rather referred to that spice which is called
Carpesium, than to any kind of pepper. But properly and in true speech, this
word in Latin Piper, and in English pepper; is to be understood of one of the
three peppers in common use, of which one is named white pepper, the other
black pepper, the third long pepper. Of the which three kinds, and not of the
other things falsely named peppers, that confection so greatly commended in cold
affections of the stomach, called Diatrion pipereon, is made, and kept in our
Apothecaries shops. So that these three kinds of peppers most properly do
deserve the name of pepper, and are so most conveniently called: and the other
things are rather by similitude so termed, for yielding some taste like pepper,
and therefore never known by the name of pepper without some addition, as Piper
montanum, Piper murinum, etc. So that when we do read in any author this word
Piper, or in English pepper without addition, we must understand the same of
one of these three peppers.

The nauigations in these latter years made by the Portingales into the east
Indians, and by the Spaniards into the west Indians, has made manifest to us,
how greatly the old authors, I mean Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, Auicenna,
Serapio, and other writers of the former time were deceived in and about the
history of pepper. For first, all the ancient writers in their monuments have
delivered to us, that the three kinds of pepper in common use are all three
the fruit of one tree. For (say they) the pepper tree does bear a long fruit,
like unto that which does hang in hasell nut trees, and birch trees. And they
affirm, that this long fruit is the first rudiment of the pepper, which is
called long pepper: after that this fruit being more ripe is disclosed, they
take the seeds contained in it to be the white pepper, and the black pepper:
such grains which are not perfectly ripe, they supposed to be white pepper,
and those which are perfectly ripe, to be black pepper. So they concluded,
that these three kinds were all the fruit of one tree, and differed only in
that one was not so ripe as the other. But by the nauigations of the
Portingals, and of the Spaniards into those countries, in which these pepper
trees do grow, it is evident and well known, that the trees which do yield
these three spices are diverse in kind. For the travelers into those countries
which have seen the trees, and gathered the fruits, do witness, that not one
and the same tree, but diverse and different do bear these spices. And that the
plants which do bear white pepper and black pepper are not trees of any
bigness, but weak shrubs, which do clime up by other trees, as an Iuie does in
this our country. And have leaves like to the apple tree called Malum
Assyrium, and do carry their fruit in clusters, like the clusters of grapes of
vine trees, which are always green until they wax ripe. And Garcia, who lived
in these parts, writes, that the plant which yields the white pepper, does
in kind differ from that which bears the black pepper, and yet are so like,
that no man can know the one from the other, but they which do dwell there. For
(says he) they do so differ, as the vine tree which bears the white grape,
does differ from that which yields the red grape: and as we cannot know the
difference of these vine trees, but when the grape is ripe, so we cannot
discern the plant which yields the white pepper, from that which bears the
black pepper: and yet (says he) it is certain, that the same tree, which
brings forth the black pepper, does not yield the white pepper. He says
also, that the white pepper tree is not so common in these countries as the
other is, and that the same is not to be seen, but in certain places of
Malauar and Malachae. The same Garcia writes, that the tree, of which long
pepper is gathered, does greatly differ from the other forenamed pepper trees:
and that long pepper is a fruit depending of the tree in like sort, as we see
things to hang down in our hasell nut trees, and in our birch trees: and that
this fruit will never yield either white or black pepper. By this discourse we
do understand, that the pepper tree is not like to the Juniper tree, as Pliny
writes in his 12. book. And Garcia also says, that the root of the pepper
tree is very little. So that it is not like to ginger, as some believed in
Dioscorides time, nor like to the root of Costus as Dioscorides writes. And
heerby also we are to understand that the old saying is fabulous and untrue,
that pepper is made black with fire. For the merchants which brought the
peppers, said, that serpents and venomous beasts did use much to be under these
pepper trees, and that they were driven to fray away those serpents with making
fires under the trees, before they durst gather the peppers, and so the pepper
was made black by the fire. But now we learn by the histories penned by the
latter writers, that all this is untrue, and that black pepper is of that
color by his own kind, when it is ripe: and so that white pepper is of his
own kind, even of that color when it is ripe. As the red grape has that
color naturally when it is ripe, and the white grape keeps his color even
to his full ripenes. Wherefore those writers were much deceived, which
affirmed, that white and black pepper were of one tree: and that white pepper
was the fruit not thoroughly ripe, and that black pepper was the same perfectly
ripe. For (say they) as in our country, when we gather apples, all of the same
tree are not of like ripenes, some not full ripe, some full ripe, some over
ripe, and all are gathered at one time: so, say these men, when the merchants
do gather pepper, some grains are thoroughly ripe, and they black and wrinkled,
some not full ripe, and they whiter in color, and smoothe not wrinkled. But it
appears by that which they have delivered to us, which have seen and
gathered both these kinds of peppers, that they are gathered of several trees,
and that each does perfectly ripe in his kind, and each retain his color: the
white grain when it is ripe keeps the white color, and the black pepper
when it is ripe keeps his black color: Even as the white grape being ripe
remains white, and the red grape red, and yet each do come of several vine
trees different in kind. So we are to think of these kinds of pepper, that
each does come of his proper tree, and each full ripe retains his natural
color: the white pepper his, and the black his color, as does evidently
appear by that which Garcia has written in his first book De aromat. Indiae.

That the Greek and ancient writers did err in expressing the history of
these peppers, it is no marvel: for in that their countries were far distant
from the provinces from whence these peppers came, that they themselves could
not search out a truth, but followed the report of merchants, which tell many
untruths, they were easily deceived, and so did set down in their books for
verities many untrue relations of the merchants.

But that the Arabians did commit the same errors, whose country was not far
distant from the places where pepper does grow, their gross negligence in
searching the true knowledge of simples, can not be excused, who would rather
follow herein that which was written by the Grecians, than themselves search
out a truth.

Matthiolus in his commentaries upon Dioscorides witnesses, that many pepper
trees are set to be seen at Naples, and at Venice, and diverse affirm, that
these trees are planted in diverse places in Spain and in Portingall. But I
could never understand that any pepper tree was at any time brought into
England. I have often seen at Poole in Dorsetshire, and also in London, the
whole clusters of pepper preserved in brine and in salt: these clusters are
long and thin, not so thick together as the clusters of grapes.

Long pepper is to be seen in every shop: for the whole fruit is brought by
the merchants gathered together like scales, rough and uneven, biting the tongue
like the other peppers.

We do read of another kind of pepper brought out of the Indians, which the
Portingals called Piemento de Rabo, in Latin Piper caudatum, and may be
englished tail pepper. Clusius in his annotations in Garcia, seems to have
known this kind of pepper, and says that it is like to the cubebs, and that it
hangs in clusters, is very spicie, and has a little stalk or stem. This
kind is not now brought: for the king of Portingall did forbid any to bring it,
fearing least it might decay the price and sale of the other kinds.

Monardis also in his book De plantis Indiae, makes mention of another kind
of long pepper, different from the common long pepper, and is much hotter than
the common long pepper, and more pleasant to the taste than black pepper. Where
the latter writers in the history of pepper do divide long pepper into the
garden and wild, this kind written of by Monardis is supposed to be the wild
long pepper, and the common long pepper, the garden or domestical.

The latter writers in the history of pepper, do write of another kind of
pepper, which they call Piper corniculatum, some call it Siliquastrum, which
may be englished, Codded pepper, because it bears his grains in a cod or
husk: and they describe this kind to have leaves like to the herb called
Nightshade, a square stalk of color green, full of ioints, white flowers, and
after them comes the cod, at the first greenish, and after red, with a
perfect smoothnes and slikenes: within that cod are flat grains, whitish,
yellow, more biting in taste than pepper. These cods are not always of one
form: for in some of the plants they are greater and longer, in some lesser
and shorter: and the lesser kind they call pepper of Brasilia: the greater they
call pepper of Calecut, named after the countries from whence they are brought.
The herbarians of our time do witness, that this plant is set in diverse places
in Italy, Spain and Portingal: for that it is a goodly plant and fair to the
eye, and the grains are used for pepper all the year, and are thought to
commend meats condited with them, better than common pepper. I did never see
the plant, but the cods are common in the Apothecaries shops. It is supposed of
many, that the old Greek authors have not written any thing of this plant,
but Actuarius seems to speak of this kind of pepper, under the name of
Capsicum. Amatus in his commentaries upon Dioscorides affirms, that this
kind of pepper is that which Auicen in 2. tract. lib. 2. cap. 746. called
Zinziber caninum. Thus much of the true history of pepper, as well out of the
old as latter writers.

How to choose pepper.
DIoscorides writing of three kinds of pepper, does give signs and notes to
choose only black pepper: for that as it seems in his time deceit was only
used in that kind of pepper. For Dioscorides writes, that amongst black
pepper are found certain seeds or grains light, and empty, which he calls
Bresma, and Pliny says they are termed Brechmasis, which word does sound,
seeds uttered before their time. For (says he) by unseasonable time the
grains sometimes do wither, and so are empty, having in them no substance.
But Garcia says, that while he did dwell among the Indians, he inquired, and
could not learn of any such name, yet acknowledges, that such grains like to
pepper are often found amongst pepper, and are not easily known from pepper,
but that they are light, and broken do yield no substance as pepper does.
Wherefore as in Dioscorides time, so rather in this our age, we ought to be
diligent in the choice of pepper, and to have some notes or signs to choose
the good from the bad, and to know the best pepper. Dioscorides commends
pepper when the grains are heavy, full, whole, not much wrinkled, new, not
full of dust. And Galen in 4. De sanit. tuend. adddeth, which has not a very
thin, nor yet a gross and thick skin.

Serapio praised white pepper, which has a white color, and the latter
writers say, the whiter the better, which is smooth and not wrinkled. Galen in
4. De sanit. tuend. says, that those grains are best, which are fullest and
greatest.

Serapio allows of long pepper, which when it is broken, does show his
substance compacted, and his grains thick joined together, which do bite the
tongue with sensible heat. Galen in the said book De sanit. tuend. adds,
that long pepper must be whole, and not have any holes in it, and not
sophisticated. For (says he) the merchants do bring two sorts counterfeited,
the one is the bud of an herb, the other is made in Alexandria by art. And in
his book De theriaca ad Pisonem, he tells the manner of making of this
counterfeit long pepper. They form it (says he) of the length and bigness of
this pepper, and then cast to it the powder of the root of Pyrethrum, or of
mustard seed, and so deceive the taste. But these deceits are easily bewraied:
for by taste you may discern the right pepper from the buds of that herb, which
are in form like to long pepper, but not in taste: and so by tasting, you shall
discern the one from the other. For whosoever will with diligence observe the
taste of pepper, he shall easily judge that pleasant spicines which it yields
with the biting. And Galen shows how to discern the counterfeited from the
right, by putting it into water. For the counterfeited will dissolve in water,
and so the right and natural will not dissolve. Wherefore he concludes, that
if it has the true taste of pepper, and does not dissolve in water, nor has
holes in it, then that is good pepper. All writers do make this for a sign of
good long pepper, when it has no holes: for in deed this pepper is moister
than any other kind, and therefore will sooner mould and wax mustie than the
other, and so will quickly be woorme eaten, and full of holes.

Of the temperament of Pepper.
DIoscorides and Galen do yield to all the kinds of pepper a faculty to heat
and to dry, but neither of them do declare in what degree they do heat and
dry. After that Auerrhois in lib. Simply. had pronounced long pepper to be
moister than the other: And that white pepper was not come to his ripenes, and
that black pepper was full ripe: He concludes both kinds to be hot in the
third degree, and as some say in the fourth degree. Auicen in lib. 2. tract. 2.
entreating of white and black pepper generally, affirms pepper to be hot and
dry tending toward the fourth degree. And in the very next chapter handling of
long pepper, he writes that it is hot in the third degree, and dry in the
second. Dioscorides does not appoint the degrees of heat and drines to every
kind of pepper, yet handles each very distinctly, saying, that long pepper
does more strongly bite: and because it is taken from the tree before it is
ripe, therefore it remains a little bitter. Black pepper, because it is
perfectly ripe, therefore it is well sauored, sharper than white pepper, and so
more pleasing to the mouth, and more profitable to condite meats. The white
pepper remaining a little bitter, is not so strong as the black. By this
Dioscorides concludes, that black pepper is the hottest, and best of all;
next to it is long pepper, and that the weakest is the white pepper. Galen does
seem heerin to dissent from Dioscorides. For Galen in 8. simpl. med. facult.
does put long pepper to be moister than the rest, because it is the young
fruit, and therefore does soon wax woorme eaten. And after affirms, that
white pepper is more sharp and biting than the black, and gives this reason
of his assertion: for that black pepper is ever heated and dried with the sun
by long tarrieng upon the tree: for heerby many of his hot and fiery parts do
breath out, the rather because pepper is of a thin substance, that his hot
parts will quickly consume and breath out: and so he concludes, that because
white pepper is not so heated and dried by the sun, but does retain and keep
al his hot parts, therefore it is the hotter, more biting, and the best
pepper, contrary to Dioscorides assertion. Brassauolus Musa going about to
reconcile this controversy in Galen, by distinguishing of the Greek word
(...). For in that white pepper has plenty of moisture in it, therefore it
biteth stronger, and leaves the sharp and biting quality to continue longer:
and in that respect it may be said to be hotter than the black pepper, having
little moisture, and that much extenuated by the heat of the sun, does bite
quicklier, deeper, and sharper: but because the heat of his biting does not so
long continue, therefore it seems not so hot as the black, and yet for that
it biteth deeper, therefore Dioscorides writes, that it is hotter and stronger
than the black. And if to try the truth hereof, a man will taste both kinds
of pepper, surely he shall manifestly perceive the difference of them both. And
so in the one sense white pepper may be said to be hotter and more biting, as
Galen writes: and in the other sense black pepper may be thought to exceed
the white as Dioscorides affirms. But where Dioscorides says, that white
pepper is weaker than long pepper and black pepper, because it not being full
ripe is acerbious or more tart: surely his argument is not perfect. For as he
puts white pepper not so ripe as black, so he makes long pepper not so
ripe as white pepper. And so it must follow after his opinion, that long pepper
should be weaker than white, and white than black pepper. So Hippocrates is
deceived in his own reasoning. But in that it is now certain, that these
kinds do not differ, that the one is riper than the other, but each is ripe and
perfect in his kind: these arguments of more or less ripenes, do take no
place, and are of no efficacy: because that by taste it is evident, that white
pepper does bite the tongue more, and the biting does continue longer: therefore
we may justly say that white pepper is the hotter. And for that Galen lib. 9.
De composit. sec. loc. in the medicine of Philo affirms, that white pepper is
better for the stomach than black pepper. And in 4. De sanit. tuend. he
says, that white pepper does stre^gthen the stomach above the other kinds.
Surely the Friars writing upon Mesue do truly counsel Apothecaries when pepper
simply is read, to take white pepper.

Notwithstanding in some affects long pepper is to be preferred before the
other kinds, as Galen witnesses lib. 4. De sanit. tuend. where he counsels
to give long pepper to them which have their sides blown up with wind, and
which do turn all they eat to wind. For (says he) long pepper does dissolve
the grosnes of wind, and casts down by the belly such matter which does stay
in the sides.

By this discourse it appears, that the Arabians did truly set white and
black pepper in the uttermost point of the third degree of heat and drines,
or in the beginning of the fourth degree. And Galen confirms the same when he
does write, that white and black pepper do strongly heat and dry.

And with good reasons the same Arabikes do set long pepper in the third degree
of heat, and not beyond the second degree of drying. For in that by all
writers consent this kind is moister than the other, therefore it cannot dry
so much as the other: for the drying quality must needs be somewhat obtunded by
the moisture which is in this kind. And therefore long pepper tasted does not
by and by bite strongly, but after it is a little chewed, and then the biting
does last longer. And we may heerby also gather, that long pepper is not so
subtle of substance as the other kinds are.

Garcia writes, that Emperikes amongst the Arabians and Persians do hold
opinion, that pepper is cold: which opinion does also prevail amongst the
common sort in this our country. For it is a common saying, that pepper is hot
in the mouth, but cold in operation. But for as much as we do try the quality
of medicines by taste, these men do show their ignorance, in calling that cold
in operation, which is hot in the mouth.

The temperament of Siliquastrum, or Indian Pepper.
THe Indian pepper called also Siliquastrum, is accounted hot and dry in the
fourth degree, and therefore does very effectually break wind, does heat and
strengthen the inward parts, and is very good for the breast.

The virtues and faculties of Pepper.
DIoscorides, Pliny, Auicenna, and Serapio do recite and number many virtues
and medicinal properties of these kinds of peppers, which I leave the reader
to peruse in their books. The cheifest use of peppers is in cold affects of the
stomach, and of other parts which do serve for nutrition. For every kind of
pepper does greatly help concoction, discuss wind, and does occasion all
gross and slimie humors to descend sooner. And to this purpose many medicines
devised by physicians of these kinds of peppers are kept in Apothecaries shops,
but amongst other Galen in his 4. book De sanit. tuend. does chiefly commend
three sorts. And the medicine termed Diatrion pipereon, in that it is confected
of the three kinds of pepper, bears the bell, and is reputed in the first
place. And then he commends the medicine called Diacalaminthe: and thirdly,
that which is used under the name of Diaspoliticon: notwithstanding each of
these medicines is not good to the selfsame affects, neither are they in like
sort and times to be used. Touching Diatrion pipereon, it is famous for to help
concoction, to discuss wind, and to do good against cold affects of the
stomach, and yet not to heat the liver or the blood, wherein consists a
singular property of this medicine. For it is agreed upon by all authors, that
the heat of this medicine is extinguished in the belly, and the first veins,
and is not carried into the whole body, as the heat of the medicine called
Diacalaminthe is; so termed, for that it receives the herb called Calaminth,
as Gal. writes in the said book De sanit. tuend. cap. 10. where he affirms,
that Diatrion pipereon is to be given when crude and slimy humors are in the
stomach and first veins, yea both before and after meat. The use of
Diacalaminthe is, when we mean to warm further into the body, and have an
intent to cut and make thin gross humors in the veins. For Diacalaminthe does
thin gross and slimie things, breaths out by the skin, provoke urine,
and the monthly sickness in women. Therefore neither this medicine, neither
Diaspoliticon ought to be used after meat, because they two hasten
distribution, and so do hinder concoction: whereby we may conclude, that the
medicine Diatrion pipereon may with most safety be used after meat to help
concoction. And to this intent Galen does counsel to have in a readiness this
medicine prepared in two manner of ways: the one simple, as consisting of
fewest things; the other more compound: the simplier is soonest concocted; the
other by reason of the number of simples is harder to be digested. And
therefore the simplier is best for them which do not well concoct their meat,
and do find some cold temperament in the stomach and belly, and so do gather
much slimie phlegm: and the other by reason of many simples in it, is harder to
be altered of nature, and so does remain longer in the stomach when it is
taken. So Galen does best commend the frequent use of Diatrion pipereo^ to
remove crudities in the stomach and first veins. The other which is more
compound, has his best use in fluxes from the head to the breast. In these our
days the medicine Diatrion pipereon is in use, made in both ways. In
compounding the simplier, our Apothecaries do follow Nicolaus Myrepsicus, and
so do make the medicine in manner as follows: Taking of each of the three
peppers one ounce, of ginger, thyme, anise seeds, persley seeds of each half
an ounce.



This description comes nigh to the Diatrion pipereon of Galen. For there is
no difference, but that Galen takes of each kind of pepper fifty drachmes, of
ginger, thyme, anise seeds eight drachmes. Galen has in his receipt no persley
at all: yet Galen admonishes, that to 50. drachmes of each pepper, 16.
drachmes of the other things may be added. And Galen wills this medicine to
be made with honey of Athens: in this our time it is compounded with sugar. The
other Diatrion pipereon more compound and medicinal is at this time made
according to the description of Mesue, in manner as follows.

Take of the three kinds of pepper ginger, anise seeds, thyme.6..ij.
ana..ij..ij.

spikenard, amomum ana..j..j.
cassia lignea, asarum, enula camp. dried, persley seeds seseli ana..ij.

saccharum albissimum q. s.

This is the same laborious confection set down by Mesue, of which Galen
makes mention, lib. 4. cap. 11. De sanit. tuend. For Galen in that place does
recite by name every simple: save that Galen in stead of Amomum, mentions the
seeds of ammios. And where our authors do differ in opinion, what is the right
Amomum, and all writers do agree, that we have the right ammi: I adiudge it
better in these days to put in this receipt the seeds of ammi, according as
Galen prescribes, than amomum, as Mesue counsels. So you have both
medicines in use in our time made of three peppers, and are to be sold in the
Apothecaries shops, under the name of Diatrion pipereon.

Diaspoliticon.
THE medicine called Diaspoliticon is most commended to loose the belly: this
medicine is composed of cummine seeds, pepper, rue, and that kind of salt
called Salnitre. And Galen advises to have this medicine also prepared in two
sorts. First to make it of the foresaid simples mixed in equal parts, and so
by reason of that salt, it will loose the belly more: the second way to put to
equal parts of the other things, but only half the proportion of that kind
of salt. So will the medicine remain longer in the stomach, and better further
concoction, more digest crude and raw humors, and will less make the belly
laxatiue.

Diacalaminthe.
GAlen in his fourth book De sanitate tuend. ca. 14. does set down the
composition of the medicine called Diacalaminthe, in manner following.

Take of calaminth, of organy, or organmint, called Pulegiu^, of persley, which
grows in stony places, called Petroselinum, of the herb called Seseli, of
each.ij.

of persley seeds, of the tops of thyme, of each.iiij

of louage,.16. of pepper,.48.


And Galen does name the countries from which he counsels to procure the
simples, but in that they are not in these days brought from those places,
therefore it shall suffice to make choice of the best simples of this our
country in confecting of this medicine: for this our country yields very
good of every sort.

In dispensing of this medicine, our Apothecaries do not follow this
description of Galen, but their Apothecary book confected by Nicolaus: which
composition does differ from that of Galen in the doses of the simples, and
that this of Nicolaus has some mo simples than that of Galen. The receite
after Nicolaus is as follows.

Take of calamints organie, seselios black pepper petroselini of each.iij..ij.

leuistici..ij..j. persley seed.j. ammy seed thime, annise seed cinnamon,
ginger. of each.ij.



In this composition, persley seeds, ammy, annise seeds, ginger, are mo then
are set in the description of Galen. Some learned men of our time do commend
this receipt of Nicolaus before that of Galen, because it has mo simples: but
for my part, I do rather allow of that receipt of Galen, which for the paucitie
of simples, is with less labor concocted of them, which do take it, and to the
intent of the medicine, it receives a sufficient number of simples, so that
they which are inserted by Nicolaus, seem superfluous.

Galen appoints a proportion of the best and chosen honey, therewith to
compounde this and the other medicines, which he wills to be scummed with
great diligence: and if the quantity of honey be increased, the medicine says
he will be more pleasing. And he here sets a rule which the apothecaries are
to follow in compounding of medicines, to make them so pleasant to the taste as
they can, without weakening of their strength, or diminishing of their virtues.
In these days the most part of medicines are made up with sugar in stead of
honey, for sugar is more grateful to the taste, and many can not well away
with honey. And honey is sooner converted unto choler than sugar.

Touching the manner of making these medicines, Galen does admonish, that they
are not to be compounded in one and like sort, for in some respects the simples
are to be pounded finely, and sersed with a fine serser. For says he when
things are finely beaten, they pass quickly into the whole body, things
grosely powdered do stay longer in the belly, for the same cannot so easily
pass through the little veins and small pores of the body. In which respect
things grosely powdered do more loose the belly: when they are brought into
fine powder, they go sooner into the body, and provoke sweat, and better move
urine, but do less move to stool. Therefore in compounding of the medicines
called Diacalaminthe Galens counsel is to bring all the simples into fine
powder, that the same may the better pass into all parts of the body, for the
use of this medicine is, when we have an intent to concoct and digest the crude
and raw humors in the inner veins and habit of the body, and so to euapore
them by the pores of the skin, when we mean to provoke sweat, urine, and the
courses of women, And therefore he will not have this medicine often used after
meat. In the medicine called Diaspolitico^, all the simples must be pounded in
gross manner, for so the medicine will more loose the belly, and by staieng
longer in the stomach, further concoction, if the things be finely powdered
into dust: as the medicine will little or not at all make the belly laxatiue,
so it will provoke urine and sweat, to the intention of this medicine.

The like manner is to be observed in confecting of Diatrion pipereon, that if
an intent be to have the medicine stay in the stomach and guts to warm those
parts, to digest crude humors in them, or to loose the belly, the simples must
be pounded grossly: but if we have a purpose to open obstructions, to warm
the inner veins, to provoke urine or sweat: althings must be beaten into fine
powder. By which discourse that question is easily answered, which some latter
writers do move about the beating of the kinds of pepper, whether the same
ought to be beaten finely or grossly. For some do affirm that pepper is always
to be beaten grossly, for so it will remain longer time in the stomach, and
will the less heat the liver and the blood. Some other do maintain a
contrary opinion, and that by Galen himself, who in the 5. book De sanit.
tuend. cap. 8. After meats which do bread stoppages in the body, take (says
he) the medicine called Diacalaminthe, and if you have not it ready, take
Diatrion pipereon: and if that be not at hand, take white pepper beaten into
fine powder, and diligently sersed, and mingle the same with the meat, and
sprinkle it to your drink. And in the same book the 10. cap. Galen
prescribes a ptisane in which the dust or fine powder of white pepper is
mingled. And in the 6. book De sanit. tuend. cap. 14. Galen gives pepper
alone, as finely powdered as may be. By these counsels of Galen, these men do
conclude that pepper ought always to be beaten into fine powder by Galens
doctrine. Nevertheless, these men in mine opinion, do not with diligent care
consider Galens intention in these and the like places, neither well have
marked the scope and cause why Galen in these places does advise to pound
pepper into fine powder: for if they had well considered that Galen writes:
they might have understood, that he gives pepper so finely beaten, to remove
the obstructions and stoppages, for so before he did admonish, that things
beaten into thin powder pass into the body better, and sooner do remove
obstructions: and contrariwise, that which is grossly beaten, does stay in the
belly longer, and better warm those parts, better digest crude and raw humors
gathered in them, and do more effectually discuss wind: to these latter
intents pepper is to be beaten grossly, especially in this our country, in which
men commonly do seed upon gross and slimy meats, and so do heap in the parts
of the belly and first veins, many crude and gross humors, that pepper ought
in this region to be beaten most grossly, that it may thereby be occasioned to
stay the longer in the belly, so to warm the same the better, and the better
to concoct and extenuate such gross and crude humors, for the heat of this
medicine (as Galen writes) is founded in so subtle a substance, that the same
is extinguished before it can come to the liver: then if you shall beat the
medicine finely, the heat will so soon be exhausted and spent, that it will
neither sufficiently warm the belly, neither in good sort concoct those crude
and raw humors. Wherefore I do think it very needful for our apothecaries
to pownd pepper always grossly in the medicine Diatrion pipereon. For if we shall
need withal to open obstructions, we may prescribe the medicine called
Diacalaminthe, and so we may mingle it to Diatrion pipereon, or as occasion
serves give it alone: wherefore I hold it best to follow Galen his precept,
which is, that always things be powdered finely and in subtle manner when our
purpose is to remove obstructions, or to digest, cut, and absterge crude, raw,
slimy, and gross humors, which are in the inner veins and habit of the body,
or mean to provoke sweat or urine; but if our meaning be to increase heat in
the parts of the belly, to concoct humors there, and in the first veins, or to
make the belly loose, then things are to be beaten in gross powder.

The private properties of the medicine called Diaspoliticon.
THis medicine does make the belly loose, and brings out meat, which
corrupts in the stomach, and is special good for them which have a cold
belly, or declining to cold. For it makes thin gross phlegm, and
expels flatulent wind. See Galen in the fourth book De sanitate tuenda.

The particular faculties and properties of Diatrion Pipereon.
DIatrion pipereon is of great efficacy and does much good in all cold
diseases of the stomach, in sower belkes, in quartaine feauers, in palsies, in
evil affected livers, in them which have their bellies blown up with wind.

Diatrion pipereon confected after the description of Mesues, is chiefly
commended in fluxes, from the head to the breast, good generally to the coldness
of the cheste, and to coughes, which do proceed of a cold cause.

That the excellent and rare virtues of this medicine called Diatrion pipereon,
might the better be known, I thought good in this place to remember the reader
what is written in the book entitled Secretorum, which book is ascribed to
Galen, in which book we read in this manner.

A certain friend of mine being about the age of 70. years, complained of a
coldness in all the parts of the body, insomuch that his memory failed him,
and he had pain in his ioints, and then I made for him this medicine called
Diatrion pipereon, and it was a wonder to see how he recovered in the space of
a fortnight. And I made trial in many which were sick of diseases of the
bladder, of the head, and of the iointes, occasioned by cold and crude
humors: and it is found special good in a cough of cold phlegm, in weakness
of the stomach. For it breaks gross wind, digesteth meat, provoke
appetite, resolves crude humors, strengthens the stomach every way,
restores memory, clears the voice, puts back gray hears, remedieth the
gout which comes of a cold cause: And in general whosoever aged does use
much this medicine, he shall not need any other help to preserve his health.

The private properties of the medicine called Diacalaminthe.
IT cutteth gross and slimy humors, and occasioneth the same to be cleansed by
the skin by sweat, provoke urine, and the monthly courses in women, as Galen
witnesses in the 4. book De sanit. tuend. it is good for them which do abhor
meat, for the use of it provoke appetite, it remedieth the shortness of
breath, and helps them which find a coldness in their stomachs, and which
have their sides and bellies blown up with wind, as Mesue writes.

The manner and particular use of the foresaid medicines.
WHen many crude and raw humors do abound in the belly and first veins,
that in that respect it will not be safety to give a purgative medicine, then
is the cheifest use of Diaspoliticon, for it then given will safely stir nature
to expel those humors by the siege. So in other cases when so ever the belly
is dry, and does not her duty, then it is expedient to give Diaspoliticon.

The use of Diatrion pipereon, and of Diacalaminthe: out of Galen. 4. De sanit.
tuend.
WHen many raw and undigested humors are gathered in and about the first
veins, the same are to be cut and digested, and in so doing special care is
to be had lest the same be carried farther into the body. In this case
Diatrion pipereon simple, is with most security given. And it is not enough to
give it once or twice every day, but it must be taken often, in the morning
before meat, and after meat, and when they go to bed, a spoonful at a time,
and so to younger folk and which have less need, the lesser quantity: to elder
and to them which have more need, the bigger quantity, so to the mean, the
meaner quantity is to be proportioned.

When crude humors are heaped in the inner veins, and in the habit of the
body, the same are to be concocted, and also to be expelled by breathing the
same thorough the pores of the skin, and to these intents there is not a more
convenient medicine known than Diacalaminthe, for it has property to
extenuate thick, and slimy things, and then moves the same to be expelled by
breathing out at the skin, and by urine. And this medicine is not unpleasant to
be taken, if a good proportion of honey be boiled with it, but where some do
not like of sweet things, and do abhor honey, to such you must put the less
honey, yet oftentimes even in this case it is good to boil good store of
honey, so you boil it well, for then the medicine will not be ouersweet, and
the honey well boiled does less offend the stomach. And the use of this
medicine is in the morning after frictio^, before exercise, and before bathing.
And you may use this medicine dry in powder without honey in steed of salt for
sauce to your meat, and you may put of it in a Ptisane in steed of pepper.

This medicine is used not only dry in steed of salt, but also when honey is
mixed, for even so it may be used with meat, and so is it pleasing to the
taste. But neither this, neither any other medicine which has strong faculty
to further distribution, is to be taken after meat. For at that time nature
goes about concoction of meat taken, and not to distribute the same,
therefore immediately after meat, endeavor must be to further concoctio^ by
giving Driatrion pipereon simple, or to put some pepper powdered into your
drink.

If such crudities hap to be not only in the belly and first veins, but also
in all other veins, yea in the fleshie parts of the body: in this case at the
beginning of the cure, it is best to use Diatrion pipereon, adding so much of
the seeds of persley growing in a dry and stony ground, as is put of anise
seeds, thyme, and ginger, and after the first day, or rather after the second
day, you may put a little of Diacalaminth, and then in a while after mingle
both, I mean Diatrion pipereon, and Diacalaminth, in equal parts, and in
process of time increase the Diacalaminthe, so at the latter end of the cure,
you may use Diacalaminth alone. So it is to be concluded in this, as in all
manner of diets, when the effects are equal, the medicines to cure, are equally
to be mixed, yet so that at the first greatest care be had of the crudities in
the first veins, and at the latter end, of those crudities, which are in the
other veins and habit of the body, in the middle time both are equally
according to the effect to be mingled. Thus far Galen in his 4. book De
sanitate tuenda.

FINIS.

