THE SVCCESSION OF THE BISHOPS OF ENGLAND SINCE THE FIRST PLANTING OF CHRISTIAN
RELIgion in this Island, together with the history of their lives and
memorable actions faithfully gathered out of the Monuments of Antiquity.

Whereunto is prefixed a discourse concerning the first Conversion of our
Britain unto Christian Religion.

BY Francis Godwin now Bishop of Hereford.

Isaiah 42.4. He shall not fail nor give over till he have set judgment in
thearth, and the Isles shall wait for his Law.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Hebb, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bell
in Paul's Churchyard.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, OUR GRACIOUS Sovereign, JAMES by Gods
merciful providence of great Britain, France and Ireland, the most potent and
illustrious Monarch, and most deservedly instiled, Defender of the true
Catholic and Apostolic FAITH.
IT is accounted of S.t Augustine, (and not without cause) grande miraculum, a
great and wonderful miracle, ineruditos liberalibus disciplinis etc. that the
Apostles of our Savior, twelve poor men (fishermen, publicanes, and such
like) never brought up in learning, and in comparison of the gentile
Philsophers, altogether unlettered, not skillful in Grammar, not armed with
Logike, not swelling with eloquence and Rhetorike, should yet be able by the
help of Christ, to entangle in the nets of faith, in a manner the people of
the whole world, and amongst the rest the very Philosophers themselves. For of
them and their time was veryfied that of the Prophet, Psalm. 19.4.
Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words unto the ends of the
world. Those people, that noe force or power of the Romans (masters of the
world) could bring to the obedience of the Roman laws, although they subdued
their persons, Scythians, Indians, Aethiopians, Parthians, Germans, and Britans
(so speaks Theodoret reckoning many other Nations beside) these same
fishermen, De cur: Gr: affect: l: 9.
using neither weapons nor soldiers, nor any other inforcinge means th^n
persuasions and the examples of their virtues, as especially of their patience
of injuries and afflictions; induced notwithstanding to subject themselves unto
the law of a man done to death by the base, servile, and most shameful
punishment of the cross. A branch or limme of this miracle I have taken upon
me to describe, even so far forth as it concerns this our Britain, and
have presumed to offer the same unto your Majesty; as an argument, if it were
well handled, not unworthy your consideration. For whereas this work
consists of two parts, being both narrations, one reporting the history of
our conversion from Paganism unto Christian religion; the other containing a
memorial of the lives and actions of such as from time to time have been the
principal instruments of the propagation and continuance of that first
plantation: It will lay open two points ministering matter of great and most
just glory, both unto your self and the Dominions over which God of his
goodness has placed you: the first, showing, that here the miracle aforesaid
had his first operation; as the second, that here likewise it has found the
most effectual operation.

For first, it will appear (that which Sabellicus has well noted) how that
Omnium Prouinciarum prima, Britannia, publicitus Christi nomen recepit; Ennead:
7 lib: 5.
In which respect it is worthylie called Primogenita ecclesiae, the first
begoten daughter of the church of God: secondly, that the godly care and
judicious choice of your Majesty, has afforded unto our Church such Pastors
both for piety and learning, as neither can any age past in our country, nor
any other country in the world at this present, be compared justly with us, for
abundance of Preachers of Gods truth, men endued with excellent learning, and
moreover by Godliness of life and good example confirminge what they teach;
howsoever by the slanderous mouths as well of Puritanes as Papists,
imputations are daily cast upon us importing the contrary. In the former of
these I have the more willingly taken pains, by enlarging that which
heretofore I have written to that purpose somewhat more breefly th^n were
expedient; because I perceive that diverse of late years have greatly
endeavored, to deduce the pedigree of our Christianity from Rome, by making
the Bishops thereof the first authors of the same. And herein they have been
so earnest, as well we might marvel they should so (incalescere in re
frigida) but that one of them tells us in plain terms, N: D: in hist: 3.
conuers:
we have in that respect such an obligation to the Sea of Rome, as needs we
must mayntaine that religion that is now taught and mayntained there by the
Bishops of the same. Were the antecedent all true, we might not allow the
consequence for good.

Pers: Sat: 1.
-- Non quicquid turbida Roma
Eleuat, accedas, examenue improbum in illa
Castiges trutina. --
Tertullian (peradventure alluding to that of the Apostle, Gal: 4.
Jerusalem which is above is free and Mother of us all) caleth Jerusalem Matrem
and Fontem religionis. Cont: Marci: lib. 2.
And S. Augustine in a certain disputation between him and one Pascentius,
Epist: 178.
says, that faith and religion sprang first from the Grecians. Hereupon may
we in like sort conclude, that Tertullian was persuaded, we ought ever to
mantaine the doctrine taught in Jerusalem and by the Bishops thereo^f, amongst
which diverse are known to have been gross Heretics: And that S. Augustine
in the place before named, approved once for all, all such opinions as the
Greek Church should at any time happen to defend. Now although the
consequence being so weak, the argument of it self falls to the ground;
yet, in as much as, going about to make good the antecedent (which is
notoriously false) these men they cast a mist before our eyes in deprauing and
falsifying the history of our Church: I have thought good to endeavor, that the
very truth in that behalf may appear, as by testimonies worthy credit and
without exceptions I trust it shall. For the other point, concerning the
virtues and sufficiency beyond all exception of those Prelates, our Church has
brought forth since the reformation of the same; I fear I have dealt but too
too modestly, refusinge to yield to them their due praises, least I should
seem to flatter men, that either in person, or by their near friends and
posterity are as it were yet present amongst us. For ^^ncerning them I have set
down nothing, but mat^^r of fact; and that such, as either is to be shown in
^^blique record, or is so notorious, as noe man but ^^oweth who ever knew them.
Neither indeed do I ^^nke it very needful for me to proceed much far^^er,
seeing the writings of most of them heertofore ^^blished unto the world, are
testimonies sufficient (...) the excellency of their learning and sincerity of
^octrine: And their conuersations such, as neither ^^y malicious Saunders, or
envious Marprelate, was e^^rable to cast upon (I doubt not I may say) any one
(...) them, an aspersion of scandal that could leave a^^ permanent stayne
behind it. God of his infinite ^^odnesse grant unto your Majesty many and
ma^^ happy days amongst us, and that after it shall ^ease him to translate you
from these temporary ^ingdomes to that which is everlasting, you may ^^ue of
your posterity such, as from time to time ^ay succeed you as well in your
virtues as in your ^^minions. Then shall the breasts of your Priests ^euermore
adorned with Vrim and Thummim; yea ^^y shall shine as so many stars in the
right hand ^im that has the keys of hell and of death, Revel: 1.
that ^lpha and Omega, the first and the last; to whom be honor and glory, now
and for ever.

Your Majesty's poor Chapleine, Fr: Landauen:

To the Reader.
THis Work being now the second time published, in this edition has received
suc^ augmentation, as it may seem to be an ^ther and not the same. Wherefore
conce^ning the additions, by which it has go^ten this increase, I have thought
good ^^ advertise the Reader, that they are of three sorts; praefix^ infixa,
and affixa. The first of these containing a true ^^^story of the first
plantation of Christian Religion amongst (...) is divided into four parts or
Chapters: Whereof one d^^^uereth a report of those things that I find written
conc^^ning our conversion by the Apostles themselves. The seco^^ what I find in
that kind concerning Apostolical men; that (...) such as lived in the Apostles
times, and in likelyhoode mi^^^ be their disciples. The third, what is to be
thought of (...) History of King Lucius. And lastly, the fourth, a true
nar^^tion of what was performed by Augustine; commonly ^^^led in our histories,
the Apostle of England. That bei^^ done, I proceed in my former course; but
withal imparti^^ unto the Reader such other antiquities concerning the ma^^ I
have taken in hand, as now in these doosen years last pa^^ have lighted upon
(which are not a few) and inserting the worthy Bishops and excellent men that
the princely and r^^^gious care of his Majesty has in the mean time afford^^
unto our Church. Lastly then, besides a catalogue of the^^ shapes of two sees.
( Bangor and S. Assaph) form wanting, I have thought it not amiss, to deliver
a brief rehearsal of such of our English nation, as either were, or are
reported to have been Cardinals of the Church of Rome. And to these I have
yielded a place amongst our English Prelates; first because they were men for
the most part very memorable, famous in their times, and endued with
extraordirie gifts: Secondly to this intent, that where of late years a great
volume has been published at Rome, by one Ciaconius, containing the lives of
the Bishops and Cardinals of the same, a work (as it is pretended) of great
perfection; it may appear unto the world, that there as well as elsewhere,
some things glister which are not gold, many particulars being misreported
concerning our Countrymen; which may assure us, the rest of that work so
highly esteemed, to be but eiusdem farinae; and in other parts as well as
these, full fraught with the like untruths and errors. Now whereas by reason
of a mischance in our copy, and my absence, the Printer has not been able to
do his duty so well, as that many things are not mistaken; I must earnestly
entreat the Reader, to take notice of the corrections; the want whereof may
greatly wrong both me and himself. That done, I trust these my labors shall
find the like acceptance as my former did; the which I must commend unto the
mercy and goodness of our gracious God, whose name be blessed and praised now
and for evermore.

Canterbury fol. 49. London. fol. 181. Winchester. fol. 207. Ely. fol. 285.
Lincoln fol. 252. Couentry and Lichfield. fol. 313. Salisbury fol. 332. Bath
and Wells fol. 357. Exceter. fol. ^89. Norwich. fol. 416. Worceter. fol. 434.
Hereford. fol. 450. Chichester. fol. 464. Rochester. fol. 476. Oxford. fol.
490. Gloucester fol. 495. Peterborough fol. 497. Bristoll. fol. 500. S. David's.
fol. 503. Landaff. fol. 515. Bangor. fol. 535. S. Asaph. fol. 542. York. fol.
554. Durham. fol. 627. Carlisle. fol. 675. Chester. fol. 684.
Clariss:o Viro DO:o FRA:co GODW: Epis:po Land:si Antiquitatum Britt:cae
Eccl:ae oculatiss:o Indagatori, Restauratori fideliss:o Do:o optume merenti
SACRVM.
PRaesul, praesule silius Parente,
(Mox and praesulibus Parens futuris,
Cui tam contigit erudita Proles;)
Qui priscum Eusebium, (...) and Ipse,
Doctrinae superas amore Doctor,
Scribendi superas honor Scriptor,
Very amantior, and Magister aequi:
Vnus prae reliquis Episcoporum,
Sacras Relliquias Episcoporum
Qui recolligis, asserisque fato;
Cassis qui Patribus, Pater superstes
Et Anglis simul, and simul Britannis,
Das iam viuere, das vigere rursus,
Antiquam memorans Fidem, Labores,
Antiquum renouans Decus, Nitores:
Quae Laus, quae meritis Corona tantis
Digna? dignior omnibus Coronis,
Atque ipsa potior priorque Laud!
Dignus; quem merito Patres Britanni
Patrem suspiciant, amentque Vivum,
Per quem Saecla patrum vigent Britannum;
Quemque, Ecclesia Mortuum, rubente
Festo concelebret, legatque Sanctis,
Per quem Ecclesia Sanctior revixit.
Dignus; quem merito IACOBVS ipse
Praesulum pater, Omniumque Princeps,
Praesulem indies ornet, augeatque;
Re mage augeat, ornet auctiorem:
Natosque ad Patris euehant honores.
Longam per seriem boni STVARTAE,
Godwyne p^^s^e Anglis Dilectus deo.
Vt longa serie Deo dicata,
Haec DILECTA-DEO domus, STVARTIS
Adsit regibus vsque and vsque ohara.
Euge Lector! Amoris and Honoris ergo:
Musae MAHONID^S diu gementes,
Torpentesque diu, and diu silentes,
Arsere insolitum: entheamque Phae^^
Arreptam capiti sacro Coronam
Iam poscunt sibi; ^austa iu^ilantes
GODVVYNO omnia^ Gratias, Amorem,
Nomen, Diuitias, Locum ampliorem,
Et quicquid bona Men's auet m^renti,
Et quicquid bona S^rs habet earen^i,
Ouantes lepidum, bonum precantes,
SENEM Summa beent, beentque and IPSAS.
C: D: Q. EDW: MAHONIDES. alias CH:
A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE first conversion of this Island of BRITAIN unto
Christian Religion.
CHAP. I.
Diverse years after the ascension of our Savior Christ into heaven, his
Apostles continued at Jerusalem, as we may perceive in the story of their Act.
8.1.
Acts. But James being slaughtred by the sword of Herod, Act. 12.2.
and Peter appointed unto the like pain (which by the miraculous assistance of
God he escaped) being also persecuted of the Jews with great malice and
cruelty; The Apostles d^sperse themselves.
they all (except only James, commonly called frater Domini, the brother of our
Lord, because he was his near kinsman, who was left at Jerusalem, as Bishop
and Governor of that Church) they all (I say) dispersed themselves amongst the
gentiles. So says Homil. 70. in Matthew. c. 22.
S. Chrysostom, Apostoli praedicauerunt Iudaeis, longoque temporis spatio
caesi and flagellati in Iudaea manentes; ac demum ab ipsis propulsi, in gentes
profecti sunt. And this came to pass (as Baronius Annal. to. 1. in anno
Christi 44.
probably deduceth) in the second year of Claudius the Emp. the year of Christ
44. although there want not some to affirm Apollonius apud Eusebius. hist. ec^.
lib 5^ c. 16.
this, whether separation or dispersing of the Apostles to have fallen out two
years later.

Whenever it was, we find, that John the Evangelist planted himself in
Eusebius: hist: l. 3. c. 1.
Asia about Ephesus, remaining there in a manner altogether. Andrew passing
through Asia, sowed the seeds of the Gospel amongst the Eu^eb: ib. Nice^h:
lib: 2 c. 3^. and l. 8. c. 6.
Scythians, the people called Sacae and Sophron: apud Hier: de sc^ip^ed:
Sogdiani, and returning into Greece, ended his life in Achaia, by the way
preaching unto the Thracians, Macedonians and Thessalonians, of all which he
converted great numbers unto the faith of Christ. Thomas travailed into Eusebius:
l. 3. cap: 1. O^^g^m Gen: l. 3.
Parthia, Greg: Nazian^: hom: ^d Arian:
India, Aethiopia, and as far as the great Island of Taprobana, as Nicephorus
Lib: 2. c. 40. and l, 3, c, 1.
reports. The Indians to this day show the place Osot: de reb: gest: ^ m:
of his burial. Matthew spent his time altogether, for ought I find in Soci:
lib: 1, c, 15.
Aethiopia: and so did Sophron: apud Hier: de descript: ecc: Niceph: l, 2, c,
40.
Matthias. Bartholomew in Chrysostom. hom: de 12, Apost:
Armenia, Lycoania, Sophron^^ bisup.
Albania and the hither part of Soc, l, 1 c, 15
India; and Judas Thaddaeus in Niceph^l, 2, ^ 4.
Mesopotamia, Arabia, and Idumaea. Philip travailed in the over part of Asia,
first; and then passing into Scythia, spent afterward much time in France as
Isidore has delivered Devi: and ob. sanct. 3, c, 1.
with some other. Howbeit In M^^tyrolog M^^j^. (...)
Baronius will needs persuade us, that Gallia is mistaken for Galatia. If any
blind note out of some obscure Greek author have deceived him (as happily it
may be) he shall do well to take notice of that of (...)
Ammianus Marcellinus, that says, Gallos sermon Gr^co Galatai dici solere and
Celtas. And thereof we have a plain testimony in Lib: 15.
Theod^ret, that writing of that place of the Apostle, Crescens into Galatia,
Sic Gallias appellauit, says he.

Now whereas it is delivered plainly by sundry Theod^de ^ur: G^^ (...): l. ^.
Solip^on: l. 3. c^p. 1
ancient writers, that Brytaine fell in division amongst the Apostles (amongst
the rest Nicephorus has these words, Aegyptum and Lyb^am ali^s, alues item
extremas Oceaniregiones and insulas Britannicas sortitus est.) Of all the 12. I
find mention of three only of the Apostles to have been in our Britain, to
wit Peter and Paul (of whom we shall anon entreat by Gods grace), and ^n l^p: ^
ad l^ (...), 4.
Simon Chananaeus, called also Zelotes that S. Hierom Hier: in ep: ad Gal.
delivers is sometimes named Judas) who preached Christ in Beda in retract: in
Act: Ap.
Persia, Egypt and Isid: de vit: ob: s.
Afric, passing at last into Britain, as Lib: 2. cap: 40.
Nicephorus affirms together with In Synopsi: Apost.
Dorotheus; who also writes that he was slain and buried in Britain, and the
same is confirmed by the Greek Martyrologe, as Baronius witnesses.

As for S. Peter, the author of the 3. conuersions will needs persuade us,
Whither St. Peter were ever in England. 12
that he was, as the first Bishop of Rome, also the first founder of our
Church. For proof whereof, he brings us 3. testimonies, the weight and
validity whereof it shall not be amiss in few words to examine, The first of
them is a bare report of Simeon Metaphrastes; of whom, if it be not sufficient
for me to say as Melchior Canus does of Sozomenus, Theolog. loc. lib. 11. cap
penultinio.
Graeciu sint, and haec natio est, fuitque semper, ad mentiendu^ pro^ptula; how
worthy he is to be credited, let Baronius be the judge, whose words I may well
use of him in this case, Annal. ecc. Christ^. 44. page 371.26.
Sicut in alijs multis ibi^se positis errare Metaphrastem ertu^c^est, ita and
in his hallucinatu^ esse constat. And well might he brand him with this
imputation of a notable liar, who in less th^n 9. leaves before, he had three
or four times confuted and taken napping in so many notorious untruths.

To leave him therefore as an author not worth the regarding, let us consider
the words of Innocentius, Epist. ad ^^cent. did. 11. ca. Quis n^sci. at
praeserum cu sit manifestu^ in omnem Italia, Hispaniam and Afric^ atque
Siciliam insul asque intertacent^s nullum instituisse ^^^lesias nisicos quos
venerabilis Apostolus Petrus aut succ^ssores e^^s constitue: un^^^cerdotes?
(if happily they be his) affirming how that the first Churches of Italy,
France, Spain, Africa, Sicilia and the Islands that ly betwixt them, were
founded by S. Peter, or such as he or his successors had ordained to the
Ministry; whereof if we can conclude any thing in this case, it is that the
British churches in the judgment of Innocentius were founded neither by S.
Peter, nor by either his scholars or successors. For it is manifest, that he
intending to de^cipher unto us the particularity of those Churches, that the
Apostle aforesaid had caused to be converted to the faith in the West part of
the world, has plainly excluded ours; that is neither any of those he has by
name set down, nor any Island lying betwixt them. If the question had been
concerning Sardinia or Corsica, Maioica, Minorca, Malta, or any other Island of
the Mediterran sea (of such at least as do lie between Europe and Afric) the
conclusion had been for the Jesuit; but our Britain lying quite out of the
compass of Innocentius his limitation. I see no means to avoid it, but that
thereby we are utterly excluded. For be sides that it is unlikely, he would
have emitted by name to set down the same, being the most noble and renowned of
all Islands the^ known to our world, when Sicile was not forgotten that cannot
make the fifth part of Britain; if he had had any intent to draw us within the
bounds by him pitched, he would at least have said, insulasque adiacentes and
not interiacentes.

Now therefore to pass unto the third testimony, it consists of certain
words of Gildas, In initio Epistolae.
taken out (not of his Epistle de excidio Britanniae, as the Conuersioner
falsely quoteth) but out of another discourse entitled Castigatio in
Ecclesiasticum ordinem. The words are these. Sedem Petri Apostoli immundis
pedibus vsurpantes, sed merito cupiditatis in Iudae traditoris pestilentem
Cathodram desidentes. Wherein I see not any more proof that S. Peter preached
Christ here, then that Judas the traitor preached against Christ else where,
which I suppose is not to be shown. The meaning of those words for my part I
cannot conceive to be other then this, that in abusing and profaning so
excellent and holy a function, immundis manibus sacra contrectando, they did
rather represent and imitate Judas that betrayed Christ, then Peter and the
rest of the Apostles that faithfully preached him.

Besides these beforementioned testimonies, he offreth us for proof a monkish
dream taken out of Alredus Rieuallensis, and the bare assertion of one
Gulielmus Eysengrenius a late writer; neither tone nor the other carrying with
them any weight at all. Against all which, I will oppose two reasons, I think
not so easy to be answered.

The travails of the rest of the Apostles, being so diligently and
particularly recorded by writers of al sorts (as before I have related) how is
it possible that this so important a work of S. Peter (not the meanest of the
Apostles) should find mention no where, either in our particular Chronicles,
or in the general story of the Church, nor amongst any of the ancient writers,
saving only at the hands of Metaphrastes, an author not very ancient (for he
lived about the year 900.) and moreover so far distant from our country (to
wit at Constantinople) as he had not any such special opportunity to take
notice of those antiquities concerning our Church; which so many other men very
diligent collectours and excellently learned, dwelling as it were amongst us,
could never light upon?

Again, whereas all that seem persuaded of S. Peter's coming into this Island
( Baronius, Parsons, and the rest) assign the particular time to be none other
than that, when as all Jews were commanded by a public edict of Claudius the
Emp. to depart out of the City of Rome (the which thing is mentioned not only
in the Scripture Act. 18.2.
, but in many other O^os. l. 7 Sueton. in Claudio. Dic 29. Iunij.
authors also) Metaphrastes (the Conuersioner his chief pillar) affirms,
that he failed immediately from Rome into Afric, where he founded the Church
of Carthage, and left to govern the same Crescens his disciple, departing
thence into Alexandria, of which Church he ordained Bishop S. Mark, and then
from Alexandria took his journey to Jerusalem. Heerunto accords Onuphrius in
his notes upon Platina, that making no mention of any travail of S. Peter at
that time either Northward or Westward, Ad vitam S. Petri.
says, Edicto Claudiano quo Iudaei pulsi sunt, Petrus Roma exire coactus,
Hiesolymam reuersus est. And least we should think he might stay there but
some short time and then pass westward again, he adds, Ibi co^cilio
Apostoloru^ de abroga^da circu^cisione, and morti beatissimae virginis
interfuit. Bellarmin to. 1. de Romans Pont l. 2. c. 6.
The same is likewise affirmed by Bellarmin who describes the travails of S.
Peter in this sort: Igitur ex Judea, etc. The 5. year after the passion of our
Savior, Peter travailed from out of Jury into Syria and settled himself at
Antiochia, continued Bishop of that city almost 7. years. Howbeit we are not
to persuade our selves that in all the space he never parted from that place;
for it is certain that at that time he ranged over all the countries
adjoining, Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bythinia. But the seventh year
after he became Bish. of Antiochia (which was the 13 after the passion of our
L.) he returned to Jerusalem, and being there apprehended of Herod was cast
into prison in the days of sweet bread. Act. 12. But soon after, he being
delivered by the Angel, the same year, (which was the 2. of the reign of
Claudius) he came to Rome fixed now his seat or sea there, and held the same
25. years. Yet he remained not all the time at Rome, but after he had
preached 7. years there, he returned to Jerusalem being expulsed out of Rome
by Claudius together with all the Jews that were then in Rome. And then a
little after, when therefore (says he) they which were at Antioch, heard how
that Peter was come to Jerusalem, they sent unto him Paul and Barnabas, and
then was called together the Council of Jerusalem: but Claudius being dead,
Peter returned to Rome and there ended his life. Thus far Bellarmin. These
things being considered, and search made amongst such authors as are without
exception; if we affirm that S. Peter was never further westward in Europe th^n
Italy, I assure my self it will never be disprooued.

So, though we should account it a great glory to our nation, to derive the
pedigree of our spiritual lineage, from so noble and excellent a father as S.
Peter; yet reason of the one side, and want of authority on the other,
enforces us to rest persuaded, that S. Peter never saw this Island.

of S. Paul's (...) Spayn and England.
Concerning S. Paul's being in our Britayn, the proofs are much more pregnant.
In the same chapter where he says of himself Rom: 15.16.
that he had filled all nations with the Gospel of Christ as far as
Illyricum, he declares his certain purpose and determination of trauayling
into Spain, by twice mentioning the same. And in as much as after his
deliverance out of prison at Rome, in the 5. year of Nero, he lived many
years at liberty; verse. 24.23.
I see no reason why we should doubt but that he satisfied that his so earnest a
desire by making a journey thither and spending some time there. Howbeit our
Romanists, not enduring to hear of any good to slow from any other fountayn
then their Rome, diverse of them maintain stiffly that S. Paul never performed
the said voyage.

Innocentius Bishop of Rome says plainly, Epist. ad Dec^nt. did. 11. Quis
nesciat. L^gant (...) istis ^^ouincijs alius ^llus Apostol^^^, inuenitur aut
legitur (...); In Romans 15.
that none of the Apostles except Peter taught either in Spain ^r in any other
part of the west. And Thomas Epist. ad Dec^nt. did. 11. Quis nesciat. L^gant
(...) istis ^^ouincijs alius ^llus Apostol^^^, inuenitur aut legitur (...); In
Romans 15.
Aquinas grounding himself upon the judgment of Galasius delivered by
Gratian Epist. ad Dec^nt. did. 11. Quis nesciat. L^gant (...) istis ^^ouincijs
alius ^llus Apostol^^^, inuenitur aut legitur (...); In Romans 15.
utterly denies the repair of S. Paul into Spain. So does Dominicus Soto,
In Romans 15.
yelding for his opinion 2. or 3. very frivolous reasons, whereof one (I
remember) is, that no ancient writer ever mentioned that voyage; whereas in
deed, in a manner, all the fathers have as it were with one mouth delivered and
affirmed the same. And some of them there are that so deliver it, as though
withal they would give us to understand, that before his return to Rome, he
passed into diverse other countries, and amongst the rest into our Britain.

Concerning this matter S. Hierom has these words, Paul the Apostle being
called of the L. was powered forth upon the fate of the whole earth^ that he
might preach the Gospel from Jerusalem unto Illyricom; Hier in cap. ^. Amos.
so that he built not upon the foundation of any other, where Christ had
heretofore been preached, but extended his travails even into Spain, and
continued them from the red sea unto the Ocean, yea even from one Ocean to
another, imitating therein his L. God the sun of righteousness of whom we
read, his coming for this from the furthest part of heaven, and his passage
unto the outmost bounds of the ^ame: Psalm. 18.
so as land should sooner fail Paul, th^n his desire of preaching the
Gospel. Thus far S. Hierom. But Theodoret Theodore^ in cap: vlt: 2. Tim.
somewhat more plainly to the same purpose ^ when Paul, says he, upon his
appeal being sent to Rome by Festus, was heard, and upon his hearing acquitted
and set at liberty; he travailed into Spayn and making excursion unto other
nations, brought unto them the light of heavenly doctrine. Again, Paul (says
he) extended his trauaile^ into Italy ^ Spain, pro^iting also the Islands that
ly in the Sea. And lastly, that we may not doubt, in these kind of speeches
(other nations, and, the Islands that ly in the Sea) he had an aim at our In
Psalm: 116. Lib: 9. de cu^: Graec. ass.
Britayn, in another place he says plainly and expressly (as I find it cited
by N.D.) that he preached in Britayn. The same seems to be confirmed (if
happily he used not Poeticalicentia) by Venantius a Christian Poet (yet very
ancient) that describing the travails of S. Paul, Ven: Honor: Clementian.
Fortunatus.
writes thus of him; Transiit Oceanum, vel quafac^^ ^^sula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet t^r^^s, quaesque vltima Thule.


Furthermore, Sophronius Sermo de rat. Apost.
Patriarch of Jerusalem in plain terms delivers, that S. Paul was here
amongst us. And one there is Arn. Mirmannus in Theatro de conuers^gent.
(as the conuersioner tells vs^ for the book it self I confess could yet
never see) that takes upon him to set down the very time of his coming
hither, to wit, that it was in the 4. year of Nero, and the year of Christ
59. wherein it cannot be but he i^ mistaken; for that if it were in the 4. of
Nero it could not be Anno Dommini 59. and it seems that Paul was called to
his answer in the third of Nero his (...), which was (...) 49. of Christ, and
continued a prisoner (but with some liberty) two years after. So it must be
Anno Domini 61. and Neronis 5. before he passed either into Spain or Britayne.
And thus much concerning the Apostles, so far forth as I can find any
likelih^^d, that they were the immediate instruments of our conuerston by
preaching Christ amongst us, themselves in person.

CHAP II.
Whether ever Ar^stobulus were here or no^
NOw to descend one step lower, unto the disciples of the Apostles who are
mentioned to have preached here amongst us; I find, especially two named,
Josephus of Arimathia that buried the body of our Savior, and Aristobulus
mentioned Romans 16. in these words; Verse. 10,
s^lute those that are of the house of Aristobulus. Of this latter, the Roman
martyrologe In Martij. ^5
says, that he was disciple unto the Apostles (not peculiarly of S. Peter, as
the conuersioner makes him) and that cursu praedicationis per acto, Martyrium
consummauit Dorotheus In Synopsi.
and the Greek martyrologe (as Baronius tells us) report furthermore of him,
missum esse ad Britannos euangelicae praedicationis causa. All which if it be
true (as that he was sent hither by S. Peter, that he preached here the Gospel
that he ended his life with Mar^^rdome, and that even here (for the
conuersioner puts us also in mind that he was never read to have returned
back again) Then must I needs say that as our first Apostle S. Peter (as he
imagines) was very unfortunate to find so slender mention of his so memorable
labors amongst us; so was this his Chaplain much more unhappy, that being our
proto-mar^i^, none of all our histories or Chronographers should once dream of
him, when the books and discourses written concerning the sufferings of S.
Albane (generally reputed our first martyr) are sufficient I ween to fill a
pretty library.

Of Joseph of Arimathia who first plant^d Christian Religion her^.
For Joseph of Arimathia, the testimonies of his coming hither and his actions
here, they are so many, so clear and pregnant, as an indifferent man cannot
but discern, that there is somewhat in it, our conuersioner mentions them so
faintly, and passes them so slightly over. It shall behooue me therefore to
take a little the more pains in setting down ye particularities of the same.

Ann^l: to: 1, an: Chr: 35.
If we will believe an ancient manuscript of the Uaticane library at Rome,
mentioned in Baronius; Act. 8.^.
Joseph of Arimathia was not only driven out of Jerusalem at the time of the
general dispersion of the disciples after the death of Stephen, but also
carried to the sea side, and there put into a ship or boat without either
stern or tackle, together with Lazarus, Mary Magdalen, Martha, and others, and
so turned loose into the sea; where they were protected by the powerful
goodness of God from the danger of drowning, and brought safe unto Marseilles
in France, whence (says this author) Joseph sailed into Britayn and there
ended his life.

The occasion of which his Journey hither, Freculphus Bishop of Lexouia that
flourished A. 840. reports to be this, Chronici lib: 2. c. 4. and in coll: in
Nennium. Leland in assert. Arturij.
that when Philip the Apostle (or as some think rather the Evangelist: for
their actions are much confounded in histories) preaching Christ in France,
had much to do with the Druides who had their beginning and chief Doctors in
Britayn, in so much as no man was esteemed his crafts master amongst them, that
had not spent some time there, as Caesar Caesar com. De bello Gall. lib. 6.
witnesses; and understanding that this our Island was separated from France
by a small cut of a few hours sail: He thought good to send over hither 12.
preachers, the chief whereof was Joseph before said; the which ariuing here the
year of Christ 63. did their best endeavor for the conversion of our Britaynes
to the faith. The place where they principally settled themselves, was even
there where Glastonbury now stands near Wells, which being at that time and
long after, an Island all compassed about with lakes and standing water, was
given unto them by the King of those parts; beside with 2. other Kings after him
(as our histories moreover report) gave unto each of those 12. a hyde of land,
which now we commonly term a plow land, in the country near adjoining, and
they are named to this day the 12. hydes of Glastonbury.

In this Island (then called Auallon) Joseph and his fellows found means to
build a Church or Chapel, and were the first beginners of that famous and
ancient monastery there yet partly standing, in which Joseph, after the course
of his life finished an. 76. and was buried, De script: A^g^cent. 1. c. 22.
as Bale grounding upon the testimony of other more ancient has delivered.

For the further credit of this history, because our conuers^oner is not
disposed to take notice of any testimony thereof (except tradition) above 200.
years old; beside the authority of Freculphus, and the manuscript of the
Vaticane library before mentioned, it is wholly witnessed by W. of Malmsbury
that lived 400. years since, De antiq: Glast: monasterij.
as also Apud ^elandum in a^^^rtione Artu^ij.
Patricius, the second (if not the first) Bishop of the Scots or Irishmen, who
having preached unto them the space of 40. years, and perceiving his end to
approach; returned to this monastery (in which before that, he had led a
Monastical life 30. years) and dying at the age 122. Anno Domini 491. was
buried in the same, as partly De ant: Glast. monast.

De Pontii. lib. 2.


W. Malmesbury and partly Sigebe^tus in Chron. Mar: Scot: l. 2. 6. Aetat.
other have delivered. The same, Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury
seems partly to confirm in an Epistle to S. Gregory as I find it cited by
the author of the book entitled. Antiquitates Britannicae. Est in consinio
occidentalis Britanniae, quaeda^ regalis Insula antiquo vocabulo Glascon
nuncupata, latis locorum dimensa sinibus, piscosis aquis, stag^eis circundata
sluminibus and plurimis humanae indigentiae vsibus apta, sacrisque (quod
maximum est) dedicata muneribus. In ea siquidem primi Catholicae legis
neophytae, Ecclesiam, nulla hommum art constructam (vt ferunt) imo humanae
salutia Deo paratam repererunt. In the west part of Britayn (says he) there is
a certain royal Island, called of old by the name of Glascon large in
circuit, compassed about with lakes and waters plentifully abounding with fish,
and furnished with most things requisite for man's use, and (which is the
special thing) dedicated to holy uses. For in it the first nouices of
Christian religion found a Church, not built by the hand of man, but provided
by God himself for the salvation of men. These are the words of Aug. wherein
although (for what cause I know not) he name not Joseph; yet the place, the
persons in general, and the matter he sufficiently acknowledges.

Again, the charters are extant of King Henry the second, that died 420.
years since, wherein passing certain grants unto that Monastery, he affirms,
it was founded by the desciples of our Savior, meaning perhaps, together with
Joseph, Simon Zelo^es, whom some think to have been one of his companions.
The words of John Stow to this purpose I think not amiss here to insert. In
Annal.
K. Henry the second (says he) having diligently perused diverse privileges
and charters which were presented and read unto him, not only of William the
first, William the second and Henry the first his grandfather; but also the
charters of the Princes his predecessors of more ancient time, to wit of
Edgar, Edmund, Edward, Elfred, Bringwalthius, Kenthwin, Baldred, Ina, Arthur
and that noble man Cudred, and many other Christian Kings beside, also of
Kenswalla sometine a Heathen and Pagan King, concerning the house of
Glastonbury; found, that in some of those charters it is called the mother of
Saints, of some other, the grave of the Saints; and that the said place was
first builded even by the very disciples of Christ themselves and by them
dedicated to our Lord, as the first place which he chose to himself in this
Realm. All which so to be, the foresaid King Henry established by his
Charter, which Charter (says Stow) my self have seen and read. To these
testimonies let me add an ancient inscription engraven in brass, heretofore
fixed upon a pill^r of S. Joseph's chapel before mentioned, remaining in the
custody of Th. Hughes of Wells Esquier, which myself have lately read: and
this it is (good and bad altogether) word for word.

Anno post passionem domini 30.12. sancti (ex quibus Joseph ab Arimathia primus
erat) huc venerunt, qui Ecclesiam huius regni pr^mam in hoc loco construxerunt,
quam Christus in honorem suae matris, and locum pro eorum sepultura
presentialiter dedicauit, sancto David Meneuensiu^ Archiepiscopo hoc testante,
cui Dominus Ecclesiam illam dedicare disponenti, in somnis apparuit, and eum a
proposito reuocauit, nec non insignum quod ipse Dominus Ecclesiam ipsam primies
cum coemiterio dedicarat, Scilicet.
manum Episcopi digito perforauit, and sic perforata multis videntibus in
crastino apparuit. Postea vero idem Episcopus Domino reuelante ex sanctoris
numero in eade^ crescente, quenda^ cancellu^ in orientali part huic Ecclesia
adiecit and in honor beatae virginis consecrauit, cuius altar inestimabili
sapphiro in perpetuam huius rei memoriam insigniuit; and ne locus aut quantitas
prioris Ecclesiae per tales augmentationes obliuioni tradatur, erigitur haec
columna, in linea, per duos orientales angulos eiusdem Ecclesiae, versus
meridiem protracta and pradictu^ cancellu^ ab ea abscindente: Et erat eius
longitudo ab illa linea versus occidente^ 90, pedu^, latitudo vero eius 26.
pedum, distantia centriistius column a puncto medio inter praedictos angulos
48 pedum. That is, In the thirty and one year after the passion of our
Savior, twelve holy men (of whom Joseph of Arimathia was chief) came hither,
and built here the first Church that ever was built in the Kingdom etc.

What should I speak of writers of later time? Io. Capgraue (whom N.D.
worthily calls a learned man) in that Catalogue of his English Saints, In
vita 5. Joseph.
which (amongst many other better works) we find written by him, he (I say)
living even almost 200. year since, affirms confidently this story. So does
Georgius Mayor, In pre^atione ad.
adding, that by Joseph of Arimathia, Euangelij lucerna primum in Britannia
accensa est. Harding acknowledges it an old tradition, Consut. Apol. Cap. 14..
3.
that the faith of Christ was first brought hither by Joseph and his fellows.
In prefat. ad lib. de Schis. Angl.
And D. Sanders, a man of no small reckoning amongst his consorts, to the same
purpose has these words, Britannos, ad sidem Christi primus conuertisse,
primamque ecclesiam in illa natione erexisse perhibetur Josephus ab Arimathaea.
By which words, not only S. Paul, but S. Peter also, and his legate
Aristobulus, are manifestly excluded.

See now the indifferency of our conuersioner, whom such a rotten twine thread
as Metaphrastes could draw into a conceit of S. Peter's preaching here, when
in the behalf of Joseph of Arimathia, so mayn strong cables cannot serve the
turn, and all because he had not taken Rome in his way between this and
Jerusalem; or rather (happily I may say) because he taught not the same
doctrine nor instituted the same discipline which since the church of Rome has
maintained. For it is manifest, that in a manner all the Churches of Ireland,
Scotland and Wales, differed in many Nec non and de alijs ecclesiasticae vitae
disciplinis controuersia nata est. Beda l. 3. c. 25.
things from the practice of the Roman Church at the time of the coming of
Augustine into this land and long after. Yea in Ireland almost 600. years
after, diverse particulars we may find noted by Topograph. Hibern: lib. 3. c.
26.27.
Giraldus, (as about the manner of their fasting, the marriage of their Clergy
men, and other points of their discipline) wherein they were more conform unto
the Greek Church then the Latin.

But the general usage of celebrating Easter after the manner of the Eastern
That the ce^ebration of Easter after the manner of the ^^ist churches was
received of him.
Churches, See Beda ecc. hist. l. 3. c. 25.
so costa^ntly (I will not say obstinately) reta^ned of them, argues plainly
how that from thence came their first teachers and instructers in Christian
religion. That by some heretic the said custom should be brought in after the
Gospel planted, has no likelihood. Doctrine is much more easy to be
corrupted then discipline: the one is done, paulatim, by little and little, in
corners, works most commonly upon the ignorant and weakest minds, and is
carried in silence till it become great as it were unawares. But in discipline
once established, there cannot be the least alteration sine strepitu; none so
simple but they take notice of it; and the wisest sort discern, that it is
much better to endure some inconvenience in that kind, then to hazard the
danger of change by innovation.

Now although the contrary cannot appear, but that Damianus and Faganus,
first, and after them Germanus and Lupus might endeavor the alteration of this
usage concerning the observation of Easter, and we never hear any thing of the
same; yet it is very probable, having their hands full enough otherwise, the
matter being of no great importance, they would rather leave it unstirred, then
by dealing with too many things at once, hazard the whole success of their
enterprise.

Neither is there any likelihood they could easily have prevailed, if they had
attempted any such innovation: Well they might have expected from our
Countrymen, this answer of their motion out of Gratian, which in effect was
afterward shaped unto Augustine and his followers: Ridiculum est and satis
abhominabile dedecus, Di^^. 11.
vt traditiones quas antiquitus a patrib. suscepimus infringi patiamur. Or else
this of S. Augustine, In his rebus de quibus nihil certistatuit diuina
Scriptura, Ad Casulansi Presbyterum.
mos populi Dei and instituta maiorum pro lege tuenda sunt: Or lasty thus with
S. Hierom, Traditiones ecclesiasticae, praesertim quae fidei non officiant, Ad
Lucianu^.
ita obseruandae vt a maioribus traditae sunt, nec aliorum consuetudo aliorum
contrario more subuertenda.

It could not be denied unto them, that the Churches of Asia founded by S. John
had been wont to hold their Easter the fourteenth day of the moon: Luna. 14.
yea and much deal did at that present, celebrating it after the same manner
that our Scots and Britains did; neither could Wilfride deny the same in the
solemn disputation held about that matter at Strenaeshalch (now called Whitby
in Yorke-shire) mentioned by Beda. Nay rather it is to be thought, Ecc. hist.
lib. 3 cap. 25.
that the said order of celebrating that feast, was established by all or many
of the Apostles in the counsel of Jerusalem aforementioned; when, even as
blood and things strangled were forbidden unto Christians, so happily this
feast might be instituted in sort as aforesaid; al sending unto one and the
self same end mentioned by S. Augustine in these words. Aug. contra Faust.
lib. 23. cap. 13.
Etsi hoc tunc Apostol^ praecepera^t, vt ab animalium sanguine abstinerent
Christiani, ne praefocatis carnib. vescerentur; eligisse mihi videntur pro
tempore rem facilem, Opus fuit olim multa Christianis in du^gere quod senes
ple^umque ad nost^^m religio^nem con^e^si fuerint, ideoque haud ^acile adduci
po^^erint vt ^eme^ receptu^ consi^^tudmem abijeerent. Nam Quo semel and imbuta
etc.
and nequaquam obseruantib. oner^sam, in quacum Israelitis etiam gentes,
propter angularem illum lapidem duos parietes in se condentem, aliquid
communiter obseruarent simul and admonerentur, in ipsa arca Noe quando Deus hoc
iussit, ecclesiam omnium gentium suisse praefiguratam, cuius facti prophetia,
iam gentibus ad ^idem accedentibus, incipiebat impleri. Howbeit I will not
deny, but the cause of all these things ceassing, these effects might then well
have received alteration, as they now have done, and did for the most part in
the time of S. Aug. who after a few words, adds as follows; Vbi ecclesia
gentium talis effecta ^st vt in canullus carnalis Israelita appare^t, quis iam
hoc Christianus obseruet, vt turdos vel minutiores auiculas non attingat, nisi
quarum sanguis effusus est, au^ l^porem non edat, simanu a ceruice percussus,
nullo cruento vulnere occisus est? Et qui forte pauci adhuc tangeri ista
formidant, a caeteris irridentur. And therefore, howsoever that Eastern
custom was well altered; B. Rhenanus in Tertull: de Coron: milit.
yet having a good ground of institution at the first, and so long a time of
continuance; our Britans had no reason over rashly to leave it, nor the
preachers before mentioned to trouble themselves about so difficult a piece of
work, having matters to deal in of far greater weight, and more easy to
manage; although (as before I said) well it may be, they endeavored somewhat
in that kind, which none of our writers have recorded.

As for the first beginning of that usage here amongst us, First, it is
manifest that it was not nuperrima exorta, no nouelty lately sprung up, (...).
hist. lib. 3. ^^p. 5^
howsoever Honorius the Bishop of Rome (who seems to say so in Beda) might be
falsely informed; seeing it appears by the allegation of Colman, not denied by
the adverse party, that it was practiced by Columba and his successors for the
space of 70. years before the time of the conference mentioned in the said
Beda, and how long before that by other, no man is able to say. And theerefore
except our adversaries can show us when and where it was brought in other wise,
we have no reason but to think that it had his beginning amongst us together
with Christian religion it self.

In this point how the conuersioner behaueth himself, how bustly he searches
and how greedily he makes advantage of the least hold he can get, it is a
world to see. One while he will make Pelagius the heretic author or that
kind of observation, or else his fellow Celestius; Another while, he says the
Britons fell upon it he can not tell how; and lastly he thinks it probable
that it was imparted unto them by the Scottish nation of Ireland, or of the
Isles Hebrides. Marry how they should come by it he cannot tell without the
help of two or three peraduentures.

If Pelagius or his fellow had been author of such an innovation, how can we
think it possible that they which write against him should never mention the
same, or that it should not be condemned amongst other their heresies?

As for the conceit of our deriuing that usage from the Scots, it had been
much more probable to have affirmed, that they had received it from us.
Palladius was not the first preacher of Christ in Scotland, as many make him.
For if Christian religion were generally received i^ this Island, in long
before the time of Palladius, as by many testimonies out of authors without
exception it shall be proved; how could Scotland so great a part of the same
remain still in the darkness of ignorance and Idolatry? And Ireland has
undoubtedly for his first Apostle, Patrike, a student of that worthy college
of Auallon or Glastonburie. So that we must say and maintain, Joseph of
Arimathaea the disciple of our Saui^ur, first brought unto this Island the
light of the Gospel (if happily by some of the Apostles some kind of
foundation were not laid before his coming) and that by his scholars and
successors the doctrine and discipline by him taught, was delivered unto the
Scottish nation, of Scotland first, and of Ireland afterward: for both those
people of old were called Scots. All these things are delivered either by our
adversaries themselves or by authors approved by them, as has been partly
showed heretofore, and hereafter by Gods grace more at la^ge shall be.

In the mean time before I end this chapter, Io: Naucler: vol: gener. 7.
I think it not amiss to remember, how that Nauclerus delivers, Timothy,
to whom Paul writ his Epistles, to have preached the Gospel unto King Lucius,
and that he converted him and his people. But because amongst so many as write
the history of K. Lucius there is no one that I have met withal, who joins
with him in this report, and the times of their ayes agree not; I pass it over
as a matter very unlikely if not impossible to be true, and therefore, unworthy
further regard.

CHAP. III.
IT seems that Joseph and his fellows prou^^led little by their preaching,
and therefore gave themselves at last unto ^ mo^asticall and solitary life in
the Island of Auallon before mentioned. Yet it seems also, by some, rather
likelyhoods, and probable conjectures th^n clear testimonies, that our
Britayne about these times brought forth ^iners Christians, as namely amongst
the rest, Claudia Ruffina, Of Claudia Rufina.
a noble British lady, wife (as it is delivered) unto one Rufus Pudens a
Senator of Rome whom S. Paul is thought to have mentioned in these words, 2.
Tim. 4.21.
Eubulus, Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brethren salute thee. And the
same Lady it was (as diverse of our writers take upon them to prono^nce,
Antiquit. Brit. Camden in Brit:
and surely not without great probability) whom Martial. the Poet so greatly
praised for her beauty and virtues in these verses following, Bale cent: 2. c
26. S. Aug.
Claudia caeruleis cum fit Rufina Britannis
Lib. 11. Eplg. 54. D^ Clau: dia Rufi^s.
Edita, our Latiae pectora plebis habet?
Quale decus formae? Romana^, credere matres
Italides possunt; Atthides esse suam:
Dij be^e quod sancto peperit foecunda marit^
Quot sperat generos, quotque puella nurus.
Si place at superis vt coniuge gaudeat vno,
Et semper natis gaudeat illatribus.
Whether it were one and the same woman that S. Paul so mentioned and Martial
in these verses praised, and whether she were mother to Praxedes and Pudentiana
two famous and godly virgins, I will not stand to dispute, as being little to
the purpose we have in hand: Only this I say, that these things are affirmed,
but whether upon sufficient ground or no, I think it scarce worth the doing to
examine.

That her husbands name was Pudens, unto whom Martials Epigram has relation,
it may appear by another Epigram written as an Epithalamium by the same Poet
at the time of their marriage beginning thus, Claudia Rufe meo ^ubet peregrina
Pudenti etc. Lib: 4. Epi. 13.

Which also persuadeth me that neither she nor her husband could be the first
intertainers of the Apostles in Rome (as by an ^utworne tradition the
conuersioner goes about to prove) being married young (so the Epigram
purporteth) and that as it seems in the beginning of Domitian; except happily
the said Epigram (as often it falls out in those cases) were made long before
it was published, or some time after their marriage. Again, that the same
Pudens was a Christian, we have a great presumption in the former Epigram,
where for his v^rtuous carriage he calls him sanctus maritus; but greater in
another of the same Martial, wherein he yields him thanks for persuading him
to amend his writings that for obscenity and lasciviousness are in deed not
to be endured by Christian cares; And this it is, Lib. 7. Ep. 10.
Cogis me calamo, manisque nostra
Emendare meos Pudens libellos.
O quam me nimium probas amasque
Qui vis archetypas habere nugas.


To write therefore that which for mine own part I am persuaded to be the truth
in this matter; I should conjecture, first, the aforesaid tradition to be
utterly vain and untrue: Secondly, that Pudens and Claudia were two young
persons, but faithful Christians, and at that time unmarried when S. Paul writ
the second Epistle unto Titus, which was in the last year of Nero, as all men
suppose that I have read except Baronius: Then that their religion was a means
which did conciliare nuptias, did work their conjunction in marriage; for (as
S. Bernard says) amor spiritualis cito transit in carualem, if happily we may
call that carnal love which aims but at holy Matrimony: And lastly, that
they were married in the latter end of Vespasian, or about the beginning of
Domitian, and continued together til the reign of Nerua, under whom (if not
sooner) it is evident that his 11. book of Epigrams was published: Which being
from the time we ^^nde that couple first mentioned by S. Paul some 26. years,
Claudia might well be a comely matrone about 40. years of age (what if it
were 50.) when Martial praised her beauty in his last Epigram; which happily
might be written some years sooner, when her beauty was more fresh then now,
though now then fresh in memory.

Britain^ a refuge for Christians.
Well howsoever it was with them, of these times we speak of I doubt not we may
use the words of Cassiodorus concerning a later age: Superstite adhuc
Constantio, etc. Constantius (Chlorus) yet reigning it was not counted
unlawful (says he) for those to be Christians that dwelt beyond Italy and
France, Tripartit: hist: l. 1. c. 7.
as in Britain or near the Pireney mountains and so to the Western Ocean.
Whereby undoubtedly it came to pass, that many professing Christ, not daring to
abide near unto the heart of the Empire (as in Italy, France or some other of
the nearest provinces) made choice of our Britayne and some other remote places
(though then very barbarous) where to lead their lives in such sort, as they
might enjoy liberty of conscience.

In the number of these, I may well suppose A. Rufus Pudens before mentioned to
be one, who after the time of his marriage, travailed to these Northern parts of
the world as it is plain by these verses following Martial: ad A. Pudentem
lib: 6 Epig: 58.
Cernere Parrhasios dum te iuuat Aule Triones
Cominus and Schythicisydera far poli,
O quam pene tibi Stygias ego raptus ad vndas
Elysiae vidi nubila fusca plagae?
Quamuis lassa tuos quaerebant lumina vultus
Atque erat in gelido plurimus ore Pudens.
Si mihi lanificae ducunt non pulla sorores,
Stamina, nec surdos nox habet ista Deos;
Sospite me sospes, latias reueheris ad vrbes
Et referes pilipraemia clarus eques.
By means of these kind, of men (adding their helps unto the successors of
Joseph and his disciples) I suppose it came to pass that Lucius a King of this
country, King Lucius his conversion.
was drawn to a liking of Christian religion: Concerning whose conversion, I
will endeavor to set down, first the causes, secondly the manner, and thirdly
the sequel and effect of the same.

For the causes, besides them above mentioned I find another touched in Galf.
Monumethensis, where he says Sernauerant mentem eius miracula quae tyrones
Christi per diuersas nationes faciebant. Lib: 5. c. 19.
He became well inclined through the miracles which were reported to be
wrought by the soldiers of Christ in diverse countries.

The same motive it was, that wrought in M. Aurelius the Emp: if not a
favorable affection toward Christians, yet a stay of their persecutions, when
that, rain was procured for his thirsting host by the prayers of Christians,
with thunder and lightning that destroyed the enemies; for which cause he not
only honored the legion which consisted of them with the name of Thaumaturgus
(as you would say the lightning legion) but also gave straight charge upon
pain of death throughout all his Empire, Tertul: in Apol: c. 6.

Eusebius: Eccl: hist. lib. 5. c. 5.


that no man should dare to accuse any Christian for his religion. So has
Tertulliam, and out of him Eusebius, delivered.

This (says Baronius) was declared unto Lucius by the Emperors Ambassador,
Baron. To. 2.
who also showed him, how great numbers were daily converted unto Christ even
in the city of Rome and that not of the meanest sort; two senators of great
account ( Trebellius and Pertinax) being of that number.

All this notwithstanding, these seeds of the Gospel had proved but badly (we
may suppose) had not God as it were made way for their growth, by pulling up
the weeds of that so long continued superstition of the Druides. Augustus
Suet: in Claud.
the Emperor having forbidden unto the Romans only the exercise of that
religion, Plin: not: hist: lib: 30. c. 1.
Tiberius afterward unto the Frenchmen; Claudius his next successor save one
about the year of Christ 50. (as much as in him lay) quite abolished the same.
So Suetonius witnesses But a short space could not extirpate a superstition
that had taken so deep root. In vita Claud: cap: 25.


It continued therefore, notwithstanding all the Romans could do, till about
these times. For Pliny speaking of it some 50. years after the death of
Claudius, Vbi sup.
uses these words, Britannia hodie que eam attonite celebratt Antis
ceremonijs, vt dedisse Persis videri possit. The Britaynes to this day do use
and follow it, with such admiration and so many ceremonies, as though they had
first taught it unto the Persians. But Marcus Antonius a virtuous prince, not
enduring the barbarity of that superstition, by his public edict utterly at
last suppressed and abolished the same; So I find delivered by some late
Antiqui^at. Britan.
writers, who I doubt not have their authority in other more ancient, though my
self (I must confess) have not light upon it.

The pulling up of these weeds (as before I said) gave good occasion unto the
seeds of the Gospel, heretofore sown in this Realm (as has been declared)
but to small purpose, now at last to spring and bring forth fruit. Lucius and
his people being forced to forsake their ancient religion, were easily induced
to hearken unto the preaching of the truth. Thus much for the causes of his
conuers^on.

Now concerning the manner and final accomplishment of the same, the first
notice I find worth regarding, in which Beda affords us, who I presume had
it out of the old Mar^yloges, whereof some undoubtedly are very ancient; but
they have received from time to time so many additions and alterations, ( In
precap. dicen l^ad Martyrol c. 8.
Baronius and Mola^n praef: r. ad Vsuardu^. Ecc. hist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Molanus do both acknowledge it:) as I discern not what we may account in
them either ancient or true. The words of Beda are these: Anno ab incarnatione
Domini, etc. The year of Christ's incarnation, 56. M. Ant. Verus, the
fourteenth Emperor from Augustus began his government together with Aur:
Commodus his brother. In whose time, Eleutherius a holy man, sitting Bishop of
the Roman Church; Lucius a King of the Brittanes writ unto him his letters,
praying that by his appointment and direction, he might be made a Christian.
And presently he obtained the effect of his godly desire: from which time, the
Brittanes, until the reign of Diocletian, inuiolably held the true faith
uncorrupted in peace and quietness. Thus much Beda.

Concerning this matter, Vsuardus our neighbor that writ his Martyrology at ye
commandment of Carolus Magnus, about ye year 800. has nothing at all: but
that which Baronius calls ye true Roman Martyrologe, adds further unto
that of Beda, that Eleuthersus sent into Brittane Damianus and Fugatius, who
baptized the said King Lucius, In 7. Kal. Iun.
his wife also, ac^o^um fere populum, and in a manner all the people of the
Land. The history of Landaff, (commonly called the book of S. Teilo) says,
(that which Baronius also delivers) how that the messengers sent unto
Eleutherius, were named Eluanus and Meduinus: and that propter eloquentia^ and
scientiam in sacris Scripturis, in regard of their eloquence and knowledge in
the Scriptures, Eluanus was by the said Eleutherius consecrated a Bishop, and
Meduinus appointed a Doctor or teacher.

The Author of the book called Antiquitates Britannicae, out of Capgraue, and
Bale out of Leland; report, how that Medwin was by birth a Dutchman, but as for
Eluan, he was a Brittane brought up in the College or Monastery of Auallon
amongst the Disciples and successors of Joseph of Arimathaea; and had
dispersed through the wild fields of Brittane those first seeds of the
Gospel sowed by the said Joseph.

Whether Lucius were baptized by these men, or some other sent by Eleutherius,
it is not easily to be discerned. The history of Landaff aforesaid with diverse
other deliver, that it was done by Eluan and Medwyn: But by most it is
affirmed, how that Elutherius sent with these two before named, two other, to
order the state of the Church, who had the honor of performing that office.

The one of them is called by some Damianus, by other Duuanus, and by other
again Deruianus, Derunianus, Dimianus, Diuianus, and Donatianus. Neither is
the agreement much better about the name of the other; who is sometimes termed
Faganus, and sometimes Fugatius.

Concerning the time also of this conversion, there is much difference amongst
writers: The history of Landaff says it was anno 156. (in which year Galfr.
Monumeth: says, the said King died.) Nauclerus also sets down the same
time, and so does a Manuscript containing a story in Latin (but without the
Authors name) now remaining in my custody. Nennius reports the messengers
aforesaid were sent to Rome the year 163. mary not to Eleutherius, but to
Euaristus. Another ancient Chronicle of mine written in English (a large
history but namelesse also, In lib. de Antiq. Glast. Mo^
) appoints for the time of this conversion the year 164. W. of Malmsburie
concerning this matter has these words, Fluxerunt anni ab aduentu, etc. From
the coming of the disciples of S. Philip into Brittane unto the time that
Phaganus, and Deruuianus arrived here, there passed 103. years, by which
reckoning it must fall out, they came the year 165. Henricus de Erfordia says
it was the year 169. Marianus Scotus 177. Bale 179. Polydore Virgill, 182.
Baronius 183. The history of the Church of Rochester 185. Flores historiarum.
187. and lastly Martinus Polonus (to trouble the reader with no more) the year
of Christ, 188.

Whenever it was that this good Prince received the faith of Christ; so it
fell out (our histories say) that not only his wife and family accompanied him
in that happy course, but Nobles also and commons, Priests and people, high and
low, even all the people of this land which we now call England: And that
generally all their Idols where then defaced; the temples of them converted
into Churches for the service of God; the livings of their idolatrous Priests
appointed for the maintenance of the Priests of the Gospel, and that in stead
of the 25. Flamines, or high Priests of their Idols, there were ordained 25.
Bishops; as also for 3. Archflamines 3. Archbishops, whereof one was seated at
London, another at York, and a third at Carlion in Monmonthshire.

Now whereas many of these points are (and not without good cause) called into
question; it shall not be amiss, to spend some time in debating and discussing
of the same. First it is made a doubt whether ever there could be any such King
as Lucius or no. In Britannia etc. imperium eius recusa^tib. prouinci lib. quae
omna per duces seda^a sunt.

Ael. Lamprid. in Commodo: Pe^tinax ^n Britannia seditiones com. pescuit.
Capitol. in Pertinace.


In this very season yt is appointed by our writers to the reign of Lucius,
the Romans possessed Brittane quietly, as may appear by all the Roman
writers, to wit, during the times of M. Antonius and Commodus: and long before
this, Brittane was wholly subdued unto the Romans, and brought under the
soruie of a Province, to wit, in the time of Domitian, as In fastis a^ ab vib.
cond. 838. Christi. 86.
W. Malmsbury has delivered, and amongst later writers, two men of great
judgment, In Martyro: ad diem 26. Maij.

De Romans in Britannia.


Baronius, and Master Camden: which is partly confirmed by Tacitus, Redactaque
paulatim in formam prouinciae proxima pars Britanniae. Tacit. in vit. Agric.
Romanorum inaccessa loca Christo vero subdita. T^it. Adu. Iudae^s.
delivering, that a great part of it was reduced into the form of a Province
as aforesaid, in the time of Claudius. These things being so, how should a
King have any government here?

For answer whereof, first; I say, it appears notably by the testimony of
Tertullian and Origin, Quando terra Britannia ante aduentu^ Christum in vnius
dei conse^sit religione^? Orig. ho 4. in E^^^h.
who both lived in these times, that our Brittane did then profess the faith
of Christ, although when they first received it, be not by them specified.
Then furthermore I say with Tacitus, In vita Agric.
speaking of Cogidunus a King of our Brittane it was Vetus ac in pridem recepta
populi Romani consuetudo, vt haberet instrument a seruitutis and Reges, An old
fashion and long since put in ure by the Romans; to have Kings the instruments
of their tyranny.

Asia minor, in a manner all, after Mithridates and Antiochus were overthrown,
was brought into the perfect form of a Province: Yet long after that, some
petty kings reigned in diverse parts of it. He that will take the pains to
read but one chapter of Josephus, Antiq. lib. 18, cap. 11.
shall find mention of no less than five Kings of so many several places in
Asia; to wit, of Sigerammes King of the Emifeni; of Archelaus king of
Cappadocia, of Antiochus king of the Comageni; of Herod and Agrippa, the one
brother, the other son to Agrippa King of the Jews, the which were, one
after the the other, kings of Chaleis; and lastly of Alexander king of Lesis in
Cilicia, by the appointment of Vespasian: all which reigned, either in or after
the time of Augustus.

But this in this case I have observed, that upon every change the jurisdiction
and authority lightly was some what diminished, and the precinct of the
government lissened by cautoning out the territory of the same into several
portions and quillets, till at last the name and memory of kingly government
was quite extinguished. Hereof we have an example in Herod the great king of
the Jews, Ios Ant, Iud. l. 17. c. 17.
a man so greatly in favor with Augustus, as he gave him leave by his last will
and testament to bequeath his kingdom to whom he list; which thing he did,
appointing unto the same Archelaus his son. Howbeit, he being dead, the said
Augustus allowed unto Archelaus only the tone half of that his Father
possessed, denying unto him the name and title of king; and bestowed the other
half upon Philip and Antipas his brethren, (whom he made Tetrarchs) of the
which two Philip dying shortly after, his portion was added to the government
of Syria.

This and many other like examples persuade me, Lucius but a petty King.
that Lucius was never king of all Brittane (so long after the conquest of the
same) but rather happily of some principal thereof.

Vide, p. 35.
To this opinion I am the rather induced, because if we believe what has been
written by Caesar, Tacitus, Suetonius and other authors of credit; it cannot
but appear unto us, that our Brittane was never wont to be governed by one
Monarch, except peradventure, that upon a pinch and at a time, by occasion of
some foreign invasion, all the cantons of the same might happily combine
themselves together under one captain; as many of them did under Cassiuellanus
upon the arrival of Julius Caesar, when as in a small territory near London,
there were at that time no less then five Kings, Com. Caes. l. 5
whom Caesar names, to wit, beside the said Cassiuellanus, Cingetorix,
Caruilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax; to whom also I think we may add,
Mandubratius, king of the Trinobantes.

Tacit. Annal. lib. 12.
So in the time of Claudius Caractacus king of the Silures^, or Southwales; he
stood up and had the managing of martial affairs against Ostorius and other
Roman captains; when as beside him, there were many other Princes in the
country. Cartismanda (as Tacitus witnesses) ruled the Brigantes, and Venutius
the Iugantes; and of Caractacus the said Tacitus reports, that multa eum
ambigua, multa prospera extulerunt, vt caeteros Britannorum imperatores
praemineret; that many doubtful, and many prosperous chances (not his regal or
monarchical authority) had made him to be esteemed above all other leaders of
the Britanes. Domicae ge^^tes, capti Reges. Tac. in vit Agr.

Ad^maginem bellica^ and deditionem Britanniae regum cap. 1.

Iuuenal. lib. 1. sat. 4.


Tacitus in Agricola, and Suetonius in the life of Claudius, do both mention
Reges Britanniae, the Kings of the Brittanes. And so in my conceit does Iuuenal
in these words: Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno
Excidet Aruiragus.
Where in my understanding he seems to say, thou shall take prisoner one
king or another of the Brittanes, or else at the least Aruiragus shall be
thrown down from his seat of government. But my principal argument in this
case is, that no man I suppose, is able to show, by any monument 500. year
old, that ever before the Romans time, either Brittane, or so much as that
part sometime (as they say) called Loegria, ^^w Bishops in Britain till the
c^mming of Germanus and Lupus.
now England, was under the perpetual government of one man.

Another thing now that seems unlikely to me in the foresaid report
concerning king Lucius, is, the multitude of Bishops and Bishoprics that are
said to be ordained at that time. In the counsel of Arles -- which was the
year 325. mention is made of one Restitutus a Brittane Bishop not entitled to
any certain See, but only called Britanniarum Episcopus. And even so likewise
after him Fastidius is mentioned of Gennadius by the same style. In Catal. ece.
script^^pud Hieron.
Which being considered, together with the rare and seldom mention that we find
of British Bishops, whose antiquities I have hunted after with all diligence;
I cannot but rest persuaded, that our Brittane had very few Bishops, until the
coming over of Germanus and Lupus to suppress the Pelagian heresy;
concerning which matter, I think it uot amiss to ofter unto the reader that
which I find in our history of Landaff.

Ad haeresim Pelagianam confutandam, sanctus Germanus Episcopus and Lupus, a
Galliae antistitibus ad Britannos missi sunt. Saepe tamen ante missis legatis a
Britannis adeos, implorantibus auxilium contratam execrabile periculum; quia
prauae doctrinae haereticorum non acquiescebant, neque tamen consundere
valebant. Postquam praedictiseniores Pelagianam haeresim extirpauerant,
Episcopos pluribus in locis Britannia consecrauerunt. Super omnes autem
Britannos dextralis partis Britannia, beatum Dubritium, summum doctorema Rege
and ab omni parochia electum Archiepiscopum, consecrauerunt. Hac dignitate ei a
a Germano and Lupo data; constituerunt ei Episcopalem sedem concessu Mourici
Regis, Principum, cleri and populi, apud podium Lantaui in honor S. Petri
Apostoli fundatans and cum funbus istis etc. To confute the Pelagian heresy,
Saint German a Bishop and one Lupus, were sent into Brittane by the prelates of
France, when as many times before the Brittanes had sent their messengers to
crave aid against so execrable a danger; because neither they could like of the
naughty doctrine of the heretics, nor yet were able to overthrow the same.
After the said elders had rooted out the Pelagian heresy, they consecrased
Bishops in many places of Brittane. Over all the Brittanes dwelling on the
right side of Britain, they consecrated for Archbishops S. Dubritius, who was
chosen for the supreme Doctor, by the King and all the Diocese. This dignity
being bestowed upon him by Germanus and Lupus, they, with the consent of
Mouric the King, the Nobility, Clergy and people, appointed his see to be at
the manner of Lantaui, and founded the same there, to the honor of S. Peter,
bounding the territories thereof in this wise. etc. This was about the year of
Christ 430. about which time also (or somewhat later) Palladius (who is falsely
said to have been the first Preacher unto the Scottish nation) did first
appoint Bishops and ordain Bishoprics in Scotland, Rer. Scotic. l. 5 Reg. 42.
as Buchanan has delivered.

Upon these testimonies, I reason thus; If before these times we had so many
Bishops, Bishoprics, and Archbishoprickes, how comes it to pass, that in
no monument whatsoever, we find any name or mention of any Bishop of this
land, saving some few that (as we say) had their see at London? and if so many
sees had been furnished before, what occasion had Germanus and Lupus to
consecrate so many Bishops as in the report of the history of Landaff before
mentioned is related.

Bishops in steal ^f Flamines an absurd conceit.
But there is nothing more absurd in this history, then the imagination of
fitting the sees of Bishops and Archbishops according to the place and number
of the Flamines forsooth, and Archflamines of the Pagans. A devise so childish
and ridiculous as I cannot but wonder that any man of learning and judgment
should approve it: and yet I perceive not any that have gaine-saide it, before
Master Doctor Su^cliff; but contrariwise diverse both ancient and learned are to
be found, that have partly broathed, and partly applauded the same.

Of this number I account especially two, The one is Fenestella; whose
testimony were very ancient, if he were that historiographer whom Pliny De
sac. Romans cap. 5.
so often mentions. But he died (as the said Pliny witnesses Not. hist.
lib. 33. c. 11.) in the last year of Tiberius the Emperor: so that it could
not be he that writ the book now extant De Magistratibus sacerdotijsque Romans
except he have been much corrupted and altered: For thus he writes; Vt
nostrum inter sacerdotum gradus non nihil interest, vt Episcopum,
Archiepi^copum, Cardinalem, Patriarcham, and Metropolitanum; Ita apud illos
(Gentiles) Flaminum Protoflaminum and Archiflaminum diff^rentiam fuisse
idone^^estes sunt. It is sufficiently to bo proved (says he) that as amongst
us there is difference between the degrees of our Priests, as Bishops,
Archbishops, Cardinals, Patriarchs and Metropolitans; so, likewise there was
difference between the Flamines, Protoflamines, and Archflamines of the
Gentiles. But al men know, yt it was many a year after the death of Tiberius,
before diverse of these titles were heard of amongst Christians. By which, as
also, for that he cites in diverse places A. Gellius, who lived a hundred
years after the death of Tiberius; it is manifest, that he is some later
counterfeit that is author of the Fenestella that we have.

But to say no more of the man, his opinion (whatsoever he were) is manifestly
false. No man I dare affirm is able to show out of any ancient writer or other
authentical monument, yt ever there was any such office amongst the Gentiles as
Archiflamen or Protoflamen. Look who list in that volume of ancient
inscriptions published of late by Gruterus. Scaliger and other: He may there
find oftentimes mentioned Flamen for a man, and Flaminica for a woman Priest;
but of Archflamen, Protoflamen or any other like, altum silentium.

Now, to leave Fenestella; the other defender of this conceit, is Gratian, whom
I do^ht not we may account the first author of the same. True it i^, that
having first delivered it as his own opinion in Did. 21. c. Decretis. Did.
80. c. In illis.
one place; afterward he cites for the same, Clement a Pope; wherein either
he abuses us in citing that which never was written; o himself is abused by
some counterfeit Clement; or else we shall be able to allege this for an
instance, that a Pope may err and be deceived as well as an other mortal man.

For beside (as before I have alleged) not so much as the name of Archflamen
or Protoflamen is to be found in any author or monument of credit before his
time; it is manifest, that diverse cities had many Colleges of Priests and
consequently many Flamens. In lib. de lingua Lat.

De sac. Romans c. 5.


Marcus Varro sufficiently witnesses the same, affir^^^^ming (which Fenestella
takes knowledge of) totidem Flaminibus, quot Deos colerent, veteres vsos, That
the ancients used to have for every one of their Gods a Flamine. They had for
Jupiter Dialem; for Romulus Quirinalem, for Vulcane Vulcanalem, for Mars
Martialem, and so of the rest. Yea after they grew into a custom of making
their Emperors Gods being once deceased, they also allotted unto every one of
them their Flamine, Augustus had Augustalem. Vesp. Flauialem, or gentis
Flauiae, Traiane Traianalem, etc. Whereupon when this inconvenience grew, that
the number of Colleges, Priests, and temples daily increasing, they discerned
that shortly the whole city of Rome would not be able to contain them: for
saluing that sore, they used this device that now I shall declare unto you.

Hist. l. 3.
The people of Smyrna (as themselves do boast in Tacitus) would needs make a
God of the city of Rome, and accordingly built in honor thereof a Temple^
appointing unto the same with great solemnity, Priests, sacrifices, and all
kind of Divine worship. This gross and absurd flattery of theirs, being yet
notwithstanding well accepted by the Romans; in many other parts of the world,
the same practice was taken up by and by, and is worthily taxed by Prudentius,
in these words -- Colitur nam sanguine and ipsa
Prudentius.
More Deae, nomenque lociceu numen adorant.


The examples of so many other, at last stirred up the Romans themselves to do
the like. But fearing it would not so well become the Majesty and gravity of
that ^tate, to attribute not only life, but divinity, unto a company of ^elesse
walls and houses; somewhat to countenance the m^^ter, as also at once to make
a stay of the immoderate and da^^-growing number of temples and colleges; they
devised, to ^^ild one only more, and to dedicate the same, to the new made
Goddess the city of Rome, and together with her also, to all the Emperors that
had been, or hereafter should be deified, ca^ling it Templum Romae, Et Augg.
and this was done at the charge of Adrian the Emp. as Dio has delivered. In
vita Hadr.


Yea it seems also (to note by the way) that another Temple was then likewise
built unto all the Empresses consecrated after their death. For amongst a
number of ancient inscriptions to be seen in the book before mentioned,
(where we find memorial of diverse women, priests of several wives, daughters,
and sisters of Emperors, whom before that time these God-makers had registered
amongst the numbers of their Goddesses,) there is one, wherein one Vsia is
termed a Priest, diuarum (and I suppose it is to be understood Augustarum) the
copy wheof is as follows.

Inscr. ant. arbis To. p. 322. nu. 6.


Upon this occasion it came to pass, that there was no place of any reckoning
in the Roman Empire which was unfurnished of his temple dedicate to the city
of Rome and diuis Augg. which must have their college of Priests and so their
Flamine; as by the great number of old inscriptions daily to be seen, and
witnessing the same, it may appear. And then lightly they had also their
temple for some one of the Emperors or other, as Camalodunum had of Claudius,
which in like sort had as the other, their Flamine etc. Tacit. Annal. 14.
Now whereas the same cities they had also temples built before unto other
gods; Carleon for example had one of Diana, London another of Diana likewise,
which by testimony of authentical monuments is clearly to be proved: so that
one and the same city had for the most part many Flamines, and namely Rome not
so few I ween as 100. how is it possible I pray you, that there should be any
manner of proportion at all between our Bishops and their Flamines; they
having diverse Flamines to almost every town, and we one Bishop not so much as
for every whole shire? and so much for that matter.

It is time for me now to say somewhat of a certain Epistle written (as we
find delivered) by Eleutherius Bishop of Rome unto King Lucius. The copy of
which Epistle was first found (for ought I can discern) in an old Chronicle
entitled Brut^^, amongst certain laws or statutes of the Saxons. The
occasion thereof, was, that Lucius sometime after his conversion (but whether
before or after his baptism appears not) made request unto Eleutherius to
send him some kind of abstract of the Roman laws, whereby he might establish
a settled order of government in his dominions. Now whereas the Druides, they
were the judges of all matters Caes^ co^. l. 6. F^re de omnib. controuersijs
publicis priuatisque constituunt, and si quod est admissum facinus, si caedes
facta, si de haereditate, de ^inibus co^trouersia est, ijde decerunt praemia
poenasque constituunt. Fox. page Contra Hard. fo. 119.
both spiritual and temporal; the abolishing of them, made an alteration, in
politic matters as well as ecclesiastical, or concerning religion. So that,
the cause of reformation in both kinds being one and the self same, I see no
reason why we should not think, that the remedy of both was likewise sought at
once. And true it is, that the author of the book called Antiquitates
Britannicae, affirms, how that Eluan and Medwin made the foresaid motion for
the Roman laws at their being with Eleutherius before the baptism of Lucius
and then received answer. So does Mr. Fox: And the reverend father of happy
memory Bishop Jewel seems to be of the same opinion. Yet because the
authors of our great Chronicle ( Holinshead and the rest) deliver, not only yt
this motion was made after the Baptism of Lucius; but also ^etting down
precisely the particular time, do say it was in the third year after his
conversion; I will not take upon me to pronounce either tone way or the other, but
leave it unto the readers judgment and dis^retion to determine of.

The Epistle, whenever written, is as here insueth together with the title
of the same, although I must acknowledge that I find great variety in the
diversity of copies, some containing much more then others.

Anno Domini 169. a passione Christi, scripsit D. Eleutherius Papa, Lucio Regi
Britannie ad correctionem Regis and procerum regni. etc.
PEtistis a nobis leges Romanas and Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in regno
Britanniae vti volui^tis. Leges Romanas and Caesaris semper reprobare possumus,
legem D^^ nequaquam. Suscepistis enim nuper miseratione diuina in regno
Britanniae legem and ^idem Christi. Habetis penes vos in regno vtramque
paginam: Ex illis Dei gratia per concilium regni vestrisume legem^, and per
illem Dei patientia vestrum reges Britanniae regnum. Vicarius vero Dei estis in
regno iuxta prophetam Rege^, Domini est terra and plenitudo eius, orbis
terraru^ and vniuersi qui inhabitant in eo; and rursum iuxta prophetam Regem,
dilexisti iustitiam and od^^ti iniquitatem, propterea vnxit te Deus tuus ol^o
laetitiae prae consortibus tuis; and rursu^^ iuxta prophetam regem, Deus
iudicium tuum etc. Non enim iudicium, neque iustitiam Caesaris; Filij enim
regis gentes Christianae, and populi regnisunt quisub vestra protectione and
regno i^ pace degant and consistant, iuxta euangeliu^; Qemadmodum gallina
congrega^ p^llos sub alis etc. Gentes vero regni Britanniae and populi vestri
sunt, and quos debetis in vnum ad concordiam and pacem and ad fidem and ad
legem Christi and ad sanctam ecclesiam congregare, reuocare, fouere,
manutenere, protegere, regere, vt possitis cum eo regnare in eternum, cuius
Vicarius estis in regno pradicto, qui cum patre and ^ilio etc.

That is.

The year of our Lord 169. after the passion of Christ Eleutherus the Pope
writ unto Lucius King of Britain, to the reformation and amendme^t of the
King and the Nobles of the Kingdom, etc.


YE require of us the Roman laws and the Emperors to be sent over to you
which you would practice and put in ure within your realm. The Roman laws and
the Emperors we may ever reprove, but the law of God we may not. Ye have
received of late through Gods mercy in the Kingdom of Britaine^ the law and
faith of Christ; ye have with you within the realm both parts of the
Scriptures. Out of them by Gods grace with the council of your realm take ye
a law, and by that law through Gods sufferance rule your kingdom of Britain.
For you be Gods Vicar in your Kingdom. The Lords is the earth and the fullness
of the world and all that dwell in it. And again according to the Prophet that
was a King, thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore has
God anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, and again
according to the same prophet, O God give judgment unto the King and thy
righteousness unto the Kings son, etc. He said not the judgment and
righteousness of the Emperor, but thy judgment and righteousness. The Kings
sons be the Christian people and folk of the realm, which be under your
government and live and continue in peace within your Kingdom as the Gospel
says, Like as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, so does the King
his people. The people and folk of the realm of Britain be yours, whom if
they be divided, ye ought to gather in concord and peace, to call them to the
faith and law of Christ, to cherish and to maintain them, to rule and govern
them, so as you may reign everlastingly with him whose Vicar ye are, which
with the father and the son etc.

This copy I find thus set down (for the Latin) in the book^ called
Antiquitates Britannicae. But in Mr. Fox his English copy, I find moreover
added after the word (govern them) this that follows, and to defend them
always from such as would do them wrong, from malicious men and enemies. A
King has his name of ruling and not of having a realm. You shall be a King
while you rule well; but if you do otherwise, the name of a King shall not
remain with you, and you shall loose it, which God forbid. The almighty God
grant you so to rule the realm of Brittane, that you may reign with him for
ever whose Vicar you be in the Realm.

Against the title of this Epistle the conuersioner takes exception, and
namely concerning the date, which (he says) falls out to be certain years
after the death of Eleutherius; wherein if there were a mistaking, me thinks it
should not be so much wondered at; seeing that, of 12. several stories (which I
have before recited, all written concerning King Lucius his conversion) no
less than 11. do manifestly err in the time thereof, for that, of them, there
is never a one that agrees with the other.

Correctio regis etc. mistaken by N D.
Notwithstanding this so great a maime and imperfection as he accounts it; see
how ready he is to make his advantage of the same, and to scrape together any
riff-raffe whatsoever for the heightning of his Babel; taking occasion (and
that a poor one God wot) to prove out of the same, the superiority of the
Pope over Princes. Etiam monstra and portentosi partus prosunt (says Vlpian)
With them that are childlesse, De verb: and re^^sig: Quaeret aliquis.
monsters and misshapen creatures are well accepted, for children. And surely,
had he not great want of proofs otherwise, this would well have been spared,
wherein he has showed, either great malice, or ignorance more gross than I
can think to be in the man. For translating corrigere, to correct: he goes
about to make Lucius and his Nobility, like school boys before their master;
to be subject to the correction of Pope Eleutherius.

As it possible that N.D. should be so ignorant, as to think^ that corrigere,
did always import a superiority? When Simo said to his servant Dauu^: Terent:
An^l: Act. 3. s^. 3.
corrigere mihi guatum porro enitere; belike he gave him authority over his
son to correct him, that is, according to the ordinary signification of our
English word to chastise and to punish him. If a shepherd seeing a King ready
to go out of his way, do put him into the right; I trow it may be said of him,
past^r reg^m correxit, and yet it will not follow that the shepherd had any
either superiority, or authority over him. In this case it was even so:
Eleutherius seeing King Lucius to go astray in the way of error, correxit
reg^m, like a good pastor he reformed the error of the King; and to use the
words of Tully, Philosophia^ines veterem correxit et emendauit, by refining in
him the old British Philosophy and taking away the dregs of the Druides,
Cic^de finib: lib: 4.
he endeavored to bring him to the knowledge of true wisdom, even of our
Savior Christ, that is become unto us 1. Cor. 1.24. and 30. Col. 2.3.
wisdom, and in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
And therefore, allowing for good, the word (correctio) in the title of this
Epistle; we will yet acknowledge and maintain, that the english word
correction, upon Kings and Princes, is, and not without cause, in these days,
(in which the light of the truth shines more brightly than in former ages)
right odious, especicially from Clergy men, that should be examples unto
others of obedience and humility.

The time was, when the noble and victorious King, Henry the second submitted
himself unto the correction of the monks of Canterburis; Virgis corporaliter
castigatus. Neubri gensis, l. 2. c. 34
by receiving upon his naked body stripes, at the hands of every one of them:
And so King John, his son was induced to resign his crown at the Popes
appointment, not receiving the same again, but upon such conditions as pleased
the Pope in his good nature to afford; which were such; as a good whipping
peradventure had been more tolerable. To say nothing of the old Henry's,
Othoes, Frederikes, and other Princes of other Nations, what disciplings they
have received at the hands of the Popes of former times: these of our age may
seem yet to say with Nero, Sueton. in Ner. cap. 37.
Principium nemi^e (...) scisse quid sibiliceret: No Popes before us knew their
own authority. For going an ac^ further th^n their predecessors, they so
correct Princes, Medicos admouebat qui cunctan^es continuo curate^t. Ita enim
vocabat venas mo (...) gratia iucidere. Suet. ibidem. Bulla Pij quinti.
as the said Nero was w^nt to cure his Senators that is, by cutting their
throats. Parry was set a work after that sort to cure our late Queen
Elizabeth, ^ by whom of the Cardinal de Como it is no question: But that he
was but a conduit to conueigh this medicine from the Pope, it may partly
appear by the words of that Popes predecessor; Volumus and inbensui, etc. We
will and command all the subjects of Queen Elizabeth to take arms against
her, and to what end but to destroy her? Henry the third of France was so cured
by Clement the Iacobin, (if we may say the Aposthecary cures) for he alas did
but minister the potion. The recipe was written by them that say, Lib. de abd.
Hen. 3. Greg. de vale^. Q To. 3. d^^p. 1. q 11.
Tyrannum occidere honestum est, etc. It is lawful to kill a tyrant: And
again, Si vita priu^ri possint. etc. If they may be bereued of their lives,
how much more of their living and government? But his breath and spirit no
doubt it was from whom came the first direction that at Rome commended it at
last, tanquam rarum, insigne and memorabile facinus, for a rare, Xistus 5. in
orat: habita in consist. Sept: 2. 1589.
worthy and memorable exploit. And how likely it is, that our late intended
drench of gunpowder was brewed at the same place, ad correctionem Regis and
procerum regni, to correct with a vengeance or (to use Nero his phrase) to cure
at once the King and all the governors of the Kingdom; I shall but refer me
to the book heretofore published concerning the arraignment of Garnet the
Jesuit.

Well, whatsoever be the opinion of N. D. the conuersioner in this case, or of
his Masters at Rome, that will needs be the successor of Eleutherius; we will
say with Eleutherius (that which in deeds as well as in words they deny,
howsoever they cloak it) how that our Princes in their several dominions,
they are the Vicars and Lieutenants immediate of God, subject unto none other
but God himself; and that therefore if ought be amiss in them, we ought to
use no other weapons in dealing with them but our tongues, namely and
especially in praying for them, saying with an ancient Father, arma
Christianorum process and lachrymae; Ambros. epist. 34.
The w^^pons of us Christians in this case are none other, than prayers and
tears. And so much for this Epistle of Eleutherius.

Now to proceed in our story, it is recorded by most of our writers (in a
manner all) that King Lucius having founded many Churches, and afforded unto
them many possessions, with great privileges; be at the last departed this
life in peace and was buried at Gloucester, the 14. year after his Baptism as
some say; the tenth as other, and again (as some other will have it) the
fourth. Whereby it may appear, how greatly they are deceived that affirm, R.
Vitus.
how King Lucius after a certain space forsaking his kingdom, became a
Clergy man, and preaching the Gospel in diverse countries of France and
Germany, suffered martyrdom at last at a place called Curiac.

When and wheresoever he died, great cause have we with all thankfulness to
celebrate the memory of this excellent Prince: by whom God did not only bl^sse
this land with the knowledge of his truth, but in such sort did it, as thereby
he has purchased unto the same the title of primogenita Ecclesia the most
ancient and first-begotten of all the Churches in the world, Sabellic: Enn: 7.
lib: 5.
for that (as Sabellicus has well noted) although Christ was preached
elsewhere privately in many other nations long before; yet, omnium proninciarum
prima Britannia, publicitus Christi nomen recepit; Of all nations it was the
first that with public approbation of Prince and state received the
profession of Christian Religion; which also it retained in great sincerity,
for the space of 100. years, to wit, until the time of Dioclesian that
cruel persecutour, who began his reign the year 288.

Now by yt which has been before delivered, Brittane hitherto no way obliged
to the Sec of Rome.
it may sufficiently appear unto the indifferent reader, how little our
country of Brittane has been hitherto beholding unto the sea of Rome. For
whether it were Simon Zelotes, or S. Paul, that brought hither ye first light
of the Gospel; yea were it S. Peter (which could not possibly be, as before
has been shown and proved) In as much as they were all Apostles, who at once
received their commission of him unto whom was given all power both in heaven
and in earth, Mat. 28.19.
in these words, Go teach all nations, etc. and that Peter if his function
were by God appropriate unto any one place more than another, Mat. 28.19.
was rather the Bishop of the Jews th^n of the Romans (for as S. Paul
witnesses, he was appointed the Apostle of the circumcision) I see not how
we are any thing at all obliged unto the sea of Rome, Gal. 27. and. 9.
or unto any Bishop of the same for any thing by them done amongst us.

As for Joseph of Arimathea, for whose history the testimonies are so pregnant
as no man me thinks hereafter should greatly doubt of the same, it appears
not that ever he was at Rome in his life; nay rather the contrary appears,
and that he received directions for his preaching and discipline; either in
the council of the Apostles gathered at Jerusalem, or else of Saint Philip the
Apostle in France.

Concerning King Lucius, I discern not but the Sea of Rome is more beholding
unto us than we unto it. Here he was converted in his own Country: but he was
contented, peradventure (for it is questionable) to affoorde unto the Bishop
of Rome, the honor of baptizing of him and his company. For there is no doubt
to be made, that at their hands (if he were not) he might have been baptized,
that were the instruments of his conversion. But what shall I say? humanitus
aliquid passus est: He tho^ght happily it would be some little glory unto him,
and a countenance also to the action, to fetch them that might seem to be the
authors of his design from Rome, the seat^ of the Empire, the Mistress of the
world^ yea and also happily, the vpholders of his Crown and authority regal.
The men that were sent from Rome, were utterly ignorant of the British
language, and so could not possibly preach any thing themselves, but were feign
to commit that office altogether unto other, to wit, especially, to Eluan and
Medwin. And what is all this to the Sea of Rome? Surely, hitherunto we see
little cause to acknowledge ourselves any thing at all obliged thereunto. The
Story following will yield some better color of these needles exprobrations;
wherein notwithstanding, the truth by Gods grace shall plainly and ingenuously
be acknowledged.

CHAP. IIII.
IN the former three chapters I have delivered what by search and all my best
endeavors I could get notice of concerning the first conversion of this Island
unto Christian religion; the history whereof I must acknowledge for the
particular circumstances of the same to be very uncertain and inuolued in much
obscurity, although for the general there can be nothing more clear and
manifest then that soon after the Apostles times we had Churches established
here. Tertullian and Contra Iudaeos.
Origin do witness the same about the year of Christ 200. And between the
years 300. and 400. we^ find in the Fathers often mention of the Churches and
Bishops of Britane, In Ezech.
as in the places quoted in the Athanas. Apol. 2.
margent may appear to such as shall think it worth the doing to search for
them. For the times following, Theodoret. hist. ecc. l. 1. c. 10. and l. 4. c.
3. Hilar. de synod Chrysostom in Hom. quod Christus sit D^us.
Beda and other that succeeded him have affoorded us much more light, which I
shall gladly make use of. Now therefore to proceed, you shall understand that
amongst diverse terrible persecutions wherewith our Churches here in Brittane
were shaken at sundry times under Dioclesian and other tyrants; the most
grievous of all others was that of the Saxons, who being Pagans and worshippers
of Idols, expelled, not only Christian religion, but the followers also of
the same into a corner of this Island, to wit, Wales and Cornwall, whereby it
came to pass, that all the rest of our England was quite overwhelmed with the
waves of Paganism and Idolatry. True it is yt many of the Brittanes remained
here after the conquest of the Saxons: William of Malmsbury testifies the
same: De Regib. l. 1.
Of some he says, In eius verba volentes concessere, speaking of Cerdic King
of the West Saxons, they were content to submit themselves unto him. And again
of other reliquos in sidem acceptos, placidae quietis gratia mulcebant: having
received their submission for peace and quietness sake, they made much of them.

But these we are to presume were of the basest of the people, and so kept
under by perpetual servitude, as it was impossible for them to maintain any
exercise of religion in any public manner. Yet privately no doubt, many of
them, they not only in secret served God, and kept a good conscience, but used
their talent in seeking to draw some of the Saxons unto the faith of Christ.
This partly appears in Offa that (as Munster reports) being an Englishman
and of the blood royal (it seems he was son unto Athelfride King of the
Bernicians) was a very good Christian, Munster in Cosmogr.
traveled into Germany, and there the year 601. laid the first foundation
of the monastery of Schuttern.

It is manifest also by the letters of S. Gregory unto the King and Queen of
France, that there were many amongst the Saxons well inclined in religion, that
complained of the negligence of the Frenchmen their neighbors, in affoording
them instructers and teachers, which it seems they greatly desired. Greg. in
Regist. c. 158. ad Theodoricu^ and Theodebertum Reges
For thus he writes to the King; Peruenit ad nos, etc. We are informed, that
the English nation by the mercy of GOD is become desirous to be converted
unto the faith of Christ; but that the Priests of your neighborhood do neglect
to satisfy their desire, or so much as to increase the same by any good
exhortations. Cap. 159. ad Brumchildim Reginam.
Again to the Queen thus, Indicamus, etc. We certify you, that the English
nation (God permitting it) is willing to become Christian; but that the Clergy
of their neighborhood, extend not their pastoral care unto them. But this
negligence of theirs, it pleased God at last in his good time to s^pply, by the
means and occasion that now I shall declare unto you; and to replant again
Christian Religion in this Realm, where heretofore, until the coming of the
Saxons, it had so many years flourished.

Io. Diac. in vita S. Greg. lib. 1. cap. 21.
It chanced upon a time, S. Gregory (being then a private man) to espy
certain beautiful children to be sold in the streets of Rome; and
understanding they were Pagans, asked of what country they were? it was
answered, they were Angles or Englishmen. Well may they be called Angles
(quoth he) for they look like Angels. Demanding then of what Province they
were; it was said they were of Deira: God grant (says he) they may be De ira
Dei eruti, delivered from the wrath of God and made partakers of his mercies by
Christ. He proceeded yet further, and asked how the King of that Co^ntry was
called; Understanding his name was Aella, Alleluia (quoth he) must needs be
sung in those parts in praise of the true God. Hereupon he went presently
unto Pelagius the second, that was then Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send
Preachers into Britain, offering himself to be one; and obtaining his
request, took his journey toward England. He was scarsely three days journey
on his way, when at the importunity of the Romans (who would not endure the
loss of so worthy a man) he was called back.

Not long after it fell out, that Pelagius dying, this good man, Gregory, was
chosen Bishop of Rome in his place. He mindful then of his former enterprise,
presently took order for the sending of Preachers into this land, for the
conversion of the same; and the sooner, for that (as before I said) the daily
complaints of certain good Saxons, concerning the carelessness of the French
Clergy in that behalf, did greatly provoke him thereunto. The man that he made
choice of for performance of this great work, was one Augustine a Monk of
greater virtue than learning; although as a mortal man he was not without his
vices, and namely, such, as the now aspiring See of Rome (from whence he came)
was likely to infuse into him, as anon (by Gods grace) shall further be
declared. Unto him were adjoined for assistants 40. other, that should
accompany him in this voyage, and help him in the work he was appointed unto.
They, being now well onward on their way, enquired of the State of the Country,
and manner of the people unto whom they went; and understood so much of their
barbarous and fierce rudeness, as they in a manner, all utterly renounced
proceeding any further in the voyage, and as it were compelled Augustine to
post back to Rome, there to crave license of return.

Saint Gregory much grieved with this message, writ his letters unto them,
using many reasons to persuade them, in any wise to go forward; whereunto at
last they yielded. He writ also unto the Kng and Queen of France, and to
diverse Bishops, to show unto them what kindness they might in their passage;
which thing they did abundantly, not only in welcome and entertainment, but
also in adjoining unto their company diverse French men to be their
interpreters; whereby it seems, the French tongue, and the English at that time
were much alike; as well they might be, the Franks and Saxons, being both,
people of Germany, and having seated themselves much about one time; the one in
France some 130 year, the other in Britain, 150. years then past.

Augustine and his associates landed in the Isle of Thanet the year 596. (as
most affirm, but as some account 597.) which was the year (as histories
deliver) in which Mahomet was borne. Florant. Wigorne.
There reigned at that time in Kent Ethelbert, the fifth King of the Saxon
race; whose dominions, though he bare the title of Kent only, were extended
Northward as far as the river of Humber. He had unto his wife at that time, a
daughter of Clotharius the first of that name, King of France, named Berta; who
being a Christian, and born of Christian parents, was permitted by her husband,
the exercise of her Religion, and had attending upon her for her Chaplain, one
Luidhard a Bishop with diverse other Christian servants; And there was allowed
unto them a certain Church built heretofore by the Romans, dedicate unto S.
Martin, and standing near the walls of the City of Canterbury, where they
used to pray, preach, and administer the Sacraments; whereby (no doubt) many of
the Saxons were daily won unto Christ, and Ethelbert the King well prepared
to entertain the motion which Augustine and his Assistants made afterward
unto him. In regard thereof, Capgraue says, In vita Aug.
that the said Luidhardus was praecursor and ianitor venturie Augustini, the
forerunner and porter to give Augustine entrance when he should come: and
again, that, parauit ei viam and ingressum, he prepared him a way and
entrance. And surely so it may well seem by his first welcome and
entertainment.

When Augustine upon his arrival sent to the King to let him understand that
he was come from Rome, and that he and his company had brought with them such
doctrine as should bring him and his (if they received the same) to enjoy
everlasting happiness in heaven after this life past: he presently commanded
that they should be well entertained, and all necessaries provided for them,
and wished them to attend a while; saying^ that even shortly they should have
audience.

It was not long after, before the King came himself in person into the said
Isle; where he took order, these men should be brought before him, not into
any house, but (forsooth) to prevent sorcery, in a place appointed for that
purpose, in the open fields. So thither they came, in an equipage somewhat
strange; one carrying aloft a Cross of silver before them, another having a
Table containing the picture of our Savior, and all singing of the Letanie.

Being come, they were all willed, first to sit down, and then to declare
their errand: which being delivered, they received of the king this gentle and
courteous answer; that their pains in coming so far to seek his good, he
took in very good part, although he could not without note of leuity and
rashness, suddenly forsake the religion left unto him by his ancesters, to
receive an vncertains nouelty. He therefore would be so far from giving them
cause of grief or coffeehouse, as that they should not only find kind
entertainment at his hands, but have all ample liberty and license to preach
and teach the doctrine they had so greatly commended. So hi^ appointed them a
dwelling in the City of Canterbury, where by their preaching (as well in
deeds, and good example of life as of words) the same being confirmed by
certain miracles, (as Beda reports), they won daily many unto Christ, and
in the end amongst other, the King himself, who thereupon gave them a fair
house at Stablegate within the City aforesaid, and assigned a liberal portion
of possessions for maintenance of them in the same.

The matter being thus far forward, Augustine thought good to step into
France, where he caused himself to be consecrated a Bishop, of Etherius
Archbishop of Arles, by the name of Episcopus Anglorum.

This narration is taken in a manner altogether out of Beda. And whosoever
shall duly consider of the same, Lib. 1. cap. 23. and in seq.
shall find that we are not so much beholden to the Sea of Rome for this
conversion of the Saxons, as N. D. our conuersioner would persuade us. For had
not the ground been first well prepared by the remnant of Christian Britons;
by some (though not many) Saxons converted by them; by the good life and Quo
factum est vt postea beato Augustino predicanti, Regis animus ram emollitus
facile cederet. W. Malmsb. de Reg. lib. 1.
preaching of Lu^thardus^ by the persuasions of Berta the Queen with her
husband, who at the first hearkened so readily to the motion; by the virtuous
examples of her servants and other Christians; surely, in all likelihood, long
enough it might have been before the seed of Christian religion sown^ by
Augustine would have brought forth any great harvest, himself being a man very
unlearned (as his simple questions proposed unto Saint Gregory Beda lib. 1.
cap. 28.
do sufficiently show) and the rest of his company (we may presume) much more
ignorant.

Yet we will not greatly grudge him the name of Apostolus Anglorum, the Apostle
of Englishmen, so it be but rightly understood. For we deny not but he was
sent, marry by whom by Gregory, that had no more authority here then himself;
and therefore he was not able to say as Saint Paul the Apostle, Gal. 1.1.
neque ab hominibus, ne^ per hominem, sed per Iesum Christum, neither from men,
nor by man, but by Jesus Christ. We deny not but he was sent hither to preach
unto the nation of the English; but a great (I think we may say far the
greatest) part of England, remained in the darkness of their infidelity, many
years after he was dead. For by Beda lib. 2. c. 9. and 4. c. 13. lib. 2. c. 15.
Paulinus the Gospel was first preached in the North of England, anno, 625. by
Wilfride in the South, 681. by Foelix in Norfolk and those parts, 630. and so
by other elsewhere at other times. We deny not but he was sent to preach Christ
and his Religion: but it is manifest, he preached also himself; like a cursed
cow throwing down with his heel, much of the good milk that before he had
given, as anon we shall have occasion to show.

Presently upon the return of Augustine out of France, two of his company (
Lawrence and Peter) were sent unto Rome, to advertise Gregory of their good
success, by whom, at their coming back, he sent unto Augustine an
Archiepiscopall Pall, certain books, Church ornaments, and other necessaries.
He sent also by them presents unto the King, and writ diverse letters, some
gratulatory to the King, some unto Augustine, exhorting him to diligence in his
calling, and to take heed, lest the miracles which for the conversion of this
people, God wrought by him (diverse it is said he wrought) should lift him up
into a proud and high conceit of his own worth: and lastly, others unto the
Archbishop of Arles, to thank him for his good aid and assistance yielded
to these men in this business.

Augustine in the mean time had obtained of the King an other Church in the
midst of the City, built likewise heretofore by the Romans, and dedicated
the same unto our Savior Christ. Soon after, this good King gave unto him
also his own Palace, and chief seat of his kingdom, removing himself unto
Rheaculfe^ called by the Romans Regulbium, now Reculuer: And lastly, he laid
the foundation of a goodly Monastery which he dedicated to Saint Peter and S.
Paul, known afterward by the name of S. Augustines.

These things being thus ordered, he made show of endeavoring a concord and
agreement between the Saxons and the Britons; but his intent was, to establish
his own throne, and to enlarge the bounds of his Province, by bringing Wales
under his jurisdiction, whereas they had an Archbishop of their own, and might
not in policy submit themselves to him, that was to live a subject to a
foreign Prince, more likely to be a foe th^n a friend.

Yet thus, Beda lib. 2. c. 2
and in this sort he deals with them. He procured by the means of king
Ethelbert, a certain meeting of diverse British Bishops, and other the
principal of their Clergy, at a certain place called afterward upon that
occasion, Augustines oak, being in Wiccia or Worcestershire, upon the confines
of the Country of the West Saxons. There by persuasions, entreaties, threats,
and all manner of means he endeavored to draw them to an entire conformity
with the Church of Rome, that had then admitted diverse corruptions, and much
fallen from the purity of former times, whereas the Britons had continued still
in the same tenor of pure Grex Domini rectum ordinem tenebat Galfr. Menum. l.
11. cap. 12.
doctrine which they had received in the first infancy of the Church. But his
answer was short and peremptory, that they might not submit themselves unto
him, having an Archbishop of their own; that the doctrine and discipline of
their Church they had received from the Apostles of Christ, neither would they
change the same for any man's pleasure whatsoever.

Augustine notwithstanding not discouraged with this repulse, procured yet
another meeting, to which many more of the Britains repaired then unto the
first: For it was said there were there 7. Bishops, to wit, of Hereford, of
Landaffe, of Pattern, of Bangor, of Saint A^^aph, of the VViccians, and of
Morgan. There were there also many other Clergy men, and Monks, especially out
of that famous Monastery of Bannachor near Chester, in which there lived at
that time above 2000. Monks, whose Abbot or governor Dinot was there present
at this conuenticle.

Some time before this assembly, certain of the Brittanes thought good to ask
counsel of a certain Anchorite whom they esteemed greatly of for his
holiness, and to know of him whether he thought it best for them to yield
unto the directions of Augustine or no. He advised them, if he were a man of
God, to take the course he showed, and to follow the same. And when they asked
how they should discern whether he were such a one or no; he pronounced this
saying of our Savior, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek
and humble of heart: Matthew. 11.29.
If therefore (says he) this same Augustine be a meek and humble minded man^
it is a great presumption that he bears the yoke of Christ and offreth the
same unto you: But if he be stout and proud, he is not of God you may be bold.
This therefore (quoth he) is my advice, have a care that he and his company be
first in the place where you meet: If then you being the greater number, he
rise not to do you reverence, but despise you; despise you also him and his
counsel.

Augustine therefore first entered the place, with his banner and his cross,
with singing, procession, and great pomp; and when the Brittane Bishops came
in, never moved to rise or saluted them at all. This they taking very ill,
gainsaid him in every thing, exhorting one another not to yield a jot unto him
by any means. Beda vbis.
For say they, si modo nobis assargere noluit; quanto magis si eisubdi
c^perimus, nos pro nihilo contemnet? If he will not daine so much as to rise
out of his chair to salute us, how much more when we have once submitted
ourselves to his jurisdiction, will he despise us, and set us at naught?

With this repulse Austin was so much moved, as he could not forbear
immediately to breath out threats against the poor Brittanes, telling them
that they which refused to be at peace with their friends, should shortly find
war and enemies; and that they should find temporal death by the swords of
them, at whose hands they would not receive the offer of everlasting life.

How well he seconded these words by deeds, let it appear by the words of
Thomas Gray that writ a Chronicle in french now well near 300. years since.
Aust^n (says he) being thus refused of the Bishops and other the learned of
the Brittans; made such complaint thereof unto Ethelbert the King of Kent, that
forthwith he levied his power and marched against them, and slew them in most
cruel wise; having no more regard of mercy, then a Wolf has upon sheep.

An other old Chronicle reports, that Ethelbert being incensed as aforesaid
by Augustine, he sent to Elfred king of Northumberland to come and help him to
distress the Britons of Wales; that Augustine the Archbishop of Canterbury
met them at ^egecester (now Chester) the King whereof was called Broch^ail, who
being afraid of the other two Kings, fled away and left his Country, which
they parted between them. Afterward (says he) they went toward Wales, which
the Britons heting of, sent men to them in their shirts and barefoot to ask
mercy; but they were so cruel, they had of them no pity at all. Whereby it
appears, that the said Austin was not only author and perswader of this
slaughter, but also present, and an actor in the same, which our conuersioner
cannot endure by any means to hear of.

Well I know, that diverse affirm, Austin died the year 603. whereas this
war was made two years after that time. Lib. 2. c. 2. in fine cap.
And Beda (as now we have him) seems to confirm the same. For talking of the
foresaid slaughter, and how it was foretold by Augustine (as before I have
declared) he adds, quamuis ipso (Augustino) iam multo ante tempore ad
coelestia regna translato, as though long before that war, Austin had died.
Howbeit it appears manifestly, that those words are fraudulently thrust in.
For the old Saxon copies (whereof diverse are to be seen) have no such thing.
Again, it appears that Augustine was alive, and confirmed a Charter made by
King Ethelbert, the year, 605. which was two years after the war. And
diverse do witness he died after that, some the year 611. and other (as namely
Mat^. Westmin) ^he year, 608. whereas most of our histories affirm, the said
war was made against the Britons, the year, 603.

Whenever it was, a great overthrow they received upon this occasion, wherein
they lost, beside an infinite number of Soldiers and men of Arms, a great many
Monks (no less then 1200.) that never fought against the enemy at all, but
only by prayer: Sic Fimbria accusat Scaeuolam (apud Cic:) quod totum telum
corpore non recepisset: Orat. p^o Sext: Ros. Amer.

A Bonifacio 5. rogatus, Phocas Imp. sta^uit, vt Ecclesia Romans esset caput
omnium ecclesiarum, and magistra. Nam antea ecclesia Constantinopol itana
primam se scribebat om^um Ecclesia^um. Flo^lerg. in an. 609.

Greg Epist. ex Regist: 194


50. there were that saved themselves by flight, and escaped the revenging
sword of our Apostles soldiers, who hac of all others the greatest spleen
against them of the Clergy, as the greatest wrong-doers, because they would not
take wrong by receiving quietly the yoke of a foreign and usurping
jurisdiction, obtruded unto them.

This action undoubtedly sauoureth strongly of that ambitious humor, wherewith
Rome has ever been deeply tainted, and that now waxing weak, and less
hopeful in the temporal state, began to creep into the Spiritualty. Gregory
an humble and virtuous man, suppressed the same in himself and other what he
might; and the rather happily, because the title of supremacy which afterward
his Successors arrogated to themselves, was usurped by the Patriarchs of
Constantinople; against which, how bitterly Gregory inneigheth, it shall not be
amiss a little to consider; that it may appear unto the Reader, how true it
is which the conuersioner and his fellows stand so confidently upon, that
Saint Gregory, and so his Disciple Augustine our Apostle (as they call him) was
just of the same Religion that now is maintained, in Rome.

Ego sidenter dico (says he) etc. I speak it confidently, whosoever calls
himself the universal Priest, or desires to be so called, in that kind of
pride is the forerunner of Antichrist; quicunque whosoever, he excepteth not
the Bishop of Rome.

Nay, when this title (as himself says) was offered him, being the Bishop of
Rome, by a Synod assembled at Chalcedon, he refused the same, yielding this
reason of his so doing; Nullus decessorum meorum hoc tam profane vocabulo vti
consensit, Lib: 4. Ep: 36 cap: 80.
None of my predecessors would ever endure to use so profane a word; Lib: 4.
Ep. 32. c. 76.
and again, No Bishop of Rome ever took unto himself a name of such
singularity. In one place he calls it, Nouum Lib: 4 Ep. 32
nomen a new name; In an other vocabulum Lib: 4. Ep: 38
temerarium and stultum, a rash and foolish name. Again elsewhere, superbum
Lib: 4. Ep. 32
pompaticum, a proud and pompous title, Lib: 4 Ep: 38
peruersum, superstitiosum, Lib: 4. Ep. 24
prophanum, Lib: 4. Ep: 39
sc^lestum, nomen Lib: 4. Ep: 38
erroris, Lib: 4: E: 39.
vanitatis, hypocriseos, and blasphemi^, perverse, superstitious, profane,
wicked, a name of error, vanity, hypocrisy, and blasphemy; and lastly, Typhum
Lib: 6. Ep. 2:
superbiae, a puff of arrogance and pride.

If we should go no farther but even to the Epitaph engraven upon the tomb of
our Austen, me thinks it might sufficiently persuade us that things are far
otherwise for matters of religion in our days, th^n they were at Rome when
that was written; for thus it is, Hic requiescit Augustinus Dorobernensis
Archiepiscopus, qui olim huc a Beato Gregorio Romanae vrbis Pontifice directus
and a Deo operatione miraculorum suffultus, and Ethelbertum Regem and gentem
illius ab idolorum cultu ad ^idem Christi perduxit, and completis in pace
diebus officij sui defunctus est. 7. call. Iun eodem Rege regnante. Declaramus,
dicimus, definimus, pronuntiamus, omnino esse de necessitate salutis, omni
humanae creaturae; sub esse To: Pontifici. Bonif: de maiori: and obed: vnam
sacta^. Q^icquid saluatur est sub To: Pont: Glosa ibidem
Here rests the body of Augustine the first Archbishop of Dorobernia, that
was sent into this land by S. Gregory Bishop of the city of Rome, approved of
God by working of miracles, and that brought Ethelbert the King and his people
from the worshipping of idols unto the faith of Christ, the days of whose
office being ended in peace, he deceased, May the 26. the said King Ethelbert
yet reigning.

If Augustine were now alive, and should call the Pope Episcopum vrbis Romanae,
Bishop of the city of Rome, when orbis Romani, of the Roman world will not
content him, how well think you it would be taken at his hands? But if S.
Gregory should hear the Pope challenge an universal jurisdiction over the
whole globe of the whole earth, even amongst the Indians East and West, and
the very Antipodes (Super and G^ramantas and Indos Protulit Imperium.) and yet
not over the Clergy only, or the baser sort of the laity, but over Kings and
Emperors, Princes and Magistrates, and whosoever; how would he detest and
abhor such presumptuous and monstrous arrogance: how far would he be from
either accepting in himself, or approouing in others, such a large authority,
that took so hainously the very show and offer of the title only, which being
pr^ffered unto himself, he utterly refused, as most absurd and blasphemous?
An easy thing it were to set down (God wot) a number of other points of
doctrine, wherein Saint Gregory and diverse of his successors, do apparently vary
much from the doctrine now current in the Church of Rome. But it is matter of
history only which I have undertaken, and therefore refusing to meddle with
any controversy, that shall not of it self fall within the compass of those
things I have been occasioned to entreat of; I shall leave that unto the
discourse of some other man.

This Augustine was a man of exceeding tall stature, well favored, of a very
amiable countenance. His body was buried first without doors, near to the
Church of his Monastery, because the Church was not yet finished, but
afterward was removed into the North porch of the said Church, in which place
all the bodies of the Archbishops following were laid until Theodor, who was
first buried in the Church, because the porch was full.

Tho: Spot that lived a Monk in the Abbey of Saint Austins at Canterbury,
about the year 1270. sets down for his Epitaph (how truly I know not) this
which follows, which I think not amiss here to insert: Inclytus Anglorum
praesul pius and decus altum,
Hic Augustinus requiescit corpore, sanctus.


Thus much concerning the first conversion of this Country to Christian
Religion, and Augustine the first Archbishop of the Metropolitan See of
Canterbury.

THE ARCHBISHOPS OF CANTERBVRIE.
1. Augustine.
BY that which has been before delivered, it appears, that Augustine was
the first Archbishop of Canterbury, 596.
concerning whom I need not any further to discourse.

2. Laurence.
SAint Augustine before his death had appointed to succeed him, 611.
one Laurence a Roman borne, a very godly and well learned man, whom Ciaconius
in the life of Saint Gregory, seems to make a Priest, Cardinal in titulo S.
Siluestri in Exquilijs, tt: Equirij Archipresbyter. But the name of Cardinal
God wot is of a far later date. This Laurence took great pains not only with
his own charge, but also in laboring to reduce the Britons of Wales, the
Scots and Irishmen to o^e consent in matters of religion. It is likely his
diligence might have done good, but that he was disturbed by the death of that
good King Ethelbert. Eadbald his son succeeded him in the Kingdom, who being
a vitions young man, was not ashamed to marry the wife of his late deceased
father. This and other enormities, when Lawrence like a good John Baptist,
doubted not to ^eprehend him for, he first began to fall out with him, and
afterward, even with Christian Religion; which a while he seemed to like of
well enough, but now at last utterly renounced. The people (as commonly it
comes to pass) fol^owing the example of their King, they likewise returned
to the filthy vomit of their abominable idolatry; although the Archbishop
like a good Pastor ceased not by earnest exhortations and what other means
possibly he might, to stay them from this horrible relapse. Perceiving at last
that his words did no good, but rather incited the King to a more desperate
hatred of him and religion: He determined to follow Mellitus and Iustus into
France, that (as anon you shall have occasion to read) were lately banished by
the wicked sons of good Sebert King of the East Saxons. Tho night before the
day of his intended departure, he caused his bed to be made in the very Church
of his Monastery; where after many tears and sighs, he recommended unto God
the miserable state of his poor Church, and so fell a sleep. It seemed unto
him (says Beda) that S. Peter came unto him and first expostulated the matter
with him, after chid and reprehended him sharply for purposing to forsake the
Church committed unto him; and lastly, whipped his naked body so terribly, as
when he waked, finding it more then a dream, all his body was gore-blood. He
went immediately unto the King; showing him his wounds, and together related
unto him the occasion of them. This struck such a terror into the King, as by
and by he renounced his idols, put away his incestuous wife, caused himself
to be baptized, and for a farther testimony and assurance of his unfeigned
conversion, builded a Church in the monastery of S. Peter, and dedicated the
same unto the blessed virgin. Laurence very joyful of this alteration, sent
presently for Mellitus and Iustus into France; who coming unto him, one of
them (Iustus) Bishop of Rochester, he returned unto his old charge^ the other
he retained with him, hoping to find means, he also might be restored to his
See again. In the mean time, even the same year that King Eadbalde became a
Christian, himself (I mean Laurence) died, to wit, Feb. 3. 619 (as Bale
delivers) and was buried beside Augustine his predecessor.

3. Mellitus.
AT what time the Britains refused to join with Augustine in preaching of
Christ, 619.
he writ unto Saint Gregory, certifying him, that the harvest here was great,
but the laborers very few; and therefore requested him to appoint some that
might assist him in this work of the Lord. He did so; and sent unto him
Mellitus an Abbot of Rome, Iustus, Paulinus, Rufinianus and others, who arrived
in England the year 601. To leave the rest unto their own places, Mellitus
about three years after was consecrate by him Bishop of London, where King
Ethelbert built a goodly church and dedicated the same unto S. Paul. The fourth
year of his consecration he went to Rome to confer with Boniface the Pope
about diverse things, and was by him honorably entertained. A year or two
after his return died both Ethelbert King of Kent, and Sebert (that under him
ruled the East Saxons) unto whose jurisdiction London appertained. This Sebert
left behind him three wicked sons, that being never baptized, came
notwithstanding one day unto the Church at Communion time, and asked the
Bishop what he meant that he delivered not of that same fine bread unto them
as he was wont to do unto their father Saba, and did yet unto the rest of the
people. He answered, that if they would be washed in the water of life as he
was and the rest of the people there present; then would he deliver unto them
of this bread also, but otherwise, neither was it lawful for him to deliver,
nor them to receive it. This notwithstanding they would have enforced him; and
when they could not prevail, were so enraged, as they expelled him their
dominion, hardly holding their hands from doing him violence at that time. He
being thus exiled, went first unto Laurence the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
finding him in little better case than himself was at London, departed into
France together with Iustus Bishop of Rochester. Being sent for soon after
by Laurence (as above said) it happened the same year that the said Laurence
died, and he was appointed to succeed him. He was a man of great birth, but
of greater mind, exceeding careful of his charge, despising the world, and
never caring for any thing but heaven and heavenly things. Having been sick a
long time, he died at last of the gowt, Apr. 24. ann. 624. and was buried
beside his predecessor.

4. Iustus.
624.
IVstus (of whom I have before spoken somewhat) was taken from Rochester to
supply the place of Mellitus after his decease; wherein having traveled
painfully the space of 10. years, ( Malmsbury says but 3.) he departed this
life, Neuemb. 10. anno 634. and was buried in the porch above mentioned.

5. Honorius.
634.
After the death of Iustus, Honorius was made Archbishop, a very reverend man:
He was a Roman born, very learned, and sometimes a Disciple of Saint Gregory.
He was consecrate at Lincoln by Paulinus Archbishop of York. He received a
Pall from Rome with letters, wherein authority was given to him and the other
Archbishop, whenever either of them did fail, to consecrate another in his
place without posting to Rome. This man appointed diverse Bishops to diverse
Countries, as in their several places God willing shall be more at large
declared: He also divided his province into parishes, that so he might appoint
particular Ministers to particular congregations; and having sat Archbishop
almost 20. years ( W. Malmsbury says 26) died the last day of February; or
(as some deliver) of September, the year, 653. He was buried amongst his
predecessors.

6. Deus-dedit, or Adeodatus.
655,
The Sea was void after Honorius died the space of 18. months. An Englishman or
Saxon called sometimes Frithona (famous for his learning and other virtues) was
then elected Archbishop, and after that named Deus dedit. He was consecrate by
Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, (York being then without an Archbishop:) and
died the last day of June (or as Westminster has) July 14. 664. having
attended that charge carefully about the space of 6. years, the very same day
(says H. Huntington) that Ercombert the King of Kent dyed. He was the first
Englishman that was Archbishop, and the last Archbishop that was buried in the
Church porch of Saint Augustines.

7. Theodorus.
ONe Wigardus an Englishman, 668.
an ancient and learned Priest, was chosen to succeed Deus-dedit, and sent to
Rome for consecration with letters commendatorie from Egebert King of Kent, and
Oswy King of Northumberland, who also sent presents of great value unto
Vitalianus that was then Pope. It chanced he came to Rome at a time when the
plague was very hot there; and died of the same, as did also almost al his
company that came with him. The Pope understanding the Sea had stood long
void, and careful to see it furnished, made choice of one Adrian an Abbot of
Italy, but borne in Afric, a grave man and very learned. He would not be
persuaded to take so great a charge upon him; but being importuned thereunto,
he promised to find out a man that should be of greater both learning and
years then himself, and in all other respects very fit for the place. He
was familiarly acquainted with one Theodore a Grecian borne in Tharsus of
Cilicia, Saint Paul's country; a man well seen in all kind of good learning,
and 66. years of age. Vitalianus notwithstanding refused to allow of him,
except the other would promise to go into England with him also. He was
content, (...) and at his coming thither was made Abbot of S. Augustines.
Theodore then was consecrate Archbishop, April 1. 668. when the Sea had been
void almost four years. In May following, they set forward toward England.
They had many lets by the way, and got not thither in a year and a half. They
brought with them great store of books both Greek and Latin, whereof some
remain yet to be seen at this day, as namely a Homer (so fair and
exquisitely written, as no print in the world yet extant is thought to be
comparable to it either for truth or beauty) and diverse other. Unto this man
all the British Bishops and generally all Britain yielded obedience, and
under him conformed themselves in all things unto the rites and discipline of
the Church of Rome. He was a very stout and rigorous man, exercising the
authority of his place so peremptorily, as many think it a great blot unto
him. How he took upon him to place and displace diverse Bishops at his
pleasure, as Wilfride, Cedda and other, see in the beginning of York. In his
time were held two Synods, one at Hereford (the Canons whereof you may see in
Beda, lib. 4 cap. 5.) the other at Clyff beside Rochester, in which he
procured all the Prelates there assembled to set down their opinions touching
the heresy of Eunches, wherewith his countrymen the Grecians were much
infected: They all detested it, and gave their approbation of those five famous
general Councels, of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, and the two first of
Constantinople. Never before this time had England so happy days, nor so many
learned men as under him, and a little after. Amongst a great number of other,
these were of his breeding, Beda, Saint John of Beuerley, Alcu^nus, and Tobias
Bishop of Rochester, all excellent and very famous men. He erected (as some
say) a kind of school or Uniuersity at Creekelade, or rather Greekeslade in
Wiltshire, so called of the Grecians that taught and studied there. These men
soon after remoouing thence, are supposed to have laid the foundations of our
Uniuersity of Oxford. He left sundry monuments of his learning in writing
behind him, and appointed many Bishops in diverse parts of this land. Having
continued Archbishop 22. years, he died September 29. anno 690. being 88
^^^res of age, until which time, he would often say, he thought he should
live, for that in a dream it had been so signified unto him many years
before. A little before his death he sent for Wilfride Archbishop of York, and
Erkenwald Bishop of London, and confessing himself unto them; acknowledged
that he had done Wilfride great wrong, insomuch as, there was no one thing that
lay so hard upon his conscience as that, and therefore with tears besought him
to forgive him, and to pray for him. He was buried within the Church of Saint
Augustines Abbey, because the porch was full before, all his predecessors (six
in number) being buried there. In memory of them, were composed and engraven in
marble these verses that follow, Septem sunt Angli Primates and Protopatres,
Septem Rectores, septemcoeloque triones,
Septem cisternae vitae, septemque lucernae,
Et septem palmae regniseptemque coronae,
Septem sunt Stellae, quas haec tenet area cellae.


8. Brithwald.
ALmost two years the Sea was void after the death of Theodore; 692.
Brithwald Abbot of Reculuer which stands upon the mouth of the river Gentad,
and before that, a Monk of Glastenbury, was then elect, July, 1. anno. 692.
and consecrate by Godwyn the Metropolitan of Wales, or of France rather as Beda
reports. The year following, May 30. he took possession of this his
Bishopric. He was a man very well learned both in Divinity and otherwise, but
not comparable unto Theodore his predecessor. He bare a hard hand upon
Wilfride Archbishop of York, as Theodore had done before him, and caused his
second banishment, or at least was some means of it. He was coniured by the
Pope, who turned him about, and dealt so with him by letters, as he made him
more earnest for him then ever he had been against him. No Archbishop ever
continued so long in this See as he, either before or since his time. He sat
38. years and a half. Dying then, January 9. 731. he was buried at Saint
Augustines with his Predecessors.

9. Tatwyn.
THe same year in which Birhtwald died, succeeded Tatwyn, otherwise called
Cadwyn and Scadwyn, 732
being cons: June 10. following. He was borne in Mercia. A man very religious,
and no less learned. Soon after his consecration there arose a great
controversy between him and the Archbishop of York about the Primary.
Wherein Tatwyn prevailed, having traveled to Rome in person and received his
Pall there. He suit three years, dyed July, 30. 734. and was buried at
Canterbery. Unto this man's time Beda (who died the same year) deduceth ^his
history, the most ancient that England has worthy any credit.

10. Nothelmus.
736.
HEnry Huntingdon affirms one Egbright to have succeeded Tatwyn: I have not
found him mentioned elsewhere: and therefore to follow the report of the
greater number, I will omit him and pass unto Nothelm. He was born at London.
Q. West. S. Prebyt. Lon.
Beda acknowledges himself much beholding to this man for diverse things which
upon his report he inserted into his Ecclesiastical story. He received his
Pall at Rome, anno 736. dyed October 17. 741. and was buried at Canterbury.

11. Cuthbert or Cudbrict.
742.
CVthbert an Englishman of great parentage, being Bishop of Hereford, the year
742. was translated to Canterbury. Five years after, to wit, 747. by the
counsel of Boniface Bishop of Mentz, he called a convocation at Cliff beside
Rochester, to reform the manifold enormities wherewith the Church of England
at that time was ouergrowne. Our Kings forsaking the company of their own
wives, in those days delighted altogether in harlots, which were for the most
part Nuns. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. The rest of the Nobility
therefore following their example, trod also the same trace. The Bishops
likewise, and other of the Clergy that should have been a means of reforming
these faults in others, were themselves no less faulty; spending their times
either in contentions and brabbles, or else in luxury and voluptuousness,
having no care of study, and seldom, or never preaching. Whereby it came to
pass that the whole land was overwhelmed with a most dark and palpable mist
of ignorance, and polluted with all kind of wickedness and impiety in all
sorts of people. Cuthbert therefore endeavoring (like a good Pastor) by the
reformation of these things to turn away the wrath of God which seemed to hang
over this land, and to threaten those plagues which shortly after fell upon it
when the Danes invaded the same: gathered together his Clergy at the place
before mentioned, and there after long consultation, caused certain Canons to
be decreede which are to be seen at large elsewhere. Amongst the rest, by
one, all the Clergy were required to read to their parishioners the Lords
prayer and the Creed in the English tongue. This man obtained from the Pope a
dispensation for making of cemiteries or Churchyards within towns and cities,
whereas until his time, within the walls none were buried. He also procured
Eadbert king of Kent to command, that the bodies of Archbishops deceased
hereafter should not be buried at S. Augustines (as heeretofo^e) but at
Christchurch: And that he might put his monks of Christ Church as it were in
possession of this privilege; he took order his death should be concealed
until his funerals were ended. He died ann. 758. and was buried according to
his own desire in Christchurch, or (as one reports) in a little Church near
adjoining, which he had built and dedicated unto Saint John Baptist; meaning to
settle his consistory there, and to make it a place of burial for himself
and his successors. This Church many years after was consumed with fire,
together with Christchurch it self, and a great part of the monastery.
Christchurch was afterward re-edified by Lanfranke.

12. Bregwyn.
BRegwyn was borne of ^ Noble parentage amongst the Saxons of Germany, 759
whence he traveled into England for the ^ncrease of knowledge, being yet
very young. After the death of Cuthbert, in regard of his modesty, integrity
and great learning, choice was made of him as the fittest man to succeed, and
so he was consecrated upon Michaelmas day 759. He took even the like course
for his burial as his predecessor had done. He sat only 3. years. and died
Aug. 24.762.

13. Lambert. al. Iainbert.
764
THe monks of S. Augustines taking it very hainously to have the burial of
their Archbishops discontinued from them; began to make their complaint unto
the Pope. Now though Christchurch-men had no great reason to doubt of the Pope,
who had confirmed unto them this privilege at the suit of Bregwyn; yet to make
the matter the more sure, they determined to elect Lambert Abbot of Saint
Augustines for their Archbishop, assuring themselves he would now be as
earnest a defender of their liberties; as he had heertofore been an oppugner
in the behalf of S. Augustins. In his time Offa King of Mercia erected a new
Archbishopricke at Litch^^eld, and obtained of the Pope authority for Eadulfus
Bishop there to govern the Diocesses of Worcester, Legecester, Siduacester,
Hereford, Helmham and Dunwich. So that Canterbury had left unto him for his
Province only these, London, Winchester, Rochester, and Sherborne. Some say
that Lambert consented unto this alteration; others report that he spared no
cost to reduce things to their oulde estate. He sat many years, and
perceauing his end to approach, took order to be buried in Saint Augustines,
infringing by that means the grants and privileges of the monks of
Christchurch, obtained for the burial of the Archbishops amongst them. He dyed
Aug. 12. 790. and was very honorably enterred in the Chapter House of Saint
Augustines.

14. Athelard or Edelred.
793
AThelard was first Abbot of Malmesbury, then Bishop of Winchester and lastly
consecrated Archbishop: July. 21. 793. A man of great virtue and excellently
learned. Offa soon after this being dead, together with his son Egfride;
Athelard made earnest suit unto Kenulfe the son of Cuthbert, then King of
Mercia that he would restore unto the Sea of Canterbury, the revenues and
jurisdiction taken from it wrongfully by Offa: Heereunto Kenulfus without much
ado readily assented, as also Leo the third then Pope. Unto whom he traveled
in person about that business. He sat about an eight or nine years, as most
report; Malmsbury (to whom I give credit in that behalf) says 13: and dying
the year 806. was buried in Christ Church to the great coffeehouse of the
monks of S. Augustines.

15. Wlfred.
WLfred being a monk^ of Christchurch in Canterbury was made Archbishop at
Rome by Leo the third. 807
And the ninth year after his consecration he went to Rome about some
business of his Church not recorded. He died the year 830. and was buried at
Canterbury in his own Church.

16. Theologild.
AFter Wlfred, 832
Theologild or Fleogild sometimes Abbot of Canterbury was Archbishop, for the
space of 3. months, and dying was buried also in Christ church. One named
Syred succeeded him; but being taken away before he had full possession, is not
reckoned amongst the Archbishops.

17. Celnoth.
CElnoth that is said to have been Deane of the Church of Canterbury, 832
succeeded Theologild and continued Archbishop 38. years, died anno 870. as
most deliver. William Malmsbury allotteth unto him only 41. months. His time
was exceeding troublesome by reason of the continual invasions of the Danes:
yet no memory remains of any action of his in so long space of so memorable
a time. He died anno 870. and lies buried in Christchurch in Canterbury.

18. Athelredus.
AThelredus a great divine, 871
sometimes a monk of Christ Church in Canterbury, and then Bishop of
Winchester, was Archbishop after Celnoth 18. years. In his time all the
monasteries of England, were destroyed by the Danes; so as, for the space of
90. years after, monkerie ceased throughout the realm; yea in the North parts
there was not seen^ any ei^^ther monk or nun in two hundred years after,
viz. until about the middle of the reign of William Conqueror. Married priests
every where inhabited monasteries; whence for a long time after with much ado
they were hardly removed. This Athelredus died anno 889. and (as in a manner
all his successors) was buried in his Church of Christ in Canterbury.

19. Plegmund.
889
PLegmund the most excellent learned man of his time was borne in the kingdom
of Mercia. In his youth he first dedicated himself unto a solitary life and
lived an Hermit in the Island of Chester, which of him (as it should seem)
was wont to be called Plegmundsham. He was taken thence to teach Alfred that
was afterward king of England. Being chosen Archbishop, he traveled to Rome in
person, and was there consecrate. Soon after his return (to requite belike
the courtesy he had found there) he took great pains in collecting the
alms of al men well disposed through the land, which the king sent together
with much treasure of his own unto the Pope by Athelmus Bishop of Winchester,
appointing a certain portion of the same to be conveyed unto Jerusalem.
Marianus then Pope, a little before had gratified the King diverse ways: He had
granted immunity of tribute unto the Saxons school at Rome, and sent sundry
presents unto him; namely (amongst other things) a piece of wood that was (as
he would make the King believe) part of the cross upon which our Savior
suffered death. By this contribution his kindness was sufficiently requited.
The most memorable action of this Archbishop is, that the year 905. he
consecrated seven Bishops in one day. By reason of continual wars, all the
province of the West Saxons had been without any Bishop seven years: Which
Formosus the Pope imputing unto the negligence of the King, sent out an
excommunication against him. He therefore caused Plegmund the Archbishop to
call a convocation, wherein it was ordered, that the country of the Gewisses
(which till that time had ^ut two Bishops, one at Winchester, another at
Shirburne) should hereafter have five; viz. besides the Sees before named,
Wels in Sommersetshire, Criditon in Devonshire, and Saint Petro^ks in Cornwall.
Unto Winchester was appointed Frithstan, to Shirburne Wolstan, to Criditon
Cedulfe, and to Saint Petrocks Athelstan. Moreover at the same time were
consecrate with them, Bernegus Bishop of the South Saxons, and Kenulsus Bishop
of Dor^hester. Plegmund sat Archbishop 26. years, and dying anno 915. was
buried in his own Church.

20. Athelmu^.
AThelm that had been Abbot of Glastoubury and (as before is mentioned) was
appointed the first Bishop of Wells, 915
was chosen to succeed Plegmund in Canterbury. William of Malmesbury says
that this Archbishop laid the first foundation of the Abbey of Malmesburie:
but it seems to be more ancient th^n so. He sat nine years, died anno 924.
and was buried with his predecessors.

21. Wlfelmus.
WLfelm succeeded Athelm, 924
first in Wels, and then afterward in Canterbury also. He continued there ten
years, and died. anno. 934.

22. Odo Seuerus.
ODo was borne in the country of the East Angles. 934
His parents were Danes, of great wealth and nobility, but Pagans and utter
enemies of Christ and Christian religi^n, insomuch as, they disinherited their
son Odo for keeping company with Christians. He therefore forsaking his
country, betook himself to the service of a noble man in the Court of King
Edward the older named Ethelelm; who perceiving in him a great forwardnes and
excellency of wit, set him to school, where he profited exceedingly. He was
not baptized till he was come even unto man's estate. Soon after his baptism,
by the Council of his Lord and Master he entered into orders and became a
Deacon; in which office he continued preaching very painefully, until at last
he was made Priest. Some report that he served in the wars, some while under
King Edward before he came a Clergy man; and it is not unlikely. For after he
was Bishop he was thrice in the field, and did his prince notable service. He
was preferred to the Bishopric of Wiltshire (the Sea whereof was then seated
at Ramsbury) by the special favor of King Athelstan the year 920. King
Athelstan being dead, Edmund his brother (that succeeded) favoring him no
less th^n his brother had done; upon the death of Wlfhelm, procured him to be
chosen Archbishop. A great while Odo refused (because he was no monk) to take
that charge upon him; saying, that never any man had held that place hitherto
but he was a monk. Therein he was deceived. For Nothelmus and two or three
other before him were secular priests, and not monks. But he resolute in this
error, and leath to break the dance, was persuaded first to become a monk of
Floriake in France; and that done, accepted of the election. He continued
Archbishop 24. years, in great favor and authority under diverse Princes,
Edmund, Edward, Athelstan, and Eadred. Toward the latter end of his time,
Edwyn a young Gentleman obtained the Crown, with whom he had very ill
agreement. He^ caused him to be divorced from his Queenz some say for
consanguinity, some allege other resons. He excommunicated his Concubines, and
causing one of them whom the King doted unreasonably upon, to be fetched out of
the Court by violence, burnt her in the forehead with a hot iron, and banished
her into Ireland. These things exasperated the King much against him: But he
was taken away by death soon after, and so delivered from all fear of the
Kings displeasure. He was buried on the south side of the high altar, in a
tomb built somewhat after the form of a Pyramid. I take it to be the tomb of
touchstone standing in the grate near the steps that lend up to S. Thomas
Chapel. After his death (which happened the year 958.) Elsinus Bishop of
Winchester (that could never break Odo in his life time) by bribery and
corrupt means obtained election unto Canterbury, and coming thither, spurned
at his tomb despitefully, using these speeches, now at last (quoth he) thou
art dead old dotard, and much against thy will have left thy place unto a man
woorthier of it th^n thy self. Our stories report, that the next night Odo
appeered unto him in his sleep, threatening a speedy and fearful vengeance of
this insolency. According unto which prediction it fell out, that traveling to
Rome for his pall, upon the Alps he was so oprressed with cold, as he was
constrained to put his feet wherewith he had so contumeliously disgraced his
deceased predecessor, into the bollies of his horses, and yet at last to die
for cold. Brithelm Bishop of Wels was then chosen Archbishop, a virtuous and
meek man, but not very fit for government: In regard whereof, King Edgar
entreated him, and he easily condiscended, to abide still at his old charge.

23. Dunstan.
WIth the approbation of all men Dunstan Bishop of London was then elected to
this Metropoliticall See. 961
Of whom I know not how to write, that which is delivered of him is so
infinite. But I will hold my self within my determined bounds, and send the
Reader that is desirous to hear more of him unto other histories. He was
borne in Somersetshire of good parentage: his Fathers name was Herstan, and his
mothers Kinedcid. He was brought up for the most part in the Abbey of
Glastonbury, where beside other good learning he was also taught to sing, play
upon instruments, to paint and carue, in all which he proved very excellent.
From thence he went unto Athelm Archbishop of Canterbury his uncle, who
commended him unto the King; And he partly for the good parts he saw in him,
partly also for that he was near of kin unto him, made very much of him. So
he lived in the Court a while, till for a certain miracle (as the monks call
it, which was then imputed to Coniuration) with much disgrace he was driven out
of the Court. After this he betook himself unto the service of Elphege Bishop
of Winchester, another uncle of his, who persuaded him continually to become a
monk. He could not hear of that side in any wise, till upon a time falling
dangerously ^icke, and thinking his disease a plague sent of God for his
backwardness in that holy course where to his uncle directed him, in great
have professed himself a monk. This done, and having recovered his health,
he went to his first nurse Glastonbury, leading there (in outward show at
least) an exceeding strait life. King Edward hearing great fame of his
holiness, sent for him unto the Court; where he lived in very diverse
reputation, sometimes judged too familiar with fair women, sometimes accounted
a coniurer, but for the most part admired as a most holy and virtuous man.
Under two princes, Edmund and Eldred (with whom he was most gracious) he ruled
all things at his pleasure. Edwyn the son of king Edmund that succeeded
Eldred, could in no wise brook him. Some say it was because Dunstan was
forward in reprehending the kings vices; as namely, that when the king rising
from the feast of his coronation^ went immediately to his chamber, where a
certain beautiful Concubine attended his coming; Dunstan that had gotten
some inkling of the business he went about, followed him boldly, and forced
him not only to leave that enterprise for that time, but also to forswear the
company of that woman. But the undoubted ground of this dislike was this.
Dunstan had so bewitched the former kings with the love of monkery, as they not
only took violently from married Priests their livings to e^ect monasteries,
but also spent very lauishly of their own treasures, which they should rather
have employed in resisting the common enemy both of God and their country the
Dane. King Edwyn perceiving all the wealth of the land to be crept into
monasteries, not only restrained to bestow more upon them, but recalled diverse
of these prodigal gifts his predecessors had made; and when the monks refused
to render them at his demand, he became a very bitter persecutor of them, and
their patrons. Dunstane therefore seeing nothing before him at home but danger
and continual disgrace, got him away into France, and there lived in
banishment the space of a year. In the mean time King Edwyn by the rebellion
of his subjects (at the instigation it is likely of our monks, and their
favorers) was deprived both of his life and kingdom. Edgar that succeeded,
warned by his brothers example, was content to eurry favor with them, and to
that purpose restored whatsoever was taken from them; and not only called home
Dunstan, but promoted him, first unto the Bishopric of Worcester, soon after
of London, and lastly having been but two years at London, to the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury. In that place he continued 27. years, applying
all his endeavors to the enriching of monks and monasteries inhabited by them,
persecuting and hunting married Priests every where out of their living. He died
at last May 19. 988. and was long after canonised a Saint.

24. Ethelgar.
AFter Dunstan succeeded Aethelgar sometimes a Monk of Glastonbury; 988
afterward Abbot of the new abbey of Winchester; then Bishop of Seolsey, and
lastly made Archbishop of Canterbury 989. He continued in that See only one
year and three months: Dying then he was buried in his own Church. Some say
that he put out Monks from his Church, and brought in secular Priests in
their rooms.

25. Siricius.
SIricius of a monk of Glastonbury was made Abbot of S. Augustine in
Canterbury by Dunstan, 989
and by his means preferred to the Bishopric of Winchester (as one says)
but it was of Wiltshire or Wilton, and not Winchester. Ethelgar being dead, he
bacame Archbishop the year 989. He is blamed much in our histories for
persuading to buy peace of the Danes with 10000. pounds. He sat four years,
died 993. and was buried at Canterbury.

26. Aluricius alias Alfricus.
ALuricius was also brought up at Glastonbury, 993
and succeeded Siricius first at Wilton in the Bishopric there, then at
Canterbury. He died an. 1006. and was buried first at Abingdon, but was
afterward removed to Canterbury. This man in the catalogue of Malmsbury is
omitted.

27. Elphege.
1006
ELphege was borne of great parentage, and spent his yoonger years in the
monastery of Hirst, where he first entered into religion. After his departure
thence he became Prior of Glanstonbury (as Malmsbury says) which place after a
season he left and gave himself to a very strait kind of life at Bathe, for
which he was so much admired (the rather because he was a gentleman of great
linnage) as many went about to imitate him, and joining themselves to him, made
him their governor by the name of an Abbot. Having lived so a certain space,
he was called to the Bishopric of Winchester the year 984. There he continued
12. years, and the year 1006. was removed to Canterbury. He was a man of
wonderful abstinence, never eating, drinking or sleeping more th^n necessity
compelled him; spending his time altogether either in prayer, study or other
necessary business. So that what with preaching and example of holy life he
converted many unto Christ. The year 1012. it happened the Danes to be
disappointed of certain tribute which they claimed as due unto them: For want
whereof they spoiled and burnt the city and Church of Canterbury. The monks
and people thereof, men, women and children they tithed; putting nine to the
sword, and letting go a tenth only: So for 804. that were suffered to escape,
7236. went to the pot. As for the Archbishop, they kept him in prison s^uen
months, and at last put him to death at Greenwitch. The vengeance of God
suffered not these cruel hell hounds to escape unpunished: By sundry kinds of
mis^ortune they were little and little in a manner all consumed very shortly
after. The body of Elphege was first buried in Saint Paul's Church in London,
afterward carried to Canterbury, by the commandment of King Knute and there
enterred. He was made a Saint and allowed the 19. day of April for
celebration of his memory.

28. Liunig alias Lifwing.
LIunig surnamed Eistan was first Bishop of Wells, 1013
and translated to Canterbury soon after the death of Elphege. His time was
very troublesome, by reason of the continual invasion o^ the Danes. Besides
many other calamities, he endured seven months imprisonment at their hands;
from which being delivered, he departed into voluntary exile, and bewailed
there the misery of his country, until such time as King Swanus being dead and
Ethelred returning, all troubles were appeased. So it pleased God to suffer him
at last to end his days in peace the year 1020. when he had been
Archbishop about 7. years.

29. Agelnothus alias Aethelnotus.
AGelnothus surnamed The Good, 1020
was the son of an Earl called Agelmare, and is said to have been Deane of
Christchurch in Canterbury, which at that time was replenished for the most
part with canons wearing the habit and garments of monks, but in profession
and manner of life differing much from them. Therefore when as in that same
terrible tithing of the Danes mentioned in the life of Elphege all the monks
were slain except only four; the canons that were now the greater number,
gave unto their governor the name of Deane. From this place Agelnoth was taken
to be Archbishop. Malmsbury says he was sometimes a monk of Glastonbury, and
therefore procured from king Knute a confirmation of the old privileges of
that Abbey, the charter whereof he exemplifieth De reg. 1. c. 11. Going to Rome
to fetch his pal, he bought (as one reports) an arm of that blessed Father
S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo for an hundred talents of silver and a talent of
gold, and bestowed it upon the Church of Couentry. He sustained great pains
and cost in repairing his church and monastery destroyed and burnt by the
Danes, and by his good advise directed king Knute (that favored him
exceedingly) unto many honorable enterprises. He died at last having sat
Archbishop 17. years and upward, October 29. an. 1038.

30. Eadsin.
1038
EAdsin was a secular Priest, and first Chapleine unto King Harold, who
preferred him to the Bishopric of Winchester. Thence he was removed to
Canterbury soon after the death of Agelnoth. He continued Archbishop almost
12. years: All which time he was so oppressed with sickness, as he could not
attend his pastoral charge, but was feign to commit the same to another: and
he made choice of one Siward, Abbot of Abingdon, whom he termed sometimes
Vicarium suum, sometimes Chorepiscopum, and sometimes Archiepiscopi vices
moderantem. He discharged not his duty according to the trust reposed in him:
For he abused much not only his authority, but also the goods, yea and person
also of the Archbishop that committed the same unto him. In regard whereof,
though Eadsinus besought the King and other about him very earnestly, that he
might succeed him, (not knowing belike how ill he was used so well as they)
yet they would not condescend thereunto: but bestowed upon him the Bishopric
of Rochester. Henry Huntingdon says he was consecrated Archbishop, and
Florent Wig: says he died some little space before Eadsin. But they are both
mistaken I think. As for Edsinus himself, certain it is, he departed this
life October 28. 1050. was buried in his own Church, and after his death made
a Saint.

31. Robert, surnamed Gemeticensis.
1050
RObert a Norman succeeded by the favor of King Edward the Confessor, with
whom he became acquainted, at what time he was exiled into Normandy. He
preferred him first unto London, and then presently after the death of Eadsin
unto Canterbury. This man is said to have laid the first foundation of the
Normanes conquest in England, persuading ye king to make Duke William his heir;
whereunto when the King had condescended, himself became the mesenger of this
good tidings unto the Duke, taking Harold with him; peradventure to that
purpose, that he might so hamper him with an oath (as indeed he did) and so
bar him from all possibility of the kingdom. This oath Harold afterward
broke; but he spedde thereafter, loosing his life and ill-gotten kingdom both
together. The Arcbishop now assuring himself of the favor not only of the
King present, but of him also that was to succeed: could not endure that any
should bear so great sway as himself in Court, and therefore fell to devising
how he might overthrow Emma the Kings mother, who only seemed to ouertop him.
He began therefore to beat in^to the Kings head (that was a mild and
soft-natured Prince) how hard a hand his mother had held upon him when he lived
in Normandy; how likely it was that his brother came to his death by the
practice of her and Earl Godwyn; and lastly that she used the company of Alwyn
Bishop of Winchester, somewhat more familiarly th^n was for her honor. The King
somewhat too rashly crediting these tales without any further examination or
debating of the matter, seized upon all his mothers goods, and committed her to
prison in the Nunry of Warwell; vanished Earl Godwyn and his sons; and
commanded Alwyn upon pain of death not to come forth of the gates of
Winchester. The Queen made the best friends she could to be called to her
answer: But the Archbishop so possessed the king, as other trial of her
innocence might not be allowed th^n this. She must walk over nine plowshares
red hot in the midst of the Cathedral Church of Winchester. If either she
performed not this kind of purgation, or were found any thing at all hurt, she
and the Bishop both should be esteemed guilty: If otherwise, the Archbishop
was content to submit himself to such punishment as they should have endured.
To make short, the Queen led between two Bishops in open sight of all the
people, performed (as all our histories report) this hard kind of purgation,
and so acquitted her self and Alwyn the Bishop of these crimes objected. The
king then greatly bewailing the wrong done to his mother, asked her forgiveness
upon his knees, restored both her and the Bishop unto their goods and former
places; and lastly (to make some satisfaction for his fault committed) would
needs be whipped by the hands of the Bishops there present, and receiving
three stripes of his mother, was by her clearly forgiven, and the wrong
promised for ever hereafter to be forgotten. Emma now and the Bishop to show
themselves thank^full unto God for his miraculous deliverance, for a perpetual
memorial of the same, gave each of them unto the monastery of S. Swithun nine
Manors, in remembrance of the nine plowshares. This gift of theirs the King
confirmed, and gave moreover two Manners of his own; to wit, Meones and
Portland. Now to return unto the Archbishop; he doubting of the success of
this matter, under pretense of sickness held himself at Dover; and as soon as
he heard how the world went, well knowing England would prove too hot for
him, he got him over into his own Country to the Abbey of Gemetica where he
was brought up, and there overcome (it is like with shame and sorrow) within a
short time after ended his days, and was buried in the Monastery aforesaid,
having been Archbishop about the space of two yeer^^ or scarcely so much.

32. Stigand.
1052.
STigand was Chaplain unto King Edward the Confessor, and preferred by him
first unto the Bishopric of the East Saxons and Helmham 1043. and after unto
Winchester the year 1047. He was a man stout and wise enough, but very
unlearned (as in a manner all the Bishops were of those times) and unreasonable
covetous. Perceiving the King highly displeased with Robert the Archbishop, he
thrust himself into his room (not expecting either his death, deprivation or
other auoydence) without any performance of usual ceremonies. And whether it
were that he mistrusted his title to Canterbury, or inexcusable covetousness
I cannot tell; certain it is, that he kept Winchester also together with
Canterbury, even until a little before his death he was forced to forgo them
both. Many times he was cited unto Rome about it; but by gifts, delays and
one means or other he drove it off, never being able to procure his pall
thence so long as King Edward lived. William the Conqueror having slain king
Harold in the field, all England yielded presently unto his obedience, except
only Kentishmen, who following the counsel of Stigand and Egelsin the Abbot
of S. Augustines, gathered al their forces together at Swanscombe near
Grauesend, and there attended the coming of the King (who doubted of no such
matter) every man holding a green bough in his hand; whereby it came to pass
that he was in the midst of them before he dreamed of any such business
toward. He was greatly amazed at the first, till he was given to understand
by Stigand, there was no hurt meant unto him, so that he would grant unto
that country their ancient liberties, and suffer them to be governed by their
former customs and laws, called then and till this day Gauelkind. These
things he easily yielded unto, upon this armed intercession, and afterward
very honorably performed: But he conceived so profound a displeasure against
Stigand for it as he never ceased till he had revenged it with the others
destruction. A while he gave him very good countenance, calling him Father,
meeting him upon the way when he understood of his repair toward him, and
affoording him all kind of gracious and favorable usage both in words and
behavior: but it lasted not long. The first sign of his hidden rancour and
hatred toward him was, that he would not suffer himself to be crowned by
him, but made choice of Aldred Archbishop of York: for which he alleged
other reasons, as that he had not yet received his pall, etc. But the matter
was, he was loath in that action to acknowledge him for Archbishop. Soon after
his coronation, he departed into Normandy carrying with him Stigand and many
English nobles, under pretense to do them honor: But in truth he stood in
doubt least in his absence they should practice somewhat against him: And
namely Stigand he knew to be a man of a haughty spirit, subtle, rich,
gracious and of great power in his Country. Presently upon his return,
certain Cardinals arrived in England, sent from the Pope as Legates to
redress (as they said) certain enormities and abuses of the English Clergy.
Stigand by and by perceiving himself to be the mark that was specially shot
at, hid himself a while in Scotland with Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and
after in the Isle of Ely. At last perceiving a convocation to be called at
Winchester, he came thither and besought the King in regard of his own honor,
and the promise made unto him at Swanscombe (which was, not to be offended
with him or any other for their attempt at that time) to save him from the
calamity he saw growing toward him, which he could not impute unto any thing
so probably, as his undeserved displeasure. The king answered him with very
gentle words, that he was so far from endeavoring to take any revenge of
that or any other matter, as he loved him, and wished he knew how to protect
him from the danger imminent: But that which was to be done at that time,
must be done by the Popes authority, which he might not countermand. So do
what he could, he was deprived of his livings by these legates. The causes
alleged against him were these; First, that he had held Canterbury and
Winchester both together (which was no very strange thing; for Saint Oswald had
long before held Worcester with York, and S. Dunstan Worcester with London.)
Secondly, that he had invaded the Sea of Canterbury, Robert the Archbishop
being yet alive vndepriued; And lastly that he presumed to use the pall of his
predecessor Robert left at Canterbury, and had never received any pall but of
Pope Benedict, at what time he stood excommunicate for simony and other like
crimes. In the same convocation many other Prelates were deprived of their
promotions as Agelmare Bishop of Helmham brother unto Stigand, diverse Abbots
and men of meaner places. All which was done by the procurement of the King,
that was desirous to place his countrymen in the rooms of the deprived for the
establishment of his new-gotten kingdom. Poor Stigand being thus deprived, as
though he had not yet harm enough, was also clapped up presently in prison
within the Castle of Winchester, and very hardly used there, being scarcely
allowed meat enough to hold life and soul together. That was thought to be
done to force him to confess where his treasure lay, whereof being demanded,
he protested with great oaths he had no money at all; hoping belike so to
procure his liberty the rather, and then to make himself merry with that he
had laid up against such a dear year. He died soon after of sorrow and
grief of mind, or (as some report) of voluntary famine, 17. years after he
first obtained the Archbishopricke. After his death, a little key was found
about his neck; the lock whereof being carefully sought out, showed a nete or
direction of infinite treasures hid under ground in diverse places. All that the
King pursed in his own coffers. The bones of this Archbishop lie entoombed at
this day upon the top of the north wall of the Presbytery of the Church of
Winchester in a coffin of lead, upon the north side whereof are written these
words, Hic iacet Stigandus Archiepiscopus. He was deprived ann. 1069. and died
within the compass of the same year.

33. Lanfrank.
STigand being yet alive, 1070. W. Con. 5
but deprived as is beforesaid, Lanfrank was consecrate Archbishop. This
Lanfrank was borne at Papia in Lumbardie, twenty miles from My^laine, being of
the house and family of the Beccarij, who derived their pedigree from Carus and
Numerianus Emperors of Rome, as Hier: Hennenges author of Theatrum
Genealogicu^ delivers: there, (to wit at Papia) he was brought up in all good
learning, till being come unto man's state, he determined to travel. Through
France he came into Normandy, provoked by the same, and great reports, he had
heard of Eluin, or Herlewin abbot of Becco. Upon the way thitherward, it was
his hap to be encountered with thieves that spoiled him of all he had, bound
him and threw him into a thicket; where he might have perished with cold and
hunger, had not God sent some extraordinary company that way that loosed him,
having la^en there only one night. Thence he got him unto the Monastery of
Becco, and for very want and penury, was feign to become a Reader of Logic
there, until he was admitted to the place of a Monk. Soon^ after that, he
was made Prior of Becco; whence in regard of his singular wisdom and great
knowledge in all good learning (that those times could afford) he was called
by Duke William to be Abbot of S. Stephens in Cane, a monastery that the said
Duke had founded. Now Stigand being displaced in manner above rehearsed, the
Conqueror well knowing how much it behooued him to the establishment of his
new erected throne in England, to have a man wise and faithful in that place^
made a special choice of him, as one in all respects most fit and worthy;
which being well known to all men, the Covent at the Kings first nomination
readily chose him, the nobility and courtiers willingly assented, and received
him with great applause, and lastly the Pope affoorded him his pall with
extraordinary favor. It is said, at his first coming the Pope rose up unto
him and met him, telling him he yielded him that honor, not of duty, but in
regard of his excellent learning, whereof he had heard great fame. Thomas
Archbishop of York was present the same time, together with Remigius Bishop
of Dorchester. This Thomas had been lately consecrated unto York by
Lanfranke, and for a certain time refused to make profession of obedience unto
the Sea of Canterbury, even until by the commandment of the King he was
enforced thereunto. Now whether it were coffeehouse and persuasion of a
wrong, or else envy at Lanfrankes either virtue or good fortune that moved him,
he presently began to make complaint unto the Pope of a great injury offered
unto his See, in the demand of his profession. Lanfranke pleaded prescription
for his right, and offered to make proof of the same. The Pope therefore not
willing to trouble himself any more with the matter, committed the hearing
thereof unto the king, who in the year 1072. judged it for Canterbury. See
more of this quarrel in Thomas of York. Lanfranke himself was consecrated
very solemnly at Canterbury, all the Bishops in England being present
themselves, or by their Proctors, August, 29. or (as Hou^den delivers) on
Midsommer day, 1070. Almost 18. years he continued Archbishop, governing his
charge laudably, and happily, till that about the end of his time, one action
obscured his former praises, and furthermore was the cause of many great
calamities unto him. It is thought that William the Conqueror left the
Kingdom of England unto his younger son William Rufus, at the persuasion
especially of this Archbishop, who the rather wished well unto the young Prince,
because he had been brought up under him in his childhoode. He is blamed much
for putting the eldest son Robert from that which might seem in some sort
due unto him; and surely God blessed him not in that action. The King thus
advanced by him, fell out with him, and drove him out of the realm. The cause
of this displeasure is diversely reported: But most men agree it was none other
th^n this, that the King thought him a little too busy in exhorting him to
virtue and godliness, and reprehending his manifold vices. Being thus
banished, he travailed to Rome, and wandered up and down many countries, till at
last (by what intercession I find not) he was suffered to come home again.
Soon after his return, he fell sick of an ague, and died of the same
according to his own desire. For it is remembered he would often wish he might
take his end either by a flux or an ague, for that in those kind of infirmities
men are wont to have the use both of speech and memory to the last cast. He
deceased (as most write) Iun. 4. or (as Houeden, Florentius, Wigorn, and other
deliver) May 24. 1089. He was buried at Canterbury in his own Church, unto
which he was a great benefactor. He bestowed much upon the fabrike and
reparation of the same, built much housing for the Monks (whose number he
increased from 30. to 140) restored the dignities and offices of old belonging
to the Monastery, and recovered unto the same 25. Mannor^ that had been taken
from it wrongfully in times past by Odo Bishop of Bayon and Earl of Kent.
Moreover he built the Archbishoppes pa^ace at Canterbury in a manner all, he
founded two Hospitals without the City of Canterbury, and endowed them with
competent revenues; (S. John's and Harbaldown) He bestowed large money toward the
building of the Cathedral Church of Rochester, (or rather indeed built it all)
gave a Manor also unto it, and did much (the particulars I cannot set down)
for the Abbey of Saint Alb^ns. He was a great Student, writ diverse learned
works, and (which deserves especial remembrance) took great pains in
reformiug the Bible, the copies whereof were much corrupted throughout England
by the negligence of the Writers.

34. Anselm.
1093. W. Rufus. 7
Four years the Sea continued void, after the death of Lanfranke, and the
King pursed the profits thereof. In what good mood I know not, he which was
wont to sell all other Ecclesiastical promotions as it were by the drum,
bestowed this Archbishopricke freely, upon a most worthy man, Anselm Abbot of
Becco. This Anselm was horn at Augusta a City of Burgundy standing at the foot
of the Alps. His fathers name was Gundulfe (a man of great account in his
Country) and his mothers Hemeberg. He came unto Becco of the like errand as
Lanfranke had done, moved thereunto by the great fame of the said Lanfranke,
and professed himself a Monk there in the 27. year of his age. Lanfranke
being called away to Cane, he was made Prior, and soon after Abbot; Eluin, or
Herlewin, the old Abbot being dead. In that place he continued 15. years, and
then was earnestly requested by Hugh Earl of Chester lying bery sick, to come
into England unto him to confer with him, and to order certain affairs of
his. H^ther he came and had much honor done him every where of all sorts of
people. The King himself amongst the rest, beside many verbal favors, made
offer unto him of the Archbishopricke of Canterbury; verily hoping belike that
a man given to Monastical contemplation, and not esteeming worldly pomp,
would undoubtedly have refused the same: For it is certain, that after Anselm
had accepted the offer, pitying belike the spoil and desolation of the Church
for want of a pastor; the King would feign have retracted his gift, and
persuaded him with many reasons to leave it; showing him how the burden and
trouble of the place was greater than he should be able to endure, a man that
had spent his time within the walls of a Monastery, and not experienced in
managing of great affairs. But he lost his labor: Anselm kept fast his hold,
and was soon after consecrated by Walkelin Bishop of Winchester, or (as I
find also recorded) by Thomas Archbishop of York, December. 4. 1093. all the
Bishops of the land that could possibly come, being present at that solemnity.
Presently after his consecration, the king and he fell out. Not long before,
the king had thrown down thirty churches to make his new forest near
Winchester. This Anselm reprehended him sharply for, and besought him to amend
that and other faults; as namely his simony, his extortion, his cruelty, etc.
wherein he daily offended God grievously, and greatly dishonored himself.
This admonition of his displeased the king very much; but his quarrel in show
was none other then this, that asking leave to go to Rome to fetch his pall,
he had named Urban Pope, whom the king as yet had not acknowledged for Pope;
and for so doing, accused him of no less than high treason. After great stir
and much ado between them about this matter, it was determined that all the
abbots and Bishops of England should be called together to judge of this
controversy. They met at Rochingham Castle; and the matter being proposed by
the king, for fear or flattery they all assented unto him, and forsook their
Archbishop, except only Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester. A while he endured to
live in continual fear and disgrace, even until he was commanded out of the
Realm by the king. Being at Dover ready to take ship, all his carriages were
searched, his goods there and elsewhere soever taken from him and fold to the
kings use, his temporalties seized, and himself set a land in France in a
manner naked. He traveled presently to Lions, and was sent for thence by the
Pope. At his first coming to Rome, he had all manner of favor: But by that
time the king with golden eloquence had informed him of the cause, his
entertainment began to war colder. He determined therefore to have returned to
Lions, but was stayed by the Pope; whose pleasure while he was content to
awaite a while longer, the Pope dyed. Soon after him, the King died also;
being chanceably slain by the glance of an arrow as he was hunting in that
forest, for the making whereof, Anselm had reprehe^ded him. This king was a
very vicious prince, conetous in getting, and prodigal in spending, the most
sacrilegious symonist that ever reigned in England. Rejoicing in the gain he
made that way, he would often say, Panis Christi panis pinguis. His death as
some report was miraculously signified unto Anselme in France. A paper was put
into the hands of one of his Chaplains no man knew how, in which was found
written, Galielmus Rufus occisus est. Within a few days after, certain word
was brought of the tyrants death, and this notice taken as sent from heaven.
Henry the first succeeded William Rufus in the kingdom, who presently called
home Anselme, and restored him to his former place. The first thing he did at
his return, he called a convocation at London, wherein he deprived many
Prelates of great place for their several offenses, Guy Abbot of Windham and
Eldwyn of Ramsey for symony; Geffry of Peterburgh, Haymo of Cherwell, and
Egelrie of Middleton for not being in orders; Richard of Ely, and Robert of S.
Edmunds, all Abbots, for other enormities. Diverse canons were agreed upon in
the same convocation too long to rehearse: Some of them tended to the
restraining of Clergy men from marriage, which notwithstanding many married
daily, and many that came for orders refused utterly to make profession of
chastity, as we may see reported by Girard Archbishop of York in an Epistle
written by him unto Anselm in the end of S. Anselmes Epistles. The falling out
also of Anselme with the King (which happened presently after) was a great
weakening unto these Canons. All the time that the Archbishop was absent (which
was three years) the King had disposed of all Bishoprics that fell, at his
pleasure, giving inuestiture and possession of them, by delivery of the staff
and the ring. And indeed the Princes in a manner of all Christendom, had taken
this kind of authority unto themselves every where about this time. Bishops
thus appointed, demanded consecration of Anselm, which he utterly denied unto
them, prosessing withal, that he would never receive, or repute them for
Bishops that were already consecrated by other upon such election; alleging
how it was lately forbidden in a Council held by Pope Urban the second, that
any Clerk should take inuestiture of any spiritual preferment at the hand of
any King, Prince or other lay man. The king upon Anselms refusal, required
Gerard Archbishop of York, to give these Bishops consecration; whereunto
he readily assented. But William Gifford nominated to Winchester stood so in
awe of Anselm, as that he durst not accept consecration at Gerards hands. This
incensed the King wonderfully; so as presently he commanded Giffards goods to
be confiscate, and himself banished the Realm. Great adoo now there was
about this matter throughout the realm; some defending the Kings right, others
taking part with the Archbishop. In the end, the King doubting what might come
of it, and being loath to give occasion of tumult, considering that himself
was a stranger borne, and that his father by force and much bloodshed, had not
many years since obtained the rule of this land: he determined to send an
Ambassador to the Pope, together with the Archbishop, so to grow to some
reasonable conclusion. The Pope ( Paschalis 2.) would not yield one jot unto
the King: insomuch as, when the kings Ambassador William Warelwast (after
Bishop of Exce^ter) said he knew the King would rather loose his crown then
this privilege; he answered, yea, let him loose his head also if he will,
while I live he shall never appoint Bishop but I will resist him what I may. So
without doing any good, homeward they came. But the king understanding before
hand how the world went, sent a messenger to forbid Anselm entrance into the
Realm, and presently seized all his goods mooneable and immovable into his
hands. Three years more he spent in exile, all which time he lived with Hugh
Archbishop of Lions. At last it pleased God to open this passage of his
reconciliation to the King. Adela Countess of Bloys, the Kings sister, fell
dangerously sick in those parts, where it chanced the Archbishop to abide. He
went to visit her, and yielded so great comfort unto her in that time of her
distress, as recovering afterward, she never reased importuning her brother,
until she had wrought an agreement between them, the conditions whereof were
these; First, that Anselme should be content to consecrate the Bishops already
nominated by the king: And then that the king should renounce all right to such
nomination or inuestiture for the time to come. These conditions were allowed
by the Pope, and the Archbishop restored not only to his place, but to all his
goods and fruits gathered in the time of his absence. Two years he lived
after this his last return: in which time he persecuted married Priests very
extremely. Dunstan, Oswald, Ethelwald, and other enemies to the marriage of
Clergy men, had only expelled them out of Monasteries that had wives: But
Anselme utterly forbidding them marriage, deprived them of their promotions
that were married, con^iscated their goods unto the Bishop of the Dioces,
adjudged them and their wives adulterers, and forced all that entered into
orders to vow chastity. Half the Clergy of England at this time were either
married men, or the sons of married Priests. The king therefore pitying the
generality of this calamity, sought to protect them a while from Anselmes
severity in this point: But he (I mean Anselm) was a little too resolute in
all his determinations; in so much as he might never be persuaded to yield
one jot in any thing he once intended. So, notwithstanding the Kings
inclination to succor so many distressed poor families, the Canons of the
Convocation before mentioned were generally put in execution throughout
England. About this time it happened Gerard Archbishop of York to decease, and a
second Thomas to be elected for his successor. What adoo there was between him
and Anselme about profession of obedience, and how it was ended, see in the
history of the said Thomas. To make an end at last with this Archbishop, the
year 1109. he fell extremely sick at Saint Edmundsbury, and thence got him
to Canterbury, where he lay languishing a long time, and at last departed this
life, April 21. in the 16. year of his government, and of his age 76. He was
first buried at the head of his predecessor Lanfranke, but removed after to
the east end of his Church of Canterbury (upon the building and beautifying
whereof, he had bestowed very much money.) And almost 400. years after by the
procurement of John Moorton one of his successors was canonized a Saint. A man
of great learning as his works yet extant testify, whereof one entitled, Cur
Deus homo, he writ in the Abbey of Telesin in Italy, while there he waited the
Popes leisure; An other, De processione Spiritus Sancti, contains principally
the effect of a Sermon preached at the Council of Barum, in the presence of
certain Grecian Prelates, whose Church has long dissented from us in opinion
concerning that matter. As for the life and conversation of Anselm, it was for
integrity even admirable. That he was more peremptory in diverse of his
resolutions th^n became him, and so hot against Clergy men's marriage, I impute
it but to a blind zeal far from any malicious intent of doing wrong.
Und^^^^^dly notwithstanding these imperfections, he was a good and holy man;
and as worthy the honor of a Saint, I dare pronounce, as any that ever was
Canonized by the Pope since his time. In favor of him (to note that by the
way) the Pope affoorded unto his See this honor, that whereas the Archbishop
of Canterbury was wont to sit next the Bishop of Saint Ruffine in all
general Councels, hereafter his place should be at the Popes right foot, and
withal used these words, Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis
Papam^ alluding peraduentur to that of Solinus, where he calls our Britain
alterum orbem, an other world.

35. Rodolphus.
THe King well remembering how troublesome the austerity of Anselme had been
unto him, 1114. Hen. 1.15.
and knowing it greatly imported him to make choice of some quiet tractable man
to succeed in that place; took five years deliberation before he would
appoint any thereunto. April, 26. 1114. he caused a Council to be called of
all the chief Clergy men, and Nobility of the Realm, referring himself unto
them for the nomination of an Archbishop, but declaring that for his own
part he liked best of one Farecius Abbot of Abingdon. They notwithstanding
made choice of Ralfe Bishop of Rochester. This Ralfe or Rodolph was a Norman
borne, a Monk first of the order of Saint Bennet, and a Disciple of Lanfrank
in the Abbey of Cane. Then he became Abbot of Say; and so continued, until
that upon disagreement between him and a Noble man of that Country Robert de
Belesmo, waxing weary of that Country, he came into England; and having no
place of abode, traveled up and down from one Monastery to an other, till at
last the Archbishop gave him entertainment for a while, and then preferred him
to the Bishopric of Rochester, whereunto he was consecrate, Aug. 11. 1108.
To Canterbury he was removed in June, 1114. and had his pall very solemnly
delivered unto him by Anselm Abbot of Saint Sabine, Ne^^^^ unto Saint Anselme
by his sister, June 27^ at Canterbury. In this man's time Thurstan obtained
consecration of the Pope unto the Archbishopricke of York, without making the
usual profession of obedience, for which there was long time after much adoo.
This our Archbishop being an aged and sickly man, much troubled with the
palsy, and lame in his feet, would yet needs travel to Rome in person about
that matter as some report^ (See the end of that controversy in Thurstan of
York.) William Malmsbury says, his chief errand was to complain of injury
done unto him, by the sending of Legates into England, whereas always it had
been a Privilege of the Archbishop of Canterbury, to be Legatus natus, and
none other to be admitted into the Realm without special license. This
allegation (says Malmsbury) was proved before the Pope, and approved by him.
Eight years Ralfe continued Archbishop, behauing himself well in the place,
but that he was sometimes way ward, and ouersoone provoked to anger, an
infirmity following those that are subject to his disease, the palsy:
otherwise generally he was a very affable and courteous man, willing to
pleasure, and not especially roted with any great vice: Only some blame him
for being more delighted with jesting and merry toys, th^n became the gravity
of his age and place, in regard whereof, some have given unto him the surname
(or rather nickename) of Nugax. Three years before his decease he was
continually h^ld of his palsle, whereof at last he died, October 20. 1122. and
three days after was buried in the middle of the body of Christ Church in
Canterbury, howbeit I see not any monument or other sign of his Sepulture
there at all.

36. William Corbell.
WIlliam Corbell or Corbois, was first a secular Priest, then a Monk of the
order of Saint Benet, 1122. Hen. 1.23.
and lastly Prior of Saint Sythes in Chiche. From thence he was taken to be
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Popes Legate upon Candlemas day, 1122. This
man in the year 1126. called a Convocation at Westminster, where John de Crema
the Popes Legate inueighed most bitterly against the marriage of Priests, and
was the next night taken in bed with a common strumpet; for shame whereof he
presently got him away, leaving all his business at six and seven, never
taking leave of any body. In this Synod more Canons were yet made against the
marriage of Clergy men; which notwithstanding, the Archbishop (that in deed
was but a weak man) not able to restrain them of his time from taking wives;
prayed aid of the King, who either set them all to a yearly pension (so many
as were married) or else took some large sum of present money to bear with
them. The year 1130. Christchurch in Canterbury (that had lately been new
built by Lanfranke, soon after fell down (a great part of it at least) and
was by the industry of Eardulfe the Prior, quickly repaired) now I know not by
what chance was all burnt and consumed with fire. This Archbishop found means
to repair it again, and in Rogation week the year following, did dedicate
the same wonderful solemnly in the presence of the King, the Queen, David
king of Scots, and a great number of the nobility of both Realms. K. Henry
dying that did prefer him, he was content to betray his daughter Mawde the
Empress, and contrary to his oath to join with Stephen Earl of Bloys, whom
he crowned with his own hands; but with such fear and terror of conscience,
as it is noted, that the consecrate host fell out of his hand in the middle of
Mass, by reason of his trembling and fearful amazedness. Soon after he
died, viz. the year 1136. having sat almost 14. years, and lies buried in
his own Church, the particular place I find not.

37. Theobald.
1138. K. Steph. 4.
IN a Convocation held at London by the commandment of Albert Cardinal Bishop
of Hostia the Popes Legate, Theobald was chosen Archbishop by the suffragan
Bishops of his own Province, and consecrate in the same Convocation or Synod
by the Legate before named. He received his Pall at Rome of Innocentius the
second who also endued him and his successors for ever with the title of
Legatus natus. This Theobald was first a Benedictine monks, and then (til he
was chosen Archbishop) Abbot of Becco. A man of no great learning but of so
gentle and sweet behavior (being very wise withal) as he was greatly esteemed
of high and low, kings, nobles and commons. With the Pope he had often much
ado. One Syluester a man infamous for many notorious offenses, was presented
unto the Abbotship of Saint Augustines in Canterbury, whom in respect of his
known unworthiness the Archbishop refused to admit. But the Popes letters came
so thick and threefolde in favor of him, that after many delays, excuses and
allegations against him, at last he was feign to receive him. There was at the
same time one Jeremy Prior of that Abbey, an old acquaintance and friend of
the Archbishops, whom notwithstanding (upon some great occasion it is like) the
Archbishop deprived and removed from his place. In the behalf of this man
also, the Pope (who never was wont to fail where he might be well paid for
his pains) began to stickle and to enterpose his authority, restoring Jeremy
to his place again, till the cause might be heard and determined before him.
Whereat Theobald, though a mild man of nature, being exceedingly moved, in a
great fury vowed he would never exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction so
long as Jeremy held that room. He therefore seeing the Archbishop so resolute
against him, and fearing some great inconvenience, would fall upon the monastery
by means of this business, and to procure him the hatred of his own company,
upon payment of 100. marks, was content to give over his said preferment, and
lived a private Monk in the same house ever after. In the time of this
trouble, S. Barnard writ in his behalf unto Pope Innocentir. recommending unto
him both the man and his cause. It is his 111. Epistle. Now in the third year
of his consecration, it happened a Council was summoned at Rhemes, whereunto
he was called. Henry therefore Bishop of Winchester King Stephens brother
(that by virtue of his power Legantyne had often contended with him, and ever
opposed himself against him in the Popes behalf) circumuented this good
plain meaning man in this sort. He dealt first with the Pope in no wise to
dispense with his absence; and then with his brother the King to forbid his
passage, and perforce to stay him at home. But such were those times, as it was
safer then to offend the King then the Pope; and therefore he resolved to go,
and in no wise to give the Pope such an advantage, against whom he had now
twice opposed himself already dangerously. Go therefore he would, but all the
difficulty was in getting passage. All the ports of England were laid for him;
yet so cunningly he handled the matter, that over the seas he got, and was at
the Council in good time. The King then following the advice of his brother
the Bishop of Winchester, seized upon his goods and temporalities, and banished
him the Realm. He like a tall fellow interdicted the king and the whole
Realm, and taking advantage of the time which was very troublesome,
(notwithstanding the Kings commandment) came home, and lived in Norfolk, till
by the intercession of certain Bishops he was restored. Afterward he grew into
great favor with the King; and was the chief means of concluding that final
peace at Wallingforde between him and Maud the Empress. In the year 1152.
he summoned a convocation at London, where the King would have constrained the
Clergy to make Eustace his son King, to the disheriting and great injury of
Duke Henry the Empresses son. The intent was spied before, and letters
procured from the Pope to forbid the Clergy to meddle in any such business. This
notwithstanding, the matter was earnestly followed in behalf of the young
Prince Eustace, insomuch as, when they perceived it was not effected according
to their desire, they shut the doors upon the Clergy in the place where they
were gathered together, and thought by force and threatening to compel them
before they should depart. The greater number seemed to yield; when Theobald
stealing secretly out of the place, took his barge, and rowing down the
Thames, got him beyond sea, and so by his absence the Synod was dissolved.
His goods by and by were once more confiscate, and his temporalties seized
into the Kings hands. But in a short time after King Stephen died, and Henry
Duke of Normandy, surnamed Fitz-Empresse succeeded, who restored him
immediately to all his possessions again. Under him he passed the rest of his
days quietly in great favor and estimation. He departed this life the year
1160. when he had sat Archbishop two and twenty years. Perceiving his end
to approach, he made his Will, and gave all his goods unto the poor, or other
like go^d uses. He lies buried in the south part of Saint Thomas Chapel in a
marble Tomb joining to the wall.

38. Thomas Becket.
1161. Hen. 2.8.
SInce the Conquest never any Englishman obtained this Archbishoppericke before
Thomas Becket. He was borne in London, his fathers name was Gilbert a Merchant,
his mother was a stranger borne in Syria, He was first taught and brought up
during the time of his childhoode by the Prior of Merton, and seeming towardly,
was sent to the Uniuersities of Oxford and Paris: Having there attained some
more learning, and also the knowledge of the French tongue, he returned, and
became an officer in some Court about London; it is said, he was a Justice;
Stow in his Suruay of London, delivers that he was the Sheriffs Clarke: but
waxing soon weary of that kind of life, he found means to get into the service
of Theobald the Archbishop, who quickly espying his manifold good parts, loved
him entirely, and sent him into Italy, at Bononia to study the Canon law, lest
there might be any thing wanting in him requisite in a Common wealths man, for
the managing whereof he discerned him the^ very fit and likely. Upon his return
thence, it should seem he repaired to Oxford, where Gul. Worcestrensis says,
he proceeded Doctor of Law. After which, in short time he was preferred by the
Archbishop unto the Archdeaconry of Canterbury, the Prouostship of Beuerley and
the parsonages of Bromfield, and S. Mary hill, a Prebend in Paul's, and another
in the Church of Lincoln. The Archbishop then seeing himself sick and weakly,
which made him altogether unable to look thoroughly into the drifts and devises
of Courtiers (that in all ages seek to prey upon the Church, and ever need
some watchful eye to ouerlooke their practices) commended Thomas Becket unto
the King so effectually, as he was content first to receive him into the
number of his Chaplains, then made him Chancellor of England, and loaded him
with all kind of spiritual preferment. For Theobald being a wise man, well
perceived Becket to be first so subtle and discreet, so painful and
industrious, as the King being yet young, he would surely possess him
altogether, and be able to withstand any endeavors that might be prejudicial
unto the Church; And again, he could not doubt either of his faithfulness to
him, or his stoutnesse in so good a cause, of which both he had had long
experience. In regard hereof, he employed all his endeavor, to plant a
perfect liking of Thomas Becket in the mind of the King; wherein he prospered
so well, as in a short time no man was so far in the Kings books as he, nay
no man could do any thing in a manner with the King but he. For the maintaining
of this his credit (says one) he thought it good to relinquish and forsake by
little and little all Priestly either behavior or attire, to affect the pomp
and bravery of the Court, to live as other Courtiers, to fare daintily, to lie
long in bed, to hawke, to hunt, to have many followers, etc. in so much as some
sticked not to say, the Chancellor had forgotten he was an Archdeacon also, and
blamed him for not living like a Clergy man. But by this means (says he)
Thomas Becket was ever at the kings elbow, was partaker of all his counsels,
and either by notice given to the Archbishop, or some devise of his own
otherwise, could and did stop any courses that might be prejudicial to the
Church. Having continued thus in the office of Chancellor four or five years
with the great favor and liking of the King, it happened Theobald the
Archbishop to die. The king little thinking what a snake he nourished in his
bosom, determined by him to do his utmost endeavor for the advancement of him
(Thomas Becket) unto the Archbishoppricke. Being therefore at that time in
Normandy, he sent Richard Lucy a counselor of special trust into England with
charge to effect these two things; first to procure all the Nobles, and best of
the Comminalty to swear fealty unto young Prince Henry his son, and then to
cause the Monks of Canterbury to elect Thomas his Chancellor Archbishop.
The first he quickly brought to pass (the rather by the help of the
Chancellor that was joined in Commission with him.) And in the second also he
bestirred himself so well, as he caused the whole Convocation of the Clergy (a
most authentical kind of election) to choose Thomas Becket for their
Archbishop, no one man gainesaying it, except Gilbert Foliot Bishop of
London. He was consecrate Archbishop upon Whitsonday (being made Priest but
just the day before) by the Bishop of Winchester, anno 1162. being not yet
full forty four years of age. Presently after his consecration, he altered
all the whole course of his life, became so grave, so austere, and so devout in
all outward show, as he seemed quite another man. Also he resigned his
Chancellorship, certifying the king by letters, (who was then in Normandy) he
could not serve the Church and the Court both at once. The King that ever
hitherto thought to use Thomas Becket as a Schoolmaster to instruct and inure
his son in matters of state and policy: was now very sorry that he had made
him Archbishopp, seeing he threw off all care of temporal government; and
considering the haughtiness of his spirits, sore doubted whereunto this strange
dealing would grow at the last. Another thing the king greatly disliked in him
was this; that being yet scarsely warm in his seat, he began to look so
narrowly into the state of the land belonging to his See, and to challenge with
such extremity what soever might seem to pertain unto him, as he provoked many
of all sorts of people against him, who every where exclaimed with open mouth,
and made their complaints thick and threefold unto the king, saying, that
having some authority and more knowledge in the law; under color of defendiug
the rights of his Church she took violently from every man what he li^t. But
the maine quarrel betwixt the king and him was this: The Clergy of those
times bare themselves so bold upon the privileges of the Church (whereby, in
crimes never so heinous they claymed to be exempted from the judgment of
temporal Courts) as, daily infinite outrages were committed by Clergy men,
murders, robberies, rapes, etc. which temporal Judges might not meddle
withal; and in the spiritual Courts they were either not punished, or for the
most part very lightly. For the amendment and prevention of this inconvenience
in time to come, the king intended to publish a certain declaration of the
customs of England set down long since by king Henry the first his
gandfather, wherein this intolerable and licentious liberty of the Cle^rgy was
somewhat restrained. And that it might not be spurned at by any (the
Archbishop especially he doubted) he devised to send this declaration unto the
Pope, and to crave his allowance of the same. But the Archbishop having some
inkling of the kings intent before hand, had so dealt with the Pope, as it was
no sooner seen but it was straight rejected. Heerewith the king was so
incensed, as after that time he bent himself altogether to the diminishing and
breaking of all immunities and liberties of the Church. And the Archbishop was
so far from seeking to pacify the kings displeasure^ as daily he provoked
him more and more. The particularities thereof to pass over, the king thought
good to try whether he could put in execu^ion the contents of the aforesaid
declaration even in despite of the Archbishop or no. He offered the same unto
all the Clergy gathered together in a synod; who as if they had learned all
one less^n, told the king severally in the same wor^ds, that they were content
to allow it saluo ordine suo, so far forth as they might without prejudice
of their own coat and calling: Only one man Hilary Bishop of Chichester was
content to yield unto it simpliciter and without condition, but was so baited
and reviled for his labor, as it is like he often repented it. Yet so the
matter was handled not long after, as first diverse other Bishops were content
to yield unto the king in this demand, and at last even the Archbishop
himself with all his followers. So at a time appointed they met at Clarindon,
and there swear unto the observation of the articles comprised in that
declaration. This notwithstanding, soon after again they disliking that they
had done, got the Pope to assoile them of this oath. The Archbishop then, the
chief procurer of this absolution, well assuring himself he had so offended
the king, as there was no abiding for him here, took ship at Rumney,
intending to avoid the realm, but missed of his purpose^ for he was forced by
a contrary wind to return to land again. Presently upon this arrival he was
apprehended and carried prisoner to Northampton (where the King then held a
Council) and was there accused of extortion, perjury, treason, forgery, and
many other crimes. His own suffragan Bishops, though he had appealed unto the
Pope, gave sentence against him, and warranted the king they would make proof
of these accusations unto the Pope. The next night after his condemnation, he
escaped away and once more hasted unto the sea, committed himself very
desperately unto a little bad rotten fisher boat, and, accompanied only with
three seruitors, crossed the sea, and got into the low Countries, and thence
posted to the Pope at Senon, who placed him in the monastery of Pontiniar.
While he there rested himself, he thundered out excommunications apace against
all such as did observe the articles contained in the declaration set forth at
Clarindon, whereunto himself had once sworn. The King as fast be stird
himself in seasing all the goods and temporalties of the Archbishop into his
hand. He sent also ambassadors unto the Earl of Flanders, the French King and
the Pope, praying them in no wise to foster or suffer him in their dominions;
requesting moreover of the Pope, that he would confirm and allow of the
declaration published at Clarindon. The Pope made an answer (though frivolous)
saying his would consider of the matter. But the French K. (with whom the King
of England had amity and a league of friendship at that time) he thinking that
this disagreement between him and the Archbishop would breed some stir in
England, presently fell to inuading the King of Englands dominions and took by
assault certain holds of his in Normandy. The Archbishop also about the same
time sent out particular excommunications against all the suffragan Bishops of
his Province. The King mightily offended with this exceeding boldness of the
Archbishop, whereunto he well knew he was hartned and animated by the Pope and
the French King: be thought himself how by all means possible he might vex
and grieve him; First, because he knew he delighted much in the monastery of
Pontiniac (which was an Abbey of Cistercian monks) he signified to all the
monks of that order in his dominions, that he would banish them every one, if
they would not procure the Archbishop to be thrust out of that monastery; which
for fear of so great calamity to so many men was effected. Then he also drove
out of the realm, all his kinsfolks, friends and professed welwillers of whom
he suspected him to be any way aided or comforted. Alexander the Pope, Thomas
Beckets surest card, was ferited in much like sort the same time by Friderike
Barbarossa the Emperor. The King therefore by the counsel of Gilbert Bishop of
London determined to feign in league with the Emperor, (if possibly he might)
that was a professed enemy both to the French King and the Pope. To his
purpose he sent two ambassadors unto him, persuading him to deal with the
Cardinals ( Lucius the Antip^pe being then lately dead) to set up another in
his room, to whom he promised al his dominions should yield obedience. The
Pope having notice of this practice, began presently to quail, sent the King
word he would order all things between the Archbishop and him, to his own
liking, and that out of hand. Now it had happened a little before, that the
Pope had granted unto the Archbishop a very large license of excommunicating
whom he list in England; the King, the Queen, and a very few other excepted.
This authority he abused very intemperately at that time when these matters
were thus in hammering between the Pope and the King; insomuch as he had
marred all if the Pope had not speedily yielded a reason thereof to the King.
By this time the French king (the Popes only Protector against the Emperor)
began to spy that he was much more cold in the defense of the Archbishop th^n
he had been, and reprehended him sharply for it. The Pope therefore not
knowing which way to turn himself; for the satifying of both those
Potentates, (neither of which he could safely offend as things stood) he
determined first to labor a reconciliation between them, and thou to make the
French King a mediator for the Archbishop. This he effected, and brought the
two kings together at Paris. Thither also came Thomas Becket: And suit being
made unto the king in his behalf, that he might return, be restored to his
goods and revenues arising in the time of his absence, and lastly (upon his
humble submission) to the kings favor; The king answered, that for the rest he
was contented; but (says he) the profits of his Archbishopricke since his
banishment I cannot allow him, for that I have already given them to others:
Mary recompense I will make him for them to the liking either of the French
king, or the Senate of Paris, or else of the students of the Uniuersity.
Presently the Archbishop was called for, who falling down upon his knees, used
these words, My Lord and Soueraign, I do hee^re commit unto your own judgment
the cause and Controversy between us, so far forth as I may, saving the
honor of Almighty God. The king much offended with that last exception (Saluo
honor Dei) turned him about unto the French king, and telling him how much he
had done for the Archbishop, and how he had used him, I am (quoth be at last)
so well acquainted with the tricks of this fellow, that I cannot hope for any
good dealing at his hands. See you not how he goes about to delude me with
this clause (saving the honor of God?) For whatsoever shall displease him, he
will by and by allege to be prejudicial to the honor of almighty God. But
this I will say unto you, whereas there have been kings of England many before
me, whereof some were perad^enture of greater power than I, the most part far
less; and again many Archbishops before this man holy and notable men: Look
what duty was ever performed by the greatest Archbishop that over was to the
weakest and simplest of my predecessors, let him yield me but that and it shall
abundantly content me. Heereunto the Archbishop answered cunningly and stoutly
enough, that the times were altered, his predecessors which could not bring all
things to pass at the first dash, were content to bear with many things, and
that as men they fell and omitted their duty oftentimes; that which the Church
had gotten, was by the constancy of good Prelates, whose example he would
follow thus far forth, as, though he could not augment the privileges of
the Church in his time, yet he would never consent they should be diminished.
This answer being heard, all men cried shame upon him, and generally imputed
the fault of these stirs unto him. But this was the issue for that time, that
they parted without reconciliation. The king doubting what might come of these
broiles, caused his son Henry (that died soon after) to be crowned King in
his own lifetime, so to assure him of the succession. Afterward coming into
France again, they were upon the point of reconciliation, when the casting out
of some such word or another as before, marred all. At length the King and he
were made friends; but his full restitution referred till he had behaved
himself quietly a while at Canterbury, which he promised to do. But he, was
so far from perfourming that promise, as he sent into England before him
diverse excommunications which the Pope had granted out long before, and
committed to his discretion. Amongst other, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop
of London and Salisbury were named in them, together with so many as had been
doers in the coronation of the young king, which the Archbishop said might not
be performed of any but by his appointment. The men thus stricken with this
holy fire, hasted them over into Normandy to make their complaint unto the
King; who infinitely grieved at this kind of dealing, cursed the time that
ever he made him Archbishop, or restored him to his place again, adding, it
was his chance ever to do for unthankful men, otherwise some or other would
longere this have made this proud Priest an example to all such troublesome
perturbers of his realm and state. It happened amongst other, four knights
to be present at this speech of the Kings; who gathered thereby, they should
do a deed very acceptable unto him if they killed the Archbishop. Their names
were Reynald Fitz-Vrse, Hugh de Mortuill, William de Tracy, and Richard Briton.
In this mean time the Archbishop was come to Canterbury, and was received
there with great joy. Thence he went to London, and so to Woodstocke, where the
young King then lay. But before he could get to the Kings presence, word was
brought him, the kings pleasure was he should first go to Canterbury, and
revoke those excommunications before he the king would talk with him. So he
returned again to Canterbury without seeing the King at all. Soon after his
return thither, the four Knights before mentioned arrived at Canterbury, to
wit, upon Innocents day. They coming unto the Archbishop, told him the kings
pleasure was, he should go to his son and reverently make offer of doing
homage and fealty unto him, for the Barony of his Archbishopricke; secondly,
that he should cause all the strangers he brought into the realm with him to
be sworn to his obedience; and thirdly, that he should retreat those
excommunications which he had caused to be denounced against such as were the
instruments of the young kings coronation. To those demands he a^swered, that
neither the King nor any other mortal man should extort from him, or any of
his by his consent, any unjust or unreasonable oath. And as for the Bishops and
other excommunicate concerning the Coronation, it was indeed (quoth he) a
thing done in my behalf and for an injury offered to my Church: But it was the
act of the Pope. If therefore they will swear they shall be ready to make me
amends at the Popes discretion, I will absolve them; otherwise not. And
whatsoever you say, it was the kings pleasure, I should take my best course for
the redress of this abuse by ecclesiastical authority. Many other words
passed between them the same time, they breathing out terrible threats, and
he continuing still the same man without yielding one jot. At last the
knights departed, giving the monks charge in the kings name, to see the
Archbishop forth coming, and not to suffer him to escape away. At evening
prayer time the same day, they came suddenly into the Church, with their swords
drawn, crying, Where Is the Traitor, Where Is the Traitor? The Archbishop who was
then going up the stepps toward the quire, hearing the noise, turned back unto
them, and every one of the four striking mainely at him, upon the third or
fourth greice of those steps was slain. His body these knights had determined
to have cast into the sea, or else to have hewn into a thousand pieces: but
the Prior and the monks doubting some such thing, buried it immediately in the
vndercraft, whence shortly it was taken up and laid in a most sumptuous shrine
in the East end of the Church. The Pope hearing of this massacre,
excommunicated immediately all that were either authors or consenters to the
same. The king was feign to purge himself by oath, and yet could not be
absolved before he had done certain strange penance; as first, that he should
pray devoutly at the tomb of this new Martyr; that he should be whipped in the
chapter house, receiving of every monk one lash; that he should maintain
200. soldiers for the space of one year of Jerusalem; and lastly, revoke the
declaration published at Clarindon, that originally gave the occasion of this
murder. All this (such were these times) the king was feign to perform.

39. Richard.
IN the month of February, 1171 Hen. 2.18.
following the death of Thomas Becket (which was December 28. 1170.) one Robert
Abbot of Becco was chosen Archbishop. But he liking better a quiet life, chose
rather to sit still where he was, th^n to adventure himself in a place
subject to the blasts of such terrible tempests as Thomas Becket was tossed
withal. The king then dealt earnestly with the Covent of Canterbury to choose
some mild^ and soft-spirited man, to prevent such broils as had been raised
by the last Archbishop. They followed his direction, and elected one Richard, a
Benedictine Monk Prior of the Monastery of Saint Martins in Dover, who was
presently allowed of the king and the Pope, and soon after consecrate. He was
a man very liberal, gentle and passing wise. So he handled the matter, that in
all his time he never was out, either with the Pope or the king. The Pope he
entertained with often gifts and money; the Kings favor he retained by
yielding and conforming himself to his pleasure. This man continued Archbishop
about the space of to^ne or eleven years. In all which time, there happened
not any thing concerning him worthy memory; except peradventure the stir
between him and the Archbishop of York Roger. The old quarrel chanced to
be renewed between these two Archbishops concerning the Primacy; and one
Hugocio the Popes Legate coming into England, both of them requested him to
hear and judge this controversy between them. Upon this and other occasions,
a Convocation was summoned at Westminster, where was a stately throne provided
for the Legate. At ye tune appointed the Legate came and took his place, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury sat him down next unto the Legate upon the right
hand. After this in came Roger Archbishop of York and would needs have
displaced Canterbury to fit above him: that, when the other would not suffer,
he sat down in his lap. The other Bishops present amazed at this strange
behavior of the Archbishop of York, cried out all upon him, the Archbishop of
Canterburies men by violence drew the other out of his ill chosen place, threw
him down, tare his robes almost from his back, trod upon him, beat him, and
used him so despitefully, as the Legate, whether for shame or for doubt what
might happen to himself in such a tumult, got him out and went his way. The
Archbishop of York all ragged as he was, bloody and dusty went to the King;
who first was exceeding angry, but when he heard the truth, laughed merrily at
it and said he was well enough served. Much adoo there was long after at Rome
about this and the old controversy; the end whereof at last was, that much
money was spent and neither party ever a whit the nearer. The end of this man is
thus reported, how that being a sleep at his manor of Wrotham, there seemed
to come unto him a certain terrible personage demanding of him who he was?
whereunto when for fear the Archbishop answered nothing, Thou art he (quoth
the other) that have destroyed the goods of the Church, and I will destroy thee
from off the earth: This having said, he vanished away. In the morning betime
the Archbishop got him up, and taking his journey toward Rochester, related
this fearful vision unto a friend of his by the way. He had no sooner told
the tale, but he was taken suddenly with a great cold and stiffness in his
limbs, so that they had much adoo to get him so far as Halling a house
belonging to the Bishop of Rochester. There he took his bed and being horribly
tormented with the cholike and other greefes until the next day, the night
fellowing the 16. of February he gave up the Ghost. anno. 1183. His body was
carried to Canterbury, and honorably in^erred in the Lady Chapel.

40. Baldwin.
AFter the death of Richard the Archbishop, 1184 Hen. 2.31.
a controversy gr^w between the Covent of Christ's Church in Canterbury, and
the Suffragan Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, who of right ought to
choose the Archbishop. For it had been^ often done by both, as (in that which I
have before delivered) you may perceive. The King destrous to have some honest
quiet man, dealt ^^rst with the Covent; praying them to make choice of such a
one as he might have cause to like, and after made the same request unto the
Bishops. The Monks (though moved thereto) would in no wise join with the
Bishops, but perceiving the Bishops began indeed to set foot into the matter,
appealed to Rome. Much adoo there was there about it the space of nine months.
At last the Bishops got a mandate wherein the Monks and they were commanded
to join together. The day of election was appointed; but the Monks for cursed
heart would not come unto it. So the Bishops proceeded, and make choice of
Baldwin Bishop of Worcester. This election the monks labored mightily to
disanul; professing, that they liked the man elect very well, but they must not
endure such a president. The king therefore (who favored Baldwin exceedingly)
wrought so with the one party and the other, as the Monks were content to
elect him, upon condition he would renounce all benefit of his former election,
and the Bishops themselves would confess the same to be void and of no effect.
All this was done, and he received into quiet and peaceable possession of this
Metropoliticall see. This Baldwin being a poor man's son, and borne in
Excester; was first a schoolmaster, then entered into orders; and was preferred
to an Archdeaconry, which promotion he voluntarily resigned, and intending to
forsake the world, became a Cistercian or white Monk. Heuing lived in the
space of one whole year, he was made Abbot of Ford in Devonshire. From thence
he was called to the Bishopric of Worcester, consecrate thereunto the year
1181. translated to Canterbury in the end of the year 1184. and solemnly
installed there May 19. 1185. being the first white Monk that ever was
Archbishop. Giraldus Cambr. describes the person of the man in this sort. He
was of complexion somewhat swarthy, his countenance simple and like a plain
meaning man; but very comely, his stature indifferent, well made of body, but
slender timbred. For his manners, he was modest and sober, of such abstinence,
as same durst never stamp any sinister report upon him, of few words, flow to
anger, and very studious from his very childhood. The only fault he finds
with him is, that he was too remiss and gentle in his government, saying that
he was Monachus melior quam Abbas, Episcopus and Archiepiscopus: for which
cause the Pope in a certain letter greeted him thus: Vrbanus seruus seruorum
Dei, Monacho seruentissimo, Abbati calido, Episcopo repido, Archiepiscopo
remisso, salutem, etc. It is a wonder that a man of this temper and disposition
should be so much troubled as he was: With the King he always agreed very
well: But between the Monks of Canterbury and him there was much and
continual debate. The occasion thereof was this. The King greatly misliking
the insolency of the Monks, thought to wrest from them the pre-eminence of
choosing the Archbishop in time to come by this device. He gave direction unto
Baldwyn their Archbishop, to begin the foundation of a College at Mackington
now called Saint Stephens, being distant from Canterbury about half a mile.
This College it was deuis^d should have one prebend erected by the King, and
by every several Bishop of the Province of Canterbury one other, which should
ever be of the gift and Patronage of their founders. As for the Archbishop,
the building of the Church and other edifices was appointed unto him for his
share, which he intended to perform with great magnificence. The end of this
foundation was none other th^n this, that it might be a mean of traducing the
right of election of the Archbishop, (a matter greatly importing the King and
the whole Realm) from the monks (men of little learning, less discretion,
and smallest experience in matters of government, yet very ^bstinate and
altogether wedded to their own wills) to other men, in whom the King and the
rest of the Bishops (as being their patrones) might challenge an interest. For
the better execution of this plot, it was ordained, that this College should
be dedicated unto Saint Thomas; who was now grown so famous throughout the
world, as every man thought himself happy that could do any thing to his
honor. In regard hereof they made no doubt, but the Pope would soon be
entreated to take from Christ (unto whose name the monastery of Canterbury was
consecrate) all privilege of election, and to confer the same with many other
upon Saint Thomas that famous martyr. The matter was now veri^ forward and
grown to good perfection; in so much as, the foundations were dug, stone,
timber, and other provision laid ready in place for the building, when as the
subtle monks suspecting whereunto this great forwardness of the King and
Bishops tended, made their complaint at Rome. That notwithstanding, on went the
work: The Church partly built was solemnly consecrate, and diverse secular
Priests (such Saint Thomas himself was) instituted and installed into their
prebends; when the monks that never linne laying on load by requests, gifts and
al manner of importunate suit to disturb this platform, procured the Pope to
set down an order, that this corporation should be dissolved, the buildings
thereof rased and made even to the ground. Such were the times, the Popes
pleasure was an inevitable necessity; it must be, and was performed. It
happened then soon after that Urban the Pope died, who was a great protector
of the monks cause, Gregory the sight succeeded, a man with whom Baldwyn might
do very much. He determined therefore once more to set on foot his former
devise, but in another place. He procured of the Bishop and Covent of
Rochester, for exchange of other land, a certain quantity of ground at
Lambhith; where the Archbishops pa^^ace and house of chief res^dance is now
situate. Thither he caused to be brought by water all the provision of stones,
timber, etc. that was intended to the building of the College at Hackington,
and began the foundation of a goodly Church there, which he lived not to
finish. King Richard the first to expiate the fault of his rebellion and
disobedience unto his father, determined to carry a great power into the holy
land. Baldwyn would needs attend him thither, and did so. By preaching,
counsel, liberal alms, and continual example of a most virtuous life, he
did great good there, until at last in the slege of the city of Acon being
taken with a ^reeuous sickness he died, when he had been Archbishop even
almost seven years, and was buried there. He gave all his goods unto the
soldiers to be divided amongst them at the discretion of Hubert the Bishop of
Salisbury, that soon after succeeded him.

41. Reginald Fitz-loceline.
1191 Ric. 1.3.
PResently after the death of Baldwyn, the King dispatched a messenger from Acon
with letters, wherein he earnestly prayed the monks to make election of some
such man to succeed^ as he might have cause to like. And the rather to bring
the same to pass, he wrote unto the Archbishop of Roan, who (the Bishop of
Ely being then newly displaced) governed the Realm in his absence, to cause
all the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury to meet at Canterbury, and to
take the best course they might for the placing of some fit man in that See.
The monks (who were exceeding joyful to hear of the Archbishops death)
casting many doubts by reason of this m^eting, proceeded first unto their
election, and chose Reginald Bishop of Bathe (that was son to Ioceline
sometimes Bishop of Salisbury) but concealed it till the Bishops were come
together; at what time in the presence of them all they published their
election, and withal laid hands upon Reginald there present, drew him unto the
Archiepiscopall throne, and violently placed him in the same. Albeit at that
time he withstood them what he might, and with tears unfeignedly besought them
to make choice of some other^ yet being asked the next day by the Archbishop of
Ro^n, whether he assented unto the election, he answered, that so far he was
from ambitious desire of that place, as it was a great grief unto him to be
chosen, and that he would be very glad they would take some other in his
room: Howbeit (quoth he) if they will needs stand to their election, though
with grief and hearts sorrow, I must and will accept of the same. Messengers
were by and by dispatched unto the Pope, who presently affoorded the pall and
other usual ceremonies unto this new elect. But before news could be brought
of his confirmation, or he take possession of his new honor, he died at his
house of Dogmersfield in Hamshire upon Christmas day, fifteen days after his
confirmation, and after his election nine and forty. He was buried at Bath.
See more of him in Bath and Wels.

42. Hubert walter.
KIng Richard the first, 1193. Ric. 1.5.
surnamed Coeur de Lion; being taken prisoner in his return from the holy
land, by Leopold Archduke of Austrich, at what time the Sea of Canterbury was
yet void; well knowing how notable a stay a good Archbishop might be unto
the whole realm in his absence; and having experience of the great wisdom
and other manif^ld virtues of Hubert Bishop of Salisbury that had attended him
in all that long and dangerous voyage; he used what means he might possibly
to procure him to be translated thither. This Hubert was borne at a place
called West Derham in Norfolk, and brought up under Raynulph de Glandfeld
chief Justice of England. The first preferment he obtained was the Deanery of
York; thence he was called in the first year of king Richard unto the
Bishopric of Salisbury, by the means of Baldwyn the Archbishop, who loved
him entirely in his life time, and at his death trusted him with the
disposition of all his goods. Being yet Deane of Yorke^ he bought certain
land of Geoffry Fitz-Geoffry in West Derham where he was borne, and founded a
monastery in the same for his own souls health (so himself speaks in his
foundation) as also for the souls of his father, mother, Raynulph de Glanfeld,
and Berta his wife who brought him up. The manner of his election unto
Canterbury was this. The the king writ earnestly to the Covent to choose some
wise, quiet, and moderate man, but refrained to name any, in regard of the
former repulses taken by him and his father. But his mind and particular
desire could not be unknown unto them. He signified unto Elianor his mother,
to the Archbishop of Roane and other, what course he wished to be taken: and
so wisely they handled the matter, as before any man looked for it, the monks
(who well saw ^ow greatly it imported the realm in that dangerous time to have
some worthy prelate in that place) had elected him, and published suddenly
their election at Paul's Cross, to the great contentment of the Queen and
Council, and no less joy of all other sorts and states of people. While his
pall was retching at Rome, considering how odions Baldwyn had been to his
Monks of Canterbury, for not being a Monk as themselves were and in a manner
all his predecessors had been; he went to Merton and there prof^ssed himself
a Monk, in like manner as Reginald the last Archbishop had done. Then he
began to bestirre him in leuying of money for the kings ransom. So
discreetly he wrought, as the Clear^y and commonalty of the whole realm did
very willingly yield a quarter of all their revenues for one year, which
(together with the plate and ornaments of Churches that were feign to be sold
in this extremity) amounted unto 150000. marks, the sum required by the
Emperor. The King returning, made him presently Lord Chauncelour, chief
Justice of England, and high governor of all his dominions immediately under
him. So that being already Archbishop and the Popes Legate, he wanted no
authority that was possible to be laid upon him. Never was there any Clergy
man either before or after him of so great power, never any man used his
authority more moderately. Yet he was much blamed (and peradventure not
unworthily) and no less envied for taking so many offices upon him. It is
remembered that a noble man said unto him in scorn, at what time he was made
Chancellor, I have heard of many Chauncellors mad^ Bishops; but of an
Archbishop that would vouchsafe to stoop to the Chauncellorship, till now I
never heard of any. Within two years after his first promotion to these high
places, the better to excuse his ambition, he made a dissembling and
counterfeit show of being desirous to leave his temporal offices, in so much
as, he dealt effectually with the King by letters to give him leave to resign
them, saying, that the charge of his Church was work enough for one man,
whereunto only he would hereafter gladly dedicate himself. This he did,
assuring himself in his own conceit, that the King had no man about him so
likely to manage those affairs as himself, and not being able to want him,
would entreat him to retain them still. It fell out otherwise th^n he
expected: For though at first the king seemed and peradventure was unwilling to
yield to this his request; yet he found it so reasonable in the end, as he
could not any longer deny the same. Here now this Archbishop manifestly
bewrayed his insatiable desire of rule and government: Being thus taken tardy
in his own snar^; as though his mind and determination were suddenly altered,
he signified unto the king by letters, that notwithstanding his great desire
of betaking himself only to spiritual matters, and the manifold infirmities
of his age; he would be content to afford his labor and diligence in his
other offices yet a while longer, if therein he might do him any pro^^table
service. And that the King should not think it possible to provide himself
elsewhere of better officers, he certified him withal, that in these two
years since his preferment, he had gathered for his use 1100000. marks which
he was ready to pay into his c^^^fers; augmenting (it is like) the sum, and
adding thereto out of his own purse, that so he might in cleanly sort buy
again those honorable and gainefull offices, which his subtle dissimulation
had almost lost him. Setting this fault aside whereunto the greatest wits are
most subject (I mean ambition he was an excellent and memorable man, a bridle
(says one) unto the king, and an obstacle of tyranny, the peace and comfort of
the people, and lastly a notable refuge of al both high and low against all
manner of injury and oppression. Faithful and loyal he was unto his Prince,
loving and very careful of his Country; in which he caused many excellent
laws to be established; He it was that first devised our assise of bread,
our waights and measures of wine, oil, corn, etc. Uery valiant he was also,
and performed many great services in the wars, the report whereof I leave
unto the Chronicles. His house keeping they say was such, as the expense
thereof was thought to be nothing inferior unto the Kings: And yet he
performed many great works of inestimable charge. Beside the monastery of
Derham before mentioned, he also founded another for Cis^ercian Monks at
Wulferhampton, but lived not to finish the same; he compassed the Tower of
London with a strong wall and a deep moate, so as the water enclosed the same
quite round, which before that time could never be brought to pass; he
increased the revenues of his See very much, adorned it with many sumptuous and
stately buildings, and procured diverse notable privileges unto the same,
called in old English, Geld, Dangeld, Hidage, Warpon, Bloodwhite, Childwhite,
Uillenage, etc. Lastly it is remembered that he gave unto his Church of
Canterbury, to repair the books and library of the same, the church of
Halegast. Now notwithstanding his great power and riches; with the monks of
Canterbury he had as much to do as other of his predecessors. By entreaty and
fair means he endeavored to procure their consent for the ^^nishing of the
Chapel at Lambhith, begun by Baldwin; for without their leave to go about
it, he knew it was to no purpose. To this end he sent unto them the Abbots of
Wal^^^m, Reading, and Chertsey, to debate this matter with them. The very
mention thereof was so odious unto them, as by and by they made a great
complaint unto the Pope^ not only of this but many other things also,
especially of his intermedling in civil affairs. Hereupon the Pope presently
enjoined him, without farther delay to resign all his temporal offices; which
he (how loath soever) was saine to do. As for the matter of the Chapel,
after it had hung long in the Popes court, the parties grew to a composition;
that upon condition it were pulled down, it should be lawful for the
Archbishop to build another upon a new foundation, to endue the same with an
hundred pound a year revenues and no more, and lastly to place in the same
twenty Canons or Probendaries. Marry it was conditioned, that no Bishops in any
wise should be consecrate ther^, no Abbots admitted, no orders administered,
etc. After this, the rest of his days he ended in peace. King John that had
attempted many times to depose his Brother King Richard: and was always
hindered in those practices by the diligence, faithfulness and wisdom of
this worthy Prelate, estranged himself a while from him, and gave him no
countenance. But finding at last how ill he might spare him, used his
Counsel, received intertainment of him (which was very royal) at Canterbury,
trusted him with the government of the whole Realm at his departure into
Normandy, and affoorded him many other gracious favors. Having been
Archbishop twelve years saving four months, he sell into a kind of ague
upon the way as he was riding to Rochester to work an agreement between the
Bishop and the Monks there, turned into his Manor of Tenham, made his Will,
and lying sick there only four days, departed this life. He was buried
July, 13. 1205. in the south wall of the Church beside the quier near Walter
Reynald that long after succeeded him.

43 Stephen Langton.
THe King did so rejoice at Huberts death, 1206. K. John 8.
as when it was first reported unto him, me thinks (quoth he) I am now indeed
King of England. But had he known either how ill he might have missed him,
or how great trouble his death would have caused him, he would rather have
said, now I begin to loose my Kingdom, and would little have ^steemed the
wealth he left behind him; which although it were bequeathed by Testament,
traveling to Canterbury in his own person, he seized upon the same, and
converted it all to his own use. The Monks in like sort rejoiced; little
knowing how great calamity hung over their heads ^ must shortly fall upon them
by reason of his death. For they forsooth hasty and desirous to use their
privilege of election, as also jealous least the liberty of the same should
be disturbed by any request of the King; secretly at midnight, made choice of
Reginald, or (as Thomas Walsingham in his Ypodigma calls him) Reyner their
supprior, taking an oath of him not to make his election known to any, till he
came to the Popes presence, whither he was advised to hye himself as fact as
^e might. This oath notwithstanding, as soon as he was gotten over the seas,
he bare himself every where as Lord elect, not letting to show the
testimonial of his election to who so demanded the same. This breach of
promise so incensed his brethren Electors, against him, as presently they
determined to become suitors to the king for pardon of their fault in choosing
without license; as also, that now he would permit a new election, supposing
the old frustrate and made void by the perjury of the elect. They did so, and
eastly obtained their request; but much ye rather, because they made show of a
readiness in satisfying the kings desire, that wished the Archbishopricke unto
John Gray Bishop of Norwich. He was then in the North country, about some
business of the kings: Being sent for in all haste, at his first coming to
Canterbury, he was solemnly elected, and his election published in the Church
before the King and an infinite number of people. These two elections being
presented unto the Pope he determined to make use of the monks debate, and
discouraging each side (for the greater part of the Monks were then at Rome,
some of them auouching their old election for good, others importunately suing
to have the later confirmed) he practiced secretly with either of them, to be
content to choose yet a third man that he would nominate unto them, and that
was one Stephen Langton a Cardinal of Rome a man in regard of many excellent
gifts both of mind and body, very fit for the place, and no way to be misliked,
if he had orderly obtained the same. By birth he was an Englishman, brought
up in the Uniuersity of Paris, greatly esteemed by the king and all the
nobility of France for his singular and rare learning, made Chauncellor of
Paris, and lastly, called thence by the Pope to be a Cardinal of Rome. Now
when by fair means he could not preuail with them (for they feared the kings
displeasure, whom they knew to be a hot and violent Prince) he began to
terrify the^ with threatening, and what by one means or other, made them
content at last to choose him, which done, the Pope with his own hands gave him
consecration at Viterbium June 17. Then well knowing how hainously the king
would take this matter, he writ letters unto him sweetened with many gentle
entreaties, large praises of the new Archbishop, and seasoned now and then with
some touches of doubtful threatening if he should oppose himself against that
was then done. This notwithstanding, the king in great indignation, banished
all the Monks of Canterbury, seized upon their goods and lands, and forbad
Stephen Langton entrance into the realm. The Pope hearing of this, sent his
mandate unto three Bishops, William of London, Eustach of Ely, and Mauger of
Worcesters; wherein he willed them first to admonish and persuade the King to
restore the Monks to their goods and places, and to give the Archbishop
possession of his temporalities by a day; then if he refused so to do, to
interdict the whole realm. They durst not but obey, and finding the king
resolute in his determination, at the time appointed, they published the Popes
interdiction; and as well foreseeing the great trouble to come, as the present
danger, got them out of the land, together with Ioceline Bishop of Bathe, and
Gyles of Hereford. The king immediately seized all their goods and temporalties
into his hands, and moreover banished all the friends and kinsfolk of these
Bishops, that were likely to yield them any comfort or relief. During the time
of this interdict, all service ceased throughout the Realm, except only
Baptism of children, auricular confession, and the administration of the
Sacrament unto such as lay upon the point of death. The Pope seeing this course
prevailed not, proceeded to a particular excommunication of the king, and not
long after, deprived him by sentence of all regal authority; a thing till that
time in no age ever heard of. All this while the King esteemed the Popes sword
blunt and unable to wound him, till at last he perceived the French King ready
to take advantage of this sentence, and providing busily to invade his
dominions. His own people also began to fall from him, and to doubt whom i^
conscience they ought rather to follow, their own natural Prince or a foreign
intruder; a strange and monstrous ignorance. Seeing therefore no other remedy,
he was feign to yield; received the Archbishop, restored the other Bishops, the
Monks and all the rest banished, unto their goods and revenues; and moreover
was content to resign his crown into the Popes hands, and upon restitution,
to assure him by his letters pattents a yearly pension of a thousand marks.
This done, he thought all troubles at an end, when the worst of all was yet
behind: For he bare himself so bold upon the Popes favor (which he had
bought dearly) as he doubted not to oppress diverse of his nobility, with many
and continual wrongs reuoking al former grants of privileges at his pleasure,
upon this point that he had received his kingdom from the Pope absolutely,
free from all entanglement of any privileges derived from the same. Hereupon
the Barons rebelled, the Archb. taking their part, and when they doubted least
they should not make their party good against the King, the Pope stuck so
close unto him; they procured Lewis the French kings eldest son to invade the
realm. Him together with the Archbishop and all the Barons, the Pope
excommunicated. This great hurly burly was appeased suddenly by the kings
death, who died some say, of care and sorrow, some of surfeit; and some say, he
was poisoned by a Monk. His son Henry a Prince of ten years old was received
to the kingdom, Lewis forsaken, and the Barons upon promise of obedience unto
their king, absolved by the Popes Legate. Clergy men were debarred a while from
their absolution that they might compound for the same, which they were glad to
do. All things being thus quieted, this our Archbishop called a Convocation at
Osuey, wherein many things were decreede, to be seen for the most part among
the provincial constitutions. Th^ther came a certain young man that showing
the marks of wounds in his hands, feet and side, professed himself to be no
less man then Jesus Christ. He brought also two women with him, whereof one
took upon her to be our Lady, the other Mary Magdalen. This counterfeit
Christ, for his labor was worthily crucified, and forced to resemble him in
the manner of his death, whose life and person he had preposterously imitated,
and sought to resemble. Soon after, he translated the bones of S. Thomas
Becket from the place where they were first buried in the vndercrost, into a
goodly sumptuous shrine. This was done wonderful solemnly, the King and
greatest part of the nobility of all the Realm being present. During the time
of this ceremony, all passengers from London to Canterbury were allowed
horsemeat at the Archbishops charge, who also caused vessels of wine to run
continually in di^ers parts of the City all the day of this translation, that
who so list might drink of them. This solemnity proved so chargeable unto
him, as neither he, nor four of his successors were able to recover the debt,
he cast his See and Church into. He was Archbishop in all, two and twenty
years, and died July 9. 12^8. at his manor of Slyndon in Sussex, from whence
his body was conueighed to Canterbury, and there buried in the chapel of
Saint Michael, ^^tu^te near the South stayre that goes up from the body of
the Church, and the lower cross Isle, to the South side of the Quire. This man
was admirably learned, and writ many notable works, the Catalogue whereof is to
be seen in Bale. Amongst the rest, it is especially to be noted, that he first
divided the Bible into Chapters, in such sort as we now account them. The
Archbishoppes palace at Canterbury is said to have been built in a manner all
by this Stephen Langton. Moreover, it is delivered, that he bestowed great cost
in making a fair horologe in the South Cross isle of the Church, near which
helyeth buried, his monument being situate in a manner just under the altar.

44. Richard Wethershed.
WIthin a few days after the death of Stephen Langton, 1229. Hen. 3.14.
the Monks with the Kings license proceeded to election, and made choice of one
Walter de Hempsham, one of their own company, and presented him unto the King,
who by the advice of di^ers Prelates refused to allow of him. Which
notwithstanding, he got him to Rome, hoping by one means or other to obtain
the Popes confirmation. The King having notice of his intent, sent thither the
Bishop of Chester, to signify that he was a man very unlearned, and moreover
infamous for his life and conversation, as namely, that he had gotten diverse
children upon a certain Nun, that his father was hanged for theft, and that
himself had deserved the like punishment, by taking the part of the rebellious
Barons. All this would not stay the Pope from giving him confirmation, until
the Kings Ambassadors had promised him a tenth of all spiritual promotions in
England, to aid him in his wars against the Emperor. That being assured him,
he straight way pronounced the election void, and by reason of the
insufficiency of the elect, the right of nomination to be deuolued unto
himself; by virtue of which title he took upon him at the Kings request to
name unto that See, Richard the Chancellor of Lincoln. The Author of
Polychronicon calls him M. Richard of Wethershed, the great Deane of London.
This Richard was a man very well learned, wise, grave, well spoken, and of good
report, stout in defending the rights and liberties of the Church; and (which
is not altogether to be neglected) of a goodly personage, tall, straight, and
well favored. He was consecrate at Canterbury by Henry Bishop of Rochester, in
the presence of the king and many of the nobility, June 10. 1229. being the
first Archbishop of 44. now having possessed that See, who bare the Christian
name of one of his predecessors. A little while he enjoyed that honor, to
wit, two yeer^ or there abouts. In which time there happened a controversy
between him and Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, concerning some ^^nds of the
Earl of Gloucester, the profits whereof the Archbishop challenged as due unto
him in the minority of the Ear^e. Hubert was a man greatly favored by the
king, for his long faithful service unto his father and himself; namely, for
defending the Castle of Dover against Lewis the Frenchman, he made him Earl of
Kent, and chief Justice of England. He had entered upon these lands. The
Archbishop first complained of the wrong unto the king, and finding no remedy
at his hands, excommunicated all the authors of this injury (the king only
excepted) and got him to Rome. The king understanding thereof, dispatched
messengers thither also to hinder his proceedings there what might be. The
Pope notwithstanding delighted much with the eloquence, gravity, and excellent
behavior of the Archbishop, granted presently all his demands. Little joy had
he of this victory: Being three days journey in his way homewards, he fell
sick at the town of Saint Gemma, and there died in the Friery, where also he
was buried. It is reported that soon after his burial, certain thieves brake
open his toombe, and thought to have robbed him of his mysterrings, etc.
wherein (according to the manner of those times) he was buried; but that they
claue so fast unto him, as by no device they could take them from him. Beliue
it as you list. It shall not be amiss also to note how that in the time of
this Archbishop, a great number of Italians had possessed themselus of the best
benefices of England; which being much spited at; certain mad fellows took
upon them by force to thresh out their corn every where, and give it away unto
the poor; as also, to rob and spoil them of their money and other goods. It
was done so openly, and so boldly, as it was manifest that some great men were
at one end of that business. The Italians after that time were not so eager
upon English benefices.

Saint Edmund.
THe Monks of Canterbury by this time weary of contending with the King, 1234.
Hen. 3.19.
soon after the death of the former Archbishop, chose of their own accord
Ralph Neuill Bishop of Chichester, and Chancellor of England; a man very wise
and highly in favor with the King, who liking well of this election, put him
in possession of the temporalties by and by. The Pope being requested for his
approbatation, chanced to enquire of Simon Langton Archdeacon of Canterbury
brother unto Stephen the late Archbishop, what manner of man this Ralfe Neuill
should be, who told him that he was a hot fellow, stout, subtle, an old
courtier, and very gracious with the king; it was much to be doubted, therefore
he would set the King and him together by the ears, and cause him to deny the
payment of that tribute granted unto him by King John. This was enough; without
more adoo he willed the monks to choose another, never alleging any matter of
exception against him. So to a second election they proceeded, and chose one
John their Subprior: He went to Rome, and being examined by certain Cardinals,
was adjudged fit enough for the place; yet the Pope misliked him for his age,
and persuaded the good old man to forbear to take upon him so great a charge
in his old years. He yielded; and thereupon a third was elected, one Richard
Blundy a student of Oxford. Him also the Pope refused, because for sooth he
held two benefices contrary to the Canons, and because it was known he had
borrowed a great sum of money of Peter Bishop of Winchester, wherewith it was
thought he fed well the Monks that chose him. The Pope then made request unto
such of the Monks as were at Rome, to chose Edmund Treasurer of Salisbury, a
man very well known, and indeed famous for his virtue and great learning. They
neither durst deny the Popes request, nor would do any thing in the matter,
till they had understood the pleasure of their Prince, and conferred with the
rest o^ their brethren. He was content to take their silence for a sufficient
election, and without more adoo sent him the pall into England, little thinking
of any such matter. Both the King and the Covent liking well enough of the man,
he was consecrate at Canterbury by Roger Bishop of London, April 2. 1234. He
was borne (as some say) at London, and baptized in the same font Thomas Becket
his predecessor had been. But, other affirm more probably that he was borne
at Abingdon in Bar^^shire, being son unto one Edward Rich a Merchant; his
mothers name was Mabell. In their elder years they forsook each other by
mutual consent, and betook themselves to a Monastical life. Edmund their
son they caused to be brought up in University College at Oxford. Having
attained unto reasonable perfection in the knowledge of Divinity (whereunto his
study was chiefly directed) he applied himself to preaching, wherein he
took great pains; namely in the Counties of Oxford, Gloucester, and Worcester,
until such time as he was called to the Treasurership of Salisbury. Being
consecrate Archbishop, he presently fell into the Kings displeasure, by
opposing himself against the marriage of Elianor the kings sister with Simon
Mountfort Earl of Leicester, because upon the death of the Earl Marshall her
first husband she had vowed chastity. To have this vow dispensed withal, the
king procured the Pope to send a Legate into England: his name was Otto a
Cardinal. Him also this Archbishop offended; and that so grievously, by
reprehending his monstrous covetousness, his bribery and extortion, as ever
after he sought to work him all the mischief he might. The Monks of
Rochester had presented unto him the (Archbishop) one Richard de Wendouer,
demanding of him consecration unto the Bishopric of their Church; which he
utterly denied to affoorde, knowing the presented to be a very unlearned, and
insufficient man. Hereupon the Monks appealed to Rome; which the Archbishop
understanding of, hasted him thither also. O^to the Legate endeavored to stay
him at home; and failing thereof, did his errand so well at Rome, as not only
in that suit, but an other also which he had against Hugh Earl of Arundell in
an other cause of appeal, he was overthrown and condemned in a thousand
Marks charges to his great disgrace and imponerishment. Being at Rome he had
complained of many great abuses in England; and amongst the rest, of the long
vac^cy of Bishoprics. The Pope seemed willing to redress these things; and
namely concerning that matter, set down this order, that if any Cathedral
Church continued void above six months, it should be lawful for the
Archbishop to confer it where he list, as well as any smaller Benefice. The
procuring of this order cost him a great sum of money: Yet no sooner was his
back turned, but the Pope at the Kings request revoked the same. Being thus
continually vexed; thwarted and disgraced, he departed into voluntary exile;
and there bewayling the misery of his country, spoiled and wasted by the
tyranny of the Pope, spent the rest of his life in continual tears. Through
extreme grief and sorrow, or (as some think) too much fasting, he fell first
into a consumption, and after into a strange kind of ague. Whereupon he
thought good to remove from the Abbey of Pontiniac in France, (where he had
layen ever since his coming out of England) unto Soissy, and there departed
this li^e, November, 16. 1242. eight years after his first consecration. His
heart and entrails were buried at Soissy, his body of Pontiniac. Within six
years after his death he was canonized a Saint by Innocentius, the fourth, who
appointed the foresaid day of his death for ever to be kept holy in memory of
him. Jews the French King caused his body to be translated to a more
honorable place then it was first laid in, and bestowed a sumptuous shrine
upon him, covered with gold and silver, and richly adorned with many precious
stones.

46. Boniface.
1244 Hen. 3.19.
THe Monks of Canterbury at the instance of the King elected then unto the
Archbishopricke, Boniface, the son of Peter Earl of Sauoy, and uncle unto the
Queen: a man not greatly to be commended ^or any thing but the nobility of
his stock, and the comeliness of his person: For in other respects he was
thought utterly unfit, and unworthy of that place. The King therefore doubting
least the Pope would reject him, caused in a manner all the Bishops and Abbots
of England to write their letters commendatory in his behalf; and so sent him
to Lions, where he quickly obtained consecration at the Popes own hands. At
his first entrance into this See, he found the same indebted by the ouerlashing
of his predecessors, to the value of 22. tho^sand marks which he took for an
occasion of both absenting himself from his charge, and also of raking money
together by all kind of means. Departing therefore into his own country, by
felling of woods, making leases, and other such like means, he raised great
sums of money, promising to employ the same, and whatsoever he could save by
living privately at home, in the payment of his churches debt. By the same
pretense also he induced the Pope to grant him in Commendam the Bishopric
of Ualentia in Prouence, and diverse other spiritual promotions. But he gave
himself to warring, and spent all he could make in hyring of Soldiers. When
therefore (notwithstanding all these helps) the debt was little or nothing
diminished, he was glad by bribing the Pope, to procure of him a grant of the
profit of all spiritual preferments that should be void within his Province
for the space of seven years. The king a while spurned at this grant; but in
the end half for fear of the Pope (of whom he stood in great awe) and
partly by suit and intercession, he ratified and allowed of the same. Having
been many years absent, he returned into England, the year 1250. and took
upon him to visit all his Province in some extraordinary manner. All men knew
it was rather to make money, then for any desire of reformation^ and that
caused it to be taken the more odiously. He began first with his own Dioces,
which he so hampered with straight and unreasonable orders, such as he knew men
would rather buy out th^n endure to observe, that every one said the Monks of
Canterbury were now justly rewarded for their folly in electing an unlearned
stranger, that was more fit and likely to make a soldier then an Archbishop a
great deal. Coming then to London, he took a small occasion to deface the
Bishop there with foul and reproachful speeches; and being resisted by the
Deane and Chapter of Paul's (who had appealed from his Uisitation to the Pope)
he made no more adoo but excommunicated them every one. Going the next day
about the same business to the Priory of Saint Bartholomewes in Smithfield, he
was met very honorably by the Supprior and all the Covent in their coapes.
Telling them by and by he came to visit them, one of the company answered him
reverently, he was very welcome unto them, but they were sorry he came for
that purpose, wherein they must disappoint him: They knew their Bishop (whose
only office it was) to be a very sufficient man for his place, and so long
they must not entertain the Uisitation of any other. This answer (though
gentle enough) so euraged this lusty Archbishop, as not being ^ble to contain
his anger within any bounds of discretion, he ran violently not to him that
had spoken, but to the Sub-prior that was next him, struck the poor old man
down to the ground, kicked him, beat and buffeted him, ^^ttifully, tore his
coape from his back, rent it into a number of peece^^ and when he had done
stamped upon it like a mad man. In this conflict it happened the Archbishop to
stumble and fall backward, by means whereof his apparel loosening, many
perceived a privy coat under the same. His serui^ors and attendants taking
example of their Lord, gave much like entertainment to the rest of the Monks
as he had given to the Supprior. By this time the Londoners were up, and taking
the matter very hainously in the behalf of their Bishop, whom this injury did
originally concern (as they thought) laid such wait for the Archbishop, as with
much adoo he stole secretly to the Thames side, and was conveyed by a wherry
provided for him to Lambhith. If they could have met with him, they had surely
hewn all to pieces. He was no sooner come home, but he thundered out his
excommunications against not only the whole Covent of Saint Bartholomew, but
the Bishop of London also, as a favorer of theirs. They all agreeing together,
determined to send the Deane of Paul's a grave and wise man to Rome, and by the
letters of certain Bishops (they knew the Pope would credit) to advertise him
of this strange disorder. The Archbishop understanding hereof, followed thither
apace, and entered Rome with great pomp; nothing doubting, but the King and
Queens letters which he had brought, his nobility and great lineage, or if all
failed, his purse should bear him out in this matter well enough. But
understanding how odiously it was taken by all that heard it, and how hardly
the Pope was informed against him; he fell to entreaty of his adversaries, the
Deane of Paul's and the rest, whom partly by fair promises, and partly by
threats, at last he subdued and made them content to stay their complaint.
That matter being so ended, he dealt earnestly with the Pope to ratify the
doings of his Uisitation. The Bishops of his province understanding thereof,
and knowing how great an inconvenience it would be to them, and all their
Clergy, they made a collection of two pence in the mark out of all spiritual
promotions in the Province to be expended in suit of Law against the
Archbishop. In the mean time the King had written his letters earnestly to the
Pope in the Archbishops behalf, which so enchanted him with partiality, as the
Bishop of London utterly despairing of any justice, gave over the matter in the
plain field: Only thus much was obtained, that he, the Chapter of Paul's, and
the Covent of Saint Bartholomewes should be absolved from their
excommunication. Soon after this it happened that the Archbishop, (the old
malice still boiling in his breast) taking a small advantage, excommunicated
again the Deane and Chapter of Paul's; the indignity whereof so moved all the
Clergy, as they took order to meet at Dunstable, and there laying their
purses together, gathered the sum of four thousand Marks, which they
determined to bribe the Pope withal so he would deliver them from the misery
of this unreasonable kind of Uisitation. The Pope took their money and
promised them fair: And the Archbishop seeing no remedy but he must Clauum
clauo pellere, by taking the same course, feed him as well on the other side.
He whose affection was ever wont to be measured according to his rewards, so
divided his favor, as he took not away from the Archbishop all authority
of visiting; and yet so moderated the same with circumstances, as it was like
to prove to^^erable enough. As soon then as he returned, he went forward in
his visitation^ wherein he dealt at the first somewhat mildely, but soon
falling to his ollde bias, caused every where such stirs and tumults, as it was
long after called by the name of the troublous Uisitation. At Lincoln he fell
out with the Chapter there (the Sea then being void) about the gift of
prebends and benefices which he challenged, and had ever heretofore in the
vaca^cy belonged unto them. One William Lupus Archdeacon of Lincoln especially
resisted him in this matter, and appealed unto the Pope. This poor man he so
vexed and hurried with his excommunications, and all manner of molestation he
could devise, as at last he enforced him to hide himself, and to steal
secretly to Rome; where he was so pitied, as the Pope was entreated not only
to absolve him, but to protect him from the violence of Boniface, and at last
to judge the controversy of his side. So homewards he got him with assured
hope of restoring his church to her ancient privilege. But being worn out
with continual travel and vexation which he had endured three years upon the
way he died. Now while he was abroad in the rest of his province, his Monks of
Christ Church in Canterbury had procured of the Pope a Charter of immunity from
all visitation. This being tendered unto him at Saint Alb^ns, he made no more
adoo, but cast it in the fire. The matter being complained of both to the Pope
and the king, no redress could be found. The king durst not disgrace him for
fear of offending his Queen^ to whom he was uncle; and the Pope, partly for
his kindreds sake (that were mighty men and his near neighbors) partly
because he was his instrument for polling of England, and brought him in much
money, would hardly give ear unto any accusation against him This boystrous
Uisitation ended, he got him beyond sea, and with the money he had scraped
together in the same, hired a great number of Soldiers to rescue his brother
Thomas, sometime Earl of Sauoy, that was kept in prison by the Citizens of
Taurinum, who could not endure his tyranny. In this war he had the Popes Bulls
and excommunications at commandment to assist him: of which, having spent a
great many, all his money, and no small number of his soldiers to no purpose,
with shame and sorrow for his loss and disgrace, home he came. Toward the
latter end of his time he waxed more moderate, and applied himself in some
reasonable sort to the government of his Church. The realm being filled with
strangers of the kings blood by his mothers side, and their attendants, that
still snatched up all places of preferment, especially ecclesiastical: he was
content to join with the rest of the Bishops in a request to the king, wherein
he besought him to have some regard of his own countrymen, among whom he
might find choice enough of wise, virtuous and learned then. The King taking
this speech of his in very evil part, told him he was content to do as he
wished him, and because says he, it is indeed great reason that I should
favor worthy men of my own nation before any unworthy stranger. You and my
brother Aethelmar of Winchester (men utterly unlearned and aliens, whom I have
preferred for no other respect than kindred or affinity) shall do well to give
over your places: and you shall see I will soon fill them with men you shall
take no ^^ceptions against. By this and diverse other manifest tokens perceiving
the kings mind to be alienated from him, and knowing himself very ill beloved
of all the Commons and Clergy in general, waxing weary of England, he felled
his woods, let leases, forced from his tenants and others what money he could
possibly; and having gathered great sums by one means or other, carried it
all with him into Sauoy, whence he never meant to return again. He lived not
long after his arrival there, but deceased in the castle of Saint Helen, July
18. 1270. after his first consecration, 26. years, six months and sixteen
days, and from the time of his first election nine and twenty years. He
performed 3. things not unworthy of memory; he paid the debt of two and
^^einty thousand marks that he found his See indebted in. He built a goodly
Hospital at Maidstone called the New works, and endued it with revenues,
vallued at the suppression in 159. l. 7. s. 10. d. ( William Courtney long
after translated the same into a College of secular Priests.) And lastly, he
finished that most stately hall at Canterbury with the buildings adjoining,
which had only been begun by Hubert, and little or nothing continued by them
that followed, but by him at last was thoroughly perfited.

47. Robert Kilwardby.
Soon after the death of Boniface, 1272 Hen. 3.56.
the Covent of Canterbury by the license of the King, elected William
Chillinden their Supprior to succeed him. The Pope took exceptions against
him as an insufficient man for the place, and ex plenitudine potestatis, thrust
into the same one Robert Kilwardby. This Robert was a great Clarke, and left in
writing behind him many monuments of his learning; being an Englishman borne,
but brought up first in Oxford, and then afterward in Paris; whence after he
had proceeded there Master of Arts, he returned, and became first a Friar
Minor, and then Provincial of that order here. The monks that many times
opposed themselves against their kings and lawful Princes, durst not resist
this intruder of the Popes sending; but to preserve their right of election,
were content forsooth to choose him the Pope had before appointed them. He was
consecrate February 26. 1272. being the first sunday in Lent, at what time the
Prior of Canterbury demanded of him the sum of 3000. marks spent in the
election of William Chillinden, which the Pope promised the next Archbishop
should repay. But he loath to disburse this money, began to pick holes in the
Priors coat, and threatening to deprive him of his place, never linnd si^ting
of him, till he had entreated his Covent to abate 1300. of the 3000. Marks. In
the first year of his consecration, he renewed the Statutes made by his
Predecessors for his court of the Arches, and contracted them briefly into five
Articles. Then shortly after he visited all his Province, and both the
Uniuersities; in which he disputed excellently, and showed himself in diverse
kinds of exercise. Toward the latter end of his time, he made a collection for
the building of a Monastery for the Friar Minors in London. Men contributed so
largely thereunto, (and he had the help of a certain old Tower which yielded
him stones without charge) as he finished the same with other men's money, and
was able to afford the foundation for an other at Salisbury, as I find
delivered: but that was for black Friars. Having been Archbishop about the
space of six years, he was sent for to Rome by Pope Nicholas the third, and
made Cardinal of Hostia, and Bishop of Portua. He resigned then his
Archbishopricke, and getting him into Italy, within a few months after fell
sick^ and died (of poison some say) at Uiterbium, where also he was buried.

48 John Peckham.
1278 Edw. 1.7.
THe resignation of Robert Kilwardby once known, the Monks made have to their
election, and with the kings good liking chose for their Archbishop Robert
Burnell Bishop of Bath, at that time Chancellor of England^ But the Pope who
had therefore promoted Robert Kilwardby, that he might place another in his
room, such a one as he would be sure should serve his turn at all times,
perceiving himself prevented in the election; thrust in ex plenitudine
potestatis, in like sort as last time he had done, John Peckham another Friar.
He was borne of mean parentage in Sussex, spent his childhood in the Abbey of
Jews, was brought up in Oxford (where he became a Friar) and succeeded Robert
Kilwardby in the office of Provincial of their order. From Oxford he went to
Paris to study Divinity, and after a while to Lions to get some knowledge in
the Canon law; without the which, Divinity was esteemed imperfect in those
days. At Lions he was chosen Canon or Prebendary of the Cathedral Church; and
by that means being furnished with allowance to trauell^ for his increase of
his knowledge in the Canon law, he went into Italy, and visiting personally
all the Uniuersities of Italy, came lastly to Rome. His rare learning being
soon perceived there, he was made by the Pope Auditor or chief Judge of his
Palace, and so continued till his preferment to Canterbury. He was consecrate
the first Sunday in Lent, which fell upon the sixth day of March 1278. Soon
after his arrival in England the Pope his Creator (as he called him) sent unto
him a mandate of making payment of 4000. marks upon very short warning, or
else assured him to be speedily excommunicate. It shall not be amiss to set
down the words of his answer to this demand; Ecce me creastis says he,
etc. Behold you have created me: And if the Creature cannot but desire
naturally what perfection the Creator can yield, how can I but ^esort unto you
for succor in all my oppressions and calamities? I received of late certain
letters horrible to see, and fearful to hear, denouncing, that except I make
payment of 4000. marks that I became indebted unto certain Merchants of Luca
at Rome within the space of a month after Michaelmas next, I was to be
excommunicate with bell, book, and candle, and that excommunication to be
published in my Church, etc. Then (to make short) he declares how his
predecessor at his departure carried away all the mooueable goods belonging to
the Sea, that Boniface had left all his houses very ruinous, that the King had
taken up before hand, one years profit of his lands, that in the mean space
he was feign himself to live upon credit; and that to borrow to serve his
necessary uses (the realm being so exhaust with continual payments) it was
exceeding hard. In regard hereof, he besought him (whom only in truth the
matter concerned, though merchants of Luca bore the name of this debt) to order
the matter so, as he might be allowed a years day of payment, which at last
with much adoo was granted him by the suit of Robert Kilwardby his predecessor,
who died (as before is rehearsed) soon after. The new Archbishop then became a
suter unto the Pope, that he would cause to be restored unto his Church five
thousand marks; the value whereof, the said Robert had carried away with him
of the goods belonging to his See. This he was so far from obtaining, as by
and by the Pope began to call upon him again very hastily for the ^ower
thousand marks above mentioned, and so made him glad to hold his peace for
that time, and yet to pay the money at his day. In the first year of his
consecratlon he sommoned a Convocation at Lambhith, at what time the Archbishop
of York coming to London, caused his cross to be borne before him within
the Province of Canterbury, which the Archbishop of Canterbury took to be a
great wrong unto him and his See. It had been often in question heretofore
whether it might be done or no, and much adoo there had bin about it: therefore
to redress this abuse quickly and good cheap, our Friar devised this course
to be taken. He caused proclamations to be made in all places where he
understood the other Archbishop meant to pass, in with he commanded all men
under pain of excommunication to afford no manner of intertainement, no not so
much as bread, or drink, unto him or any of his company, so long as he bare
up his cross in that manner. So except he and his train should starve, down
must the Cross there was no remedy. The Convocation ended, he began a general
visitation of his whole province; and being destrous to know the state of every
Dioces, went himself in person to most of them, using great lenity and
gentleness every where. For he was a man though very stately both in his
gesture, gate, words, and all outward show; yet of an exceeding meek, facile
and liberal mind: He took great pains in laboring a peace between Edward
the first, and Leolin prince of Wales; unto whom he went in person, and
travailed long with him, but altogether in vain. He bare a very hard hand
upon the Jews, whose Sinagogues he commanded to be pulled down to the ground
throughout his Province. But the King was a means to stay the execution of
that commandment so far forth, as he would have one Church allowed unto them,
in the city in with with certain restraints they should practice their
ceremonies. Unto double beneficed men and non residents he was very hard.
Diverse elected unto Bishoprics he rejected, having no other exception against
them. Many he compelled to reform themselves according to the Canons in that
behalf; and some that refused to be conformable, he finally deprived. Adultery
he was wont to punish very severely. He persecuted a Bishop terribly (his
name is not delivered) for keeping a Concubine. One Roger Ham a Priest, he
enjoined to three years penance for fornication, requiring him to spend all
that time in fasting, prayer, and pilgrimages to Rome, Compostella, and Colon,
and moreover sequestered the fruits of his benefice during those three years,
appointing them to be given unto the poor. Neither dealt he thus with men of
his own coat only. There was a certain knight of Wiltshire called Sir
Osborne Gifford; He had stolen two Nuns out of the Nunry of Wilton: which
coming to the Archbishops ears, he first excommunicated him, and after
absolved upon these conditions; first that he should never after come within
any Nunry, or in the company of a Nun; then, that 3. Sundaies together he
should be whipped in the parish Church of Wilton, so likewise in the market and
Church of Shaftsbury three other days; that he should fast a certain number
of months, that he should not wear an shirt in three years; and lastly, that
he should not any more take upon him the habit or title of a knight, but wear
apparel of a russet color, until he had spent three years in the holy
land. All this he swear should be performed before he might have absolution.
If some of our Gentlemen were now and then thus served, they would not be so
wanton as they are. Thirteen years and almost a half this man continued
Archbishop, holding all this while his prebend he had first at Lions, which
when diverse begged of him, he would answer, that he might not in any wise
spare it; for he looked every day when being drouen out of England by the King
(against whom indeed he often very boldly opposed himself) he should have no
other home to take to. For the same cause belike, it was annexed unto the Sea
of Canterbury. Many succeeding Archbishops enjoyed the same a long time after.
He died very rich, and yet in his life time, founded at Wingham a College
valued when it was suppressed at ^ower score and four pounds of yearly
revenues, and advanced diverse of his kindred to great possessions, whose
posterity have continued in the state of Knights and Esquires even until our
time. He was buried in his own Church, but in what particular place I find
not.

49. Robert Winchelsey.
1294. Edw. 1.23.
WHat countriman Robert Winchelsey should be, no man delivers: But it is
certain he first went to school at Canterbury, where he was so admired for
his towardliness, and loved for his gentle and modest behavior (being also a
very welfauoured child) as many would take upon them, even then to prophecy
that he should one day be Archbishop of Canterbury. Being ripe for the
Uniuersity, he was sent first to Merton College in Oxford, then to Paris.
There he proceeded Master of art, and before his departure thence was chosen
Rector of that Uniuersity. Having passed through that office (which seems to
be annual) with great commendation of integrity and wisdom, he returned
into England; and coming to Oxford, gave such proof there of his extellent
knowledge in all good learning by preaching, disputing, etc. as they thought
good to honor him with the degree of a Doctor, and shortly after made him
Chancellor of their Uniuersity. His government there was such, as all men
easily discerned him fit for a much higher place. He made many good and
profitable statutes, and took away diverse fond and pernicious customs; to the
great honor of the Uniuersity, and no less advancement of good learning. His
first spiritual promotion was a Prebend in Paul's Church and the Archdeaconry
of Essex. His Archdeaconry he visited himself in person duly every year, and
did reside upon his Prebend, preaching in that Cathedral Church or some other
place almost every day. By reason hereof and his manifold good parts, he grew
so famous, as Peckham being dead, he was straightway pointed out by the
expectation of all men unto the Archbishopricke. The monks therefore those him
with the Kings very good liking and great applause of all men. It was his
chance to come to Rome while Coelestinus was Pope, a good and virtuous man; but
so simple, as Boniface that succeeded him could persuade him by counterfeiting
the voice of an Angel through a trunk in the night, to resign his Papacy and
become an Heremit again, as before his election he had been. Not only this
simple Heremite, but even all the prelates and Cardinals there, were amazed at
his wonderful rare learning, the like whereof (especially to be joined with
such discretion and wisdom) they well assured themselves was no where to be
found. They were desirous therefore to have made him a Cardinal, so to have
retained him amongst them: But he yielding many reasons why he might not be
spared at home, obtained at last consecration and hasted him unto his charge.
Upon the day of his inthronization, it is said he consecrated Bishop of
Landaffe one John Monemouth Doctor of Divinity, and bestowed twenty benefices,
ten of very good value upon ten Doctors, and ten less upon ten Bachelors of
Divinity. The Sea being yet void the king had caused a Convocation to be
summoned, in which he required the one half of all Ecclesiastical revenues
for one year toward the charge of his wars. This intolerable exaction the
Clergy not intending to yield unto, sent the Deane of Paul's William de
Monfort with diverse other prelates unto the King to crave pardon, and to show
how hard it were for them to yield to this demand. Being admitted unto his
presence, the Deane began his speech, and after a few words fell down
suddenly stark dead. Herewith the king nothing moved, sent a knight the next
day unto the Convocation to know whether any of them durst withstand the King
in this demand: if there be any such (quoth he) let him come forth, that I
may take order with him as a disturber of the Kings peace. So no man daring to
gainesay it, the grant passed for good. The Archbishop now coming home soon
after, called another Synod, wherein his Clergy complained much of the last
exaction. The Archbishop told them it was more then they could justify that
they had done, for that in the late Council of Lions it was decreede, no
Clergy man should pay any thing to any temporal magistrate without the Popes
license: that therefore they now set down for a canon to be kept hereafter
inuiolably. At that time the King that had had so liberal allowance very
lately, demanded nothing. But within a year or two after having spent an
infinite deal of money in the conquest of Scotland, he summoned a Parliament
at Berwicke; wherein when the Temporalty contributed liberally toward the
charge of that war, the Clergy alleging the aforesaid Canon, would grant no
thing. The king would not take this for payment: And therefore presently he
took order, that all barnes of Clergy men should be locked up: he also made
proclamation that from that time forward, all Clergy men were excluded for
under his protection, so that hereafter it should be lawful for any man to sue
them, but they might not commence suit against any other. This constrained them
to yield, and all submitted themselves to allowance of such a proportion as the
King liked (it was a fist part of their revenues) except only the Archbishop
who would make no other answer unto the king but this: Under God our
universal Lord, says he, we have two other Lords, a spiritual Lord the
Pope, and a temporal Lord the king; and though we be to obey both, yet rather
the spiritual Lord then the temporal. When therefore he saw all the rest
inclined to yield, using no other words then this, Saluet vnusquisque animam
suam, he rose up and suddenly departed. For this contumacy the king caused all
his goods to be seized into his hands, and made show of greater displeasure.
Shortly after, notwithstanding being to make war in France, before his
departure he thought good to receive the Archbishop to favor again; but this
his grace endured for a very little while. Presently upon his return, he
laid diverse treasons to his charge, as that he had dehorted his subjects in
his absence from payment of their subsidies, that he had conspired with diverse
of his nobility to deprive him of his kingdom, and to crown his son Edward,
etc. Whether the Archbishop were guilty of all the crimes objected against him
or no, I cannot tell. But certain it is, that as guilty, he submitted himself
to the kings mercy, and besought him for the same in most humble manner, or
rather indeed dejected himself more basely, and lamented his case more
passionately then became a man that were guiltless; much less a prelate that
would be esteemed, grave, learned or wise. Notwithstanding this his submission,
the King commenced a complaint against him at Rome, banished him the Realm,
and seized upon all his goods, mooueable and immovable, forbidding all his
subjects upon great pain to foster him or yield him any manner of
intertainement. He was in that case he must have starued for want of
sustenance, had not the monks of Canterbury secretly taken him in and
adventured to yield him things necessary, till they found means to shift him
beyond sea; which the King afterward understanding, seized upon all their
goods and lands, turned them all even four score monks a begging, forbad all
men to harbor them, and kept them in that miserable state, till after a
certain space he was content to restore them again. These were the violent
courses were taken by Princes in those days: how happy are we that in all
peace, liberty and assurance quietly enjoy our own, without great desert to
the contrary? Two years the Archbishop contin^ed in exile: In which time the
king ( Edward the first) died, and his son Edward the second that was to
succeed, thinking it convenient belike at his first entrance to show all
examples of Clemency, called him home by letters, and restored him to all his
goods, even every penny of that which had been received of his temporalties in
his absence. Hereby it came to pass that he was the richest Archbishop of
many that were, either before or after him; so that his trouble turned him to
great good. In regard whereof, he was wont to say (Nihil nocebit aduersitas vbi
nulla iniquitas dominatur) so often as he talked of his trouble and banishment.
He was no sooner come home but a new danger encountered him, occasioned by his
own wonted boldness. The young King by the counsel of Piers Gaueston (a
wanton and vicious man, banished into Ireland by king Edward the first for
corrupting his son) had committed the Bishop of Couentry to ward at York: A
convocation being gathered, the Archbishop would not suffer any matter to be
debated in the house till the Bishop were set at liberty. This the king was
content to bear withal at that time: and afterward he so behaved himself, as
there never grew any dislike between them. So the rest of his age after his
return from banishment (which was six years) he passed in quietness, and
great prosperity, and died at last at Otforde, May 11.13^ 13. haiung been
Archbishop about the space of ninteene years. He was a stout prelate, and a
severe p^nisher of sin. He opposed himself against Piers Gaueston, the
Spensers, and other corrupters of the young King very boldly, He enforced John
Warren Earl of Surrey to forswear the company of a certain beautiful
harlot, with the love of whom he was greatly bewitched. And afterward when
notwithstanding his oath he returned to her company again and got children
upon her, he accused him to the Convocation of adultery and perjury both, and
at last made him to leave her. Such preferments as fell to his disposition, he
ever bestowed upon men of excellent learning; despising letters and requests of
noble men, which he esteemed not a rush. Many poor scholars he maintained at
the Universities with liberal exhibition, and unto all kind of poor people
was exceeding bountiful, insomuch as therein I think he excelled all the
Archbishops that ever were, either before him or after him. Beside the daily
fragments of his house, he gave every Friday and Sunday unto every beggar that
came to his door a loaf of bread of a farthing price (which no doubt was
bigger then our penny loaf now.) And there were usually every such alms day
in time of dearth to the number of 5000. but in a plentiful 4000. and seldom
or never under, which communibus annis amounted unto 500. pound a year. Over
and above this he used to give every great festival day 150. pence to so many
poor people, to send daily meat, drink and bread unto such as by reason of
age or sickness were not able to fetch alms at his gate, and to send money,
meat, apparel etc. to such as he thought wanted the same, and were ashamed to
beg. But of all other, he was wont to take greatest compassion upon those that
by any misfortune were decayed and had fallen from wealth to poor estate. For
these and other virtues, the common people would needs esteem him a Saint,
and frequensed much the place of his burial: Therefore his tomb (which was
situate beside the altar of S. Gregory near the south wall) was afterward
pulled down. His books, apparel, and other mooueables (which were but of
very small value) he gave all (such as they were) unto his church of Canterbury.

50. Walter Reynolds.
RObert Winchelsey being dead, 1313. Edw. 2.^.
the monks of Canterbury elected for his successor, one Thomas Cobham that was
Deane of Salisbury, and Prebendary of Yorke^ a man of such virtue and learning,
as he was commonly called by the name of the good Clerk. The king ( Edward the
second) was destrous to prefer unto that place Walter Reynolds Bishop of
Worcester; whom he favored singularly for the opinion he had of his assured
fidelity and great wisdom. Before therefore that the said Thomas Cobham could
get away to Rome, the king understanding of his election, sent thither in all
post have, earnestly requesting the Pope to find means that this Walter might
be made Archbishop. He glad of such an occasion to exercise the utmost of his
usurped authority, without any more adoo, thrust in the said Walter Reynolds
into that See, pretending, that he had reserved the gift of the
Archbishopricke for that time unto himself before it fell. Cobham a while stood
upon the right of his election; but perceauing to how little purpose it was to
stir with so mighty adversaries as the Pope and the king both at once, was
content to accept of the Bishopric of Worcester which the other left. This
Walter had been a Courtier a long time, Chapleyne first unto Edward the first,
and Parson of Wimberton, then by Edward the second (whose Schoolmaster some
say he was) made Treasurer and Chancelour of England, and preferred to the
Bishopric of Worcester the year 1308. The bulls of his translation were
pubished in Bow Church January 4. 1313. He received his pall February 17.
following. and was installed with great pomp and solemnity April 19. in the
presence of the king the Queen and many Nobles. The first thing he did after
his coming to Canterbury was to take order by giving pensions and diverse
sums of money at Rome, that appeals made from him to the Court there should
find no favorable intertainment. He procured also eight several Bulls,
containing so many great and extraordinary privileges. The first gave him
authority of visiting all his province, so as he should have procurations
every where, and yet his charges borne; The second, to visit monasteri^, and
all other exempt places; The third, to absolve and restore to their former
state two hundred Clergy men that had incurred irregularity; The fourth, to
dispense with the Minority of a hundred Clearks, and enable them to take
spiritual livings; The fifth, to absolve a hundred of such as by striking any
Clergy man had fallen into the danger of excommunication; The sixth to grant
for^y pluralities; The seventh, to require the gift of any one dignity or
spiritual promotion in any Church or College where he should visit; The
eighth, to grant pardon of a hundred days in any place where he should
visit, preach, give alms, or keep hospitality. Being thus armed, he
performed his visitation; traveling himself in the same till by the Barons
wars he was hindered, and sent for unto the Court by the king. That war
being ended, and execution done upon diverse of the nobles that had rebelled:
Adam Tarlton Bishop of Hereford was apprehended and brought to the bar to be
arraigned for the like fault. All the Bishops of England almost were then at
London. The Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin hearing of it, in
great have hied them thither, and having their crosses borne before them,
entered the court, by violence took the prisoner from the bar; and carried
him away with them. Much adoo there was about this matter a good while: and the
stir was not quite ended when the Queen rising against her husband, and
setting up her son to challenge the kingdom, at last procured him to be
deposed. This our Archbishop then showed himself a very weak man: He was
content a while outwardly to stand with the King (as beside the common duty of
a subject, he was bound to do by benefits received infinite) but first
underhand he aided the Queen with great sums of money; and at last utterly
forsook him, his lawful prince, his master, his patron that had advanced him
by so many degrees unto an estate so honorable. It pleased God, that
unthankful timorousness should be his destruction: By the Queen aforesaid
(of whom he stood so greatly in awe) he was commanded to consecrate one James
Barkley elected Bishop of Excester. He did so, but for his labor was so
threatened, taunted, and reviled by the Pope, that said he had reserved the gift
of that Bishoprike unto himself, as for grief and anger together he died,
when he had sat Archbishop 13. years, 9. months, and three weeks. He was
buried in the south wall of Christ's church in Canterbury near the Quier, where
his tomb is yet to be seen, with an inscription which I have read long since,
but I think is now defaced. This man was but meanly learned, yet very wise
and of good government, except when for fear and want of courage he neglected
his duty. He gave unto his Covent the Manor of Caldcote, and the wood of
Thorlehot.

51 Simon Mepham.
SImon Mepham Doctor of Divinity, 1327. Edw. 3.1.
Canon of Chichester, Prebendary of Landaff, and Parson of Tunstal, a Kentish
man borne, brought up in Merton College there, one very well learned (as
learning went in those days) was then elected by the monks, approved by the
king, and affoorded consecration by the Pope at Auinion the year 1327. The
first thing he did at his return home was, that he excommunicated all the
authors of the death of Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester, as they had well
deserved. Soon after, he began to wrangle with his monks of Canterbury about
certain land: They complained them unto the Pope, who sent a Nuncio to
Canterbury to hear and determine of this controversy. He condemned the
Archbishop in seven hundred pound charges. After this, he began to visit his
Province in like sort as his predecessors had done before him. The the^ Bishop
of Excester John Graundson resisted him (for what cause I find not) appealed
to Rome, and would not suffer him so much as to enter into his Cathedral
Church, much less to visit in the same. These two repulses he took so
tenderly, as being yet scarcely returned home, he fell sick and died,
October 12. 1333. at Magfield. His body was conueighed to Canterbury, and laid
in a marble tomb upon the North side of Saint Anselms chapel. He sat
Archbishop five years and somewhat more.

52. John Stratford.
1333. Edw. 3.8.
THe Pope (who now took upon him to dispose of all Bishoprics at his
pleasure) was content at the Kings request to nominate unto Canterbury (Uoide
by the death of Simon Mepham) John Stratford Bishop of Winchester. This John
Straford having long and to good purpose studied the Canon and civil Law, was
called to the Archdeaconry of Lincoln. Being famous for his learning and good
government of that jurisdiction, Walter the Archbishop made him his
principal Official and Deane of the Arches, and king Edward the second shortly
after that, appointed him Secretary, and so one of his privy counsel. It
chanced he was Ambassador unto the Pope at what time the Bishop of
Winchester died; and he at the request of Walter the Archbishop bestowed that
Bishoprickke unto this John Stratford then present with him. This was done
without the kings priuity, who desired to have preferred unto that place Robert
Baldock his Chauncellor. Therefore taking it very ill, that either the one
should give, or the other dare to take it without his knowledge; he was
content to give ear unto Robert Baldock who plotted many devises, a while how
to keep him from it, and after how to make him weary of it. He was consecrate
upon the Sunday called then Multae tribulat iustorum, which he thought boaded
unto him, how in the whole course of his life he should find nothing but
continual trouble. It fell out according to that omino^s conceit. Never I
think any Archbishop, either before or after him, giving so little cause, and
doing his endeavor to please, was more encombred with vn^eserued and often
crosses. He had no sooner set foot into this Bishopric of Winchester, but
the king (who at that time was altogether ruled by the said Robert Baldocke)
caused all his goods to be seized, and his livings to be sequestered to his
use. Moreover, he caused him to be summoned by a certain strange kind of
writs to appear I know not where; and when for fear he was feign to hide
himself, proclamation was made that no man should dare to harbor him, or give
him any kind of entertainment by meat, lodging, or otherwise. Having endured
these miseries the space of a year, he entreated the Archbishop to be an
intercessour unto the King for him; who relating unto him how dishonorable a
thing it was for him to persecute a true subject so terribly, both for an other
man's fault, and an other man's pleasure too; he was soon won to receive the
poor Bishop to his grace, and laid all the blame of that injury upon Robert
Baldock. Being thus restored, he grew daily more and more into the kings
favor, whom he served both diligently and faithfully to the last hour. When
all other forsook him, even Walter the Archbishop of whom he had deserved so
notably; this good Bishop would never be allured unto the contrary part by any
means; in so much as, the Queen and Roger Mortimer began to devise how they
might make him away. This he being certified of, hid himself, and was feign so
to hold him self close a long time. In the end, the king being dead, and all
his favorites or partakers either executed, or otherwise consumed; the Queen
and her son king Edward the third, well knowing they had nothing to lay
against this man, but that he was true and loyal to his Prince; they were
content not only to receive him to their favor, but also to make him Lord
Chauncellor of England. Simon Mepham the Archbishop being then dead soon
after, the king was also content to write earnestly unto the Pope to prefer
him unto that See of Canterbury. He did so (as before I have said.) And the
monks to make a virtue of necessity, they forsooth elected him also. About
this time it happened that King Edward the third began to lay claim unto the
crown of France; and passing the seas with a great power to justify his
claime^ he thought good to commit the government of the realm here at home
unto the Archbishop. He beside other general promises of faithfulness and
diligence, in the charge delivered unto him, assured the King he should want
no money to expend in this exploit; whereunto all kind of people showed
themselves so willing to yield what help they possibly might, as he took
upon him to discern, the king might command of them even what he list. He was
not deceived in this conjecture: For no sooner was the King over the seas, but
infinite sums of money were collected with the very good liking of all people.
This money (which men thought would have maintained the charge of that war 2. or
3. years) the king being young and so easy to be either mistaken or deceived,
was spent in less then one year. The Archbishop maruelling thereat, advised
the king by letters, to remove from him such as had had the disposing of his
treasure; for that without imbesilling and falsehood, it was impossible so much
money should be so soon consumed. The king on the other side, he put the
Archbishop in mind of his promise, and called upon him continually for more
money. He well knowing how hard it would be to collect any reasonable sum
so soon after so liberal contribution as had been lately yielded; fell to
persuading the king to accept reasonable conditions, which he heard the French
King had offered him, and to come home. The king either was or seemed to be
exceeding angry with this motion: yet knowing there was no remedy but he must
get him home, his money being now spent, and his credit amongst the usurers
stretched to the highest pin; he told his soldiers on the one side that the
Archb. had betrayed him unto the French king, who no doubt had hired him to
detain their pay in his hands; and on the other side made his creditors
believe that the Archb. had taken upon him the discharge of al his debt, as
having now gathered money sufficient for that purpose. So the coffeehouse of
these people being either allaied, or cast upon the Archbishop; it was devised,
that for the further countenance of this plot, the king should step over into
England suddenly, and cast into prison the Archbishop, together with the
Bishop of Chichester the Chancellor, and the Bishop of Litchfield the Treasurer.
To London he came secretly in a night, caught the two Bishops, and sent them to
the Tower; but the Archbishop by mere chance was gone from Lambhith else
whether the day before, and having some inkling afterward, of that was meant
unto him, got him to Canterbury and there stood upon his guard. A knight was
sent unto him to require him to make present payment of a certain huge sum of
money which the king said he had taken up of outlandish merchants upon his
(the Archbishops) credit, or else to get him over the seas immediately unto
them, and to yield them his body till the debt were satisfied, for that so the
King had undertaken he should, being an^^ated thereunto by his own promise.
Soon after, there came certain messengers from the Duke of Brabant desiring
to speak with the Archbishop, and when he refused to confer with them, cited
him by writings to make payment of certain great sums of money which they
alleged he ought to the Duke for money the king of England had received. This
Citation they fixed upon the high cross at Canterbury with many ceremonies.
Now the Archbishop perceiving what a terrible tempest was growing toward him
(for he was charged not only with the debt of many thousand pounds more then
over he should be able to make, but with horrible treason, that might not only
take away his life, but make him odious in his life time, and infamous for ever
with all posterity)^ He wrote many letters unto the king, wherein he purged
himself most clearly of whatsoever was objected, and prayed him not to
command his repair unto his presence, until a parliament were assembled;
wherein, if he were to be charged with any crime, he vowed to offer himself
unto justice. Understanding then that the king had written diverse discourses
against him unto the Bishop of London, the covent of Canterbury and others, to
the intent they might be public; for defense of his credit, he thought it
requisite to make his Apology in the pulpit, which he did, taking this for his
text, Non pertimuit Principem, and potentia nemo vicit illum, etc. Eccles. 48.
At last a Parliament was summoned, whereunto upon safe conduct he came. He was
not suffered to come into the parliament house before he had answered to
certain crimes objected against him in the court of the Exchequer. He went
thither, and receiving a copy of the articles, promised to make answer unto
them. The next day coming again unto the parliament, he was once more
forbidden entrance. A great number of people flocking about him in the mean
time, he told them how he had been summoned to the parliament, whereof he
was a principal member; and now being come, was kept out by violence. But says
he (taking his cross into his own hand) I will not hence till I either be
suffered to come in or hear some cause alleged why I should not. While he
stood there, some of the company began to revile him and to tell him he had
betrayed the realm, etc. Unto whom he answered thus, The curse of of almighty
God (quoth he) and of his blessed mother, and min^ also, be upon the heads of
them that inform the king so, Amen, Amen. In the mean time certain noble men
chanced to come out, whom he besought to request the King in his behalf. By
their means he was at last admitted into the house, and being charged with
diverse heinous crimes, offered to purge himself of them; and if, they might be
proved, to submit himself unto justice. Twelve men were chosen to examine this
matter, viz. 4. prelates, the Bishops of London, Bath, Hereford and Exceter; 4.
Ea^les, Arundell, Salisbury, Huntington and Suffolk; and lastly 4. Barons.
Henry Percy, Thomas Wake, Ralfe Basset, and Ralfe Neuill. All this was but to
make the Archbi. odious with the common people: A fault was committed; and the
king willing the blame thereof should lie any where rather then upon himself,
made all this ado to bleare the peoples eyes. The matter never came to the
hearing of these nobles: but was so handled, that the Archbishop upon great
suit and entreaty of in a manner the whole parliament, must be pardoned all
that was past, and received to favor again. After this, he lived certain
years quietly. Having been Archbishop about 15. years, he fell sick at
Magfield, and making his will (wherein he gave all he had unto his servants)
died there. He was butied in a goodly tomb of Alabaster on the south side of
the high altar beside the steps of S. Dunstanes altar. He was a very gentle
and merciful man, rather too remiss then any way rigorous unto offenders. His
manner was thrice every day to give alms to 13. poor people; in the morning
pence a piece; at 9. a clock, bread, meat and pottage, and at noone again
every one a loaf and a penny. He gave unto his Church of Canterbury a very
sumptuous miter and certain books. He assigned also unto the same a pension
of five pound out of the parsonages of Boughton and Preston appropriated unto
the Ab^ey of Feuersham: Lastly he founded a fair College at Stratford upon
Auon where he was borne, and endowed the same largely, so that at the
suppression it was valued in yearly revenues at 123. pound 11. shillings 9.
pence.

53. Tho. Bradwar^in.
THe Pope at this time had so far incroched upon us here in England, Edw.
3.23. 1348.
as he would seldom or never suffer any orderly election to take place, but
bestow all Bishoprics where it pleased him. The King ( Edward the third) much
discontented herewith, writ unto him, very earnestly praying him, to forbear
his provisions and reseruations, whereby he robbed patrones of their right and
chapters of their elections: telling him, that the disposition of Bishoprics
belonged of old unto the king only, that his progenitors at the suit of
diverse Popes had given that their authority unto Chapters; which if they used
not, he assured him self, it deuolued again unto the first granter, which was
the king. The copy of this letter is to be seen in Thomas Walsingham and
other. After the receipt of this letter, the Pope would seldom or never take
upon him to give any Bishopric, but unto such as the King made request for.
But so, between the King and the Pope, elections were altogether deluded, and
made frustrate. And therefore Stratford being dead, whereas the Covent made
choice of one Thomas Bradwardin to succeed him, the king writing somewhat
earnestly to the Pope in favor of John Vfford, he was by and by pronounced
Archbishop by the Popes Oracle, and the other utterly rejected. This John
Vfford was son unto the Earl of Suffolk, brought up in Cambridge, and made
Doctor of Law there (says Matthew Paker, howbeit it appears, that one John
Offord took that degree at Oxford about these times) promoted first unto the
Deanery of Lincoln, then to the Chancellorshippe of England, and lastly the
Archbishopricke. He never received either his pall, or consecration: Having
expected the same the space of six months, he died in the time of that great
plague, that (as Walsingham reports) consumed nine parts of the men through
England, (scarce leaving a tenth alive) June, the seventh, 1548. His body
without any pomp or wonted solemnity, was carried to Canterbury, and there
secretly buried by the North Wall, beside the wall of Thomas Becket, at that
place (if I mistake not) where we see an old wooden tomb near to the toombe
of Bishop Warham. He began to build the Archbishops palace at Maidstone,
but died before he could bring it to any perfection. Now the foresaid John
Vfford being suddenly taken away, as before is declared, the Covent of
Canterbury once more chose him the said Bradwardin, the King very willingly
allowed of their choice; and the Pope having not yet heard of this their second
election, of his own accord before any request made cast upon him this dignity.
Hardly shall you find any Archbishop in any age to have attained his place
in better sort. He was consecrate at Auinion by one Bertrand a Cardinal in the
Church of the Friar minors there. That Ceremony once performed, he hasted him
home into England; where first doing his duty to the King, he received of him
immediately his temporalties with all favor. From the Court he departed to
Lambhith to rest himself after his long journey. Lying there a while with the
Bishop of Rochester, he fell sick and within five weeks and four days
after his consecration died, so that he was never inthronized at all. He was
buried in the Chapel of Saint Anselme toward the south wall. This man was
borne at Hatfield in Sussex, and brought up in the Uniuersity of Oxford, where
having traveled a long time in the study of good learning, he became one of
the Proctors, the year 1325. and afterward proceeded Doctor of Divinity. He
was a good Mathematitian, a great Philosopher, and so excellent a Divine, as he
is commonly enstyled Doctor prosundus; which title that he well enough
deserved, diverse works of his not yet perished do testify. But above all he
is especially to be commended for his sincerity of life and conversation. John
Stratford the Archbishop in regard of these virtues commended him unto that
noble prince K. Edward the third, for his Confessor. In that office he behaved
himself so, as he deserves eternal memory for the same. He was wont to
reprehend the King with great boldness for such things as he saw amiss in him.
In that long and painful war which the king had in France, he never would
be from him, but admonished him often secretly, and all his army in learned
and most eloquent sermons publicly, to take heed they waxed not proud and
insolent because of the manifold victories God had sent them; but to be
thankful unto him for them, and to have a care to use them moderately. Some
there be that have not doubted to ascribe that notable conquest rather to the
virtue and holiness of this man, the^ to any other means either of prowesie
or wisdom in other instruments of the same. He that might have obtained of
the king any preferment be would have craved, was so far from ambitious
desire of promotion, as it was long before he could be persuaded to take a
Prebend of Lincoln, when it was offered him, being before that Chancellor of
Paul's in London. It is certain also that he was elected unto the
Archbishopricke without his own seeking, and might easily have made the king
for him, if he had endeavored it. When some men marvelled that the king should
refuse him, and prefer any other before him; he answered he could very ill
spare him, and he perceived not he was desirous to be spared.

54 Simon Islip.
SImon Islip brought up in Merton College in Oxforde, being Doctor of law,
became Canon of Paul's, 1349. Edw. 3.24.
then Deane of the Arches; after that was chosen to be of the Privy Council of
King Edward the third, first in the place of Secretary, and then keeper to the
Privy Seal. John Stratforde lying upon his death bed, foretold he should
be Archbishop. It came to pass, within two years after his death, though
two other were served before him. The Monks with the kings very good liking
those him, and the Pope would not refuse him: yet being loath to ratify the
Monks election, he rejected the same, and ex plenitudine potestatis bestowed
the Archbishopricke upon him. His bulls were published in Bow Church, October,
4. 1349. and in the month of December following, he was consecrate by the
Bishop of London in Paul's Church. He was inthronized secretly to save charge.
For he was a very frugal and sparing man, never esteeming pomp or outward
bravery any thing at all. He was also very severe. When he first visited his
own Dioces, he deprived many clergy men of their livings. He passed thorough
the Diocesses of Rochester and Chichester without keeping any great adoo: So
that every one made account he was content to wink at the faults he espied.
But they ^ound it otherwise. For he afterward called home unto him the
offenders, and there dealt so with them, as all men might assure themselves he
would prove a very austere man in his government. John Synwel Bishop of
Lincoln, standing in doubt of this asperity of his, with great cost procured a
privilege from Rome to exempt himself from his authority and jurisdiction.
But the Archbishop caused the same afterward to be revoked. The Uniuersity of
Oxford had presented unto him the said Bishop of Lincoln (unto whose
jurisdiction Oxford then appertained) one William Palmori^ for their
Chancellor, and prayed him to admit him. The Bishop (I know not for what
cause) delayed his admission from time to time, and enforced the Uniuersity to
complain of this hard dealing unto the Archbishop. He presently set down a
day wherein he enjoined the Bishop to admit this Chancellor, or else to
render a reason of his refusal. At the time appointed, the Proctors of the
Uniuersity were ready together with this William Palmorie to demand admission:
And when the Bishop of Lincoln came not (trusting belike to his privilege
aforesaid) the Archbishop caused his Chancellor John Carlton Deane of Wels
to admit him, writ to the Uniuersity to receive him, and cited the Bishop
to answer before him for his contempt. He appealed to the Pope, would not
come, and for his contumacy was interdicted. Much money was spent in this su^^
afterward at Rome. The end was, that the Archbishop prevailed, and the
others privilege was by special order of the Pope revoked; who also granted
unto the Uniuersity at the same time, that the Chancellor hereafter should
only be elected by the scholars themselves, and so presently authorized to
govern them without the admission of any other. This conquest thus achieved,
he entered ^e: into another combat in the same sand, I mean at Rome. He sued
Andrew Vfford Archdeacon of Middlesex, the administrator of John Vfford his
predecessor, for ^ilapidatio^, and recovered of him 1101. l. fifteen shillinges
two pence half penny farthing. That money he employed in repayring the palace
at Canterbury. He pulled down the manner house at Wrotham, and employed the
stones and timber of the same in ending the building that John Vfford his
predecessor aforesaid had begun at Maidstone. Toward this and other charges he
obtained of the Pope leave to crave a contribution of four pence out of every
Mark from all the Clergy of his Province. But his officers (whether of
purpose, or peradventure mistaking) demanded and had a whole tenth. All this
was within a year or two of his first coming to the Archbishopricke; at which
time also in a Parliament held at Westminster, the year 1350. the old
controversy between him and the Archbishop of York, about hearing up his
Cross in the Province of Canterbury began to be renewed, was compromitted
unto the hearing and judgment of the king, who set down a final order for
the same, viz. that the Archbishop of York, should bear his Cross in the
others Province, yielding all preeminence otherwise unto Canterbury, but that
in token of subjection, every Archbishop at his entrance should offer an
image of gold to the value of forty pound, at the shrine of Saint Thomas, the
same to be sent by some Knight or Doctor of the Law within the space of two
months after his inthronization. Amongst the rest of his actions, I may not
in any wise forget his College of Canterbury, (which is now become a parcel
of Christ Church in Oxford). He built it and endowed it with goo^ possessions,
appropriating unto the same the parsonages of Pagham and Magfield. He granted
also unto the Covent of Canterbury the Churches of Monkton and Estrey. It is
worthy remembrance likewise, that when a certain Countess of Kent after the
Earl her husbands death had professed her self a Nun, and having lived so
certain years, suddenly married a certain Knight named Eustace Abricourt
contrary to her vow, and that secretly without asking of banes or dispensation;
he punished them severely for it, but suffered them to live still together,
and severed them not. Amongst many good deeds, he is blamed for ^elling unto
the Earl of Arundell the right which he had unto six and twenty Dear
yearly out of certain grounds of his. He had for them only two hundred and
forty Marks. After he had been Archbishop sixeteene years, four months
and twelve days, he died April 26. 1366. Riding to Magfield, his horse
chanced to cast him into a meiry poole. Wet as he was, he fell asleep at his
coming thither, and waking found himself in a pals^e, whereof within a few
days after he died. He bequeathed unto his church of Canterbury a thousand
sheep, his vestments which were all cloth of gold, a very sumptuous coape and
much plate, viz. 6. dozen of silver dishes, six saltes, and four goodly
Basins all enchased with his Arms. He lies buried in the middle of the body
of his Church of Canterbury, under a fair toombe of Marble inlaid with brass,
whereon is engraven this Epitaph. Simon Islep oriens, vir bina lege probatus,
Vt nascens, moriens sic nunc iacet arcte locatus,
Arcem qui tenuit hic quondam Pontifica^us,
Clero quique fuit regno toti quoque gratus.
Princeps pastorum fac Simon Apostolorum,
Simon vt iste chorum per eos pertingat eorum.
Mil. trecenteno sexageno modo seno,
Eius septeno pastoratus quoque deno
Hic kal. Maij seno rupto carnis nece freno
Flos cadit e foeno coelo peto qui sit amoeno.
O spes Sanctorum decus and pie Christ tuorum,
Coetibus ipsorum prece iungas hunc precor horum.
He took order to be buried obscurely, desiring therein (as in all other
things) to avoid superfluous expense what he might, and not esteeming outward
pomp.

55 Simon Langham.
AFter the decease of Simon Islip, 1366. Edw. 3.41.
the Monks of Canterbury chose William Edindon Bishop of Winchester for
Archbishop, who refused the place, using (as the report goes) this speech:
Canterbury is the higher rack, but Winchester is the better manger. The Pope
then with the Kings good liking, removed to Canterbury Simon Langham Bishop
of Ely and Treasurer of England. He was first a Monk of Westminster. then Prior, and
lastly Abbot there. Thence he was elected Bishop of London; but before he was
consecrate thereunto, obtained Ely, where he continued five years. He received
his pall by the hands of the Bishop of Bathe, in Saint Nicholas Chapel at
Westminster, Nouemb. 4. 1366. and was enthronized the Lady day following. He
was Archbishop but a little while, viz. two years or little more, and
therefore did not many things very memorable. There was a great strife between
the Londoners and their Clergy about tything, which he thus composed; he took
order that they should pay, their offerings, personal tithes, and then also for
the rest a farthing of every 10. s. rent. From Canterbury College (which his
predecessor had founded) he sequestered the fruits of the benefice of Pagham,
and otherwise molested the scholars there, intending to displace them all, and
to put in Monks; which in the end he brought to pass. John Wickliffe was one
of them that were so displaced, and had withstoode the Archbishop in this
business with might and maine. By the Popes favor and the Archbishops power,
the Monks ouerbore Wickliffe and his fellows. If then Wickliffe were angry
with Pope, Archbishop, monks, and all, you cannot marvel. But to return to
our Archbishop, he sat here only two years. For being made Cardinal of
Saint Sixtus by Pope Urban the fi^t, September 21. 1368. he left his
Archbishopricke and went to Auinion; where shortly after he was made Bishop
Cardinal of Preneste by Gregory the eleventh, and held diverse livings in
Commendam, as the Archdeaconry and Treasurership of Wels with other. He lived
there in great estimation about eight years, and died July 22. 1376. of the
same disease his predecessor had done, viz. a palsy, wherewith he was
suddenly taken as he sat at dinner. He was buried first in the Church of the
Carthusians (whose house he had founded) at Auinion: but after three years,
his bones (by his own appointment while he lived) were taken up, and buried a
second time at Westminster, in a goodly toombe of alabaster. It is scarce
credible that is reported of his wonderful bounty and liberality to that
Monastery, I mean Westminster. When he was first made Abbot, he bestowed all
that he had gathered together being Monk and Prior, in paying the debt of the
house, which was to the value of two thousand and two hundred marks: he
discharged it every whit, and diverse other sums of money also, that
particular Monks did owe: whom he tendered and cherished as his own children,
never taking any thing from them, but rather augmenting their portions out of
that which was due to himself. Being Chancellor and Treasurer, he purchased
diverse good pieces of land and gave it unto them. When he went out of England,
he left them books to the value of 830. pound, and copes, vestments, etc.
esteemed worth 437. pound. At his death he bequeathed unto them all his plate,
prised at 2700. pound, and all his debts any where due; they amounted unto
3954. l. thriteen shillinge and four pence. He also sent unto the said
Monastery the sum of one thousand marks to buy ^orty marks a year land, to
increase the portions of four monks that daily should say Mass for the souls
of himself and his parents. To say nothing of the Monastery which he built for
the Carthusians at Auinion, the money that he bestowed only upon the Abbey of
Westminster one way or other, is reckoned by a Monk of the same to be no
less than 10800. l. They caused this Epitaph to be engraven upon his toombe,
Simon de Langham sub pet^is hijs tumulatus,
Istius Ecclesiae Monachus fuerat, Prior, Abbas;
Sede vacant, fuit electus Londoniensis
Praesul, and insignis Ely, sed postea Primas
Totius regni, magnus Regisque minister:
Nam Thesaurarius and Cancellarius eius,
Ac Cardinalis in Roma Presbyter iste.
Postque Praenestinus est factus Episcopus, at que
Nuncius ex part Papae transmittitur is^ue.
Orb dolente, pater, quem nunc reuoca^e nequimus,
Magdalenae festo, milleno septuageno
Etter centeno sexto Christi ruit anno.
Hunc Deus absoluat de cunctis quae male gessit,
Et meritis matris sibi coelica gaudia donet,


William Wittlesey.
SImon Islip was uncle unto a young man named William Wittlesey, 1368 Edw. 3.43.
whom he caused carefully to be brought up, and directed unto the study of the
Canon law. Having at Oxford proceeded Doctor in that faculty, his uncle (that
now was become Archb.) sent him to Rome, that there he might both solicit all
his causes, and also get experience by seeing the practice of that Court. After
he had stayed there a while, he was called home and preferred by his uncle
aforesaid, unto the place of vicar general, then to the Deanery of the Arches,
the Archdeaconry of Huntingdon, the Parsonages of Croydon and Clyff, and
lastly, the Bishopric of Rochester. From Rochester he was removed to
Worcester, (his uncle yet living and ioying much in this his advancement) the
year, 1363. From thence some say he was translated to London; but that I take
to be mistaken. Simo^ Sudbury was Bishop of London before he came to Worcester,
and so continued till that after his death he succeeded him in Canterbury.
Thither this man was advanced by the Popes only authority presently after
Simon Langham was made Cardinal, viz. the year 1368. At two several synods he
preached in Latin very learnedlie; The latter of those sermons he could hardly
end for sickness, wherewith he had been so much troubled before, as for two
years space he was feign to keep his chamber almost altogether. Not being able
to resist the force of this tedious wearing disease any longer, he paid the
debt of his mortality. October. 11. (or as T. Walsingham has Iul. 5) 1374.
having continued in this see almost 7. years. He was buried over against his
uncle between two pillars, under a fair marble toomb inlaide with brass,
which is lately defaced by tearing out the brass; I remember that some
sixeteen years since I read the Epitaph engraven upon the same. This man
procured the Uniuersity of Oxford to be exempt from the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Lincoln, and all authority of governing the same to be committed
unto the Chancellor and Proctors.

57 Simon Sudbury.
1375. Edw. 3.50.
PResently after the death of William Wittlesey, the Monks of Canterbury
elected for their Arcbishop a certain Cardinal that was an Englishman born,
but thoroughly Italianate, having lead his life in a manner altogether at Rome.
I take it his name was Adam Easton. The King with this choice of theirs was so
grievously offended, as he determined to banish them (the Monks I mean) out
of the Realm, and to confiscate their goods. Gregory the 11. that then was
Pope, though he favored his Cardinal, to shield the poor Monks from the
danger of such a tempest, was content to refuse this election, and to bestow
the Archbishopricke by way of provision upon Simon Sudbury Bishop of London,
whom he knew the King liked well enough. This Simon was the son of a Gentleman,
named Nigellus Tibold, so that his true name was Simon Tibold: But he was borne
at Sudbury a town of Suffolk in the parish of S. George, and of that town
took his name, according to the manner of many Clergy men in those days. He
was always brought up at school, and being yet very young, was sent by his
father beyond the seas to study the canon law, and having proceeded Doctor of
that faculty, became household Chapleine unto Pope Innocent, and one of the
Judges or Auditors of his Rota. The said Pope by way of provision thrust him
first into the Chancellorship of Salisbury, and then afterward^ viz. the year,
1364. into the Bishopric of London. He received the bulls of his translation
thence, June 6. 1375. Two Synods or Conuocations were held in his time, at both
which he preached in Latin in his own person. Sir years one month and ten
days he governed the Sea of Canterbury laudably, and at last was most
unworthily slain, or rather wickedly murdered by a company of villainous
Rebels. By the instigation of one John Bal a seditious malecontent and
hypocritical preacher, the baser sort of the Commons arose in diverse parts of
the realm, and intending to destroy all gentlemen, lawyers, cleargymen, and
whosoever were of any account, either for their riches, lineage or authority in
the commonwealth came up to London, appointing for their leaders, VVat Tyler,
Jack Straw, John Lister, Robert Westbrom, etc. The king understanding of their
coming, sent unto them to know the cause of their repair in so great numbers.
They answered, they were to impart unto him certain matters greatly importing
the state of the common wealth; which if he would understand, he should
speedily resort unto them. The king having received this saucy answer, began
to consult with his friends whether he were best to go to them or not. The
greater number persuaded him to go. But the Archbishop and Sir Robert Hales
Treasurer of England, dissuaded him saying, it was a thing not only indigne
and shameful for a Prince to be commanded by such rascals, but also dangerous
unto his person to commit himself to a route of seditious people, that having
once broken the ba^ds of all duty and allegiance, feared no more to violate
the sacred majesty of their anointed prince then to wrong their neighbors of
far meaner condition, of whom they had already slain, spoiled and robbed an
infinite number; for which cause they thought it more safe for the king, more
honorable and every way more expedient, to gather some power together
speedily, and to set upon them; who being yet unprovided of armor, destitute
of good leaders, and without all skill or experience of warlike affairs, would
soon he dispersed and overthrown. This speech of theirs (I know no^ by what
tell-tales) was carried unto the rebels, who swear by and by they would have
off the heads of these cruel counselors. So in all haste to the Tower they
came, where the Court then lay; requiring with great outcries the Archbishop,
and the said sir Robert Hales to be delivered unto them. The Archbishop having
heard seem inckling of their intent the day before, had spent all that night in
prayer, and just when they called for him, was saying of Mass in the Chapel
of the Tower. That ended, and hearing of their coming; Let v^ now go (says
he unto his men) Surely it is best to die, seeing to live it can be no
pleasure. With that, in came these murtherous rebels crying, where is the
Traitor? where is the Traitor? He answered, I am the Archbishop (whom I think
you seek) but no Traitor. With great violence then they drew him out of the
chapel and carried him to the Tower Hill. Seeing there nothing but swords,
and weapons, and hearing nothing but Kill, kill, away with the Traitor; Yet he
was not so amazed, but with great eloquence he could go about to persuade them
not to imbrue their hands in the blood of their Archbishop, their chief
pastor, that had never offended them to his knowledge, nor deserved so cruel a
death at their handes^ assuring them, that all the Realm would be interdicted
for it, that the fact must needs be punished first or last by the temporal
law; and lastly that though both these failed, God the just judge would revenge
it either in this, or the world to come, if not both. He was a man admirably
wise, and exceeding well spoken. But these varlets were so eagerly bent, as the
very songs of the Sirens would nothing have moved them at all from their
intended course. Seeing therefore nothing but death before his face, with a
very cheerful countenance, and comfortable words, forgiving the executioner
(that scarce ever requested him so to do) he kneeled down and yielded himself
unto their fury. Once he was stricken in the neck so weakly, as that
notwithstanding, he kneeled still upright, and putting his hand up to the
wound, he used these words, a ha, it is the hand of God. He had not removed
his hand from the place when a second stroke cut off his fingers ends, and
felled him to the ground. After much ado, having hacked and hewn his neck
with eight blows, they got off his head. This horrible murder was committed
upon Friday, June 14. 1381. all which day, and a part of the next, his body lay
there headless, no man daring to offer it burial: as for his head, they
nailed his hood upon it, and so fixing it upon a po^le, set it on London
Bridge. Sir Robert Hales and a great many of others that day tasted of the same
cup the Archbishop had done. Thus ended this noble Prelate his days, who
though he were very wise, learned, eloquent, liberal, merciful, and for his
age and place reverend, yet might it not deliver him from the rage of this
beast with many heads the multitude; then which being once incensed, there is
no bruit beast more cruel, more outrageous, more unreasonable. How this
monstrous tumult was appeased at the last, and the Authors of the same
punished, according to their demerites, the Chronicles at large declare. Only
this I think fit to remember, that one John Starling who boasted to have
beheaded him, within few days after lost his own head for the same, as he had
well deserved. The body of this our Archbishop, after all st^rres ended, was
carried to Canterbury, and there honorably enterred upon the South side of the
Altar of S. Dunstan, a little above the toombe of Bishop Stratford. Being yet
Bishop of London, he builded the upper end of Saint Gregory's church at
Sudbury; and in the place where his fathers house stood, founded a goodly
College, which he furnished with secular Clearkes and other Ministers. At the
time of the suppression thereof, it was valued at one hundred twenty two
pounds eighteen shillings lands by the year. After his translation to
Canterbury, he built the West gate of the City, and all the wall from that gate
unto Norgate, commonly called ^y the name of the long wall; A great work, no
less necessary and profitable unto the City, th^n costly and chargeable unto
the builder.

58 William Courtney.
Soon after the lamentable death of Simon Sudbury, 1138 Ric. 2.5.
the Monks of Canterbury elected for their Archbishop William Courtney
Bishop of London, and the Pope knowing nothing of their election, about the
same time bestowed the Archbishopricke upon him by way of provision. He was
the son of Hugh Courtney Earl of Devonshire, in his youth studied the Canon
Law, and no sooner entered into orders, but he was quickly loaded with
spiritual living enough, as a Prebend in Wels, an other in Exceter, and a
third in York, beside benefices with cure in now. The year 1369. he was
consecrate Bishop of Hereford, sat there five years and a half, and then
removed to London, at what time Simon Sudbury was made Archbishop. Thomas
Walsingham adds to these former honors, that the year 1378 he was made
Cardinal, concerning which matter see London. The Bulls of his trantiation to
Canterbury were published in Christ church there January 9. 1381. Having then
received his temporalties of the King, and done his homage, he went to
Lambhith. Thither came unto him a Monk sent from the Covent and Prior of
Canterbury, to deliver him his Cross, which he did in the Chapel of
Lambhith, using these words; Reverend Father I am the messenger of the great
King that does require and command you to take on you the government of his
Church, to love and defend the same. In token whereof I deliver you this his
ensign. Soon after he received his Pall, and then being thoroughly settled,
began his Metropoliticall Uisitation, which he intended to perform in every
Dioces of his Province. Having passed quietly through Rochester, Chichester,
Bathe and Worceter^ at Exceter he found some resistance, as well as Simon
Mepham his predecessor had done. After the time of his first inhibition, he
prorogued diverse times the day of his visitation; and when he had sat^, was not
so hasty in granting a relaxation of the inhibition as they would have him.
Hereby it came to pass that the Bishop and his Archdeacons were suspended
from their jurisdiction longer, (as it seemed unto them) then they ought, and
not disposed to awaite the Archbishops pleasure any longer, rushed into their
jurisdictions again, his visitation nothing near finished, commanding all men
upon pain of excommunication, to repair unto their wonted ordinaries for
proof of Wills, administrations, institutions, or any other such like
occasions. This commandment published in many places of the Dioces, the
Archbishop pronounced to be void; and required all men in these and the like
cases to repair unto him, and none other. Herupon the Bishop appealed to Rome,
and the Archbishop cited diverse of the Bishops officers to appear before
him. His Apparitor (named Peter Hill) had also in his bosom a citation for the
Bishop himself. It happened that some of the Bishops followers, meeting this
gentle Somner at Tapsham, beat him well and thristily, and after forced him to
eat the citation, wax, paper and all. This fact was very prejudicial to the
Bishop of Exceters cause: For it incensed the king against him; insomuch as
though a while he did prosecute his appeal at Rome diligently, he saw
himself so ouerborne by the king, he was like to do no good at all, and
therefore resolved to make his peace with the Archbishop upon reasonable
conditions which he easily obtained. But they that had abused his Apparator,
were put to terrible penance in diverse parts of the realm, and were feign to
perform the same. One William Bid a Doctor of the Arches had given counsel
unto the Bishop in this cause: for so doing he was displaced, and upon that
occasion an oathe was ordained of this Archbishop, that every Advocate of that
Court should take at his admission. This Uisitation ended, the Archbishop
proceeded to the Dioces of Salisbury, where he likewise found some resistance
The Bishop there had procured a privilege from Pope Boniface ( Urban the 6
being lately dead) that it should not be lawful for any Metropolitan to
visit him or his Dioces by virtue of any authority granted from Pope Vrbane.
The Archbishop (that was a great Lawyer) knew well enough he had power of
himself, as being Metropolitan to visit without the Popes license; and
therefore proceeded boldly (notwithstanding that vain privilege) and so
canuased the Bishop with excommunications and ecclesiastical censures, as he
was feign to yield at last and cry peccaui. Since that time our Archbishop^
have visited quietly all Diocesses of their Province without resistance.
Toward the latter end of his time he procured a license of the Pope to gather
four pence of the pound in all Ecclesiastical preferments within his
Province. The Bishop of Lincoln refused to make this collection in his Dioces,
and appealed unto the Pope. That appeal yet depending, the Archbishop died
July 31. 1396. at Maidstone, when he had sat 12. years lacking one month. The
old work at Maidstone first built by Boniface his predecessor for an
hospital, he pulled down and building it after a more stately manner,
translated it into a College of secular Priests, which at the time of the
suppression was valued at one hundred thirty nine pounds seven shillings Axe
pence by the year. The church of Mepham quite fallen down, he repaired again
and built certain Alms houses near it for the use of poor people. In
building and enlarging of his houses he bestowed much, especially upon his
Castle of S^ltwoo^. Toward the reparation of the body of his Church and
Cloisters he gave 1000. marks; He gave also unto the same Church a certain
image of silver, waighing one hundred and threscore pounds, two vestments, and
thirteen coapes of great value, besides a number of books. He lies buried
upon the South side of Thomas Beckets shrine, at the f^et o^ the Black Prince,
in a goodly Toombe of Alabaster.

59. Thomas Arundel.
BY the Popes provision Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Yorks was removed to
Canterbury about Christ^^s a^^er William Courtneyes death, and presently
thereupon (...) over his office of the Chancellorship of England. His (...) more
published at Canterbury, January 11. Soon after (...) Cross was delivered unto
him at Westminster by Hen(...) the Prior of Canterbury with accustomed so(...)
in the presence of the King and many nobles, Febr. (...) he received his pall,
and the 19. of the same mo(...) ^^^^ronized at Canterbury with great pomp. He
(...) unto Robert Earl of Arundel and Warren first Bishop of Ely, then of
York. See more of him there. Scarce was he warm in his seat, when by the
kings displeasure he was dispossessed of the same. In the second year of his
translation a Parliament was held at London. The King there accused the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earl of Arundell that was the Archbishops brother and diverse
other of high treason. Now because Clergy men were forbidden by the Canons to
be present at any trial or judgment upon life and death; the matter being
once proposed, all the Bishops departed the house as their manner was in like
eases. The Archbishop being absent upon this occasion, was condemned together
with his brother of high treason; for which his brother was presently executed,
and he commanded within forty days to depart the realm upon pain of death.
He (thus banished) got him to Rome, and found such favor with the Pope, as
first he was content to write earnestly unto the king for his restitution; and
when he could do no good that way, he translated him to the Archbishopricke of
S. Andrews in Scotland, intending to heap so much Ecclesiastical living upon
him by benefices, etc. in England, as he should be able to live in state
honorable enough. The king understanding of his intent, writ a marvelous
sharp letter unto the Pope; telling him plainly he must repute him for his
enemy, if he yielded any manner of succor unto him, whom he knew well to hat^
him deadly. That letter so wrought with the Pope, as after that time he never
endeavored to prefer him farther; and moreover, at the Kings request made
Roger Walden (Deane of York, and treasurer of England) Archbishop of
Canterbury in his room, who thereupon was consecrate, inthronised, held Synods
and did all things belonging unto that place the space of two years. If
happened in the mean time that the king ( Richard the second) was deposed; or
at least enforced to resign his crown unto Henry Duke of Lancaster, that
after possessed the same by the name of king Henry the fourth. Boniface the
Pope understanding then of the fall of king Richard pronounced the said Roger to
be an intruder and usurper of the Archbishopricke, and by his omnipotent bulls
restored Thomas Arundell unto the same again. As for Roger Walden that was now
a Bishop without a Bishopric (for Episcopatus is ordo, and so Character
indelebilis) he lived in that state a while, till at last by the kind endeavor
of the Archb. his charitable adversary, he was promoted unto the Bishopric
of London, which he enjoyed but a short time, being taken away by death within
one year after. About a twelve month after the Archb. restitution, a
conuocatio^ was held at London, whither the K. sent the Earls of Northumberland
and Westmerland, that told the Clergy they came from the King, but not of that
errand that Courtiers were wont to be sent for to that place; they came not
for money, but only to signify the kings hearty and favorable good will unto
them, and to request their daily prayers for him and the good estate of the
Realm. This new broom with sweeping so clean at the first, was so worn out
unto the stumpes, in a year of two, as not conten^ed with a bare tenth, the
next convocation after, he was very angry that a more liberal allowance was not
made unto him; and began to hearken unto the sacrilegious motions of certain
impious politicians, that intending to cast the burden of all subsidies and
other kind of tributes upon the Clergy, let not to say openly in the
parliament house, how the laity was not able to yield any thing to the Kings
coffers, for that the clergy had all the wealth of the land in their hands:
And therefore the king must either take from them their temporalties, or else
lay all the burden upon them that only were able to beat it. The Archbishop
(that was undoubtedly a worthy prelate, wise and very stout) rose up and
proved by manifest arguments that the contributions of the Clergy were after
the proportion of their ability, much more liberal then the subsidies or other
paiments of the temporalty in many respects. For (says he) we pay the tenth of
our livings oftener then they pay fifteenths, and though we serve not in the
wars our selves, our servants and tenants do; neither are we altogether idle,
in as much as we pray daily for the king and the realm, as well in time of
peace as war. The prolocutor of the lower house of parliament at that time
was a knight called Sir John Clyen, that having been a Clergy man sometimes,
without any dispensation forsook the calling and became a soldier. This
profane Apostata was not ashamed to say, it was no matter for their prayers,
so the king might have their money. I see now (quoth the Archbishop) whither the
fortune of this Realm tends, the prayers of the Church being despised,
which should appease the wrath of God justly kindled against us by the daily
monstrous iniquities of our age. Perceiving then that the King (who at his
first coming to the crown had made many open and public protestations of his
love to the Church, and his intent to defend and protect the same to the
utmost) that he I say began to hearken somewhat too patiently to these wicked
motions; he turned him toward him, and making low ob^isance, humbly besought
him, it would please his majesty to remember those gracious and most honorable
speeches, wherein he had often signified his resolute determination of
protecting the Church from all injury, as also his oath taken to the same
purpose at the time of his coronation, the danger and dishonor of breaking
the same; and lastly, that he should fear to offend him by whom Kings reign,
and before whose tribunal all princes and monarchs never so great must one day
come to be judged. The King seemed to be somewhat moved with these words, and
desiring the Archbishop to take his place again, well (quoth he) howsoever I
do otherwise I will leave the Church in as good estate as I found it. The
Archbishop then turning him about unto the Proloquutor and certain other
knights of the lower house that accompanied him: You it was (says he) and such
as you are that persuaded the last king to take into his hand all such Celles
in England as appertained unto any religious houses of France or Normandy,
assuring him it would so stuff his coffers, as he could not want in many
years after, and there is no question, but the land belonging to such celles
was worth an infinite sum of money: Howbeit it is certain and well enough
known, that within one year after he had taken that course, he was not the
value of half a mark the richer; and how he thriued afterward otherwise, I
need not tell you. After that time there were no other attempts against the
Church in his days. But the clergy were so terrified with that wavering
doubtfulnesse of the king, as they durst not but grant him a tenth every year
after; and though there were no other occasion, the Archbishop was feign to
call a convocation even for that purpose. His end (being as some report it) was
very miserable: his tongue swelled so big in his mouth, as he was able neither
to eat, drink nor speak in many days before his death, and died at last of
hunger Febr. 20. 1413. when he had sat one month above 17. years. He^ lies
buried on the Northside of the body of Christ church in Canterbury, at the West
end whereof toward the North, he built a fair spire ste^ple called to this
day by the name of Arundell steeple, and bestowed a goodly ring of five bells
upon the same; the first of them, he dedicated to the holy trinity; the second
to the blessed Uirgin, the third to the Angel Gabriell; the fourth to Saint
Blase, and the fifth to Saint John the Evangelist.

60. Henry Chichley.
1414. Hen. 5.3.
AFter the death of Thomas Arundell, Henry Chichley Bishop of Saint David's was
elected by the Covent of Canterbury to succeed him. Now though many Laws had
been made against the Popes usurped authority in bestowing Ecclesiastical
preferments by the way of prouision^ Yet durst not this man consent unto this
election so made; but committed the matter unto the Popes determination, who
first pronounced the election of the monks void and then bestowed the
Archbishopricke upon him. This Henry Chichley was borne Highamferrys in
Northamptonshire, brought up in New College in Oxford (where he proceeded
Doctor of Law) and first preferred unto the Chancellorship of Salisbury. Having
been employed much in Embassages and other businesses of the king (wherein he
ever behaved himself wisely and to the Kings great good liking) by his means
he was made first Bishop of S. David's, and then afterward Archbi. by his
son king Henry the fifth. He received his pall at the hands of the Bishop of
Winchester, the 29. of July. 1414. and bought of the king the fruits of the
vacacy (which was half a year) for six hundred marks. The year 1428. he
was made the Popes Legate, but refused to exercise his power Legantin^ further
then he was authorized thereunto by the King. He was a man happy (enjoying
always his princes favor, wealth, honor and all kind of prosperity many
years) wise in governing his See laudably, bountiful in bestowing his goods to
the behoof of the common wealth, and lastly stout and ^euers in due
administration of justice. For the town of Highamferris where he was borne, he
obtained and bestowed diverse important benefices, and in the same the year
1425. he began at once the foundation of a goodly College and a hospital:
the College, for eight secular Priests fellows, four Clerks, and six
Queristers, which partly by him, partly by his executors, to wit his two
brethren, was so endowed, as at the time of the sac^ilegious suppressing of the
same, it was valewed at 156. pound and two shillings by the year. The hospital
was for poor people, endowed likewise liberally. Those two foundations
finished, he began two other at Oxford; one called Bernard College suppressed
by King Henry the eight, and renewed or newly founded by Sir Tho. White (who
named it S. John's College) and All Souls College, which yet continues in such
state as he left the same, one of the fairest and seemliest of our Uniuersity.
K. Henry the sixth gave unto that College at his request the lands of certain
priors aliens, to wit of 4. priories, of Albervery in Shropshire, Rumney in
Kent, Languenith in Southwales, and Wodon Pinkney in Northamptonshire. This
Archbishop moreover bestowed much money in repairing the library at Canterbury,
and then replenished the same with a number of goodly books: He gave unto his
Church many rich ornaments and jewels of great price, and built a great part of
the Tower called Oxford Tower in the the said Church. William Molash Prior
there (that I may take any occasion to record so good a deed) the year 1430.
furnished that Tower with a goodly bell remaining there to this day and known
by the name of Bell Dunstan. The Diameter of that Bell at the lowest brim is
two yards and somewhat more. But to return to Henry Chichley, no Archbishop
ever enjoyed that honor so long as he did in 500. years before him. He sat
29. years, and dying April 12. 1443. was laid in a very fair toombe built
by him self in his lifetime, standing upon the North side of the Presbitery.
On it I find engraven this Epitaph,

Hic iacet Henr. Chicheley Ll. Doctor quondam Cancellarius Sarum, qui anno
septimo Henr. 4. Regis ad Gregorium Papam 12. in Ambassiata transmissus, in
ciuitate Senensi per manus eiusdem Papae in Episcopum Meneuensem consecratus
est. Hic etiam Henricus anno 2. Henr. 5. Regis, in hac sancta ecclesia in
Archiepiscopum postulatus and a Ioanne Papa 23. ad candem translatus, qui obijt
anno. dom. 1443. mensis Apr. die 12.

Coetus sanctorum concorditer iste precetur,
Vt D^us ipsorum meritis sibi propicietur.
61. John Stafford.
1443 Hen. 6.22.
EVgenius 4. the Pope, of his absolute authority translated then from Bath and
Wels John Stafford. He was son unto the Earl of Stafford, borne at Hook in
Dorsetshire in the parish of Abbots-bury, and brought up in Oxford, where also
he proceeded Doctor of Law. A while he practiced in the Arches, even until
Henry Chichley the Archbishop made him his Uicar general there. By his favor
also he obtained the Deanery of Saint Martins in London, and the prebend of
Milton in the Church of Lincoln. King Henry the fifth a little before his death
began to favor him much, found means to prefer him first to the Deanery of
Wells; then a Prebend in the Church of Salisbury, and afterward made him one of
his privy Counsel, then keeper of the privy seal, and in the end Treasurer of
England. This renowned King being taken away by untimely death, though he
found not his passage so clear, yet he still went forward in the way of
preferment, and obtained of Pope Martin the fifth, the Bishopric of Bath and
Wels the yeer^ 1425. Eighteen year he continued in that See, and August 23.
1443. was removed to Canterbury. In the mean time, viz. the year 1431. in
February he was made Chancellor of England, and held that office (which you
shall hardly find any other man to have done) eighteen years, even until
the year 1449. Waxing weary then of so painful a place, he resigned
voluntarily the same. He sat Archbishop almost nine years. Holding a
convocation at London the year 1452. he fell sick, and thereupon departed to
Maidstone, where shortly after he died, viz. July 6. He lies buried at
Canterbury in the place called the Martyrdom, under a flat marble stone,
whereupon I find engraven this Epitaph: Quis suit enuclees quem celas saxea
moles?
Stafford Antistes, fuerat dictusque Ioannes.
Qua sedit sede, marmor quaeso simul ede?
Pridem Bathoniae, regnitotius and inde
Primas egregius. Propraesule sunde precatus.
Aureolam gratus huic det de virgin natus.
See more of this man in Bath and Wells.

62. John Kemp.
THe funeral rites and exequies of John Stafford being performed, 1452. Hen.
6.31.
the monks with the kings license proceeded to election of a new Archbishop,
and made choice of John Kemp Archbishop of York, that had been brought vp^ at
Oxford in Merton College; there then the Pope would not allow of the monks
election, but yet not daring to put any other into the place, of his own good
nature he bestowed it upon the same man that they had chosen. He received his
cross September 24. 1452. at London, and his pall the next day at Fulham, by
the hands of Thomas Kemp the Bishop of London his nephew. December. 11. following
he was inthronized with great pomp and solemnity. This Archbishop was borne at
Wye in Kent: Being Doctor of Law he was made first Archdeacon of Durham, then
Deane of the Arches and Uicar general unto the Archbishop. The year 1418. he
was consecrate Bishop of Rochester, removed thence to Chichester 1422. from
Chichester to London the same year, and from London to York 1425. Dec. 18.
1439. he was made Cardinal of Saint Balbine, and afterward being Archbishop
of Canterbury was removed to the title of S. Rufine. These his preferments one
briefly expressed in this verse: B^s primas, ter praeses and bis cardine
functus.
He continued not at Canterbury above a year and a half, but died a very
old man March 22. 1453. While he was yet Archbishop of York he converted the
parish Church of Wye where he was borne into a college; in which he placed
secular Priests to attend divine service, and to teach the youth of the parish.
Their governor was called a Prebendary. This college at the time of the
suppression was valued at fowerscore and 13. pound two shillings by the year.
His father and mother lie buried in the said Church with this Epitaph, Hic
sistunt ossa Thomae Kemp marmore fossa,
Cuius opus pronum se probat esse bonum,
Dum vixit laetus fuit and bonitate repletus,
Munificus viguit pauperibus tribuit.
Iungitur huic satrix virtutum sponsa Beatrix
Quae partitur opes sponte iuuans inopes.
Ex his processit vt ramus ab arbore crescit
Cleri praesidium, dux sapiens ouium.
Christo lectoris men's cunctis supplicet horis
Vt patur Deitas luminet has animas.


This Archbishop was also a benefactor unto our Uniuersity of Oxford. He died
very rich, and in his life time advanced diverse of his kindred to great wealth;
some to the dignity of knighthood, whose posterity continue yet of great
worship and reputation. His body was buried in a seemly monument on the
Southside of the Presbytery a little above the Archbishop^ See. Of him read
more in York.

63. Thomas Bourchier.
1454. Hen. 6.33.
ABout a fortnight after the death of Bishop Kemp the Covent of Canterbury made
suit unto the king ( Henry the 6.) for license to choose a new Archbishop. He
granted the same absolutely, never making any kind of request or motion, for
any man. April 22. 1454. they elected Thomas Bourchier, Bishop of Ely. He was
son unto Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, brought up in Oxford (of which
University he became Chauncellor anno 1434. and continued so three years)
preferred first to the Deanery of S. Martins, then to the Bishopric of
Worcester, from whence the year 1443. he was translated to Ely. The Pope that
now saw his provisions were little regarded in England, was content to allow of
the monks election, and confirmed the same by his bulls which were published at
Canterbury August 22. and January 26. following, he was e^thronized.
Afterward, to wit Sept. 18. 1464. the Pope bestowed a Cardinals hat upon him,
which was brought unto him by the Archbishop of Rauenna December 9. following.
He continued Archbishop 32. years, lived after the time of his first
consecration 51. years, and departed this world March 30. 1486. I ^inde not
that ever any English man continued so long a Bishop; or that any Archbishop,
either before or after him in 800. years enjoyed that place so long. I marvel
much that in all that while he never endeavored to leave behind him some
monument or other for preservation of his memory. Of good deeds worth
remembrance, I find only this, that he gave unto the Uniuersity of Came. 120.
pound, which together with 100. pound heretofore given by one Bellingforth are
kept in the Congregation house, in a chest called the chest of Billingforth and
Bowrser. He lies buried upon the north side of the high altar in a reasonable
fair marble tomb, bearing this inscription, Hic iacet reuerendissimus pater
and Dominus, D. Thomas Bourchier quondam sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, S.
Cyriaci^n Thermis Cardinalis and Archiepiscopus huius Ecclesiae, qui obijt 30.
Die Martij 1486. cuius animae etc. See more of him in Ely.

64. John Moorton.
John Moorton was borne at Beer or Bery in Dorsetshire, 1487. Hen. 6.3.
and brought up a while in the Uniuersity of Oxford; where having spent some
time in the study of the Civil and Canon law, he proceeded Doctor of that
faculty, and then became an advocate of the Arches. By reason of his practice
there, the Archbishop his predecessor (Thomas Bouchier) got knowledge of his
manifold good parts, his great learning in the law^ his wisdom, discretion and
other virtues; which he not only rewarded by preferring him to much good
spiritual living, but also commended him unto the king, who made him of his
privy Council. In all those miseries and a^flictions which that good king
endured ( Henry the 6.) he ever stuck fast to him, and by no means would be
drawn to forsake him when all the world in a manner betook them to his
victorious adversary. This so notable loyalty and faithfulness king Edward
himself honored so much in him, as king Henry being dead, he never ceased to
allure him to his service, and having woone him, swear him of his Council, and
trusted him with his greatest secrets; assuring himself belike, that he that
had been so faithful unto his adversary in so great adversity, would no doubt
be as faithful unto him in the like case if occasion should serve. After many
years trial of him and diverse other preferments whereunto he advanced him, he
procured him to be elected unto the Bishopric of Ely, the year 1454. Not
long after his consecration to that See, it happened king Edward to die, who not
reposing greater trust in any one then in this Bishop, made him one of his
executors. The Duke of York therefore his unnatural brother, intending by the
destruction of his children to make a passage for himself unto the Crown, and
knowing how watchful an eye this man carried over them, as also how impossible
it was to corrupt him and draw him to be a partner in his wicked consort^
accused him of many great and unlikely treasons, for which he committed him to
the Tower. The innocence of the man would not suffer him to lie there long: Not
being able to stamp upon him any probability of such matter as he laid to his
charge, he took him thence and delivered him to the keeping of the Duke of
Buckingham; who at that time lay for the most part at the Castle of Breknock in
Wales. This Duke was the only instrument of displacing the children of K.
Edward from the crown, and procured the same to be most unjustly set upon the
head of their wicked uncle the Duke of York before mentioned, who was
appointed protector of them and the realm, These lambs committed unto the
keeping of such a wolf, were soon devoured, being not only despoyled of the
rule and government of the kingdom which descended unto them by inheritance,
but of their lives also, which were violently taken from them, by smoothering
the poor innocent children between fether beds. Now whether it were the
detestration of this abominable murder (which the Duke of Buckingham
pretended) or the unthankfulness of the tyrant, in not gratifying him according
to his expectation, (which is the opinion of most men) or the envy of his so
great adua^ncement, whereof he thought himself b^tter worthy (which also is
like enough) certain it is, that he quickly be^an to grow malecontent, and
being egged on by the Bishop his ghest, entered at last into a conspiracy
against the said King, plotted the remoouing of him, and endeavored to match
the Earl of Richmond heir of the house of Lancaster with the eldest daughter
of King Edward, that (her brethren being made away) was now out of all question
heir of the house of York, so to throw down headlong the tyrant from the
throne which he usurped, to restore it to them to whom of right it appertained,
and to join in one these two noble houses, whose contention had wasted away
almost all the nobility of the land. How this device was debated between the
Duke and the Bishop, every Chronicle reports. To let that pass, when the
Bishop saw the Duke had waded so far in the matter as step back he could
not, and seeing how he was able to do the Earl of Richmond better service
elsewhere th^n where he was; he found a means to slip away in a night
disguised, never making his host the Duke acquainted with his departure. And
first he ga^e him into his Isle of Ely: but not daring to stay there long^ he
took ship and sailed into Flannders. It pleased God, that as the Duke had
been a partner with the tyrant in his offense, so he should be a partner also
with him in the punishment. For being destitute of the advice of this wise
prelate, or rather I may say destitute of the protection of God that had
determined to revenge his disloyalty unto his natural prince, he fell soon
after into the hands of his enemy (the usurping K.) that cut off his head, and
was within a short space after overthrown himself and slain in the field by
the noble Earl of Richmond, who took upon him the government of our land by
the name of King Henry the 7. He calling home this our Bishop, made him
Chancellor of England, and Thomas Bourchier the Archbishop dying, he found
means that the monks of Canterbury elected him for successor; and the Pope
not only confirmed and allowed readily of their choice, Oct. 6. 1486. but also
within few years after, to wit, September 20. 149^. created him Cardinal of
Saint Anastasia, Thirteen years he enjoyed quietly the Archbishopricke, and
died at last at his manner of Knoll the year 1500. in the month of October.
At his first coming he laid a great imposition upon the Clergy of his
Province, forcing them by the Popes authority to contribute so largely toward
the charges of his translation, as of his own Dioces only (which is one of
the least in England) he received 354. pound. The year before he died, with
great charge he procured Anselme one of his predecessors to be canonized a
Saint. He bequeathed in a manner all he had either unto good uses, or unto
such of his servants as he had yet been able to do nothing for. He gave unto
the King a portuis, to the Queen a Psalter, to the Lady Margaret his
God-daughter a cup of gold and forty pound in money, to the Church of Ely his
miter and his cross. Unto his kinsefolke and other friends he gave nothing as
having preferred them sufficiently in his life time. His executors he bound by
oath to maintain sufficiently twenty poor scholars at Oxford, and ten at
Cambridge for the space of twenty years after his decease. He bestowed great
sums in repairing and augmenting his houses at Knoll, Maid stone, Alington
park, Charing, Ford, Lambith and Canterbury, and built while he lived a
sumptuous chapel in the vndercroft or vault which is under the quier. He
lies buried in the said chapel under a marble stone: Howbeit a goodly tomb
is erected in memory of him upon the south side of the chapel. See more of
him in Ely.

65. Henry Deane.
1501. Hen. 7.17.
BIshop Moorton being dead, the monks of Canterbury chose Thomas Langton Bishop
of Winchester for their Archbishop: But he died of the plague before his
translation could be persited. Then they elected Henry Deane Bishop of
Salisbury. At what time Perkin Warbeck began to show himself in ye likeness of
Richard the young Duke of York, king Edwards second son. This Henry Deane
was Abbot of Lanthony, and had been brought up in the Uniuersity of Oxford.
King Henry the seventh that knew him to be a wise and industrious man, made
him Chancelour of Ireland, where this ^ounterfet Duke began first to play his
part. By his care and diligence he was driven out of Ireland, and forced to
fly into Scotland. The rather in regard of this good service, the king
procured him to be elected unto the Bishopric of Bangor, which (by reason the
Bishops had lame from it a long time, holding ever some Abbotship or other
spiritual living in Commendam, whereupon they lived) was horribly wasted and
spoiled. But this man coming thither, took great pains in recovering diverse
parcels of land that by the in^^oachment of other for want of looking to were
woone from his See. Amongst other things a certain Island between Holy head
and Anglesey called (...) Moylr. honni^it, or the Island of Seals, was
unjustly detained from him by the possessors thereof. He euicted the same first
in law, and yet was same afterward to bring a great power of armed men thither
to drive the inhabitants by force out of the same. His church and palace had
been burned and destroted long before in the time of Henry the 4. by Owen
Glendowr that famous rebel: He bestowed much money in repairing them; but
before he was able to bring the^ to any perfection, he was called away thence
to Salisbury. Being yet very destrous the work should go forward, he left
unto his successor a Myter and a Crosye^ of good value, upon condition he
should finish those buildings. After he had been a few months at Salisbury,
the Archbishop dying, he was preferred unto Canterbury. His pall was sent unto
him by Hadrian de Castel^o the Popes Secretary, (that after was B of Hereford
and Wels as also a Cardinal) and delivered by the B. of Couentry with these
words. Ad honorem Dei omnipotentis and B. Mariae Virginis ac Bb. Petri and
Pauli Apostorum, and D N. Alexandri Pp sexti, and S. Romanae Ecclesiae nec non
and Cantuariensis Ecclesiae ^ibi commissae, tradimus palliu^ de corpore B.
Petri sumptum, plenitudinem viz. Pontilicalis officij; vt vtaris co infra
ecclesiam tuam certis diebus qui exprimuntur in priuilegijs ei ab Apostolica
sede concessis. Having received his pall, he was to take his oath unto the
Pope, which once for all it shall not be amiss to set down. Ego Henricus
Archie Cantuariensis ab hac hora in antea fidelis and obediens ero B. Petro
sanctaeque Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, and Domino meo D Alexandro Pp. 6.
suisque successoribus Canonice intrantibus. Non ero in consilio aut cosensu vel
facto, vt vitam perdant vel membru^ s^u capiantur mala captione^ Concilium vero
quod mihi credituri sunt, per se aut nuntios ad little damnum mesciente nemini
pandam Papatum Romans and regalia S Petri adiutor ero eis ad retinendum and
defendendu^ saluo ordine meo, contra omnem hominem. Legatum sedis Apostolicae
in eundo and redeundo honorific^ tractabo, and in suis necessitatibus adiuuabo,
vocatus ad Synodum veniam nisi prepeditus fuero Canonica praepeditione.
Apostolorum limina Romans curia existente citra Alps singulis annis, vltra vero
montes singulis biennijs visitabo, aut per me aut per meum nuntium, nisi
Apostolica absoluar licentia. Possessiones vero ad mens^ mei Archiepiscopatus
pertinentes non vendam, neque donabo, neque impignerabo, neque de nouo
inseudabo, vel aliquo modo alienabo inconsulto Romans Pontifice, sicut me Deus
adiuuet etc. With what ceremony the cross was wont to be delivered, see
before in William Courtney page. 104. This Archbishop died February 15. 1502.
the second year after his translation, at Lambith. His body was conueighed to
Feuersam by water, conducted with 33. watermen all apparelled in black, (a
great number of tapers burning day and night in the boat) and from thence was
carried to Canterbury, where it was buried in the middle of the place called
the martyrdom, under a fair marble stone, inlaid with brass. He bequeathed
to his C^rch a silver image of 51. ounces weight, and appointed 500. pound to
be bestowed in his funerals: He built the most part of O^ford house, and made
the iron work upon the coping of Rochesterbridge.

66. William Warham.
1504. Hen. 7.20.
William Warham a Gentleman of an ancient house, was borne in Hamshire, brought
up in the College of Winchester, and chosen thence to New College in Oxford,
where he proceeded Doctor of Law. Intending then to use and put in practice
the knowledge he had gotten at the Uniuersity, h^e became an advocate or
Doctor of the Arches, and soon after Master of the Kolles. While he was in
that office, King Henry the seventh, sent him Ambassador to the Duke of
Burgundy to persuade him that he should not believe the false reports of his
Duchess, and to signi^^e how notably she had abused him and all the world, in
setting by two counterfets against him; Lambert that made himself the Earl of
Warwick, who was then so be seen in the Tower safe enough; and Perkin
Warbeck whom she had taught to name him self Richard Duke of York, that was
certainly known to have been murdered by his wicked uncle long before. In this
business he behaved himself so wisely, as the king greatly commended him for
the same, and the Bishopric of London happening to be void soon after his
return home, he procured him to be elected thereunto. He had not bin Bishop
there two whole years, when Henry Deane the Archbishop died, to whose place
also by the Kings special endeavor he was advanced. He was translated Nou. 29.
and inthrouised March 9. 1504. with wonderful great solemnity. The day before
his coming to Canterbury, the Duke of Buckingham that was his high steward,
came thither attended with 7. score horse to see all things in a readiness.
The said Duke had also the office of chief Butler, and therefore being unable
to do the duties of both, he deputed Sir George Bourchier unto the Butlership.
Himself took great pains to see that nothing might be wanting requisite for
the performance of this ceremony in most magnificent manner. The next day
(which was Sunday) he met the Archbishop over against S. Andrews Church, and
doing low obeisance unto him, went before him to Christ church. At the great
gate near the market place, the Prior and Covent received him honorably and
carried him to the Church (whither he went from S. Andrews Church bare-foote)
said mass there, and was placed in his throne after the accustomed manner.
From Church he was attended by the Duke in like sort as he was thetherward. The
cheer at dinner was as great as for money it might be made. Before the first
messe^ the Duke himself came riding into the hall upon a great horse, bare
headed with his white staff in his hand; and when the first dish was set on
the table, made obeisance by bowing of his body. Wauing so done, he betook him
to his chamber, where there was provision made for him according to his state.
With the Archbishop sat the Earl of Essex, the Bishop of Man, the Lord
Aburgauenny, the Lord Brook, the Prior of Canterbury, and the Abbot of Saint
Augustines. The Duke at his table was accompanied with the Lord Clinton, Sir
Edward Poynings, the chief justice of England, named Phineux, Sir William
Scot, Sir Thomas Kemp, and others. A great many other guests were served in
other places, noble men and knights, at one table, Doctors of Divinity and Law
at another, and Gentlemen of the count^y at a third, besides an infinite number
of meaner calling, placed by themselves, according to their several degrees.
But to let pass these matters, and to come unto his government; all the time
of K. Henry the seventh (under whom he lived Archbishop some three years) he
enjoyed all manner of prosperity, being in so great favor with his Princ^, as
no man greater. He dying, and his son King Henry the eight succeeding,
Cardinal Wolsey that was then but Almosner and Deane of Lincoln, diued so
cunningly into the bosom of the young king, as by and by he over topped the
Archbishop, and quickly wound him out of all authority. First, by the kings
means he got from him the Chauncellorship of England: Then being Cardinal,
and the Popes Legate a latere by special commission, he set up a new court
called Curia legatina; under color whereof, he drew all manner of jurisdiction
throughout England into his own hands, and appointed Officials Registers, etc.
in every Dioces, who took up all causes, and suffered other officers (to whom
the jurisdiction of right appertained) to sit still without either regard or
profit. This deiection of the Archbishop wherein men esteemed him for the time
very unhappy, fell out to his great good; the others immoderate greatness, was
the cause of his destruction. At what time the King endeavored to be divorced
from his first wife M. Catherine^ she made choice of this our Archb. and
Nicholas West Bish. of Ely (two lawyers) and of I. Fisher Bishop of Rochester,
and Henry Standish By. of S. Assaph (Doctors of Divinity) to assist and direct
her in that suit: they did so, and behaved themselves in such sort, as neither
the king had cause to be offended with their ouerforwardnes, nor she to blame
their slacknes or negligence. But the Cardinal yt was joined with Cardinal
Campeius in commission, wherein they were authorized by ye Pope to examine the
circumstances of that cause, he I say being more slack in his proceedings, then
the K. expected he should, so incensed him yt said K. against him, as shortly
after he was content, first to take the advantage of a Praemunire against him,
and then to cause him to be arrested of high treason; whereof see more in
York. Soon after the Cardinals death, there was a Convocation held, wherein
the Clergy was advertised that they all had fallen into a praemunire by
yielding unto the Cardinals power legantiue, never allowed by the King: which
allegations though diverse of them knew to be false enough, yet durst they not
do otherwise then to redeem the penalty they were said to have incurred with
the payment of 118. thousand pounds, whereof the Province of York should pay
eighteen thousand, and Canterbury the rest, which was 100000. pounds. When
this gift was to have been presented, they were certified that the king would
not accept of the same, except they declared in a Canon that he was supreme
head of the Church. Long this matter was hammering. But at last they agreede to
give unto him this new title, and inserted the same into the instrument of
their gift. In that Convocation many Canons were made against Lutherans, and
many motions for renouncing the Popes authority; wherein the greatest part
being fearful of resolving either way, the Convocation was often prorogued.
After many adiournements it was once more put over from April till October 5.
In which mean space the Archbishop died at Saint Stephens near Canterbury, in
the house of William Warham his kinsman, Archdeacon of Canterbury. That house
at that time belonged unto the Archdeaconry, but (by what sacrilegious means I
know not) was long since nipped away from the same; so that the Archdeacon,
except he be otherwise provided for then by his Archdeaconry, is now
houselesse. But to return unto our Archbishop, he was buried without any great
funeral pomp, giving mourning clothes only to the poor, and laid in a
little Chapel built by himself for the place of his burial upon the North
side of the Martyrdom, and has there a reasonable fair toomb^. He purchased
much land for his kindred, and bestowed very much in repayring and beautifying
his houses with fair buildings, even to the value of thirty thousand pound,
(as he professes in his Will) for which cause he prayed his Successor to
forbear suit for dilapidations against his executors. They were the Duke of
Norfolk and the Lord Windsor. He continued Archbishop eight and twenty years,
and died Aug. 23. 1532.

67. Thomas Cranmer.
1453 Hen. 8.25.
A Famous and memorable man succeeded William Warham, Thomas Cranmer Doctor of
Divinity, whose life is written at large by M. Fox and others. I should loose
labor therefore in making any long discourse of the same. Briefly, to set
down that which I cannot omit without interrupting my course, you shall
understand that he was borne at Arslacton in Nottinghamshire, of a very
ancient house, which (as it should seem) came out of Normandy with the
Conqueror; For it is certain that in the time of this Archbishop a certain
French Gentleman named Cranmer came into England, bearing the same arms that
the Archbishop did, w^o gave him great entertainment and did him much honor.
He was brought up in Jesus College in Cambridge. Being yet very young he
married, and so lost his fellowship in the said college; but his wife dying
within one year, he was received into his old place again. For the manner
and occasion of his advancement, his diverse imploiments before, and his actions
in the same, his lamentable ^al, his heroical and memorable combats, and
lastly, his constant death, I will (as before I said) send the Reader to Master
Fox, who has exactly set down all the particularities of these things. Only
thus much he^re, that he was cons: Mart. 30. 1553. and suffered most unworthy
death at Oxford March ^1. 1556. being the first Archbishop that ever was put to
death by order of law in England, except only Richard Scroope Archbishop of
York.

68 Reginald Poole.
1^^^. Ma^y 3.
Cardinal Poole was the son of Sir Richard Poole, (who was cousin get main unto
king Henry the seventh) and Margaret Countess of Salisbury, that was daughter
unto George Duke of Clarence, the second brother of king Edward the fourth. His
said parents caused him to spend some time first in Magdalen college in
Oxford, then in Corpus Christi, of which college he was fellow; and being yet
very young, sent him beyond sea, by travel to get both learning and experience
in the world. In the mean time king Henry the eight (that favored him much, as
being near of kin unto him both by father and mother) before his departure,
had bestowed upon him the Deanery of Exceter. He had been in Italy (lying for
the most part at Padua) the space of 7. years, at what time the King having
abolished the Popes authority, sent for him home; and he not coming,
proclaimed him Traitor, and gave away his Deanery unto another. This loss he
esteemed little of^ Petrus Bembus an old acquaintance of his, was become the
Popes chief Secretary, who so commended him unto his master, that shortly after
he was content to make him a Cardinal, persuading himself belike that he
would prove a good instrument for English matters as occasion should serve. And
surely, if he regarded the worthiness of the man, in respect of his manifold
rare and excellent parts he could not lightly prefer any man less obnoxious
to exceptions. For he was not only very learned (which is better known then
that it needs many words) but also of such modesty in outward behavior, and
integrity of life and conversation, as he was of all men both loved and
reverenced. I know well that Pasquill played his parts with him, and fathered a
brat or two upon him, but without any probability at all. He was made Cardinal,
May 22. 1536. The Pope employed him the^ in diverse Ambassages unto the Emperor
and the French King, wherein he did his best endeavor to join them against
his own Sovereign the King of England; and not content therewith, he dealt
so busily with his letters amongst his friends in England, wherein he dehorted
them from the kings obedience, and all conformity unto reformation, as it
turned many of them to great trouble, and amongst the rest cost his mother the
Countess of Salisbury, and his eldest brother the Uicount Mountacute their
heads. It pleased not God that any of his platformes should take success: And
therefore partly malecontent, and partly also weary of the pains and
continual danger these ambassages forced him unto, he procured the Pope to
make him Legate of of Uiterbio, where he determined to lead the rest of his
life quietly; but he was disappointed of his purpose. The Pope ( Paul the
third) summoned a Council at Trent. Cardinal Poole and one or two other
joined with him, must needs be his Uicegerents there. He for his part was
nothing so resolute in matters of religion as men expected he would. In the
question of justification he professed to be on our side, and persuaded one
Morell to be of his opinion, a learned Spaniard that lay in the same house he
did, and that was sent out of Spain of purpose to defend the Popes quarrel in
disputation, wherein he was esteemed excellent. Soon after his return from
the Council, it happened the Pope to die. A great faction there was at that time
in the College of Cardinals, some taking part with the Emperor, and some with
the French king: Cardinal Poole was altogether Imperial. All that side and
diverse that were indifferent gave him their voices for the Papacy; whereunto
when they had elected him orderly he forsooth found fault with them for their
rashness, and persuaded them to take further deliberation in so great and
weighty a matter. Here of the French party taking advantage, began to cry out,
it was reason regard should be had of many French Cardinals and other that were
absent, and could not possibly repair unto the election so soon; put them in
mind also how the Emperor had lately sacked Rome as it were in jest, and that
it was much to be feared if they elected any man that were altogether addicted
unto him it would be a cause of great st^rres and trouble. One of their
company then rising up, began to take particular exceptions against Cardinal
Poole, charging him with suspicion of incontinency (whereof he alleged some
reasons, though peradventure frivolous) as also with her^sie, for that he had
reasoned for justification by faith in the Council of Trent, that he preferred
Ant. Flaminius a known Protestant, and kept company much with him, as also
with T^emelius, and other thought ill of that way; and lastly, that in the time
he was Legate of Viterbio, he had been so slack in persecuting of heretics,
upon whom he seldom inflicted any punishment, but death upon none. This
accuser was the Cardinal Caraffa, that afterward was Pope Paul the 4. an old
acquaintance of Cardinal Pooles many years, even until such time, as that
partaking in this faction between the French and Spanish sundred them. Caraffa
thought him self the likeliest of the French side, and in that respect was the
rather induced in this sort to deface his old friend, so to set up himself.
But he was utterly deceived in his expectation. Cardinal Poole cleared
himself of all those suspicions absolutely, so that the next day (or rather I
should say the night after the next day) the company were more resolute for him
then they had been before, and once more elected him Pope. Cardinal Farnesius
the last Popes nephew was the mightiest of that canuasse. For so ever all Popes
lightly take order, that some Cardinal of their kin shall strike a great
stroke in the election of their successor, that he may be a means to shield
the rest of his friends from that hard measure which successors are wont to
meat^ unto the favorites of their predecessor. This Cardinal Farnesius
exceeding joyful that he had brought the matter to so good pass, came unto
Cardinal Poole, and would needs adore him by the name of holy father, kissing
his feet. etc. But he would not suffer him so to do, saying he wo^ld not have
their election a work of darkness, that the day was the only time for the
orderly dispatch of such business, and therefore he desired them to defer the
accomplishment of their choice until the morning. They were feign so to do.
But whether it were that his friends were angry with this double delay, or that
they were induced otherwise to alter their determination^ so it fell out, that
the next morning they chose another, the Cardinal de Monte that named himself
Julius 3. He well knowing that the backwardnes of Poole made him Pope, ever
after made very much of him, and yielded him all manner of favor. And first,
to begin with, he enforced Cardinal Caraffa to ask him forgiveness before
they departed out of the conclaue^ Cardinal Poole professed to be nothing at
all moved with loosing that place which he took to be a burden importable^
and saying, his only desire was to lead his life in quiet contemplation,
craved licenc^ to depart unto a certain monastery in the territory of Uerona,
replenished with monks of Saint Bennet, of which order he was taken for patron
during the time of his residence in Rome. He was scarsely settled there, when
news came that king Edward was dead, and that his sister the Lady Mary had
obtained the crown; who was brought up a great while under the Countess his
mother, by the especial choice and direction of Queen Katherine her mother.
And many are of opinion that the Queen committed her the rather unto the
tuition of the Countess, for that she wished some marriage between one of
her sons the^ Pooles and the Lady Mary to strengthen her title to the crown
in case the king her husband should die without issue male, for that (as before
I have declared) they were descended from George Duke of Clarence the next
heir male of the house of York. Now Cardinal Poole knowing the Queen had a
special affection unto him for his learning, his nobility, but above all ^r
his religion (and he was a man personabl^ enough, though elderly) longed sore
homeward, not doubting a dispensation for his Clergy would soon be obtained
of the Pope in this case, if happily the Queen should cast a fancy unto him;
and assuring himself that though he missed of the crown, he should not
fail of the Myter. He procured himself therefore to be appointed the Popes
Legate, and to be dispatched into England with all speed. The Emperor by this
time had determined to endeavor a match between his son Philip and Queen
Mary. Doubting therefore lest the presence of the Cardinal should disturb his
platform, he used many devises to stop and hinder his passage, till such time
as the marriage was indeed concluded. At last (but a day after the fair) over
came this jolly Legate, reconciled the Realm of England to the Pope, caused
the Archbishop of Canterbury to be deprived and degraded, seating himself in
his See, which things and many more are discoursed of him at large by Master
Fox, and therefore I pass them over. He was consecrate March 22. 1555. in the
gray Friars church at Greenewich. The Lady day following he received his pal in
Bowchurch, where he made a dry and frivolous sermon touching the use, profit,
signification, and first institution of the pall, March, 31. he was installed
by a Procter, one Robert Collins his commissary. While these thing were a
doing, Cardinal Caraffa his ancient enemy became Pope. He presently
discharged our Cardinal of his power Legantine, and made one Friar Peto first
a Cardinal, then his Legate, and bestowed the Bishopric of Salisbury upon
him. He alleged against Cardinal Poole that he was unworthy the honor of the
Legate Apostolical that would suffer the Queen to proclaim wars against
the French King; but the matter was, the old quarrels were not yet digested,
and this way he thought to pay him home. The queen kept Friar Peto out of the
Realm by force, until the Pope was reconciled unto Cardinal Poole again.
Two year and almost eight months this man continued Archbishop. (In the year
1558. many old men fell into quartaine agues (a disease deadly and mortal unto
elderly folk.) Amongst the rest a quartane had seized upon him, and brought
him to a low ebb, at what time news brought of queen^ Mari^s death struck
him quite dead. For he departed this life even the same day that she did, viz.
November, 17. 1558. being 58. years of age, and six months. So the like
happened unto him that befell unto Deus dedit his predecessor, to end his days
together with his Prince. For as queen Mary and he, so Deus dedit and
Ercombert king of Kent died in one and the self same day. He procured in his
life time the gift and patronage of 19. benefices from the queen unto his See,
which he no way else benefited, except by the building of a certain gallery
toward the east at Lambith, and some few rooms adjoining. He purposed indeed
to have bestowed much cost upon his palace at Canterbury, but was prevented by
death. Unto his Church of Canterbury he gave (as I find noted) a pair of
large candlestickes double guilt, a great cross of silver double guilt, a
Censer with a ship, and a spoone parcel guilt, a myter of silver and guilt
set with pearl and stone, a Crosier staff of silver and guilt with a staff
in it, a cross with a staff for a crossebearer of silver parcel guilt, two
pontifical rings of gold set with sapphires, the borders whereof were set with
turkyes, rubyes and pearls; and lastly a holy water pot with a sprinkle of
silver parcel guilt. He was a man of indifferent stature, slender, well
colored, somewhat bread visaged, his eyes gray and cheereful, and his
countenance mild. His good ^he left to the disposition of one Aloysius Priolus
an Italian, who bestowed them all to good uses, reserving nothing unto
himself, but two prayer books. His body was conueighed to Canterbury, and
entombed on the north side of a little Chapel, that is at the east end of
Thomas Beckets chapel.

69. Matthew Parker.
1559 Eliz. 2.
Matthew Parker was borne at Norwich, August. 6. 1504. and brought up by his
mother (for his father died, he being but twelve years of age) in the
Uniuersity of Cambridge. He was first a Bible Clerk of Corpus Christi College
there, and afterward fellow. His first preferment was the Deanery of Stoke,
which he obtained by the favor of Queen Anne Bulleyne, whose Chaplain he
was. That College (though he resisted it what he might) was suppressed in the
first year of King Edward the sixth. After the death of that noble Lady, king
Henry her husband took him for his Chapleine, in which place he also served
king Edward his son. By these two Princes he was preferred unto many other
good Ecclesiastical promotions, as a Prebend in Ely by king Henry the 8. the
Mastership of Corpus Christi College (where he was brought v^) by the election
of the fellows, but commandment of the same king; and lastly the Deanery of
Lincoln, with the prebend of Coldingham given him by king Edward the sixth.
Besides these livings he had also the Parsonage of Landbeach four miles from
Cambridge by the gift of the College, whereof he was Master. These livings he
quietly enjoyed the second year of Q. Mary, at what time for being married,
he was deprived and lived poorly all the time of her reign. That terrible
fire being extinguished that consumed so many zealous and learned men, and the
Archbishopricke left void by the death of Cardinal Poole, this Matthew Parker
then Doctor of Divinity, sometime Deane of Lincoln, and Master of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridge (as aforesaid) was thought meetest for that high
place and preferment. He was consecrate there unto December 17. 1559. by the
Bishop that lately had been of Bath, Exceter, Chichester and Bedford, to wit,
W. Barlow, Miles Couerdale, Io. Scory, and John Hodgekins Suffragan of Bedford,
held the same fifteen years and five months, and deceased May 17. 1575.
be^ing seventy two years o^ age. He founded a Grammar school at Roch^ale in
Lancash^^e: Unto Corpus Christi College in Cambridge (where he was brought up)
he procured thir^eene Sch^llerships, built the inward Library, and two fair
chambers in the same. Moreover he gave to the Library of that College a great
number o^ Books some printed, other written; but very rare, and much to be
esteemed for their value and antiquity. He gave them also three hundred and
senne ounces of plate double guilt, the perpetual patronage of S. Mary
Abehurch in London, land for the maintenance of two fellows above the
ordinary number, aleasse for seauenteene years, worth 14. pounds eight
^hillinges de claro, and one hundred pounds to mainetaine a fire in the ^al^
there, from Alhallo^i^^^e ^ill Candlemas. He took order for the preaching of
^ire Sermons yearly in the Rogai^^^n (...), in five several Churches in
Norfoll^e. Unto the City of Norwich (where he was born^) he gave a Balon and
Ewer double guilt weighing one hundred seventy three ounces, and fi^ty
shillings yearly reuenew, to be divided among poor people of the same City.
Unto Conuell and (...) College a po^ double guilt, of fi^ty six ounces,
together (...) neast of goblets, and certain books: To (...) ^all a Scholars
place, a cup waighing fifty three ounces, a neast of goblets and books
likewise: To the Uniuersity fi^ty written books of great value, and fifty
printed: And otherw^^e bestowed much money unto charitable uses, not necessary
particularly to be re^^^^bre^. Upon there para^^o^ of his Palace at Canterbury
^ which was now ((...)) he bestowed one thousand four hundred pound. (...)
also he repaired and built much so his great char^^. But above any thing I may
not forget his great care (...) antiquities, unto which his care we are (...)
of our ancient histories, that but for him we^^ (...) upon the point utterly to
perish. He lies ba^^ed in the C^^ppell belonging to his house at Lamb^ith
under a sa^e marble stone.

70. Edmund Gryndall.
1575. Eliz. 18.
IN the month of February following Edmund Gryndall Archbishop of York was
translated to Canterbury. This man was borne at Saint Bees in Cumberland,
fellow first, then Master of Peabrooke Hall in Cambridge, of which Uniuersity
he was for one year one of the Proctors. A while he was chaplain unto Master
Rydley Bishop of London, who preferred him unto the service of king Edward the
sixth. In the end of which Kings reign, there was an intent that the said
Bishop should have bin removed to Durham, and it was thought that Master
Gryndall should succeed him in London. But the death of that good king
disturbed the progress of this platform, and in stead of the expected
honorable advancement, forced him to a voluntary exile in Germany, where he
lived all the ^aigne of Queen Mary. She dying, and the late gracious
Princess happily succeeding, he was appointed unto the government so long
before intended, elected thereunto July 26. 1559. and enjoyed the same about
11. years, viz. until May 20. 1570. at what time he was removed to York.
There he safe almost six years; and as before is mentioned; was once more
translated viz. to Canterbury. Two years before his death he became blind,
and died at Croydon (where also he was buried on the south side of the
Chancell) July 6. 1583. being 64. years of age, when he had continued
Archbishop seven years and almost a half. In the place where he was borne he
founded a free School, which he endowed with thirty pound land. To Queens
College in Oxford he gave twenty pound land to maintain a fellow and two
scholars to be taken out of his said School: He gave them also the greatest
part of his books, and 87. ounces of plate, besides forty pound debt which he
forgave them. To Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge, he gave two and twenty pound
land for the maintenance of a Greek lecter, of a fellow and two Scholars, to
be likewise taken out of his School. To them he also gave some books, and
forty ounces of plate. To Magdalen College in Cambridge he gave five pound
land for one fellow to be taken from his School: To Christ's College there
five and forty ounces of plate, To eight little Almeshouses in Croydon fifty
pound to be bestowed in land for their relief: and lastly to the City of
Canterbury an hundred pound of be employed upon a stock to set the poor on
work.

71. John Whitgift.
Soon after the death of Edmund Gryndall, John Whitegift Doctor of Divinity,
1583 Eliz. 26.
Bishop of Worcester, was appointed to succeed him, and his translation
confirmed September 23. following. He was borne at Grimsby in Lincolneshire,
brought up a while under Master Bradford in Penbrooke Hall, and afterward
becam^ fellow of Peterhouse in Cambridge. The year 1567. he proceeded Doctor
of Divinity, and being chosen Master of Pembrooke hal, within the compass of
the same year was called to the government of Trinity college. In the mean
time he had been reader of both the divinity lectures; first the Lady
Margarets, and after the Queens. Ten years he continued Master of Trinity
College, in which space he was twice Uicechancellour, and the year 157^. by
the gift of her Majesty (whose Chaplain he was) became Deane of Lincoln. In
the beginning then of the year 1577. he was advanced unto the Bishoppericke of
Worcester, in September following had the government of the Principality of
Wales committed unto him, and held the same two years and a half, even all
the time that Sir Henry Sydney the President lived in Ireland as Lord Deputy.
Six years and almost a half he had been at Worcester, when he was called
unto the Metropoliticall See of Canterbury. Upon Candlemas day 1585. he wa^
sworn of her Majesty's Privy Council, and died of a palsy, Febr. 29. 1603.
at Lambhith being 70. years of age. when he had continued Archbishop 5.
months above 20. years, in which mean space he built a ^aire hospital at
Croydon, induing it with revenues for the relief and maintenance of a warden,
and 28. poor people: unto the which he adjoined a School, with housing for a
Schoolmaster, unto whom he allowed 20. pound by the year for ever. He lies
buried at Croydon in the South Isle.

72. Rich Bancroft.
1604 Iac. 12.
RIchard Bancroft Bishop of London, was removed to Canterbury. 1604. sworn
of the Privy Council, and upon the death of the Earl of Dorset, elected
Chancellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, April 1608. He died Nouem. 2. 1610.

73. George Abbot.
GEorge Abbot Doctor of divinity, being Dean of Winchester, and Master of the
Uniuersity College in Oxford, was consecrated Bishop of Couen^ry and
Lichfield, 1609. removed thence to London, about Candlemasse following, and
within little more th^n one year after was translated to Canterbury.

The Archbishopricke of Canterbury is valued in the Kings book at 2816. l. 17s.
9d. and was wont to pay to the Pope at every income for his first fruits,
10000. Ducates or Florens, and for his pal 5000. every ducate being of our
sterling 4. s. 6. d.

The old corporation of Prior and Covent of Christchurch being dissolved, K.
Henry the eight, by his Charter bearing date April 8. 1541. made a new of a
Deane and 12. Prebendaries. The names of the Deanes I have thought not amiss
here to set down.

1. Nicolas Wotton, Doctor of Law. 1541 2. Thomas Godwyn, Doctor of Divinity,
1566 3. Richard Rogers, Bishop of Dover. 1584 4. Thomas Neuill Doctor of
Divinity. 1597.
THE BISHOPS OF LONDON.
AT what time Christian Religion was first publicly received in this Island,
there were established in the same 28. Sees or Cathedral Churches, whereof
three were Archbishopricks, York, whose province was Scotland, and the North
of England; Caerlegion (now called Caerleon upon Usk) to which the Churches of
Wales were subject; and lastly London that had jurisdiction over the rest of
England. To speak of the Archbishops of London (with whom only we have now to
do) there is not any precise Catalogue or continuate history delivered of them.
Some I find mentioned sparsim in our histories; their names I will set down,
and the Reader must content himself with them.

1. Thean, It is said he built S. Peter's Church in Cornehill, with the help of
one Cyran chief Butler unto King Lucius, and made it his Metropoliticall See.
2 Eluanus is named the second Archbishop. He built a Library near unto the
same church, and converted many of the Druydes to Christian religion. 3 Cadar.
4 Obinus. 5 Conan. 6 Palladius. 7 Stephan. 8 Il^ut. 9 Theodwyn or Dedwyn. 10
Thedred. 11 Hillary. 12 Restitutus, he was present at the Co^ncell of Arles in
France the year 326. under Constantius the son of Constantine the great, and
subscribed unto (...) the Decrees of the same Council, which he brought over
with him: One Decree amongst the rest was, that if a Deacon at the time of his
ordering did protest he intended to marry, it should be lawful for him so to
do. Restitutus himself was married. 13 Guitelnius, when the Romans weary of
the often invasions of the Picts and Scots, refused to affo^rd the Britains
any more aid, and rather chose to remit them their tribute: This man passing
into little Britain entreated Aldroenus the King there to send over
Constantine his brother with a certain number of men, by whose help the
strangers might be expelled, and he obtain the kingdom; which was performed
accordingly. 14 Fastidius; Gennadius in his Catalogue illustrium virorum,
mentions him by the name of Fastidius Britan^arum Episcopus, and commends
certain^ works of his. 15 Vodinus; he was slain, anno 436. by the procurement
of Hengist first King of the Saxons, for reprehending king Vortigers unlawful
marriage with Rowen, Hengists daughter, his Queen and lawful wife being yet
alive.

After the coming in of the Saxons, the succession of Archbishops was still
continued in London for the space of three hundredth years (but secretly) even
until the time that Saint Gregory sent Augustine hither. I find only one of
them named, viz^

16 Theonus, that being first Bishop of Gloucester, forsook it, and took the
charge of London upon him, the year 553. The year 586. he with Thadiocius
Bishop of York, taking their Clergy with them, got them into Wales, and
Cornwall, to the rest of their Countrymen, whom the Saxons had lately drouen
thither.
1 Mellitus.
SAint Augustine having established his Metropoliticall See at Canterbury, 604.
for that it was the seat of the King of Kent, who commanded the kings of the
East and South Saxons as his vassals, and holding their kingdoms at his
pleasure^ He thought good to appoint a Bishop at London; and he made choice of
Mellitus, whom he consecrated ann. 604. This Mellitus converted unto the faith
of Christ Sebert King of East Saxons, who ^oone after built the Church of
Westminster, and dedicate^ it to Saint Peter. In his time also Ethelbert king
of Kent built the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, that being often increased by
Erkenwald and other, was burnt at last down to the ground some 500. years
after, and built a new in that stately form it now has by Mauritius Bishop of
London, and his successors. King Ethelbert moreover gave Tillingham and other
lands unto this Church. Of Mellitus see more in Cauterbury, whether he was
translated.

2. Ceadda.
AFter the departure of Mellitus the Church of London was long without a
Pastor, 654.
even until that Segebert obtaining the kingdom of the East Saxons by the
persuasion of Osway king of Northumberland he became a Christian, and procured
Ceadda a virtuous and godly Priest to be consecrate Bishop of his country. That
charge he attended painefully many years. At last, building a Monastery in the
North country called Lestinghen; the same was scarcely finished, when the
infection of the plague being brought thither, took away not only this
Bishop the founder, but almost all his monks that were now newly placed in the
same. Of this man Beda writes much in his Eccl: history Lib. 3. c. 22. and 23.
He died Octo. 26. 664. and was buried in the aforesaid Monastery of Lestinghen.

3 Wina.
666.
A But the time that Ceadda died, it happened Kenwalchus King of the west Saxons
to fall out with Wina the Bishop of his country; insomuch as, he forced him to
fly unto Wulfher K. of Mercia, of whom (being now destitute of living) he
bought for money the Bishopric of London. See more in Winchester.

4 Erkenwalde.
675.
WIna being dend, Erkenwald the son of Offa King of East Saxons (a very
devout and ^ertuous man) became Bishop of London. His own patrimony he
bestowed in building of two Monasteries; one for Monks at Chertsey, another
for Nuns at Barking, making Edelburg his sister the first Abbess there. He
converted unto the faith of Christ Sebba King of the East Saxons: He bestowed
much upon building in his Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, increased greatly
the revenues of the same, and obtained for it of diverse Princes many notable
and important privileges. Having sat 11. years, he died about the year of
our Lord 685. and after his death was honored for a Saint. His body was laid
in a very sumptuous shrine, which not many years since stood in the East part
of the Church above the high Altar.

After Erkenwald, sat these in order successively.
5 Waldhere; of him Beda makes mention, Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 11.

6 Ingwald; this man lived in the time of Beda, and dyed 744.

7 Egwulfe, This man seems to be called Egtiolphus by William of Malmesbury,
who delivers that Egtulphus Bishop of the East Angles was present at a
Convocation held by Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, anno 747.

8. Wighed.

9. Eadbright.

10. Eadgar.

11. Kenwalch.

12. Eadbald.

13. He^bert or Heathobert. He died the year 802.

14. Osmund or Oswyn, he lived 833.

15. Ethelnoth.

16. Ceolbert.

17. Renulph or Ceorulf.

18. Swithulfe^ he lived the year 851.

19. Eadstan, lived 860.

20. Wulfsius.

21. Ethelward.

22. Elstan; he died an. 898. or (as Asserius and Hor: Wig: say) an. 900.

23. Theodred, surnamed the Good. He taking down a slight chapel of timber
that was built over the body of S. Edmund, 900.
began the foundation of a stately Church of stone, which also (as it seems)
he finished. Himself lies buried in his own Church in a high tomb by the
window of the vault or vndercroft, now called (if I mistake not) Saint Faiths
Church.

24. Wulstan.

25. Brithelm, he died the year 958.

26. Dunstan. 961.
See more of him in Canterbury, whither he was translated 961.

27. Alfstan, holi^ed 966. and 996.

28. Wulfstan.

29. Alhum; he taught the children of king Etheldred, and carried thom into
Normandy the year 1013.

30. Alwy.

31. El^ward (Ho) or Alword, before he was Bishop, Abbot of Euesham; being
Bishop, hel^ still his Abbotship in Commendam. Waxing old, he intended to
resign his Bishopric, and returning thither again to spend the rest of his
days there: but the monks refused to receive him, whereupon he took ^^om
them many books and rich ornaments that he had sent thither (yea some also
that other men that had bestowed) and gave them unto the Abbey of Ramsey where
he lies buried. He died July 25. anno 1044.

32. Robert, he was translated to Canterbury 1050. See more there.

33 William.
1050.
BY what means I know not, Spearcafochus Abbot of Abingdon set foot into the
Bishopric of London, Robert being translated. But the king displaced him,
would not suffer him to be consecrate, and bestowed the same upon one William
that was a Norman (as his predecessor was) and came into the realm with Queen
Emma his (I mean the Confessors) mother. Within two years after his
preferment, at what time upon the reconcilation of Earl Godwin with the king,
all Normans of any sort were banished the realm; with much ado, he, with
Robert Archbish. of Canterbury, and Vlf, Bishop of Lincoln, got over into
Normandy, so escaping imprisonment whereunto they were appointed. The other two
died there; but William (says Houeden) for his virtues was soon after
recalled; and restored to his Bishopric. Unto this man the city of London
acknowledges it self greatly beholding, for that king William the Conqueror
by his means and instant suit, granted unto them all kind of liberties, in as
ample manner as they enjoyed them in the time of his predecessor. In
thankfulness heerof the Citizens have caused to be engraven this Epitaph upon
his grave (which is in the middle of the body of his Church.)

Gulielmo, viro sapientia and vitae sanctitate claro, qui primum Di^o Edwardo
Regi and Confessori familiaris, nuper in Episcopu^ Londinensemerectus, nec
multo post apud inuictis^imum Principem Gulielmum Anglie Regem eius nominis
primum ob prudentiam sidemque singularem in confisium abhibitus, amplissima
huic vrbi celeberrimae priuilegia ab eodem impetrauit; Senatus populusque
Londinensis benemerenti posuit. Sedit Episco pus ann. 20. Decessit ann. a
Christo nato 1070.

Haec tibi clare pater posuerunt marmora ciues,
Praemia, non meritis aequiparanda tuis.
Namque sibi populus, te Londinensis amicum
Sensit, and huic vrbi non leave praesidium.
Reddita libertas duce te, donataque multis
Te duce, res fuerat publica muneribus.
Diuitias, genus and formam breuis opprimit hora;
Haec tua sed pietas and benefacta manent.
34 Hugh d'Oriuall.
AFter the death of Bishop William, 1070. W. Con. 5.
the Conqueror advanced unto this See one Hugh d'Oriuall a Norman. Within
short space after his pro^erment, he feel into a leprosy; for cure whereof by
the counsel of the Physicians he was gelded. It little auailed him; that
notwithstanding. he continued a leper all his life, and so died January 12.
ann. 108^.

35. Mauritius.
MAuritius Chaplain and Chauncellor to the Conqueror, 1087. W. Co. 21.
was coasecrated Bishop of London the year 1087. A man not of the best report
for his life, but famous for his memorable endeavor of building Paul's Church
in London. It happened the year 1086. the whole City of London (in a manner)
to be consumed with fire. The Cathedral church amongst the rest going to wrack,
Mauice the year following (which was the first year of his consecration)
intending to reedi^ie the same, laid the foundation of so huge a plot as all
men thought it would never be finished. The same fire destroyed a great Castle
standing in that place where Robert Kilwardby Archbishop of Canterbury did
afterward build the Blacke-Friers. The ruins of this castle the K. was
content should be employed upon Paul's Church. He gave also unto the Bishop and
his successors for ever the Castle of Stor^ford with the Appurtenances.
Notwithstanding these and many other helps, this Bishop doing his utmost
endeavor for the advancement of this noble work, in twenty years that he sat,
was not able to bring it to any perfection. He deceased, September 26. 1107.

36 Richard Beauveyes.
1108. Hen. 1.9.
RIchard Beauveys surnamed Rufus by some (for difference I think of his nephew
of the same name, that afterward succeeded him) lived long in great favor and
authority with Roger Mo^tgommery Earl of Shreusbury. By his means he was
preferred to this Bishopric, and consecrated thereunto at Pagham the year
1108. king Henry then appointed him first Warden of the Marches of Wales, and
after governor also of the county of Salop^ He purchased diverse whole streets,
and much h^using near to his Cathedral Church; all which he pulled down, and
leaving the ground unbuilt for a Cemitery or Churchyard, enclosed the same
with a wall, which yet ^or the most part remains; but so covered with houses,
as it cannot be seen but here and there. This man sitting (as his predecessor
did) twenty years, and employing all his revenues upon this fabric almost
all his time, was nothing nere able to finish it. Toward his latter end waxing
weary of that tedious work, he gave it over, and undertook the foundation of
a monastery for regular Canons at Saint Osythes in Essex, which place he
procured, giving Ladsworth in exchange for it. At the time of the suppression
it was valued at 758. pound five shilling eight pence. Diverse times he was
about to resign his Bishopric, that he might become a regular Canon in his
own new built Monastery; and that the rather, because being taken with a
desperate irrecouerable palsy, he well knew his time to be short: But he
deferred so long the execution of this intent from day to day, that he was
suprised by death before he could perform it, viz. January, 16. 1127.

27. Gilbertus Vniuersalis.
1128. Hen. 1.29.
A Canon of Lions was then preferred to this See, one Gilbert surnamed
Vniuersalis, vir probus and grandaeu^s (says Florent. Wigorn:) a very aged,
but a very good man. Other report of him, that he was a very covetous man, and
a very rich man; but a very learned man. It seems he was a man of some note
in these days: Saint Bernard writes diverse Epistles unto him, He died the
year 1133. traveling toward Rome.

38. Robertus de Sigillo.
AFter the death of Bishop Gilbert, 114^ Steph. 6.
one Anselme Abbot of Bury, nephew to Saint Anselme, was elected Bishop of
London, and had his election confirmed at Rome. But presently such exceptions
were taken against him^ as thereupon he was no^ only slayed from consecration,
but deprived also of his Abbotship. His electors were William the Deane of
Paul's, Ralfe Langford, and Richard Beauveys (the same I believe) that
afterward was Bishop. The King who very much misliked this election (having
made request for some other) amongst other effects of his displeasure, caused
the wives of these Canons (as Bale reports) to be imprisoned, and otherwise
shamefully entreated. True it is, that a little before this time, even until
Anselme was Archbishop, many Clergymen had wives: But he so far forth
restrained them, as if any were married afterward, they were very few, and
durst not in any wise be acknowen of it. By reason of the stirs that were
about this election, the Sea continued void a long time. The year 1140. Ma^d
the Empress having taken King Stephen prisoner, came to London, and finding
the Bishopric void, caused one Robert de Sigillo a monk of Reading (or as
others say Archdeacon of London) to be elected and consecrate Bishop. Within a
year or two after, he was taken prisoner at Fullham by Geof^ry de Mandeuill a
Captain of king Stephens, who ye may b^e sure could ill brook any man that
the Empress favored. He sat Bishop about ^en years. S. Bernard in his 211.
epistle written to Pope Innocent the second in his behalfe^ calls him,
antiquum amicum, fidelem seruum, deuotum ^ilium.

39. Richard Beauvey^.
1151. Steph. 17.
THe year 1151. in the beginning of October Richard Beauveys Archdeacon of
Middlesex, and nephew unto the former Richard Beauveys became Bishop. He died
ann. 1162.

40. Gilbert Foliot.
1161. Hen. 2.8.
GIlbert Foliot was first Abbot of Gloucester (as Matthew. West. has) but Bale
affirms he was Abbot of Leycester, and not of Gloucester. The year 1149. he
was consecrate Bishop of Hereford, continued in that See almost 12. years, and
in 1161. upon the kings special request, he was translated to London. In all
the stirs between Thomas Becket and the King, he stuck unto the king very
faithfully, and was partaker of all his counsels. Misliking much the
Archbishops pride and obstinacy, he would often exhort him to humility in these
words, Ad Zaccheum non diuertisset Dominus ni^i de S^comoro iam descendisset.
Mat. Paris reports a strange thing of him (believe it if you list) that one
night coming from the king, after long conference concerning the business
between the king and the Archbishop: as he lay musing of those things in his
bed, a terrible and an unknown voice sounded these words in his ears, O
Gilberte Foliot, dum reuoluis tot and tot, Deus tuus est Ascaroth. Taking it to
be the devil he answered boldly, Mentiris Demon, Deus meus est Deus Sabbath.
At what time the King banished certain favorites of the Archbishop, that were
Clergy men, he commanded this Bishop to receive the fruits of their livings
into his hand. For obeying the authority of his Prince herein, the Archbishop
excommunicated him. And presently upon the slaughter of the said Archbishop,
the Pope excommunicated him also; but affirming by oath he was not guilty of
the murder, he was absolved. He died February 18. 1187. It seems he was
not only wise, but (for those times) very learned; He writ diverse books
mentioned by Bale. I find in Polycraticus, a note concerning him, that because
it expresses very well an humor unto which mortal men are much subject, I
think not unnecessary to offer unto the Reader even as I find it. Venerabilis
Pater, etc. The reverend father Gilbert Bishop of Hereford, would sometimes
discourse unto me (says he) a certain guise of Cloister men, the experience
whereof he found in himself. When first he entered into the Monastery, hot with
the fire newly kindled in him, he was wont to blame very much the
sluggishnesse of his governors. Being preferred himself, he was still moved
with compassion toward his equals; but spared not his betters. He became first
a Prior; taking part then with Priors, he would complain of Abbots. Afterward
being made an Abbot, favoring his fellow-Abbots, he ceased not to reprehend
Bishops. And lastly when he was a Bishop himself, he began to see how much
more easy a thing it is to find faults, than to mend them. I think not (says
he) that this Bishop was to be esteemed envious, but being a wise man, he
expressed pretily an affection, as it were naturally engraffed in every man;
and was the more willing to take that kind of fault upon himself, that he
might be the better heard of others. Joan. Sarisb. Polycrat. lib. 7. cap. 24. A
very wise and reverend Bishop now deceased, in my hearing has often
acknowledged the like humor in himself before his preferments, and therefore
adjudged it the rather to be borne with all in other men.

41. Richard Fitz-neale.
NIgellus Bishop of Ely (that was nephew to Roger Bishop of Salisbury) had a
son named Richard, 1189 Rich. 1.1.
for whom, he bought of King Henry the second the Treasurership of England,
and paid for the same 400. marks. He held that office almost all the reign of
the said K. and was so good a husband in it^ as that at the kings death, his
tresure amounted to 100000. marks. In the latter end of his reign he found
means to prefer him unto the Bishoprike of London, whereunto he was consecrate
December. 31. 1189. He bestowed much upon the building of his Church and other
edifices belonging to his See, sat there about 9. years, and died Septem. 10.
1198.

42. William de Sancta Maria.
1199 Joan 2.
WIlliam de Sancta Maria succeeded, a Canon of Paul's, and sometimes secretary
to king Richard the first. He was consecrate, June 22. 1199. This Bishop was
one of them that interdicted the whole realm, and excommunicated king John by
the commandment of the Pope. They all endured five years banishment for their
labors, (as elsewhere is more at large declared.) Against this man especially
the King was much incensed, and in token of great displesure in the year 1211.
threw down to the ground his castle of Stortlord which William Conqueror had
given unto the Church. He resigned his Bishopric January 26. 1221.

43. Eustachius de Fauconbridge.
1222 Hen. 3.7.
EVstachius de Fauconbridge was elected unto the Sea of London February 25.
following, of his electors and election these verses were made, Omnes hie
digni, t^ dignior omnibus^ omnes
Hi^ plenesapiunt^ pleni^s ipse sapis.


Upon Saint Marks day 1222. he was consecrate at Westminster. The next year
a great controversy was ended by arbitratrors between him and his Cathedral
church of Saint Paul on the one part, and the Abbey of Westminster on the
other. The arbitrators were the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Winchester and Sarum. Thomas Prior of Me^ton and Richard of Dunstaple. Their
order was, that the Abbey of Westminster should be exempt from the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of London, that the church of Stanes should ever
hereafter belong to Westmnister, the manor and church of Sunbery unto the
Cathedral Church of Paul's. This Eustache had been one of the kings Justices,
Chancellor of the exch^quer, Trea^urer of England, and twice Ambassador into
France. Upon his advancement to London from these places, one alluding to his
name composed this distich, Eustachi nuper been stabas, nunc been stabis
Ille status valuit, praeualet iste tamen.
He was a great benefactor unto his Cathedral Church, in which he lies
intoombed in a fair monument of marble standing in the south wall of the Cast
and of the Church. October 31. 1228. he deceased.

44. Rogerus Niger.
ROger (in our histories surnamed Niger) Archdeacon of Colchester, 1229 Henr.
3.14.
was chosen Bishop the year 1228. soon after the death of Eustachius, and
consecrate by Ioceline Bishop of Bath June 10. following, being Trinity
Sunday, together with Richard Archbishop of Canterbury and Hugh Bishop of Ely.
This Roger (says M. Paris) was very reverend man, religious, learned,
painful in preaching, eloquent, a great housekeeper, of very gentle and
courteous behauior. Whereunto he might have added, that he was also stout and
very courageous. One Rustandus the Popes Nuntio being earnest in a convocation
for setting forward a certain pr^^^ing devise to scrape up money for his
Master^ he not only withstood him openly, but cried out upon the unreasonable
and shameless covetousness of the court of Rome and was the only means of
staying the course of that exaction. For revenge heerof not long after the
began to frame an accusation against him at Rome, alleging matters altogether
false and frivolous. It forced him to travel thither, and cost him great
sums of money before he could rid his hands of that brabble. The year 1233.
Walter Mancl^rke, Bishop of Carlisle, takin^ ship to pass over the seas, was
hindered by some of the kings officers, for that he had no license to depart
the realm. These officers for so doing, he e^communicated; and riding
straight unto the court, certified the king what he had done, and there renewed
the same sentence again. About the same time the king gave commandment for
the apprehending of Hubert de Burgo Earl of kent, who having sudden notice
thereof at midnight, got him up and fled into a Church in Essex. They to whom
the business was committed, finding him upon his knees before the high altar
with the Sacrament in one hand and a cross in the other, carried him away
nevertheless unto the Tower of London. The Bishop taking this to be a great
violence and wrong offere^ unto holy Church, would never leave the king (that
was indeed a Prince religious enough) until he had caused the Earl to be
carried unto the place whence he was fetched. It is thought it was a means of
saving the Earls life^ For though order was taken he should not escape thence,
yet it gave the kings wrath a time to ^^ole, and himself leisure to make
proof of his innocence: By reason whereof, he was afterward restored to the
kings favor and former places of honor. This Bishop died at his manner of
Bishops hall in the parish of Stupenheath on Michaelmas day 1241. or as some
report (I think untruly) Octo. 3. 1243. and was buried in his own Church,
where Matthew Paris says diverse miracles were wrought at his tomb. It stands
in the enter close or North wall of the Presbytery a little above the quire.
Upon it is to be read this Epitaphe: Ecclesiae quondam Praeful praesentis, in
anno
M. bis C. quater X. iacet hi^ Rogerus humatus.
Huius erat manibus domino locus iste dicatus.
Christ suis precibus veniam des, toll reatus.


45. Fulco Basset.
1244 Hen 3.29.
ABout Christmas following, Fulco Basset Deane of York, was elected unto the Sea of London, but not consecrate until October 9. 1244. for that the King,
who earnestly desired to have removed Peter Bishop of Hereford unto London,
misliked greatly their choice. This our Fulco was a gentleman of a great house,
but a second brother. After he had entered orders, his elder brother and the
only son of that brother, died within the compass of a year, leaving the
inheritance unto him. Our histories blame him for not being forward enough in
the cause of the Barons, that is for being too true unto his Prince:
Otherwise, they give him the praise of a good man, a discreet and vigilant
pastor. Questionless he was a man stout, and no less courageous than his
predecessor. The year 1255. Rustandus the Popes legate held a convocation at
London, in which when he went about to lay an importable exaction upon the
Clergy (and it was known the King was hired to wink at it) this Bishop rose
up and openly professed that he would suffer his head to be chopped off before
he would consent unto so shameful and unreasonable oppression of the Church.
Yea when the king stormed at this his resistance, and reviled him saying, that
neither he nor any of his name was ever true unto him, threatening moreover
that he would find means to chastise him for it: In the presence of some that
he knew would tell the king of it, he sticked not to say (a speech I confess
not commendable, but bold and courageous): My Bishoprike indeed, my myter and
crosier, the king and the Pope may take away from me (though unjustly) but my
helmet and sword I hope they shall no^. He died of the plague at London, the
year 1258. and was buried in his own church upon Saint Urbans day.

46. Henry de Wingham.
HEnry de Wingham Chauncellor of England, 1259 Hen. 3.44.
chamberlain of Gascoigne, Deane of Tottenhall and S. Martins, having been
twice Ambassador into France, was chosen Bishop of Winchester the year 1258.
but refused to accept of that place. See why, in Ethelmare of Winchester. The
year following, the like offer being made for London, without any scruple he
accepted of the same, and was consecrated about midsommer the same year. A
small time he enjoyed that preferment, being taken away by death July 13. 1261.
He lies in^oombed in the South wall near to the monument of Bishop
Fauconbridge.

17. Richard Talbot.
Soon after the death of Henry Wingham, Richard Talbot was elected and
confirmed Bishop of London, whether consecrate or no I cannot tell. Certain it
is he died upon Michaelmas day the year following, viz. 1262.

48. Henry de Sandwich.
1262 Henr. 3.47.
BEfore the end of that year, Henry de Sandwich, Archde^con of Oxford was
consecrate Bishop. So London had 3. Bishops in one year. This man was
excommunicate by Ottobonus the Popes legate (as he had well deserved) for
taking part with the rebellions Barons against their Prince. He died September.
16. 1273.

49. John de Chishull.
1274 Edw. 1.3.
John de Chishull Deane of Paul's, sometimes Archdeacon of London, having been
first keeper of the great seal, and then Treasurer of England, was consecrate
April 29. 1274. He died February 10. 1279.

50. Richard de Grauesend.
1280 Edw. 1.9.
RIchard de Grauesend the Archdeacon of Northhampton, was consecrate Bishop of
London at Couentry August 12. 1280. He was the principal founder of the
Fryery at Maldon for Carmelit^s or white fryats, valued at the suppression at
26 pound 8. shilling. He died at Fulham December. 9. 1303. and was buried at
London.

51. Ralfe de Baldocke.
1305 Edw. 1.34.
BY the consent of the whole Chapter, Ralfe Baldocke their Deane was then chosen
Bishop upon Saint Matthias day following. Howbeit he might not have
consecration till the Pope had confirmed the election, for that three Canons
lately deprived from their Prebends by the Archbishop, being excluded from the
election, had appealed from the same unto the Pope. By the commandment of the
Pope ( Clement 5.) he was consecrate at Lions, January 30. 1305. by ^he hands
of one Petrus Hispanus, a Cardinal^ He was very well learned, and amongst other
things, he writ (as Bale records) an history or Chronicle of England in the
Latin tongue. In his lifetime he gave two hundred ^orks toward the buliding
of the new work of the chapel on the East and of his Church, now called the
Lady chapel, and in his will bequeathed much toward the finishing of the
same. And here by the way it shall not be amiss to note, that in digging the
foundation of this building, there were found more tha^ an hundred heads of
cattle, as oxen, kine, etc. which seems to confirm the opinion of those
that think the Temple of Jupiter was situate in that place, before the
planting of Christian religion, took away those Idolatrous sacrifices: whereof
we shall ^est more assured, if we read the life of S. Gregory, lib. 2. cap.
37. and the 71. epistle of his ninth book. This Bishop was brought up at
Oxford in Merton College, died at Stell, July 24. 1313. and lies buried under
a flat marble in the said chapel.

52. Gilbert Segraue.
GIlbert Segraue borne in Leicestershire, 1313 Edw. 2.7.
and brought up in Oxford, was a man very well learned, and left diverse good
monuments of his knowledge behind him. He was consecrate Bishop of London,
Nouem. 25. 1213. and sat about three years. See more of him in Th. Corbridge
of York.

53. Richard Newport.
RIchard Newport was consecrate Bishop of London, 1317 Edw. 2.11.
March 26. 1317. and died August 24. 1318.

54. Stephen Grauesend.
STephen Grauesend was consecrated January 14. following, 1318 Edw. 2.12.
and sat about twenty years.

55. Richard Byntworth, or Wentworth.
RIchard Byntworth had his election confirmed, 1338 Edw. 3.13.
May 23. 1338. was consecrate afterward at Lambhith by the Bishop of
Chichester, and died December 8. 1339.

56. Ralfe Stratford.
1339 Edw. 3.14.
RAlfe Stratford was consecrate at Canterbury, March 12. 1339. He purchased the
year of ground called Nomans-la^d beside Smithfield, and dedicated it to the
use of burial. He was borne at Stratford upon Auon, where he builded the
Chapel of Saint Thomas, and died at Stupenheath, having sat Bishop about the
space of 14. years.

57. Michaell Northbrooke.
MIchaell Northbrooke Doctor of Law, had his election confirmed, 1355 Edw. 3.30.
July 7. 1355. and died of the plague. Sep. 9. 1361. at Copford.

58. Simon Sudbury.
1361 Edw. 3.36.
SImon Sudbury alias Tibald Doctor of Law succeeded. He sat Bishop about 15.
years, and was translated to Canterbury. See more of him there.

59. William Courtney.
1375 Edw. 3.50.
THe year 1375. at what time Bishop Sudbury was removed to Canterbury, William
Courtney Bishop of Hereford was called to London, and afterward succeeded the
same man in Canterbury also, viz. in the end of the year 1381. In the mean
time, to wit the year 1378. it should seem he was made Cardinal. So Thomas
Walsingham affirms. And as well Ciaconius as Onuphrius deliver that the
Bishop of London was then created a Cardinal, but they call him Adam^ whereas
there was indeed one Adam an Englishman about those times advanced to that
dignity, but his name was Easton (as Bale has recorded) of whom and his great
troubles at Rome (where he lived many years a Cardinal) Theodoricus a Niem
(amongst other) has written much in his history De schimate, etc. See more of
this Bishop in Canterbury.

60. Robert Braybrooke.
RObert Braybrooke was consecrate January 5. 1^81. 1381 Rich. 2.5.
In Sept. 1382. he was made Lord Chauncellor, but held not that office past
half a year. The year 1387. it seems there fell some disagreement between
him and Io: of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. For Th. of Wallingham and other report,
that the Londoners were so greatly exasperated against him for some soul word
given to their Bishop, as they sought with great tumult to kill him; and had
burned his house at the Sauoy, if the Bishop himself had not appeased their
fury. He died August 27. 1404. not 1405. (as his Epitaph reports) and lies
buried in the middle of the Lady Chapel, under a fair marble stone in laid
with letters^ made every one of a several piece of Brass.

61. Roger Walden.
ONe Thomas Langley was then elected Bishop, 1404 Henr. 4.6.
October 20. following. But the Pope little regarding this election, of his
mere authority (according to his manner) bestowed this Bishopric, December
10. 1404. upon Roger Walden, that for a time had held the place and authority
of Archbishop of Canterbury. Never had any man better experience of the
variable uncertainty of worldly felicity then he. From the estate of a very
poor man, he was suddenly raised to be Treasurer of England (having been
first Secretary to the king, Deane of York, and Treasurer of the Town of
Calis) and then made Archbishop of Canterbury. That honor he enjoyed not past
two years, but he was removed from the same, and forced to lead a private
life a great while. At last being once more lift up into a place of honor, he
was not suffered to enjoy the same any long time; within the compass of a year
after he was made Bishop of London, he died, and was buried in the Priory of S.
Bartholmewes in Smithfield. See more of him in T. Arundell of Canterbury.

62. Nicholas Bubwith.
1406 Henr. 4.8.
SEptem. 26. 1406. Nicholas Bubwith was consecrate Bishop of London at Mortlake.
Within little more then the compass of that one year, he was twice
translated; first to Salisbury August 13. 1407. and then to Bath Octo. 5. the
same year. See more of him in Bath.

63. Richard Clifford.
1407
THe Pope had bestowed the Bishopric of Bathe (by way of provision) upon
Richard Clifford Archdeacon of Canterbury, the year 1401. But King Henry the
fourth then newly come to the crown, being very desirous of preferring another
man to that place, assured him, he would never give him possession of his
temporalties, yet promised him his favor in some other matter. Hereupon he
was content to let go his hold, and begin a new suit for Worcester, which in
the end of the same year he easily obtained. There he sat about six years;
and October 13. 1407. was translated to London. The year 1414. he traveled
to the Counsel of Constance and preached in Latin before the Emperor, and
other estates there assembled. In that Council, the long schism was ended,
and Martin the fifth, chosen the sole Pope. The Council thinking it meet that
thirty persons should be added to the Cardinals in this election, this Bishop
was one of that number: In which also, there were that named him unto the
Papacy. Himself was the first that named the Cardinal Columna; who thereupon,
the rest consenting, was immediately elected. He died Aug. 20. 1421. and lies
buried near the place where the shrine of S. Erkenwald stood toward the South:
to wit, hard by the monument of Sir Christofer Hatton.

64. John Kemp.
1421 Henr. 5.10.
AFter him, succeeded John Kemp, first Bishop of Rochester, then of Chichester.
whence the year 1421. Feb. 27. he was translated hither, and from hence to
York, 1425. as also afterward to Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury and
York.

65 William Gray.
WIlliam Gray Doctor of Law, and Deane of York, was consecrate May, 26. 1426.
and the year 1431. translated to Lincoln. 1426 Hen. 6.5.
See Lincoln.

66 Robert Fitzhugh.
RObert Fitz Hugh Doctor of law, and Archdeacon of Northampton, 1431. Hen. 6.10.
was consocrate September 16 1431. This mam had been twice Ambassador once into
Germany, and another time to Rome. The year 1435. he was elected Bishop of
Ely, but died before his intended translation could be perfected, viz. Sept.
22. 1435. and lies buried in the Presbetery, a little above the Bishops See,
under a Marble stone inlaid with brass.

67 Robert Gilbert
RObert Gilbert Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of York, sometimes Warden of
Merton Colleoge in Oxford, 1432. Hen. 6.11.
was consecrate the year 1432, and died 1448. in the beginning of July.

68. Thomas Kempe.
THe Pope of his absolute authority he stowed the Bishopric of London upon T.
Kempe (sometimes Proctor of the Uniuersity of Oxford) the year 1449. 1449. Hen.
6.28
He was consecrate at York place (now called Whitehall) Feb. 8. 1449. by the
hands of his uncle John Kemp then Archb. of York. This man sat Bishop almost
40. year. He died Mar. 28. 1489. and was buried in the upper end of the body
of his church between two pille^s, where he caused to be built (...) tomb a
sumptuous chapel, and erected (as I take it) a Chantry in the same. He built
Paul's cross, in form as now it stands as also (for the most part) that same
goodly and magnificent School, called the Divinity School in Oxford, the
founder whereof is accounted commonly (but falsely) Humphrey Duke of Gloucester.

69 John Marshall.
1489. Hen. 7.5.
THe Chapter elected for their Bishop one Richard Hill, August 19. 1489. But I
find that John Marshall (by the Popes appointment no doubt) became Bishop of
London the same year, and died the year, 1493.

70 Richard Hill.
MArshall being dead, the forenamed Richard Hill (whether by virtue of his old
election or no I know not) obtained consecration the same year, 1493. 1493.
Hen. 7.9.
He lies buried in the body of the Church under a Marble stone, bearing yet
the title of his name, though even almost worn out.

71 Thomas Savage.
1496. Hen. 7.12.
THomas Savage a Cambridge man, was first Bishop of Rochester; translated
thence to London, 1496, and from London to York 1501. See more of him in York.

72 William Warham.
1503. Hen. 7.19.
WIlliam Warham Doctor of Law, became Bishop of London, in the beginning of
the year 1503. In the end of 1504. he was translated to Canterbury. See more
of him there.

73 William Barnes.
1505. Hen. 7.21.
IN the beginning of August, 1505. William Barns Master of the Rolls, an Oxford
man, was made Bishop of London, and died before the end of the same year.

74 Richard Fitz-Iames.
RIchard Fitz-Iames Doctor of Law, brought up in Merton College in Oxford,
1506. Hen, 7.22.
and sometimes Warden of the same, was consecrated Bishopps of Rochester, the
year 1496. translated thence to Chickester, 1504. and from Chichester to
London, Aug. 2. 1506. He bestowed much money in repayring the church of Saint
Mary's in Oxford, as also in adorning and beautifying his own Cathedral
church, and died the year 1521. A gentleman of an ancient house, learned and
very virtuous. He was buried between the two pillars next unto the steeple,
on the north side of the body of the church, under a marble stone, over which
was built a kind (...) toombe or chapel of wood, that by the burning of the
steeple was also consumed, and quite defaced, June 4. 1561.

75 Cuthbert Tonstall.
CVthbert Tonstall Doctor of Law, 1322. Hen. 8.14.
a Cambridge man, Master of the Rolls, and Keeper of the Privy Seal, was
consecrated to the Bishopric of London, October. 19. 1522. and translated to
Durham, March 25. 1530. See more of him in Durham.

76 John Stokesley.
John Stokesley brought up at Magdalen College in Oxford, was enthronized^
July 19. 1530. and departed this life September, 1530. Hen. 8.22.
8. 1^39. He lies buried in the Lady chapel under a Marble, inlaid with
brass.

77 Edmund Boner.
EDmund Bonner Doctor of Law, an Oxford man, and Archdeacon of Leycester; 1540.
Hen. 8.32.
sometimes Master of the Cardinals faculties, had the Bishopric of Hereford
bestowed upon him, at what time he was out of the Realm Ambassador unto the
Pope from king Henry the eight, for renouncing his authority here in England.
Soon after his return having yet scarcely en^red upon ^ereford, he was
called to London, elected October 20. 1539. and installed April 3. 1540. How
butcherly he behaved himself in that place, I refer you unto the report of
Master Fox. He was deprived October. 1. 1549. restored by Queen Mary, August,
5. 155^. and lastly displaced again by authority of Parliament May 30. 1559. He
died in the Marshalsea, September, 5. 1569.

78 Nicholas Ridley.
15^9. Edw. 6.4.
AFter the first displacing of Bishop Bonner, Nicholas Ridley Bishop of
Rochester was translated to London, and enstalled there, April 12. 1550. He
was a Gentleman of an ancient house, borne in the Bishopric of Durham, and
brought up in Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge (where he proceeded Doctor of
Divinity) ^ometimes also fellow of Uniuersity College in Oxford, then
afterward Master of Pembr^ke Hall aforesaid, Prebendary of the Churches of
Canterbury and Westminster, and Uicar of Hearne in Kent. Sept. 25. 1547. he was
consecrate Bishop of Rochester, removed to London (as before is mentioned,) and
lastly died for the cosntant profession of his faith, October 16. 1555. the
history whereof, and of his whole life, ye may read in Master Fox more at
large.

79. Edmund Grindall.
BIshop Bonner being the second time deprived, Edmund G^indall Doctor of
Divinity, 1559. Eliz. 2.
sometime Master of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, was elected the twenty sixth of
July following, consecrate December 21. 1559. translated to York, May 20.
1570. and after to Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

80 Edwyn Sands.
EDwyn Sands Bishop of Worcester was confirmed Bishop of London, 1570. Eliz.
19.
July 13. 1570. He sat there about the space of six years, and was
translated to York. See more in York.

81 John Elmer.
John Elmer Doctor of Divinity and Archdeacon of Lincoln, 1576. Eliz 19,
a Cambridge man succeeded being consecrated March 24. 1576. He sat almost
eighteen years, died at Fulham, June 3. 1594. and was buried toward the North
side of the East part of the Church above the high Altar.

82 Richard Fletcher.
The Sea of B^^stow having been void many years, 1594. Eliz. 37.
Richard Fletcher Doctor of Divinity, sometime fellow of Bennet College in
Cambridge, Deane of Peterborough, and one of her Majesty's Chaplains, was
consecrate thereunto, December, 14. 1589. translated thence to Worcester in
February 1593. and in the end of the yee^e 1594. to London. He died suddenly in
his house at London, being (to see to) well, sick and dead in one quarter of
an hour, June, 15. 1596. and was buried in his own Cathedral Church.

83. Rich. Bancroft.
RIchard Bancroft Doctor o^ Divinity, 1597. Eliz. 40.
brought up first in Christ's College, and after in Jesus College in
Cambridge, was consecrate the eight of May, 1597. and translated to Canterbury.
Dec. 1604.

84 Richard Vaughan.
RIchard Vaughan Doctor of Divinity, 1604. Iac. 2.
and Bishop first of Bangor, then of Chester, was translated to London in
January, 1604. He dyed March 30. 1607.

85 Thomas Rauis.
1607. James, 4.
THomas Rauis, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Christchurch in Oxford, was
first Bishop of Gloucester, and then removed to London, May 19. 1607. He
deceased December 14. 1609.

86. George Abbot.
GEorge Abbot, Doctor of Divinity, having been little above one month
Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, was called to London toward the latter end
of January, 1609. and removed to Canterbury.

87. John King.
John King Doctor of Divinity, Deane of Christchurch in Oxford where he was
brought up, and Archdeacon of Nottingham, was consecrate Sept. 8. 1611. His
grandfather was brother unto Robert King, sometimes Bishop of Oxford.

This Bishopric is valued in the Kings books at 1119. l. 8. s. 4. d. and
yielded the Pope from every Bishop his first entrance 3000. florens.

THE BISHOPS OF WINCHESTER.
THe Cathedral Church of Winchester (according to a report that I find in an
old Manuscript) was first built and erected by K. Lucius, who abotlishing
Paganism, embraced Christ he first year of his reign, about the year of our
Lord, 180. and placing Monks in the same, allotted for their maintenance large
revenues, which heretofore had belonged for the most part unto the Flamines and
other heathen Priests. This Church (as the same Author says) was hallowed and
dedicated unto the honor of our Savior, October 29. 189. by Faganus, and
Damianus Bishops. About the space of 100. years, the Church of Christ had then
peace in this land, viz. until the reign of Dioclesian, who endeavoring to
root out Christian Religion, not only killed the professors of the same, but
also pulled down all Churches and Temples, any where consecrate unto the
exercise thereof. Amongst the rest, this of Winchester at that time went to
wrack, the buildings thereof being ruinated, and made even with the ground,
and the Monks and all the officers belonging unto it, either slain, or
enforced to fly for the present time, and yet afterward to deny Christ. This
happened Anno 289. Not long after the death of this cruel tyrant, to wit, the
year, 309. the Church aforesaid was again reedefled, and that with such
wonderful forwardness and zeal, as within one year and thirty days, both it
and all the edifices belonging unto it (as Chambers, and other buildings, for
the Monks and officers) were quite finished in very seemly and convenient
manner. The 15. day of March following, it was again hallowed and dedicated
unto the honor and memory of Amphibalus (that had suffered death for Christ in
the late persecution) by Constans Bishop (as my Author says) of Winchester, at
the request of Deodatus Abbot of this new erected Monastery, 200. years and
upwards; it then continued in the same state, to wit, until the year, 519.
at which time, Cerdicke the first King of the West Saxons, being a Pagan,
converted the church into the Temple of Dagon (says the Manuscript aforesaid,)
and either flow or chased away all the Monks and Ministers of the same. Thus
much for the first foundation of this church, and the estate thereof, until
the coming of the Saxons. Now let us proceed unto the discourse of the
Bishops, that we find successionely to have sat in the same.

1. Birinus.
635
THe Province or kingdom of the Gewisses or West Saxons, containing the West
part of England, was governed along time by one Bishop, that was called the
Bishop of the West Saxons. This Country after the Saxons invaded the same,
received first the faith of Christ in the time of King Kinigilsus, by the
preaching of Byrinus first Bishop, who being a very zealous and denoue man,
obtained leave of Honorius the Pope of Rome to adventure himself in preaching
Christ unto Insfidels. And his promise was, to travel vuto the most savage and
barbarous people in the furthermost part of this Isle, that amongst them he
might sow the seeds of the gespell; whereupon he was consecrated Bishop by
Asterius then Bishop of Genoa. But coming thither, and finding the Country of
Gewisses, where he first arrived to be altogether Pagans, and without any
knowledge of Christianity, he determined to go no farther to seek that which
even there he had already met withal. It pleased God so to bless his labors,
that in a short time not only great numbers of the common people, and many of
the nobles, but even Kinigilsus the King himself believed in Christ, and took
on them the badge and cogni^ance of Christianity by Baptism. Oswald the king
of Northumberland was present at what time Kinigilsus received this Sacrament,
and was his Godfather, being afterward to become his son by the marriage of
his daughter. These two Kings appointed unto Birinus the city of Dorchester for
his Cathedral See, where spending his time in preaching, and other pastoral
offices (not without great and in^stimable profit) he died about the year
650. Dec. 3.15. years after his first coming into this country, and was
buried there in his own Church.

2. Agilbertus.
IN the mean time it had fallen out, 650.
that Kinigilsus dying, Kenwal^hus his son reigned in his stead, who refusing
the offer of the kingdom of heaven by refusing Christ, lost also soon after
his earthly kingdom. He had married the daughter of Penda king of Mercia or
Mid. England, and (upon what occasion I know not) putting her away, married
another. For this cause Penda took arms against him, and forced him out of
his kingdom. Then for succor he flod unto Anna king of Essex, a good man and
very rel^gious, in whose court he lived the space of three years, and there
was first brought unto the faith of Christ. By the help of this good Prince he
also was restored to his Kingdom again. His father had pulled down the Temple
of Dagon (as beside the foresaid Manuscript certain antiquities I have seen
at Winchester do report) and begun the building of a very fair Church in
Winchester, but was taken away by death before he could finish it, and for
maintenance of the Ministers of the same, had allotted all the Country round
about within 7. mile of the City. This building Kenwalchus finished, and not
only ratified the foresaid gift of his father, but also himself bestowed upon
the same church the mannours of Downton, Alres^ord and Wordiam. Soon after the
conue^s^on of Kenwalchus, one Agilbertus (a Frenchman born) that had spent a
great time in Ireland in preaching the gospel there, came into these parts,
an. 650. and of his own accord took great pains in instructing the people.
The King being given to understand of his learning and painfulnesse, prayed him
to accept the pastoral charge of his country, whereunto he agreed and continued
in the same a long time.

3. Wina, or Wini.
AT last it came to pass that the king mis^^king his speech and utterance (as
not being able to deliver his mind, but in broken and very bad English) caused
an other Bishop to be ordained, one Wina (a French man likewise, but one that
could speak very good English) and dividing his Country into two parts,
allotted the one unto Agilbert, who held his Episcopal See as before is said
at Dorchester, and the other unto this same Wini appointing unto him for his
See the city of Winchester. This ma^ter Agilbert taking very grievously, (the
rather for that it was done altogether without either his consent or knowledge)
returned in a great chafe into his own Country, where soon after he was made
Bishop of Paris. So Wini or Wina, was the f^^st Bishop of Winchester, of whom
some vainly suppose, the City to have taken his name. He lies entoombed in
the north part of the Presbyt^ry upon the top of a wall, where is to be seen
this inscript^on, I lic iacent olla Wini Episcopi. Not long after the departure
of Agilbert the king (I know not for what cause) sell into great mis^ike of
Wina, and d^oue him out of his country, who slying unto Wulf^^ere king of
Mercia or Mid England, bought of him for money (as it is said) the Bishopric
of London, being she first Simonist that is mentioned in our histories.

4. Eleutherius.
THe West Saxons were then a long time without a Bishop. In which mean space
Kenwalchus perceiving all things to go against the hair with him, and nothing
to prosper under his hand, but crosses and mischances to come thick, one in
the neck of another, (for so indeed it fell out with him, for the
particularities whereof I refer the Reader to our Chronicles) he began to
consider with himself, how that by neglecting Religion, he first lost his
kingdom, and no sooner embraced Christ, but he was restored to his crown
again; and therefore persuaded himself, that his negligence in appointing a
Pastor that might look unto the service of God, was the cause why his worldly
affairs had no better success. Hereupon he sent an ambassador into France
unto Agilbert, to excuse the wrong heretofore done unto him, and with all
earnestness to persuade him to return unto his former charge there again.
This though Agilbert refused to do, alleging that he was bound by promise
not to forsake the place he now held: yet that he might show his readiness to
gratify the King in what he might; he sent over with the Ambassador a Priest
named Elcutherius, his own nephew, that might (if so it pleased him) be
ordained Pastor and Bishop of that Country, testifying, that (for his own
part) he thought him not unworthy of the place. He was honorably received of
the King and his people, and at their request consecrate Bishop by Theodorus
then Archbishop of Cant^rbury. He continued Bishop seven years.

5. Headda.
AFter Eleutherius succeeded Headda, 673.
a very holy and virtuous man, but one that profited more his charge in example
of good life and conversation, then in often preaching unto them: for (as it
should seem) very learned he was not. Yet (i^ Beda say true) God approved his
government by the testimony of many miracles. He died (as some deliver) the
year 704. or (as other) 705. and that (as the Martyrologeis tell us, where he
is calendred for a Saint,) July the 7.

6. Daniel.
HE dying after he had sat somewhat above thirty years; it seemed good to Ina
then King of the West Saxons, 704.
to divide the Province into two parts; whereof the one he committed unto a
kinsman of his own called Aldelmus, commanding him to make Sherborne his See,
and unto the other was ordained Daniel; who following the steps of his
predecessors, continued at Winchester. He was very learned and writ
commendably diverse histories, as one concerning his own Province, an other
containing Austrialium Saxonum gesta, a. 3. de vita Ceddae Episcopi, and
moreover, de reb. vectae Insulae, and some other discourses. This man sat 43.
years, and at last perceiving himself unable to govern by reason of old
age, he resigned his Bishopric, an 744. West. and became a Monk a Meldune or
Malmesbury, where he died the year, 745.

7. Humfridus.
774.
HVmfridus then governed this See for the space of 9. or 10. years, and died
an. 754. West. 756. He was present at a convocation held near Rochester in
Sept. 747.

8. Kinehardus.
756.
AFter him came Kinehardus, of whom I find nothing recorded.

9. Hathelardus.
ANd after him Athelardus, or Hathelardus Abbot of Meldune, who the year 794.
was translated to the Metropoliticall See of Canterbury. See more in Canterbury.

Then these:
10 Egbaldus, 11. Dudda. 12. Kineberthus, He traveled to Rome with the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, 799. 13. Alhmundus. 14. Wigtheinus. 15. Herefridus,
slain of tho Danes in battle, anno 834. 16. Edmundus.
ANd Helmstanus who died 837. He lies buried upon the North wall of the
Presbytery, together with one of his successors Kenulphus, as these verses
there written do show.

Pontifices haec capsa duos tenet incineratos,
Primus Helstanus huic successorque Kenulphus.
ABout this time many (as Simon Dunelm, Henry Huntingdon, Rog. Houeden, and
other) many I say, suppose Athelwulf or Athulf (that was king of the West
Saxons twenty years) to have been first Bishop of Winchester by the space of
seven years, which in my judgment cannot well be true. Certain it is, that
being in orders, viz. a Subdeacon, and peradventure elected Bishop, (for so
says the Abbot of Geruaux, Io. Brampton) by the dispensation of the Pope, he
was taken out of the monastery of Winchester to be king; and that is all I find
of this matter worthy credit.

18. Swithunus.
AFter Helmstan succeeded (as it seems) Swithunus, the opinion of whose
holiness has procured him the reputation of a Saint. How miraculously he made
whole a basket of eggs that were all broken, and some other things accounted
miracles in our histories, who so list may read in Matthew Westminster, in his
report of the year 862. at what time July 2. this Bishop died (and according
to his own appointment) was buried in the churchyard: whatsoever his holiness
was, his learning questionles was great; in respect whereof Egbert King of the
West Saxons committed unto his government that same Ethelwolfe his younger son
that of a Subdeacon in the church of Winchester, was afterward made king, as
before is declared. Some there be that say he was Chancellor of England,
whereas that office was not erected till after the Conquest.

19. Adferthus.
863.
ADferthus succeeded him in this Bishopric, a man (says Florilegus)
sufficiently learned, and that a while discreetly and wisely governed this See.
It seems he was translated to Canterbury, and is remembered in the stories of
that Church, by the name of Athelredus.

20. Dumbertus.
DVmbertus the successor of Adferthus died in the year 879. and left his
Bishopric unto Denewulsus.

21. Denewulsus.
879.
THis Denewulsus (as the fame goes) was sometimes a hoggeheard, and dwelt in the
place where the Abbey of Athel^^ey in Summersetshire was afterward builded. It
happened at that time king Alfred (that famous king of the West Saxons) to be so
near followed of the Danes (that sought nothing more than his life) as being
abandoned of all his followers, he knew no better or more likely course for his
safety, then (dissembling his estate) to deliver himself for a while into the
service of this hogheard, dwelling in a place (at that time) almost
inaccessible for water, and so of very little or no resort. So long he
continued there, as his master and dame were almost weary of his service,
wherein he was not so ready as a man should that had had education accordingly.
Of her it is particularly delivered, that when the king let certain cakes burn
that she had set him to toast, she reprehended him sharply as an unprofitable
servant in these words.

Vrere quos cernis panes girare moraris,
Cum nimium gaudes hos manducare calentes.
These Cakes that burn,
While them to turn
Ye make so little haste,
When dressed they be
I warrant ye
Yo'wl eat them but too fast.
At last it fell out, that the kings friends gathering themselves together, he
joined himself unto them, and his subjects (that now a great while thought him
dead) resorted unto him in so great numbers, as setting upon the Danes, he
overthrew them; and in a short time not only brought them under his obedience,
but also reduced in a manner the whole Realm of England into one Monarchy.
Having thus recovered the peaceable possession of his crown, he was not
unmindful of his old Master, in whom perceiving an excellent sharpenes of wit,
he caused him (though it were now late being a man grown) to study, and having
obtained some competency of learning, he preferred him to the Bishopric of
Winchester. Moreover, that he might show himself thankful unto God as well as
man, in the place where this Hogheard dwell, he built a Monastery, the walls
whereof are yet partly standing.

22 Athelmus.
OF Athelmus that succeeded, this only is recorded, that the year 888. he
traveled to Rome, to carry thither the alms of King Alfred. I find not
mention of this man any where but in Matthew. Westminster.

Bertulsus.
HE also reports that one Bertulsus Bishop of Winchester, anno 897. was
appointed a Guardian of the realm (amongst many others) by king Alfred to
defend it against the Danes. Elsewhere I find him not mentioned.

23. Frithstane.
905.
Certain it is, that in the year 905. one Frithstane was consecrate with six
other Bishops by Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury, at the commandment of K.
Edmund the elder, the occasion whereof is elsewhere set down. He was a man
highly esteemed of for his learning, but much more for his great virtue and
holiness. He sat a long time, and at last resigned, procuring one Brinstan to
be his successor anno 931. the next year after he died, viz. 932.

24. Brinstan.
BRinstan (as is said) became Bishop, anno 931. and died three years after,
931.
viz. 934.

25. Elphegus Calvus.
934.
ELphegus surnamed Calvus succeeded, and died in the year 946. H. Wig. says
951. Of these three Bishops, diverse miracles are reported in histories, which
need not to be rehearsed.

26. Elssinus, alias Alssius.
946.
AFter him sat Elssinus or Alssius who sat till the year 958. and then by
bribery, and great sums of money procured himself to be translated to the Sea of Canterbury, of which preferment he had small joy See Cant.

27. Brithelmus.
958.
Upon the translation of Elssinus, one Brithelmus became Bishop, and sat about
5. years; for an. 963. he died.

28 Ethelwald.
EThelwald Abbot of Abingdon, was consecrate 963. sat 19. years and died, 963.
984. Augu. 1. How Brinstan his predec^ssor appeared unto him, challenging the
honor of a Saint, etc. See Matthew. Westminster in ann. 965. He was a great
patron of monks, and no less enemy unto married Priests. At his first coming
he expelled them out of the old Monastery to place monks. In the year 867.
the Danes had slain all the monks they could find in Winchester. From which
time, secular Priests inhabited the same (being authorized by the king so to
do) till that the year 971. a company of monks were brought from Abingdon
(of the Bishops old acquaintance it is like) to shoulder them out of the
doors. Not contented thus to have replenished his own Church with monks,
having bought the Isle of Ely, he played the like rex in that Church (not yet
Cathedral) turning along eight honest Priests into the world, with their wives
and children, to put in monks And then at Thorney, he built new, or at
leastwise repaired, an old monastery that had layen wast many years. I may
not let pass one commendable action of this bishop, that in time of a great
dearth, brake all the plate belonging to his Church, and gave it to the poor;
saying, that the Church might in good time hereafter again be provided of
ornaments necessary, but the poor perished for want of food, could not be
recovered.

29. Elphegus.
ELphegus Abbot of Bathe succeeded him, 984
an honest and learned man. He was translated to Canterbury ann. 1006. see
more of him in Cant.

30. Kenulphus, alias Elsius.
KEnulphus (by some called Elsius) was then consecrate, 1006
a man infamous for simony, and aspiring by corrupt means to this place. He
was Abbot of Peterborough, and having enjoyed his dear bought preferment
little more then one year, he was called from it by death. Even so it fell out
with Elsius for Canterbury, to make the old saying true, ill gotten goods
seldom prosper. Kenulphus died anno. 1008. And lies buried in his own church,
as before is mentioned.

31. Brithwold.
10^8
BRithwold (whom Matthew. Westminster. and Fl. Wigorn seem to call Ethelwold) was
Bishop after Kenulphus. It is written of him, that one night being late at his
prayers, he chanced to think of the low ebb of the blood royal of England,
which now was almost al consumed and brought to nothing. In the midst of this
cogitation falling a sleep, it seemed unto him he saw Saint Peter crowning
young Prince Edward, that lived in exile at that time in Normandy, and
furthermore, to show how he should reign 24. years, and die at last without
issue. The Bishop then (as he thought) asked him who should reign next,
whereunto this answer was made. The kingdom of England is Gods kingdom, and
he shall provide a King for it. Some copies of Will. Malmsbury report this
vision of Brithwold B: of Wilton, that died anno. 1044. And to say the truth,
considering the times wherein both lived, I cannot but much incline to a
persuasion that it was rather Brithwold of Wilton then of Winton: As for this
man, he died the year 1015. Houeden delivers that one Alfigus Bishop of
Winchester died the year 1032. and had for successor Elfwyn. But I esteem it
an error, because I find not elsewere any mention of the foresaid Alfigus. This
man died the year 1015.

32. Elsinus, or Eadsinus.
1015
ELsinus or Ealsinus otherwise called Eadsinus, was first Chaplain unto King
Harald, and by him preferred to the Bishopric of Winchester, from whence the
year 1038. he was translated to Canterbury, see more of him in Canterbury.

33. Alwynus.
^^38
ALwyn that then succeeded; was of very great authority with Emma the Kings
mother, who favored him so much, as many suspected them for living ill
together. Robert the Archbishop of Canterbury acquainted the king with this
rumor. Whereupon the king presently imprisoned Alwyn, and dealt little better
with his mother, with whom also he was otherwise offended for allowing him so
scantly in time of his minority. She seemed to purge her self by miracle,
effering to walk upon nine plowshares red hot to prove her innocence, which
she is said to have performed, and so was restored to the favor of her son
again. Alwyn also was set at liberty; and Robert the Archbishop their accuser
(whether for shame or fear I cannot tell) was glad to get him out of the
realm. What else is to be delivered of this Bishop, this his Epitaphe
contains. Hic iacet Alwyni corpus qui munera nobis,
Contulit egregia, parcito Christ rogamus.
Obijt anno 1047.
He lies entoombed upon the North wall of the Presbytery in Winchester, with
diverse of his predecessors before mentioned. See more of him in Robert
Archbishop of Canterbury.

34. Stigandus.
STigand his successor was chaplain unto Edward the confessor, 1047
and by him preferred to the Bishopric of Elmham (whence that See was soon
after removed to Norwich) 1043. In the short time he stayed there (not past 4.
years) he had much adoo with one Grinketell, that by money found means to
cast out Stigand and placed himself in that Bishopric. He could not keep
his hold long: For Stigand quickly recovered it again, and held it til that the
year 1047. he was translated to Winchester: from whence also he was removed
to Canterbury in the year 1052. But whether he mistrusted his title to
Canterbury, Robert the former Archbishop being yet alive, or that insatiable
covetousness provoked him thereunto, I cannot tell; he retained still
Winchester, notwithstanding his preferment to Canterbury: which was the cause
of his undoing at last. For the Conqueror who came into this realm while he
was Archbishop, being desirous to place his own countrymen in all rooms of
special authority; and besides having a private grudge at Stigand for forcing
him to yield Kentish men their ancient liberties, whereof see more in
Canterbury) procured him to be deprived of both his Bishoprics upon this
point, that he had contrary to the law held them both together. He lies
intoombed at Winchester with Wyni the first Bishop, enclosed (as it seems to
me) with him in the same coffin: upon the North side thereof is written: Hic
iacet Stigandus Archiepiscopus.
He was deprived an. 1069. and died a prisoner in the castle of Winchester
shortly after.

35. Walkelyn.
1070 W. Con. 5.
Soon after the deprivation of Stigand, Walkelyn a Chaplain of the kings was
consecrate Bishop of Winchester, viz. ann. 1070. He favored not monks, but
displaced them where he might, and put in secular Priests in their rooms. He
died January 3. 1097. So he continued Bishop 27. years. In his time, to wit,
the year 1079. the Cathedral church of Winchester that now stands began
first to be built.

36. William Gifford.
1107 Hen. 1.8.
AT this time, and how long before it is hard to say, lay Princes every where
took upon them to bestow Bishoprics, giving inuestiture and possession of
them by delivering the ring and the croster. Pope Gregory the seventh first
withstood Henry the Emperor in this case, and made him at last glad to yield
unto canonical elections. King Henry the first taking unto himself the like
authority, placed diverse of his chaplains in Bishoprics (without election)
commanding the Archbishop to consecrate them. Amongst diverse other, he
appointed this William Gifford Bishop of Winchester, and required Anselme the
Archbishop to give him consecration, which Anselme utterly refused to afford,
either unto him or any other in the like case. The King sent then unto Girard
Archbishop of York, whom he found nothing strange. But Giffard (says Matthew
Westminster) timens rigorem Sancti Anselmi, spreuit consecrationem eiuus, stood
so much in awe of Saint Anselme, as he durst not but reject the offer of the
others consecration. The king angry hitherto with the Archbishop only, was now
much more incensed against this Giffard, and in great displeasure banished him
the realm. In the end, the king and the Archbishop grew to this agreement,
that the gifts of the king already passed should be ratified; and his clerks
nominated to Bishoprics, have consecration, upon promise, that hereafter he
should not disturb canonical elections, but utterly renounce his pretended
privilege. So after much adoo, he was consecrate, together with diverse other,
an. 1107. He founded a Monastery for Cistercian monks at Wauerly, and a
Nunnery at Taunton, whereof the first valued at the suppression in 174. pound,
eight shillings three pence ob. the other 438 pound, nine shillings ten pence.
Moreover he built the Bishop of Winchesters house in Southwarke, and was a
large contributor toward the foundation of the monastery for regular Canons at
S. Mary Oueries. He sat 21. years, and dying January 25. 1128. was buried at
Winchester in his own Church: howbeit I se^ no memorial of him there at all.

37. Henry de Bloys.
AFter the death of Giffard, the king found means to prefer unto his
Bishopric a nephew of his own Henry de Bloys Abbot of Glastonbury, 1229
Henr. 1.30.
being the son of his sister Adela, by the Earl of Bloys. A man in regard of
his manifold good parts fit and likely enough for the place. For he was very
wise and honest, (though through the mildnes and facility of his nature somewhat
unconstant) and for his learning, diverse of his writings yet extant do show it
to be above the ordinary pitch of those times. Amongst the rest it is not to
be forgotten that he writ a history not yet perished concerning the finding of
King Arthurs tomb at Glastonbury, at what time himself was Abbot there. Being
Legate a latere when his uncle king Henry died, although he with all other
Bishops of the land had sworn fealty unto Maud the Empress; yet the being
absent in Normandy, the nobility and people much estranged from her in regard
of her marriage which they misliked, and this Bishop doubting least some other
stopping up before her arrival, the kingdom might be rent away quight from
his kindred and pass to some stranger; by virtue of his power Legatine he
called a council of the clergy (who swayed all in those days) and drawing
Roger Bishop of Salisbury to his party, easily procured his brother Stephen
Earl of Boloigne to be elected King; and the rather because he made
extraordinary protestation of defending the Church with all the rites and
liberties of the same, to which purpose he was content to take a very straight
oath. Howbeit, few years passed before he so far forth cast behind him all
remembrance of this oath, and the good offices done unto him by the clergy, as
he seized upon diverse castles belonging to the Bishops of Salisbury, Lincoln
and Ely, spoiling them of whatsoever he found in them, as in the life of Roger
of Salisbury you may read more at large. Whereupon this Bishop by virtue of
his power Legatine, called a Council at Winchester, whereunto the King himself
was summoned. ^ow that matter was debated there between the Legate and such as
the king sent, is to be seen at large in W. of Malmsburie who lived in those
days, and was an eyewitness of much of that which he reports. The issue
was no other then a delay for the present: The King would yield nothing, and
the Legate durst not excommunicate him without the Popes priui^y. Yet the
Bishop intending no means unattempted to reduce his brother to that which he
took to be the right way; taking the Archbishop and some other Bishops with
him repared unto him, and putting him in mind of the has he had taken; upon
their knees they humbly besought him that he would pity the Church, his own
soul and his honour^ and not to give occasion of a breach or dissension
between the kingdom in the Priesthood. Fair words the King returned unto
them, leaving them in hope of some reasonable satisfaction; which how far
soorth he meant to perform it cannot appear, because the Bishop of Salisbury
of very grief, (as it is supposed) shortly after died. This unthankfulness of
his to the Church and Church men which only had set him, did so alienate them
from him, and seemed so odious unto most m^n in general, as presently after
the Empress was able to make her party good against him, took him prisoner,
and was received for Queen of the Legate and great part of the kingdom
beside; as of the rest also in likelihood she had been, but that her base
brother Robert Earl of Gloucester (whose valor and wisdom was the principal
means of her advancement) being also taken prisoner by the Kings friends, they
were feign to exchange the one for the other; by which means the king having
regained his liberty, both sides were now set even again. The Legate then
(nature no doubt working in him a desire of his brothers welfare, and
pretending a commandment from the Pope) addicted himself altogether to his
party; yet so as in the end he willingly became a mediator for that peace
which made an end of the controversy which had now held the land in a civil
war for 17. years together. Eustace the kings eldest son being dead, it
was agreed Stephen should hold the crown during his life, young Prince Henry
the Empresses son should have Normandy and be declared heir apparent unto
the kingdom of England after him. In the mean space during the time of these
hurliburlies, the city of Winchester was by the Bishops followers spoiled and
burnt, (for the greatest part) down to the ground, together with the Nunry,
the monastery of S. Grimbald, and more then 20. other Churches, (some say 40.)
This happened upon the 2. day of August. 1141. Soon after, by the same men the
Nunry of Warwell was likewise spoiled and burnt, and the Bishop himself
returning to Winc. took off from the cross that was burnt in the new Monastery
500. l. of silver, and 30. marks of gold, 3. crowns with so many seats or
thrones of five Arabike gold, set with precious stones. All this he put in his
own purse. Now concerning the monuments of his bounty and liberality, you
shall understand, that he founded that worthy hospital of S. Cross near Winc.
In which place some thing had been built long before to some such good use;
but it was destroyed by the Danes, and quite ruinated, til he reedified it, or
rather laid new foundations in the same place, an. 1132. ^endowed it with the
reuenew it now has. He also built the castle of Fernham, (destroyed
afterward by king Henry the 3. but reedified by the Bishops of Winchester) and
much increased the means of the Nunry of Tatinton, founded by his last
predecessor. He was a man as of great blood, so of a great and high mind. He
contended often with the Archbishop of Canterbury for superiority, under color
that he was the Popes legate a latere, and (as Matthew Parker delivers) a
Cardinal. Matthew Westminster reports that he obtained or Pope Lucius the
title of an Archhishop, receiving from him a pall and authority over seven
Churches, what they were he names not. Walsingham in his Ypodigma says (which
I take to be the truth) that the said Pope only intended that course and was
prevented by death. In the 42. year of his consecration he fell sick
dangerously: whereof the K. Henry the second hearing, came to visit him: But he
was so far from yielding the king thanks for this great grace, as he gave him
no looks but frowning, nor speeches ^ut very sharp and cursed: reprehending him
with very bitter words as the ca^ser of Thomas Beckets death. Yet such was the
great meekenes of this prince, as he not only took very patiently this
reproof, but long after thought much of the same. And surely no great marvel.
The memory of a dying man's words abides long: How much more of a Bishop, a
grave, wise, and learned prelate? He departed this life August 6. 1171. where
he was buried I find not.

38. Richard Tocliue alias More.
1174 Henr. 2.21.
AFter the death of the former Bishop, the Sea stood void 3. years: many of her
churches likewise at the same time stood long void. At last the year 1173, by
the instance of two Cardinals, the king granted license of free election unto
them all. Unto Winchester was then chosen Richard Tocliue Archdeacon of
Poytiers, by some called More, by other Richard de Iuelcester: He was
consecrate at Lambith the year following, viz. 1174. together with three other
Bishops, Geffery of Ely, Robert of Herford, and John of Chichester: He died
says one Dec. 22. 1187. an other Dec. 21. 1188. and his Epitaph has 1189. He
lies intombed in the north wall of the Presbytery, just under Wina, where is
engraven this that follows.

Obijt anno Dom. 1189.
Presulis egregij pausant hic membra Ricardi
Tocliue, cui summi gaudio sunto poli.
39. Godfridus de Lucy.
GOdfridus de Lucy son unto Richard Lucy chief Justice of England, was
consecrate Bishop of Winchester Nouem. 1. 1189. and died an. 1204. so he sat
15. years This man purchased of king Richard the first, the manors of
Wergra^e and Menes, which in times past had belonged unto his See of
Winchester, but (I know not how) had bin alienated from the same. Moreover, he
became a great benefactor unto the priory of Lesnes or Westwood in Kent,
founded by his father.

40. Peter de la Roche.
ABout the end of the same year, one Petrus de rupib. being a knight, 1204
John 6.
was consecrate Bishop of Winchester at Rome. A notable wise prelate, and of
such authority under king John first, and Henry the third after, as none
greater in those times. He with two other Bishops, viz. Philip his country
man of Durham (for they were both Pi^tauians) and John Gray of Norwich,
animated king John to withstand the Popes excommunication: but they were all
feign to cry peccaui at last. The year 1214. king John made him chief justice
of England: the nobles of the realm grudging very much that a stranger borne,
should rule over them. After the death of king John, king Henry being a
child, the realm was long governed almost altogether by this Bishop. For
William Earl Marshall dying, he was chosen in his room Protector of the king
and realm: And afterward the King being grown to years of discretion,
relied altogether upon his counsel. He had a nephew (or as some say a son)
named Peter d'Oriuall treasurer of England, in marvelous great favor also
with king Henry. Yet as court favors are variable; so were they often
disgraced and often restored again to the height of worldly happiness, I
mean the Princes great and entire favor. The year 1226. he took his voyage
to the holy land, and being absent 5. years, at his return was received with
procession and all signs of great joy. He died June 9. 1238. at Farnbam, when
he had sat Bishop the space of 34. years, and was buried (according to his
own appointment) very meanly and even obscurely in his own church. In his
death (says M Paris) the counsel of England received a great wound. What good
soever happened unto the Church, either by peace or war in the Holy land at the
coming of the Emperor Frederick, it is specially to be ascribed unto the
wisdom of this Bishop. Again (says he) when as discord between the Pope and
the Emperor threatened the destruction of the whole church; he was the special
means of compounding a peace between them. Now of the religious houses he
built, and being built enriched with revenues for their maintenance, these be
the names; Edward^^ow, whose valuation I find not; Hales of the order of
Premonstratenses, valued at the time of the suppression in 357. l 7 s. 7 d. ob.
Tickford of the same order, in 28^. l. 19. s. 10. d. ob. and Halisowen which
some seem to call Saleburn for Canons regular of the order of S. Augustine,
whose value was 337 l. 15 s. 6 d. ob besides a goodly Hospital at Ports-mouth,
valued at 33 l. 19 s. 5 d ob. Moreover it is to be remembered that he removed
the Church of S. Thomas the Martyr (as they call him) in the holy land, from a
very unfit place, unto a more convenient, and reformed the statutes of the
company belonging to that Church, causing the Patriark of Jerusalem to take
order, that whereas they were heretofore mere lay men, now they should be
under the Temple^s and of their society. And lastly, he bestowed great cost in
fortifying and repairing the Town of Ioppa, a notable succor and refuge of
the Christians in those parts. He made a worthy and memorable will, giving
unto every of the asaid places, a huge sum of money: for the least that he
gave was unto the house of S. Thomas of Acon, unto which he bequeathed 500.
marks. All this notwithstanding, he left his Bishopric very rich, his houses
furnished, and his grounds ready stocked for successor. Thus much M. Paris.

41. William de Raley.
The Sea being thus void by the death of Peter de rupibus: the king ( Henry
the 3.) dealt very earnestly with the monks of Winchester, 1243 Hen. 3.28.
to choose in his place the Bishop elect of Ualentia, the Queens uncle. But
they were agreed upon W. de Raley; Bishop of Norwitch, and took exceptions
against the elect of Ualentia, calling him virum sanguinum. When the king heard
of their intent, he was exceeding angry and made great havoc of the Bishops
temporalties, swearing, he would have his will at last, or they should never
have Bishop. The monks then seeing him so obstinatly set against the Bishop of
Norwitch, determined to altar their purpose, and were content to choose Ralfe
Neuil Bishop of Chichester, the kings Chancellor; wherein they were so far
from contenting him, as he was much more incensed against them then before;
and not against them only, but the new elect also; from whom immediately, he
took the great seal and gave it to another. As for the election, not without
great charges, he caused the same to be cassi^ed and made void at Rome. Much
adoo there was, for the space of five or six years about this matter. At
last, the monks seeing no end, and being resolved against the Ualentine; they
proceeded to election again, and chose according to their first determination,
the Bishop of Norwich. This election was suddenly made and quickly confirmed at
Rome. Yet the king ceased not to spurn at the same, commanding the Mayor of
Winchester to forbid the new Bishop entrance into his city, which he did, and
was by him excommunicate for his labor, and the whole city interdicted. In the
mean time, the Bishop felt the burden of the Kings displeasure so heavy upon
him in England, as he thought good to ^lie the realm. He got him into France,
and was honorably received of the K. there. At last, by the intercession of
Boniface the Archb. and the Popes earnest letters to the King and the Queen,
he was restored to the kings favor and obtained license to return, For
recompense of this benefit and his fatherly care, the Bishop (says Mat.
Westminster.) in thankfulness bestowed upon the Pope 6000. markes^ which he in good
nature took every penny, without disdainefull return of one denier. The
payment of this money, and the charges of his trouble stuck so close unto him,
as though he lived very privately, in all his life long, he was never able to
recover himself out of debt. He died about the twentieth day of September, 1249.
at Tu^on, whither he had withdrawn himself with a very small ^raine almost a
year, before. It is recorded of him, that being near death^ he had the
Sacrament brought unto him. And perceiving the Priest to enter his chamber with
it, he cried out, stay good friend, let the Lord come no nearer unto me, it
is more fitt^ that I be drawn unto him like a traitor, that in many things
have been a traitor unto him. His servants therefore by his commandment drew
him out of his bed unto the place where the Priest was, and there with tears
he received the Sacrament, and spending much time in prayer, afterward, he so
ended his life, when he had been Bishop about the space of six years: for
he was translated, ann. 1243. so that the Sea was void five years.

42. Ethelmarus.
THe King being certified of his death, sent immediately two of his
Chaplains to Winchester, to persuade the monks to elect Ethelmarus the son
of Hugh Earl of March, and Isabell the Queen his mother; so that he was
half brother unto the king; a man (says M. Paris) in respect of his orders,
years, and learning, utterly insufficient. By that time they had labored the
matter the space of a fortnight the king himself came unto Winchester, and in
the Chapter house made a most earnest request in the behalf of the same his
brother. The monks too well remembering what great trouble and sorrow they had
endured for denying the kings last request; some of them beaten and sore
wounded, many tormented with hunger, and laden with chains, in long
imprisonment, besides continual charges, of suits and travel, and knowing well
they should have no assistance at Rome, so long as the Kings purse was better
then theirs: they resolved (though they knew the man most unfit) to gratify
the king; and so, no man daring to say no, with one consent he was elected. He
had at that time other spiritual living equivalent in revenue to the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury, which that he might keep, and yet receive all
the profits of the Bishopric of Winchester; he determned not to be consecrate
at all, but to hold it by election, and so did indeed, for the space of 9.
years. In the mean time, he and the rest of his countrymen (with w^^m the
realm was much pestered) were grown very odious as well with the nobility, as
the commons, not only for that their infinite wealth and immoderate preferment
was much envied, but much more for their pride, and insol^ncy which a man can
hardly bear in his own friend much less in an alien or stranger, whom men
naturally dislike much sooner then their own countrymen. Amongst the rest,
this Ethelmarus bare himsel^e so bold upon the king his brother, as he gave
commandment to his servants to force a clergy man out of the possession of a
^enefice, whereunto he pretended some right; and if he withstood them, ^o draw
him out of his possession by violence. The poor man loath to loose his living,
defended it so long, till by my Lord Electes men he was ^laine himself, and
his people so sore beaten, as within few days one or two of them died. This
fact and other like brought all the Pictauians into such hatred as the realm
was ready to rise against them: which perceiving, to avoid the tempest growing
toward them, the year 1268. they all fled Ethelmar sent over for his
treasure, whereof he had laid v^ great store: but much of it came short being
intercepted at Douer^ and taken away from those to whom it was committed. The
year after the departure of the Pictauians, viz. 1259 the monks of Winchester
thought good to proceed to the election of a new Bishop. And knowing it was to
no purpose to make choice of any, but such as the K. favored, elected Henry de
Wingham then Chancellor of England. But he, although (he doubted not of the
kings savor) in regard that another being elected it might prove litigious,
re^us^d to consent unto their election, alleging his own unworthiness for
want of learning. The king was content to allow of him, conditionally, that
some stay might be made for a time to see whether his brother Ethelmar might
attain consecration of the Pope. While the king stood upon these uncertain
terms, Henry de Wengham became Bishop of London the year 1259. and 2. years
after, viz. 1261. Ethelmar died. He took order his heart should be brought to
Winchester, where it was entoombed in the South wall of the presbytery as this
Elogium witnesses.

Obijt anno Dom. 1261. Corpus Ethelmari (cuius cor nunc tenet istud Saxum)
Parisijs morte datur tumulo.

43 John Gernsey.
John Gernsey or John of Oxford (for so also I find him called) was consecrate
Bishop an. 1265. at Rome, 1268. Hen. 3.53.
where it is said he paid unto the Pope 6000. marks for his consecration, and
so much more unto Iordanus the Popes Chancellor. Presently upon his return he
was suspended by Ottobonus the Popes legate for taking part against the king in
the Barons wars. A small time he enjoyed his honor so deerly bought: the year
1268. he died in Italy, and was buried there at Viterbium.

44. Nicholas de Ely.
1265. Hen. 3.50.
RIchard Moore a Doctor of Divinity was then chosen Bishop. But Friar Peckham
at that time Archbishop of Canterbury, took exception against him for holding
of many benefices; And said, that a man of such conscience as were fit for that
place, would rather content himself with less living, then load himself with
the cure of so many souls. He being refused, Nicholas de Ely having been
scarcely one yeea Bishop or Worcester, was called to this Church. He sat 12.
yeeres^ and died an. 1280 His body was buried at Wauerly, his heart lies
entoombed in the South wall of the Pr^sbytery with this inscription: Intus est
cor Nicholai Episcopi cuius corpus est apud Wauerley.
One of his name was first Chauncellor, then treasurer of England about the
year 1260. I assure my self it was he.

45 John de Pontissara, alias Pountois.
ABout this time the Pope began to take upon him the bestowing of
Bishoprics for the most part every where. 1280. Edw. 1.9.
This John de Pontissara was placed by him upon his absolute authority. He was
a great enemy unto the monks of his Church, whose living he much diminished to
increase his own. He died the year 1304. having sat near 24. years, and
lies buried in the North wall of the Presbytery, where his toombe has this
Epitaph engraven on the same; Defuncti corpus, tumulus tenet iste Ioannis
Pountes, Wintoniae presulis eximij. Obijt anno Dom. 1304.

He was sometimes Chancellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford.

46. Henry Woodloke.
HEnry Woodloke succeeded him. 1304. Edw. 1.33.
Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury being banished the realm by king
Edward the first, who charged him with treason, this Bishop became an
intercessor for him, and in the request he made the king in his behalf,
chanced to call him his good Lord: which the king took so hainously, and by
and by he caused all the Bishops goods to be confiscate, and renounced all
protection of him. How he recovered the kings favor again, I find not. Not
long after the said king dying, by the permission of the foresaid Archbishop
he crowned King Edward the second January 22. 1307. and died an. 1316, the 13.
year of his consecration.

47 John Sandall.
ONe John Sandal succeeded, whom Walsingham calls John Kendall. 1316. Edw.
2.10.
He was Treasurer and Chancellor of England, consecrated 1316. and having sat
scarcely 4. years, dyed 1320.

48 Reginald Asserius.
1320. Edw. 2.10.
THe Pope then thrust in Reginald de Asser his Legate, the king being very angry
that the Pope took so much upon him in these things. He was consecrate by the
Bishop of London ( Walter the Archbishop refusing to do it) sat little above
two years, and died an, 1323.

49. John de Stratford.
1323. Edw. 2.17.
John de Stratford Doctor of Law succeeded. When he had continued in this seat
10. years an. 1333 He was translated to Canterbury. In the mean time he was
for 4. years Chancellor of England.

50. Adam Tarlton, alias de Orlton, or Arlton.
1333. Edw. 3.8.
ADam de Arlton Doctor of law borne in Hereford, was consecrate Bishop of
Hereford September 26. 1317. In a Parliament holden at London, anno 1324. he
was accused of treason, as having aided the Mortimers with men and armor
against the King. When he should have been arraigned (a thing till that time
never heard of, that a Bishop should be arraigned) the Archbishops of
Canterbury, York and Dublin with the^^ Suffragan Bishops, came unto the bar,
and violently took him away. Notwithstanding, the accusation being found true,
his temporalties were seized into the kings hands, until such time as the K.
(much deal by his machination and devise) was deposed of his kingdom I^he
which had been a Traitor unto his Prince before, after deserved punishment for
the same, would soon be entreated to join with other in the like attempt; it
is no marvel. No man so forward as he in taking part with Isabel the Queen
against her husband king Edward the second. She with her sons and army being
at Oxford, this good Bishop stepped up into the pulpit, and there taking for his
text these words (My head grieueth me) he made a long discourse to prove, that
an evil head, not otherwise to be cured, must be taken away. Having gotten the
King into their power, he fearing least if the king at any time recovered his
liberty and crown again, they might receive condign punishment; counseled
the Queen to make him away. Whereunto she being as ready and willing, as he to
have it done, they writ certain letters unto the keepers of him (the old
King) signifying in covert terms what they desired. They either not perfectly
understanding their meaning, or desirous to have somewhat to show for their
discharge, pray them in express words to declare unto them, whether they would
have them put the king to death or no. To which question this subtle fox
framed this answer, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est. If you set the
point between nolite and time^e, it forbidddeth: if between timere and bonum,
it exhorts them to the committing of the fact: This they took for a
sufficient warrant, and most pitifully murdered the innocent king by
thrusting a hot spitte into his fundament. And who then so earn^st a
persecutour of the murderers as this Bishop, that when diverse of his letters
were showed against him, eluded and avoided them by sophistical
interpretation, and utterly denied that he was any way consenting to that
heinous fact. How cleanely he excused himself I know not: But sure I am, he
was so far from receiving punishment, as within two Months after, viz. in
November 1327. he was preferred unto the Bishopric of Worcester. Six years
after that he was translated thence to Winchester by the Pope, December the
first. 1333. at the request of the French king: which king Edward taking in
very ill part, for that the French King and he were enemies, detaining from
him ^is temporalties, till that in a Parliament, at the suit of the whole
Clergy, he was content to yield them unto him. He sat Bishop of Winchester
eleven years, seven Months, and seauenteene days, and being a long time
blind before his death, departed this life the eighteenth of July, 1345.

51. William Edindon.
1345. Edw. 3.20.
THe same year William Edendon (sometimes a student in Oxford) was consecrate
Bishop, a man in very great savor with King Edward the third. Being Treasurer
of England, he caused groats and half groats to be coined the year 1250.
(coin not seen in England before) but they wanted something of the just
sterling weight, which was the cause that the prices of all things rose then
very much. And where as many other times the like practice has been used,
insomuch that five shillings has now scarce so much silver in it, as ^^ue
groats had 300. years since, no marvel it things be sold for treble the
price, that they were 300 years ago. Hereof also it comes to pass, that
the Prince and Nobility cannot possibly maintain their estates, with their
ancient rents and revenues, which bring in, though the wonted tale and number,
yet not the one weight and quantity of metal. But to return to William
Edendon, he was also Chancellor of England, and once elect Archbishop of
Canterbury, but refused to accept that place, saying (as the report goes)
Canterbury was the higher rack (but Winchester the better manger He founded a
Monastery at Edendon, (where he was born) for a kind of religious men, called
Bonhommes, valued at the time of the suppression in 521. l. 12. s. 5. d. ob
yearly revenue. He died an. 1366. when he had been Bishop almost one and
twenty years, and lies in a very fair toombe of Alabaster, on the south side
of the entrance into the Quier, whereon is e^grauen this rude Epitaph.

Edindon natus Willmus hic est tumulatus,
Praesul praegratus in Wintonia Cathedratus.
Qui per transitis eius memorare velitis.
Prouidus and mitis, ausit cum mill peritis.
Peruigil Anglorum fuir adiutor populorum,
Dulcis egenorum pater and protector eorum.
M. C. tribus iunctum post LXV. sit I. punctum.
His Successor William Wickham sued his Executors for dilapidation^, and
recovered of them 1622. pound, 10. shillings, besides 1556. head of neat,
3876. weathers^ 4717 ewes, 3521. lambs, and 127. swine, all which ^^ock^ it
seems belonged unto the Bishopric of Winchester at that time.

52. William Wickham.
AT the kings request, 1367. Edw. 3.42.
William Wickham his Chaplain, principal Secretary, and Keeper of the Privy
Seal, soon after Edendons death, was both elected by the Prior and Covent of
Winchester, and allowed of by the Pope, who now took upon him to ba^e an
interest in the disposition of all our Bishoprics, as also where I have more
at large discoursed This man was the son of one John Perot and Sib^ll his wife,
for whose place of burial, he erected a Chapel afterward at Tich^^eld
near the town of Wickham in Hampshire. In that town he was borne the year
of our Lord 1324. and (according to the manner of most Clergy men in those
times) of that town (the place of his birth) took his surname. I find also
recorded, that he was wont to be called sometimes by the name of Long; and
that (as it is probably supposed) for no other cause, but in regard of his
stature, which they say was very tall. He was brought up ^^rst at Winchester,
and then at Oxford, at the charge of a Gentleman called Nicholas V^^dall or
Woodall. In these places (having first passed the Rudiments of Grammar) he
studied Logic, Geometry, Arithmetique, and the French tongue; but principally
the Civil and Canon laws. In all which as he profited exceedingly for the
time he spent in the^; so there is no doubt he would have proved so excellent
as men are wont, that do long and painfully employ good wits to such purposes,
had he not been even as it were violently drawn from them when his abode and
continuance in the Uniuersity might seem most requisite. His Patron and
exhibitioner being appointed Constable of Winchester castle (an office of great
importance in those days) he made choice of this his young scholar to serve
him as his clerk or secretary, and so took him from the Uniuersity, when he
had as yet continued there not fully six years. How long he lived s^ under
him I find not: but certain it is, his service was very well liked of him: For
besides his personage (which was tall and exceedingly comely) not to speak
anything of his learning (whereof his Master could make no great use) he writ
very fair, penned excellently, and spoke no man better. By reason whereof he
was often employed in writing letters, yea and sometimes in messages also to
the Court; not only by his master, but by the Bishop, that a while used to
borrow him of his master, and at the last drew him to his service. It happened
then after a while K. Edward the 3. to come to Winchester, who taking special
^ote of the behauio^^ and other ^ood parts of this young man, would needs have
him ^o serve him. He employed him much at the first in surueighing his
buildings at Dover, Quynborough, Henly, Windsor^ Yest^nstead, and else where.
In which, and all other businesses committed to his trust, he behaved himself
so well, as he soon grew into great favor and high estimation with the King;
and quickly reaped those fruits that Princes favors are wont to yield, many
rich and honorable preferments. It shall not be amiss to remember, how that
having obtained diverse goodly promotions, which (in modesty peradventure) he
acknowledged to have received rather as rewards of service, then in regard of
any extraordinary desert otherwise; he caused to be engraven in Winchester
Tower at Windsor, these words, (This made Wickham.) Whereof when some
complained to the King, as a thing derogating from his honor, that another
should seem to bear the charge of his buildings, and the king in some
displeasure reprehending him for it: He answered, that his meaning was not to
ascri^e the honor o^ that building to himsel^e, but his own honor of
preferments unto that building; not importing that Wickham made the Tower, but
that the Tower was the means of making Wickham, and raising him from base
estate, unto those great places of honor he then enjoyed. He was first Person
of Saint Martins in London, then Deane of Saint Martin le graund, Archdeacon
successively of Lincoln, Northampton, and Buckingham, and of the gift of his
old acquaintance John Bokingham Bishop of Lincoln; with whom, and Simon
Burleigh (a knight afterward of great honor) he only in a manner conuersed
during his abode in Oxford. Besides these ecclesiastical preferments, the
Pro^ostship of Wels, a number of benefices, and twelve Prebends in several
Churches, he held many temporal offices, as the Secretaryship, the keeping of
the privy seal, the Mastership of Wards, the Treasurership of the kings
revenues in France, and diverse other, with whose ^^^^es I am not acquainted.
But she yearly revenues of his spiritual promo^tions only, according as they
were then rated in the kings books, amounted unto 876. l. 13. s. 4. d. He was
consecrate Bishop of Winchester, the year 1367. and was made soon after first
Treasurer, then Chancellor of England; although whether he were Treasurer or
no, I find some doubt made, and I dare not affirm it too confidently. Whether
he were Treasurer or no, certain it is, that many years after he was Bishop,
he was trusted with all the weighty affairs of the Realm, disposed of the
kings treasure, and governed all things at his will. In this greatness of his
authority, the king found two notable commodities, one, that without his care
al things were ordered so well, as by a wise and trusty servant they might; the
other, that if any thing fell out amiss, wheresoever the fault were, he had
opporunity to cast all the blame upon the Bishop of Winchester. Now whereas
long and continual war (whereby lightly each party is a l^^^er) had consumed,
not that only (...) which many victories brought in, by the ransom of two
kings, and by the spoil of diverse large countries which this noble Prince
subdued; but other huge sums of money also^ gathered at home by v^^suall
subsidies and taxations, much grudged at by the Commons, all which
notwithstanding, the king was so bare, as for the payment of debts, he was
constrained to bethink him first of some new device to raise money: the Bishops
enemies taking the advantage of this occ^sion ^^nouced the king to be content,
that a solemn complaint might be se^med against him (...) by his
misgouernement, the kings treasure had been (...) v^inely wasted, or falsely
imb^silled, for that other (...) forsooth it was impossible, the king should
(...) be fallen behind hand. They charge him therefore with the receite of 1109
600^ l. (which amounts to more then a million of pounds) besides a hundred
thousand franks paid unto him by Galeace Duke of Millaine. For all this they
demand suddenly an account; and to set a better color upon the matter, patch
up a number of other accusations, partly untrue, partly frivolous, yet
su(...)appily to bleare the eyes of the common people, and (...) the
displeasure of this inconvenience from them, o^ whom otherwise it must have
lighted, to derive it unto him; upon whom if it fell never so heavily, it could
cast him no lower then that place from whe^^e the king had first ca^sed him.
Amongst many enemies that government and envy had provoked against him; John of
G^unt Duke of Lancaster, for some other cause needless here to be recited, bare
unto him an implacable hatred. The King was then old and very impotent; the
Duke his eldest son that was living, and so governing all things under him.
The Duke therefore found means, that William Skipwith Lord chief Justice,
condemned him as guilty of those accusations, procured his temporalties to be
taken from him, and to be bestowed upon the young Prince of Wales; and lastly
commanded him in the Kings name, not to come within twenty miles of the Court.
The year 1376. happened unto him this trouble, which I may call the Prologue
or praeludium of the pa^eant to be plaide the year following, I mean the
Parliament; the chief end and purpose whereof was a subsidy, that this
Prelates vexation must make way unto. The Clergy assembled, greeuing much at
the unjust oppression of so worthy and reverend a man; (for his fidelity unto
his Prince, his great care of the common good, his wisdom and integrity^ were
well enough known to such as understood any thing) they utterly refused to
debate of any matter what soever, till the Bishop of Winchester, a principal
member of that assembly might be present with them. By this means license was
obtained for his repair thither, and thither he ^ame, glad he might be
near to the means of his restitution: but whether it were that he wanted
money to bear the charge, or to the intent to move commiseration, or that he
thought it safest to pass obscurely; he that was wont to ride with the
greatest train of any prelate in England, came then very slenderly attended,
traveling through by-ways, as standing in doubt what snares his enemies might
lay for him. After two years trouble and the loss of ten thousand marks
sustained, by reason of the same: with much adoo he obtained restitution of his
temporalties, by the mediation of Alice Piers, a gentle woman that in the last
times of King Edward altogether possessed him. Returning then unto Winchester,
he was received into the city with solemn procession and many signs of great
joy. Soon after his return King Edward died, and the Duke hoping by reason of
the young kings nonage to work some mischi^fe unto him, whom of all mortal
men he most hated, began to rub up some of the old accusations with
additions of new complaints. But the Dukes malice being as well known as the
Bishops innocence, the king thought good to be a means of reconciling these
two personages; and then was easily entreated, under the broad seal of England
to pardon all those supposed offenses, wherewith the Bishop had heretofore
been charged. This tempest thus ouerblown, the rest of his days he passed in
great peace and quietness. Two years after his restitution he began the
foundation of that worthy monument, the coll^dge commonly called the New
college in Oxford, laying the first stone of the same himself, March 5. 1379.
dedicating it unto the honor of God and the blessed virgin Mary. Bee^ng
finished, the first warden and fellows all together took possession of it
April, 14. 1^86. at three of the clock in the morning. The very next year he
began his other college near Wol^esey, the Bishops palace at Winchester,
laid the first stone of it March 26. 1^87. and finished it also in six years
space, so as the Warden and fellows entered into the same at three of the
clock in the morning^ March 28 1393. Beside the charge of these two worthy
foundations, he built all the body of his church of Winchester from the quier
westward, excepting only a little begun by Bishop Edington: he procured many
priuile^ges and liberties unto his See: he bestowed 20^00. marks in reparation
of his houses: he paid the debts of men imprisoned for that cause to the sum
of 2000. l. he mended all the high ways between London and Winchester: he
purchased unto his See two hundred marks land: he forgave his officers two
thousand marks which they owed him, he bestowed two hundred pound upon the
Church of Windsor: he released his tenants of 520. pound, due for a reliese at
his income: he ordained a Chant^y of five Priests at Southwyke: he kept
continually in his house four and twenty poor^ almesmen: he maintained at the
Uniuersity fifty scholars for the space of seven years before the building
of his College: he built a Chapel (as before is mentioned) at Lichfield for
the burial of his parents; and lastly provided for himself ten years before
his death a goodly monument in the body of his church. All these charges
notwithstanding he bequeathed legacies to the value of 6270. l. left ready
money to pay them, left his heir 100. l. land and all his houses furnished
plentifully with most rich and sumptuous housholdestuffe. After all these so
memorable actions, having run the course of a long, a happy and most
honorable life, he ended his days in peace, the year 1404. being full
^owerscore years of age, and was laid in the toombe so long before provided for
him. Upon it I find engraven these verses, which rather for his honor then
any commendation they deserve, I have thought good to set down.

Wilhelmus dictus Wickham iacet hic nece victus,
I^^ius Ecclesiae Praesul, reparauit eamque,
Largus ^rat, dapi^er, probat hoc cum diuite pauper,
Con^ilijs pariter regni fuerat, been dexter.
Hunc docet este pium fundatio collegio ^um,
O^oniae primum stat, Wintoniae que secundum.
I^giter oretis tumulum quicunque videtis^
Pro ta^tis mentis quod sit sibi vita perennis.
53. Henry Beaufort.
THe Pope was now grown to that height of tyranny, that he not only placed,
1405 Hen. 4.5.
but displaced Bishops at his pleasure. And his means to do it, was by
translating them to some other Bishopric, peradventure of less value and
peradventure nothing worth at all. So was Alex. Neuill perforce translated from
York to Saint Andrews in in Scotland, whence (wars being at that time between
England and Scotland) he was sure never to receive penny. And so he translated
John Buckingham from Lincoln to Lichfield, a Bishopric not half so good.
But he choosing rather to have no bread, th^n but half a loaf; in a very
malecontent humor, and great chafe, put on a monks cowle at Canterbury, and
there lived privately the rest of his life. To his Bishopric of Lincoln was
then preferred Henry Beaufort (son to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, by
Katherine Swinford) the year 1397. He was brought up for the most part at Aken
in Germany, where he studied the civil and canon law many years (but spent
much time also at Oxford) and coming home, was preferred to Lincoln very
young. He continued there se^en years, and presently upon the death of William
Wickham was translated to Winchester, June 23. 1426. he was made Cardinal of
S. Eusebius, and received his hat with great solemnity at Calis, the Lady day
following. A man of great frugality, and thereby exceeding rich. King Henry the
fifth in the latter end of his reign, by great and continual wars, being
waxen much behind hand, and greatly indebted; began to cast a covetous eye
upon the goods of the Church, which at that time were grown to the full
height; and there wa^ted not many that incited him unto the spoil of the same.
This wealthy Prelat (best known by the name of the rich Cardinal) supplied
his want out of his own purse, to divert him from that sacrilegious course,
and lent him 20000. pound, a great deal of money in those days. He was also
valiant and very wise. Pope Martin the fifth, determining to make war upon the
Bohemians that had renounced^ all obedience the Sea of Rome, made this
Cardinal his Legate into that country, and appointed such forces as he could
make to be at his commandment. Toward the charges of this voyage, the Clergy
of England gave a tenth of all their promotions, and furnished out 4000. men
and more. With this power he passed by France (doing there some service for his
Prince and Country) into Bohemia, the year, 1429. There he remained certain
months, behauing himself very valiantly, till by the Pope he was discharged.
In his youth he was wantonly given, and gate a base daughter named Jane upon
Alice the daughter of Richard Earl of Arundell. Her he^ married after unto Ed.
Stradling or Easterling a knight of Glamorganshire. But this was done, before
he entered into orders. Toward his latter end he employed his time altogether
either in matters of counsel and business of the common wealth, or the
service of God and the Church committed unto him. Amongst other good deeds it
is remembered that he built an Hospital in Winchester near to Saint Crosses,
which he presently endued with land to the value of 158. l. 13. s. 4. d. of
yearly rent, and moreover, gave unto it the hospital of S. John de
Fordingbridge. In it was to be maintained, a Master, 2. Chaplains, 35. poor
men, and three women. He died April 11. 1447. when he had been Bishop of
Winchester 43. years, and from the time of his first consecration fifty
years. Except Thomas Bourchier that was Bishop fifty one years, I read of
no Englishman that ever enjoyed that honor longer. He lies buried in a
reasonable stately toombe behind the high Altar of his Church at Winchester
toward the South. The inscription is much ^efaced: of it remains only this;
Tribularer si nescirem misericordias tuas. I find that he was three several
times Lord Chancellor of England; two years being yet Bishop of Lincoln, then
at Winchester; four years at one time, and two years at an other.

54 William Waynflet.
A Worthy Prelate succeeded him, 1447. Hen. 6.26.
William Waynflet Provost of Eaton College, then lately founded by K. Henry
the 6. who for his great wisdom and integrity was long Chancellor of England,
viz. from Oct. 11. 1449. until that Iul. 7. 1458. he surrendered and delivered
up the great Seal, a little before the battle of Northampton. He was son
and heir unto Richard Pattyn a gentleman of an ancient house, brother unto John
Pattyn Deane of Chichester, and Richard Pattyn that lived at Baslo in
D^rbishire, where he left (as I have heard) a posterity behind him. It
appears hereby that his name was not indeed Waynflet but Pattyn. It was an
ancient custom even till those days that Clergymen should take their surname
according to the place where they were borne; and amongst monks and Friars it
continued till the very suppression of monasteries. This William (whether
Waynflet or Pattyn) was brought up first in Winchester School, and then in new
college in Oxford. His fellowship there he left to become schoolmaster of
Winchester, and continued there 12. years, even until he was taken thence by
K. Henry the 6. to govern his new College of Eaton, whereof he made him (as
before is said) Provost. He was consecrate July 30. 1447. and sat 39. years,
in which space he would have done much more good th^n he did, had he not been
hindered by those continual wars between the houses of Lancaster and York: in
all which storms, he stuck always unto his patron, and first preferrer K
Henry the sixth. And after his death, King Edward the 4. knowing the faithful
affection and true heart he always bore unto Henry the 6. his enemy, carried
ever a hard hand upon him time notwithstanding and the revenues of that goodly
Bishopric, enabled him to the foundation of that excellent and stately
college in Oxford dedicated unto S. Marie Magdalen; to the which, I think the
whole world has hardly any one in all perfections comparable, He died, August
11. 1486. having first seen the house of Lancaster (to his great joy) restored
again to the Crown in K. Henry the 7. So that between the consecration of
William Wickham, and the death of William Waynflet his next successor saying
one, it is 119. years. A thing not often seen, that 3. men should hold one
Bishopric saving one year, full sixscore. He lies buried in the north part
of the room beyond the high Altar, over against the Cardinal in a very fair
toombe, the Epitaph whereof is quite defaced.

55. Peter Courtney.
1486. Hen. 7.1.
IN the month of November, 1477. Peter Courntey the son of sir Philip Sidney
of Powderham knight, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Walter L. Hungerford,
was consecrate Bishop of Exeter, whence he was translated to Winchester, in the
latter end of the year, 1486. At Exeter he bestowed much money in finishing the
North Tower, unto which he gave a goodly bell, called after his name Peter bell.
He died Sept. 22. 1492. having governed the Dioces of Winchester the space of
5. years, and was buried in his own Church whereabouts I know not.

56 Thomas Langton.
THe Bishopric having been void somewhat more then one year, 1493. Hen. 7.9.
Thomas Langton Bishop of Salisbury was preferred thereunto. He was consecrate
B of S. David's, 1483. removed two years after to Salisbury, sat Bishop of
Winchester 7. years, and was to have been t^anslated to Canterbury, but died
of the plague, an 1500. before his translation was perfited. He built a very
fair Chapel in the south side of the Lady Chapel in the Cathedral Church
of Winchester, in the middle of which Chapel his body rests in a very
sumptuous toombe of Marble. This Thomas Langton was sometime fellow of
Pembroolto Hall in Cambridge, in memory whereof he bestowed upon that house a
Cup of silver do^ble guilt, waighing 67. ounces, whereupon are engraven these
words, Tho. Langton Winton Eps. aulae Penbr. olim socius, dedit hanc tassiam
coopertam eidem aulae 1497. qui al^enarit anathema sit.

57 Richard Fox.
AT what time Henry Earl of Richmont abiding at Uenice, 1502 Hen. 7.18.
was requested by letters from many of the English Nobility to deliver his
Country from the tyranny of that wicked Par^^^de Richard the 3. and to take on
him the kingdom, He willing to furnish himself as well as he might for the
setting forth of so great an enterprise, determined to crave aid of the French
king. Coming therefore to Paris, he only commenced his suit unto the king, and
having manifold business elsewhere, he ^est ^he farther prosecution of this
matter unto Richard Fox (a Doctor of Law, proceeded in Oxford, but incorporate
in Cambridge, where he became M of Penbrooke hall) that chanced to live a
Student in Paris at that time. Whether the Earl know him before, or else
discerned at the first sight (as it were) his excellent wisdom: certain it is,
he deemed him a fit man for the managing of this great affair. Neither was he
any thing at all deceived in him; For the matter was followed with so great
diligence and industry, as in a very short time all things were dispatched
according to the Earls desire, who soon after obtaining the kingdom,
mindful of the good service done him by Doctor Fox, preferred him immediately
unto the keeping of the privy seal made him Secretary and one of his Council,
and laid upon him what spiritual living might possibly be procured him. In the
mean time he employed him continually either in matters of counsel at home, or
in Ambassages of great importance abroad. The second year of K. Henry's
reign, he was sent into Scotland, for the establishing of a peace with the
king there, whence he was scarsely returned, when the Bishopric of Exeter
falling void, was bestowed upon him. He held it not past 6. years, but he was
removed to Bath and Wels, and thence within three years after to Durham. There
he stayed six years, and the year 1502. was once more translated, viz. to
Winchester, where he spent the rest of his life in great prosperity. For such
was his favor with the king, as no man could ever do so much with him, no man
there was upon whose counsel he so much reli^d. Amongst other honors done unto
him, it was not the least, that he made him Godfather unto his second son,
that was aferward King Henry the 8 (...) one only mischance he was unfortunate.
He lived many years ^lind before he died. Whereby ghessing his end not to be
far off, he determined to make unto himself friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
bestowing well his goods while he lived. And first he was purposed to have
built a monastery until that consecring with Hugh Oldham Bishop of Exeter a
very wise man: He was advised by him rather to bestow his money upon the
foundation of some College in one of the Uniuersities, which should be more
profitable unto the common wealth, and more available to the preservation of
his memory. As for Monasteries (quoth he) they have more already, then they are
like long to keep. So by the counsel of this wise Prelate (whose purse also
was a great help to the finishing thereof) the college of Corpus Christi in
Oxford was built, anno 1516, and endued by the said founder with possessions,
to the yearly value of 401. l. 8. s 11. d. Afterward in the year 1522. he
bestowed the cost of building a fair free school by the castle in Taunton
(where the B. of Winchester has a goodly Lordship) and convenient housing
near it for the Schoolmaster to dwell in: the like he performed at Grantham
also, in which place it is probable he might be borne: lastly, it is to be
remembered, that he covered the quier of Winchester, the Presbytery and Isles
adjoining with a goodly vault, and new glased all the windows of that part of
the Church. It is said also that he built the partition between the presbytery
and the said Isle, causing the bones of such Princes and Prelates as had bane
buried here and there dispersed about the church, to be removed and placed in
seemly monuments upon the top of that new partition. Many other notable
things no doubt he did which have not come unto my knowledge. He was brought up
in Pembrooke hall in Cambridge (unto which house he gave certain hangings)
and died a very old man, anno 1528. when he had worthily governed the church
of Winchester the space of 27. years. He lies entombed upon the south side of
the high altar in a monument, rather sumptuous then stately, of the same
building with the partition.

58 Thomas Woolsey.
OF this man I will only say thus much in this place, 1530. Hen. 8.32.
that he was first after a sort Bishop of Turney in France, then of Lincoln,
and lastly of York; that he was made Cardinal, anno 1515. and being so
qualified to hold more livings: he took first the Bishopric of Bathe and
Wels in Commendam with York; then resigning Wels, Durham; and lastly,
resigning Durham also, held Winchester in the like sort a little while,
scarsely one year I take it: for I find that he left Durham, the year 1530.
and in the end of the same year, viz. November the 29. died. See more of him
in York.

59. Stephen Gardinar.
The Sea then continued void almost four years. 1534. Hen. 8.26
At last Stephen Gardener Doctor of Law, and sometimes Master of Trinity Hall
in Cambridge, borne at Bury in Suffolk, was preferred thereunto and consecrate
an. 1534. Fourteen years after, viz. June 30. 1548. he was committed to the
Tower, for a Sermon he preached before the King the day before, being Saint
Peter's day at Westminster. When he had continued there the space of two years,
and a half, he was by authority deprived of his Bishopric February 14. 1550.
sent to prison again, and there kept till the beginning of Queen Mary; at
what time, he was not only restored to his Bishopric, and set at liberty, but
made L. Chaucellor of England, viz. August 23. 1553. In the mean time (to
wit, the year 1539.) he was chosen Chancellor of the Uni^ersity of
Cambridge. A man of great learning (as diverse of his works extant do testify)
and of too much wit, except it had been better employed. For the extreme
malice he bare to our religion, he not only burnt many poor men, but
wrought all the means his wily head could devise to make away our late
Sovereign Queen Elizabeth: saying often, it was in vain to strike off a few
leaves or branches when the root remained whole. And surely in all reason his
cursed policy must have prevailed, if God had not touched the heart of Queen
Mary her sister with a very kind and natural affection toward her: which
notwithstanding, it is much to be doubted what he might have wrought in time,
had not God in mercy taken him away the more speedily. He dyed at White Hall,
November 12. 1555. of the gout, being (according to the common saying of men
affected with that disease) very rich, leaving behind him 40000. marks in
ready money (if Bale say true) beside much sumptuous household stuff. His, body
was conueighed by water unto Winchester house in Southwarke, where (being
enclosed in lead) it was laid in a vault of brick made for that purpose in
Saint Mary O^eries Church, and there rested for a time. Febr. 24. following, it
was carried from thence through Southwarke unto Winchester, in a Chariot
covered with black, having on it an image lively resembling the person
deceased, clothed in a coape of gold, with a Myter on the head, and all
manner of Pontisicall attire; the Uicount Mountacute and the Bishop of Ely,
(who were his Executors) attending the corpse with two hundred horse. He was
buried (accordingly as in his last Will he had appointed) on the North side of
the high Altar in Winchester, in a Toombe both in place and building answerable
to Bishop Fox.

60 John Poynet.
1550. Edw. 6.5.
PPresently upon the deprivation of Stephen Gardener, John Poynet Doctor of
Divinity, a Kentish man borne, brought up in Kings College in Cambridge,
consecrate Bishop of Rochester, June the twenty sixth, 1550. was tran^^ated to
Winchester. Queen Mary having attained the Crown, he well knew there was no
living for him in England, and therefore sled the Realm and died at Strausburg
in Germany, April, 11. 1556. being scarce forty years of age. A man of great
learning, whereof he left diverse testimonies in writing, works yet extant both
in Latin and English: beside the Grecke and Latin he was very well seen in
the Italian and Dutch tongue, and an excellent Mathematician. He gave unto King
Henry the eight a dial of his own devise, the wing not only the hour of the
day, but also the day of the month, the sign o^ the sun, the planetary hour;
yea the change of the moon, the ebbing and flowing of the sea; with diverse
other things as strange, to the great wonder of the king and his own no less
commendation. He was preferred altogether by King Edward in regard of certain
excellent sermons preached before him.

61. John White.
AFter the death of S. Gardener, 1556 Mary 4.
there was an intent that Cardinal Poole (who complained his living was too
small for the maintenance of his port) should hold this Bishopric in
Commendam. But the Bishop of Lincoln John White, for that he was borne in that
Dioces, and had been Warden of Winchester College, sueing importunately for
the same; it was granted unto him, upon condition, that he should pay out of
it unto the Cardinal a pension of 1000. l. a year so long as the Cardinal
lived, and one year after his death Thereunto he agreeing, was admitted to
that place, which he enjoyed but a small time, being deprived in the beginning
of Q. Elizabeth for refusing to conform himself to the religion by her
established, and that somewhat the rather, in regard of a sermon preached by him
at Q. Mary's funeral, wherein he magnified and extolled her so immoderately
mentioning withal her sister so coldly, as it was manifest he would have
defaced her gladly enough if he durst.

62. Robert Horn.
FEbruary. 16. 1560. Robert Horn born in the Bishoprike of Durham, 1560 Eliz.
3.
brought up in S. John's Col. at Cambridge, and in K. Edwards days Deane of the
Church of Durham, coming then newly out of Germany (where he lived all Queen
Mary's days) was consecrate Bishop of Winchester. He sat well ^eere twenty
years, died at Winchester place in Southwarke, and lies near the pulpit in
the body of his Cathedral Church under a flat marble stone, whereon I find
engraven these words: Robertus F^orne theologiae doctor eximius, quondam
Christi causa exul, deinde Episcopus Winton: pie obijt in Domino Iun. 1. 1580.
Episcopatus for anno 19.

63. John Watson.
1580 Eliz. 23.
Soon after his death, it pleased her Majesty to bestow the Bishopric upon
John Watson, he was consecrate thereunto S^p. 18. 1580. He lies buried over
against his prededecessor on the other side of the body of the Church, having
these words engraven upon the marble stone that covers him: D. Ioannes
Watson, huius ecclesiae Winton: Praebendarius, Decanus, ac deinde Episcopus,
prudentissimus pater, vir optimus, praecipue erga mopes misericors, obijt in
Domino Ianuar. 23. anno aetatis suae 63. Episcopatus 4. 1583.

64. Thomas Cooper.
1584 Eliz. 27.
THomas Cooper Doctor of Divinity succeeded him, being translated from
Lincoln. He was brought up in Magdalen college in Oxford, was for a space
schoolmaster to the free school near the College, after Dean of
Christ-Church, and consecrated Bishop of Lincoln. February 24. 1570. In the
Bishopric of Winchester he continued ten years, and departed this life
April 29. 1594. A man from whose praises I can hardly temper my pen, but I am
determined to say nothing of those men whose memory is yet so fresh: my reason
I have elsewhere set down.

65. William Wickham.
1595 Eliz. 38.
WIlliam Wickham sometimes fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, after that
fellow of Eaton College, prebendary of Windsor and Deane of Lincoln,
succeed^d Bishop Cooper in both his Bishoprics. No Bishop of Winchester ever
enjoyed that honor so short a time; he was translated about our Lady day in
the beginning of the year 1595 and died of the stone in the bladder (or some
like disease) the 12. day of June following at Winchester-house in Southwarke,
having not made water in fowerteen^ days before.

66. Willam Day.
WIlliam Day brought up in Kings College in Cambridge (of which Uniuersity he
was Proctor anno. 1557) being Deane of Windsor and Provost of Eaton college,
1596. Eliz 39,
was consecrated unto this see Ian. 25. 1595. and houlding the same little
longer then his predecessor had done, died a few days before Michaelmas the
same year. He was brother to George Day that died Bishop of Chichester in Q.
Mary's time some 43. years before him.

67. Thomas Bilson.
THomas Bilson Doctor of Divinity and Warden of Winchester, 1597. Eliz. 40.
brought up in new Collede in Oxford became Bishop of Worceter the year 1595.
and staying there not past two years, was translated to Winchester, where he
yet lives.

The Bishopric of Winchester is valued in the Kings books at 2491. pounds,
nine shillings eight pence halfepenny, and paid to the Pope for first fruits
12000. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF ELY.
SAint Etheldred (of whom the Cathedral Church of Ely has his name) was the
daughter of Anna King of the East Angels. She was twice married: First unto
Tombert Prince of the South Angles (who gave her the Isle of Ely to her Dower)
And then, he dying within three years, to Egfrid king of Northumberland. With
him she lived twelve years, and at last left him, and all the pomp and
pleasure she might have lived in, to serve God in such sort as she thought was
most acceptable unto him. She betook her, unto her Isle of Ely, and whereas
Ethelbert king of Kent had long before (viz. ann. 607.) b^ilt a Church ther^ by
the direction of Saint Augustine, she reedified the same, and much increased
it year 677. and by the counsel of Wilfrid Archbishop of York (^ut not
without the help of Aldulph her brother king of the East Angles) converted it
into a monastery of Nuns, whereof she her self became A^besse. This Monastery
was under her, Sexburg^ Armenild, Werburg, and other Abbesses 183. years
until it was destroyed by Pagans, Inguar, and Hubba, the yeer^ 890. It lay
then waste a great while. In the end certain secular Priests to the number of
eight, began to inhabit there, but were displaced by E^helwald Bishop of
Winchester, who bought the whole Island of king Edgar; and by his authority
placed in their rooms an Abbot and monks, unto whom he procured many great
and notable privileges. Brithnod provost of Winchester was appointed the first
Abbot, an. 970. He is said to have been murdered by Elsticha the Queen of
King Edilred, causing bodkins to be thrust into his arm holes, because like an
unhappy Actaeon he had seen her in a certain wood busy about forcery.
Elflius was the second Abbot, Leofsinus the third, Leofricus the ^ourth, and
another Leofsinus the fifth. He by the Kings consent let out the farms of the
monastery, in such sort as they should find the house provision all the year,
Shalford paid 2. weeks provision, Stapleford 1. Littlebery 2. Triplaw 2.
Hawkston 1. Newton 1. Melburne 2. Grantsden 2. Toften 1. Cotnam 1. Wellingham
1. Ditton 2. Horningsey 2. Stenchworth 2. Balsam 2. Cathenho 4. days
provision, and Swansham 3. Spaldwich 2. weeks provision, Somersham 2. Blunsham
1. Colne 1. Hortherst 1. Drinkston 1. Ratsden 2. Hackam 2. Berking 2. Needing
1. Wederingseat 1. Breckham 2. Pulham 2. Thorpe and Dirham 2. Nurwald 2. and
Feltwell 2. Merham was appointed to carry the rent to a certain Church in
Norfolk and there to entertain comers and goers to or from the Monastery.
Wilfricus the sixth Abbot, bought the manor of Boreham for 25. ma^ks of gold.
In the time of Thurstan the seventh Abbot, the Isle was held by many of the old
Saxon nobility against King William the Conqueror. He therefore by the counsel
of Walter Bishop of Hereford, and other, gave all the Church goods and lands
without the Is^le to his soldiers. After seven years resistance, the Saxon
gentlemen, some upon promise of pardon submitted them selves, others betaking
themselves to flight, the place was delivered into the possession of the
Conqueror. Delirant Reges plectuntur Achiui; For the fault of these noble men,
the poor monks must be punished: to be restored to their lands, and enjoy their
Ancient privileges quietly, they were feign to give the king 1000. marks. For
making which money they were constrained to sell all the plate and silver that
was in their Church. The king also fearful least from the same place the like
trouble might happen unto him hereafter, appointed them to maintain a
garrison of 40. soldiers, which they did until such time as himself called
them away, to employ them elsewhere, which was five years after. Theodwinus
was the eight Abbot, Godfrey the ninth, and Simon the tenth. After whose death
the place stood void seven years. Richard the son of the Earl Gilbert was
then made Abbot.

1. (...).
1109 Hen. 1.10.
BY this time the revenues of the monastery were grown to be very great. Their
yearly receipt was not so little as 1400. pound, which sum contained then
more metal, and would go farther in those days then 6000. pound of our
money. Of that 1400. pound, the Abbot allowed scarc^ 300. unto the monks,
converting the rest unto his own^ use. This Richard therefore if his mind were
any thing so great as his lineage, could not but disdain to live under the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lincoln, to whose Dioces Cambridgeshire at that
time appertained. But he had reasonabl^ pretenses for his ambition. He caused
the king to be told, that the Dioces of Lincoln was too large for one man's
government: that Ely were a fit place for an Episcopal See, etc. These
reasons amplified with golden Rhetoric, so persuaded the king, as he not only
consented himself that this monastery should be converted into a Cathedral
Church, and the Abbot made a Bishop; but also procured the Pope to confirm and
allow of the same. After that Richard the Abbot had with great pains and more
cost, beaten this bush a great while, the bird that he had so long and
earnestly thirsted after, fell to another man's share. Himself was taken away
by death when the matter was grown to good perfection and ready to be
finished. The Bishop of Lincoln a while hindered the proceeding of this
business; but his mouth was stopped with three Manors which the king being
liberal of another man's purse, was content to bestow upon him, such as
heretofore belonged unto the monastery of Ely, viz. Spaldwich; Bicklesworth,
and Bokeden: these were given to the Sea of Lyncolne in recompense of the loss
the Bishop sustained by exempting of Cambridgshire from his jurisdiction: And
that the revenues of the new Bishop might notwithstanding this gift be no less
then the Abbots were, but rather greater, they divised to diminish the number
of monks which were then 70. and to draw them down unto 40. Richard the 11. and
last Abbot being thus taken away when he would most gladly have lived: K.
Henry the first with the consent of the monks appointed this Bishopric unto
one Heruaeus that had been Bishop of Bangor; and agreeing ill with the
Welchmen, was feign to leave his Bishopric there, and seek abroad for
somewhat elsewhere. He was translated the year 1109. sat two and twenty
years, and died August the 30. 1131.

2. Nigellus.
The Sea having been void then two year, 1133 Hen. 1.34.
Nigellus Treasurer of England, and Nephew unto Roger Bishop of Salisbury was
placed therein May the 28. 1133. He was received with such joy into his city of
Ely, that all the street where h^ should pass was hanged with curtains,
carpets and tapestry, the monks and clergy of his Church meeting him with
procession. By reason of his employment in matters of state and Counsel, he
could not attend his pastoral charge, and therefore committed the managing and
government of his Bishopric unto one Ranulphus sometime a monk of
Glastonbury, that had now cast away his cowle, a covetous and wicked man. For
his faithfulness unto his patron^ and first preferrer king Henry, this
Nigellus is much to be commended. When as Stephen Earl of Bloys contrary to
his oath and promise to king Henry the first his uncle usurped the crown due to
Maud the Empress king Henry's daughter; This Bishop could never be induced to
forsake her, but most constantly stuck^ unto her, and endured much for her
sake. See more hereof in the life of Roger Bishop of Salisbury.
Notwithstanding those his great troubles, he found means to erect an hospital
for Regular Cannons, in that place where Saint John's College in Cambridge now
stands: the foundation of which house was afterward twice altered, first by
Hugh Norwald his successor, who placed therein a certain number of scholars
to cohabite with the Cannons, giving allowance for their maintenance: and
afterward by Margaret Countess of Richmond and Darby, who new built it,
partly in her life time, and partly by her executors after her death, endowing
it with (in a manner) all the revenues it possesses, and raising it unto that
beauty and perfection which now it has. This man was Bishop 36. years, and
died the 29. day of May 1169. having long before seen the issue of his Lord
and first patron king Henry restored to the crown in Henry the 2. Three
years before his death he was taken with a dead palsy, so as ever after he
was feign to be carried from place to place by his servants. He is said to have
been buried before the altar of S. Cross in his own church. See more of him
in the discourse of Richard his son, that was Bishop of London.

3. Galfridus Rydall.
1174 Hen. 2.21.
AFter his death, the Dioces of Ely continued without a Bishop five year.
October. 6. 1174. Geoffry Rydell or Rydall Archdeacon of Canterbury was
consecrate Bishop: a very lofty and high minded man, called therefore commonly
the proud Bishop of Ely. He bestowed great cost upon the building of the
new work of his Cathedral Church toward the West, and upon the steeple which
he built almost unto the battlements. He died intestate at Winchester the 21.
day of August 1189. a ^ower days before the coronation of king Richard the
first, leaving in his cos^ers great store of ready money, viz. 3060. marks of
silver, and 205. marks of gold. All which the king was content to take unto
himself to help to bear the charges of his coronation. He sat Bishop 14.
years, ten months, and 14. days, and was buried at Ely.

4. William Longchamp.
THe last day of December the same year, 1189 Rich. 1.1.
William Longeshamp Chauncellor of England, was consecrate Bishop of Ely. One
greatly favored by King Richard the first, and a man very worthy of that
favor for many excellent parts in him, had not those his virtues been matched
and ouermatched, with as many great and notorious vices. When the king took
that his famous voyage to Jerusalem he made this Bishop (Chauncellor before)
chief Justice of the South part of England, and Protector of the Realm in his
absence. And least he should want any Authority that might be given him, he
procured the Pope to make him his Legate, the obtaining whereof
(notwithstanding the Kings request) cost him 1000 l. of ready money. It is a
true saying Magistratus indi^ at virum, the man that in base fortune seemed to
all men not only wise, but vertuons and humble enough; being raised unto his
height and power of authority, as being either drunken and infatuate with too
much and sudden prosperity, or amassed with the brightness of his own good
fortune, began presently to do many things, not only untowardly, and
indiscreetly, but very arrogantly and insolently, sauouring as well of
unconscionable covetousness and cruelty, as lack of wisdom and policy in so
great a governor requisite That which in our histories is most blamed, and
most odiously mentioned, I find no such great fault withal, that calling a
convocation by virtue of his power Legantine; at the suggestion and entreaty of
Hugh Nouaunt or Nuuant Bishop of Chester, he displaced the monks of Couentree,
and put in secular Priests in their rooms. Officers appointed by the King
himself he discharged; Geoffry Archbishop of York the kings bastard brother,
at his first arrival in England after his consecration, he caused to be
apprehended and drawn from the very Altar of the Church of Saint Martins in
Dover unto prison. John the Kings brother, and afterward king him self, he
sought to keep under and disgrace by all means possible, being jealous (as
he said) least the king dying without issue, he should defraude Arthur his
elder brother of the kingdom; and whether unto his brother now king, he would
continue loyal, having pow^ to invade his kingdom, for certain he will not.
True it is, that Earl John began to take somewhat more upon him then needed,
and being demanded a reason of some of his doings made no other answer but
this, I know not whether the King my brother be alive or not: Whereunto the
Chancellor replied, if he be living it were untruth to take his kingdom from
him; if he be dead, Arthur the eldest brother must enjoy the same. Now he that
feared not to deal thus with the kings own brother, no marvel if he used
such of the nobility far worse that in any sort opposed themselves against
him. As for the commonalty, he not only grieved them with continual and
needless exactions, and tyrannised intollerably over them otherwise, but
offended them much also with his glorious pomp, and unreasonable proud
behavior. His manner was to ride with no less th^n 1500. horse, and in his
travail to lodge for the most part at some Monastery or another to their great
and unsupportable charge; yea there was not any Church in England either
Conuentuall or Cathedral unto which he was not very burdensome some way or
other. And his officers were such prolling companions, bearing themselves ^old
upon their masters absolute Authority, as there was no sort of people whom they
grieved not by some kind of extortion. Yea (says Matthew. Paris) all the wealth
of the land, was come into their hands, in so much as scarce any ordinary
person had left him a silver belt to gird him withal, any woman either
brooche, or bracelet, any gentleman a ring, to wear upon his finger. But the
Chancellor he purchased apace, and bestowed as well Abbotships, benefices and
spiritual preferment as temporal offices all that fell, where him pleased,
whereby his servants and kindred were all grown exceeding ^ich. Among other his
follies it is remembered that he built the outer wall about the Tower of
London, and spent an infinite deal of money in making a deep ditch about the
same, thinking he could have caused the River of Thames to go round about it.
But that cost was bestowed in vain. These and many other his misbehauiours
incited the people and Nobility woonderfully against him. Insomuch as he
feared greatly least some sedition being raised, sorce would be offered unto
him. He thought it therefore no less th^n needful in all places of any
public assembly to render reasons openly of his doings; which being
considered, I know not whether he may justly be thought so blame worthy as
our Histories for the most part make him. Officers placed by the king he said
he discharged, least the people being grieved with so many governors would
complain, that instead of one king they now were constrained to obey many. What
reason he yielded of his dealing with Earl John you heard before. Concerning
the Arbishop of York, he affirmed (and it was true) that the king before his
departure, had not only forbidden him to set foot in England within 3. years
after, but had bound him with an oath to that effect: Howbeit he offered to
depose (as afterward indeed he did) that he never gave direction for the
apprehension of the Archbi. So says Roger Houeden. As for his exactions he
said they were but such as the maintenance and incredible charge of so great a
war as the king had then in hand required: and lastly, for a general
defense, he protested he had not taken any course in these or any other
matters of importance, for which he had not some particular direction from the
king. These excuses satisfied ^ot men so fully, but that infinite complaints
were daily made unto the king against him, so that he could do no less th^n
discharge him from his place of protectorship; which he did, and sent over
William Arcbishop of Roan to succeed him, but joining some other in Commission
with him, as ^^nding an inconvenience in giving so much and so absolute
authority to one man. At this news his enemies greatly rejoicing, and thinking
him a man now easy enough to deal withal, they conspire against him; and
causing a Convocation to be summoned, they procure him to be excommunicate for
the violence done unto the Archbishop of York, and with him all other, that
were his aiders and ministers in that enterprise. As soon as he understood of
these things, fearing greater dangers, he be thought himself how he might do
to get over the seas: and knowing that his enemies if they should have any
inkling of his intent, would assuredly hinder the same, or work him some
mischief by the way; He devised to disguise himself in w^mans apparel, and
so went unto the sea side at Dover mu^^led, with a metyard in his hand, and a
web of cloth upon his arm. There he sat upon a rock ready to take ship,
when a certain lewd mariner thinking him to be some strumpet, began to dally
wantonly with him; whereby it came to pass, that whereas he was a stranger
borne and could speak no English being notable to answer this merry mariner
either in wo^ds or deeds; he su^pec^ed him to be a man, and called a company
of women, who pulling o^f his kerchiefe and mu^^ler, found his crown and beard
shaven and quickly knew him to be that hateful Chancellor whom so many had
so long cursed and feared. In great despite they threw him to the ground,
spitting upon him, beat him ^ore, and drew him along the sands. Whereupon a
great cry being made, the Burges^es of the town took him away from the
people, and though his servants endeavored to rescue him, thrust him into a
^^ller, there to keep him prisoner till notize might be given of this his
depar^ure. It is a world to see, how he that was a few months before honored
and reverenced of all men like an half God, attended by Noble men's sons and
Gentlemen of great worship whom he matched unto his neeces and kinswomen; every
man accounting himself happy that he favored, yea to be well acquainted with
his porters and officers was accounted no small ma^^er: This man once down and
standing in need of his friends help^, had no man to defend him, no man to
speak for him, no man that moved a finger to rid him out of the present
calamity and trouble. The Earl John was desi^o^s to have done him some farther
notable disgrace and cont^mely; Neither was there almost any that for his own
sake withstood it. The Bishops, diverse of them his enemies, regarding
notwithstanding his calling and place, would not suffer it, but caused him to
be set at liberty. So, not long after he got him over into Normandy, where he
was borne, and there rested himself after all this ^u^moile, till the return
of K. Richard; with whom he made such fai^e weather, and so cunningly excused
all things objected against him, that in short time he was as greatly in favor
with him as ever heertofore. The year 1197. he was sent Ambassador to the
Pope, together with the Bishop o^ Durham and other: and falling sick by the
way, died at Poytiers the last day of January, one month above seven year
after his consecration. He was buried in a monastery of the order of the
Cistercians called Pimy. Petrus Blesensis in an epistle written unto Hugh
Bishop of Couentry, whom he taxes and reprehendeth sharply for his malice and
envy against him, gives him (how truly God knows) this Elogium, that he
was Episcopus dilectus Deo and hominibus, virsapiens, amabilis, genero^us,
b^nignus, and mihi, and in omnes liberalitate^ e^fusus, etc.

5. Eustachius.
The Sea was then void one whole year and somewhat more^ 1198 Rich. 1.10.
The ninth day of August next after Longchamps death, Eustachius Deane of
Salisbury and (as Roger Houeden has) Uicechancelour unto the King: was
elected, but not consercate till the fourth Sunday in Lent the year following.
A man (says Florilegus) very well seen as well in profane as divine and holy
learning. He was one of them that pronounced the Popes excommunication against
king John, and interdicted the whole Realm. For doing thereof, he knew the
kings displeasure would lie so heavy upon him, as there was no abiding in the
realm, and therefore got him beyond the seas. This fell out the year 1208.
After 5. yeer^ banishment, king John being reconciled to the Pope, he returned
home, viz. the year 1213. and lived not long after He fate seventeen years
wanting nine days, and departed this life at Reading the third day of February
1214 The galiley at the West end of the Cathedral Church was of his building.

6. John de Fontibus.
AFter his death Galfridus de Burgo Arch Deacon of 1219 Hen. 3.4.
Norwich and brother unto Hubert de Burgo or Borough Earl of Kent and chief
Justice of England was elected Bishop of Ely. But before the publication of
this election one Robert of York was also chosen, who held the temporalties of
the Bishopric without consecration, and disposed of benefices that fell, and
all things belonging to the Sea as Bishop, for the space of five years. The
Pope at last disanulling both these elections, conferred the Bishopric, upon
John Abbot of Fountney a just and virtuous man, who was consecrated March 8.
1219. He was Treasurer of England for five years and died at Downham May 6.
1225. He is said to be buried before the altar of S. Andrew.

7. Geoffry de Burgo.
1225 Hen. 3.10.
HE being dead, Geoffry Borough before mentioned was again elected and
obtained consecration, which he received upon Saint Peter's day the year 1225.
Of him Polidor Virgil gives the same testimony that Matthew West, does of his
predecessor Eustachius, that he was vir in diuinis pariter and humanis literis
eru litus, a man well learned both in divine and profane literature. He gave
two hundred acres of Moore in Wisbich marsh to the augmentation of the priory
of Ely. He continued Bishop about four years, and dying the 17. of May 1229.
was buried upon the North side of the Quier.

8. Hugh Norwold.
1229 Hen. 3.14.
HVgh Norwold Abbot of Saint Emundsbury succeeded him; and was consecrate
together with Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, and Roger Bishop of London, by
Iocelin Bishop of Bath and Wells, upon Trinity Sunday 1229. being the tenth
of June. This man is much commended for his house keeping and liberality unto
the poor, which may well seem strange, considering the infinite deal of
money spent by him in building of his Church and houses. The presbytery of the
cathedral Church he raised from the very foundation, and built a steeple of
wood toward the galiley at the West end of the church This noble work he
finished in seventeen years with the charge of 5350 l. 18 s. 8 d. And the
seventeenth day of September 1253. he dedicated, or (as we commonly call it)
hallowed the same, in the presence of the king ( Henry the third) and his
son Prince Edward, the Bishops of Norwich and Landaffe, and many other great
personages. All these, and an infinite number of other people of al sorts he
seasted many days together in his palace of Ely; which he built every whit
out of the ground, and covered it with lead. In Ditton and other houses
belonging to his See he also bestowed much money. He died at last the 9. day of
August 1254. being well contented (as he professed) now to depart the world,
after he had seen the building of his Church finished, which he so earnestly
desired. He sat two months above 25. years, and was buried in the
presbytery which he had built.

9. William de Kilkenny.
ABout the middle of October following, 1255. Hen^ 3.40.
William de Kilkenny Archdeacon of Couentry (that then for a time supplied the
room of the Chauncellor of England) was elected by the monks unto the Sea of
Ely, and was consecrate the fifteenth of August following beyond the seas at
Boloysa in Sauoy. He was chaplain unto the king, a councellor of special
credit with him, and (as the book of Ely reports, I find it no where else)
Chancellor of England. A goodly man of person, well spoken, very wise and
learned in the laws. He enjoyed that preferment a small time. Being sent
Ambassador into Spain, he died there upon S. Mathewes day 1256. when he had
been Bishop one year, one month and six days. He took order his heart
should be brought unto Ely and buried there.

10. Hugh Balsam.
News being brought unto the Court of the death of William de Kilkenny: 1257.
Hen, 3.42.
The king by and by dispatched his letters unto the Prior and Covent of Ely,
requiring them in very gracious manner, to choose for their Bishop Henry de
Wingham his Chancellor, using many reasons to persuade them thereunto But they
proferring their own knowledge before the kings commendations, the 13. day of
November, made choice of Hugh Balsam or de Bedesale (for so also I find him
called) their Subprior, one (as they persuaded themselves) most fit for the
place. Hereat the king being greatly displeased, refused to accept of their
election, and caused the woods of the Bishopric to be cut down, the parks
to be spoiled, and havoc to be made of all things. Many times he urged them
to a new election, telling them it was not fit, that a place of that strength
should be committed unto a simple cloister man, that had never been acquainted
with matters of state. The new elect therefore got him over the sea to Rome,
hoping there to obtain that which in England would not be affoorded him^.
Boniface the Archbishop of Canterbury hearing thereof, although having
diligently si^ted and examined him, he could take no exception against him;
yet to gratify the king, writ diverse letters to his friends at Room against
him and set up one Adam de Marisco to be a countersuter to the Pope for that
Bishopric. This Adam was a man of great learning, and had written diverse
books much commended. But he was a very aged man, and moreover a friar minor
and therefore one that had renounced the world, and all meddling in worldly
matters: which notwithstanding he followed gladly the directions of the
Archbishop, and was well content to have been a Bishop before he died. As for
Henry Wingham the Chauncellor, it is said that he never stirred at all in the
matter, but confessed them both more worthy of the place then himself. It is
said likewise, that the suit in his behalf was first commenced by the king
without his knowledge, and that when he saw the king so earnest and deal so
violently in it, he went unto him and humbly besought him to let alone the
monks in the course they had begun, and to cease farther soliciting of them
by his armed and imperious requests: for (says he) after invocation of the
name of God, the grace and direction of his holy spirit, they have chosen a man
more worthy then my self; And God forbid that I should as it were invade by
force that noble Bishopric, and usurp the ministry of the same, with a
^eared or caute^ised Conscience. The end of this suit was this, Henry Wingham
was afterward made Bishop of London. See more of him there. Hugh Balsam come
home from Rome confirmed by the Pope, March 10. 1257. and was consecrate Octov.
14. following. He sat 28. years and three months. In which time he founded
a College in Cambridge, by the name of S. Peter's College, now commonly called
Peter house. He first began the same being yet Prior of Ely, and finished it
in the year, 1284. June 16. 1286. he departed this life at Dodington, and was
by Thomas Englethorpe Bishop of Rochester buried at Ely before the high Altar.

11 John de Kyrkby.
AFter him succeeded John de Kyrkby Deane of Winburne, 1286. Edw. 1.15.
Archdeacon of Couentry, and Treasurer of England. He was once elected unto
the Sea of Chester: but the election was cassate and disanulled by Friar John
Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, who took exception against him for holding
many several sprituall preferments, saying, that a man of so good conscience
as a Bishop ought to be, would rather content himself with a little living,
then cumber himself with so many charges. He was elected July 26. 1286. ordered
a Priest by John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, at Feuersham, Sept. 21.
1286. consecrate the the day following at Canterbury; sitting Bishop of Ely but
three years and eight months, died March 26. 1290. He was buried in his own
Church by Ralph Walpoole Bishop of Norwich (that afterward succeeded him) on
the North part of the quier before the altar of S. John Baptist.

12 William de Luda.
THe fourth day of May following was elected William de Luda Deane of Saint
Martins, 1290. Edw. 1.19.
Archdeacon of Durham, and Treasurer of the kings house. Upon the even of
Trinity sunday following, he was ordered a Deacon by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, at Lenham, confirmed the same day Bishop of Ely, ordered a Priest
at Barking in Essex, Sept. 16. and consecrate at Ely the sunday after
Michaelmas day. He sat seven years, and lies buried in the south part of
the Church between two pillars at the entrance into the old Lady Chapel.
This Bishop gave the manor of Old burn with the app^^tenances unto his See,
upon condition that his next successor should bestow a thousand marks to
provide maintenance for three chaplains to serve in the Chapel there.

13 Ralph Walpoole.
1299 Ed. 1.28.
MUch adoo there was now about the election of a new Bishop. The covent co^ld
not agree within themselves; one part (and the greater) made choice of John
their Prior, the rest of John Langton Chancellor of England. This election
being examined before the Archbishop, and judgment by him given for the
Prior, the Chancellor appeals unto the Pope, and traveled to Rome in his
own person. The Prior bearing of his journey, highed him after as fast as he
might, neither was he long behind him, although many blocks were cast in his
way. Being there, they were persuaded to resign all their interest into the
Popes hand. He then in favor of the Covent set down this order, that they
should be at liberty (Notwithstanding these elections) to choose again, so
they chose any one Abbot in England, except three, to wit, of Westminster, Bury
and Saint Augustines: they belike were not in the Popes favor. The Proctors of
the covent they would not agree to this order, so favorable for them. Wherefore
the Pope being very angry, upon his own absolute authority removed Ralph
Walpoole from Norwich unto Ely, gave Norwich unto the Prior; and lest the
Chancellor should altogether loose his labor, he made him Archdeacon of
Canterbury in the place of Richard Feringes that was then appointed by him
Archbishop of Dublyn This Ralfe Walpoole was consecrate Bishop of Norwich in
the beginning of the year 1288. and sat there 11. years. At Ely he continued
scarce 3. years, but died March 22. in the beginning of the year 1302. He was
buried in the pauement o^ the Presbytery before the high altar.

14 Robert Orford.
THis time the Monks agreed better amongst themselves, 1032, Edw. 1.31.
and with one consent chose Robert Orford their Prior upon the foureteenth day
of April ensuing, howbeit the Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Winchelsey
refused to afford him consecration, alleging him to be insufficient for want
of learning: whereupon he appealed to the Pope, who so far forth approved him
upon his examination before the whole Consistory of Cardinals, both for wisdom
and learning, as he much condemned the Archbishop for opposing against him.
But it is very like, his purse help him well in his suit: for it is remembered,
that he came home indebted no less then the sum of 15000. l. He sat somewhat
more then 7. years, and ended his life at Dunham, January 21. 1309. He was
buried in the pauement aforesaid near R. Walpoole his predecessor.

15 John de Keeton.
AFter him followed John de Keeton Almoner unto the Church of Ely, 1310. Edw. 2
4.
he sat likewise seven years, and dying May the foureteenth, 1316. was buried
also in the same pauement.

16 John Hotham.
WIthin the compass of the same year a Chaplain of the Kings named John
Hotham or Hothu^, 1316. Edw. 2.10.
sometimes Chancellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, as al^o the Chancellor of
the Kings Exchequer, was made Bishop of Ely, and the next year, viz. 1317.
Chancellor of England. A man wise and virtuous, but very unlearned. He
continued in that office two years, and then giving it ever, was made
Treasurer. That place also he resigned within a twelve month, and betook
himself altogether to the go^ernment of his Church. In his time the Steeple in
a night fell down upon the quier, making a most horrible and fearful noise.
This steeple (now called the Lantern) was in his time reedisied, the charge
w^ereof and other buildings about the Church within the space of 20. years,
amounted unto the sum of 6094. l. 18. s. 10. d. ob. q. Beside which sum,
this Bishop bestowed 2034. l. 12. s. 8. ob q. in finishing of the Presbytery,
begun heretofore by Hugh Norwold his predecessor, as a writing yet to be seen
upon the North wall of the said Presbytery witnesses. So that upon the very
sabricke and building of the Church he spent 4441. l. 9. s. 7. d. ob. farthing.
Besides which this worthy Benefactor gave unto his Covent the manor of
Holbourne with six tenements belonging to the same, and to his Church a
chalice, and two crewets of pure gold, very costly wrought. He sat almost 20.
years, and died at Somersham upon S. Paul's day, January 25. 1336. of the
palsy, whereof he had lain sick two years. He lies entoombed in a monument
of Alabaster that was sometimes a very stately and goodly building, but now
shamefully defaced, as are also all other monuments of the Church. It stands
east from the less Altar, in the middle, but to the west end of the Presbytery.

17 Simon Mountacute.
1336 Edw. 3.11.
ABout the middle of March, after his death Pope Ben^ the 11. translated Simon
Mountacute, brother to William Earl of Salisbury from Worcester (where he had
sat^ three years unto Ely. He began the building of that beautiful Lady
Chapel on the North side of the Church, and bestowed an infinite deal of
money upon the same, but could not finish it being prevented by death. John de
Wisbech a Monk of Ely (as I remember) continued that work, and much deal by
the contribution of well disposed people ended it at last. It is said, that in
digging thereabout he found a pot of treasure, which served to pay the work
men's wages a great while. This Bishop holding his place here little about seven
years, departed from it and the world, Iure, 20. 1344. and was buried in the
Chapel before mentioned. He procured diverse privileges to the Uniuersity of
Cambridge.

18 Thomas Lylde.
ALan de Walsingham Prior of Ely, 1344. Edw. 3.19.
being then chosen Bishop, his election was disanulled and pronounced void by
the Pope, Clement 5. who explenitudine potestatis, without any more adee,
thrust into his place Thomas Lylde a Friar preacher, and caused him to be
consecrate at Auinion in the month of July, 1344. He was a Doctor of
Divinity, brought up in Cambridge, and much esteemed for his learning. He
preached often with great commendation, and writ diverse works mentioned by
Bale. Within a year or two before his death he endured great trouble and
persecution by the means of the Lady Blanch Wake, a near kinswoman of the
Kings, the circumstance of which business it shall not be amiss briefly to
set down. This Lady had certain lands near unto one or two of the Bishops
houses, by reason of which neighborhood, many controversies daily arose
between them concerning bounds and other such like matters. The Bishop was a
rough and plain man, hardly brooking such indignities as it is likely a woman
of that Nobility, rich, and near of kin unto the King, would be ready
enough to offer. By reason here of the Lady conceived a deadly and inueterate
malice against him: for wreaking whereof, she awaited this opportunity. The
Pope at the request of the King (or rather the Black Prince his son) had
suffered one Robert Stretton to be consecrate Bishop of Lichfield; a man in
many respecte^ very unworthy of that honor. This good Bishop was not afraid
(like another John Baptist) to step unto the King, and reprehe^d him for it;
which he taking very tenderly, commanded him in great displeasure to avoid his
presence. The Lady before named thinking it now a fit time to deal with the
Bishop, commenced a suit against him, the ground and color whereof was
this. Certain le^de persons had fired some housing belonging to the said Lady,
and being apprehended, were content to accuse the Bishop as accessory to this
soul ^act. Whereupon before ever the Bishop heard any thing of the matter,
at the instance of the Lady, and commandment of the king, a Nisiprius passed
against him, and adjudged him to the payment of 900. l. which presently he was
feign to lay down. But esteeming more the discredit th^n the money, he never
ceased to importune the king, til he obtained license of him to call the Jury
and witnesses to a reckoning of their doings. The time being come when the
matter was to be determined in the Assizes at Huntington, the Lady found a
means to hinder the Bishops proceedings by corrupting the officers, who denied
him the copy of the former judgment, without which nothing could be done.
Being much grieved herewith, he went unto the King, and complained how he was
oppressed; requesting him as he was the guide, and (...) of the law, so he
would direct the same according to justice, and not see him so ouerborn. This
his speech was delivered in somewhat more rough terms then beseemed him (as
the king took it at leastwise) who making the worst of it, accused him to the
Parliament then assembled. Some things the king laid to his charge he denied,
and extenuated the rest what he might. But the king affirmed every thing upon
his honor, and made some mention of witnesses; who then durst but take this
proof for good? So he was condemned by Parliament, and this punishment laid
upon him, that hereafter he should never presume to come in the kings presence.
Not long after this, it happened that his servants meeting with certain of the
Ladies men; in a fray, one of her men were slain. Of this murder, the Bishop
is by and by deenied an accessory, and howsoever he knew himself guiltl^^se,
searing the success of this matter, would prove but as his other suits had
done, he sold all his moveable goods, put the money into the hands of his
trusty friends, and hid himself ^t might not serve his turn; being absent, he
was found guilty by the Crowners inquest, and his temporalties seized into the
kings hands. Seeing therefore now the worst (as he thou^ht) he was content, 1.
upon Summons to appear in the Kings Bench, where he demanded trial by his
Peers, which the Judges denied him, well knowing that by an ordinary and
honorable trial they should not be able to condemn him. A common Jury of
twelve Knights of the Post, found that one Ralfe Carles the Bishops
Chamberlain had slain one William de Holme the Ladies servant, that the
Bishop was not guilty of the murder, or accessory before the fact; but
after, for that they found forsooth, quod praedict^m Radulfum post perpetratam
feloni^m recept^sset s^i^nter; that which notwithstanding he to the last gasp
with great protestations ever denied. So judgment being pronounced against
him, and his temporalties seized into the kings hands; he entreated the
Archbishop of Canterbury to put him to his Canonical purgation, the which
thing the Archbishop seemed content to do; but having proceeded a while in
that course, he advised the Bishop to make means unto the King for his
favor, promising after he had made trial what might be done that way, then to
proceed, and to accept of his purgation. This the Bishop taking as an argument,
that the Archbishop was fearful to do him justice, for doubt of displeasing
the King, he resolved to have recourse unto the Pope; to whom repayring, he
declared all the circumstances ^f his trouble, from the beginning unto the end.
Hereupon his accusers were cited to appear in the Popes Court, and for not
appearing were excommunicate. The Bishop of Lincoln was commanded to
denounce this excommunication (which he did unto his great trouble) and also,
that if any of the excommunicate were dead, he should cause them to be dug
out of their graves, and forbid them burial in holy earth. This peremptory
dealing of the Pope moved the king unto great choler: for diverse of those
that were excommunicate, were persons of no small account; some of them of his
Privy Council. Proclamation therefore was made throughout the Realm, that upon
pain of death, no man should hereafter be so hardy as to bring into the realm
any kind of writing from the Popes Court. Some notwithstanding contrary to this
prohibition, delivered letters to the Bishop of Rochester (then Treasurer of
England) from the Pope concerning this matter, and fearing the worst had armed
themselves. This done, they shrunk away and sled, but were soon after
apprehended, and diversely punished, some dismembered, other fair and well
hanged. The Pope hearing of this, was so incensed, that he wrote a very sharp
letter unto the King; breathing out terrible threats against him, if he did
not presently reconcile himself unto the Bishop, and cause full amends to
b^e made him for all the less he had sustained either by the Lady, or him in
these troubles. The king was too wise either to do all he required, or utterly
to despise his authority. The one he knew was not for his honor, nor (so far
had this tyrant incroched upon the authority of Princes) the other for his
sa^ety. War^ed by the examples of King John, Henry the Emperor, and other; he
thought good not to exasperate him too much: and so was content to yield unto
somewhat. But before the matter could grow to a full conclusion, it was
otherwise ended by God, who took away the Bishop by death. He deceased at
Auinion: June 23. 1361. and was there buried, having been Bishop even almost
17. years. This Bishop was a good benefactor to Peter house in Cambridge.

19 Simon Langham.
1361. Edw. 3.36.
INnocent 6. translated then Reginald Bryan Bishops of Worcester unto Ely. But
he died before he could take benefit of the Popes gift. John Buckingham
afterward Bishop of Lincoln was then chosen, and was rejected by the Pope,
who preferred to this See Simon Langham, Abbot of Westminster. He continued
here but five years (being in that space first Treasurer, then Chancellor of
England) and was then removed to Canterbury. Of his translation some merry
fellow made these verses: L^tentur c^li, quia Simon transit ab Ely,
Cuius in aduentum s^^nt in K^nt millia centum.
See more of him in Canterbury.

20 John Barnet.
1^66. Edw. 3.41.
AL what time Simon Langham was translated to Canterbury, John Barnet was
removed from Bathe to succeed him in Ely. He was first consecrate Bishop
of Worcester, 1362. and staying there but one year, obtained Bathe, 1363. and
lastly, Ely, 1366. He was Treasurer of England. Being a very old man before
his coming to Ely, he lived there notwithstanding six years, in which time
he bestowed the making of 4. windows in his Church, two in the South side, and
two in the North side of the presbytery. He died June 7. 1373. at Bishops
Hatfield, and lies buried at Ely, on the South side of the high altar: in
which place there is to be soon a goodly toombe monstrously defaced, the head
of the Image being broken off; I take that to be Barnets toombe.

21. Thomas Arundell.
AFter the death of John Barnet the king writ earnestly unto the Covent to
choose John Woodroue his confessor. 1375 Edw. 3.50.
But they elected Henry Wakefield Treasurer of the kings house. This election
was made void by the Pope, who placed of his own authority (as I find
delivered) Th. Arundel Archdeacon of Taunton, son unto Robert Earl of
Arundell and Warren, being an aged Gentleman of two and twenty years old, and
as yet but a Subdeacon. How be it, some report, that order being taken by
Parliament about this time for the ratifying of capitular elections, and
stopping the injurious provisions of the Pope, that this Thomas Arundell was
chosen orderly, and consecrate at Otford by the Archbishop William Witlesey,
April, 6. 1375. Having sat there fourteen years, three months and
eighteen days, from the time of his election; he was translated to York, and
after to Canterbury. In the mean time, to wit, Oct. 23. Ric. 2.10. he was
appointed L. Chancellor of Eng. He left for an implement of his house at Ely
a wonderful sumptuous and costly table, decked with gold and precious stones.
It belonged first unto the King of Spain, and was sold to this Bishop by the
Black Prince for 300. marks. He also bestowed the building of the great Gate
house in the house at Holbourne. See more of him in York and Canterbury.

22 John Fordham.
1388 Ric. 2.12
The Sea had been void but foureteen days when John Fordham Bishop of Durham
was translated to Ely by the Pope. He was first Deane of Wels, consecrata
Bishop of Durham, May 29. 1381. and inthronized there in Sept. 1382. Being
Treasurer of England, to his no small coffeehouse, he was displaced from
that office the year, 1386. and John Gilbert Bishop of Hereford made
Treasurer. Seven years he continued at Durham, and September twenty seven,
1388. was by the authority of the Pope translated to Ely; in which See he sat
seven and thirty years, two months and twenty four days. He died November
19. 1425. and lies buried in the West part of the Lady Chapel. It appears
by this reckoning, that he was Bishop in all from the time of his first
consecration 46. years and upward. See more of him in Durham.

23 Philip Morgan.
1425 Hen. 6.4.
THe King then and many noble men commended unto the Covent William Al^wicke
doctor of Law, the kings confessor, and Keeper of the privy Seal, who was
after Bishop of Lincoln. But they chose Peter their Prior. That election being
disliked at home by the Archbishop, he was feign to seek unto the Pope,
whose manner was little or nothing to regard elections, but to bestow any
Bishopric or other preferment that fell according to his own pleasure, if it
were not filled before the auoidance might come to his knowledge. According to
this custom, having no respect of the election of the Covent, of his own
authority he thrust in Philip Morgan into this Bishopric. This man being
Doctor of Law, was consecrate Bishop of Worcester, 1419. and soon after
Fordhams death, viz before the end of the year 1425. removed a^ is aforesaid
unto Ely. He was a very wise man, governed there with great commendation nine
years, six months, and four days, and departed this life at Bishops
Hatfield, October. 25. 1434. He was buried at Charter house in London.

24 Jews Lushborough.
PResently after his death the Monks elected Robert Fitz Hugh Bishop of London,
1435. Hen. 6.14
who died before his translation could be perfected, The King then writ for
Thomas Rodburne Bishop of S. David's: which notwithstanding the Covent made
choice of another, to wit, Thomas Bourchier Bishop of Worcester, whose election
the Pope confirmed, but the King utterly refused to restore to him the
temporalties of that S^e. And so for fear of a praemunire he durst not receive
the Popes bulls of confirmation, but renounced all his interest by this
election. The king then appointed this Bishopric unto Jews Lushborough
Archbishop of Roan, Cardinal and Chancellor both of France and Normandy, that
was some way I know not how kin unto him. By his means a dispensation was
gotten of the Pope to hold Ely in commendam with his Archbishopricke. He
enjoyed it six years and six months, and then died at Hatfield September
18, 1443. He is said to have been buried in his church of Ely between two
marble pillars, beside the Altar of Relics.

25 Thomas Bourchier.
THomas Bourchier being now once more chosen, without any great difficulty
obtained full confirmation the twelfth of March following. 1454 Henr. 6.33.
He was brother unto Henry Earl of Essex, first Deane of Saint Martins, then
consecrate Bishop of Worcester, 1435. and sat there eight years. Here he
continued ten years, five months, and twelve days, and was then removed
to Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

26 William Gray.
1454 Hen. 6.33.
The Sea having been void only 14. days, Pope Nicholas the 5. upon an
especial liking he had of William Gray, Doctor of Divinity, placed him in the
same. This Gray was a Gentleman very well borne, to wit of the noble and
ancient house of the L. Gray of Codnor, whose friends perceiving in him a
notable towardness and sharpness of wit, dedicated him unto learning. He
was brought up in Baylioll College in Oxford. Having spent much time there
profitably, and to very good purpose, in the study as well of Divinity as
Philosophy; he passed over the seas and traveled into Italy, where he
frequented much the lectures of one Guarinus of Uerona, a great learned man in
those days. Following thus his study, and profiting exceedingly therein, he
grew very famous, and no marvel, for to see a Gentleman of great lineage,
having maintenance at will, to become very learned, especially in Divinity, is
in deed a wonder, and seldom seen. He writ many things both before and after
his preferment, whereof I think nothing now remains Neither was he a simple
scholaris and a bookeman only. King Henry the sixth perceiving him not only
learned, but very discreet, and no less industrious, appointed him his
Proctor for the following of all his business in the Popes Court. By this
occasion having often recourse unto the Pope, his great learning and other
excellent parts were soon espied by him, and worthily rewarded with this
Bishopric. It was impossible such a man should not be employed in
State-matters. The year 1469. he was made Treasurer of England by K. Edwar^
the 4.24. years two months and 21. days, he was Bishop of this See. In which
mean space he bestowed great sums of money upon building of the steeple, at
the west end of his Church, and at his death (which happened at Downham, August,
4. 1478) he bequeathed many good^y ornaments unto the same his Church, in which
he was buried between two marble pillars.

27 John Moorton.
A Happy and memorable man suceeded him, 1478. Edw. 4.19.
John Moorton Doctor of law, from whose wisdom and device sprung that happy
conjunction of the two noble houses of Lancaster and York, after so many
years war between them. He was borne at Berry near Blandford in
Dorsetshire, first Parson of Saint Dunstans in London, and Prebendary of Saint
Decumans in Wels, then Master of the Kelles, and Lord Chancellor of England.
August 9. 1478. ( viz. within fewer days after the death of Bishop Gray) he
was elect Bishop of Ely, where he continued about eight years, and the year
1486. was translated to Canterbury. Being yet Bishop of Ely, he bestowed
great cost upon his house at Hatfield. At Wisbich castle likewise all the
building of brick was of his charge, as also the new leame that he caused to
be made for more convenient carriage to his town, which they say serves now
to small purpose, and many complain that the course of the River Nen into the
sea by Clowcrosse is very much hindered thereby. See more of him in Canterbury.

28 John Alcocke.
AFter the translation of John Morton the Sea was void (as one says) three
years. Howbeit I find that John Alcocke Doctor of Law, and Bishop of
Worcester, 1486. Henr. 7.1.
was preferred thereunto the year 1486. A man of admirable temperance, for his
life and behavior unspotted, and from a child so earnestly given to the study,
not only of learning but of all virtue and godliness, as in those days never
any man bare a greater opinion and reputation of Holiness. He lived all his
life time most soberly and chastely, resisting the temptations of the flesh, and
subduing them by fasting, study, prayer, and other such good means, ab^orring
as poison (says Bale of him) all food that was likely to stir him up unto
wantonness. He was borne at Beuerley in Yorkshire, brought up in Cambridge,
first Deane of Saint Stephens in Westminster, and Master of the Rolls, then
consecrate Bishop of Rochester, 1471. translated first to Worcester 1476
(where as the Chronicle of Wales reports, he governed as President of the
Princes counsel) and then to Ely (as I said) 1486. about which time, he was
for a while Lord Chancellor of England by the appointment of that prudent and
most excellent Prince king Henry the 7. Being yet at Worcester he founded a
free school at Kingstone upon Hul; built a Chapel upon the south side of the
parrish Church, where his parents were buried, and ordained a Chantry there. He
built moreover from the very foundation that stately ha^ in the palace of Ely,
together with the gallery; and in almost every house belonging to his
Bishopric, bestowed very great cost. Lastly, he was the author of a goodly
College in Cambridge, now called Jesus College, it was first a Monastery of
Nuns, dedicated to Saint Radegund, and being f^llen greatly in decay, the
goods and ornaments of the Church wasted, the lands diminished, and the Nuns
themselves having forsaken it, insomuch as only two were left, whereof one was
determined to be gone shortly, the other but an infant: This good Bishop
obtained license of King Henry the seventh, to convert the same to a College,
wherein he placed a Master, 6. fellows, and a certain number of Scholars
(since augmented by other benefactors) and dedicated the same unto the honor of
the holy Trinity, the blessed Uirgin, S. John the Evangelist, and S. Radegund.
What was not expended upon these buildings, or to other good purposes of like
profit, he bestowed in hospitality and house keeping every whit. Having sat
14. years and somewhat more, he was taken out of this life to that place where
no doubt he finds the reward of his doings, viz. upon the first day of
October, 1500. He lies buried in a Chapel of his own building, on the North
side of the Presbytery, where is to be seen a very goodly and sumptuous
toombe, erected in memory of him, which by the barbarous and d^ltish peenishnes
of some body, is pitifully def^ced, the head of the Image being broken off,
the compartiment and other buildings torn down.

29 Richard Redman.
ONe whole year the Bishopric had been void after Alcockes death, 1501
Hen, 7.17.
when as Richard Redman Doctor of Divinity, a Cambridge man, first Bishop of
Saint Assaph, then of Exeter, was translated thence unto Ely. He sat there but
three years and a half, and dying, August, 25 1505. was buried between two
pillars on the North side of the Presbytery, where we see a very stately
toombe of free stone welt built. He was very liberal unto the poor. His
manner (they say) was, in traveling to give unto every poor person that
demanded Alms of him a piece of money, six pence at least; and le^t many
should loose it for want of knowledge of his being in town, at his coming to
any place, he would cause a bell to ring, to give notice thereof unto the
poor. No doubt, but he that bestowed thus much in public, bestowed also much
in private that all the world knew not of.

30 James Stanley.
James Stanley a Doctor of Divinity of Oxford, and brother unto the Earl of
Darby succeeded him. 1506 22. Hen. 7.
Other good I find none reported of him, but rather much evil. He was made
Bishop the year 1506. and enjoyed that preferment eight years and a half;
of which time he spent very little or none at Ely: But lived all the Summer
time at Somersham, keeping company much there with a certain woman in very
offensive manner; and all the winter he would be with his brother in
Darbishire. So drowned in pleasures, he passed his time without doing any one
thing worthy commendation or remembrance, and died in the beginning of the
year 1515.

31 Nicholas West.
1515. Henr. 8.7.
OCtober the 7. Nicholas West Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Windsor was
consecrate Bishop of Ely. He^ He was the son of one John West a Baker, and
borne at Putney, where he enlarged the Church by the addition of a very
beautiful Chapel; built all of free stone, arched over and very curiously
wrought. His first education he had in the School of Eaton, whence he was
chosen to be a scholar of Kings College in Cambridge. There he proved very
factious; insomuch as being yet no Graduate, upon a coffeehouse taken
against the Provost of his College about the choice of a Proctor, he set the
Prouosts lodging an fire. For this fact he was expelled the College and
Uniuersity also. Into the Uniuersity, in regard of his towardlynesse, he was
soon after received again, and lived there many years in good estimation.
This Bishop (as I find noted) kept daily in his house an hundred servants,
of which, to the one half he gave yearly four marks wages, and the rest
forty shillings, every one being allowed four yards of cloth for his winter
livery to make him a gown, and thre^ yardes and a half for a coat to wear
in summer. Daily he gave at his gate warm meat and drink to two hundred
poor folk: and moreover in time of dearth distributed diverse sums of money
unto the poor. He governed the Dioces of Ely seventeen years and six
months At last falling into the displeasure of the king ( Henry the eight) for
some matter concerning his first marriage: the grief thereof (as it is
thought) cast him into a disease, which being the worse able to sustain
because of a fistula that he had near his fundament: he yielded unto the
necessity of nature, April 6. 153^. He lies buried in a Chapel very
sumptuously built by himself in the south east part of the Presbytery of Ely.
He was a great benefactor unto Kings College in Cambridge, where he had been
once scholar as aforesaid. The particularitie I cannot set down.

32. Thomas Goodrich.
BIshop Wes^ being dead, 1534 Hen. 8.26.
Nic. Haukins Doctor of Law was appointed to succeed him. He also was brought
up in Eaton and kings College, being nephew and Godsonne unto the said
Bishop, who gave him the Archdeaconry of Ely, and preferred him unto other good
living. At the time of Bishop Wests death, he was Ambassador for the King
beyond the seas; whence being sent for upon his nomination to this see,
himself together with all his family, fell into a ^luxe, whereof he amongst
many of the rest died, before he might receive consecration. At last after a
whole years vacacy, Th. Goodrich Doctor of Law, some say of Divinity, and that
in Cambridge, was consecrated, to wit. April 19. 1534. and sat 20. days
above 20. years. he built a fair gallery in the North side of the palace of
Ely, and otherwise in that house bestowed much cost. He died at Somersham of
the stone the tenth of May 1554. and lies buried almost in the middle of the
Presbytery. More would be said of him: but I had rather you should hear it in
other men's words then mine. For I now grow near the time of which I mean to
speak^ little, as judging it neither safe to r^prehend, nor seemly to praise
(though truly) th^se men whose memory is fresh and diverse their friends living
amongst us. This therefore that I find written upon his tomb I will impart unto
you, and concerning him no more:

Thomas Goodricus annis plus minus 20. huius ecclesiae Episcopus hoc loco
sepultus est. Duobus Angliae illustrissimis regibus varijs and religionis and
reip. muneribus pergratus fuit, foris enim apud exteros principes saepe
legatus, domi quidem cum regi Edwardo eius nominis sexto aliquandiu
consiliarius extitisset, magnus tandem factus Angliae Cancellarius. Chariorne
principi propter singularem prudentiam, an amabilior populo propter
integritatem and abstinentiam fuerit; ad iudicandum est per quam difficile.

In English thus:

Thomas Goodrich for 20. years Bishop of this Church lies buried in this
place. A man very acceptable unto two noble kings of this realm; in many
actions both concerning the Church and commonwealth. For abroad he was often
employed in embassages to foreign Princes, and at home, after he had been of
the privy Council a while unto King Edward the sixth of that name, he was made
at last high Chancellor of England. Whether he were more dear unto his Prince
for his singular wisdom, or more beloved of the commonalty for his integrity
and abstinence, it is even very hard to say.

33. Thomas Thirlby.
1554. Mary. 2.
AT what time it pleased king Henry the eight to make the Church of Westminster
a Cathedral See, he appointed for the first Bishop of the same (who also
was the last) Thomas Thirlby Doctor of Divinity, some say of Law, and that he
had his education in Cambridge. He was consecrated December. 19. 1540. the year
1550. removed to Norwich, and within four years after, by Queen Mary he
was not only advanced unto the Bishopric of Ely, but also made of her privy
Council. After her death, for resisting obstinately the reformation intended
by Queen Elizabeth; he was committed to the tower, and displaced from his
Bishopric by act of parliament. Having endured a time of imprisonment,
neither very sharp nor very long; his friends easily obtained license; for
him, and the late secretary Boxal, to live in the Archbishops house, where they
had also the company of Bishop Tunstall till inch time as he died. The
Archbishop entreated them all most kindly, as considering no doubt the
variablenes of this mutable world, how possible it was for God, that so lately
had set him up, to cast him down, as he had done those men. He lived in this
sort the space of 10 years and upwards, taking more pleasure (I assure my
self) in this time of his imprisonment (for so some men will needs esteem it)
then ever heretofore in the midst and fullest stream of his highest honors.
He departed this life at Lambhith August 26. 1570. and lies buried in the
middle of the chauncell of the parish Church there at the head of Bishop
Tunstall under a marble stone. I find it reported that he gave some 6.
aduousons of vicaridges unto Jesus College in Cambridge.

34 Richard Coxe.
BIshop Thirlby being removed from his place by parliament (as is before said)
Richard Coxe Doctor of Divinity was appointed thereunto by Queen Elizabeth,
1559. Eliz. 2.
and consecrate December 21. 1559. He was borne in Buckingham shire, and
brought up a while in Kings College in Cambridge, even until Cardinal
Wool^ey in regard of his towardliness, made choice of him for one, to furnish
his new foundation in Oxford. From thence he went to Eaton and continuing
schoolmaster there a space, was taken from thence to teach and instruct King
Edward. By him he was mad^ Deane of Westminster and Oxford, Chauncellor of
that Uniuersity, Almoner unto him, and (as Bale also reports) one of his
privy Council. All Queen Mary's time he lived in Germany. He was Bishop of
Ely seven months above 21. years, and departed this life July 22. 1581. He
lies buried near Bishop Goodrich under a marble stone, upon which (though
much of the Epitaph be defaced) I find these verses: Vita caduca vale, salueto
vita perennis,
Corpus terra tegit, spiritus alta petit.
In terra Christi gallus Christum resonabam,
Da Christ in coelis te sine fine sonem.


35. Martin Heton.
The Sea having continued void almost 20. years, 1599. Eliz. 42.
it pleased Queen Elizabeth at last to appoint unto the same Martin Heton
Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Winchester. He was brought up in Christ church
in Oxford, consecrate unto this See February. 3. 1599. and died July. 14. 1609.

36. Lancelot Andrews.
1609 Iac. 7.
LAncelot Andrews first fellow, and then Master of Pembrooke hall in
Cambridge, being Bishop of Chichester, was translated hither before the end of
the same year, continuing still Aulmosner unto his Majesty.

The valuation of this Bishopric in the Exchequer is 2134. pound, 18.
shillings five pence half farthing and the third part of a farthing: in the
Popes books seven thousand ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF LINCOLN.
THe Bishop of that Dioces, whereof Lincoln is now the Sea, sat first at
Dorchester, a place distant from Oxford about 10 miles. Except happily it ^e true
which one Simon de Burnston has delivered, that his Cathedral See was once
planted at a place called Bucklesworth, which thing is testified by no other
antiquity that ever I met withal. His Dioces and jurisdiction was all that
country, which now belongs unto the Bishops of Winchester, Lincoln
Salisbury, Oxford, Bristow, Wels, Lichfield, Chester, and Exceter; and he
(notwithstanding that he governed also the Mercians or Saxons of Mid-England,
who for a while had not any Bishop peculiar unto themselves) he I say was
called the Bishop of the West Saxons. Birinus was the first Bishop of this so
large a territory; Of him see more in Winchester. The second was Agilbert a
French man. In his time Kenwal^hus king of the West Saxons, caused this huge
Diocese to be divided into two parts, the one of which he left unto Agilbert
unto the other he caused one Wina to be consecrate, appointing Winchester to
be his See, and all the West country his jurisdiction. After Agilbert there
was no other Bishop of Dorchester along time. He departing into France, Wina
and his successors Bishops of Winchester, governed that See also, or part of it
at least. For it happened not long after that Oswy K. Mercia erected an
Episcopal See at Lichfield, and placed one D^uma in the same. He had all
Mid-England for his Dioces; so had six or seven of his successors, until the
year 678. at what time a Bishop was placed at Si^nacester, one Eadhead: He
dying within one year, Ethelwine succeeded.

Then these;
Edgar. Kinebert, Beda calls him Embert, and acknowledges himself much
helped by him in the writi^g of his Ecclesiastical history. He died 733. 733.
Alwigh, he was present at a convocation held by Cuthbert Archb. of Cant. an.
747. and died 751 751. Eadulf Archdeacon under his predecessor dyed 764. 764.
Ceolulf, he died 787. 787. Ealdulf.
After Ealdulf, the Sea continued void many years. The year 872. Brightred
became Bishop. In the mean time, viz. the year 737. another See was erected
at Legecester, now called Leicester (but soon after removed to Dorchester)
and one Tota made Bishop there; Then these;
Edbertus consecrate ann. 764. Werenbert. He died 768. V^wona succeeded him (as
has Florilegus^) Other put him before Werenbert. He lived an. 806 Rethun Abbot
of Abingdon. He died 851.


Aldred, consecrate 861. or rather as Matthew. Westminster. reports an. 851. The
year 873. he was deprived of his Bishopric.

Ceolred, consecrate 873.

Halard, by king Alfred appointed one of the Guardians, of the realm to defend
it against the Danes, ann. 897. which year he dyed.

Kenulfus or rather Ceolulfus consecrate ann. 905. together with six other
Bishops by Plegmund the Archbishop.

Leofwyn, unto him the Dioces of Sidnamcester was also committed (which had now
continued void almost fourscore years) and his See for both established again
at Dorchester. He was a great benefactor to the Abbey of Ramsey, and died the
year, 959.

Ailnoth, consecrate 960.

Ascwin or Aeswy.

Alfhelim.

Eadnoth, Provost of Ramsey slain by the Danes in battle, 1016.

Eadheric, he died 1034. and was buried at Ramsey.

Eadnoth, He built the Church of our Lady in Stow, and died the year 1050.

Vlf, He was a Norman, brought into England by Emma the Queen of king
Ethelred, sister to Richard Duke of Normandy. She commended him unto her son
Saint Edward, and found means upon the death of Eadnoth to advance him
(though a man very unlearned) unto this Bishopric. The year 1052. he and all
the Normans (that through the favor of Queen Emma possessed the chief places
of honor in all the realm) were compelled to depart the land. This man
amongst the rest going to the Council of Uercels to complains unto the Pope
of his wrongful banishment, so far forth bewrayed his own weakness and
insuffciency, as the Pope was determined to have displaced him from his
Bishopric, until with gifts, and golden eloquence he persuaded him to wink
at his imperfections. It seems he died the year following.

Wulfin or Wulfsin, was consecrate the year 1053. died 1067. at Winchester;
and was buried in his Cathedral Church of Dorchester.

1. Remigius de Feschamp.
1070 W. Con. 5.
THe last Bishop of Dorchester and first of Lincoln, was Remigius, a monk of
Feschamp the son of a Priest. Unto this man William the Conqueror (for
diverse good services done unto him) had promised long before, a Bishopric in
England, if it should please God to send him victory. He was as good as his
word, and the year 1070. preferred him to Dorchester, void by the death of
the former Bishop. The consideration of this gift coming to the Popes ear, he
would needs adiudge it symony, and as a Symonist actually deprived him of his
Bishopric: But at the request of Lanfranke the Archbishop of Canterbury, he
restored him to his ring and crosyer again. Soon after his preferment, he
began to build at Dorchester, and intended great matters there. But order being
taken in a Convocation at London by the kings procurement, that Episcopal Sees
every where should be removed from obscure towns to greater cities, he
diuerted the course of his liberality from Dorchester to Lincoln. Lincoln at
that time (says William Malmsbury) was one of the most populous cities of
England, of great resort and traffic both by sea and land. Remigius therefore
thinking it a fit place for a Cathedral Church, bought certain ground upon
the top of the hill near the castle then lately built by William the
conqueror, and began the foundation of a goodly Church. The Archqishop of
York Thomas hearing of this designement, forbid him to proceed in that
course, alleging that Lincoln, Stow and Newarke were not only of his
Province and Dioces, but of the possessions of his Archbishopricke. This
allegation, though frivolous, was an occasion of great charge unto the Bishop,
who was feign to work the king to be a means of clearing that title, for
which he gave him (as says Huntingdon) no less then 5000 pound. The fabrike
of the Church being now finished, and 21. prebends founded in the same, all
which he furnished with Incumbents very well esteemed of both for lea^ning and
conversation; He made great provision for the dedication of this his new
Church, procuring all the Bishops of England by the kings authority to be
summoned thereunto. The rest came at the time appointed, which was May. 9. 1092.
Only Robert Bishop of Hereford absented himself, foreseeing by his skill in
Astrology, that Remigius could not live unto the day prefixed, which also he
foretold long before. It fell out (according unto his prediction) that Re^igius
died two days before the time appointed for this great solemnity. He was
buried in that his own new built Church. This Remigius was a man, though of so
high and noble a mind, yet so unreasonable low of stature, as hardly he might
attain unto the pitch and reputation of a dwarf: So, as it seemed, nature had
framed him in that sort; to show how possible it was that an excellent mind
might dwell in a deformed and miserable body. Besides this worthy foundation at
Lincoln, he reedified the Church and Abbey at Stowe, as also the Abbey of
Bardney. By his persuasion king William the conqueror erected the Abbeyes of
Cane in Normandy, and Battle in Sussex upon the very place where he had
overthrown king Harold in battle, and so made a passage unto the conquest of
the whole land. Huntindon reports that he had been accused of treason, but
purged himself thereof by one of his men by walking upon red-hote iron, and so
was not only acquitted, but restored to the kings favor again. The
superstitious and credulous posterity ascribe diverse miracles unto the
holiness of this Bishop, wrought (not in his life time^ but) many years after
his death. This is the report of Malmsbury (beside some other) concerning the
foundation of this Church. And me thinks it were hard but he should know the
truth, being a man that lived in those days. Howbeit I hold it not fit to
conceal, what I find in Matthew. Paris touching the same matter. Where (says
he) before the conquest the Episcopal see that is now at Lincoln being then
at Dorchester; according unto the demerits of the Bishop then governing, not
only he was deprived by the Pope, but the place it self also accursed; of so
memorable an accident: after many years there remained no memorial, and so
the country continued long without either Bishop or Bishopric. At last it
came to pass that Will. Rufus having thrown down many Churches in the new
Forest, and becoming penitent, for the same he determined in recompense
thereof not only to restore that noble Bishopric to his former state, but to
increase the same, and to remove it to a more convenient place. Wherefore
having gotten, either by purchase or exchange, certain land, from a noble man,
one M. Gaunt, that came into England with his Father the Conqueror, and had the
same bestowed upon him for his service; He the said William the second
founded the Cathedral Church, which is now at Lincoln. Which being finished, he
sent for two Cardinals, who brought with them all ample authority from the
Pope, for the ordering of that Church and Bishopric; and calling together
eight Archbishops beside 16. other Bishops, he caused the said Church to be
hallowed with exceeding great solemnity, secular Canons to be placed in the
same and their rents and several portions to be distinguished and set out,
that under their Bishop and Deane they might live in good sort, etc. Thus far
Math. Paris, in his report of the year 1241. Where he records the history
of a great contention between the Bishop and the Chapter concerning
jurisdiction. And this I think indeed was rather an allegation of the Chapter
then the narration of any indifferent writer of former times. And therefore for
mine own part I give no c^edite unto it.

2. Robert Bloett.
1092. Wi. Ruf. 6.
IT happened soon after the death of Remigius, the King (William Rufus) to fall
dangerously sick at Gloucester: And thinking he should die, began seriously to
repent him of his dissolute and vicious life forepassed: Especially, he showed
great grief for his simony and sacrilegious oppression of the Church and
Clergy men. In this good mood he bestowed the Archbishopricke of Cant. (having
kept it void 4. years) upon Saint Anselm; and Lincoln upon Robert Bloet or
Bluet his Chauncellor. When he recovered, he much repented his repentance
wished they were in his hands again, and fell to his old practices as busily
as ever heretofore. This Robert Bloet was a man passing wise, liberal,
affable, courteous and very personable, but unlearned, light of behauior, and
much given to lust. Bale reports he had a son named Simon (base borne no
doubt) whom he made Deane of Lincoln. He dedicated his Church; bestowed very
much in furnishing the same with ornaments requisite. Unto the 21. Prebends
founded by his predecessor he added 21. more, and very largely endued) or as
some deliver, founded) the Abbey of Eynsham besides Oxford, unto the which
monastery he removed the monks of Stow. Again he bestowed the manor of
Charlton upon the monks of Bermondsey, and gave unto the king 500, l. (as
Stubbes says 1000. or as H. Huntingdon has 5000.) to clear the title that
the Archbishop of York laid unto the jurisdiction of his See. He was
consecrate the year 1092. sat almost 30. years, and dich at last suddenly
January 10. 1122. Riding by the kings side talking with him near Woodstocke he
shranke down speechless, and be^ing carried to his lodging, died in a manner
presently. His bowels were buried at Eynsham, his body was con^eighed to
Lincoln, and there in his own Church solemnly in^e^^ed. Upon his tomb was
engraven this Epitaphe: Pontificum Robertus honor, quem fama superstes
Perpetuare dabit, non obiturus obit.
Hic humilis, dives, (res mira) potens, pius vltor,
Compatiens, mitis, cum pateretur, erat.
Noluit esse sui Dominus, studuit pater esse,
Semper in aduersis murus, and arma suis.
In decima Iani, mendacis somnia mundi
Liquit, and euigilans, vera perenne vidit.


3. Alexander.
ROger that famous Bishop of Salisbury, 1123. Hen. 1.25.
was now so great a man with the K. ( Henry the first) as being able to do with
him what he list, he easily entreated him to bestow the Bishopric of Lincoln
upon one Alexander his own brothers son, a Normane borne, whom not long
before he had made Archdeacon of Salisbury, and chief Justice of England. He
was consecrate at Canterbury Iulie 22. 1123. The next year after, his
Cathedral Church so lately built, and yet scarcely finished, was burnt and
horribly desaced by casual fire. He repaired it again, and added unto it a
special ornament, a goodly vault of stone, which before it had not, and
therefore was the more subject unto ^^re. He also increased the number of his
Prebends, and purchased unto his church certain manors and other lands. But
his chief delight was in building of castles, wherein he imitated his uncle
the Bishop of Salisbury. This humor was the undoing of them both. To leave the
other unto his own place, Alexander built a stately castle at Banbury, another
at Newarke, and a third at Sleford. Newbrigensis reports that he also founded
two monasteries, whereof one was Hauerholm for white Canons and Nuns, valued
at the suppression in 88. pound five shillings five pence, the other was S.
Mary's in Tame for white monks, valued at 256. pound, 13 shillings senen pence
half penny, yearly revenue. His Castles were such eye-sores unto king
Stephen, as they provoked him to pick a quarrel otherwise unto the Bishops,
to clappe them up in prison (where the other died) and to bereave them at once
of these munitions and all their treasure, whereof they had hoorded up great
store. They that kept the castle of Newark refused to deliver it at the kings
summons, till such time as the Bishop entreated them to yield, signifying (and
it was true indeed) that the king had sworn he should neither eat nor
drink before he had possession of the castle. Hereupon they set open the
gates unto the king, and then with much adoo having lain by it certain months,
he was at last released of his imprisonment. After that, perceiving the vanity
of his former course, he gave himself wholly to building and advancing the
state of his Church, performed that which before I have expressed, and so made
it simply the most beautiful Church of England at that time. He was twice at
Rome, to wit, the years 1142. and 1144. where he behaved himself so, as he
pleased both the king and the Pope very well. The first time he was there, the
Pope gave him authority to call a convocation as his Legate, and especially
commended unto him the redress of certain enormities; for the effecting
whereof he caused diverse canons to be made thought very necessary for those
times. A 3. journey he made unto the Pope, lying then in France, in the month
of August 11.17. where, through immoderate heat of the weather during the time
of his travel he fell sick, and with much adoo getting home, not long after
his return died, having sat Bishop about the space of 24. years. I find in
Henry Huntingdon certain verses written in commendation of him which I think
not amiss here to be inserted: Splendour Alexandri non tam renitescit honor
Quam per cum renitescit honor^ flos namque virorum,
Dando tenere putans, the sauros cogit honoris,
Et gratis dare festinans, ne danda rogentur,
Quod nondum dederit, nondum se credit habere.
O decus, o morum directio; quo veniente,
Certa fides, hilaris clementia, cauta potestas,
Lene iugum, doctrina plac^^s, correctio dulcis,
Libertasque decens venere, pudorque facetus.
Lincoliae gens magna prius, nunc maxima semper;
Talis and ^^le diu sit nobis tutor honoris.
The said Henry dedicateth unto him his history, in the preface whereof he
calls him Florem and cacumen regni and gentis and further uses these words,
Tuque pater patriae, princeps a Rege secundus
Praesul Alexander, etc.
For all this by the same author he is taxed not only for his prodigality in
wasting and spending; but much more for his avarice in extorting from his
underlings, wherewithal to supply his wants.

4. Robert de Chisney.
AFter Alexander succeeded Robert Archd. of Leycester, 1^74 Steph. 13.
a very young man, surnamed by some de Querceto, by others de Chesueto, which is
al one, ye one being drawn from ye French and the other Latin; both
signifying a grove of oaks. He was consecrate in September 1147. and died
January 8 1167. This man added one Prebend unto those that were founded by his
predecessors, purchased a house for himself, and his successors near unto the
temple at London, and built the Bishops palace at Lincoln in a manner all. It
is said also that he founded the Priory of S. Catherines near Lincoln for
Gilbertines, valued at the suppression in 270. pound one shilling three pence,
yearly revenues. He left his See indebted unto one Aaron a Jew the sum of
300. pound, (a great deal of money in those days) and his successors were
feign to see it discharged long after.

5. Walter de Constantijs.
1183. Hen. 2.30.
The Sea of Lincoln continued then void after the death of the said Robert
almost seventeen years; in so much as all men were of opinion there should
never be any more Bishop there. A certain convert of Tame reputed a very holy
man, and half a Prophet in regard of many things he had strangely foretold,
this man I say had given out, that the said Robert lately deceased should be
the last Bishop of Lincoln. This prediction of his many men de^ided, when not
long after the death of the Bishop before mentioned, they saw Geoffry king
Henry the second his base son and Archdeacon of Lincoln, elected unto that
See But he contenting himself with the large revenues of that rich
Bishopric, never sought consecration, well knowing he might so sheare the
fleece, though he listed not to take the charge of feeding the sheep. Seven
years he reaped the fruits of that See by color of his election; and then by
his fathers commandment r^signed all his in rest in the same, became an entire
courtier for eight years more, and at last returning to the church again,
became Archbishop of York About the latter end of of the year 1183. when all
men now assured themselves the Prophecy of that convert of Tame must needs fall
out true, Walter de Constantijs Archdeacon of Oxford, was elect and con^ecrate
Bishop of Lincoln, by the Archbishop of Canterbury at Anton. ^e was very
fearful to accept of the election, thinking assuredly he might not live to be
Bishop, in regard of that vain and false Prophecy before mentioned^ Being yet
scarce warm in his seat, the Archbishopricke of Roan was offered unto him, a
place of much higher dignity, but of less Revenues then Lincoln a great deal.
See the power and force of ambition, that could provoke this man, notably
covetous, to forsake riches, and content himself with a place of far less
wealth, but a little more honorable. He was translated to Rean the next year
after his coming to Lincoln, viz. 1184.

6. Saint Hugh.
TWo years after the departure of Walter to Roan, 1186. Hen, 2.34.
the Sea of Lincoln continued void. Upon Saint Matthewes day 1186. one Hugh
the first Prior of the Charterhouse monks at Witteham in Sommersetshire was
consecrate Bishop of the said Church. This Hugh (who by his integrity of life
and conversation, and the opinion of diverse miracles wrought by him, has
purchased unto himself the honor and reputation of a Saint) was borne in a
City of Burgundy, called Gratianopolis. By the advice and direction of his
Father, (who having buried his wife, had made himself a regular Cannon) he
also entered the same profession being yet very young: But waxing elder, he be
took himself afterward unto the straight and severe orders of the Carthusians
or Charterhouse monks (as we commonly call them.) In that kind of life he not
only observed al things requisite by the rule of their order, but so far
surmounted the same in performing much more then it required, as he grew very
famou^ far and near for his extraordinary abstinence and austerity of life.
It chanced the report thereof to come unto the ears of king Henry the second:
who building a house for Carthu^^an monks at Witteham above mentioned, thought
good to send Reginald Bishop of Baths into Burgundy, to entreat this holy man,
to accept the place of the Prior of this new foundation. With much adoo he
assented, and came over with the Bishop. The king (who for the opinion he had
of his holiness, used often privately to confer with him) remembering how
great wrong he had done the Church of Lincoln in so long keeping it without a
Bishop, determined to make amends by giving them a good one at last, and
procured this Hugh before he understood of any such thing toward, to be elected
Bishop of that See. He governed very stoutly and with great severity, yet so,
as he was more reverenced and loved then feared. His excommunications were
very terrible unto all men, and the rather, for that it was noted (as I find
delivered) some notable calamity otherwise did lightly follow them. His Church
of Lincoln he caused to be all now built from the foundation, a great and
memorable work, and not possible to be performed by him without infinite
help. Moreover, he gave v^^o the King 1000. marks, to acquit him and his
successors, from the yearly payment of a Mantell of Sables, wherewith by an
ancient custom they were wont every new yeares-tide to present him. The year
1200. he would needs make a voyage to Carthusia the chief and original house
of their order. In his return home, he fell sick of a quartane ague at London
and there died, November. 17. 1200. His body was presently conueighed to
Lincoln, and happened to be brought thither, at a time, when king John of
England and William king of Scots were met there, with an infinite number of
the nobility of both realms. The two kings, for the great reverence they bare
unto his holiness, would needs set their shoulders unto the beer, and helped
to carry his coarse from the gates of the City, until it came to the Church
door: There it was received by the Prelates, carried into the quire and the
funeral rites being ended, buried in the body of the East part of the Church
above the high Altar; near the altar of Saint John Baptist. The year 1220.
he was Canonised at Rome, and his body being taken up, October 7. 1282. was
placed in a silver shrine. Who so lists to read the miracles that are
ascribed unto him, may find them in Matthew. Paris that describes his life at
large in his report of the year 1200. Amongst many things omitted for breuity,
I can not let pass one which I find elsewhere delivered concerning him, how
that coming to God stow a house of Nuns near Oxford, and seeing a hearse in
the middle of the quire covered with silk, and tapers burning round about it,
he asked who was buried there. Understanding then, it was that fair Rosamond
the Concubine of K. Henry the second, who at her entreaty had done much for
that house, and in regard of those favors was affoorded that honor; He
commanded her body to be dug up immediately, and buried in the Churchyard;
saying, it was a place a great deal too good for a harlot, and it should be
an example to other women to terrify them from such a wicked and filthy kind
of life.

7 William de Bleys.
WIlliam de Bleys Chaunter and Canon of the Church of Lincoln, 1203 John 5.
was elected Bishop of the same Church, the year 1201. but not consecrate
til Bartholomew day, 1203. He died upon ascension even, 1206.

8 Hugh Wallys.
HVgh Archdeacon of Wels, 1209 John 11.
and sometimes Chancellor of England, succeeded the year 1209. at what time
king John refusing to receive Stephen Langton for Archbishop of Canterbury,
(whereof see more in Canterbury) commanded this the elect of Lincoln to
repair unto the Archbishop of Roan for consecration. Notwithstanding this
commandment of the King, he got unto Stephen Langton, and of him was
consecrate. The king hearing of it, seized upon his temporalties, and kept him
fasting from them, till the year 1213. at what time he was restored unto them.
Afterward notwithstanding, the Pope and the king being reconciled, he
clea^ing first unto the Barons part, and after unto Lewis of France (that came
to conquer the realm) was for his disloyalty unto his natural Prince, worthily
excommunicate, and might not be absolved, before he had paid unto the Pope
1000. Marks, and to his Legate 100. For all these hindrances, he and Ioceline
Bishop of Wels, laying their purses together, built a goodly Hospital at Wels.
See more thereof in the life of the said Ioceline. Moreover he erected a
Chantry in his Church of Lincoln. I have seen a copy of a will made by him,
1211. in which, beside many great legacies to his friends and kindred, he
bequeathed to good uses above 5000. marks. He lived long after, to wit, until
February 7. 1234. Dying then, he was buried in his own Church:

Robert Grosse-teste.
1235. Hen. 3.20.
June 11. following, to wit, the year 1235. Robert de Grosse-test or Grosthead
Archdeacon of Leycester, was consecrate Bishop of Lincoln. A man famous for
his excellent learning and virtues otherwise. He was borne in Suffolk, of very
mean, or rather base parentage, and had his education for a season in the
Uniuersity of Oxford, until such time as (according unto the manner of all
students in those times) he traveled into France, partly to increase his
knowledge in other learning, but especially to attain the French tongue, which
was then almost as common here as the English. At his return he was made
Archdeacon of Leycester, and afterward (as before is mentioned) Bishop of
Lincoln. In his time, the tyranny of the Pope was now grown to the full
height and ripenes. What for appeals unto Rome and bribes at Rome, no
jurisdiction here could punish any fault never so heinous. No benefice or other
preferment was likely to fall, but the Popes reservation would take it up before
hand, and bestow it at last upon some stranger (happily a child) that would
never come near it all his life long. The year 1252. notice being taken of
this matter, the spiritual promotions of strangers within this Realm were
found to amount unto the sum of 70000. marks by the year, whereas the kings
yearly revenues at that time came not to the third part of that sum. At
these and other intolerable abuses, he repining very much, thought good in
person to go to Rome, and acquaint the Pope with his grieves. He did so, was
heard, and with fair promises dismissed. But when at his return he found no
manner of redress of those things he complained of, he feared not to write unto
the Pope a very sharp and Satirical letter, showing how far he had degenerated
from the holiness of his predecessors, and exhorting him earnestly to reform
the monstrous enormities that flying from Rome, as from a corrupt and poisoned
fountain infected the whole Church. This Epistle (if any man desire to see it)
is to be found in Matthew. Paris. The Pope having read it, grew into great
choler, and breathing out many threats, intended some terrible revenge of this
so intolerable a reproach (as he took it) until such time as, one Gyles a
Cardinal of Spain stepping unto him, used these words; Holy father, it s^all
not do well (in my opinion) to take any hard or extreme course against this
man. It is but too true that he has written. He is for religion a Catholic as
well as we, but for life and conversation so far before us, as it is thought
Christendom has not his like. Again, ^e is known to be a great learned
man, an excellent Philosopher, well seen in the Greek tongue as well as the
Latin, a profound Divine, and a diligent preacher: These things are well known
to all the Clergy, both of France and England; We have no just matter against
him we are not able to touch him, yea though we were, it were not wisdom. We
shall do well to remember, how certain it is, quod scitur, quia aliquando
Discessio est ventura, that there shall one day be a departure, and let us
take heed that we give not the occasion. My advice therefore is, that we be
content to wink at this matter, and even let him alone. Some say his counsel
was followed, and the matter passed over in silence. Howbeit it is also
reported (and both may be true) that afterward (upon some new quarrel
peradventure) he was suspended at Rome, excommunicate, and horribly persecuted.
Nay Bale affirms, that he was deprived by the said Pope, and another
appointed to his Bishopric to wit, one Albertus sometimes Archbishop of
Prussia, that had been driven out of Liuonia by the people of the country.
Howsoever, certain it is, that he would never be induced to obey any of
these monstrous and unreasonable bulls: Of which, discoursing sometimes with
his familiars, he would very confidently avouch, that the Pope was an
Heretic, yea and Antichrist. So Matthew Paris delivers. Notwithstanding
these broiles, he was a continual and diligent Preacher, writ books to the
number of almost 200. (the Catalogue whereof you may find in Bale) and yet
took infinite pains in attending matters of government and jurisdiction, so
far forth as by the Pope he was not hindered. He died at last at his manor
of Buckden, October 9. 1253. giving all his books (an excellent Library) unto
the Friar Minors at Oxford. He lies buried in the highest South Isle of his
Cathedral Church, and has a goodly toombe of marble, with an image of brass
upon it. The Pope not ceasing to persecute him after his death, was once of the
mind to dig up his body again, until by the persuasion of some other his
mind was altered. B^t see the just i^dgement of God upon this wicked Pope (it
was Innocent 4.) Lying at Naples in his way toward S^^il (the kingdom whereof
in hope he had now devoured) this bishop appeared unto him in the night, and
struck him a great blow upon the left side, which showed all blou^y in the
morning; and soon after the Pope died. This Bale reports out of Ranulfus,
Fabian, and others. Matthew Paris ascribes diverse miracles unto him, and
doubts not to account him a Saint, although the Pope ought him not so much
good will as to affoorde him Canonization. Doubtless he was an excellent man,
and deserves the commendation given unto him by the consent of all writers.
Not to trouble my self with any longer discourse concerning him, I will set
down this brief Elogium of Matthew Paris: He was (says he) Domini Papae and
Regis redargutor manifestus, Pralatorum correptor, Monachorum corrector,
Presbyterorum director, Clericorum instructor, Scolarium sustentator, Populi
predicator, incontinentium persecutor, scripturarum sedulus perserutator,
Romanorum malleus and contemptor. In mensa refectionis corporalis dapsilis,
copiosus and ciuilis, hilaris and affabili^: In me^savero spiritual^ den^tus,
lachrymosus and contritus: In officio Pont^^icali sedul^s, venerabilis, and
infatigabilis. In regard of these great and manifold virtues, the common people
of England held him for a Saint after his death: yea, the Uniuersity of Oxford
(as Th. Gascoigne reports) writ their letters unto Clem. the 4. for his
Canonization; and in illa la^ra testatur (says he) quod propt^r magna and
plura mira^ula, and propter ^manation^m (...) ^^mbo, Sanc^us Robertus in Anglia
dicebatur. He founded (as I find delivered) the Nunry at Gr^msby, valued at
the suppression in 12. pound, 3. shillings, seven pence, yearly revenue. Much
more you may read of him in Master Fox^.

10 Henry Lexinton.
THe King now was very earnest with the Chapter of Lincoln, 1254. Henr. 3.39.
to elect Peter d' Egueblank B. of Hereforde unto their See. They alleged he
was a stranger, understood not the English tongue, and was moreover an evil man,
not governing well the charge already committed unto him. In regard hereof they
humbly besought the king to hold them excused, and made choice of Henry
Lexinton their Dean. He was chosen December. 30. 1253. consecrate May 17.
following, died Aug. 8 1258. and was buried at Lincoln in his own church. The
year before his death he offered some kind of hard measure unto the Uniuersity
of Oxford, by infringing certain liberties that of old belonged unto it.
Fo^redresse hereof, they were forced to make their complaint unto the King,
lying then at S. Alb^ns, and sent nine Masters of Art to the court for that
purpose. Matthew. Paris a Monk of S. Alb^ns, was present at the delivery of
their petition, and (as himself writes) was bold to step unto the king, using
these sp^eches unto him in private. I beseech your Grace even for Gods sake, to
have compassion upon the Church, now tottering, and in great danger of utter
subversion. The Uniuersity of Paris, the nurse of so many excellent and famous
Prelates at this time present, is greatly troubled. If the Uniuersity of Oxford
be disquieted and molested also (especially at this time) being the second
Uniuersity of Christendom, and even an other foundation of the church; it is
much to be feared, least it cause a general confus^on and utter ruin of the
whole Church. God forbid said the King that that should happen, especially in
my time; I will endeavor to prevent it. I doubt not he was as good as his
word: For I find no more mention of any farther ^tirs. This I have thought good
the rather to set down to show, what was the reputation of our Uniuersity of
Oxford in those days. This man (as M. Camden has noted) brought the way that
before time was beneath Tame, through the very middle of the town; which since
that time has much the more ^lourished.

11 Benedictus Grauesend.
1258. Hen. 3.46.
ANother Deane of Lincoln succeeded him, Benedictu^ Grauesend, whom I find
called also Richard Grauesend. He was consecrate the third of November, 1258.
and died December 18. 1279.

12 Oliver Sutton.
1280. Edw. 1.9.
Oliver Sutton (as Walsingham says) was likewise Deane of Lincoln, a very
good and virtuous man. He was elected Bishop, February 6. consecrate May, 18.
1280. died in the middle of a devout and fervent prayer. November 13. 1299. and
lies buried in the North Isle of the upper part of his Church, under a flat
Marble stone near the toombe of Bishop Flemming.

13 John d' Aldarby.
1300. Edw. 1.29.
John d'alderby, or D'aderly, Chancellor of Lincoln succeeded the next year,
and died at Stow Park, January, 5. 1319. He was buried at Lincoln in the
lower south cross Isle. But his toombe was taken away for that it was
superstitiously frequented by the common people.

14 Thomas Beak.
1319. Edw. 2.13.
January 27. following, the Chapter of Lincoln made choice of one Thomas Beak
Chancellor of Lincoln, for their Bishop, who also was brother unto Anthony
Beak late B. of Durham, and Patriarch of Jerusalem. The Archbishop of
Canterbury, upon what quarrel I know not rejected the election so made: but at
Rome (where all things were to be had for money) he got it confirmed. This man
(as one reporte^h procured Hugh his predecessor to be canonized a Saint at
Rome. The year, 1278. one Thomas Beak Archdeacon of Dorchester was Lord
Treasurer of England. It may be he was the man. And it should seem he was very
old; for he sat but a very short time; which I take to be the cause that some
men make Burwash next successor to D' Alderby. He lies buried (as it seems
by a note that I have seen) in the highest cross North Isle.

15 Henry Burwash.
HEnry Burvvash an Oxford man, and nephew unto Sir Bartholomew Bad^^smer Baron
of Leedes, 1320. Edw. 2.14.
a man of great estimation in the days of K. Edw. the 2. The king by his
means dealt earnestly for the preferment of the said Henry unto the Sea of
Lincoln, which he obtained and was enthronized there about Christmas 1320.
within a year or two after he fell into the kings displeasure so far, as that
his temporalties were s^^sed upon and detained from him the space of two
years. The year 1224. they were restored unto him again, and he unto the
kings favor; but the grudge thereof stuck so in his stomach, as the Queen
rising against her husband, seeking to depose him (as afterward she did) a.
1326 no man was so forward to take her part as this Bishop, no man so eager
against the king his undoubted, true and natural Prince. He was also a very
covetous and miserable man (as Walsingham reports) Toward the latter end of
his time, he made a new park at Tynghurst, and enclosed within the same much
ground that belonged to diverse poor men his tena^ts, for the which he had many
a bitter curse of them. After his death it is said he appeared unto one that
had been one of his Gentlemen, in the likeness of a keeper, with bow and arrows
in his hand, a horn by his side, and a green ierkin on his back, telling him,
that for the injurious enclosure of that park, he was appointed to the
keeping of the same, and to be tormented there, till it were disparked and laid
open again. He therefore also besought him to entreat his brethren the Canons
of Lincoln, that the wrong done by him, by their good means might be righted.
They were so wise as to give credit unto this report, and sent one of their
company named William Bacheler to see it performed. He did so, hurled abroad
the pale, filled up the ditches, and caused the poor tenants to be restored
unto their right again. This Bishop died at Gaunt in the end of December,
1340. having been successively Treasurer and Chancellor of England, and was
buried in the East end of his Cathedral Church toward the North. At his ^eete
lies a brother of his named Robert, a Knight, a great Soldier, and a son of
the said Robert called Bartholomew. They founded a Grammar school in Lincoln,
and left maintenance for five Priests and five poor Scholars.

16 Thomas le Beck.
1341 Edw. 3.16.
AFter Henry Burvvash, it is said that another Thomas Beak succeeded called by
some Thomas le B^cke, and by others Thomas Weke, a famous and worthy Cle^ke
(as Walsingham reports.) He lies buried in the lower cross Isle. When he
died, or what time he sat I find not.

17 John Synvvell.
1351 Edw. 3.21.
John Synvvell Archdeacon of Northampton, and sometimes a Student in Oxford
succeeded, being confirmed, July 3. The year 1351. a great controversy fell
out between him and the Uniuersity of Oxford, about the election of their
Chancellor. The discourse whereof you may see page 9^. This only I think good
to note, that whereas some Whiters report this controversy to have fallen out
in the time of Bishop Buckingham, it must needs be they are mistaken, for
that this Io. Synvvell died at Lidington, Aug. 5. 1362. and not before This man
(if I mistake not) built a great Chapel of Saint Mary Magdalene without the
north wall of the Cathedral Church, and lies buried in the West part or body
of the said Church.

18 John Bokingham.
John Bokingham keeper of the Privy Seal, 1363. Edw. 3.38.
by the help of his purse, and the kings instant request, with much adoo
shouldred into the Bishopric of Lincoln the year, 1363. He is accounted of
some very unlearned, and peradventure he was so. Howbeit certain it is, that
one John Bokingham lived about those times a Doctor of Divinity of Oxford, a
great learned man in Scholastical Divinity, as di^ers works of his yet extant
may testify: and for my part I think this Bishop to be the man. The year,
1397. the Pope bearing him some grudge, translated him perforce from Lincoln
unto Lichfield, a Bishopric not half so good. For cursed heart he would not
take it, but as though he had rather have no bread then half a loaf, forsook
both and became a Monk at Canterbury. He was one of the first founders of the
Bridge at Rochester.

19 Henry Beaufort.
HEnry Beaufort became Bishop of Lincoln in his place. 1397. Ric. 2.22.
This man was brother unto K Henry the 4. and is best known by the name of the
rich Cardinal. He sat here seven years (being in the mean space for one
year Chancellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, to wit. ann. 1399.) and the
year 1404. was translated to Winchester. See more of him in Winchester.

20 Philip Repingdon.
PHilip Repingdon Doctor of Divinity, 1405. Hen. 4.7.
Abbot of Leicester an Oxford man, and the year 1400. Chancellor of that
Uniuersity, was consecrate at Canterbury, Mart. 29. 1405. A man of great
learning, and namely a good Poet. Alluding unto the name of Neckam, he made
these v^rs^s, ^t niger and nequam, cum sis cognomine Neckam,
Nigrior esse potes^ nequior esse nequis.
But the other repayed him with this reallusion, Phi nota foeto^is, lippus
malus omnibus horis,
Phi malus and lippus, totus malus ^rgo Philippus.
He was sometimes a great follower of Wickliffe, and dafender of his doctrine;
not only by speech in preaching^ and open disputation in the Uniuersity, but
by writing also, to which purpose diverse of his books yet remain to be seen.
Afterward, whether it were that time altered his judgment, or that he was
overcome either with fear of trouble, or hope of advancement; he was content
to recant his opinions at Paul's Cross. That done, the Clergy glad of gaining
such a man unto their party (for he was greatly reputed of for his learning)
heaped upon him all manner of preferment. Being now Bishop of Lincoln, the
year 1408. he was made Cardinal of Saint Nereus and Achilleus. He continued
in that See 15. years, and in the end resigned it, May 12. 1420. He lies
buried under a flat stone near Bishopp^ Grosthead.

21. Richard Flemming.
1420 Hen. 5.9.
RIchard Flemming Doctor of Divinity, and Canon of Lincoln, had the
spiritual jurisdiction of Lincoln committed to him (having been first
appointed Bishop by the Pope,) May 24. 1420. The year 1424. he was
translated by the Pope to York, but was forced back to Lincoln again by the
King. Whereof see more in York. For two things he is famous: one, that he
caused the bones of Wickliffe to be taken up and burnt the year 1425. being
required by the counsel of Sena so to do; and the other, that he founded
Lincoln College in Oxford 1430. what time he died I find not. He was buried
where we see a high toombe in the North Isle, in the upper part of the Church,
in the wall, in which place also Robert Flemming his kinsman Deane of Lincoln,
lies buried hard beside him. They were both great learned men, brought up in
Oxford, both Doctors of Divinity, and writ diverse learned works.

22 William Gray.
MAy 26. 1426. William Gray was consecrate Bishope of London. 1431. Hen. 6.10.
Thence he was translated to Lincoln the year 1431. and lived there about the
space of four years. He founded a College at Theale in Hartfordshire for a
Master and four Canons; and made it a C^ll to Elsing Spittle in London. He
had his education in Baylioli College at Oxford, of which Uniuersity he was
sometimes Chancellor:

23 William Alnewike.
THe year 1426. William Alnwike Doctor of Law, 1439 Hen. 6.18.
was consecrate Bishop of Norwich. He built there a great Window, and a
goodly fair gate at the West end of the Church. The year 1436. he was
removed unto Lincoln. He died in December, 1449. and was buried in the body or
west end of his church. This Bishop was confessor to that deriuous king Henry
the sixth.

24 Marmaduke Lumley.
MArmaduke Lumley Bishop of Carlioll succeeded him in that See. 1450 Hen.
6.29.
He was sometimes Treasurer of England, consecrate unto Carlioll, 1430. sat
there twenty year, was translated hither 1450. and having continued here
scarsely one year, died at London. Toward the building of Queens College in
Cambridge (of which Uniuersity he was sometimes Chancellor) he gave 200. l.
and bestowed upon the Library of their College a great many good books.

25 John Chadworth.
John Chadworth borne in Glocestershire, and brought up for a time in Merton
College in Oxford, 1452. Hen. 6.31.
was chosen fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, the second election of that
foundation, and was the second Provost of the same, being admitted unto that
place upon the displacing of William Millington, November, 5. 1446. There he
continued until his preferment to Lincoln, which was 1452. The year 1454.
he was joined in Commission with the Bishop of Winchester ( Wainflet) for
re^orming the statutes of both the Colleges built by K. Henry the sixth at
Eaton and Cambridge. He lies buried under a flat stone by Bishop Sutton,
near the Toombe of Bishop Flemming, and was Bishop (as I gather) about an 18.
years.

26 Thomas Rotheram.
1471. Edw. 4.12.
THomas Scot, alias Rotheram Bishop of Rochester, was removed to Lincoln,
anno 1471. and thence to York nine years after. In the mean time, to wit,
the 14. of Edward the fourth, he was made Lord Chancellor of England, and so
continued during all the time of his reign. He was then also Chancellor of
the Uniuersity of Cambridge.

27. John Russell.
1480 Edw. 4.21.
IN the Sea of Lincoln John Russell Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon of
Barkeshire succeeded him, a wise man, and a good (says Sir Thomas Moore) and
of much experience, and one of the best learned men undoubtedly that England
had in his time, as also Chancellor of the Uniuersity o^ Oxford many yoeres,
being the first perpetual Chancellor, for that till that time the office was
wont to be annual. A while he was Chancellor of England by the appointment
of Richard Duke of Gloucester, that afterward usurped the Crown. He died at his
Manor of Nettleham, Ian. 30. 1490. and was laid in a reasonable fair toombe
in a Chapel cast out of the upper wall of the South part of the Church.

28 Willam Smith.
THe year 1492. William Smith sometimes fellow of Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge,
1495. Hen. 7.11
was consecrate Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. He ordained there (I mean
at Lichfield) an Hospital for a Master, two Priests, and ten poor men. He
also founded a free School there for the education of poor men's children, and
found means that king Henry the seventh bestowed upon it an Hospital called
Donhall in Ch^shire, with the lands belonging to it. At Farm^worth where he was
borne, he bestowed ten pound land for the maintenance of a Schoolmaster there.
Lastly he became founder of a goodly College (the College of Brasennose in
Oxford, of which Uniuersity for five years he was Chancellor) anno 1513. but
lived not to finish it in such sort as he intended. Having sat but only four
years at Lichfield, he was translated to Lincoln, an. 1495. and died the
year before mentioned 1513. about Christmas. He lies buried in the west part
or body of the church. This Bishop was the first President of Wales, and
governed that Country from the 17. year of K. Henry the 7. until the 4. year
of K. Henry the 8. at what time he died.

29 Thomas Woolsey.
A Uery little while, 1514. Hen. 8.6.
scarsely one whole year, Cardinal Woolsey (not yet Cardinal) was Bishop of
Lincoln. He was cons. March 26. 1514. and removed to York about the end of
the same year. See more of him in York.

30. William Atwater.
WIlliam Atwater that the year 1496. and diverse other years following had
been Uicechancellour, 1514. Hen. 8.6.
or rather (as then the fearme was) Commissary of the Uniuersity of Oxford, was
consecrate to Lincoln, Nouemb. 12. 1514. sat about 5. years, dyed in the
beginning of Feb. 1520. and lies buried i^ the West end of Lincoln Minster.

31 John Longland.
1521 Hen. 8.13.
John Longland Doctor of Divinity, an Oxford man, of Magdalene College there,
and Confessor unto King Henry the eight, upon the death of William Atwater was
advanced unto the Bishopric of Lincoln, whereunto he was consecrate, May 5.
1521. and enjoyed the same a long time, being almost all that while Chancellor
of the Uniuersity of Oxford. He died the year 1547. and is buried near unto
Bishop Russell in a toombe very like unto his.

32 Henry Holbech.
1547. Edw. 6.1.
HEnry Holbech a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, was first consecrate
Suffragan of Bristoll, made Bishop of Ruchester the year 1544. translated to
Lincoln, 1547. and continuing there almost 5. years, died in the beginning of
August, 1551.

33 John Tailor.
John Tailor Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Saint John's College in
Cambridge, 1552
was consecrate June, 26. 1552. and refusing to be present at a Mass, in the
beginning of the Parliament the first year of Queen Mary, was like to have
been greatly troubled, but that soon after he fell sick and died at Ankerwike.

34 John White.
John White Doctor also of Divinity, 1533 Edw. 6.6.
and brought up in New College at Oxford was appo^nted Bishop of Lincoln by
Queen Mary. The year 1557. He was removed to Winchester. See more of him
there.

35 Thomas Watson.
Upon the remove of Doctor White, 1557. Mary 5.
the Bishopric of Lincoln was bestowed upon Thomas Watson Doctor of
Divinity, sometimes Deane of Durham, and Master of Saint John's College in
Cambridge, a very austore or rather a sour and churlish man. He was
consecrate Aug. 15. 1557. and being but scarce warm in his seat, when Queen
Mary died, he was feign to leave the same, because he would not conform
himself unto reformation and religion established by Queen Elizabeth. Many
years after he lived a private life, first in the houses of the Bishops of Ely
and Rochester, but after (upon suspicion of practizing) committed a prisoner to
the Isle of Ely, where (as I take it) he died about the year 1584.

36. Nicholas Bullingham.
NIcholas Bullingham Doctor of Law in Cambridge, but brought up in All-Soules
College at Oxford, 1559. Eliz. 2.
was consecrate Bishop of Lincoln, January 21. 1559. He sat there 11 yeeres^
and was translated to Worcester; January, 26. 1570. See more of him in
Worcester.

37. Thomas Cooper.
THomas Cooper Doctor of Divinity, 1570. Eliz. 13^
and Deane of Christchurch in Oxford (but fellow sometimes of Magdalen
College) was consecrate Feb. 24. 1570. The year 1584. he was translated to
Winchester. See more of him there.

38 William Wickham.
WIlliam Wickham succeeded Bishop Cooper immediately both in Lincoln and
Winchester. 1584 Eliz. 27.
He was consecrate Dec. 6. 1584. and translated in the end of March, 1594. See
more of him in Winchester.

39 William Chaderton.
1594. Eliz, 22.
WIlliam Chaderton Doctor of Divinity, first fellow of Christ's college in
Cambridge, and after Master of Queens College there, was consecrate Bishop
of West Choster, Nou. 9. 1579. contin^ed there 15. years, and in the beginning
of the year 1594. was removed to Lincoln. He deceased about the beginning of
April, 1608.

40 William Barlow.
1608. Iac. 6.
WIlliam Barlow, sometimes fellow of Trinity Hall in Cambridge, was translated
hither from Rochester June 27. 1608. and died somewhat suddenly, Sepemb. 7.
1613.

41 Rich: Neile.
RIchard Neile Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, was translated hither. 1613.

The Bishopric of Lincoln is valued in the Kings books at 894. pound, 18.
shillings, 1. penny ob. and paid to the Pope for first fruits 5000, ducates.

THE BISHOPS OF Couentry and Litchfield.
1. Dwyna.
OSwy King of Mercia or Mid-England erected an Episcopal See at Litchfield the
year 656. 656
and ordained one Diuma or Dwyna a Scot Bishop there. He sat two years, and
dyed at Fepping.

2. Cellach.
CEllach was the second Bishop of Lichfield. He was a Scot (as also his
predecessor was.) After a few years, giving over his Bishopric, he returned
into his own country.

3. Trumhere.
TRumhere was an Englishman borne, 659
but brought up, taught and ordered among the Scots. He had been Abbot of
Ingethling a monastery not far from Richmund built in the place where King
Oswin was slain, unto whom this Trumhere was near of kin.

4. Iaruman.
664.
HE converted the East Saxons unto christianity again, having forsaken it under
Sighere their king. In his time to wit, the year ^66. the Cathedral Church of
Lichfield was first founded.

5. Cedda.
669.
THe year 666. Cedda was consecrate Archbishop of York, in the absence of
Wilfride. But Wilfride returning, he gave place, and living a while a
^^o^asticall life at Lestingeag, accepted at last the Bishopric of Lichfield
under Wulshere king of Mer^i^ ann. 669. He seems to have been a godly and
very deuou^ man, as ye may read in Beda his Eccl. hist. lib. 4 cap. 3. where
his li^e and death are at large reported. He died March 2. 67^. having fate
there two years and a half, and was bu^ied at Litchfield.

6. Winfride.
672.
WInfride a Chaplain of Ceaddaes was then ordained Bishop of Litchfield, a man
virtuous and modest (as Beda witnesses.) Yet it is said that Theodore the
Archbishop of Canterbury, deprived him for I know not what disobedience the
year 674. He returned unto Eatbarne a Monastery built by Cedda, under whom
he had lived in the same heretofore, and there lead a very holy life many
years after.

7. Saxulf.
676.
WInfride being displaced, it was thought good his Dioces should be divided
into two parts: One was allotted unto Saxulf who continued his See at Lichfield
still; the other was committed unto Eadhead. He and his successors (of whom you
may see a Catalogue Fol. 228. sat at Sidnacester. This Saxulf was the first
Abbot of Medmeshampstead now called Peterborough, and persuaded Wolfer K. of
Mercia to the foundation of that monastery. He died (says Matthew. Westminster) the
year 705.

8. Headda, al: Eathedus.
AFter Saxulf the Dioces was once more divided, 692.
and a Bishop placed at Leicester. His name was Wilfride. But he being drouen
away thence after a short space, Headda that before was Bishop of Lichfield,
recovered the Jurisdiction again, and governed the same in sort as his
predecessor had done. He died 721.

9. Aldwyn.
AFter Headda succeeded Aldwyn, 721.
(otherwise called Worcester) that lived in the time of Beda. He died the year 737.

10. Witta.
THe Country of Mercia was then again divided and made three Bishoprics. 737.
One was continued at Lichfield, another was appointed to fit at Leycester (as
is before mentioned) and the third at Dorchester. Lichfield was given to
Whitta, Leicester to Tota, and Dorchester to Eadhead. See more of them in
Lincoln. Whitta and Tota were present at the Council of Clyff: a. 747.

After Witta succeeded these.
11. Hemel. He died ann. 764. 12. Cuthfrid. Berthun. 764.
He died 785. Higbertus. Sig. M. West. 14. Aldulf.
Offa King of Mercia procured the Pope to make this Aldulf an Archbishop and
gave him authority over the Sees of Winchester, Hereford, Legecester,
Sidnacester, Hel^^ham, and Dunwich. He lived ann. 793. Iun.

15. Humbert.
795.
Matthew. Westminster. says this man died the year 795. and calls him Archbishop of
Lichfield, as he does also Higbert his successor. Howbeit I am out of doubt
that Aldulf as he was the first, so he was the last Archbishop that ever sat
there.

16. Herewin. He lived ann. 833. as appears by a Charter in Iugulfus
confirmed by him. Page 488. 17. Higbert. 18. Ethelwold. He died 858. 858.
19. Humberhtus. He died 864. 864.
20. Kenferth or rather Kinebert. He died 872. 872.
21. Cumbert, 22. T^nbriht or Burnfrith. He died 928.
By the way now it shall not be amiss to remember that Florentius Wigorn:
(from whom William of Malmsb. very little dissenteth) reports this order of
succession, as near as I can gather.

13. Berthun. 14. Higbert. 15. Aldulf. 16. Herewyn. 17. Ethelwald. 18.
Hunberht. 19. Cineferth. 20. Tunbright.
That wherein I differ from them, I find in Matthew. Westminster, whom I follow
the rather, for that he sets down not their bare names, but their times of
consecration now and then, yea and their death also.

After Tunbright without all controversy succeeded,
928.
23 Ella. 24 Al^gar. 25 Kinsy. He lived ann. 966. and 948. 26 Winsy. 27. Elseth
or Ealscage. 28. Godwyn. 29. Leosgar. 30. Brithmar. He died 1039. 31. Wlsius.
He died 1054. 1039
32. Leofwyn, Abbot of Couentry. 1054

33. Peter.
THis man forsaking Lichfield, 1067 W. Con. 1.
removed his Episcopal See to Chester the year 1075. He was consecrate 1067.
died the year 1086. and was buried at Chester.

34. Robert de Limesey.
HE was consecrate the year 1088. translated his See from Chester to Couentry
1095. died September 1. 1116. and was buried at Couentry. 1088 Wi. Ruf. 2.


35. Robert Peche, alias Peccam.
RObert, 1117 Hen. 1.18.
surnamed Peccatum or Peche, and sometimes Peccam, Chaplain unto king Henry
the first, was consecrate 1117. died August 22. 1127. and was buried at
Couentry.

36. Roger de Clinton.
THe King then bestowed this Bishopric upon Roger de Clinton that was
Archdeacon of Buckingham and was nephew unto Geoffry Lord Clinton, 1129 Hen.
1.30.
a man of great account and authority in his time. December 21. 1129. he was
ordered Priest at Canterbury, and consecrate Bishop the day following: This man
built a great part of the Church of Lichfield, increased the number of his
prebends, fensed the town of Lichfield with a ditch, and bestowed much upon
the castle there. No part of that Castle now stands; only the ditch remains
to be seen, and the place where it stood, retains the name of Castle-field.
He took upon him the cross at last, went to Jerusalem, and died at Antioch.
April 16. 1148. I find that one Roger Bishop of Chester (so the Bishops of
Lichfield were sometimes called) was founder of the monastery of Bilde was for
Cistercian^ or black Monks, the yearly revenues whereof at the suppression
were valued to be 129. pound six shillings ten pence. In like sort I find that
one Roger Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, founded a Priory in Lichfield
dedicated to S. John, the value whereof I find not. Whether this Roger de
Chriton were the author of these foundations or some other of those Rogers that
succeeded him, I cannot say.

37. Walter Durdent.
1149 Steph. 15.
WAlter Durdent Prior of Canterbury succeeded him. He was consecrate 1149. died
1161. and was buried at Couentry.

38. Richard Peche.
1162. Hen. 2.9.
RIchard Peche was son unto Robert Peche Bishop of Couentry. By him he was
preferred unto the Archd^aconry of Couentry, and the year 1162. succeeded him
in his Bishoprick^. This man in his latter days, took on him the habit of a
Chanon in the Church of Saint Thomas near Stafford, of which house some name
him the founder. He was buried there, dying the year 1181. Houeden says 1183.

39. Girardus Puella, or La pluelle.
1181 Hen, 2.28
OF this man, Robertus Montensis writes thus. Magister Girardus cognomento
Puella, etc. Master Gerard surnamed Puella, a man of great learning, and
virtue, the year 1181. was chosen Bishop of Chester in England. That
Bishopric has three Episcopal Sees, Chester, Couentry, and Lichfield. He
died January 12. 1184. and was buried at Couentry.

40. Hugh Nouant, or Nunant.
THe year 1186. Hugh Nouaunt a Norman, 1186. Hen. 2.33.
but student sometimes in the university of Oxford, was consecrate Bishop of
Lichfield. King Richard the first, being taken prisoner by the Archduke of
Austrich; he joined with John Earl of Mortayne the Kings brother that sought to
dispossess his said brother of the kingdom, for which afterward himself, and
his friends, endured much trouble, the history whereof is related by R.
Houeden, who says he was fain to redeem the Kings favor with the payment of
5000. marks. Of the King, before that time (as it seems) he bought the
monastery of Couentry for 300. marks, intending to place secular Priests in
the same. Thither he came with a power of armed men the year 1190. and when
the monks would not give place, inuading them with fine force, chased away
some, beat and lamed other, spoiled their house, burnt their Charters and
evidences, etc. and then put in secular priests in their rooms. Bale reports
that he could not carry this matter so clear as that it cost him not some
stripes: In the conflict himself was wounded, and that in the Church just
before the high altar. It seems he was a man learned, stout, and wise enough,
but not so straight and careful a censurer of his own manners and conversation
as he should be. No doubt our monks (that were the only writers of those
times) speak no better of him then he deserves: yet for his religious and
penitent end he made they commend him much. Traveling toward Rome, in his
own country of Normandy he fell sick, and perceiving his end to approach, sent
for diverse religious persons, unto whom he acknowledged the looseness of his
life, and with continual tears greatly lamented the same, heartily requested
them to pray for him, gave al his money and goods unto the poor, and lastly
put on a monks cowle, thereby thinking to make the monks amends for all the
trouble and vexation he had wrought them. He died at Beccumerhill, or (as
Roger Houeden reports) at Betherleuin March 27 1199. and was buried at Cane
in the 14. year of his troublesome government. The year 1193. he was robbed
of an infinite deal of treasure near Canterbury traveling toward king
Richard that was then prisoner in Germany. And not long after, being banished
the realm for taking part with king John rebelling against his brother king
Richard then prisoner in Germany, he was feign to buy restitution unto his
place with the sum of 5000. marks.

41. Geffry de Muschamp.
1199. Joan. 1.
THe monks soon after the death of Bishop Hugh recovered their places again,
got them a new Pryor, and proceeding to the election of a Bishop, made choice
of one Geffry de Muschamp Archdeacon of Cleueland. He was consecrate at
Westminster (says one) March 15. 1199. But Matthew Paris (whom I rather
believe) says it was at Canterbury June 21. He died the year 1208. and was
buried at Lichfield.

42. Walter de Gray.
1210. Joan. 12.
THe year 1210. Walter de Gray was elected unto this See, translated to
Worcester the year 1214. and afterward to York. See more of him there.

43. William de Cornehull.
1215 Joan. 17.
HE was consecrate January 25. 1215. died June 19. 1223. and was buried at
Lichfield.

44. Alexander de Sauensby.
1224. Hen. 3 9.
ALexander de Sauensby (whom Bale calls Alexander Wendocke) spent much time
in diverse Uniuersities, as namely in Toulouse, Bonenia and others, in which he
had the reputation of a great Philosopher, and a profound Divine. He writ
diverse works well esteemed of in times past. In them he makes report of
certain visions and strange apparitions he had seen scarce credible. He was
consecrate at Rome upon Easter day 1224. In his time a great controversy was
raised between the Monks of Couentry, and the Cannons of Lichfield, about the
election of their Bishop, which ever since the remoouing of the Sea from
Chester, had belonged unto the Monks. After the spending of much money upon
this suit in the Court of Rome, the matter was ordered there by definitive
sentence in this sort. It was agreed that they should choose alternis vicibus,
the monks one time, and the Canons of Lichfield the next: But in all elections
as well at Lichfield, as at Couentry, the Prior of Couentry was allowed to give
a voice, and it must be the first voice. Of this Bishop, the king ( Henry the
3.) stood in great jealousy, by reason of the great familiarity that was
between him and the Earl Marshall that gallant rebel. Wherefore on a time,
the King charged him as a party in the Earls conspiracy, which tended (as he
said) to the deposing and displacing of him from the Kingdom. To clear
himself from so heinous an imputation, he took no other course but this; he
put on immediately his Episcopal roabes, and solemnly accused all those that
had but any thought of so wicked a practice. It was well accepted by the King,
and gave satisfaction. Concerning this man, it is also to be remembered that
he was founder of a house for the Gray Friars, in the South west part of
Lichfield, died at Andeuer, December 26, 1238. and was buried at Lichfield.

45 Hugh de Pateshull.
Soon after the death of the forenamed Alexander, 1240. Hen. 3.25.
the Monks of Couentry with the good liking of the Cannons of Lichfield,
elected for their Bishop one William Raleigh. About the same time the Covent of
Norwich (that See also being void) chose him likewise, and he accepting the
second offer as the better of the two, left Lichfield. By reason hereof a new
controversy arose between the Monks of Couentry and the chapter of
Lichfield, whether the turn of Co^entry were served in this election or no.
Each party standing upon their title, Lichfield men elected their Deane, and
the monks one Nicholas Fernham that was afterward Bish. of Durham: See more of
him ther^. This Nicholas Fernham having notice of the election, presently
renounced the same. The Deane (that was a very good man) hearing great
commendation of the said Fernham, and thinking he refused to consent unto the
election because the title seemed doubtful and litigious, never ceased
importuning his chapter till they also had named him. This notwithstanding^
Nicholas Fernham persisting in his refusal, both parties through the kings
intercession were induced to consent unto the choice of Hugh Pateshull
Treasurer of Paul's, that had been Treasurer, and was at that time Chancellor
of England. He was son unto Simon Pateshull sometime Lord chief Justice of
England. He was consecrate July 1. 1241. Being yet in his best age and full
strength, he was taken away by untimely death December 7. 1348. having sat
not fully two years. A man for his life and conversation unblameable and not
unlearned; yet misliked in our histories because in that little time he
governed, he showed himself more favorable unto his cannons of Lichfield,
then the monks of Couentry.

46 Roger de Weseham.
1245 Hen. 3.30.
THe King now made earnest request for the election of Richard Abbot of Euesham
and Keeper of the great Seal. Some chose him: but the greater part agreed upon
a Monk that was Chaunter of Couentry. The Abbot by the means of the king and
his own purse, notwithstanding the insufficiency of his election, had now
obtaine^ the Popes favor for his consecration, at what time he was taken away
by death in Riola a City of Gascoigne, having first resigned the custody of the
great seal into the Kings hand. After his death, with consent of all parties
there was chosen one William de Monte Pessulano, a virtuous and learned man:
him also the king misliked. Once more they proceeded to election, and by
persuasion of Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, made choice of Robert de
Weseham Dean of Lincoln, sometime a Franciscan Friar of Oxford, a man very
commendable (says Matthew Paris) both for life and learning. There had been
much ado in former times between the Deanes and the Bishops of Lincoln. This
Bishop thinking the reason thereof to be the greatness of the Deanes living,
endeavored the more earnestly to prefer this man, that the Deantie being
void, he might somewhat weaken the same by disposing elsewhere the parsonage
of Alysbery that heretofore belonged unto it. This Roger Weseha^ was allowed of
by the Pope, and consecrate at Lions, the year^ 1245. before the king ever
heard of any such thing toward. For they had concealed it from him of purpose,
thinking if he might once get notice of it, the business was like never to be
effected. Having sat about 11. years, and being now waxen old and very
sickely, he resigned his Bishopric upon Alhallowen day, 1269. Two years
after he died of a palsy, whereof he had lain sick a long time.

47 Roger de Molend, alias Longespe.
Upon his resignation, 1257. Hen: 3.42.
the King labored earnestly to prefer Philip Louel his Treasurer unto this
Bishopric The Monks of Couentry, that of al other men could not like of the
said Louel (for what cause I know not) that they might be sure to avoid him,
as also at the request of Richard Earl of Cornwall the kings brother, elected
Roger Molend, one to whom the King and the said Earl were both uncles. Him the
King readily accepted, and so March 10. 1257. he was a^foorded consecration.
This man was borne and brought up altogether beyond the seas: By reason whereof
he was utterly ignorant of the English tongue. Being therefore called upon to be
resident upon his Bishopric, the year 1283. he made that his excuse: but it
might not serve his turn, John Pechham Archb. of Canterbury, not only forced
him to residence, but reprehended him exceeding sharply for his neglect and
carelesnes of his charge. He sat long, and died a very old man the year,
1295.

47. Walter de Langton.
THe Pope meaning a good turn unto John Bokingham Bishop of Lincoln, 1296.
Edw. 1.25.
of his absolute authority took upon him to translate him to this See from
Lincoln, which was then worth 3. Lichfields. He chose rather to forsake all,
and and became a Monk at Canterbury. Upon his refusal Walter Langton Treasurer
of England was preferred thereunto and consecrate December 22. 1296. He lived
in great authority under king Edward the first that favored him much. But his
son Edward the second molested and disgraced him all that ever he might. His
father the said Edward the first, dying in the North country, the young king
commanded this Bishop to conduct his corpse up to London, and when he had so
done, for reward of his pains, he caused sir John Felton Constable of the
Tower of arest him, seized upon al his goods had imprisone^ him, first in the
Tower, then in the castle of Wallingford, of which imprisonment he was not
released in two years after. In his fathers li^e time he had often reprehended
the young Prince for his insolent and dissolute behavior; which good
admonitions he taking in evil part, wronged and disgraced him many ways,
namely one time, he brake down his parks, spoiled and drove away his dear,
etc. The Bishop complained of this outrage unto the king his father, who being
greatly displeased therewith, committed the Prince his son for certain days.
And this was the cause of the grudge between the young king and him. About the
same time (or I think a little sooner viz. ^he year 1301.) he was accused of
certain heinous crimes before the Pope, and compelled to answer the accusation
at Rome in his own person. Though the proofs brought against him were either
none or very slender; yet well knowing whom they had in hand ( Noue^ant ipsum
prae multis bouem valde pinguem, says Matthew. Westminster.) they were content to
detain him there so long, as it forced him to spend an infinite deal of
money, and yet was never a whit the nearer in the end. For the Pope remitted
the hearing of the cause to the Archbishop of Canter^ury, before whom he
purged himself Canonically and was adjudged clear from those imputations
laid upon him. His accuser was a certain Knight, that soon after committing
a murder pleaded himself to be a Clergy man (although then married) having
been made a Deacon in his youth. Whereupon he was committed to the Bishops
prison (as the manner then was) and living there only five days, died
miserably. Such is the end lightly of those men that delight in vexing and
disgracing Gods Ministers. The tempests of those troubles being ourrblowne, the
rest of his time this Bishop lived (for ought I find) very quietly, and being
happily dismissed from the Court, attended only the government of his charge.
Unto his Church of Lichfield he was a wonderful great benefactor. He laid the
first foundation of the Lady chapel there, and at his death left order with
his Executors for the full finishing of it. He compassed the cloister of
Lichfield with a stone wall, and bestowed a sumptuous shrine upon S. Cedda his
predecessor with two thousand pound charge. He ditched and walled all the
Cathedral church round about, made one gate of great strength and majesty at
the west part of the close, and another (but a less) on the south part. He
builded the great bridge beyond the Uineyard at Lichfield, ann. 1310. He gave
his own house or palace unto the Uicars for their dwelling, and built a new
for himself at the East end of the close. He built also (or reedified at least
being altogether decayed) the castle of Eccleshall, the Manor place of
Showbrough and Heywood, with the palace by the Strand at London. He gave unto
the high Altar at Lichfield one chalice, and two cruets of fine gold, worth
twenty four pounds, garnished about with precious stones to the value of 200.
l. besides many copes and vestments of inestimable price. He bestowed upon the
Uicars a silver cup of five marks weight, and a pension of twenty shillings by
the year: And lastly, procured both unto them and his Church many charters and
notable privileges from the King. He died at London November 16. 1321. and
was buried in the Lady Chapel which he built.

48 Roger Northborough.
THe year 1313. Roger Northbrough then Keeper of the great Seal, 1322. Edw.
2.16.
was taken prisoner by the Scots in ye battle of Bannocksbrough. Being
afterward Clerk of the Wardrobe (so I find him called) and Treasurer of
England, by great suit and the Kings often commanding requests, he found means
to shoulder into this Bishopric. He was consecrate June 27. 1322. sat almost
38 years (a very long time) and died (says a record that I have seen) 10
Call. Dec. in fest. 5. Luciae virg. I suppose it intends the tenth of Dec.

49 Robert Stretton.
1360. Edw. 3.35.
Soon after the death of the former Bishop, Robert Stretton a Canon of
Lichfield, by the importunity of the black Prince (to whom he was Chaplain)
was elected Bishop there. A man very unlearned and utterly unworthy so high a
preferment in all respects. The Pope having notice of his insufficiency, by
special mandate prohibited his consecration. Hereupon the new elect was feign
to make repair unto Rome. The Pope himself examined him, but was so earnestly
requested by the black Prince to favor his suit, as, though he could not with
any honesty allow of him, yet he was content to leave him to the approbation
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, who would by no means yield to afford him
any testimony of sufficiency. At last with much ado, he procured the Pope to
authorize two other Bishops for the allowance or rejecting of him (who they
were I cannot call to remembrance) and they by the exceeding great importunity
of the Prince admitted him to consecration, which he received, September 26.
1360. See more of this matter in Thomas Lylde Bishop of Ely. He sat Bishop
here 25 years.

50 Walter Skirlawe.
1385. Rich: 2.9.
WAlter Skirlawe Doctor of Law, was consecrate January 14. 1385. removed to
Bathe and Wels the year following, and soon after to Durham. See more of him
in Durham.

51 Richard Scroope.
RIchard Scroope Doctor of Law, 1386. Ric. 2.20.
brother unto William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire, and Treasurer of England, was
consecrate August 6. 1386. Sat here ten years and was translated to York.
His life and lamentable death, you may see there more at large described.

52 John Burghill.
John Burghill a Friar preacher was first Bishop of Landaff, 1398. Ric. 2.22.
and Confessor unto King Richard the second, translated to Lichfield in the
month of September 1398. and dyed about Midsommer 1414.

53 John Keterich.
John Keterich a Notary of Rome, 1415. Hen. 5.4.
and Archdeacon of Surry, was consecrate Bishop of S. David's the year 1414.
and translated thence to this See in the month of May 1415 The year 1417 he
was at the Council of Constance, and was one of the thirty electors that chose
Martyn the fifth, Pope, (authorized thereunto the Council) together with the
Cardinals. He sat almost 5 years, and was translated to Exceter.

54 James Carry.
A Uery little while one James Carry was Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. 1419.
Hen. 5.8.
He happened to be at Florence with the Pope at what time news was brought
thither of the Bishop of Exceters death, and easily obtained that Bishopric
of him, being preferred unto Lichfield but very lately. He enjoyed neither of
these places any long time. Never coming home to see either the one or the
other, he died and was buried in Italy.

55 William Heiworth.
1420. Hen. 5.9.
WIlliam Heyworth Abbot of Saint Albons was consecrate November 28. 1420. and
sat 27. years.

56 William Boothe.
1447. Hen. 6.26.
WIlliam Boothe was consecrate July 9. 1447. sat six years, and was
translated to York. See more of him there.

57 Nicholas Close.
1452. Hen. 6.31.
NIcholas Close was one of the first 6 Scholars appointed by K. Henry the 6.
in the foundation of Kings College in Cambridge, and was ye Master of his works
there Afterward he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, became Chancellor of that
University, was consecrated Bishop of Carlisle 1450. translated hither 1452.
and dyed the same year.

58 Reginald Butler.
1453 Hen. 6.32.
REginald Butler was consecrate Bishop of Herford the year 1450. being Abbot of
Gloucester before. He was translated to Lichfield April 3. 1453. and sat
there six years.

59 John Halse, or Hales.
1459. Hen. 6.38.
John Hales was consecrated in the month of November 1459. sat 31 years,
died September 30. 1490. and lies buried at Lichfield. He was sometimes
Provost of Oriall College in Oxford, and a great benefactor of the same.

60 William Smith.
1492. Hen. 7.8.
WIlliam Smith was consecrate 1492. sat 4. years, and was translated to
Lincoln. See more there.

61 John Arundell.
John Arundell an Oxford man was consecrate November 6. 1496. and translated to
Exceter 1502. See more in Exceter. 1496. Hen. 7.12.


62 Geoffry Blithe.
GEoffry Blythe Doctor of Law, 1503. Hen: 7.19.
brought up in Kings College in Cambridge, was consecrate September 7. 1503.
The year 1512. he became Lord President of Wales by the appointment of King
Henry the eight, and continued in that place till the year 1524. at what time
it seems he died. He built a fair house for the Choristers of his church. The
year 1523. he was attached for treason, but happily acquitted. He lies buried
at Lichfield.

63 Rowland Lee.
ROwland Leigh Doctor of Law, 1524. Hen. 8.17.
a Cambridge man, succeeded, being consecrate April 19. 1534. A man famous for
two things, He married King Henry the 8. unto Queen Anne Bulleyn, 1533.
Again, it is to be remembered of him, that being made President of Wales, the
year 1535. in the time of his government (and peradventure partly by his
procurement) the country of Wales was by Parliament incorporated and united to
the kingdom of England, the liberties, laws, and other respects made common
unto the Welsh with the natural English. This Bishop died Lord President the
year 1543. and was buried at Shrewsbury.

64 Richard Sampson.
AFter him Richard Sampson Bishop of Chichester became Bishop of Lichfield.
1543. Hen. 8.35.
He was translated March 16. 1543. This R. Sampson being a Doctor of Law, and
Deane of the Chapel, writ somewhat for the Kings supremacy and was answered
by Cochlaeus. He writ also commentaries upon the Psalms, and upon the
Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians. He was consecrate Bishop of Chichester
the year 1537. and the year 1539. was sent to the tower for releiuing with
money certain prisoners that had denied the Kings supremacy. Presently upon
his remove to this See, he was made President of Wales. In that office he
continued til the second year of King Edward, at what time he began to show
himself a Papist, notwithstanding his former writings against the Pope. He died
at Ecclesall, September 25. 1554.

65 Ralfe Ban^.
RAlfe Bayne, Doctor of Divinity, borne in Yorkshire, brought up in S. John's
College in Cambridge, 1555. Mary 3.
and sometimes reader or professor of the Hebrew tongue in Paris, was
consecrate Bishop of Lichfield soon after the death of the other. He writ upon
the Proverbs of Solomon, and dedicated his work unto Francis the French King.
Having been Bishop almost five years, he was deprived anno 1559. and soon
after died of the stone at London, where he was buried in S. Dunstans Church.

66 Thomas Bentham.
1559. Eliz: 3.
THomas Bentham brought up in Magdalen College in Oxford, was conscrate March
24. 1559. and died February 21. 1578.

67 William Ouerton.
WIlliam Ouerton Doctor of Divinity succeeded. He likewise had his education
in Magdalen College in Oxford, 1573. Eliza. 22.
and died about the beginning of April 1609.

68 George Abbot.
GEorge Abbot Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Winchester, 1609. Iac. 7.
was consecrated December 3. 1609. and removed first to London before the end
of the same peer, and soon after to Canterbury.

69 Richard Neyle.
RIchard Neile Bishop of Rochester succeeded, 1610. Iac. 8.
being translated to this See about Michaelmasse 1610. The year 1613. about
Michaelmasse he was removed to Lincoln.

70 John Ouerall.
John Ouerall Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Paul's, 1614. Iac. 12.
sometimes fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and then Master of
Katherine Hall there, was consecrated April 3. 1614.

This Bishopric is valued in the E^chequer at 550 pounds, 17 shillings, two
pence, ob. farthing, and in the Popes books at 1733 ducats or Florenes: or
according to one report, 300.

THE BISHOPS OF SALISBVRY.
1 Aldelm.
705
AFter the death of Headda the fifth Bishop of Winchester, it pleased Iua King of
the west Saxons to divide his Dioces (which before contained all the country
of the west Saxons) into two parts. The one of them he committed unto Daniel,
allotting unto him Winchester for his See, and that Dioces which now does, and
ever since has belonged unto the same: The other part, containing the counties
of Dorset, Somerset, Wiltshire, Deuon and Cornwall, he ordained to be
governed by a Bishop, whose See he established at Sherborne, and appointed
unto the same one Aldhelm a near kinseman of his own, being (as some say) the
son of Kenred his brother. Capgraue says he was his own son. This Aldhelm
spent all his youth in trauile, and having visited the most famous Uniuersities
of France and Italy, became very learned: in Poetry especially he was
excellent, and writ much in Greek and Latin, prose and verse. ^e delighted
greatly in music and was very skillful in the same. But his chie^e study was
divinity, in the knowledge whereof no man of his time was comparable to him.
After his return, he became f^^st a Monk, and after Abbot of Malmsbury for
the space of four and thirty years. The yeer^ 705. he was consecrate Bishop
of Sherborne, and that (as it seems unto me) at Rome. For it is remembered
that while he stayed there for the Popes approbation, the same Pope (his name
was Sergius) was charged with getting of a ba^tad, for which fact he was bold
to reprehend his holiness sharply. He writ di^ers learned works mentioned by
Beda lib. 4. c. 19. and died the year 709. May. 25.

2. Fordhere.
HE lived in the time of Beda, 709.
who says, he also was a man very well seen in the knowledge of the
scriptures. The year 738. he attended the Queen of the West Saxons unto Rome.

After him succeeded these.
3. Herewald, 737.
He was present at the Council held by Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, An.
747. He also confirmed a Charter of certain lands given to the Church of Wells
by Kinewolfe king of the West Saxons. An. 766 4. Ethelnold. 5. Denefrith. 6.
Wilbert. He was at Rome with Wlfred Archbishop of Canterbury. An. 115. 7.
Ealhstan. 818.
A famous warrier. He subdued unto king Egbright the kingdoms of Kent and the
East Saxons. He fought many battles with the Danes and ever lightly had the
victory, namely at a place in Sommersetshire then called Pedredsmouth, now
Comage, he ^lue a great number of them the year 845. King Ethelwlf being at
Rome in pilgrimage, he set up his son Ethelbald against him and forced the
father at his return to divide his kingdom with his son. He died the year
867. having sat Bishop of Sherborne 50. years and was buried in his own
Church. A man very wise, valiant. careful for the good of his country, and
passing liberal. He augmented the revenues of his Bishopric wonderfully. 868.
7. Edmund or Headmund, slain in battle by the Danes the year 872. at
Meredune. 872.
8. Etheleage. 9. Alfry. 10. Asser. This man writ a certain Chronicle of
Britain (amongst diverse other works) wherein he reports of himself that he
was a disciple and scholar of that famous welchman John, that having studied
long in Athens, he persuaded King Alfrid, to institute (or rather to renew) a
university at Oxford, and himself became the first public reader there. He
writes furthermore that he was Scribe or Chancellor unto Asser the Archbishop
of Saint David's his near kinsman, who both endured great vexation and trouble
at the hands of one Hemeyd a mighty man of these parts, that tyrannized
intollerably over the Clergy there. By reason thereof waxing weary of his
office, he left his country, and coming into England, to King Alfred, became
schoolmaster of his children until such time as Alfsius Bishop of Sherborne
dying, he was preferred to his place. Ingulphus says that in the mean time
he had been Abbot o^ Bangor. Unto this man the said King gave the manors of
Wellington, Buckland, and Lydyard in Sommersetshire, which since have come unto
the Bishops of Wels, whereof one (Buckland) yet remains unto that See. By his
exhortation also that good King did much for the Uniuersity of Oxford, alotting
diverse stipends unto the readers and professors there. This Bishop died the
year 883. and was buried at Sherborne. 883.
11. Swithelm or Sigelm traveled into India to the place of Saint Thomas his
burial, carried thither the alms or offering of King Alfred, and brought home
many precious stones of great price. 12. Ethelwald, or Ethelward, brought up in
Oxford was a younger son unto King Alfred. He died the year 898.
After Ethelwald the Sea of Sherborne stood void seven years by reason of the
Danish wars. The year 905. Pleg,+mund by the commandment of King Edward the
elder consecrate seven Bishops in one day as I have before mentioned in
Canterbury and elsewhere. Three of them were appointed to Sees newly erected al
taken out of the Dioces of Sherborne. One had jurisdiction over Cornwall,
another over Devonshire, and a third over Sommersetshire. Soon after that, a
fourth was placed in Wiltshire, having his See some say at Ramsbery, others say
at Sunnyng, and some other at Wilton. So Sherborne had now left unto it only
Dorsetshire and Barkshire. Of the rest we shall speak God willing severally in
their particular places. But these Bishops of Wiltshire, because there See at
last returned back again whence it first sprang, I will deliver them and
their succession next after Sherborne.

Sherborne.
13. Werstane. He died 918. slain by the Danes in battle. 918.
14. Ethelbald. 15. Sigelm. Florilegus mentions one Sigelm to have been
slain by the Danes the year 834. I believe he mistook it for 934. 16.
Alfred. He died 940. 17. Wlf^n. 940.
This man was made Abbot of Westminster by Dunstan then Bishop of London. Being
preferred to the Bishopric of Sherborne, he displaced secular Priests and
put in monks. In regard thereof, our monkish writers favor him much, make him
a very holy man, and report of him, that when he lay a dying, he cried out
suddenly; I see the heavens open, and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand
of God, immediately after those words giving up the ghost. an. 958. 958.
18. Alfwold. He died 978. and was buried at Sherborne. 978.
19. Ethelricke. 20. Ethelsius. 21. Brithwin or Brithwicke. He died 1009. 1009.
22. Elmer. 23. Brinwin or Birthwyn. 24. Elfwold, was brother unto his
predecessor, a man of great temperance and frugality; for the which in that
luxurious age he was much admired. After his death, these two Sees were again
conjoined and made one.
Wiltshire.
1 Ethelstane, had his see at Ramsbury: 2 Odo that became Archbishop of
Canterbury the year 934. was Bishop of Wilton. So was his successor. 3 Osulf.
He died 970. and was buried at Wilton. 4 Alfstan. He died 981. and was buried
at Abundun, where he had been Abbot. 5 Alfgar or Wolfgar. 6 Siricius,
translated to Canterbury 989. See more of him there. 7. Alfricus or Aluricius,
he succeeded his predecessor in Canterbury likewise the 995. 8 Brithwold, a
monk of Glastonbury, a great benefactor of that Abbey, as also of the Abbey of
Malmesbury. He died 1045. and was buried at Glastonbury. See somewhat
concerning him in Brithwold of Winton. 9. Herman a Flemming Chaplain unto King
Edward the Confessor, was the last Bishop of this petty See. He labored to
have his See removed to Malmsbury, and had once obtained it of K. Edward the
Confessor, but by a countersuit of the monks there, he was disappointed Uery
angry with this repulse, he left this Bishopric, and became a monk at
Bertine in France. But hearing soon after how that Elfwold Bishop of Sherborne
was dead, he returned home again, and with much ado obtained that Sherborne
and his Diocese might once more be united together again, The year 1050. he
was at Rome with Aldred Archbishop of York.
1. Herman.
THe forenamed Herman living unto the time of William Conqueror, when as he
gave commandment that all Bishops should remove their Sees from obscure
towns to the fairest cities of their Dioces, made choice of Salisbury and
there laid the foundation of a Church, which he lived not to finish. Salisbury
(says W. of Malmsbury) is a place built on the top of a hill, resembling
rather a Castle then a town, compassed about with a strong wall, and well
provided otherwise of al commodities, but wants water so unreasonably, (as a
strange kind of merchandise) it is there to be sold for money. This place we
now call old Salisbury, whereof nothing remains at this time but certain
desert ^^ines. How it decayed, we shall have cause hereafter to discourse.

2. Osmond.
OSmond being a knight, and a Norman by birth, came into England with King
William the Conqueror. He had been Captain of Say in Normandy and by the
foresaid king was made Chauncellor of England, Earl of Dorset, and after
Hermans death, Bishop of Salisbury: he was a man well learned, and passing
wise, in regard whereof he was always of the privy council and might seldom
be spared from the Court. He continued the building begun by his predecessor
and at last finished the same, adding unto it a library, which he furnished
with many excellent books. This new Church at old Salisbury was finished, and
in an evil hour dedicated very solemnly by the foresaid Osmond together with
Walkelin Bishop of winchester, and John of Bath the year 1092. In an evil
hour I say; for the very next day after, ye steeple of the same was set on
fire by lightning. That he afterward repaired, and furnished his Church with
all manner of ornaments. At last he departed this life Saturday, December. 3. 1099.
and was buried in his own Church His bones were after removed to new
Salisbury, where they now lie, in the middle of the Lady Chapel under a
Marble stone bearing this only inscription ANNO. MXCIX. Above any thing I may
not forget, that amongst diverse books he writ (as the life of Saint Adelme
the first Bishop of Sherborne, not of S. Anselme who lived ten years after
him, as Baronius mistaking reports etc.) he was first Author of the ordinale
secundum vsum Sarum. After his death he was canonised, and the aforesaid third
day of December appointed for his holyday.

3. Roger.
1107. Hen. 1.8.
KIng Henry the first being yet a private man, and serving his brother in his
wars in Normandy, it chanced him and his troop to turn into a Church in the
Suburbs of Cane to hear service. Roger that rich and mighty Bishop of
Salisbury that was afterward, attended the cure there at that time for some
very poor salary. This crafty curate, well knowing how to fit the devotion of
soldiers, was so nimble at his business, as he had made an end of his work
before some of the company were aware he had begun. They all cried out he was
the fittest chaplain for soldiers that might be found. Whereupon half in
^est, half in earnest, the young Prince bid him follow him. He did so; and
albeit he was in a manner altogether unlearned, yet being very crafty, in a
short time he wound himself so fast into the Princes liking, as he employed
him in most of his affairs. Whilst he remained a private man, he had the
managing of his money and household businesses, wherein he did the Prince his
Master such service (his means being then very small, and requiring careful
attendance) as he gained a special trust with him ever after; in so much as,
soon after his coming to the crown, having preferred him to this
Bishopric, he gave him also the title of Iuslitiarius totius Angliae, and
committed ever the whole government of the Realm unto him in his absence,
which fell out to be very often, and sometime for the space of 3 or 4. years
together. These employments gave him opportunity, both to enrich himself, and
to prefer his frinds even as he listed. He had a son of his own called
Roger, surnamed Paupere-censu, whom he made Chauncelour of England. He had
also two nephews which he made Bishops; Alexander of Lincoln, and Nigellus
of Ely. This Nigellus likewise had a son called Richard Fitz-Neale, that long
after became Bishop of London. For these so great benefits he proved not so
thankful to his Master as was to be expected. For he (King Henry the first)
having lost his only son and apparent heir prince William, by misfortune
upon the sea; and having no issue lawfully begotten, left to inherit his
kingdom but only Mawde the Empress: He I say thought good to take an oath
of all the nobility, wherein they promised to yield obedience to her after his
death as their sovereign, and to none other. This (...) oath, though Roger our
Bishop did not only take himself, but minister unto the rest of the nobility,
for that he was chauncellor: yet notwithstanding, forgetting all duties of
religion toward God, of thankfulness toward his patron, and loyalty to his
Prince; he was the first man (the king being dead) that fell to plotting for
the advancement of Stephen unto the kingdom, which by his persuasion he first
attempted, and much deal by his ungracious counsel at last obtained. At the
time of king Henry's death, it happened Maud the Empress to be out of the
realm in Normandy with her Father. Whereof Stephen Earl of Boloigne, taking
advantage, wrought so with this Bishop, and the Bishop ^o Winchester Stephens
brother (that was then the Popes Legate) as they were content to set the crown
upon his head who otherwise then by a kind of election which they procured, had
no color of right unto the same. For if they regarded neerenesse of blood, not
only Maud and her son were nearer, but Theobald also Earl of Bloys that was
Stephens elder brother. Howbeit these Cleargymen that bare all the sway in
those times, desirous to continue their own greatness, would needs make
choice of him; as persuaded belike, yt in bestowing the crown upon such a one
as had least reason to expect it, they should so far oblige him unto them, as
in all likehood it must be a means not only to continue, but much to
increase their greatness. As for the oath they had taken, this Bishop devised
an excuse, that king Henry after the time they had sworn to his daughter,
marrying her out of the Realm without their consent, had therein discharged
them of that oath. Howsoever this allegation might bleare the eyes of men, it
could not deceive God^ that out of his justice turned this device to the
destr^ction of many, and the infinite trouble of all that had any finger in the
same. K. Stephen in the beginning of his reign, to secure himself the better
against foreign invasions (as he thought) granted free license unto all that
would, to build castles in any part of the Realm; by virtue of which grant in
a short time after, there were erected no less then 1117. new castles. But the
Bishops (and this of Salisbury) far outwent the nobility and all the rest
in magnificence, strength, and number of their erections. To leave the rest
unto their own places, the most cost that this man bestowed, was upon the
Castle of the Devises; the ruins whereof who so both yet view, will not
marvel if in those da^es it were accounted the most stately and sumptuous
building of all Europe. Besides it, he built also the castles of Sherborne and
Malm^bury, two places in strength and beauty little behind the other: and
lastly new walled and repaired the Castle of Salisbury. Somewhat then to excuse
the vanity of this humor, he fell to repayring of his Church of old Salisbury,
which in a manner he built all a new. It is said also that he bestowed the
foundation of two monasteries; but what they were I find not. These Antidotes
were of so small force against the poison of envy as there wanted not many to
buzze daily into the Kings ears, that these castles no doubt were intended to
intertaine the party of the Empress his adversary; and that it much behooved
him to take them from the Priest, in whose hands to leave them, were neither
safe nor seemly. Others put him in mind of his own wants, which might no way
they said, be better supplied, then by ris^ing the cofers of this rich Bishop.
Whether it were fear, and a jealousy of the Bishops fidelity (which some
deliver,) or covetousness and a desire of possessing himself of his wealth,
which others affirm; or happily both; certain it is, that violently he
despoiled at once both of his treasure and his castles this Bishop, to whom he
owed even the crown he bare. Having lately obtaines diverse victories, against
the Scots, against the Empress, the French and others, and thinking his throne
now sufficiently established; he presumed so far of his own strength, as
casting all regard of his old friend, behind him, he doubted not to take the
course before mentioned; which was very like in the end to have proved his
overthrow, as in his history the Chronicles may show you. At Oxford a council
is called by the King, whither the Bishops and especially ours of Salisbury
must needs come. He would feign have excused himself by age and the
indisposition of his body; but it might not serve his turn. Answer was made
his experience was such in affairs of the Realm and such his known fidelity,
as the king must not want his advice, whereon he meant principally to rely. And
true it is indeed that hitherunto the king was wholly ruled by him, insomuch as
he gave him for himself or his friend, whatsoever he would asks. One of his
nephews he made Chancellor, another Treasurer, and bestowed upon himself the
borough of Malmsbury; and sometimes he would not stick to say, let this man
beg while he will, for a while, I will give him half the kingdom rather than
say him nay, and sooner shall he be weary of craving th^^ I of grauting. Of
late now he had somewhat withdrawn himself from the Court, pretending
vnseruiceablenesse by reason of his debility and many years. But the king it
seems was disposed to have it for an argument of alienation of his affectious,
whereunto a great emulation grown between him and Winchester the kings brother
might give some likelihood. And therefore using fair words as a bait to tell
him into his net, seconding his kind messages with the like words, at their
meeting, he gave him all gracious entertainment; but secretly took order (as
it seems) that a querrell should be picked unto some of his retinue. So when
he least suspected any such matter, his people were set upon by some of the
kings officers, pretending that certain courtiers were by them disappointed of
their lodgings. After a little resistance one or two of the Bishops men slain
and diverse wounded, the Bishops men fled, as did al^o the Bishop himself, his
son and both his nephews. But the match was made too sure before hand for
them all to escape. Nay they were al taken, except the Bishop of Ely, that
ha^te^ him to the Castle of Denises, which he found very well provided, and
determined to hold it against the king: who presently traveled thither with
all speed, carrying along with him his prisoners, who^ he caused to be very
hardly used, shutting up ye one Bishop in an Oxe-stal, the other in a filthy
black room more loathsome then the other. At his ^i^st coming, he summoued
the castle, intending to prove all means, rather then he would let this
occasion slip, of rist^ng the same. Therefore when no other practice would take
success (for he tried many) he caused a pair of gallows to be set up, and
swear he would hang Roger the Bishops son, if the castle were not presently
delivered up unto him. The Bish^p of Ely continuing obstinate in his denial,
though his uncle of Salisbury had entreated him earnestly to yield: the halter
was now about the young man's neck, and he even ready to be executed, when his
father humbly besought the king, that he would accept his best endeavor for the
effecting of his desire; and to save his sons life, was content to swear he
would neither eat nor drink before the castle were delivered unto him.
Hereupon the execution of the son was sta^ed; but it cost the Father his
life. For the Bishop of Ely his nephew, notwithstanding what entreaty could be
made, suffered his uncle to fast three whole days before he would give over.
The Bishop of Salisbury being now very aged, partly peradventure through
grief, but partly also by reason of so long abstinence, sell sick of a
quartane ague, wherewith he languished from that time (being the month of
July) until December following, and then died, rauing and taking on like a man
distract of his wits certain days before his departure. There was found in
that castle of his forty thousand marks of silver ready coined, beside gold,
plate and jewels of inestimable price. All that the king laid hands upon; and
with that money procured (as some deliver) the marriage of his eldest son
Eustace and Constantia the French Kings sister. The Bishops son was kept lon^
in prison, and dealt earnestly withal to renounce the Empress and ^euote
himself to the party of the K. which he most honestly and constantly refusing,
with long suite obtained at last for a great ^auour, that he might be banished
the realm. To make an end now with this Bishop, he was elected April 13.
1102. consecrate August 11. 1207. with diverse other, and died December 4. 1139.
So he was Bishop (accounting the time from his first election) 37. years,
flourishing all that while in wonderful great prosperity, and yet had a
miserable and most unhappy end.

4. Ioceline.
ROger being dead, K. Stephen nominated unto his place one Philip his
Chauncellor. But the Popes Legate and the clergy of Salisbury, utterly
refusing to receive him, he made suite for the Bishopric of Bayon and
obtained the same. After that, it seems unto me one Galfridus became Bishop
of Sarum. But because my proofs are not pregnant, and diverse affirm Ioceline
to be the next successor of Roger except that same Philip (whom no man
reckons amongst the Bishops of this See) I will pass him over in silence.
Certain it is that one Ioceline became Bishop of Salisbury, continued so many
years, and died the year 1184. He was excommunicate toget^er with the Bishop
of London in the cause of Thomas Becket, and endured much trouble about him (as
you may see more at large in the life of the said Thomas.) He had a son
named Reginald Bishop of Bath, and after Archbishop of Canterbury.

5. Hubert.
November 1. 1189. 1189. Ric. 1.1.
Hubert surnamed Walter Deane of York, was consecrate Bishop of Sarum. He
attended King Richard Ceur-de lion in his famous voyage to the holy land:
Hereof see more in Canterbury, whither he was translated the year 1193.

6. Robert.
AFter him sat one Robert, Archdeacon of Canterbury, whom Matthew. Parker
seems to call (by the name of his predecessor) Hubert. And Roger Houeden
reckons him amongst those that attended the coronation of King John the year
1199. by the name of Herbert, of him I find nothing else recorded.

7. Richard Poor.
1217. Hen. 3.1.
RIchard Poor sometimes Dean of Salisbury, was consecrate Bishop of
Chichester, 1215. and removed to Salisbury the year 1217. This Bishop
considering the inconvenient situation of his Cathedral See in a place so dry,
and bleake, as also wearied with the often insolences and malap^rt demeanure
of the soldiers that guarded the Earls Castle; forsook the same, and sending
for diverse famous workmen from beyond the Seas, began the foundation of a new
Church, in a place then called Meryfield. Pandulph the Popes Legate laid the
five first stones, the first for the Pope, the second for the King, the third
for the Earl of Salisbury, the fourth for the Countess, and the fifth for the
Bishop. In this work, though he had great help of the king, and diverse of
the nobility, yet was he so far from ending it, as 30. years after his
departure, it was scarcely finished. The Townsmen of old Salisbury they
likewise removed their habitation to the same place, and left the castle al
alone, which having been the seat of the Earls of Salisbury many years, was
given over into the Bishops hands about the year 1360. and in the time of king
Henry the seventh let down; so as now except a broken tower or two, and some
pieces of walls, there is nothing of it remaining. This good Bishop was
translated to Durham the year 1228. or as some ^eliuer 1225. See much more of
him there.

8. Robett Byngham.
THe Chapter of Salisbury elected then for their Bishop Robert Byngham one of
their own company, 1229. Hen. 3.14.
the year 1228. and the year following he was consecrate at shaftsbury. This
man with great diligence set forward the work begun by his predecessor, yet
was not able to finish the same, although he sat Bishop well near 20 years.
He died November 3. 1246. and left his Church indebted 1700. ma^kes. A man of
great years, great learning, and great virtue. He lies buried upon one side
of the Presbytery, and his successor on the other.

9. William of York.
WIlliam of York Provost of Beuerley succeeded. 1247. Edw. 3.32.
A Courtier from his very childhood, and better seen in the laws of the Realm
(which he chiefly studied) th^n in the law of God a great deal^. M^^^hew Paris
reports that he first brought in the custom that Tenants should be su^ers
unto the Courts of their Landlords. He departed from these worldly cares the
last day of March, 1256. having taken much pains in finishing the building of
his Church, and was burie^ (as is above said) ouer-against his Predecessor.

10. Gyles de Brideport.
GYles de Brideport or Bridlesford, 1256. Hen. 3.41.
Dean of Wels, was consecrate Bishop of Salisbury the year 1256. and had
license of the Pope to hold the said Deanery in Commendam still. The new Church
of our Lady in new Salisbury being now quite finished, he hallowed or
dedicated the same with great solemnity, September, 30. 1258. in the presence
of the King, and a great number of Prelates, Nobles, and other great
personages, al which he feasted very magnificently. He lies entoombed in a
fair monument on the South side of the Quire.

11. Walter de la Wyle.
1263. Hen. 3.47
WAlter de la Wyle Canon of Salisbury was restored to the temporalties of this
See, Apr. 10. Henry 3.47. 1264. and died 1270. Ian. 3.

12. Robert de Wikehampton.
1274. Edw. 1.3.
RObert de Wikehampton Deane of Salisbury was elect by the Chapter of Salisbury
soon after the decease of his predecessor, and had his election confirmed by
the Prior and Covent of Canterbury, the Archbishopricke being void. The
Bishops of the Realm thinking it an ini^^ie that the Covent should perform
that which they persuaded themselves belonged unto them, not only refused to
consecrate the elect, but also appealed against this confirmation (the Papacy
being void) unto the College of Cardinals. After three or four years
contention, judgment was given for the elect, who thereupon was consecrate the
years 1274. In his time, viz the year 1280. upon Machaelmass^ day the
Cathedral Church (upon what occasion I cannot tell) was again new hallowed by
Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury. He died the year 1283.

13. Walter Scammell.
WIthin the space of five years, the Church of Salisbury about this time had
five Bishops accounting the forenamed Robert for one, 1284. Edw. 1.13.
Walter Scammell Dean also of Salisbury was the second. He was consecrate the
yeer^ 1284. and died within a year or two after.

14. Henry de Braundstone.
1286. Edw. 1.15.
THe third was Henry de Braundstone, Deane of Salisbury, who being consecrate
the year 1286. sat only one year, and then died.

15. Laurence de Hawkeborne.
THe fourth, 1287. Edw. 1.16.
Laurence de Hawkborne being consecrate 1287. died within a few days after his
consecration.

16. William de Come^.
LAstly, 1288. Edw. 1.^7.
William de Come^ became Bishop 1288. and sat scarsely three years.

17. Nicholas de Longespe.
NIcholas de Longespe was son (I take it) unto William Longespe base son of
King Henry the second, 1291. Edw. 1.20.
and Earl of Salisbury that lies buried on the left hand of the entrance into
the Lady Chapel Unto this Earl lying very sick, the Bishop brought the
Sacrament. He understanding of the Bishops coming, met him at the chamber
door half naked, with a halter about his neck, threw himself down
prostrate at his feet^, and would not be taken up until having made confession
of his sins with tears and other signs of wonderful hearty and sincere
repentance, he had received the Sacrament in most devout manner. Some two or
three days after he lived, continuallis bewailing his sinful life with
whol^ floods of tears, and departed 1226. This Nicholas, his whether son or
kinsman, was consecrate 1291. and dying 1297. was buried hard by him under a
huge marble st^ne sometimes inlaide with brass and adorned with the arms of
their house.

18. Simon de Gaunt.
AFter him succeeded Simon de Gaunt a Londoner born. 1298. Ed. 1.27.
He was a great Divine, and made many good statutes, whereby the Church is yet
governed.

19. Roger de Mortiuall.
1315. Edw. 20.9
ROger de Mortiuall Deane of Lincoln, consecrate 131^ died 1329.

20 Robert Wyuill.
1329. Edw. 3.4.
AT the request of the Queen, the Pope was content to bestow this Bishopric
upon Robert Wyuill, a man not only, not furnished with competent gifts of
learning, but so vnpersonable (says Walsingham) as if the Pope had but seen
him, he would never have cas^ so high a dignity upon him. He sat a long time,
to wit, five and forty years and upward, in which it were a great marvel he
should not perform some thing memorable. About the year 1355. he sued William
Montacute Earl of Salisbury with a writ of right for the castle of Salisbury.
The Earl pleaded that he would defend his title by combat. Whereupon at a time
appointed, the Bishop was feign to bring his Champion unto the listes provided
for this purpose. He was clothed all in white saving that over the rest of his
apparel was cast the coat armor of the Bishop. After him came one with a
staff, and another with his target. The Earl likewise brought in his Champion
much in like sort, and all things were now ready for them to go together, when
upon a sudden, by commandment of the Kings letters, the matter was staid for a
time. Before the second meeting, the parties fell to agreement. The Bishop gave
unto the Earl 2500. marks to leave the castle with his apurtenances unto him
and his successors for ever. Beside this, he also recovered the chase of Beer,
and the castle of Sherborn which had been detained from his See ever since K.
Stephen took it violently from Roger his predecessor, for the space of 200.
years. He died the six and forty year of his consecration, September. 4.
1375. and lies buried under a fair marble stone in the middle of the quire
near the Bishops See. On the south side close by him lies Bishop Jewel, who
(as I have heard) desired to lie beside him.

21. Rafe Erghum.
RAlse Erghum Doctor of Law, was consecrate at Brugis in Flaunders, 1375. Edw.
3.49
December. 9. 1375. and was translated to Wels, September 14. 1388. See more
there. He founded, (if I mistake not) the Hospital of Saint Michael near
Salisbury, valued in the Kings books, at 25. l. 2. s. 2. d.

22. John Waltham.
John Waltham Master of the Rolls, 1388. Ric. 2.12.
and keeper of the Privy Seal succeeded, being consecrate, September. 20. 1388.
The year 1391. he became Treasurer of England, and so continued till he died:
King Richard the second loved him entirely, and greatly bewailed his death: In
token whereof he commanded tha^ he should be buried in Westminster among the
Kings (as in his Epitaph is yet to be read:) many men much envying him that
honor. He died the year, 1395. and lies just beside King Edward the first,
under a flat marble, the inscription whereof is (though partly defaced) not yet
quite perished. How he resisted William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury in
his Uisitation, and the suceesse thereof, see more in the said W. Courtney.

23. Richard Metford.
THe year 1388. in the Parliament called the Parliament that wrought wonders,
1395. Ric. 2.19^
the Barons apprehended so many of the Kings favorites as they could come by,
and committed them to Prison. The lay men for the most part they caused to be
executed. But the Clergy men lying by it a while, by the next turn of Fortunes
wheel were not only set as high, as they were before, but some of them much
higher. Amongst the rest, Richard Metford (a man of no eminent place, otherwise
then by the kings favor) was imprisoned a great while in the Castle of
Bristow. Soon after his enlargement, the king found means first to advance him
to the Bishopric of Chichester, and then after Bishop Walthams death to
translate him unto Salisbury, where he sat about 12. years and died, 1407.

24 Nicholas Bubwith.
1407. Hen. 4.9.
NIcholas Bubwith Bishop of London, and Treasurer of England, was translated
to Salisbury, the year 1407 and from thence to Wels, within the compass of the
same year. See more of him in Wels.

25. Robert Halam.
1408. Hen. 4.10.
Upon the remove of Bishop of Bubwith, one Robert Halam Archdeacon of
Canterbury, became Bishop of Sarum, an Oxford man, and the year 1403.
Chancellor of the Uniuersity. June 6. 1411 he was made Cardinal, and died in
the Castle of Gotlieb, near Constance, being at the Council there, September
4. 1417.

26 John Chaundler.
1417. Hen. 5.6.
AT what time Bishop Halam died, Martin the fifth was not yet chosen Pope. By
reason whereof, (the Papacy being after a sort void, and so the Popes
tyrannous provisions ceasing) the Chapter of Sarum had the liberty of a free
election, and chose one John Chaundler their Deane, who was consecrate December.
12. 1417. and sat Bishop about ten years. He was brought up at Oxford in
New College.

27. Robert Neuill.
1427. Hen. 6.6.
RObert Neuil Provost of Beuerley, was consecrate Oct. 26. 1427. and translated
to Durham, 1438. I find it delivered, that in the mean time he became a
principal founder of a Monastery at Sunning in Wiltshire, valued at the
suppression in 682. l. 14. s. 7. d. ob.

28 William Ayscoth.
WIlliam Ayscoth, or (as I find him called by one) Hacliffe, 1438. Hen. 6.17.
Doctor of Law, and Clerk of the Counsel, was consecrate in the Chapel of
Windsor, July, 20. 1438. and soon after became the Kings Confessor, being the
first Bishop that had b^ene known to be employed in that office, as Th.
Gascoigne has noted. The year, 1450. it happened the Commons to arise in
sundry parts of the Realm, by the stirring of Jack Cade, naming himself John
Mortimer. A certain number of lewd persons, (tenants for the most part to
this Bishop) intending to join themselves to the rest of that crew, came to
Edendon, where he was then saying of Mass. What was their quarrel to him I
find not. But certain it is, they drew him from the Altar in his albe with
his stole about his neck to the top of an hill not far off, and there as
he kneeled on his knees praying, they cleft his head, spoiled him to the
skin, and renting his bloody shirt into a number of pieces, took every man
a ragge to keep for a monument of their worthy exploit. They day before, they
had robbed his carriages of 10000. marks in ready money. This barbarous
murder was committed June 29. the year aforesaid.

29 Richard Beauchampe.
RIchard Beauchampe Bishop of Hereford, 1450. Hen. 6.29.
and a Doctor of Law of Oxford, brother unto Walter Lord of Aumond, succeeded.
He built a beautiful and sumptuous Chapel on the South side of the Lady
Chapel, and lies buried in the same under a very fair toombe of marble. He
was Chancellor of the order of the Garter.

30. Leonell Wooduill.
LEonell Wooduil consecrate the year, 1482. Edw. 4.23.
1482. was son to Richard Earl Rivers, and brother to El^zabeth the Queen
of Edward the fourth, and was for a while Chancellor of the Uniuersity of
Oxford. A near kinsman of this Bishop has assured me, that Stephen Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, was begotten by him, who to cover his own fault, married
his mother unto one Gardener, one of his meanest followers, and caused another
of better sort to bring up the child, as it were of alms. When or how he
left his Bishopric I find not. The year 1585. Henry Duke of Buckingham (who
married a sister of this man) was beheaded at Salisbury; about which time it
seems that of grief and coffeehouse, to see the destruction of him, and
many other friends, he died.

31. Thomas Langton.
1485. Ric. 3.3.
THomas Langton Doctor of Law, was consecrate Bishop of Saint David's, 1483.
removed hither, 1485. and hence to Winchester, 1493. See more of him there.

32. John Blythe.
1493. Hen. 7.9.
John Blythe Master of the Rolls, was consecrate February 23. 1493. and died
August 23. 1499. The year 1494. he became Chancellor of the Uniuersity of
Cambridge. He lies buried upon the back side of the high Altar, and has a
fair toombe, not standing after the manner of other toombes East and West, but
overthwart the Church, North and South; for which cause some call him the
overthwart Bishop.

33. Henry Deane.
1500. Hen. 7.16.
HEury Deane Doctor of Divinity, Abbot of Lanthony, sometimes Chancellor of
Ireland, and then Bishop of Bangor, was translated to Salisbury, the year
1500. and within two years after to Cante^bury. See more of him there.

34 Edmund Audeley.
THe year 1480, 1502. Hen. 7.18
Edmund Audeley, a Gentleman of the ancient and noble house of the Lord
Audeleyes, became Bishop of Rochester. Thence he was translated 1493. to
Hereford, and from Hereford the year 1502. unto Salisbury. He built a Library
over the Congregation house at Oxford (where sometime he had been brought
up,) dyed at Remsbury, Aug. 23. 1524. and lies buried in a goodly Chapel
built for the purpose on the south side of the high Altar, where also it
seems he founded a Chantry.

35. Laurent Campegius.
LAurentius Campegius born in Bononia, Bishop of Feltria, and one of the
Auditors of the Rota in Rome, 1524. Hen. 8.16.
was made Cardinal of S. Thomas, (and after of Saint Anastasia) June 27. 1517.
The year 1524. he became Bishop of Salisbury, and was deprived of his
Bishopric here by the Kings authority, the year, 1535. The year 1528. he
with Cardinal Wolsey was a Commissioner from the Pope, for hearing the
controversy about the Kings divorce from Queen Ka^harine. Because they,
wanting authority thereunto (as they alleged) did not finally decide that
cause according to the Kings expectation and great desire, he conceived great
displeasure against them both, turned this man not long after out of his
Bishopric, and dealt with the other, as in his particular history you may
read more at large. He died Bishop Cardinal of Prenests at Rome in the
month of August, 1539. and was buried in our Lady Church beyond Tyber.

36 Nicholas Shaxton.
NIcholas Shaxton Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Gonwell and Caius College
in Cambridge, 1539. Hen. 8.27.
was consecrate unto this See, and sat Bishop 4. years. He resigned it July
1. 1539. the same day that Bishop Latimer resigned Worcester, and for the same
cause, but not retaining the same constancy, he afterward preaching at the
burning of Anne Askew and others, recanted the doctrine, for defense whereof he
lost his Bishopric.

37. John Capon.
John Salcot, alias Capon, a Doctor of Law of Cambridge, and sometimes Abbot of
Hyde, 1539 Hen. 8.31.
was consecrate Bishop of Bangor, April 19 1534. and translated to Salisbury,
Aug. 14. 1539. He lies buried upon the South side of the Quire almost behind
the Bishops See.

38. John Jewel.
1559 Eliz. 2.
POpe Paul the fourth bearing an old grudge against Cardinal Poole, soon
after his advancement unto the Papacy, bestowed a Cardinals hat upon one Peter
Petow a Franciscan Friar, and a Gentleman of an ancient house, whom he made
also his Legate a latere ex plenitudine po^testatis, gave him the Bishopric
of Salisbury, and sent him into England to confront the said Cardinal Poole.
But Queen Mary stood so stoutely in defense of her kinsman (and the rather for
that thee knew this course to be taken in despite of her, the Pope being
altogether addicted unto the French party) as she would not suffer this new
Legate either to enter the Realm as Legate, or to enjoy the Bishopric the
Pope had assigned him. While this matter hung thus in question, Friar Peto died
first, (to wit in April, 1^58.) and Queen Mary soon after. It pleased then
Qeen Elizabeth to appoint unto the Bishopric of Salisbury, one John Jewel
Bacheler of Divinity. He was borne at Berynarber in Devonshire, brought up in
Oxford, first in Merton College, and then in Corpus Christi. Thence he fled
the year 1554 into Germany, and after four years exile returning, was
consecrate Bishop of this Church, January 21. 1559. Having sat here well
near 12. years, he died at Monketon Farley, Septem. 23. 1571. in the 50.
year of his age, and was buried almost in the middle of the quire. A man of
great integrity of life and conversation, and for learning (as well appears)
admirable. Who desires to understand more of him, may read the whole story of
his life, set before the peerless volume, containing his works. Here only
thus much, that he bestowed cost in building a Library for his Cathedral
Church, which his next successor replenished with books, as is to be seen by
this inscription there to be read. Haec Bibliothe ^a extructa est sumptibus R.
P. ac D. D. Iohannis Iewelli quondam Sarum Episcopi, instructa vero libris a R.
in Christo P.D. Edm. Gheast, olim eiusdem Ecclesiae Episcopo, quorum memoria in
benedictione erit, A.D. 1578.

39. Edmund Gheast.
EDmund Gheast Doctor of Divinity, sometimes fellow of Kings College in
Cambridge, 1571. Eliz. 14.
was consecrate Bish. of Rochester, Ian. 21. 1559. and made Almoner unto the
Queen the same time. Thence he was translated to Salisbury, December. 24. 1571.
died February, 28. 1578. the 63. year of his age, and was buried in the quier
upon the north side of Bishop Wiuyll. He writ diverse works mentioned by Bale in
his Centuries.

40. John Piers.
John Piers Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Christchurch in Oxford, 1577 Eliz.
20.
but brought up in Magdalen College, succeeded Bish. Gheast, both in
Rochester, (whereunto he was consecrate Apr. 15. 1576.) and in Salisbury the
year, 1577. There he sat 11. years (continuing all that while the Queens
Almoner) and was translated to York, the year, 1588.

41 John Coldwell.
The Sea having then continued void three years, John Coldwell Doctor of
Physic and Deane of Rochester, Eliz. 34.
brought up in S. John's College in Cambridge, was consecrate unto the same,
December. 26. 1591. He died in October, 1596. and was laid in the same grave
where Bishop Wiuyl had long since been buried.

42. Henry Cotton.
1598. Eliz. 40.
HEnry Cotton Chaplain unto Queen Elizabeth was consecrate together with the
Bishops of Exceter, Gloucester, and Bangor, Nouemb. 12. 1598. He was brought up
in Magdalen College in Oxford, being the son of Sir Richard Cotton Knight,
Controller of the household unto King Edward the 6. and one of his Privy
Council.

The Bishopric of Salisbury is valued at 1385. pound, 5. shillings, half
penny, and paid to the Pope at every exchange of the Incumbent, 4500. Ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF Bathe and Wels
Wells (that sometimes heretofore was called Tiddington) is not a town of any
very great antiquity. It seems not to have been a place of extraordinary note
vntll the year 704. at what time In a King of the West Saxons built a Church
there, and dedicated the same unto Saint Andrew. Somewhat more the^ 60. years
after, Kenulphus King also of the West Saxons, gave unto the maintenance of the
Ministers belonging unto that Church, all the lands near adjoining. The very
words of his Charter I have thought good to set down for the antiquity, and
some other things in the same worthy consideration.

In nomine Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Cum consler omnibus Catholicis and recte
crede^tibus in Domino, quod tempora huius temporalis vitae long lateque per
orbem incertis ac diuersis causis quotidie transeunt, nec, non homines
subitanea aegritudine preuenti, statim vitam finiendo deserunt, simul que omnia
fugitiua amittunt, beneficia domini sine aliqua tarditate pauperibus hic
tribuendo erogemus, vt illi^ fructum mercedis in aetern a patria sine fine cum
Domino foeliciter accipiamus. Quapropter, ego Cynewlphus occ. Saxonum Rex,
aliquam terrae partem, pro amore Dei, and pro expiatione delictorum meorum, nee
non (quod verbo dolendum est) pro aliqua vexatione inimicorum nostrorum
Corunbiorum gentis, cum consensu Episcorum atque satraparum meorum, Dei
Apostolo atque ministro Sancto Andreae humiliter ascribendo donabo, hoc est 11.
manentium prope fluu^um qui dicitur Weluue, ad augmentum monasterij quod situm
est iuxta fontem magnum quem vocitant Wielea, (vt eo diligentius in Ecclesia
Sancti Andreae Apostoli, Deo foli deseruiant) hijs territorijs circumscriptam:
A mendie de valle quae dicitur Asancumb, in occidentali plaga in vnum fonte^
qui appellatur Diernanwiel, deinde in collem quem incolae appellant Dornhil,
deinde in desertu^ on picelon dorn, and tunc vltra flumen Weluue in fontem
Holanwielle, and inde in desertum in vnam fossam quae est iuxta fontem ri^uli
quem incolae vocitant Sealtbroc, and tunc in eundem riuulum vsque flumen Welwe,
deinde in ripam fluminis vsque vadum Welwe, and tunc in viam publicam vsque
Sambucin quem vocitant Ellentrow, and inde in torrentem lutosum in vadum
orientalem, inde sursum per campestria inter duas petrosas vias ad supra
nominatum vallem Asancumb.

Si quis haec infringere velimminuere ausus sit, sciat se coram Christo, and
Sanctis Angelis eius in vltimo examine rationem redditurum. Scripta est haec
Syngrapha ann. Dom. incarn. 766. Inductione 12.

^ Ego Cynewlfus Gewisorum Rex, hanc meam donationem cum signaculo sanctae
crucis roboraui.

^ Ego Here valdus Episcopus, huius munificentiae cartulam propria manu signaui.

^ Ego Ernehardus Episcopus huic ^argitati consensi, and subscripsi.

1. Plegmund.
905.
ALl this while there was no Cathedral Church there, but only a College. It
happened then the year 905. that Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury by the
commandment of the King, consecrated seven Bishops in one day, whereof thee
were appointed unto Sees newly erected; Amongst the rest Adelm Abbot of
Glastonbury was ordained Bishop of Wels, and had Somersetshire allotted unto
him for his Dioces. He sat here 10. years, and after the death of Plegmund,
was removed to Canterbury. See there more of him^ and this new erection. After
him followed these.

2 Wifelinus, or Vlfelmus, who succeeded Adelm both here and at Canterbury. He
lived here nine years ( William Malmsbury says 13.) and there 14. a man
(says Pol. Virg.) famous as well for virtue as learning. See more of him in
Canterbury. 3 Elfeth. 4 Wlfhelm. 5. Brithelm, He was a Monk of Glastonbury
and became Bishop of Wels, the year 958, He gave unto the Abbey of
Glastonbury his nurse, the jurisdiction of the Country adjoining, and made it
an Archdeaconry annual, to be bestowed upon a Monk of Glastonbury, and and
he to be elected yearly by the Covent. This Brithelm the year 959. was
elected Archbishop of Canterbury. Whereof see more in Dunstan of Canterbury. He
continued Bishop here 15. years, and died 973. 6. Kinewardus or Kinewaldus
Abbot of Middleton, became Bishop of Wels, the year following, sat 11.
years, and died 985. Fl. Wig. says 975. 7. Sigar He was Abbot of
Glastonbury, sat also 11. years and died ann. 995. 8. Alwyn, called by some
Adelwyn, and by others Ealfwyn. 9. Burwold, His toombe is to be seen with his
name engraven upon the south side of the Quire at Wels. 10 Leoningus translated
to Canterbury, the year 1012. See more of him there. 11 Ethelwyn expelled his
Bishopric by Brythwin, recovered the same again from him, and shortly after
his restitution died. 12 Brithwin, who entering into peaceable possession of
this See presently upon the decease of Ethelwyn, within 13. days after died
himself also. 13. Merewith Abbot of Glastonbury. 14. Dudoco whom some name
Bodeca. He was a Saxon of Germany, or (as some deliver) borne in Larrayne. In
his time King King Edward the Confessor gave unto this Church the manors of
Congrerbury and Banwell. He was consecrate the year 1031. sat 27. years, 7.
months and seven days, and was buried upon the South side of the high Altarin
Wels. It seems his toomb is the highest of those ancient monuments that we
see upon the south outside of the Quire.
15. Giso.
GIso a Frenchman of Lorraine, borne in a village called Saint Trudo within the
territory of Hasban, 1059.
was sent Ambassador to Rom^ by King Edward the Confessor, to be resolved
there of certain doubts concerning matter of religion, about the time that
Dudoco died. Being so absent, he was elected Bishop by the Chapter of Wels,
and received consecration at Rome, April 4. being Easter day, 1059 togeth^r
with Aldred Archbishop of York, and Walter Bishop of Hereford. At his return,
he found the estate of his Church very miserable; Harald the Queens brother,
that afterward became for a while King of England, being yet a private man.

(Quid Dominifacient, audent qui talia serui?)
Upon what occasion I know not, had spoiled the Church of all ornaments, chased
away the Canons, and inuading all the possessions of the same, had converted
them to his own use; so that the Canons remaining, which fled not for fear of
this tyrant (they were only five) they (I say) were feign to beg their
bread. The Bishop complaining unto the King of this outrageous havoc, found
cold comfort at his hands: For, whether it were for fear of Haralds power or
his wives displeasure, he caused no restitution at all to be made. Only the
Queen was content to give of her own, Mark and Modesty unto the Church.
After the death of King Edward, Giso was feign to fly the land, till such time
as Harold the sacrilegious usurper being vanquished and slain, William the
Conqueror was a mean to restore, not only him to his place and country, but
his Church also to all that the other had violently taken from it, except some
small parcels that, (I know not by what means) had been conueighed unto the
Monastery of Gloucester. Yet in stead of them also, he was pleased to bestow
upon the Church, the manor of Yatton, with the Patronage of the benefice
there; and moreover caused one Ealsi to restore unto ye same the manor of
Winsham, which long since had been alienated from it, by some sinister practice
as it should seem. Giso being thus settled, took great pains, in recovering
such other things as had bin imbesilled from his Church, in procuring such
things as seemed to be wanting, and charters of confirmation for the better
assurance of what already they had: Namely, of one Arser a Courtier he found
means to obtain the manors of Coomb-Nicolas, Woormister and Lytton. Then
seeing the state of his Church so well amended, he thought good to augment the
number of his Canons, and for their better intertainement built them a
cloister, a hall, and a dorter or place for their lodging. Lastly he appointed
one Isaac by the name of a Provost to be their governor. Having been Bishop
the space of 28. years he departed this life, and was buried upon the
Northside of that place where the high altar then stood. I take his to be the
highest of those old tombs that lie upon the outside of the quier toward the
North.

16. John de Villula.
HE that succeeded (John de Villula) was a Frenchman, 1088. Will. Ru. 2.
borne in Tours, and a Physician heretofore by his prosession, or rather I
should say an Empiricke; vsu, non literis medicus probatus, says Malmsbury.
He not content to do nothing toward the amendment of ye state of his church,
used all the means he might to impair and diminish the same. The cloister and
other buildings erected by Giso for his canons, he pulled down, and in the
place where they stood, built a palace for himself and his successors,
forcing them to seek dwellings abroad in the town. But the greatest wrong of
all other was, that never acquainting them with it, he procured his Episcopal
See, which hitherto had been seated at Wels, to be removed to Bathe; and
whereas all his predecessors had been known by the names of the Bishops of
Wells, he renouncing Wells, entitled himself Bishop of Bathe, which city he
bought of the King for five hundredth marks, and founded in the same a
monastery for the receipt of his new removed Episcopal throne. This monastery
was first built by Offa king of Mercia ann. 775. and being destroyed by the
Danes (who burnt and razed to the ground almost all the monasteries of England)
was afterward an. 1010. reedified by Elphegus that at last was Archbishop of
Canterbury His building stood no long time: For the year 1087. both it, and in
a manner all the city was consumed and utterly destroyed by fire; in such sort,
as this Bishop building it a new from the ground, and augmenting the revenues
(which before were little or nothing) unto a competent proportion; may not
unworthily seem to be the founder and author of the same. He had scarcely
(or indeed not) finished it, when being a very aged man, he was taken away by
death, to wit, Dec. 29. 1122. having sat 34. years. He was buried in the
Church himself had built.

17. Godfry.
1123. Hen. 1.24
ONe Godfry a Duchman and chaplain unto the Queen, was then by her means
preferred to this See, and consecrate August 26. 1123. He was also for a time
Chauncelour of England under King Henry the first. Having continued here 12.
years, he died Aug. 16. 1135. and was buried at Bathe.

18. Robert.
1136. Steph. 1.
AFter him succeeded one Robert a monk of Jews; borne in Normandy, but by
parentage a Flemming. In the beginning of his time, to wit, July 29. 1137 the
Church of Bathe lately built by John de Villula was again consumed by fire. He
reedified it, and added whatsoever might seem to have been left imperfect by
the other. In the stirs between Maud the Empress and king Stephen, he
endured much trouble, being taken prisoner at Bathe and held in captivity a
long time by the king. The continuer of Florent. Wig. sets down the history
thereof at large. After his deliverance, he took great pains in laboring an
agreement between the Churches of Wels and Bathe who had now many years
contended which of them should be honored with the Episcopal See. At last
with the good liking of both parties, he set down this order, that the Bishops
hereafter should be called, Bishops of Bath and Wels; that each of them should
by commission appoint electors (the Sea being void) by whose voices the Bishop
should be chosen; and that he should be installed in both of these churches.
Then, whereas a kinsman of John de Villula being appointed by him Provost, by
virtue of that office had withdrawn and converted unto his own use, in a
manner all the revenues of old, belonging to the canons, with great labor and
cost at last he procured, all that had appertained unto them to be restored
again. And to take away all occasion of the like usurpation, he thought good
to divide the lands of the Church into two parts, whereof the one he assigned
unto the chapter in common; out of the rest he allotted to every cannon a
portion, by the name of a Prebend. He also it was that first constituted a
Deane to be the President of the Chapter, and a Subdeane to supply his place in
absence; a Chaunter to govern the quier, and a Subchaunter under him; a
Chancellor to instruct the yoonger sort of Canons; and lastly, a Treasurer to
look to the ornaments of the Church. The Subchauntership, together with the
Prouostship an. 1547. were taken away and suppressed by act of Parliament, to
patch up a Deanery, the lands and revenues of the Deamy being devoured by
sacrilegious cormorants. Moreover, and beyond all this, whereas our Church of
Wells at this time was exceeding ruinous, and likely every day to fall to the
ground, he pulled down a great part of it, and repaired it. At last he died,
having sat 29. years, and 4. months, and was buried at Bathe.

19. Reginald Fitzioceline.
1174. Hen. 2.21.
The Sea was then void eight years, eight months, and fifteen days. At last
Reginald Fitzioceline a Lumbard, son unto Ioceline Bishop of Salisburie, and
by his gift Archdeacon of Salisbury was appointed thereunto, being but 33.
years of age (or as one delivers but 24.) He was consecrate at S. John's in
Sauoy by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, as they returned from Rome together,
where Richard himself had been newly consecrate. This man by suite obtained
for the Chapter of king Richard the first, at what time he set forward in his
voyage toward the Holy land, the manors of Curry, Wrentich and Hatch. He
founded the Hospital of Saint John's in Bath, valued at 22. pound, 19.
shillings six pence halfepenny yearly rent, and certain Prebends in the
Church of Wells. Moreover, he granted unto the city of Wells a corporation
and many privileges which by his gift they enjoy to this day. The year 1191.
he was translated to Canterbury. See more of him there.

20. Sauaricus.
1192. Ric. 1.4.
KIng Richard the first being taken prisoner in Germany by Leopold Duke of
Austria; The Emperor took order with him, that besides other conditions to be
required of the King for his deliverance; he should make him promise to
prefer a kinsman of his (the Emperors) called Sauarike (then Archdeacon of
Northampton) unto the Bishopric of Bath and Wels, and moreover to annexe unto
the same Bishopric the Abbotship of Glastonbury. For the better effecting of
which purpose, Sauarike was content to return unto the king the possession of
the City of Bath, which his predecessor John de Villula had bought of K.
William Rufus. These things being brought to pass according to his desire, he
altered his style and would needs be called Bishop of Glastonbury. He was
consecrate on Michaelmas day 1192. at Rome and returning into England by
Germany, was there stayed and left for an hostage, in assurance of payment of
the Kings ransom. After his delivery, he yet continued there a long time and
became Chancellor of Burgundy under the Emperor, till that the year 1197. the
Emperor falling sick, (as Houeden delivers) he was sent by him into England,
to release unto the King all such moneys, as yet remained unpaid of that
wrongful and unconscionable ransom. The Emperor then dying before he could
return, he thought good to remain here still upon his charge. In 12. years
that he sat Bishop, he did not any thing memorable, ^xcept happily this may
seem worthy remembrance, that he impropriated the Parsonages of Ilmister and
Longsutton, making them Prebends and appointing the one of them always to be
allot^d unto the Abbot of Muchelney, and the other to the Abbot of Athelney,
for the time being. The Prebend of Ilmister is vanished together with the Abbey
of Muchelney: Longsutton parsonage by the piety of Queen Mary was restored to
the church of Wells, and remains to this day a part of our possessions. This
Bishop died August 8. 1205. and was buried at Bathe Concerning him and the
great sums he died indebted, who so list may read somewhat in the Decretals
of Greg. lib. 3. tit. 9. cap. Nouitille.

21. Ioceline de Wells.
SAuarike being dead, the monks of Glastonbury made importunate suit at Rome
to be restored unto their old government under an Abbot. 1205. Joan. 7.
Their importunity gave occasion of setting down a decree in the Court of
Rome, Vacant sede, nihil in Episcopatu innouandum esse, That a See being void,
nothing is to be altered in the state of the same. Before the end of the year.
1205. Ioceline a Canon of Wels borne also and brought up in Wells (at
leastwise as to me by diverse arguments it seems) was consecrate unto this See
at Reading. The Monks of Glastonbury were by and by doing with him; and after
much contention prevailed, but so, as they were feign to buy their victory at a
dear rate, allowing unto the Bishopric of Wells out of their possessions,
the manors of Winscombe, Pucklechurch, Blackford and Cranmer, and the
patronage of the benefices of Winscombe, Pucklechurch, Ashbery, Christ Mai^ord,
Buckland and Blackford. Soon after this composition made, he was feign to
fly the realm and continued in banishment the space of five years. The cause
and manner thereof you may see in Stephen Langton of Canterbury. After his
return he gave himself altogether to adorning and increasing the state of his
Church. He founded diverse Prebends, impropriated diverse Parsonages to the
behoof of his Chapter, and gave them the manor of Winscombe. He allotted
reasonable revenues to every of the dignities, which before that time had
small profit by their places. He appointed vicars to assist the Prebends in
doing the service of the Church: and laid unto the Bishopric the manors of
Congresbury, Chedder and Axebridge. He also and Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, laying
their purses together, founded the Hospital of S. John's in Wells, which
being suppressed by act of Parliament and given to the Earl of Southampton,
he exchanged it with Bishop Clarke for Dogmersfield. Moreover in building he
bestowed inestimable sums of money. He built a stately Chapel in his Palace
at Wels, and an other at Owky, as also many other edifices in the same houses:
And lastly, the Church of Wells it self being now ready to fall to the
ground, notwithstanding the great cost bestowed upon it by Bishop Robert; he
pulled down the great east part of it, to wit, all the West end, built it a
new from the very foundation, and hallowed or dedicated it October 23. 1239.
Having continued in this Bishopric 37. years, he died at last November 19.
1242. and was buried in the middle of the Quier that he had built, under a
marble toomb of late years shamefully defaced.

22. Roger.
1244. Hen. 3.29
NOtwithstanding the composition lately made by Bishop Robert for the order of
election, the monks of Bathe refusing to join with the Chapter of Wells,
elected of themselves one Roger the Chaunter of Salisburie for Bishop, who (for
that a kinsman of the Popes had the aduouson of his living) obtained easily
consecration by the Popes means September 11. 1244. After long suit in law
between the two Churches for the righting of this wrong; the end was, that
Wells men must put up the wrong, and they of Bathe yield assurance of
performing the composition for the time to come; which was done accordingly.
The Bishop (by whose means this accord was made) not living long after,
departed this life, January 13. 1247. having sat not past four months above
three years. He only of all the Bishops of this Church for the space of
almost 600. years died within the compass of 6. years after his coming
hither, which in so long space has yet never happened to any other. He is the
last of our Bishops that was buried at Bathe.

23. William Bitton, or Button.
THe Covent of Bath, 1247. Hen. 3.32.
accordlng to their promise, now at last joining with the Chapter of Wells,
William Button, first Subdeans, and then Archdeacon of Wells, was with one
consent elected. This man had much to do with the monks of Glastonbury,
concerning those lands which by composition they had yielded to the Sea of
Wells: And although the Bishop had sustained great charge in diverse of the
kings services, namely and especially in traveling into the furthermost part
of Spain about his affairs. Yet he favored altogether the part of the
monks, and gave them his uttermost assistance in their suites. They were ended
at last by the Bishops death, who deceased in the beginning of the year 1264.
having first possessed his brethren and kinsfolks of all the principal places
in our Church of Wells. For I find that about this time, there was another
William Button, his brothers son, Archdeacon of Wells, and after Bishop; one
Richard Button Chaunter, Nicolas Button a brother of the Bishops Treasurer,
John Button another brother of his Provost of Coomb and Parson of Ashbery,
after whose death one Thomas Button succeeded in the Pronostship; and that one
Thomas Button (whether the same man or no I can not tell) was first Archdeacon
after William Button aforesaid, then Deane of Wells, and lastly, the year
1292. Bishop of Exceter. This Thomas Button it was that for the soul of this
William Button our Bishop, gave to our church the bell commonly called the
sermon bell, as in a French inscription upon the same bell is yet to be seen.
He lies buried in the middle of our Lady Chapel under a Marble toombe.

24. Walter Giffard.
1264. Hen. 3.49.
WAlter Giffard Canon of Wells and a Chaplain of the Popes, was elected May
22. 1264. and soon after consecrate by the Bishop of Paris, in the absence of
Boniface the Archbishop: Having sat two years he was translated to York.
See York.

25. William Button or Bitton.
1267. Hen. 3.52.
WIlliam Button Archdeacon of W^lles and nephew to the former William Button,
obtained this Bishopric the year 1267. and was restored to the temporalties
of the same. March. 4. Hen. 3.51. A man so greatly accounted of for his
holiness (says Matthew Paris) as when Robert Killwardby Archbishop of
Canterbury had license of the Pope to take consecration at the hand of any
Catholic Bishop; he made choice of him, only in respect of his holiness. He
made many good statutes by which our Church is yet governed: Amongst other
things he ordained four general Chapter days in the year, at which only
times, such things should be ordered as might pati moram. It were greatly to be
wished, that all other Churches were to observe the same order. He deceased in
the month of November 1274. Many superstitious people (especially such as were
troubled with the tooth ache) were wont (even of late years) to frequent much
the place of his burial, being without the North side of the Quier, where we
see a Marble stone, having a pontifical image graven upon it. He gave unto
our Church the manor of Bicknaller.

26. Robert Burnell.
IN the month of January following Robert Burnel Archdeacon of York and Canon
of Wells (son of Robert, 1274. Edw. 1.3.
and brother of Hugh, both Lords Burnell) was elected: A man of great power and
authoity in those days, being first Treasurer, then Chancellor of England and
always of the privy counsel under K. Edward the first. That gave him means of
gathering great wealth, which he employed, partly in building his houses (as
namely that goodly hall of the palace at Wells, pulled down some fifty
years since by Sir John Gates, that for a just reward of his sacrilege, soon
after lost his head). But his principal care was, to enrich his brethren and
kindred, whom he greatly advanced. He was much employed in Welsh affairs, from
which he could be so il spared, as the king was consent for a while to let him
keep his court of Chauncery at Bristoll. Some there be suppose the castle of
Acton-burnell in Shropshire to have been built by him, at what time he was
occasioned to live in those parts. He sat eight^ene years, and lies buried
in the middle of the body of his Church, under a marble stone, somewhat below
the pulpit.

27. William de Marchia.
THe same year that Burnell died, 1293. Edw. 1.22.
William de Marchia, then Treasurer of England succeeded, and was restored to
the temporalties of this See March. 19. Edw. 1.21. I have seen, amongst the
records of our church of Wells, the copies of diverse letters unto the Pope and
Cardinals from the King, from diverse of the nobility and the clergy of that
Church, commending this man so far forth for his holiness, testified (as they
write) by many miracles; as they entreated very earnestly for his Canonisation.
I marnell much at it: For Matthew of Westminster and Polydor Virgil, complain
grievously of him, as the author of a heinous sacrilege, in causing the king
to spoil all the Churches and Monasteries of England, of such plate and money
as lay hoorded up in them, for the payment of his soldiers. It was Edward the
first, a prince, that wanted neither wit to devise, nor courage to execute such
an exploit, and to lay the fault upon another at last. Yet likely enough it is,
that such a fault stamped upon him (how undeservedly soever) might bar him out
of the Popes Calender, who otherwise was not wont to be ouer^dainty in
affoording that kind of honor, where fees might be readily paid in for it. He
sat ten years, and lies in toombed in the South wall near the Cloister
door. In this man's time, the Chapter house was built, by the contribution of
well disposed people; a stately and sumptuous work.

28. Walter Haselshaw.
1302. Edw. 1.31.
WAlter Haselshaw, Deane of Wells, had his election approved by the Kings
royal assent. Aug. 13. Edw. 1.30. He sat 9. years, and lies buried under a
huge marble, in the body of the Church toward the North, almost over against
the pulpit. This Bishop made many statutes.

29. John Drokensford.
1309. Edw. 2.3.
John Drokensford keeper of the kings Wardrobe succeeded being consecrated (as
I find) before, May. 17. Edw. 1.3. Following the steps of his predecessor
Burnell, he bestowed somewhat in increasing the buildings and liberties of his
See, but much more upon his kindred. He had much contention with his Chapter
(the story whereof is to be seen in the statute book) sat 19 years, and
lies buried under a reasonable seemly toombe of free stone in the chapel of
S. Katherine, which is upon the right hand going toward the Lady chapel.

30. Ralfe of Shrewsbury.
1329 Edw. 3.^.
WIth one consent of the chapter of Wells and the covent of B^^^e, Ralfe of
Shresbury was then elected, and dared to be consecrate (a great venture in
those da^es) before the Pope had allowed of him. His approbation (says
Walsingham) cost him at last a huge sum of money. This man is famous for the
first foundation of our Uicars close in Wels. The memory of which benefit is to
be seen expressed in a picture upon the the wall at the foot of the
hall-staires. In it the Uicars kneeling, seem to request the Bishop in these
words: Pervicos positi villae, pater alme rogamus,
Vt simul unity, te dante domos maneamus.
Dispersed about the town, we humbly pray,
Together, through thy bounty, dwell we may.
He answers them thus: Vestra petunt merita, quod sint concessa petita,
Vt maneatis ita, loca fecimus hic stabilita.
For your demand, deser^s do plead, I will do that you crave,
To this purpose established, here dwellings shall you have,


This picture being now almost worn out; at what time of late years, the
Uicars by the gracious favor of her Majesty had their revenues confirmed to
them, being in danger to be spoiled of them by certain sacrilegious
cormorants; they likewise caused a picture of excellent workmanship to be
drawn, containing a memorial of both the one and the other. These buildings
being erected; toward the maintenance of some hospitality in them, he gave
unto that new College, the manor of Welsleigh, and allotted them twenty
nobles yearly to be paid out of the vicarage of Chew. He built moreover a house
for the Queristers and their master: He built likewise the Church of Winscombe
and the courthouse at Clauerton, a great chamber at Euercrich; and much other
odifices in other of his houses. His palace of Wels he enclosed with an
exceeding strong wall and a large mote, into which he turned the river running
hard by He gave unto his church many things, of which nothing now remains (I
think) but a great chest bound with iron, in which the Chapter seal is kept.
Lastly, it is to be remembered, that with great cost he procured the forest
of Mendip to be disparked. Having performed these and many other things
deserving perpetual memory; he departed this life at Wiuelescomb Aug. 14.
1363. having continued Bishop 34. years. His body was buried before the high
alter under a goodly monument of Alablaster, compassed about with grates of
iron. About a 60. years since (for what cause I know not) it was removed to
the Northside of the presbytery, but lost his grates by the way. The image of
Alabaster that lies upon it, is said to be very like him.

31. John Barnet.
1363. Edw. 3.38.
John Barnet removed from Worcester succeeded him, sat two years, and was
translated to Ely. See Ely.

32. John Harewell.
1366. Edw. 3.41.
EDward surnamed the Black Prince, obtained then of the Pope this Bishopric
for John Harewell, a chaplain of his that was Chancellor o^ Gascoigne. He was
consecrate at Bordeaux March 7. 1366. by the Archbishop there. He contributed
the third penny toward the building of the south west tower at the end of the
Church, the Chapter bearing the rest of the charge. He paid an hundred marks
for glasing the window at the West end of the church, and gave two great bells,
the biggest of which being cast four times since I was of this church, now at
last serves for the greatest of a ri^g, the goodliest for that number (being
but five) (I think) in England. He died in the beginning of July. 1386. having
sat 19 years and was interred over against Burwold, where we see a toombe of
Alabaster, that seems to have been a sumptuous piece of work, but is now
much defaced. The author of the book called Antiq. Britannicae affirms that
he was treasurer of England.

33. Walter Skirlaw.
1386. Ric. 2.10.
WAlter Skirlaw was translated from Lichfield hither, and after two years from
hence to Durham. See Durham.

34. Ralph Erghum.
RAlph Erghum Doctor of law was consecrate Bishop of Salisbury at Bruges in
Flanders December 9. 1375. 1388. Ric. 2.12.
From thence he was translated hither, September 14. 1388. and died April 10.
1401. He impropred to the chapter of Wells the pasonage of Puklechurch, and
gave unto them a certain house, called the George, beside certain plate and
Church ornaments to the value of 140, l. Moreover, he built a College at
Wells for fowerteen priests, at the end of the lane now called College-lane. He
lies buried in the body of the Church, upon the North side of that chapel
that joins to the great pulpit.

35. Henry Bowet.
THe Bishopric so void, 1401. Hen. 4.2.
was conferred by the Pope upon Richard Clifford Archdeacon of Canterbury who
being denied his temporalties by the king, was feign, notwithstanding the Popes
prouisory Bulls, to give place unto Henry Bowet Doctor of law and Canon of
Wells, that with the kings favor was lawfully elect thereunto. See more
hereof in Richard Clifford of London. To Wells he was consecrate Nouemb. 16.
1401. in Saint Paul's church in London, the king and all the Nobility being
present; and was translated to York December 1. 1407. as the records of Wells
testify. But the records of the Archbishop affirm Nic. Buckwith to have been
translated to Wels in this man's place October the 5. the year aforesaid. The
year before his tran^lation he attended the Kings daughter into Denmark that
was then married to the king there. The third and fourth of Henry the fourth, I
find he was Treasurer of England.

36. Nicholas Bubwith.
NIcolas Bubwith being Bishop of London and treasurer of England, 1408. Hen. 4
9.
left both those places for Salisbury, which also he was content to forsake to
accept Wells, within the compass of one year after he was first consecrat to
London. This man being at the Counsel of Constance, was appointed one of those
thirty persons that were joined with the Cardinals in the election of Pope
Martin the fifth. He built an almes-house upon the Northside of S. Cuthberts
Church, endowing it with good possessions for the relief of many poor persons:
They were much increased afterward by one Storthwayt, somewhat also by Bishop
Bourne, and lately by the now Bishop D. Montague. So that now it maintains
24. poor people. He impropred unto our Church the parsonage of Buckland
Abbatis: He built our Library over the Cloisters, and a little Chapel for
morrow mass over against the great pulpit. In that Chapel (built belike for
the place of his burial) he founded a Chauntry, and dying October 27. 1424.
was there enterred. It is supposed he was a great benefactor and contributor
toward the building of the Northwest tower at the West end of the Church:
which, his arms fixed upon diverse places of the same, do^ ^ar^ly show. It is
delivered also, that he gave Bicknaller unto the Church, which I ^ind to be the
gift of William Button the second, and not his, as before is declared. See more
of him in London.

37. John Stafford.
1425. Hen. 6.4.
By the Popes gift, John Stafford, a man very noble and no less learned, became
Bishop of Wells after Bubwith in the beginning of the year 1425. August 23.
1443. he was advanced to Canterbury. See Canterbury.

38 Thomas Bekinton.
1443 Hen. 6.22.
TThomas de Bekinton Doctor of Law and Deane of the Arches, writ a very learned
discourse in confutation of the Law Salique of the Frenchmen; (An argument very
necessary for those times) and being as well taken by other, as handled by
himself; got him such favor with that virtuous king Henry the sixth, as it was
a means to advance him, first, unto the place of principal Secretary, then to
the keeping of the privy seal, and then to this See, whereunto he was
consecrat in the chapel of Eaton, October 13. 1443. at what time, the
foundations of that chapel being but newly laid, it was hollowed, and he
sung the first mass in the fame. This man built the rank of houses on the
North side of the market place at Wells, called the new works He made a
conduit in the market place, bringing the water from S. Andrews well. He built
(as to me it least wise seems) the west side of the cloister. He was a great
benefactor to Lincoln College in Oxford; and a great builder of his own
houses, upon the repayring and beautifying of which, he spent first and last
(as himself professes in his will) 6000. marks. Perceiving himself sickly
and not like long to continue, he made his will: and doubting least K. Edward
the fourth should make it void by picking some quarrel of treason unto him; (a
thing no doubt easy to be done, for that this bishop had been always a
constant follower of the house of Lancaster) with great cost he procured from
the said king a confirmation of his will, dated November 3. 1464. In it he
bequeathed to the Church of Wels 20, l. in money, four very sumptuous
vestments, 400, l. to buy copes, a vessel for holy water of silver waighing
10, l. Troy, a cross of silver parcel gilt of the same weight, a chair for
the Bishop to use in the Church (which yet remains) and certain cushions
with other ornaments. To the Church of Bathe he bequeathed a cup, a censor and
a paxe of silver, all waighing 30. ounces, beside 30. coapes and other
vestments. To New college in Oxford (where he was brought up although by a
note I have seen it should appear he had his education in Merton College) a
silver cross of ten pound weight, a fair bible in four volumes, a silver
basin of 10, l. weight, certain coapes and other trifles. To Winchester
College a silver cross double guilt, waighing 9. pound and ten ounces, two
silver candlestickes of the same weight, and a number of v^stments. To the
hospital of S Katherines in London (whereof he had bin master) many vestments
and 50. shillings in money. To the church of Sution Courtney (a benefice of his)
he gave many vestments, beside 5. l. in money to be divided to the poor of
the parish; as also the like sum to the poor of Bedwyn, of which Church it
is said he w^^ Prebendary: and so much more (beside certain vestments) to
the poor of Bekington, of which place (as being borne th^re) most men suppose
he took his name. For my part I think not so; for I persuade my self, his
liberality in that case (I mean to the place of his nativity) could not have
been contained within so narrow a scantling. But (to proceed) unto the Austin
Friars of Bristoll he gave 20. s. and to the F^yer Minors of Bridgewater 20, s.
To ten priests that should study at Oxeford, and daily say mass for the souls
of himself, his parents and benefactors, especially of Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, William Wickam Bishop of Winchester John Elmer and Walter Thurston
5, l. a piece: and to ten poor scollers of the same university for five
years 10, d. a week. To his seruingmen of the better sort he bequeathed 5, l.
a piece; to his meaner yeomen five marks; to every boy of his household 40, s.
and to so many of his servants as were not provided of abiding places, meat,
drink and woonted wages for three months after his decease. To his successor
he gave 100, l. upon condition he would accept it in lieu of all
dilapidations, otherwise willing his executors to spend it in law against him:
and lastly unto his executors he left only 20, l. a piece, requiring them to
employ all the rest of his goods to good uses at their discretion. They
answered very justly, the trust ^eposed in them, and that with such discretion
as well as fidelity, that I should do them wrong not to remember them. The one
was Richard Swanne, Prou^st of Wells, and parson of Yeuelton, that heretofore
had been executor after the same sort unto Richard Praty Bishop of Chichester
(this man dwelt in the canonical house that is near the market place.)
Another was, Hugh Sugar Doctor of law and Treasurer of Wells (he built the
chapel all of free stone, which was of wood before, adjoining to the great
pulpit, and dwelt where I now do, in the middle house of the three that join
upon the Cambray.) And the third was John Pope Doctor of Divinity Prebendary of
Saint Decumans and ^arson of Shyre. These three (as I have been told by old
men) lie buried in a rank together, ^^er against the great pulpit, under three
Marble stones of one ^ashion. The Bishops goods that remained vnbequeathed,
they bestowed for the most part, in building the Uicars close at Wels, which
had been begun by Bishop Ralfe long before; a lumptuous and beautiful work.
This great Benefactor of our Church departed this life. January 14. 1464. and
was buried in a goodly toombe built by himself, long before his death, situate
upon the South side of the Presbytery. In his life time he mad^ a grant (as
appears by a deed which I have seen) of certain lands belonging to the
Bishopric, called Green castle, Forsbutts, Garslade, Bolehurst, and Frogmer,
unto one Thomas Dawbridgecourt Esquier, that had married one Beatrix a kinswoman
of his, signifying in the same deed that Agnes Raby the sister of Ralfe Erghum
his predecessor, had formerly held them, as also Emma had done, that was
mother, and Agnes Bradley the sister of John Stafford, whom he immediately
succeeded.

39. Robert Stillington.
I Find then that one Io. Phreas was elected Bishop of this See, 1465. Edw.
4.6.
but died before consecration. In the month of July next after his death,
Robert Stillington, a Doctor of Law of Oxford, Arch^eacon of Taunton, first
Keeper of the Privy Seal, and then Chancellor of England, was elected, and
consecrate in April following. A man greatly i^ favor with King Edward the
fourth, under whom he always ^lourished in great authority; being employed
by him in sundry Ambassages, as namely unto the Duke of Britain, for
apprehending the Earl of Richmond, that afterward was King Henry the seventh,
in which business he so ^e ^^irred himself, as that his double diligence
therein proved afterward his ouerthrow^ With Richard ^h^ 3, he temporized, and
was a man specially employed in his Coronation. W^^^ King Henry the seventh he
sorted not so well: for the year 1487. about the time that Stokefielde was
sought, in which Lambert was apprehended (the counteri^^^ E^^le of W^rwicke) I
find that this Bishop was (...), for ye^lding (as we may suppose) some
assistance unto the said Lambert. If therein he sought to advance Edward the
true Earl of Warwick, and to remove from the possession of the Crown, the
issue of his so bountiful a Patron King Edward, whose eldest daughter K.
Henry had married; he was carried but with the same humor that possessed
Margaret Duchess of Burgundy King Edwards own sister, who set up not only
this counterfeite, but after him also Perkin Warbecke, using all her possible
means to displace King Henry, as esteeming the house of York quite despoiled
of the Kingdom, except some one of the issue male of that Family were seated
in the same. But whatsoever the particular fault of this Bishop were, it
seems, that having a guilty conscience, he betook himself unto the
Uniuersity of Oxford, as hoping that the privileges of the same might be some
shelter and defense unto him. Whereof the King having advertisement, sent unto
the Chancellor of the Uniuersity, one Edward Willoughby his Chaplain, to
require that the Bishop might be delivered unto his officers, as being one,
unto whom (he being at the time no Student there) the privileges of the
Uniuersity could not extend, so far at least, as to protect him in a matter
of treason, unto which no privilege ought to yield any patrociny. After two or
three refusals, at last by permission and conniuence of the Chancellor, he was
arrested and committed prisoner to the castle of Windsor, to wit, in the month
of October, 1487. where he lay and continued until his decease, which happened
about Midsommer in the year 1491 He built that goodly Lady Chapel in the
Cloisters, that was afterward pulled down by Sir John Gates, who destroyed
also the great Hall of the Palace, mentioned in Rob, B^^nwell, p. 299^ In that
Chapel his body rested but a short time. For it is reported, that diverse old
men, who in their youth had not only (...) the celebration of his ^^nerals,
but also the building of his ^o^mbe, Chapel and all did also see, toombe and
Chapel destroyed, and the bones of the Bishop that built them turned out of
the lead, in which they were inferred.

40 Richard Fox.
Soon after the death of Bishop Stillington, Richard Fox Bishop of Exceter
was appointed his Successor, 1491 Hen. 7.7.
viz. in Feb. 1491. and so continuing for three years, was translated first to
Durham, and after to Winchester. See Winchester.

41 Oliver King.
Oliver King Doctor of Law, brought up in Kings College in Cambridge, 1495.
Hen. 7.11.
was principal Secretary to the King, became Bishop of Exceter, the year
1492. and succeeded Richard Fox in this Church, as well as Exceter, was
translated hither, November 6. 1495. He pulling down the old Church of the
Abbey of Bathe, began the foundation of a fair and sumptuous building, but at
the time of his death left it very imperfect. His successor bestowed some cost
on it, and William Bird the last Prior there, endeavoring what he might by
himself, and other to see it finished; had even brought it to perfection, when
the dissolution of the Abbey had almost ouerthrown what before was set up. The
covering of lead was taken away, and the whole fabric like in few years to
fall to the ground, but that it pleased God to stir up at several times
diverse good men (and especially the now Bishop) who out of a pious and
ch^^itable disposition, employing liberally great sums of money upon the
same, have not only preserved what had been before finished but perfected
what might seem to be wanting, whereof, more hereafter. This man sat Bishop
eight years, dyed January 24. 1503. and is thought to lie buried at Windsor in
a little Chapel upon the South side of the quire, over against which place,
upon the enterclose of tho Quier, I find written, (under the pictures of King
Henry the sixth and his son King Edward the fourth, and Henry the seventh)
this that follows, Orat^ pro Domino Olinero King iuris prosessore, ac
illustris Edwardi (primog^niti Henrici Sexti) and serenissimorum Regum Edwardi
quarti, Edw. quinti, and Henrici septimi, principali Secretario, dignissimi
ordinis Garterij Registrario, et huius Sancti Collegij Canonico, anno Dom.
1489. et postea per dictum illustrissimum Regem Henrici 7. anno 1492. ad sedem
Exon. commendato.

42. Hadrian de Castello.
1505 Hen. 7.21.
POpe Innocent the eight, hearing of a certain dangerous sedition raised up
against James the third K. of Scots: thought good to send into Scotland one
Hadrian de Castello, as a man for his wisdom and other good parts likely to
appease those tumults, he being as far as London on his way, was certified
of the King of Scots death, whom his own subjects had slain in battle. So
resting himself a while there, he grew into acquaintance with John Moorton
Archbishop of Canterbury, who being much delighted with his learning, and
discreet carriage; commended him so effectually unto the King ( Henry the
seventh) as he thought good to constitute him his Proctor for the dispatch of
all his causes at Rome; where he so well behaved himself, as the King at last
in reward of his pains and fidelity, was a means of his preferment unto the
Bishopric of Hereford first, the year 1503. and then, the year following,
of this See. Pope Alexander the sixth in the mean time, a little before his
translation hither, had made him Cardinal: being before that time the Popes
general Treasurer, and principal Secretary. In those places having gathered
exceeding great wealth^ Caesar Borgia the Popes son hoping to make a prey of
the same, determined to poison him, and accordingly provided certain slagons
of poisoned wine to be brought unto the Cardinals vineyard, where the Pope had
appointed to sup^ giving great charge unto the messenger, that no body should
meddle with the wine before himself came. Howbeit the Pope coming in very
hot, and weary, sooner then he was expected, and calling for drink, when as
yet no provision was brought to the place; the messenger thinking the wine
brought by him to be but some excellent and choice stuff reserved for the
Popes own cup, filled out of the same unto him. While he was yet drinking, in
came his son, who not perceiving the error, pledged his father The Pope (as
being thirsty) took a great draught, and moreover being very aged, died the
next day. His son being young, and happily not taking so much, applying also
convenient remedies, recovered; but lay sick very long, which was the cause of
his utter overthrow at the last. Thus died that monster of his age Alexander
the 6. And thus by his own devilish device came this Borgia to his
destruction, whom Machiauel in his works so much magnifieth. Guieciardine
(that writes this story) says, that by the like practice, he and his Father
had made away diverse other before that time as namely, the Cardinals of Capua
and Mutina, men very loving and faithful unto them. At last it pleased God in
this sort to serve them of their own sauce, and to bring them into the pit
they had dug for other. Now to return to Hadrian, he continued here 12.
years, until that the year 1518. he was deprived of this and all other
promotions, and that upon this occasion. A Cardinal of Rome called Alfonso
Petruccio conspired with certain other Cardinals, the death of Pope Leo 10.
Amongst them, this our Hadrian was content to make one; moved thereunto, (as P.
Iouius affirms) not by any grudge or private displeasure, but only by an
ambitious conceit, that surely he should be Pope, if Leo were once dead. A
certain Witch or wise woman (as we call them) having heretofore fore told him
very strangely diverse things that had happened to himself and other of his
friends: took upon her to assure him, that after the death of Pope Leo, it
should come to pass, that a certain old man named Hadrian, borne of mean
parentage, preferred only for his learning, wisdome^ and other good parts,
should be advanced unto the Papacy. These particularities, Hadrian was
persuaded could agree to none other but himself: for h^ being borne at
Corneto, a poor Fisher town of Hetruria, of mean (or rather very base)
parentage; only through virtue and good deserts, rose by many degrees unto the
preferments before mentioned. The witches prediction fell out true, but in an
other: For Hadrian a Dutchman, the son of a Brewer of Utr^^ht, that had been
Schoolmaster to Charles the fifth Emperor, was the man that succeeded Leo, by
the name of Hadrian the sixth. This conspiracy being come to the Popes
knowledge; he caused Cardinal Petruccius to be apprehended, and shortly
after executed. Coming then to the Consistory, he openly signified, that he
was not ignorant, how diverse other Cardinals were to blame in that business,
which so nearly concerning him, he was nevertheless content freely to give
pardon unto so many as should then immediately confess the fault. Hereupon
Hadrian and some other falling down upon their knees, before him, acknowledged
what they had done, and humbly besought him of mercy. He promised to be as
good as his word, and indeed so was. Howbeit Hadrian, either fearing the
worst, or ashamed to show his face, shortly after stale secretly away, and was
never either seen or h^ard of afterward.

43. Thomas Woolsey.
1518. Hen. 8.10.
Upon the deprivation of Hadrian, Cardinal Woolsey held this Bishoprick^ in
Commendam four years, even till that resigning it, he took Durham. See more
of this man in York.

44. John Clerk.
1523. Hen. 8.15.
John Clerk Doctor of Divinity, and Master of the Rols, brought up in
Cambridge, was consecrate the year, 1523. A man much employed in Ambassages.
He died in the end of the year 1540. being poisoned (as it was supposed) in
Germany, when he went Ambassador to the Duke of Cleue, to render a reason of
the Kings divorce from the Lady Anne of Cleue his sister. He is buried in the
Mineries at London.

45 William Knight.
WIlliam Knight Doctor of Law and Archdeacon of Richmund, 1541 Hen. 8.33.
brought up in New college in Oxford, a man likewise much employed in
Ambassages by K. Henry the eight, was consecrate May 29. 1541. sat somewhat
above six years, died September 29. 1547. and was buried under the great
Pulpit, which he caused to be built for his toombe. In the market place of
Wels, there is a goodly cross erected partly by this man, the inscription
whereof importing so much, is as follows. Ad honorem Dei omnipotentis, et
commodum pauperum mercatum Welliae frequentantium, impensis Gulielmi Knight
Episcopi, and Richardi Wooleman huius Ecclesiae Cathedralis olim Decani, hic
locus erectus est. Laus Deo, pax viuis, requies defunctis. Amen. Ann. Dom. 1542.

46. William Barlow.
WIlliam Barlowe Doctor of Divinity, sometimes a Canon of Saint Osythes, 1549.
Edw. 6.3.
was consecrate Bishop of Saint Assaph in the end of the year, 1535.
removed to Saint David's, within a few months after, viz. in April, 1536.
sat there about 13. years, was then translated hither to succeed Bishop
Knight, and continued here all the days of King Edward. In the beginning of
Queen Mary, he was forced to leave his Country, Bishopric and all, and to
live exiled in Germany, until that by her death, and the most happy
advancement of our late Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, he was at once restored
to to his Country, and preferred to the Bishopric of Chichester. There he
lived about the spuce of ten years, and dying the year 1569. was buried in
his own Church.

47. Gilbert Bourne.
1554. Mary. 2.
BIshop Barlow being forced to forsake his Bishopric here, Gilbert Bourne
Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon of London, Fellow sometimes of all. Souls
College in Oxford, was appointed thereunto by Q. Mary. The nonage of that good
King Edward the 6. giving opportunity to those horrible Sacriledges, that robbed
the Cathedral Churches of England of (I dare say) the one half of that they
possessed, had been an occasion of the utter ruin and destruction of this
See, if Bishop Barlow taking advantage of the death of some men in the latter
end of K. Edward and Bishop Bourn making use of the zeal of Q. Mary in
^endring the state of the Church; had not been the means of recovering what is
now left unto the same, even the lands of the Bishopric, in a manner every
whit, all the land belonging to the Archdeacon of Wels, and some land of the
Chapter, to wit, the parsonages of Duluerton and Longsutton. And it is supposed
that this man (had he stood but a little while longer) had recovered diverse
other possessions to his See, that now are thought to be lost irrecouerably.
He was a benefactor unto the Uicars close, and to the almshouse, and began
the foundation of a certain College in the Canonical house that stands
near the market place; but was hindered by the death of Queen Mary and his
deprivation, from finishing it. Being displaced for not subscribing according
to order, he was commmitted to the custody of Master Carey Deane of her
Majesty's Chapel, lived with him many years, and died at Sylferton in
Devonshire (where he lies buried) September 10. 1569.

48. Gilbert B^rkley.
1560. Eliz. 3.
IT pleased then the Queens Majesty, in the beginning of her reign, to
nominate unto this See one Gilbert Barkeley, born in Norfolk, but descended of
the ancient and most honorable house of the Lord Barkley, at least wise as the
A^mes assigned unto him by the Heralds do seem to testify. He was
consecrate March 24. 1559. sat almost 22. years, and growing into a Lethargy
(which diminished much of the vigor and strength, as well of his mind, as his
body certain months before his decease) at last departed this world. Nou. 2.
1581. being 80. years of age, and was buried upon the North side of the high
Altar in his own church, where w^^ see a handsome monument of free sto^^ built
over him.

49. Thomas Godwyn.
THomas Godwyn my dear and most reverend Father, 1584 Eliz. 26.
was borne at Okingham in Barkeshire, and brought up first in the free School
there, then for a little while under one Doctor Lauton Deane of York, who sent
him to Oxford, and so long as he lived (which was not past a two or three
year) exhibited unto him there. He being taken away, it pleased God to
provide for him otherwise, by ray^ing up friends, that procured him to be
chosen fellow of Magdalene College. Toward the latter end of King Edwards
reign forsaking that place, he took on him the teaching of a free School at
Brackley, directing his studies partly to divinity, and partly also to
physic, the practice whereof in Q. Mary's time (when he might not be
suffered to teach any longer) maintained him, his wife and children honestly.
He received orders, and his first spiritual preferments at the hand of Bishop
Bullingham, then of Lincoln, after of Worcester, in the beginning of the
reign of Q. Elizabeth. By her appointment he became first Deane of Christ
church in Oxford, in the 7. then of Canterbury in the 9. year of her reign,
and lastly, Bishop of Bathe and Wels, being consecrate thereunto, Sept. 13.
1584. Having sat 6. years, two months, and six^ days, he departed this
mortal life, being about 73. years of age, Nouemb. 19. 1590. at Okingham,
the place where he was borne, and there lies buried upon the South side of the
Chancell, under a marble; and near unto a monument (fixed in the wall) far
more answerable unto the ability of him that set it up, then unto the virtues
and deserts of him, to whose memory it was erected. On it are engraven these
words following.

Mem. S^
Parentis chariss: Patris year reuerendi Th. Godwyni, S. Theol. Doctoris, aedis
Christi Oxon. primum, ac deinde Cantuarien. Decani, Bathonum demum ac Wellinum
Epis. qui hoc in oppido natus, hic etiam (dum Valetudinis recuperandae gratia,
ex medicorum consilio hu^^ secedit) quattana febre confectus, mortalitatem
exunt, Nou. 19. 1590 cons. suae, anno 7. and hic iacet, expectans aduentum
magni Dei.

Posuit Fill. Franc. Godwyn. Exonum Subdecanus.

50. John Still.
1592 Eliz. 29.
The Sea having continued void two years and somewhat more, John Still Doctor of
Divinity, and Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, was consecrate thereunto
in February, 1592. He deceased Febr. 26. 1607. and gave in his Testament 500.
l. to the alms house in Wells.

51. James Mountague.
James Mountague Doctor of Divinity, Deane of Worcester, as also of his
Majesty's Chap. son unto Sir Edw. Mountague of Bowghton in the Coun^y of
Northamp. Kn. consecrated Bishop of Bathe and Wels, 1608. ^ae. 6.
April 17. 1608. His first education he had in Christ's College in Cambridge,
to witte^ till upon the erection of Sidney College, he was appointed the
first Master of the same. Beside great pains he took in ouerseeing the
buildinges of it, he gave unto it twenty marks per annum. By his means
chiestie, the Watercourse was brought to the town of Cambridge, and through
that College. That business cost him 100. l. He waynscotted the lower part of
the Chapel there, and sundry other ways was beneficial to that College.
After his coming to Wells, he bestowed great sums of money in repayring and
beautifying of his house there, especially the chapel and gallery. He has
increased the means of the Almesmen: He gave one thousand pounds toward the
reparation of the Abbey church at Bathe: and moreover built a fair Pulpit of
free stone in the same.

This Bishopric is valued in the Kings books at 533. pound, and 15. pence,
and paid to the Pope for an Income, only 430. florens, although in those days
it were one of the richest Sees of England.

The Deanery of Wells was first erected in the time of King Stephen, about the
year 1150. as before is delivered, and one Iuo made the first Dean, after whom
have succeeded these: 2 Richard de Spakeston. 1160 3 Alexander. 4 Leonius. 1205
5 Ralfe de Lechlade. 6 Peter de Ciceter. 7 William de Merton. 1236 8 Ioannes
Sarracenus. 1241 9 Gyles de Bride port, 1225. Bishop of Salisbury. after, viz.
1256 10 Edward de la Knoll. 1256 11 Thomas de Button, 1292. B. of Exceter 1292
12 William Burnell. 1292 13 Walter de Haselshaw, 1295 B. of Bathe and Wels
1302. 14 Henry Husee. 1302 15 John de Godeley. 1303 16 Richard de Bury, Bishop
of Durham. 1333 17 Wibert de Luttleton elect, died before installation. 1334 18
Walter de London. 1336 19 John de Carlton. 1353 William de Gamell elect,
refused the place. 1361 20 Stephen de Penpell. 1361 21 John Fordham, Bishop of
Durham, 1379 22 Thomas de Sudbury. 1381 23 Nicholas Slake. 1396 24 Thomas
Stanley. 1402 25 Richard Courtney. 1409 26 Walter Metford. 1413 27 John
Stafford, Bishop of Bathe and Wels, and after Archbishop of Canterbury, 1425 28
John Forest. 1425 29 Ioh. Delauere, Men, Ep. 1447 30 Nicholas Carent. 1448 31
William Witham. 1467 32 John Gunthorpe. 1472 33 William Cosyn. 1498 34 Thomas
Winter. 1525 35 Richard Woolman. 36 Thomas Cromwell. 1537 37 William
Fitz-Williams. 1540 38 John Goodman. 1548 39 William Turner. 1550 40 Robert
Weston. 1566 41 Valentine Dale. 1574 42 John Herbert. 1589 43 Benjamin Heyde.
1602 44 Richard Meredith. 1607


THE BISHOPS OF EXCETER. This discourse following is taken (for the most
part) verbatim out of Master John Hookers Catalogue of the Bishops of Exceter.
THe countries of Devonshire and Cornwall, after their conversion unto
Christian Religion, were a while under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of the
West Saxons, whose See was established at Dorchester. Afterward Winchester
being appointed a Cathedral See, about the year 660. All the West Country
was allotted to the government of the Bishop of that Church, and so continued
under him till that the year 705. Sherborne was made a Cathedral Church. Two
hundred years they were subject unto the Bishop of Sherborne, to wit,
until the year 905. At what time Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury, by the
commandment of the King (as elsewhere I have declared more at large) erected
diverse new Sees, namely at Wels in Somersetshire one, in Cornwall another, and
a third in Devonshire. The Sea of Athelstan the Bishop of Cornewal, was for a
while Saint Petrockes in Bodmyn, and afterward Saint Germans. Werstan
Bishop of Devonshire placed himself first at Lawton, but soon after removed
to Credyton, now called Kyrton: The successors of Athelstan in the Dioces of
Cornwall (as I find) were th^se: Conanus. Ruydocus. Aldredus. Britwyn.
Athelstan, he lived the ye^re 966. Wolfi. Woronus. Wolocus. Stidio. Adelredus.
Burwoldus.


About the year 1040. (or soon after) Saint Peter's church in Exceter was
appointed the Sea for both Devonshire, and Cornwall. And has ever since that
time so continued.

NOw to come unto the particular history of this Church you shall understand,
that amongst many religious houses erected heretofore in and about the City of
Exceter, three there have been sometimes within the site and circuit of that
place, which now is called the close of S. Peter's, The first of these was a
house of Nuns where the Deanes house and the Calender Hay or Uicars close do
now stand: The second was a Monastery for Monks supposed to be built by King
Ethelred, the third son of King Ethelwolph, about the year 868. And the
third was also for Monks, to wit, of the Order of S. Benet, founded by King
Athelstan, the year 932. therabout where the East parts of the church now
called the Lady Chapel, stands. Of this foundation thus one writes.

Hanc vrbe^ primus Rex Athelstanus, inpotestatem Anglorum effugatis Britonibus
redactam, turribus muniuit and muro ex quadratis lapidibus cinxit, ac
antiquitus vocatum Muncketon, nunc Exeter vocari voluit; ac ibisedens, mansum
quoddam dedit ad fundandum monasterium pro monachis Deo and Sancto Petro
famulantibus. Now besides the great charges he was at in building: He gave also
sufficient lands and revenues for their living, whereof Morkshut and
Treasurers-beare, be yet remaining, and are appertaining to the Treasurer of
the said Church. But after the time of K. Athelstane, the Danes with great
hostility and cruelty having ouerrun this land, this City and Church was much
infested and troubled: for with no less cruelty did the Danes pursue the
Englishmen and Saxons, then did the Saxons before pursue the Britains. And
then the Monks not able to endure the same, sted and forsook their house,
seeking places of refuge and better fafety And so was this Monastery left
destitute, and forsaken for sundry years, until the time of King Edgar. He
making a progress into these West parts to visit Ordogarus Earl of Deuon.
(whose daughter he had married) came to this City, ann. 686. and pitying
their distressed state, restored them their house and liuelihoods: And
appointed Sydemanus (who afterward was Bishop) To be their Abbot. After that,
they continued together (although in great troubles) until the time of King
Swanus the Dane. He with a great troop and Army of his Danes came to this
City, ann. 1019 besieged it, and at length having taken the same, spoiled,
destroyed and burnt both City and Monastery. But yet shortly after it was
again restored: For King Canutus being advertised of the great cruelties done
by his Father Swanus; did at the request of one of his Dukes named Atheldredus,
make restitution unto Atheluoldus then Abbot, both of lands, livings and
privileges, as appears by his Charter, dated an. 1019. About 30. years
after this, K. Edward the Confessor coming to Exceter, by the advice of
Leophricus Bishop of Crediton, sometimes Lord Chancellor of England, and of
his privy Council, partly for the better safety of the Bishop and his
successors, and partly to provide a more apt place for the Monks, translated
the Bishops See from Credit^n to Exceter, and sent the Monks to Westminster.
The Bishop then thus removed from the old, and placed in the new: indoweth his
new See with the lands and liuelihoodes of his former Church, pulled down the
two monasteries nere adjoining, the one of Nuns, the other of Monks, and
adds them to his own Church. After Leophricus his successors following his
example, did every of them for the most part endeavor the augmentation and
increase of their Church, some in liuelyhoods, some in liberties and
privileges, some in buildings, and some in one thing, some in another.

ANno 1112. William Warwest the third Bishop of Exceter began to enlarge his
Cathedral church (which at that time was no bigger then that part which is
called the Lady Chapel) and laid the foundation of that which is now the
quier. Ann. 1235. or thereabouts. William Brewer Bishop appointed a Deane,
whose name was Serlo, and a Chapter of four and twenty prebendaries; He
appropriated to the Deanrie Brampton and Coliton Rawleigh: For the Prebendaries
he purchased lands, allotting to every of them, the like portion of four pound
by the year. Anno 1284. Peter Quiuill Bishop, finding the Chauncel of his
Church to be builded and finished to his hands, built the lower part or body of
his church from the quier westward: He also appointed a Chanter and a Subdeane
in the Church: to the one he impropriated Painton and Cudleigh, and to the
other the parsonage of Egloshalle in Cornwall. Moreover he impropriated the
Parsonage of Saint Newlin in Cornwall, and of Stoke Gabriel in De^onshire to
the Chancellor of the Church, for reading of a Divinity Lecture. Ann. 1340.
John Grandisson Bishop, did increase the length of his Church from the Font
Westward, and vaulted the roof of the whole Church, so ending, and fully
finishing the same.

ABout the year of our Lord, 1450. Edmund Lacy began to build the Chapter
house, and George Neuill finished it. The Cloisters were built by the Deane and
Chapter.

Hereby it appears, that from the first foundation of this church under K.
Athelstane, until the time that Bishop Graundsone perfected the building
thereof, it was above 400. years, which notwithstanding, so uniformly the
same is compact, as if by one and the same man it had been plotted, begun,
continued and ended.

A Catalogue of the Bishops of Devonshire.
VVErstanus (called by some Adulphus) the first Bishop of Devonshire was
consecrated Bishop of this Dioces an 905. and had his See at Bishops Tawton. In
the year following, viz. 906. he died and was buried in his own Church.

PVtta after the death of Werstanus, was elected and consecrate Bishop, and had
his See at Tawton. He taking his iourny toward Crediton to see the king, (or
as some say, Vffa the kings lieutenant) was by the said Vffas men slain. Upon
his death the Sea was removed to Crediton.

EAdulphus brother to Alsius Duke of Devonshire and Cornwall, and founder of
Launceston, was consecrated Bishop of Devonshire, but installed at Crediton
where he had his See, and continued Bishop 22. years. He died the year 932.
and was buried in his own Church. In his time K. Edward the elder, gave unto
the Bishop of Crediton three manors, to wit, Polton, Coeling and Lanwitham,
and that (as the history of the Church of Winchester reports) Vt inde
singulis annis Visitaret gentem cornubiensem ad exprimendos little errores: Nam
antea in quantum potuerunt (says the writer) Veritari resistebant, and non
decretis Apostolicis obediebant.

EThelgarus an. 932. succeeded Eadulphus This Ethelgarus after he had been
Bishop ten years; he died and was buried in his own Church.

ALgarus an. 942. after Ethelgarus was constituted and installed Bishop at
Crediton. And having been Bishop about ten years died and was buried in his
own Church.

ALfwoldus, as Matthew of Westminster writes, was next Bishop after Algarus,
and consecrated by the advice of Dunstane ann. 952. He died 972. and was buried
in his own Church.

ALwolfus safe nine years after Alfwoldus, and was buried in his own Church.

SYdemanus Abbot of S. Peter's succeeded. In this man^ time the Danes overcame
and spoiled the whole countries of Devonshire and Cornwall, burned the town
of Bodwyn, and the Cathedral Church of Saint Petrokes, with the Bishops house.
Whereupon the Bishops See was removed from thence to Saint Germans, in which
place it continued until the remoouing and uniting thereof unto Crediton.
Sydemannus anno. 977. died and was buried at Crediton in his own Church.

ALfredus (whom Dicetus calls Alfricus) abbot of Malmesbury, was consecrated
Bishop, and installed at Crediton. He was taken for a learned man, and wrote
two books, the one entitled de rebus coenobij sui, and the other de rerum
naturis. In his time King Etheldred endowed the Bishopric of Saint Germans
with lands, liberties, and privileges. The Danes made a fresh invasion upon all
Devonshire and Cornwall, burned and spoiled the Abbey of Ordolphus at
Tauistorke, besieged Exceter, and being removed from thence, were fought
withal at Pynhow about 3. miles from the city and overthrown. Alphredus after
he had been Bishop about 9. years, died an. 699. and was buried in his own
Church.

ALwolfus (as Diocetus writes) was the next Bishop. In his time Sweno king of
Denmark by inticement of one Hugh then Earl of Devonshire, came with a great
host and besieged the city of Exceter, took it and burned it, and with great
cruelty used the people, until in the end Almarus Earl of Devonshire, and the
gentlemen did yield and submit themselves, and so obtained peace. This
Alwolfus about the 15. year of his Bishopric 1030. died and was buried in
his own Church.

LIuyngus upon the death of Burwoldus Bishop of Cornwall his Uncle (whom
William of Malmsbury calls Brithwoldu^) procured the county of Cornwall to
be added unto his Dioces, being first a monk of Winchester and after Abbot of
Tauistoke, he was consecrate 1032. and after became Bishop of Worcester. See
more there.

THE BISHOPS OF EXCETER.
THe first Bishop of Exceter, was Leofricus, a man (says mine Author)
descended from the blood and line of Butus, brought up in Loreine, who was so
well commended not only for his nobility, but much more for his wisdom and
learning; that King Edward the Confessor had him in great favor, and made him
first one of the privy Council, then Chancelour of England, and lastly (the
Bishopric of this Dioces being void) he was preferred thereunto. By his means
the Bishops See was removed from Crediton to Exceter, the year 1049. (or
thereabout) K. Edward the Confessor coming to Exceter, together with his
Queen; took order that the monks of S. Peter's should be placed at Westminster
(as before is mentioned) and removed the Episcopal See from Crediton to this
city. It is remembered, that himself taking the Bishop by the right hand, and
Ed^th his Queen by the l^ft, led him up unto the Altar of his ^ew Church,
and there placed him in a seat appointed for him. This Bishop obtained of the
same king much good land, and many notable privileges for his Church. He made
diverse statutes, and amongst other things, he ordained, that all his Canons or
Prebendaries should lodge in one Chamber, and take their diet at one table. He
appointed them likewise a steward that should provide them victuals daily, and
once in the year delivered them new clothes. This kind of government (says
William Malmesbury) he learned in Lorrain^, and it is (says he) continued by
the posterity, although by the corruption and luxury of our time somewhat
altered and decayed. After that he had well and worthily ruled his Church and
Diocese, by the space of three and twenty years, he ended his days in peace
Anno 1073. and was buried in the Cemitory or churchyard of his own Church
under a simple and a broken marble stone, which place by the sithence enlarging
of his Church is now within the South Lower of the same, whereof of late Anno.
1568. A new monument was erected in the memory of so worthy a personage, at the
charges of the Deane and Chapter.

1074. W. Con. 9.
2 OSbertus or Osbernus a Normane borne, and brother to an Earl named William,
was preferred to this Bishopric the year 1074. He was Bishop 30. years,
toward his latter end waxed blind, died 1103. and was buried in his own Church
H. Huntingdon, and others that follow him, make mention of one Gaufridus Bishop
of Exceter about this time; but they are mistaken. It is Gaufridus or Go^fridus
Bishop of Constantia that joined with Odo Ea^le of Kent, etc.

1107. Hen. 1.8.
3 WIlliam Warewest a Normane born, and Chaplain^ both to the Conqueror and his
two sons, William and Henry; a very grave and a wise man, having been much
employed in sundry Ambassages, was preferred at last unto this Bishopric by
king Henry the first; and consecrate thereunto in August 1107. together with
diverse other. He first began to enlarge his Church (as above I have mentioned)
and obtained from the King Plympton, Brampton, and Saint Stephens in Exceter.
Brampton he gave to his Cathedral Church, and it was afterward allotted unto
the Deane for a part of the corpse of his Deanery. Saint Stephens with the Sea
belonging to the same he reserved to himself and his successors, who thereby
are Barons and Lords in the Parliament. As for Plympton, he gave it unto a
Monastery which he built there for regular Canons. In his latter days he
became blind: which imperfection notwithstanding, the king thought good to send
him Ambassador unto Pope Paschalis the second, and he dispatched the business
commended unto him, to the Kings great contentment. Not long after his return;
having small joy of the world, he gave over his Bishopric and became one of
the regular Canons of his own house at Plympton, where he died 1127. and was
buried, He was Bishop about 20. years.

4 RObert Chichester Deane of Sarisbury, 1128. Hen. 1.29.
was consecrate Bishop an. 1128. He was a Gentleman borne, very zealous and
devout in his religion according to the manner of those days. He went often
in Pilgrimage, sometime to Rome, sometime to one place, sometime to another,
and ever would bring with him some one ^elike or other. He was also a liberal
Contributer to the buildings of his Church. After that he had continued two and
twenty years, he died the year 1150. and was buried in his own Church.

5 RObert Warewest nephew to William Warwest his predecessor and Deane of
Salisbury, 1150. Steph. 16.
was consecrate Bishop by Theobaldus Archbishop of Canterbury anno. 1150. After
that he had occupied this See nine years or therabout, he died anno. 1159.
and was buried at Plympton by his uncle.

6 BArtholomeus Iscanus, 1159. Hen. 2.6.
otherwise Bartholomew of Exceter, was consecrated Bishop of Exceter, an^ 1159.
or rather (as it seems to me) 1161. He was called Iscanus of Isca, which is
one of the ancientest names of this City: a mean Citizens son, but very well
learned; and wrote sundry books, as of Predestination, Freewill, Penance, and
others. He was esteemed also very devout, holy, and a painful Preacher.
Matthew Paris in his report of the year 1161. tells a long tale, of a
certain strange apparition or revelation which happened unto him in the
country as he visited his Dioces. He was a great adversary of Thomas Becket.
I marvel that any such thing might be credibly reported of him. After he had
been Bishop about fourteen years, ann. 1184. he died, but where he died or
was buried it appears not.

1186. Hen. 2.33.
7 John the Chaunter of the Cathedral Church of this City, and Subdeane of
Sarum, was consecrate Bishop of this Church ann. 1186. He was well reported of
for his liberality, in continuing the buildings of this Church, wherein he was
nothing inferior to his predecessors. Having been Bish^p about six years, he
died ann. 1191.

1191. Ric. 1.3.
8 HEnry Marshall sometimes a student in the University of Oxford, Archdeacon of
Stafford and Deane of York, brother to Willam ye Earl Marshal of England, was
consecrated Bishop by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury anno 1191. he finished
the building of his Church according to the plat and foundation which his
predecessors had laid, and that done, he purchased the patronage and Lordship
of Wodbery of one Albemarly, which he gave and impropriated unto the Uicars
chorall of his Church. After that he had lived 12. years in his Bishopric,
he died an. 1206. and lies buried in the Northside of the presbytery of his
Church in a very saire toombe of Marble.

1^06. Io^n. 8.
9 SImon de Apulia Deane of York was consecrate Bishop of this See 12^6^ Of him
there remains ^o memorial at all but this, that having been Bishop 18.
years, he died an. 1224. and was buried in his own Church. In this man's time,
to wit, the year 1222. the city of Exceter was divided into parishes.

1224. He^. 3.8.
10. WIlliam Brewer, very shortly after the death of the foresaid Simon was
elected Bishop, and consecrate upon Easter day an. 1224. A man very well borne,
being brother to Sir William Brewer Knight, the husband of the eldest daughter,
and one of the heirs to William de Verona Earl of Devonshire, founder of the
Abbeyes of Tor, Hartland, and other monasteries. He was of the privy Council
under King Henry the third, and greatly in savor with him The year 1235. he
traveled into Germany, to conduct thither the Lady Isabel the kings sister, to
be married unto Frederick the Emperor: and not long after, the said Emperor
making a voyage into the holy land, he attended him thither. Being returned
home, and minding (as his predecessors had done) to leave some good memorial
behind him, he made a Deane, and constituted 24. Prebendaries within his
Church. To the one he impropriated Brampton and Colyton Rawleigh; for the
others he purchased so much land, as out whereof he assigned to every
prebendary lower pound by the year, and of these he ordained his chapter.
After that he had continued here 19. years, he died an. 1244. and lies buried
in his own Church under a plain marble stone in the middle of the presbytery,
not far from the Bishops See.

11 RIchard Blondy was consecrate 1245. 1245. Hen. 3.30.
This Richard was a man of a mild spirit, but very stout against such as in
his time did offer any injury to the Church. In his old years being but a
weak man, he was much carried and ruled by such as were about him. They taking
the opportunity of time, used all the means they might to enrich themselves.
His chiefest officers were ou^ Lodosewell his chancellor, Sutton his register,
Fitzherbert his official, and Ermestow the keeper of his seal: these, with
other of the household, compacted amongst themselves, whilst the Bishop was yet
living (who then lay sick and very weak in his bed) to make unto themselves
conueyances of such liuelihood as then lay in the Bishops disposition; and
accordingly made out aduousons and other such graunts, as to them seemed best:
all which were forthwith sealed and delivered according to the orders among
them concluded. These their subtle dealings were not so closely conveyed, but
that the next Bishop following, boulted and found the same out; and did not
only rereuerse all their doings, but also excommunicate them; neither were
they absolved until they had done penance for the same at Saint Peter's Church
openly upon Palm Sunday being the 19. day of March 1267. This Bishop in the
twelfs year of his Bishopric died, to wit, an. 1257. and was buried in his
own church.

1257. Hen. 3.42.
12 WAlter Bronescome Archdeacon of Surry, was consecrate upon Passion Sunday
March 10. 1257. He was borne in the city of Exceter of poor and very mean
parentage. At the time of his election he was not priest, and therefore not
capable of any such dignity: but immediately, he took that order upon him, and
^oorthwith was consecrated Bishop: all which was done within fifteen days. So
many dignities to be cast upon one man in so short a time, had not been
lightly seen. He founded the college of Glaseney in Perin in Cornwall, and
endowed the same with ^aire possessions and revenues, being induced thereunto
by a vision or dream as himself reports in the foundation of the same. He
purchased the Barton of Rokesdone and Cli^t, and gave it to the Hospital of S.
John's within the Eastgate of the city of Exceter. He instituted in his own
church the feast called Gabriels feast; and gave a piece of land for the
maintenance thereof. He also did by a policy purchase the Lordship and house
of Cli^t Sachfield, and enlarged the Barton thereof by gaining of Cornish wood
from his Deans and Chapter fraudulently: building then a very ^aire and
sumptuous house there; he called it Bishops Cli^t, and left the same to his
successors Likewise he got the patronage of Cli^t Fomesone now called Sowton,
and annexed the same to his new lordship, which (as it was said) he procured by
this means. He had a Friar to be his chaplain and confessor, which died in
his said house of Clift, and should have been buried at the parish church of
Farryngdon, because the said house was and is in that parish: but because the
parish church was somewhat far of, the ways foul, and the weather rainy, or
for some other causes, the Bishop commanded the corpse to be carried to the
parish Church of Sowton, then called Clist Fomeson, which is very near and
bordere^h upon the Bishops Lordship, the two parishes there being divided by a
little lake called Clist. At this time one Fomeson a gentleman was Lord and
patron of Clist Fomeson: and he being advertised of such a burial toward in
his parish, and a leech way to be made over his land, without his leave or
consent required therein; calls his tenants together, goes to the bridge
over the lake between the Bishops land and his, there meets the Bishops men
bringing the said corpse, and forbids them to come over the water. The
Bishops men nothing regarding this prohibition, do press forwards to come
over the water, and the others do withstand so long, that in the end my Lords
friar is fallen into the water. The Bishop takes this matter in such grief,
that a holy Friar, a religious man, his own chaplain and confessor, should so
irreverently be cast into the water, that he falls out with the gentleman,
and upon what occasion I know not, he sueth him in the law, and so vexes and
tormenteth him, that in the end he was feign to yield himself to the Bishops
devotion, and seeks all the ways he could to curry the Bishops good will,
which he could not obtain, until for redemption, he had given and surrendered
up his patronage of Sowton, with a piece of land: All which the said Bishop
annexeth to his new Lordship. Thus by policy he purchases the manor of
Bishops Clist, by a devise gains Cornish wood, and by power wresteth the
patronage of Sowton from the true ownor. This Bishop after he had occupied
this See about 23. years, died July 22. 1280. and was buried in his own
Church, in a sumptuous tomb of Alabaster standing upon the South side of the
entrance into the Lady chapel. Upon it this Epitaph following is yet to be
seen.

Olimsyncerus pater, omni dignus amore,
Primus Walterus magno iacet hic in honor.
Edidit hic plura dignissima laud statuta,
Quae tanquam iura servant hic omnia tuta.
Atque hoc collegium quod Glaseney plebs vocat omnis,
Condidit egregium, pro voce data fibisomnis.
Quot loca construxit, pietatis quot bona fecit,
Quam sanctam duxit vitam, vox dicere quae scit?
Laudibus immensis iubdet gens Exoniensis,
Et chorus and turbae, quod natus in hac fuit vrbe.
Plus si scire velis, festum statuit Gabrielis.
Gaudeat in coelis igitur pateraste fideli^.
13 PEter Quiuil a Canon of Exceter, ann. 1281. was consecrate Bishop of
Exceter. He first instituted a Chanter and a Subdeane in this Church. To the
one he impropriated Painton, and Chidleigh, and to the other the rectory of
Eglo^heyl in Cornwall. He was a liberal and a special Benefactor to the
Hospital of S. John's in Exceter, as well in goods as in liuelihoods. He first
began to enlarge and increase his Church from the Channcell downwards, and
laid the foundation thereof. In his time anno. 1285. Walter Lichlade the first
Chaunter, was slain in a morning as he came from the morning service then
called the Mattens which was wont to be said shortly after midnight; upon
which occasion the King came unto this City, and kept his Christmas in the
same, together with Elinor the Queen, and upon diligent inquisition for the
authors of the said murder, finding diverse culpable, he severely punished the
same (as the Chronicles of Bruton report, but mistaking Oxon: for Exon:)
causing Alfride the Mayor of the city 4. other to be hanged, beside one Pikot
and others that were long imprisoned for that offense. Moreover an order was
set down for enclosing of the church yard, and building of certain gates
there, as appears by a composition between the Bishop and the city, bearing
date, in festo annuntiationis beatae Mariae, 1286. The king at the suite of the
Earl of Hereford, (who at his being here, was lodged in the house of the Gray
Friars, which then was near the house of Saint Nicholas) obtained of the
Bishop, that they should be removed from thence to a more wholesome place
without South gate; whereof after the ^ings departure grew some controversy,
because the Bishop refused to perform his promise made to the king. This man
also impropriated the parish of Saint Newlin, and the Parish of Stoke Gabriell,
and united the same to the office of the Chauncellor of the Cathedral Church;
that the said Chauncellor should continually read a lecture within the said
City of Divinity, or of the Decretals. In the eleventh year of his
Bishopric he died, being choked in drinking of a Sirrope. and.1292. He was
buried in the middle of the Lady Chapel. Upon his toombe is written, Petra
tegit Petrum, nihil officiat sibi terrum. The Franciscanes or Gray Friars of
this City, imputed his death to his hard dealing with them. For whereas he had
promised the King to provide a convenient place for them to build their house
in, and had willed their warden, named Deodatus to seek out and make inquiry
for the same; yet notwithstanding when he had so done, because the same was
within his Fee, swaruing from his said promise he utterly denied to perform
the same, being dissuaded by Peter Kenefield, a Dominicane or a black Friar,
and Confessor unto him the said Bishop: For he envying the good success of the
Franciscanes, advised the Bishop, in no wise to permit them to enjoy the place
which they had gotten. For (says he) as under color of simplicity, they
creep into the hearts of the people, and hinder us poor Preachers from our
gains and livings; so be ye sure that if they put foot within your
Liberties, they will in time find means to be exempted from out of your
Liberty and jurisdiction. The Bishop being soon dissuaded, utterly forbids
them to build, or to do any thing within his Fee or liberty. About two years
after, the Bishop kept a great feast upon the Sunday next before S. Francis
day; And among others, Walter Winborne, one of the Kings chief Justices of the
bench, was invited, who had been present when the Bishop at the request of the
King made promise to further and help the Franciscanes. He now in their
behalf, did put the Bishop in mind thereof, and requested him to have
confideration both of his own promise, and their distress. The Bishop
misliking this motion, waxed angry, and did not only deny to yield
thereunto, but wished himself to be choked what day soever he did consent unto
it. It fortuned that the same week, and upon Saint Francis eve, the Bishop
took a certain Sirope to drink, and in too hasty swallowing thereof, his
breath was stopped, and he forthwith died. The Franciscanee hearing thereof,
made no little adoo about this matter, but blased it abroad, that Saint Francis
wrought this miracle upon the Bishop, because he was so hard against them.

1^93. Edw. 1.22.
14 THomas Bitton Deane of Wells, the year following was elected Bishop, and
the Sea of Canterbury being void, he was consecrate by I. Roman Archbishop of
York. He left no memorial of any great things done by him, saving that he
continued the building of his Church. After that he had occupied this See 14
years, he died September 21. 1^07. and was buried under a fair Marble inlayed
with brass before the high altar.

1307. Edw. 2.1.
15 WAlter Stapledon, a man learned, wise, and of great pa^entage, was
consecrate Bishop of Exceter, March 18. 1307. The inthronization or
installation of Bishops was a Ceremony of great solemnity in those days; the
particularity whereof it shall not be amiss once for all to describe t^ this
man. At Eastgate he alighted from his horse, and weat on foot to S. Peter's
Church. All the way where he should pass being laid and covered with black
cloth; on each hand he was conducted by ^ gentleman of great worship. Sir Hugh
C^^^tney (who claimed to be steward of his feast) going n^xt before him. At
broad gate he was received by his Chapter and Quier in the ^o^namen^s, with
Te Deum, and so car^ie^ into the Church. The v^ual Ceremonies being performed
there, at his passa^e a g^^^t feast was prepared, for the entertainment of
such noblemen and other parsonages of account as repaired hither at that ^ime.
It is inc^edible hold many oxen, tons of Ale, and Wine, are said to have
been vs^ally s^ent a^ this kind of solemnity. Even so much, (...) the wh^le
yeere^ (...) at this time would not suffice to pay for. This Bishop was greatly
in fauou^ with king Edward the second who made him first of his pr^uy Council,
then Lord Trea^urer of England, and employed him in diverse ^mbassages of great
importance. The year 1329. he was sent Emb^ssador to the French King, and
joined in commission with the Queen, for the conclusion of a peace between
these two Princes. That being ordered and brought to pass according to his
desire, he returned home; leaving the Queen with the French king her brother,
to perfect and fluish the agreement already made. She whether weary of her
husband or provoked by the insolency of the Spencers and other favorites about
the king; had long since determined to depose her husband from the kingdom, if
possibly she might; and to set up her son Prince Edward. Having therefore
rid away this Bishop, whose loyalty and faithfulness to his soueraign she
well knew was immovable; she began to put in practice the execution of this
long plotted designement, and in the end (to be short) explored the same.
While these matters were a brewing, it happened the king to take his journey to
Bristow; and he thought good to commit the government and custody of the city
of London to the fidelity of this Bishop. At what time therefore the Queen
began to approach near unto the city with her power, he required the Mayor to
send unto him the keys of the gates. The Commons (who altogether favored the
Queens party) hearing this, and perceauing the Bishop purposed to withstand
her; set upon him violently, drew him into Cheapeside, and beheaded him there,
together with Sir Richard Stapleton a Knight his, brother. Then they carried his
body to his house without Templebar, (now called Essex house) and buried it
basely in a heap of land, in the backside of the same house. In this sort did
this worthy prelate loose his life, in defense of his Prince; and that by their
means, who of all other, were bound in the strongest bands of duty and
allegiance to have done as he did, I mean^ the Queen and the Prince her son.
They shortly after, whether regarding his calling, or desiring to make
semblance of disliking the manner of his death, or happily moved with some
remorse of conscience; commanded his body to be taken from the place where it
was first said, and being conueighed to Exceter, with all funeral pompe^
there to be solemnly enterred. He lies buried upon the north side of the high
Altar, in a fair toombe of free stone: And his brother before mentioned lies
over against him in the North wall of the North Isle. This murder was
committed October. 15. 1326. And his funerals were solemnised at Exceter March.
28. following. The year 1316. he erected two houses in Oxford for the better
increase and advancement of learning; the one named Heart hall, the other
Stapledons Inn, now called Exceter col^ege; in which he placed thirteen
fellows, and a Rector, whom he appointed to be chosen annually. This
foundation is much increased of late years, by the liberality of Sir William
Peter, late principal Secretary, and others. Moreover it is to be remembered,
that he was a special benefactor unto the hospital of Saint John's in Exceter;
to which he impropriated for the releeuing of certain poor children, the
Rectory or personage of Ernscombe.

1326. Edw. 3.1.
16. James Barkley descended of the noble house of the Lord Burkley, was
consecrate March 15 an. 1326. by Walter Reynold Archbishop of Cant. at the
comman^ement of Isabell the Queen. The Pope very angry herewithal, did so
revile the Archbishop, as he died for grief and anger soon after. Neither did
the new consecrate Bishop stay long behind him: for he died also the 24. of
June following. A man reputed very godly and wise. He was buried (as some say)
in his own church, but others deliver that he never came hither at all.

1327. Edw. 3.1.
17. AFter the death of Burkley, the chapter of Exceter, authori^ed by the Kings
Conge de'lire, proceeded to an election, and made choice of one John Godley a
Canon of their Church, who was also Deane of Wells. This election was confirmed
by the Kings royal assent (as I find by a record in the Tower. Howbeit, John
Grandeston being in Italy with Pope John the two and twentieth; his friends
found means to have a stay made of the consecration of Godley, till they might
deal with the Pope for disanulling of the fame, as also for conferring the
Bishopric by way of provision upon the said Grandesson, the which thing they
affected, and caused him to be consecrate of Rome Octo. 18. 1327. He was borne
and descended of the ancient house of the Grandessons Dukes of Burgundy. His
father was named Gilbert, the brother of Otho, the great Lord Grandesso^; which
Gilbert coming into this land, was well etertained by the king and nobility.
By means of Henry Earl of Lancaster (with whom he came) he married the Lady
Sibil, daughter and one of the heirs to John Tregos Lord of the Castle of
Ewias near Hereford East, and by her had issue five sons and four daughters of
which this Bishop was one, who was borne in the parish of A^shpertone in the
Diocese of Hereford. He was from his childhood very studious, became learned,
and wrote diverse books, one entitled Pontificales maiores, an other
Pontificales minores, and a third devitis sanctorum. He was also very grave,
wise, and politic. And thereby grew into such credit with Pope John, that he
was not only of his privy counsel, but also his Nuntio or Ambassador in
matters of great weight and importance, to the Emperor, to the king of Spain,
France, England, and other the mightiest Princes of Christendom. Being on a
time sent in an Embassage to king Edward the third; he so behaved himself,
that the king never ceased until he had procured him from the Pope, and then
he gave him the Archdeaconry of Northi^gam and other great livings; he made
him one of the privy council, and in the end preferred him to this
Bishopric. After this, some matter of dislike ^alling out between Pope
Clement the sixth, and the King, he for his approved wisdom, was sent in
Embassage to the Pope, ann. 1343. for an entreaty of a peace, and an amity
between them to be had; and with such wisdom he did his message, that he
obtained his purpose, and made a reconciliation. After his return home to his
Bishopric, he spent his time altogether in adorning and beautifying of his
Church, or building and erecting some good monument or other. He founded the
College of S. Mary Otrey, and endowed the same with great and goodly
liuelihoods; He was a liberal Benefactor to the Uicars Chorall of his own
Church, as also to the College of Glaseney in Peryn: he builded the two last
Arches in the West end of his Church, vaulted the roof of all the Church, and
fully ended the buildings of the same. Leaving it in such sort, as we see it at
this day. The^ also he enriched it with plate and other ornaments of
inestimable value. Moreover he built a fair house at Bishops Taington which
he left full furnished unto his successors, and did impropriate unto the same
the parsonage of Radway, to the end (as he sets) down in his Testament) Vt
haberent Episcopilocum vbi caput suum reclinarent, si sort in ma^u^ regis
eorum temporalia caperentur. Before his death he made his last Will, wherein he
gave such large and bounteous legacies, to the Pope, Emperor, King, Queen,
Archbishop, Bishops, Colleges, Churches, and to sundry parsons of high estates
and callings; that a man would marvel considering his great and chargeable
buildings and works otherwise, how and by what means he could have attained
to such a mass of wealth and riches. He was always very frugall, kept no
more men or horses about him then necessary, and ever despised the vanity of al
outward pomp. But this it was not that enabled him to perform these great
works, and yet to leave so much money behind him. He procured an order to be
taken, that all Ecclesiastical persons of his Diocese, at the time of their
deaths, should leave and bequeath their goods to him, or to some other in trust
toward his chargeable buildings, or otherwise to be bestowed in pios vsus at
his discretion. This was the means whereby he grew to this infinite wealth and
riches. He died July 15. 1369. having sat Bishop here almost 42. years, and
was buried in a Chapel which he built in the wall of the West end of his
Church. His funerals by his own commandment were performed without any
manner of pomp or extraordinary solemnity. In so much as he allowed not either
his servants, executors or nearest kinsfolks any mourning clothes at al. See
more of him in Simon Mepham of Canterbury.

1370. Edw. 3.44.
18 THomas Brentingham the kings treasurer in the countries of Guynes, Merkes
and Calis, was at one instant chosen B. of Exceter and Herefored. He accepted
Exceter, and was consecrate unto the same upon the 31. of Mar. an. 1370. After
that, in the first of Rich. the 2. he was appointed Treasurer of England, in
which place he continued till the 14. of the said K and being then displaced,
was restored the 12. year, but the next year he was displaced. He was a man
very well learned, expert as well in politic, government, as ecclesiastical
matters, and in both these respects greatly reverenced and esteemed. For which
cause, at the parliament holden at Westminster in the tenth year of K. Richard
the second, he was chosen to be one of the twelve Peers of the Realm under
the King. He was a benefactor to the callender hay of the Uicars chorall of his
own Church, supplied in buildings, and otherwise what his predecessors had
left undone, and having been Bishop 24. years, died at Clist the 3. of
December, ann. 1394. and was buried in the North side of the body of his own
Church, in a little Chapel standing between two pillars.

19 EDmund Stafford, 1395 Ric. 2.19
brother to Ralfe Earl of Stafford, was consecrate Bishop of Exceter, June 20.
1395. He was Chancellor of England under King Richard the second, and king
Henry the fourth. For the furtherance of good letters, he did increase 2.
fellowships in the College of Stapledons Inn in Oxford, reformed the statutes
of the house, and altered the name of it, calling it Exceter college. After
that he had continued Bishop in much honor about thre^ and twenty years, he
died the fourth of September, being the seventh year of K. Henry the fifth,
and lies buried in his own Church in a very fair toombe of Alabaster, upon
the North side of the entrance into the Lady Chapel.

20 John Keterich Bishop of Lichfield, and before that of Saint David's, was
then translated to this Church, as diverse antiquities which I have seen do
testify, although M. Hooker have omitted him. He sat but a very short time.

21 James Carry Bishop of Lichfield, 1419. Hen. 5.8.
being at Florence when news was brought to Pope Martyn the 5. of the
auoidance of this Bishopric: was then and there made Bishop of this Church
an. 1419. He enjoyed not long this place; for he died and was buried there.

22 EDmund Lacy, 1420 Hen. 5.9.
Doctor of Divinity, Bishop of Hereford, and brought up in Uninersity College
at Oxford, was translated unto this church about E^ster, anno, 1420. A man very
devout and religious, but subject to slatterers, who carried him to their
pleasure. Great contentions were between him and the City for liberties, which
by arbitrament were compounded. He built the Chapter house in his own Church,
and was a liberal benefactor unto the Uicars of Calenderhay. Having continued
in this See 35. years, he died 1455. and lies buried in the North wall of
the Presbytery, under a plain marble toombe, where many miracles are said to
have been wrought, and are ascribed to his holiness.

23 GEorge Neuill was consecrate Nouem. 26. an. 1455 He was brother unto the
great Earl of Warwick by whose help especially, 1455. Hen. 6.34
King Edward the fourth obtained the Crown. March 4. 1460. After a very
solemn procession, this Bishop preached at Paul's Cross, where he took upon
him by manifold evidences to prove the title of Prince Edward to be just and
lawful, answearing all objections that might be made to the contrary.
Whereupon the said Prince accompanied with the Lords spiritual and temporal
and great numbers of the common people, rode the same day to Westminster hall,
and there by the consent and approbation of them all, took possession of the
kingdom. This man finished the Chapter house which his predecessor had begun;
And after he had continued Bishop here about ten years, was removed to
York. See more of him in York.

24. John Boothe Bacheler of the civil Law, was consecrate upon the two and
twentieth day of February, 1466. Edw. 4.5.
anno 1466. He governed his Church very well, and builded (as some suppose)
the Bishops See in the Quire: but being weary of the great troubles which
were in this Country, between King Edward the fourth, and the Earl of
Warwick, he removed from hence to his house of Horsleigh in Hampshire, where
he died upon the first day of April, anno 1478. and lies buried at S.
Clements in London.

25 PEter Courtney Archdeacon of exceter, 1477. Edw. 4.17.
was consecrate Bishop there in November 1477. in Saint Stephens Chapel at
Westminster. He was translated from this Church unto Winchester in the ninth
year of his being Bishop here. See more in Winchester.

26 RIchard Fox succeeded him, and having continued Bishop here 6. years,
1486. Hen. 7.2.
he, was translated first to Wells, and after to Winchester. See more in
Winchester.

27 Oliver King was consecrate Bishop of this church in February 1492. 1492.
Hen. 7.8.
He also was removed to Bathe, having sat here three years. See more in
Bathe.

28 RIchard Redman Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of S. Assaph became Bishop of
this Church, 1495. Hen. 7.11.
1495. From whence he was removed to Ely in September 1501. See more in Ely.

29 John Arundel descended of the ancient and most worshipful house of the
Arundels of Lanherns in Cornwall, 1501. Hen. 7.17.
was translated from Lichfield to this Church in the end of the year 1501 Died
at London. March 15. 1503. and was buried in Saint Clements church without
Temple-Barre, upon the South side of the high Altar, under a toombe of marble
inlaid with brass.

30 HVgh Oldham a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, was preferred unto this
Bishopric by the means of the Lady M Countess of Richmond, 1504. Hen. 7.20
whose Chaplain he was. A man of more devotion then learning, somewhat rough
in speech, but indeed and action friendly. He was careful in the saving and
defending of his liberties, for which continual suits were between him and
the Abbot of Tauestocke. He was also liberal to the Uicars Chorall of his
Church, and reduced them to the keeping of Commons: Toward the maintenance
whereof, he gave them certain revenues, and impropriated unto them the
rectory of Cornwood. Albeit he were not very well learned, yet a great favorer
and a furtherer of learning he was. He sounded a goodly free School at
Manchester. Once he had intended to have enlarged Exceter College in Oxford,
as well in building as in revenues; but b^ing denied a fellowshippe there,
which he had earnestly requested in the behalf of one Atkins, he altered his
determination, and contributed largely toward the foundation of Corpus Christi
College whereof he is esteemed (and worthily) the principal Benefactor. He
chanced to die excommunicate at the suite of the Abbot of Tauistocke, June 25.
1519. and might not be buried until an absolution was procured from Rome. He
lies in a Chapel of his own building, cast out of the uppermost end of the
South wall of the Church, where he has a sumptuous and fair monument.

1520 Hen. 8.12
31 John Voysei, otherwise Harman (a Magdalen college man of Oxford) succeeded
Oldham by the preferment of K. Henry the 8. (whose Chaplain he then was, and
Deane of his Chapel, as also of this church) being consecrat Dec. 6. 1519. He
was Doctor of the laws very well learned, wise and in great favor with the
King, who sent him sundry times in Ambassages to foreign Princes. He was also
L. President of Wales, and had the government of the Kings only daughter of
Lady Mary. Of all the Bishops in the land, he was accounted the best Courtier,
an^ although he were well reported of for his learning, yet better liked for his
courtlike behavior, which in the end turned not so much to his credit, as to
the utter ruin and spoil of the Church. For of two and twenty Lordships and
Mannours which his Predecessers had left unto him of a goodly yearly reuenew,
he left but 7. or 8. and them also leased out: And where he found 14. houses
well furnished, he left only one house bare and without furniture, and yet
charged with sundry fees and annuities. By these means this Bishopric which
sometimes was counted one of the best, is now become in temporal lands one of
the meanest. He was a great favorer of learned men, and especially of
Divines, whom he preferred in his Church above others, He was very bounteous
and liberal unto all men, but especially unto Courtiers, unto his own kindred
and countrymen. He bestowed much also, as well pains as cost, in building
Sutton Coltshuill, (the town where he was borne) in procuring the same to be
incorporate, and endeavoring to set up the making of Kerfies there, all which
proved to little purpose as I have heard. In his time after the death of K.
Henry the 8. there was an alteration of religion by K. Edward the 6. whereof
ensued rebellion and a commotion in this Dioces, which in some part was imputed
to this Bishop, because he lay far from his Diocese, and dwelled in his own
Country. Whereupon he resigned the Bishopric into the Kings hands, after he
had been Bishop about thirty years, and lived by the rents of the temporalty
of the Bishopric, which when he alienated he did reserve unto himself for
term of his own life. After the depri^ation o^ M^les Couerdale in Queen
Mary's time, he was restored to his Church, and for the better settling of the
Komish reli^ion, did here stay for a while: but his mind was so addicted to
his own Country, that he returned thither shortly after, and made his only
abode there, practicing what he could, to settle there the making of Ke^^ies.
But whether it were that that kind of trade fliteth not that country, or that
God would not bless a practice founded upon such horrible sacrilege, it fell
out in triell to be more chargeable then profitable, and so was soon given
over. This man being very old, died in a pang at Sutton C^ltshull before
mentioned, the year 1555. and was buried there.

32 MIles Couerdale (a Yorkshire man borne, ^ sometimes heretofore an Augustine
feyer, 155^ Edw. ^.^.
made Doctor Divinity at Tubinga in Germany, but incorporate at Cambridge.)
^^ter the resignation of Voysye, was by K. Edward made Bishop of this City, and
consecrate Aug. 20. 1^51. allter that he had been Bishop about two years K
Edward died, an then Queen Mary having the crown, the religion was altered,
and he deprived. For a further disc^^se of his ^ife, and especially his
deliverance out of prison at the s^te and importunate request of the King of
Denmark, I commend the Reader unto Master Fox. Of his death only thus much,
that not caring to return to his Bishopric, in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, he settled himself at London, and there lead a private life. He died
at last a very old man, and was buried in the Parish Church of S Bartholomew.

1556. Mar. 4.
33 James Turbenill a Gentleman well borne, a Monk sometimes of New College in
Oxford (Bishop Voysey being dead) was consecrate, anno 1556. He was very
careful to recover some part of the lands of his Bishopric which his
predecessor wasted, and did obtain of Q. Mary to him and his successors the
see-farme of the Manor of Crediton. After that he had been Bishop about two
years, Q. Mary dyed, he was displaced, and after lead a private life

1560. Eliz. ^.
34 WIlliam Alley Doctor of Divinity, and Reader of the same, in the Cathedral
Church of S. Paul, brought up at first in Kings College in Cambridge, was
consecrate Bishop of Exceter, July 14. 1560. He lies buried under a large
marble toward the South side of the Presbytery.

1570. Eliz. 13.
35 WIlliam Bradbridge Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Salisbury, brought up in
Magdalen College in Oxford, was consecrate March 18. 1570. He died in a
manner suddenly at Newton Forries, June 27. 1578. and was buried on the North
side of the high altar, near Bishop ^acy, in which place there is a seemly
monument of freestone built over him.

1579. Eliz. 22.
36 John Wolton my most reverend father in law, being a Canon residensary of
the church of Exceter, was consecrate in the beginning of Aug. 1579. He was
borne at Wiggen in Lancanshire, and having stayed in Oxford but a few years,
in the beginning of Queen Mary attended into Germany his uncle. the thrice
reverend Alexander Now^ll after Deane of Powles, his mothers brother, with whom
he stayed there all Q. Mary's time. He sat Bishop almost 15. years, dyed
March, 13. 1593. being 57. years of age, and lies buried toward the South
side of the Presbytery, near the place where we see a Monument of touch and
free stone erected unto the memory of him.

37 GEruase Babington Doctor of Divinity, 1594. Eliz. 37.
and Bishop of Landaffe, fellow sometimes of Trinity College in Cambridge, was
translated to this Church in February, 1594. and hence to Worceter, October. 4.
1597.

38 WIlliam Cotton Doctor of Divinity, 1598 Eliz. 40.
Archdeacon of Jews, and Canon resident of Paul's, borne in the City of
London, and brought up for the most part in Queens College in Cambridge, was
consecrate Nouemb. 12. 1598.

This Bishopric by a new valuation rated in the days of King Edward the
sixth, is now esteemed in the Exchequer, but at five hundred pound, yet paid
heretofore unto the Pope after 6000. ducats.

A CATALOGVE of the Bishops of NORWICH. Collected (for the most part) out of
M. ALEXANDER NEVILL his Norwicus, by R. T.
SIgebert King of the East Angles, after the death of Copwald, returning out of
France (where he lived in banishment) and obtaining his kingdom, brought with
him one Foelix a Burgundian (with whom he had lived familiarly during the time
of his exile) and made him Bishop of the East Angles, which converting the
people to the faith of Christ, had his See at Dunwich. When he had been Bishop
17. years, he died anno 647. March 8. and was buried at Soham, now called
Some, a Monastery, afterward destroyed by the Danes: his body was then removed
to Ramsey.

After him succeeded Thomas, which sat five years.

Bregilsus surnamed Bonifacius, sat 17. years.

Bisus after the death of Bonifacius was preferred to this Bishopric. He
waxing old and very sickly divided the same into two parts, whereof the one he
appointed to be the jurisdiction of a Bishop, that should have his See at
Elmham, in the other he continued, as also did diverse of his successors.

The Bishops of Elmham, were
1. Bedwyne. 2. Northbertu^. 3. Headulacus. 4. Edelfridus. 5. Lanferthus. 6.
Athelwolph. 7. Humferthus. 8. Sybba. 9. Alherdus. 10. Humbyrctus.
The Bishops of D^nwich, were
1. Acca. 2. Astwolphus. 3. Eadsarthus, consecrate 734 4. Cuthwinus. 5.
Aldberthus. 6. Eglafius, alias Elgarus. 7. Heardredus, peradventure the same
man, of whom we find mention in the Council of Cuthbert, Archbishop of
Cunterb. 747. by the name of Hardulfus. 8. Aelphunus. 9. Tydferthus, alias
Tedfridus. 10. Weremundus. 11. Wyredus.
For these, by reason of the great troubles of these times in the Danish
wars, these Sees stood void almost an hundred years. At Canterbury, to wit,
the year 955. in the time of King Edwy one Athulfu^ was ordained Bishop o^
the East Angles, and had his seat at Elmham. After him succeeded these, 2.
Alfridus. 3. Theodredus. 4. Theodredus. 5. Athelstanus. 6. Algarus, he died,
1011. 7. Alwynus. 8. Alfricus, he died, 1038. 9. Alyfreius.


10. Stigandus.
AFter that Alfreius was dead, Stigandus succeeded him. He enjoying the place
but a short time, was deprived.

11. Grinketellus.
THe like happened to Grinketellus, which being convicted to have used
unlawful means in obtaining this dignity, was likewise deprived and Stigandus
restored unto it again. This Stigandus was after Bishop of Winchester, and
Archbishop of Canterbury. See more of him in Canterbury.

12. Egelmare.
STigandus being so preferred, found a means also to procure the Bishopric
of the East Saxons unto Egelmare his brother. All these until the time of
William the Conqueror had their Sees at Elmham.

Ar^astus the first Bishop of The^ford.
KIng William the first substituted his chaplain Arfastus in the place of
Eglemarus, by whose advise the Sea was translated from Elmham to Thetford, a
man very unlearned, and of no extraordinary parts at all. William Malmsbury
reports, that being Chaplain to the Conqueror, who was then but Duke of
Normandy, he would needs make a journey to Becco where Lanfranke was then
Abbot, as also where Arfastus had been a Monk, and well esteemed of for his
learning, because that before Lanfrank^ coming he was Luscus inter Strabones
amongst a number of drones merely unlearned, a little smattering of learning
he had, made a fair show. But now by this time by Lanfrankes means, that
Monastery was become even a very Uniuersity, flourishing with all knowledge of
good letters. Hither Arfastus coming after a pompous and bragging manner,
attended with a great troop: Lanfranke who at the first blush, by and by
espied the fellows ignorance, caused an Abcee to be laid before him, ferociam
hominis Italica facetia illudens. This jest Arfastus so took to heart, as
he never lynne till he had caused the Duke to banish Lanfranke out of
Normandy. Howbeit when Lanfranke came to take his leave of the Duke, happening to
ride upon a lame jade; the Duke fell into such a great laughter at the halting
of his horse, as in that merry mood, by means of some friends he was quickly
reconciled to him again.

William Herbert last of Thetford, and first Bishop of Norwich.
William surnamed Galfagus succeeded him in Thetford, A man very famous for
his excellent learning. He was borne at Oxford. His father was Robertus de
Losinge Abbot of Winchester. This Herbertus being Prior of the Monastery of
Fiscanum in Normandy, came into England at the request of William Kufus, and
living in the Court for a time, behaved himself in such sort, that he was
much favored of the king, and obtained diverse great preferments at his hands,
whereby it came to pass, that within the space of three years, he had so
feathered his nest, as he could buy for his father, the Abbacy of Winchester,
and for himself this Bishopric, paying to the king for the same as it is
reported the sum of 1900. l. For satisfaction of which Symony this penance
was enjoined him by Paschalis the Pope, that he should build certain Churches
and Monasteries as afterward he did. He translated the Sea from Thetford to
Norwich, and built there the Cathedral Church at his own charges, laying the
first stone of the foundation with his own hands as this elogium declares,
which he caused to be engraven upon the wall: Hunc primum huius templi
lapidem, dominus Herebertus posuit in nomine patris and silij and spiritus
sancti, Amen. This Church he dedicated to the blessed Trinity, endowing it with
great lands and possessions, books and all other necessaries. Having finished
it according to his mind, he the^ determined to build an house for himself (for
as yet he had none in Norwich, the Sea being so lately removed from Thetford)
and therefore on the north side of the Church he founded a stately palace.
Again, he built five Churches; one over against the Cathedral church on the
other side of the river called S. Leonards, another at Norwich also, another at
Elmham, a fourth at Linne, and a fifth at Yarmouth. He departed this life, July
22. in the year of our Lord, 1119. And was buried in his Cathedral church of
Norwich by the high Altar.

2. Euerard.
HErbert being dead, Euerard Archdeacon of Salisbury was consecrate Bishop of
Norwich, 1121 Hen. 1.21
June 12. 1121. which dignity although he enioied a long space, yet time the
deuourer of al things, has lest nothing of him to our remembrance, but that
when he had governed his Church 29. years he ended this life, Oct. 15. 1150.

3. William Turbus.
AFter him succeeded William Turbus, a Norman by birth, 1151 Steph. 17
being in his youth a Monk in Norwich, and afterward Prior there. In his time
the Cathedral Church of Norwich was burned by casual fire. He died in the
25. year of his consecration the 17. of January.

4 Johannes Oxonienses.
IN the year of our Lord 1175. John of Oxford Deane of Salisbury became Bishop
of Norwich, 1175. Hen. 2.22.
Bale says he was first Bishop of Chichester: but that appears to be
otherwise, This man finished the Church, which Herbert (being prevented by
death) had left unperfected, and repaired that which by fire was lately
defaced. He builded diverse Hospitals for impotent and diseased people. He
founded Trinity Church at Gypwich, and reedified diverse houses which were by
fire decayed. He died the 26. year of his consecration, June 2. 1200. and was
buried near to the high Altar. The same year he died the Cathedral Church
was again defaced with fire in the second year of King John.

5. John de Gray.
John de Gray by the appointment of the King, was then consecrate to this See.
1200. John 2.
He was a man well seen in the laws of the Realm, wise and of great integrity.
In regard hereof King John was very desirous to have made him Archbishop of
Canterbury. See more of that matter in Stephen Langton of Canterbury. He built
that goodly hall at Gaywood, and the rest of the housing adjoining: Sat about
14. years, dyed near Poytiers in his return from Rome, Nouem. 1. 1214. and was
buried in his own Church.

6. Pandulfus.
AFter the death of John de Gray, 1216. John 18.
the Sea was void for the space of seven years, after which time, Pandulfus
the Popes Legate was elected to the same by the Covent. He was consecrate at
Rome by Honorius the Pope, ann. 1222. and died the fifth year of his
consecration, the 17. of August. After his death the Sea was void again for
the space of three years.

7. Thomas de Blundeuill.
1^26 Hen. 3.11
THomas de Blundeuill an officer of the Exchequer, was then preferred unto the
Bishopric of Norwich by the means of Hubert de Burgo, that famous Chie^e
Justice of England, and consecrate December 20. 1226, He died August 16. 1236.

8. Radulphus.
AFter Bishop Blundeuill, William Raleigh is said to have succeeded
immediately. 1236. Hen. ^.21.
But Matthew Westmin^ster witnesses that one Radulfus was consecrate, October
28. 1236. and died the year following.

9. William de Raleigh.
THe Bishopric was then void by the space almost of 3. years. 1239 Hen. 3.24
The Covent had chosen orderly for their pastor Simon the P^ior of their
Church, a grave and reverend man, not i^stly to^^e excepted against: yet it
pleased the King to mislike him and easily procured their election to be
disanulled. A Canon of Paul's William de Raleigh at last obtained the same,
1239. Within a short time after, the Monks of Winchester required him for
their Bishop, and at last, after many great broils, obtained him, the King all
that ever h^ might resisting the same. See more of him in Winchester.

10 Walter de Sufield.
WAlter de Sufield suceeded, a man highly commended for his excellent learning.
1^44 Hen. 3.29.
He foun^ed the Hospital of Saint Giles in Norwich, indowing it with lands
and great possessions. He built also the Chapel of ^ur Lady in the Cathedral
Church, and in the same Chapel was afterward buried. Moreover, it is
remembered of him, that in a time of great dearth he sold his Plate, and
distributed the money every whit unto the poor. He was consecrate the year
1244. and died May 18. 1257. at Colchester, but was buried as above said, in
which place diverse miracles are reported to have been wrought, and are
ascribed to his ho^linesse.

11. Simon de Wanton.
SImon de Wanton the kings Chaplain, 1^57 Hen. 3.4^
and one of his Justices, was consecrate Bishop of Norwich March 10. 1257. When
he had sat 8. years, he died and was buried by his predecessor. This man
obtained license of the Pope to hold all his former livings in Commendam for 4.
years.

12. Roger de Skerwyng.
ROger de Skerwyng Prior of Norwich, 1265. Hen. 3.5^
was confirmed by the Cardinal of Saint Adrian the Popes Legate, and had
restitution of his temporalties, Martij 17. ann. Henr. 3.15. was the next
Bishop of Norwich, being preferred thereunto, ann. 1265. In his time there was
a dangerous sedition raised between the Citizens of Norwich, and the Monks of
the Cathedral Church; the history whereof, is briefly thus: In a Fair that
was kept before the gates of the Priory, there happened a fray, in which some
servants of the Covent flew certain Citizens. A Jury being empannelled
hereupon, found them guilty, and the officers took order for the apprehending
of the murderers if they might be met withal. The Monks greatly offended
herewith, first excommunicated the Citizens, then shutting the gates, not only
prepared themselves to defense, but also began to offend the other, shooting
at the passengers first, and afterward issuing out of their gates, killing
diverse persons, and spoiling many houses. The Citizens greatly incensed
herewith, fired the gates, entered the Monastery, and after a long conflict, a
great number being slain on both sides, prevailed, risled the Priory, and set
fire on the same in diverse places at once. This fire consumed not only the
celles and offices of the monks, but the alms house also, the steeple and
greatest part of the Cathedral Church. The king hearing of this tumult (king
Henry the third) with all speed posted thither, and caused diverse Citizens to
be hanged, drawn and quartered: Amongst the rest that were executed, a woman
that flest carried fire to the gates was burned. The monks for their part
appealed to Rome, and so handled the matter, that they not only escaped
punishment, but also forced the Citizens to pay them 3000 marks, after 500.
marks a year toward the reparation of their Church, and to present them with a
Paxe of gold of seven pound weight. This end was made by King Edward the first
(his father being now dead) at the request and solicitation of the Bishop, who
died about Michaelmas, anno 1278. having sat thirteen years.

13 William Middleton.
1278. Edw. 1.6.
AFter him succeeded William Middleton Archdeacon of Canterbury, had restitution
of the Temporaities of this See, March 16. Edward 1.6. H^e reedefied the
Church, being so destroyed and profaned in the time of Bishop Roger, and
hallowed the same in the presence of the King and many of his Nobles. In the
eleventh year of his consecration he departed this life the last of August,
Anno 1288.

14 Ralph de Walpoole.
1288. ^dw. ^, 17.
IN his room Randulph de Walpoole Archdeacon of Ely, was elected by the Monks,
and consecrate 1288. When he had governed with great commendation the space
(...) eleven years, he was by Boni^ace the Pope translated to Ely and lived
scarce thr^ years after his consecration. See more in Ely,

15. John Salmon.
THe Pope having translated Radulph to Ely, placed in the Sea of Norwich one
John Salmon pryor of Ely. 1299. Edw. 1.2^.
The year 1319. he became Lord Chancellor of England, and continued so about
four years. This Bishop built the great hall, and the Chapel in the
Bishops palace, and a Chapel at the West end of the Church, in which he
ordained four Priests to sing mass continually. He died in the monastery of
Folkstan an. 1325. July 6.

16. William Ayermin.
IT is reported by some, that after the death of Bishop Salmon, Robert Baldocke
king Edwards Chauncellor, 1325. Edw. 2.19.
was elected by the monks, and received his temporalties the year. 1325. But
it seems likelier (which other affirm) that he renounced his election of
his own accord. William Ayermin by the Popes authority, was then placed in
this See, and made Chauncellor by the King. He gave two hundred pound for
order to be taken that two monks (the cellerers of the Covent) should always
sing Mass for his soul. Having sat almost 11. years, he died March 27. at
Sharyng near London.

17. Anthony de Becko.
AFter him Anthony de Beck Doctor of Divinity, 1337. Edw. ^.12.
a retainer to the court of Rome, was made Bishop by the Pope. He had much to
do with the monks of his Church, whom it seems he used too rigorously. He
also with (...) Robert Winchelsey Archbishop or Canterbury in his Uisitation
appealing from him to Rome. This boisterous unquiet humor it seems was his
death: For it is said he was poisoned by his own servants.

18. William Bateman.
WIlliam Bateman Doctor of the Civil Law, a Cambridge man, borne at Norwich,
and Archdeacon of the same, was next elected Bishop by the general consent of
the whole Covent: a stout man and of such courage as he could not by any
means be brought to Impair and diminish the privileges or liberties of his
Church, although he were oftentimes by many of the nobility incited thereunto:
always to the uttermost of his power resisting and punishing the sacrilegious
drifts of them, which attempted the same. Amongst the rest it is remembered,
that the Lord Morly having killed certain dear in one of his parkes, and ill
entreated his keepers, he forced the noble man, to carry a burning Taper in his
hand through the streets of Norwich unto the high Altar. Though the king
became an earnest intercessor for him, ye^ mingling sometimes threats with
requests; nothing could move the Bishop from following his determined
course. Furthermore whereas the estate of his Bishopric was very litigious
before his time, he never rested, until he had rid it from all strife and
contention, obtaining also of Pope Clement all the fruits and revenues of the
vacant Churches in Norwich, which he left unto his successors. He burlded
Trinity hall in Cambridge, giving certain lands for the maintenance thereof.
He founded also the hall of the Anunciation of our Lady, and bestowed one of
the Uniuersity chests. And provoking other men to imitate his good example; he
persuaded one Gonwell to found another hal in the same university, which of
late at the cost and charges of John Caius a learned Physician has been very
much enlarged. At what time K. Edward the third laid claim first unto the
crown of France, he made choice of this Bishop to inform the Pope of his
title. In this voyage he died at Auinion upon upon twelfth day, the year
1354. In this man's time happened that great p^ague memorable in all our
histories, whereof (as some doubt not to affirm) there died so many, as
scarcely there was left alive the tenth man through England. In the city of
Norwich there died (besides religious men) to the number of 57104. persons
between the first of January, and the first of July 1348.

19. Thomas Piercy.
HEnry Duke of Lancaster bearing a great affection to Thomas Percy brother to
the Earl of Northumberland, obtained of the Pope (for the Monks refused him)
this Bishopric to us bestowed upon him. He gave unto the repairing of the
Church (which in his time was greatly defaced with a violent tempest) the sum
of four hundred marks, and obtained of the rest of the Clergy a great sum
to the same purpose. He bequeathed to the Chaunter of the Church of Norwich, a
house and certain lands lying within the Lordship of Kimerle Ca^rlton,
Fowrhow, Granthorpe, and Wychelwood, upon condition he should procure mass
daily to be said for his soul, and died at Blofield August 8. 1369.

20. Henry Spencer.
THe ^ame of his death swiftly slying beyond the Seas, 1370. Edw. 3.45.
came unto the ears of one Spencer, a G^tleman greatly esteemed for his valor
and skill in Martial affairs, that served the Pope^ at that time in his
wars: Of him with small entreaty, he obtained this dignity, for a brother of
his named Henry, a man of his own profession, which of a soldier being made a
Bishop, came into England, and March 16 1370. was consecrate in his own
Church, by the Archdeacon of Norwich. Changing then his vesture, but not his
conditions, in what manner of life he spent his youth, in the same he most
delighted eu^ in his waxing years. And being a better Butcher then a Shepherd,
he procured the Popes authority for lenying an Army, which (notwithstanding
the kings commandment to the contrary, for disobeying whereo^ his temporalties
after return were detained from him 2. whole years) he transported into the
low countries, the year 1383. And after he had slain 7000. vanquished an Army
of thirty thousand, and burnt the towns of Graneling, Dunkyrke, Newport, with
certain others; he returned home again into England, where shortly after
occasion was given of employing his valor at home to better purpose. The year
1381. the commons of the realm arose in diverse parts, ^ appointed themselves
Captains, as Wat Tyler, Jack Straw, etc. And amongst the rest, the Commons of
Suffolk and Norfolk made one John Lyster their Leader a dier of Norwich, and
called the king o^ the Commons. This fellow endeavoring to join his power with
the rest that were now at London, conducting them thitherward, By the way they
determined to have suprised William V^ford Earl of Suffolk, and having him,
to use his name, for the setting forward their devilish intents. Missing of
hint, they seized upon all the knights they could find, and made them ^weare
to assist them. One there was named sir Robert Sale, that seeming to mislike
their doings, had his b^aines stricken out, by one of his own bo^^ men.
Amongst the rest, that terrified by his example, were glad to dissemble, sir
Stephen Hales, a comely Gentleman, was chosen to be caruor forsooth of this
goodly king. But to proceed, being now on their way, they determined to send in
a message unto the king, two knights, sir W. Morley, and sir John Brewes with
three Arch-Rebels. These happened to ^e encountered with their Bishop, at a
town called Ickningham, not far from New market. Being at his manor of Burl
near Ockam Castle, and hearing of this commotion, he thought good to ride
thither where he understood they were assembled. At what time he came to
Icknyngham, he had in his company but only eight spears, and a ^ew Archers:
notwithstanding the weakness of his forces, he boldly inquired of the
knights whether any of the Kings traitors were there: They dissembled a while
for fear, but after told him plainly, that two notorious Rebels were at the
June, and the third was gone into the town, to take order for their dinner.
These he presently laid hold upon, and without more adoo, cut off their heads,
which he caused to be set upon poa^^^^t New market. Thence he hasted toward
Northwalsham, where he understood the rebels had determined to make some stay.
By the way diverse Gentlemen that had hid themselves, joined with him, so that
by him he arrived there, he had a reasonable company about him, with that troup
(such as it was) he set upon them, who had fortified themselves with trenches
and barricadoes very strongly. The Bishop for his part recovering the trench,
rode into the very midst of them, and bestirred himself so manfully, as if
it had been an action agreeable unto his calling, had deserved grent
commendation. By his courage especially, the victory in the end was achieved.
The king ( John Litster) and the rest of the chie^etaines, were feign to leave
their heads behind them, and the whole country reduced to a peaceable
obedience. Now to proceed unto his other actions, there was great contention
between him and his monks for the space of fifteen years: they being too
weak for him, at last were glad to give him 400. marks to enjoy their
privileges in like sort as heertofore they had done. He sat Bishop welneere
37. years, and died Aug. 23. 1406.

21. Alexander.
ALexander Prior of Norwich, 1408. Hen. 4.10.
was elected Bishop by the monks, but the king so misliked their choice, as he
not only kept him from his temporalties; but also imprisoned him at Windsor
almost a whole year after his election. At the request of Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse other of the Nobility, he was released,
and afforded consecration, and 1408. He sat ^^ue years, and was buried in our
Ladies Chapel, at the feet of Walter Sufield.

22. Richard Courtney.
AT the earnest suit of K. Henry the fifth, 1413. Hen. 4.13.
Richard Courtney Chauncellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, a man famous for his
excellent knowledge in both Laws, was chosen by the Covent, and consecrated at
Canterbury by the Archbishop, in the presence of the King and many of the
Nobles. A man of great lineage, great learning, and great virtue, very
personable also, much favored by the king, and no less beloved among the
common people. He died of a flux in Normandy, at the slege of Harslew, Septem.
14. 1415. in the second year after his consecration, anno. 1415. his body
being brought into England, was honorably interred at westminster.

23. John Wakering.
1416. Hen. 5.4.
John Wakering Archdeacon of Canterbury, that for his life, learning and
wisedoms, was esteemed nothing inferior to his predecessor, being keeper of
the privy seal, was elected by the Covent, and consecrate Bishop of Norwich,
by Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, May 31. 1416. In his time the
Counsel of Constance was holden; unto the which he with diverse other, were
sent out of England by the King. In that charge he so behaved himself, that he
obtained great commendation ^or the same. He built the Clo^ster which is now to
be seen in the Bishops palace, pa^ing the same with stones of diverse colors:
And having governed his charge with great praise, he died at Thorp. April 9.
1425. and was buried in the Cathedral church before the Alter of S. George.

24. William Alnwicke.
1426. Hen. 6.5.
WIlliam Alnwick Doctor of the Law, keeper of the privy seal, and Archdeacon
of Salisbury; was consecrain S. Paul's Church in London. Aug. 18, 1426. and in
the 10. year of his consecration, was translated to Lincoln. Being yet Bishop
here, he contributed largely toward the building of the Philosophy schools in
Cambridge.

25. Thomas Brown.
1436. Hen. 6.15.
THomas Brown Bishop of Rochester being at the counsel of Basil, had the
Bishopric of Norwich cast upon him before ever he understood of any such
intent toward. In his time the citizens of Norwich harboring in their minds,
their old grudge; attempted many things against the Church: but such was the
singular wisdom and courage of this Bishop, that all their enterprises came
to none effect. He sat nine years, and died anno. 1445.

26 Gualter Heart.
AFter him succeeded Walter Heart, 1445. Hen. 6.24.
Doctor of Divinity, Provost and President of Oriall College in Oxford,
consecrated in Febr. 1445. By his wisdom and discretion the malicious humors
of the malecontent townsmen, before reasonable well alaied, were now altogether
extinguished. He paued the Church, and during his life maintained twelve
students at Cambridge with all things necessary for them at his own charges.
He departed this life the 6. of May 1472. in the 26. year of his Consecration,
and was buried in his Church of Norwich, near unto the Rood loft, which he
himself erected.

27. James Goldwell.
James Goldwell Deane of Salisbury, and Secretary to the King that succeeded
was brought up in All souls College in Oxford, had restitution of his
temporalties Febr 25. Edw. 4.12. and died in Febr. 1498.

28. Thomas Ian.
This man died the first year of his consecration. 1499. Hen. 7.15.


29. Richard Nyx.
AFter the decease of Ian, Richard Nyx succeeded, of whom I find little worth
the rehearsing. 1500. Hen. 7.16.
He has the report of a vicious and dissolute liver, was blind long before his
death, sat 36. years, and died an. 1536.

30. William Rugge, alias Reps.
NExt unto Nyx, 1536. Hen. 8.28.
William Rugge, alias Reps a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge was preferred unto
this place. He was consecra^ed in Iu^e 1536. sat Bishop 14. years. and
deceased an. 1550.

31. Thomas Thyrlbey.
1550. Edw. 6.5.
RVgge being dead, Thomas Thirlby, a Doctor of Law of Cambridge the first and
last Bishop of Westminster, was removed from thence unto Norwich. He sat
about 4. years, and the year 1554. was translated to Ely. See more in Ely.

32. John Hopton.
1554. Mary 2.
THirlbey being translated to Ely, John Hopton a Doctor of Divinity of Oxford,
and household Chaplain unto Q. Mary, in K. Edwards days was elected Bishop of
Norwich: he sat 4. years, and died the same year that Q. Mary did, for
grief as it is supposed.

33. John Parkhurst.
1560. Eliza. 2.
AFter him John Parkhurst succeeded, which by the providence of God being
preserved from many great dangers and afflictions which he suffered in the
days of Queen Mary, was by our late gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth
preferred unto this place, and consecrate September 1. 1560. He was brought up
in Merton College in Oxford, and died about Candlemasse, 1574. having sat
Bishop almost 15. years.

34. Edmund Freake.
1575. Eliz. 18.
MArch 9. 1571. Edmund Freake Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate Bishop of
Rochester: Thence presently upon the death of Bishop Parkhurst he was removed
to Norwich, and thence also the year 1584. unto Worceter, where he died about
the 20. of March 1590. and lies buried upon the South side of the body of the
Church there, under a seemly monument near the wall

35. Edmund Scambler.
EDmund Scambler household chaplain a while unto the 1584. Eliz. 37.
Archbishop was consecrate Bishop of Peterborough January 16. an. 1560. upon
the translation of Bishop Freake he was preferred unto Norwich.

36. William Redman.
WIlliam Redman Archdeacon of Canterbury succeeded being consecrated Ian. 12.
1594. He was sometime fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and bestowed
100. marks upon wainscotti^g of the library there. He dyed a few days before
Michaelmasse the year 1602.

37. John Iegon.
John Iegon Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Norwich, 1602. Eliza. 45.
fellow sometimes of Queens College in Cambridge, and afterward Master of
Bennet College, was cons. Febr. 20. 1602.

The value of this Bishopric in the Queens books, is 899. pound, eight
shillings 7. pence farthing, and was rated at Rome in 5000. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF VVORCETER.
WVl^her the first christian king of Mercia being dead, Ethelred his brother
succeeded him in the kingdom. He, by the persuasion of Other governor of
Wiccia, divided his country (which till that time had never had more then one
Bishop) into 5. parts or Diocesses which he appointed unto five Bishoprics
(whereof one was Lichfield) and elected 4. new Cathedral Sees; one at
Dorchester, another at Leicester^ another at Sidnacester, and the fourth at
Worceter. And for the first Bishop of Worceter, choice was made of one
Tatfrith, a man of great l^arning, who died before he could be consecrate.
After his decease, Boselus was chosen, and consecrate by Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury. This was done (as our histories deliver for the most part) the
year 679.

679
1. After Boselus before mentioned, these succeeded:

692
2. Ostforus brought up in the monastery which Leland calls Pharense together
with Bosa, A^tla, John of Beuerley, Tatfride, Wilfride and Boisill, who all
were great learned men, and having also attained some knowledge of the Greek
tongue by the help of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, went to Rome, and
after he had studied there a while coming home, was consecrate Bishop of
Worceter the year, 692. He left diverse monuments of his learning, which in the
wars of the Danes all perished utterly by fire.

3. S. Egwyn consecrate 693. This man went to Rome with Offa king of Mercia, 693
and there ^^t license of Constantine the Pope to build a monastery in
Worceter, and so did, to wit the Abbey of Euesham. He died Ian. 30. 716.

4. Wilfridus consecrate 717. 717
This man lived in the time of Beda, and died 743.

5. Milredus. 743
He died 775.

Florilegus reports one Deuebertus to have been Bishop of Worceter the year
766. So does Malmsbury. De Regibus 1.

6 Weremundus. 776
He died 778.

7 Tilherus. 779
He died 781.

8 Eathor^dus. 782
He gave Icombe unto his Church, and died 798. 798


9 Deuebertus. He died 822. 822


10 Eadbertus or Hubertus. He gave Croyley, and died 848. 848


11 Alwin or Alhune. He built the Chapel of S. Andrew at Kimesey 868. and
died the year 87^.

12. Werebertus, 872
called by some Werefridus and Herefridus, was consecrate upon Whitsunday being
June 7. 872. as Matthew of Westminster delivers, howbeit Io. Rossus writes
that he was first Bishop of Hereford, and so had his consecration before his
coming hither. But that I take to be an untruth. This man was greatly esteemed
of King Alfred for his singular learning, and translated at his request the
Dialogues of Saint Gregory into the Saxon or English tongue. He died the year
911.

13 Wilfreth. 892
He died an. 915.

14 Ethelhune Abbot of Barkley. 911
He died 922.

15 Wilserth succeeded (as says Flor. Wigorn. as also Houeden) and died 929.

16 Kinewold, 9^0
he gave Odingley unto his church, an humble and virtuous man says Houeden.

17 Saint Dunstan translated to London 958. and afterward to Canterbury See
more of him there. 957


959
18 S. Oswald, The year 971. he became Archbishop of York, and yet held
Worceter still in Commendam till his death. He built the Cathedral Church of
S. Mary^ Concerning him and his two next successors. See more in York.

992
19 Aldulf Abbot of Malmsbury succeeded. He was also Archbishop of York.

1002
20 Wulstan, he likewise held York in like sort. He is by some surnamed (or
rather I think) nicknamed Reprobus.

1023
21 Leossius, he died at Kemesey Aug. 19. 1033. and was buried at Worceter.

1033
22 Briteagus Abbot of Parshore, the son of Wulstans sister his predecessor.
He died December 20. 1038.

1038
23 Living, first a monk of Winchester, and after Abbot of Tauestocke, nephew
unto Brithwaldus Bishop of Saint Germans in Cornwall, was consecrate Bishop of
Crediton or Devonshire 1032. He was greatly in favor with king Canutus, and
attended him in his pilgrimage to Rome, from whence the said king writ unto
his subjects a long Epistle, penned by this Living, to be seen in Flor. Wig.
an. 1031. After his uncles death, he procured Saint Germans to be united unto
his See, and (as it seems unto me) held not only both them, but Worceter
also (to which he was preferred 1038.) until his death. The year 1040. he was
accused for procuring (or consenting unto) the death of Alfred the eldest son
of king Ethelred. Some say he purged himself of that accusation; others say,
he was deprived of his livings as found guilty, and returning to Tauistocke^
died there. But I take the third report to be truest, to wit, that he was once
displaced, and after one year upon beter examination of the cause, and partly
by means of gifts, ^estores again. He died Mar. 23. 1046. at which time, even
just when he gave up the Ghost, (So W. Malmsbury delivers De reg. l. 2. c.
12) there was such a horrible tempest of thunder and lightning, as men thought
the day of doom had bin come. He was buried at Tanestoke, unto which monastery
he had bin a great benefactor.

1046.
24 Aldred the year 1060. was translated to York. See more of him there.

24 Saint Wulsta^. 1^62.
Alfred being constrained to gluc over Worceter before he might obtain the
Popes approbation for York (as in York you may see more at large) he
determined at his departure to flee^e it^ and then to fo^ll in some simple
fellow into that room, such a one as might ^^me likely to swallow his gudg^n
quietly. The man he made choice of for that purpose, was Wulstan Prior of
Worce(...) whom (the King granting liberty of free election) he easily
procured the allowance not only of the monks and Covent, unto the Clergy and
Commonalty of the whole D^oces. This plotte never so cunningly laid, had not
the success that was experted. For Wulstan proved nothing so tractable as he
thought, yielded not to all that he demanded; and yet neuer^in wrangling and
complaining, until partly in his time, partly in his successors, he had
recovered again whatsoever was taken from his See. Lanfranke Archb. of Cant.
assisted very favorably his cause, vrgens aemulum primat^s and potentiae
(says W. Malmsbury) yt rather no doubt says he, because he thought it best in
policy to weaken the sea of York what he might, that contended with him in
authority and greatness. This Wulstan was borne at Hichenton in Warwickshire.
His Father and Mother (whose names were Eatstan and Wulgeoue) long before their
death severed themselves by mutual consent, and lead a Monastical life: Then,
as though heaven were not to be entered without a monks Cowle, they not only
caused their son to be taught and brought up in the Monastery of
Peterborough, but also exhorted him earnestly (especially his Mother) in any
wise to become a monk. He did so, followed their direction, and professed
himself a monk at Worceter under Brittegus his predecessor. He was by and by
much admired for the straight life heled; and for the opinion men had of his
holiness so esteemed, as no preferme might fall whereof he was capable, but
immediately it was cast upon him. He was first made Master of the children,
then Chaunter and Treasurer of the Church, after Prior there, then Abbot of
Gloucester, and lastly Bishop of that Dioces. It is said, he refused obstinately
to yield consent unto his election a long time, protesting he had rather lay
his head upon a block to be chopped off, then to take so great a charge upon
him. No man could persuade him to yield, until that one Wulsiu^ an Anchorite
reprehended him sharply for his backwardnes; assuring him, he offended God much
in the same. His excuse was, want of learning: And certain it is, that his
defect that way, was so notable, as in the time of Will. Conqueror (when all
English Prelates were sifted to the branne) he was called in question for
insufficiency, and had been deprived (as it is thought, at least wise) if he
had not been found somewhat more sufficient then was expected. He was
consecrate September 8. 1062. by Aldred Archbishop of York, Stigand being then
suspended. But that he might acquit himself from usurpation of any right
belonging to Canterbury, he not only required him to make his oath of
profession unto Canterbury, but also renounced all right of pretended
jurisdiction unto the Dioces of Worceter, acknowledging the same to belong not
to York (as some of his predecessors had affirmed) but to Canterbury, as to
the Metropolitan of the same. Now to come unto his government, we are to
remember especially two things memorable of him. One, the building of the
Cathedral Church, which he raised from the foundation. At what time it was
come unto such perfection, as that the monks forsaking their old habitation,
betook themselves unto this new built; the other Fabrike whereof Oswald was
Author, (as in York you may read more at large) was pulled down. Which Wulstan
seeing, burst o^t into tears, and being demanded a reason thereof, by some
that told him he had rather cause to reio^ce; Our predecessors (says he)
whose monuments we deface, rather (I doubt) to set by the banners of our vain
glory, then to glorify God; they indeed (quoth he) were not acquainted with
such stately buildings, but every place was a Church sufficient for them to
offer themselves a reasonable, holy and lively sacrifice unto God: We
^ontrariwise are double diligent in laying heaps of stones, so to frame a
material Temple, but are too too negligent in setting forward the building of
that lively Temple the Church of God. The other thing that I determined to
mention is, a notable testimony of his loyal fidelity unto his Prince. All
most all the Nobility of England rebelled against the king William Rulus the
eight year of his reign. Certain of them, Roger Earl of Mount-gomery,
Barnard Newmarket, Roger Lacy, Ralfe Mortimer and other, attempted to take the
City of Worceter. This Bishop, not only resisted them, and by continual
exhortations in preaching and otherwise contained them in very dutiful
obedience, but also arming such a number of people as the city could afford,
caused them to sally out and set upon the enemy, whom they discomfited, killing
and taking a number of them prisoners. He died being welneere 90. years of
age, 1095. January 19. which day afterward (he being canonised) was made a
holy day, and appointed unto the celebration of his memory. He was buried in
his own Church, near to the place where K. John was after buried. For I find
that the said K. upon his death beb, desiring to be laid beside him was
accordingly interred between him and S. Oswald. How the Church being burnt his
toombe only escaped the violence of the fire, how he appeared unto his old
friend Robert Bishop of Hereford (being at Creeklade) at the hou^e of his
death, signifying the same unto him, and many things more strange; if any man
desire to read them, let him seek them in William Malmsbury, Florent. Wigorn:
and other, that discourse them at large. This (for my part) I think enough, if
not too much.

25. Sampson, a Canon of Bayon was consecrate Bishop of Worceter in S. Paul's
Church at London, 1097. Will. Ru. 11
June 15. 1097 A man well learned, very eloquent, and a great housekeeper. He
took away Westbery from the monks that Wulstan had planted there, and died
afterward at that place, May 5. 1112 He was buried in the body of his Church,
just before the roodl^^t. He had elder brother named Thomas then Archbishop of
York and a son that afterward was likewise Archbishop there. Of them and some
other matter concerning him, see more in York. Soon after his death, to wit,
May ^0. 1113. the Cathedral Church, Castle, and City of Worceter were burnt
and quite defaced with casual fire. One monk, three servants of the
Monastery, and fifteen townsmen perished in that fire.

26. Theulphus a Canon of Bayon likewise, 1115. Hen. 1^16.
and Chaplain unto the king, was elected Bishop of Worceter, December. 28.
1113. but not consecrate until June 27. 1115. He died at his manor of
Hampton, Octo. 21. 1123. and was buried hard by Sampson his predecessor, in
that place (I doubt not) where upon one Marble lying just before the quite
door, we see the defaced images of two Bishops.

1125. Hen. 1.26.
27. Simon. Chaplain and Chauncellor unto Queen Adelicia, the second wife of
K. Henry. the first; was consecrate May 23. 1125. He was liberal, according to
the proportion of his ability^ affable and very courteous.

28. Alured. After Simon, W. Malmsbury that li^ed in those days places Alured
for his next successor Howbeit, some put John Pagham before him, and Florent
Wigorn, leaves him quite out of the reckoning.

29 John Pagham. He gave Bihery unto the Abbey of Osney^ and the manor of Elm
Bishop unto his own See.

30. Roger son unto the Ea^le of Gloucester, died August 9. 1179. at Tours in
France and was buried there.

1181. Hen. ^.28.
31. Baldwyn Abbot of Ford consecrate 1181. was translated to Cante^bury, 1184.
See more there.

1186. Hen. 2.33.
32. William de Northale consecrate Semptember. 21. 1189. died 1190.

1191. Ric. 1.3.
33. Robert a Canon of Lincoln, son unto William Fitz Rall Seueschall of
Normandy, became Bishop of Worceter 1191. and died the year following.

34. Henry Abbot of Glastonbury was made Bishop of Worceter that Sauarike
Bishop at Bathe and Wells might unite that Abbey to his See. See more of that
matter in Wels. He died 1195.

1196. Ric 1.8.
45. John de Constantijs Deane of Roane was consecrate at Stratford October 20.
1196 He died the year 1198.

1200. Joan. 2.
36. Maugere^ Deane of York and Chaplain unto King Richard the first, was
consecrate 1^^0. (...) was one of them that excommunicated king John and
interd^ted the realm at the Popes commandment the year 1208. Thereupon he
was feign to sly the realm and died at P^nt^m^s was in France 1212. the year
before the rest of his brethren were called home.

(...)
37. Walter Gray Bishop of L^^^field was translated hethee 1214. and 1216. to
York. See more of him there.

38 Syluester, sometimes a Monk, and after Prior of Worceter, succeeded, He
removed the body of Saint Wulstan into a sumptuous shrine, and the Church being
now thoroughly repaired since the burning of it in B. Sampsons ^inie) he
hallowed the same very solemnly, dedicating it unto the honor of the blessed
virgin, S. Peter, Saint Oswald, and Saint Dunstan. This was done 1218. in which
year also he died.

39 William de Bleyes Archdeacon of Buckingham was consecrate October. 7. 1218,
1218. Hen. 3.2.
He gave unto the Prior and Covent Wyke with the appertinances, as also the
Parsonage of Sobbury, and died the year 1236.

40 Walter de Cautilupo, the son of William Lord Cautilupe succeeded 1237.
1237. Hen. 3.2^.
A man as of great birth, so of no less stomach and courage. He often opposed
himself against the covetous practices and shifting devises of the Pope and his
off^cers. The first year of his preferment, Otto the Popes Legate, at a
Convocation, sought to take order, for the remoning of such as enjoyed any
benefices against law, not being dispensed withal; thinking belike, it would
provoke many to the purchase of dispensations, they cared not at what rate. He
counseled the Legate to take farther advise of the Pope before he proceeded
too ^arre in this matter, saying there were many of great birth whom it
concerned; and they were either old (such having lived long in very worshipful
state, to deiect them now so low he thought it very hard) or else they were
young and lusty, and had rather venture their lives in any de^perat course,
th^n suffer their living to be diminished. I speak this (quoth he) by mine
own experience. At what time it was mine own case, I was of the same mind.
Having said thus much, he put on his myter, and sat him do^^ again. Other
were ahout to second him, when the Legate seeing no good was to be done in this
master, bid them trouble themselves no farther, the Bishop of Worceters advice
was good, and he was determined for this time to follow it. Another time, to
wit, the year 1255. Rustandus another Legate; demanded of the Clergy of
England a huge sum of money, and had not only bought the kings consent
thereunto, but dealing privately with many private clergy men, promising some,
and threatening other, had made a very strong canuasse. The matter being
proposed, when no man opening his mouth, the legate assured himself the game
was gotten: this Bishop suddenly rose up, and exclaimed vehemently against this
horrible exaction, saying at last, he would suffer himself to be hanged rather
then he would ever consent unto it. Other then following his example, this
impudent demand was sent away with a sleeuelesse answer. The year 1257. he
was sent Ambassador into France The year 1264. he took great pains to work
a peace between the king and the Barons, in whose behal^e when he had offered
the king conditions (as he thought most reasonable) which might not be
accepted; he addicted himself unto their party, exhorted them to fight
valiantly in the cause, and promised heaven very confidently to them that
should die in defense of the same. For this, he was after justly excommunicated
by the Popes legate. He died February 5. 1267. at what time repenting much this
fault of disobedience unto his Prince, he humbly craved and received absolution
from that excommunication.

1268. Hen. 3.53
41. Nicholas Archdeacon of Ely, and Chancellor of England, was consecrate in
the beginning of the year 1268. and translated to Winchester before the end of
the same year. See more in Winchester.

126^ Hen. 3.54
42 Godfry Gyffard succeeded, being Archdeacon of Wels, Chancellor of England,
and kinsman of the kings (so I find him called in the Records of the Tower) He
beautified the pillars of the East part of the Church, by interlacing little
pillars of marble, which he fastened with rings of Copper guilt. He died 1302.
having sat Bishop 34. years, 4. months and 4. days.

After the death of Giffard, I find that one John de S. Gernia a Monk (...)
Worceter was elected Bishop, and had his election confirmed by the royal
assent, April 8. ann. Regni Edwardi primi, ^0. Whether he ever obtained
consecration or not, I cannot say.

43 William de Geynsborough, 1302. Edw. 1.31.
Doctor of Divinity, a Friar minor, was the 26. Reader of Divinity, of his
order in Oxford. Thence he traveled to Rome, and became Lector sacri palatij
till the Pope bestowed upon him this Bishopric, unto the temporalties whereof
he was restored, Febr. 4. Edw. 1.31. He was a great learned man accounted in
those times and writ much.

44 Walter Reynald, sometime Schoolmaster unto king Edward the second, 1308.
Edw. 1.37.
first Treasurer, then Chancellor of England, became Bishop of Worceter, 1308.
by the Kings appointment, and against the Popes will, who had nominated unto
this See, one Petrus Fox de Saba^dia. He sat here 5. years, and was advanced
to the Archbishopricks of Canterbury, 1313. See more there.

55 Walter Madenstone succeeded. 1313 Edw. 2.7.


46 Thomas Cobham Doctor of Divinity, 1^17. Edw. 2.11.
Canon, and Subdeane of Salisbury, was elected Archbishop of Canterbury, 1313.
Having contended a while with the above named Walter Reynald (whereof see more
in Canterb^ry) he was glad in the end to accept of this Bishopric, into which
he entered, Mar. 31. 1317. He was a great learned man, writ much, and was
moreover so honest and vertuo^^ a man, as he was commonly called by the name of
the good Clerk^. He lies buried, (as one delivers) in the North I Will of the
body of his church, which I Will he caused to be all va^lted over at his own
charge. I should guess by some shadow of the Cobhams arms yet to be discerned,
that his toombe is that which we see upon the south side of the Chapel
standing on the north side of the body of the Church. He died about the 20. of
August, 1327.

47 Adam de Orleton Doctor of Law, 1327. Edw. 3.1.
was consecrate Bishop of Hereford (Sept. 26. 1317. translated to Worceter in
Nouemb. 1327. and then December. 1. 1333. unto Winchester. See more there.

48. Simon Mont-acute consecrate, 1333. Edw. 3.8.
1333. was by the Pope translated to Ely, 1336. See Ely,

1337. Edw. 3.12
49 Thomas Henniball consecrate 1337.

1338. Edw. 3.13.
50 Wulstan de Brandsford Prior of Worceter, consecrate 1338. He burst the
Priors great hall, and the bridge of Brandsford upon Twe^e, two miles above
Powike. It seems he died in August, the 23. of Edward the third, For August
28. that year (as I find) the custody of his temporalties was commit^ed to
one by the kings appointment.

1349. Edw. 3.24.
51 John Thorsby Bishop of S. David's was translated to Worceter. 1349. and in
Octo. 1352. from thence to York. See Yo^ke.

1352. Edw. 3.27.
52 Reginald ^ryan consecrate Bishop of Saint David's, 1349. the year 1352. was
translated hither. He was by the Popes gift translated to Ely, 1361. but died
of the plague before his translation might be perfected by acceptance. Dec. 10
1361. at Al^echurch. He lies buried by the North wall of a little Chapel,
upon the North fide of the body of the Church, as I gather (at leastwise) by
his arms engraven upon a fair toombe there.

1362. Edw. 3.37.
53 John Barnet Treasurer of England, and Archdeacon of London succeeded, and
not one David as some notes report that I have seen. He was appointed by the
Pope to this See, as void by the death and translation of Reg. Brian by a Bull
bearing dute, Ian. 10. 1361. was consecrate 1362. translated hence to Wels,
1363. and lastly to Ely 1366. See Ely,

1363. Edw. 3.38.
54 William Wittlesey nephew unto Simon Islip Archb. of Canterbury, was first
Bishop of Rochester, translated to Worceter, 1363. and then the year 1368. to
Canterbury. See more of him there.

1369 Edw. 3.44
55 William de Lynne consecrate Bishop of Chichester, the year 1462. was
translated hither, 1368. This man taking horse to ride unto the Parliament the
year 1373. was ^odainely surprised with an Apoplexy, whereof he died soon
after, to wit, Nou, 18.

1375 Edw. 3.60:
56. Henry Wakefield became Bishop of Worceter, 1375 and the year following
Treasurer of England. He made the body of his Church longer by adding two
Arches unto it, built the North Porch, and died Mar. 11. 1394. the twentieth
year after his Consecration. He lies buried under a great Marble in the
middle of the body of his Church, toward the west end.

57 Tidemannus de Winchcombe, 1395. Ric. 2.19
Bale reports one William William Badboy. Doctor of Divinity, and Consessor
unto John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, to have been Bishop of Worceter about the
^eere 1380. Either he was not at all, or for some very short time, and
therefore I omit him. Certain it is, that Tydemaunus de Winchcombe, a
Cistercian Monk and the Kings Physician, was thrust into this See, by the Pope
at the Kings earnest request (notwithstanding, that one John Green was
lawfully elect thereunto) the year 1395. Thomas Walsingham calls this man
(falsely I doubt not) Robert Tideman. It should seem unto me, that he was for
a little while Bishop of Landaffe before his preferment to Worceter. See
Landaffe.

58 Richard Clifford Archdeacon of Canterbury, was consecrate Oct. 9. 1401. and
translated to London, 1401. Hen. 4.3.
1407. See London.

59 Thomas Peuerell a Gentleman of an ancient house, borne in Sustolke, 1407.
Hen. 4.9.
and brought up in Oxford (where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity) was first a
Carmelite friar, made Bishop of Ossery in Ireland by King Richard the second at
his unfortunate being there, 1398. translated thence to Ladaffe, 1399. and from
Landaffe to Worceter, 1407. He sat Bishop ten years, died March 1. 1417. and
was buried in his own Church. He writ diverse books remembered by Bale.

60 Philip Morgan Doctor of law, 1419 Hen. 5.7
and Chancellor of Normandy, was consecrate the year 1419. about Michaelmas,
and translated unto Ely in the end of the year 1425. See. Ely.

61 Thomas Polton was consecrate Bishop of Hereford, 1426. Hen. 6.5.
1420. staying there but one year and three months, was removed to
Chichester, 1422. and lastly the year 1426. became Bishop of Worceter, He died
at Rome and was buried there.

1435. Hen. 6.14.
62 Thomas Bourchier succeeded. The year 1435. soon after his coming to
Worceter he was elected unto Ely, but durst not accept of the same. Long after,
at another auoidance, he was again chosen, to wit, 1443. and enjoyed that
place till the year 1454. at what time he was removed to Canterbury, See
more in Ely and Canterbury.

1443. Hen. 6.22.
63 John Carpenter Doctor of Divinity, brought up in Oriall College in Oxford,
was Chancellor of that Uniuersity, 1437. and Master of Saint Anthonies in
London, as also Provost of the said College. This man had so great affection
unto Westbury, a place near Bristow, as he not only bestowed exceeding great
cost upon the College there, and chose it for his place of burial, but also
intended (as I find reported) to have honored it with a part of his Style,
and to have taken upon him the name of the Bishop of Worceter and Westbury.
There had been an old College in that place long before: He pulled it
down, and in the new building enlarged it very much, compassing it about with
a strong wall embatled, adding a fair gate with diverse towers (more like unto
a Castle then a College) and lastly bestowed much good land for augmonting the
reuenew of the same. One W. Canning that having been five times Mayor of
Bristow, in the latter end of his life became Deane of this College, built the
Church of Ratcliffe near Bristow (a notable work) and lies buried in the
same. But to return to our Bishop (who also built the Gatehouse at Hartlebury)
having first resigned his Bishopric, he died at Bishops North week, and was
buried (as before said) at Westbury, where says John Rossus) he is famous for
his miracles.

1476. Edw. 4.17.
64 John Alcocke Bishop of Rochester was translated to Worceter, 1476. and
thence to Ely. See Ely.

1486. Hen. 7.2.
65 Robert Moorton nephew to John Moorton, Archbishop of Canterbury succeeded.
He lies buried in the body of Saint Paul's Church in London.

66. John Gygles or de Lilijs an Italian borne in Luca succeeded him, 1497.
Hen. 7.13
and dyed the twenty fifth of August, 1498.

67 Syluester Gigles nephew unto John Gigles followed his uncle. 1499. Hen. 7.15
He died at Rome the sixteenth of April, 1521.

68 Julius Medices a Cardinal of Rome, Nephew unto the Pope, 1521. Hen. 8.13.
Leo the tenth, and afterward Pope himself by the name of Clement the
seventh, was made Administrator of the Bishopric of Worceter by the Popes
Bull, July 31. 1521. and so continued about one year, Anno 1522. he resigned.

69 Hieronymus de Nugutijs an Italian also, 1522. Hen. 8.14
obtained this Bishopric by the resignation of Julius, and enjoyed it many
years.

70 Hugh Latimer borne in Leicetershire, 1535. Hen. 8.27.
and brought up in Christ's College in Cambridge, became Bishop of Worcester,
1535. The year 1539. (except he would yield a wicked and dissembling consent
unto the six articles) there was no remedy but he must resign his
Bishopric. He resigned (together with Doctor Shaxton Bishop of Salisbury)
July 1. and afterward, to wit, the sixteenth of October, 1555. sealed the
doctrine which he had long preached with his blood, ending his life in the
fire: For the circumstances whereof, as also of his whole life and actions, I
refer you to Master Fox.

71 John Bell Doctor of Law, brought up in Baylioll College at Oxford, 1529.
Hen. 8.39.
and Archdeacon of Gloucester, was of the Kings Counsel in the cause of his
divorce from Queen Katherine; he was confirmed Bishop of Worceter, August
11. 1539. and having sat about four years, resigned. He lies buried at
Clarken-well by London on the North side of the East end of the Chancell, under
a Marble stone whereon is fixed this Epitaph.

Contegit hoc marmor Doctorem nomine Bellum

1543 Hen. 8.35
72 Nicholas Heath Bishop of Rochester, brought up for a time in Corpus Christi
College at Oxford, yet sometimes also fellow of Clarehall in Cambridge, was
translated to Worceter, February 20. 1543. and displaced October 10. 1551.
lying prisoner in the Fleet long both before and after his deprivation. Queen
Mary restored him to his Bishopric again in the beginning of her reign,
made him first Lord President of Wales, then Archbishop of York, the year
1553. and lastly, Lord Chancellor of England. See York.

73 John Hooper Bishop of Gloceter, held Worceter in Commendam. 1551 Edw. 6.6.
See Gloceter.

74 Richard Pates (as it should seem by a report that I find) became Bishop
of Worceter about the year 1534 and being sent beyond the Seas in Embassage,
1551. Mary 2.
refused to return. Whereupon his Bishopric was bestowed upon Master
Latymer. Certain it is, that he subscribed to the Council of Trent, by the
name of Rich. Patus Wigorne Episc. Queen Mary lest she should seem to do
him wrong, having appointed Heath to the Archbishopricks of York, restored him
to Worceter. After the death of Queen Mary, he was deprived and flying beyond
sea, died there.

75 Edwyn Sands Doctor of Divinity, and sometimes Master of Katharine hall in
Cambridge, 1559. Eliz. 1.
was consecrate December 21. 1559. and translated to London, July 13. 1570.

1570. Eliz. 13.
76 Nicholas Bullingham was translated from Lincoln, Ian 26.

1577. Eliz. 20.
77 John Whitgyft Doctor of Divinity, consecrate April, 21. 1557. translated to
Canterbury. See Canterbury.

78 Edmund Freake translated from Norwich, 1584. Eliza. 27.
died in the end of the year 1590. about the 20. of March. See Norwich.

79 Richard Fletcher translated from Bristoll to Worceter, 1593. Eliza. 36.
from Worceter to London.

80 Thomas Bilson Doctor of Divinity, and Warden of Winchester, 1595. Eliza. 38.
was consecrate June 13. 1596. and after translated to Winchester.

81 Geruase Babington Doctor of Divinity, and sometime fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridge, 1597. Eliza. 20.
being Bishop first of Landafte, then of Exceter, was lastly translated hither,
anno. He deceased May 17. 1610.

82 Henry Parry Bishop of Gloceter was translated hither about Michaelmas, 1610.

This Bishopric is now valued at 1049. pound, 17. shillings, 3. pence half
penny farthing. In the Popes books at 2000. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF HEREFORD.
680.
AN Episcopal See was first established at Hereford, and Putta made the first
Bishop there the year 680.

After him these.
2. Tirhtellus. 3. Torteras. 4. Wastold, alias Walstod. He began the making of
a sumptuous cross, which his successor finished. 736.
5. Cutbert, consecrate 736. was translated to Canterbury, 740. He bestowed a
goodly monument upon his predecessors, and caused this Epitaph to be engraven
upon the same. Qui quondam extiterant famosi altique per orbem,
Corpora sena tenet hominum hic marmor obumbrans.
Tumbaque mirifico praesens fabricata decore,
Desuper ex alto cohibet cum culmine tecta.
Hos ego Cuthbertus sacri successor honoris.
Inclusi titulis exornauique sepulchris.
Pontifices ex his ternos sancta insula cinxit,
Nomina sunt quorum, Walstoldus, Torhere, Tirtil.
Regulus est quartus Milfrith, cum coniuge pulchra.
Quenburga: senis haec extitit ordine quinta.
Sextus praeterea est Oselini filius Offrith.
6. Podda. 740.
7. Ecca. 8. Cedda. He died, 857. 857.
9. Alberrus. 872.
10. Esna died, 885. 885.
11. Celmund. 12. Vtellus. 13. Wlfhard. 14. Benna. 15. Edulf. 16. Cuthwulf. 17.
Mucel. 18. Deorlaf. 19. Cunemund. 20. Edgar. 21. Tidhelm. 22. Wlfhem. 23.
Alfrike. 24. Athulf.
25 Ethelstan, thirteen years before his death he was blind, and governed
by a deputy, viz. Tramerin Bishop of Saint David's. He builded the Cathedral
Church of Hereford from the ground, died at his manor of Bosanbirig, the tenth
of February, 1055. and was buried in his own Church. A man (says Houeden) of
great virtue and holiness.

26 Leouegar, 1056.
Chaplain unto Duke Harald succeeded him. Mat. Westminster gives this
testimony of him, that he was undoubtedly, Dei famulus, in omni religione
perfectus, Ecclesiarum amator, pauperum recreator, viduaru^ and orphanorum
defensor, oppressoru^ subuersor, virginitatis possessor. Griffin King of Wales,
having ouerthrown the forces of the Englishmen about two miles from Hereford,
immediately assaulted the City, took it, slew the Bishop and seven of the
Canons, they denied him entrance into the Church, and held it against him;
spoiled it of all the Relics and ornaments that were portable, and lastly
fixed both Church, City and all. This Bishop being yet starse warm in his eat,
was thus slain, June 16. 1056. when he had been Bishop but only twelve
weeks and four days.

1060.
27 Walter, After the death of Leofgar, the Sea continued void 4. years, and
was governed by Aldred Bishop of Worceter. He being translated thence to
York, Walter borne in Lorraine, and Chaplain to Queen Edith, was consecrate
at Rome by the Pope, the year 1060. His end was much more unhappy then his
predecessors. He chanced to fall in love with a certain comely woman that he
met in the street. A long time he contended with this vile and unseemly
affection; and he thought he had quenched the same^ when a small occasion
renewed it to his destruction. Having certain linen to cut out, this woman was
commended to him for a very cunning Seamster. He sent for her, and his old
flame of filthy desire easily kindling by this little spark, he found errands
to send his men out of the way, while he set upon her, first with words, and
they not prevailing by force. She resisted what she might, but finding him too
strong for her, thrust her sheeres into his belly, and gave him his deaths
wound. This W. Malmsbury tells by hearesay of an uncertain relation, adding
moreover, that the king being desirous it should be esteemed false, forbid the
report of it. No other Historiographer living near those times makes any
mention of this so memorable an accident, and therefore it is possible to be
untrue.

1079. W. Co. 14.
28 Robert surnamed Lozing was also borne in Lorrain, had traveled and read in
diverse Uniuersities boyond the seas, and being much sauoured by William the
Conqueror for his manif^ld good parts, especially his learning, was preferred
by him unto the Bishopric of Hereford, whereunto he was consecrate December
29. 1079. This man was well seen in diverse kinds of good learning, but in the
Mathematiques he was excellent, and writ diverse discourses in that kind much
admired in those days. There was a great league of friendship between him and
Saint Wulstan, who certifyed him of his own death in a dream (as our stories
report) called him to his burial, and assured him he might not stay long
after. It fell out true, for within half a year after the other, he deceased,
June 26. 1095, Now he foresaw the death of Remigius Bishop of Lincolna by
Astrology, and therefore refused to come to the dedication of his new Church, I
have related in Lincoln. He built his Church of Hereford anew, following the
platform of the Church of Aken or Aquisgraue, and lies buried in the same, by
the Northwall, a little above the Chapel of Bishop Stanbery, as the
inscription (at leastwise) imports. For my part I am persuaded, that he
rather lies in that toombe which is ascribed to Bishop Raynelm, for that the
image of the same holds the figure of a Church in his hand, which me thinks
argues the builder of the Church to be in that place enterred.

29 Gerard Nephew unto Walkelin Bishop of Winchester succeeded. Uery shortly
after his coming to Hereford he was removed to York. See York.

30 Rainelmus, King Henry the first bestowed then this Bishopric upon one
Roger his Larderer. 1107. Hen. 1.8.
Within a day or two after (not yet consecrate) he fell sick at London, and
being loath to die before he were a complete Bishop, earnestly requested
Anselme the Archbishop to affoorde him consecration^ which foolish demand he
could not but laugh at, and answered with silence. Much against his will he
died vnbishopped 12. days after his nomination. He being dead the King gave
this Bishopric (intended to the said Roger) unto Rainelmus the Queens
Chancellor, who received it, (as the manner had then long been) at the kings
hands, and was invested into by the delivery of the ring and the cros^er-
Anselm the Archbishop refused to consecrate him and diverse other that obtained
their preserments in like manner, as in his life yen may read more at large.
He was so far from importuning him in this matter, as being now persuaded
his election to be insufficient, he renounced the same, delivering again into
the kings hands the ring and croster that he had received. Herewith the king
was so offended, as presently he banished him the realm. After much adoo
between the king and Anselme, a reconciliation at last was wrought, and this
man consecrate with diverse other the year 1107. He was very virtuous, devout,
and of good report, except only for his housekeeping wherein he was not so
liberal as his neighbors wished him. He died October 28. 1115. of the gout,
wherewith he was much tormented long before his death; and was entoombed in
the out side of the South partition of the Presbytery, if happily his toombe be
not mistaken, for Bishop Roberts, and Roberts for his. I find mention of one
Arnulfus Abbot of Peterborough to be nominated unto this See by King Henry the
first at Winchester, August 15. 1114. I think it an error of the reporter
(Houeden) for that Raynelm was then as yet alive.

1115. Hen. 1.16.
31 Geoffrey de Glyue Chaplain to King Henry the 1. was consecrate December 26.
1115. A man of great temperance and frugality. He repaired well his houses,
and reduced the lands belonging to his See into a very ^ood order, being much
wasted and spoiled in the time of his predecessors. He was a little too
niggardly unto the poor, and left much wealth behind him, which better might
have been bestowed upon them. He died February 3. 1119. and was laid in the
North wall a little above Robert his predec^ssor.

1120. Hen. 1.21.
32 Richard Keeper of the Seal under the Chancellor of England, was consecrate
at Lambhith, January 16. 1120. died at Ledbury, August 15. 1127 and was buried
at Hereford the particular place I find not. It was an opinion of many men
about this time, that the Bishopric of Hereford was a fatal place, and might
not suffer any one man long to enjoy it.

33 Robert de Betune, or Bertune Prior of Lanthony was consecrate at Oxford,
(of which Uniuersity he had sometimes been a member) Iun. 19. 1131. (and not
1153. as some deliver) by William Archbishop of Canterbury. 1131. Hen. 1.32
This Robert was a man of great authority, and much employed by the Pope in all
his businesses within the realm. He died April 22. 1148. and lies buried in
the South wall over against the Presbytery. One William Prior of Lanthony, writ
a hist^ry of his life.

34 Gilbert Foliot Abbot of Gloucester, 1149. Steph. 15.
consecrate 1149. The year 1161. or (as some deliver) 1163. he was translated
to London. See London.

35 Robert de Melun succeeded. 1162. Hen. 2.9.
He died February 28. 1167. and was buried hard by Robert de Betune.

36 Robert Foliot Archdeacon of Oxford, 1174. Hen. 2.21.
was chosen by the Chapter of Hereford (the king granting license of free
election) the year 1173. and the year following he was consecrate with diverse
other, whose Sees likewise had stood long void, by reason of the stirs between
the King and Thomas Becket. See Rich. More of Winch. He studied in ^iuers
Uniuersities of France, and there grew acquainted with Thomas Becket the
Archbishop, who favored him much for his singular learning and other manifold
good parts, in regard whereof he also preferred him to his Archdeaconry, and
laid the foundation of his advancement to this Bishopric. He died the ninth
of May, 1186. and was buried next his predecessor.

37 William le Vere a great builder, 1186. Hen. 2.33.
was consecrate 1186. and died December 24. 1199. He was buried next above his
predecessor. So these four lie together, Robert de Betune, Robert de Melun,
Robert Foliot and this man. Their toombes are very like, and but by their place
and order hardly to be distinguished.

38 Gyles de Bruise, the son of William Bruise, 1200. John 2.
Lord of Brecknocke, a man of great power and nobility, was consecrate Sept.
24. 1^00. In the Barons wars he took part with them against K. John, and
at last, was feign to sly the Realm. Afterward, being suffered to return,
and received into the kings favor, he traveled homeward, and died in the way
at Gloceter, Nouemb. 17. 1215. He left great possessions descended unto him by
his ancestors, he left them (I say) to Re^^old de Bruise his brother, that
married the daughter of ^lewellyn ap Iorwe^th Prince of Northwales. This man
lies buried upon the north side of the Presbytery. The image that lies upon
his toombe holds the likeness of a steeple in his hand: whereby it should
seem he built one of the towers or steeples.

1216 Joan. 18.
39 Hugh de Mapenor Deane of Hereford, was restored to the temporalties of this
See, December. 9. an R. Henry 3.1. He died about Easter 1219. and lies buried
(as I remember) in the North wall, near the toombe of Bishop Egueb^anke.

40 Hugh Foliot Archdeacon of Salop, 1219. Hen. 3.3^
consecrate in the beginning of November, 1219. died the twenty sixth of July,
1234.

1234. Edw. 3.19.
41 Ralfe de Maydenstan succeeded him. This man bought of a Gentleman named
Monthault the house belonging to the Bishopric of Hereford in London,
together with the patronage of the personage of S. Mary Monthault adjoining,
and gave them unto this See. The year 1239. he resigned his Bishopric, and
took on him the habit of a Franciscane Friar at Oxford He lived afterward a
Monastical life at Gloceter the space of five years, and then dying, was
buried there.

1239. Hen. 3.24
42 Peter de Egu^blanke born in Sauoy, was elected August 24. 1239. and
consecrate soon after. He is very odious in our histories, for directing the
king unto a strange and intol^erale kind of exaction, the year 1255. such and
so great, as it even quite beggered all the Clergy of that time. The year
following he took great pains in canuassing for the Archbishopricke of
Burdeaur, and having spent much money in procuring letters from the King and
diverse other great personages to request in his behalf; news was brought that
the old Arch^ishop (that he took to be dead, and whose place he sought) was
yet alive, and aliues-like, The year 1263. the Barons arrested him in his own
Cathedral Church, seized upon his goods, divided his t^easure unto their
soldiers before his face, and imprisoned him a long time in the Castle of
O^dley. He was cursed of so many (says one) it was impossible that many
calamities should not light upon him. Long before this captivity, his face was
horribly deformed with a kind of leprosy which some call Poly^pus; and though
he left no means unsought, he could not be cured of it till his dying day. He
departed this life Nouem 27. 1268. and lies buried under a large and fair
toombe over against the North door of the quie^. This man gave unto his Church
2. doles of corn of ninty six bushels a piece, yearly to be distributed to
the Ministers of the same for ever. He also founded a Monastery at Aqua-bella
in Sauoy, at which place it seems he was borne^ and caused his heart to be
buried there, as appears by a monument in the Church of that house yet
remaining.

43 John Breton Doctor of both Laws was also very well seen in the common
Laws of the land and writ a great volume deiuribus Anglicanis. 1268 Hen. 3.53.
He died May 12. 1275.

44 Thomas Cantilupe was a gentleman of a very noble and ancient house, 1275
Edw. 1.3.
but of a much more noble and excellent mind, being not only marvelous witty,
but ever from a child very studious and painful, very harmless and
virtuously given. He was brought up in the university of Oxford, where he
proceeded first Master of Art, then studied the Canon law and (as if seem^th)
proceeded Doctor of Law. But certain it is and without all question, that he
proceeded Doctor of Divinity the year 127^. Robert Kilwardby (with whom he
was very familiarly acquainted) was then Provincial of the friar Preachers and
Doctor of the chair in Oxford when he was presented; but before the time came
he should stand in the Act, the said Doctor Kilwardby was become Archbishop
of Canterbury. That notwithstanding, he touch sa^ed this his old friend that
honor, as to make a journey down to the university of purpose, and there
(being Archbishop) to aff^ord him the ceremonies of his creation. And it is
reported moreover that among^st many other pra^^i^es he gave him in his
oration, he signified that having been long his Confessor, he never perceived
him guilty of any mortal sin. Omnishomo mendax: Either the Confessor, or the
Confess^^, or the reporter, lied I doubt not. He was consecrate Bishop of
Hereford September 8. 1275. being then Archdeacon of Stafford and Chauncellor
of England, as also of the Uniuersity of Oxford. The 1282. he was feign to
travel to Rome about a controversy between him and John Peckham Archbishop
of Canterbury. In the way thither he died at Ciuita-vecchio, August. 25. 1282.
His body was brought to Hereford and there solempnly enterred near the East
wall of the North cross Isle, where we see a high toombe of marble. Many
miracles are said to have been wrought at the place of his burial, in regard
whereof, it pleased the Pope afterward to make him a Saint, and all the Bishops
of Hereford since his time, in honor of him, do bear his coat of arms as
the coat of their See, viz. G. 3. leopards heads ieasant 3. Flower-deluces O.

1282. Edw. 1.11.
45. Richard de Swinfield Doctor of Divinity succeeded a Kentish man borne, one
very eloquent and a great preacher. He was consecrate March 7. following, sat
34. years, and died March 15, 1316. He lies buried on the North side of the
North I Will above the quier, as an Elogium witnesses e^grauen upon a marble that
covers his toombe.

1317. Edw. 2.11.
46. Adam d' Orl^ton Doctor of Law borne in Hereford, was consecrate September
22. 1317. In the month of October 1327. he was translated to Worceter, and
after that to Winchester, See Winchester.

1327. Edw. 3.1.
47 Thomas Charlton Doctor of Law, and Cannon of York, was consecrate by the
Popes commandment October 18. 1327. The year 1329. he was for a while
Treasurer of England. The year 1337. he went into Ireland together with a
brother of his a knight, called Sir John Charlton, the knight being made chief
Justice of Ireland, and he Lord Chancellor. The year following, he
complaining unto the King by letters of his brothers misgouernment, his said
brother was displaced, and himself was appointed in his room chief Justice
for Ireland, as also Custos and Guardian of that Realm. The year 1340. he was
called home, having sat Bishop 16. years, he died January 11.1343. He has a
reasonable fair toombe in the North wall of the North cross I Will over against
the clock

1344. (...). 3.19.
48 John Trillecke sat 16. years and a half, and died int^state about
Christmasse, 1360.

49 Lewis Charlton, 1361. Edw. 3.35.
whom Bale seems to call Lewis de Charl^on (for that as he says he was
borne at the town in Monmouthshire so called) was brought up in Oxford first,
and Cambridge afterward, yet became Chancellor of Oxford the year 1357. He was
a great divine, and well seen in the Mathematikes, as his works in both kinds
might testify. Being Doctor of Divinity, he was made Bishop by the Popes Bull,
bearing date 4. I Would: Sept. 1361. He sat 8. years, died the year 1369. and
lies in a fair monument in the North wall of the South I Will above the quier.

50. William Courtney consecrate 1369. sat 5. years and an half, 1369. Edw.
3.43.
was translated to London 1375. and afterward to Canterbury. See Canterbury.

51. John Gilbert Bishop of Bangor, 1376. Edw. 3.51.
a Friar preacher succeeded him in Hereford. The year 1385 he was sent
Ambassador into France. 1386. he was made Treasurer of England by Parliament,
displaced 1389. and afterward restored being then Bishop of S. David's whether
he was translated the year 1389. and had restitution of his temporalties.
Iulie 12.

52. John Treneuant or Tre^nant, 1389. Rich. 2.13.
a Canon of S. Assaph, one of the Auditors of the Rota in Rome, was restored to
the temporalties of this See, Oct. 19 1389. The year 1400. he was sent
ambassador to Rome, to inform the Pope of the title of King Henry the fourth
unto the crown. He sat Bishop about 14. years and a half, died 1404. and
lies buried in the South wall of the South cross I Will, where we see a fair
and costly monument erected for him.

53. Robert Mascall, 1405. Hen. 4.7.
being yet very young, became a Friar Carmelite at Ludlow After that he went to
Oxford, where he so profited in learning and other virtues, as he was greatly
loved and admired of all men^ King Henry the fourth made choice of him for his
Confessor, and ^ound means to prefer him unto the Bishopric of Hereford.
He built the quier, presbytery and st^eple of the white Friars at London. Gave
many rich ornaments unto that house, died there December 12. 1416. and there
was entoombed in a goodly monument of Alabaster. He was often Ambassador unto
sorraine Princes, and the year 1415. was sent to the Counsel of Constance,
with two other Bishops.

1417. Hen 5.5.
54 Edmund Lacy Doctor of Divinity, Deane of the kings chapel, brought up in
Uniuersity College at Oxford, was cons. Bishop of Hereford at Windsor in the
Kings Chapel and in the presence of the King, April. 18. 1417. Having
continued there three years, he was translated to Exceter at Easter, 1420.
See Exceter.

1420. Hen 5.8.
55. Thomas Po^^on, Deane of York and Bachelour of Law, was consecrate 1420.
continued Bishop here one year and three months, and then was removed first
to Chichester, after that to Worceter. See Worceter.

1422 Hen. 6.1.
56 Thomas Spofford, Abbot of Saint Mary's in York, continued Bishop here 26.
years and resigned.

1448. Hen. 6.27.
57 Richard Beauchampe, Archdeacon of Suffolk, was consecrated about the end
of February. 1448. having sat here two years and three months, was
translated to Salisbury an. 1450.

1450. Hen. 6.29.
58 Reynald Butler, Abbot of Gloucester succeeded, sat here two years and a
half and was translated to Lichfield April 3. 1453. Howbeit it seems he
lies buried in the Church of Hereford, before the high altar, under a marble
inlayed with brass, upon which I find the arms of Butler, to wit vendy of 6.
and the arms of the Church of Hereford in chief.

1453 Hen. 6.32.
59 John Stanbery was a Carmelite Friar, brought up in the Uniuersity of Oxford,
where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and read the Lecture of that faculty.
King Henry the sixth called him thence to be the first Provost of his new
erected College at Eaton, and moreover made him his Confessor. The year 1446
he was elected Bishop of Norwich. But William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk
thrust in a Chaplain of his own (notwithstanding this election), and so
disappointed him Shortly after, to wit, the year 1448, the king found means
to prefer him to Bangor, and five years after that to Hereford, where he
sat one and twenty years. He died at Ludlow in the house of the Carmelites,
May 11. 1474. and was buried in his own Church upon the North side of the high
altar in a toombe of alabaster. A man not only very learned (whereof he left
many monuments in writing) but very wise, exceeding well spoken, and which is
not to be omitted) tall of stature, and of a very comely presence. But I
esteem his greatest commendation, his constant and immovable fidelity unto
his Prince, for which (being taken prisoner at the battle at Northampton
1460.) he was committed to the castle of Warwick, and lay in Durance there a
long time. Upon his toombe are fixed these barbarous verses: Marmoris hac
fossa, tetra petra contegit ossa,
Stanbery Pontificis Carmilitaeque Ioannis.
Doctoralis erat ^ibi regnans fama per orbem.
Criminis o Christ petimus quo tergeresordem;
Qui Bangorensem lustro rexit been sedem.
X. bino post I. simul hanc decorauit and aedem.
Hunc commisso grege lupum sibi quando fugauit,
Mors cum dente cruento trux tunc bellua strauit.
Anno M. C. quater L. X. quoque bino
Quatuor his iunctis in templi tempore sesto.
Qui legis hoec ora pro praesule mente benigna
Vt sint absque mora coelica sibi gaudia digna.


60 Thomas Mylling being yet a youth, 1474. Edw. 4.14.
became a monk of Westminster, and then went to Oxford, where he studied till
he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, having in the mean time attained good
knowledge in the Greek tongue which in those days was geason. Returning then
to Westminster, he was made Abbot there, and shortly after preferred unto the
Bishopric of Hereford by King Edward the fourth, under whom he was of the
privy counsel, and was Godfather unto Prince Edward his eldest son. He had
restitution of his temporalties Aug. 15. Edw. 4.14. died the year 1493. and
lies buried at Westminster in the middle of the Chapel of S. John Baptist,
where against the North wall there is a slight monument erected in memory of
him.

61 Edmund Audley Bishop of Rochester was translated to Hereford 1492. 1497.
Hen. 7.8.
and thence to Salisbury 1502. See Salisbury.

62 Hadrian de Castello consecrate 1502. 1502. Hen. 7.18.
was made Cardinal the next year and then translated to Wells 1504. See
Wells.

63 Richard Mayo Chancellor and Archdeacon of Oxford, as also President of
Magdalene College there for the space of 27. years, 1504. Hen. 7.20.
and Almoner unto King Henry the 7. the year 1501. was sent Ambassador into
Spain to fetch thence the Lady Katherine to be married unto Prince Arthur. Not
long after his return thonce, to wit, the year 1504. he was preferred unto
the Bishopric of Hereford, which he held eleven years and somewhat more. He
deceased April 18. 1516. and was buried on the South side of the hight altar.
where there is a goodly toombe erected in memory of him.

1516. Hen. 8.8.
64 Charles Booth, a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, Archdeacon of Buckingham,
and Chancellor of the Marches of Wales, was consecrate Nouemb. 30. 1516. He
bestowed great cost in repairing his house at London, and sat eighteen years
and five months. He lies entoombed in the North wall of the body of his
Church.

1535. Hen. 8.25.
65 Edward Fox borne in Glocestershire, a Doctor of Divinity, and Almoner unto
K. Henry the eight, was brought up in Kings college in Cambridge, whereof he
was made P^ouost the year 1528. and so continued till his death. He was often
Ambassador in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere, and became Bishop of Hereford, the
year 1535. A man very well learned, and secretly a fa^orer of religion. M.
Bucer does dedicate his commentary upon the Evangelists unto him. Himself also
writ diverse books yet extant. He sat only two years and 7. months
(continuing all that while Provost of Kings College.) and died May the 8.
1538. at London.

1538. Hen. 8.30.
66 Edmund Boner having been Bishop of Hereford only 7. months, was translated
to London. See London.

1539. Hen. 8.31.
67 John Skyp Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon of Dorset, brought up at
Cambridge in ^onwell and Caius College, was confirmed Bishop of Hereford,
Nouem. 20. 1539. sat 4. months above 12. years, died at London in time of a
Parliament, and was buried in the Church of Saint Mary ^ont^hault.

15^^. Edw. ^.7.
68 John Harley sometime fellow of Magdalen college in Oxford, was con^. May
26. 1553. displaced by Queen Mary, in the beginning of her reign for being
married, and died soon after.

69 Robert Parsew, 1554. Mary 1.
alias Warton consecrate Bishop of S. Assaph, July 2. 1536. was removed hither
(having first horribly spoiled S. Assaph) the year 1554. See S. Assaph. He
died toward the end of Q. Mary's reign. She then caused to be naminated unto
this See Thomas Raynolds Dean of Exceter. But her death stayed him from that
preferment.

70 John Scory, late Bishop of Chichester, was appoi^ted unto this See by
Queen Elizabeth in the beginning of her reign. 1559. Eliz. 2.
He died in the beginning of the year 1585.

71 Herbert Westfayling Doctor of Divinity, and Canon of Christchurch in Oxford
(in which college he was brought up) was consecrate December 12. 1585. Eliza.
29.
being the first Bishop of all that had their education in that house. He died
March 1. 1585.

72 Robert Benet Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Windsor fellow sometimes of
Trinity College in Cambridge, 1602. Eliza. 45.
was consecrated Febr. 20. 1602. by the appointment of Q. Elizabeth, but did
his homage to K. James.

The Bishopric of Hereford is valued in the Exchequer at 768. pound, 10.
shillings 10. pence halfepenny farthing, and yielded the Pope for first fruits
1800. florens.

THE BISHOPS OF CHICHESTER.
WIlfride Archbishop of York being banished by Egfride King of Northumberland
(as in York you may read more at large) he thought good to occupy his talent
by preaching the word of God amongst the South Saxons. Edilwalch the King of
that country, a little before his comming^ had received the faith of Christ,
by the persuasion of Wlfhere king of Mercia. He willing to increase his own
knowledge, and desirous that his subjects should be directed the way of
salvation; made very much of Wilfride, and assigned him an habitation in
Seolsey, a place all compassed about with the sea except one way. All that
land, containing eighty seven households, this king gave unto Wilfride for his
maintenance. He built a monastery there, and established his Cathedral See in
the same. Now it pleased God so to bless his labors, as in a short time,
great numbers of the people being converted, embraced Christian religion: And a
day being appointed for their Baptism, they had no sooner received the same,
but immediately it rained plentifully, the want whereof had caused a ^earth the
space of three years, before; and that so great, as not only many died daily
for hunger, but great numbers joining hand in hand forty or fifty in a company,
threw themselves headlong into the sea, choosing rather to die than to endure
that torment of hunger any longer. Thus it pleased God, at once to deliver
these men from temporal death by famine, and everlasting destruction that
their ignorance threatened unto them. Neither was this all the good that
Wilfride did unto them. Their sea and rivers abounding with great store of good
fish which they knew not how to take, he taught them to fish, and caused great
store of fish to be caught, wherewith many poor people were greatly relieved.
Having staid five years there, he was called home in to his own country
again, and restored to his Archbishopricke of York.

2. Eadbert. 71^
After his departure, Sussex was governed by the Bishops of Winchester until
the year 711. at what time Eadbert was consecrate Bishop of Seolsey, which
place before that; he governed as Abbot. 3. Eolla; he being dead, the Sea stood
void until after the death of Beda. 4. Sigga or Sigelm, alias Sigfridus, 733
He was present at the principal. Counsel held by Cuthbert Archbishop of
Canterbury. anno. 746. 5. Alubrith. 6. Osa, 790
alias Bosa. 7. Giselher. 8. Tota. 9. Wighthun. 10. Ethelulph. 11. Beornege. 906
Matthew Westminster makes mention of one Camelec Bishop of the South Saxons
that (as he says) was taken prisoner of the Danes the year 915. and
afterward redeemed with the price of forty pound sterling by King Edward the
elder. But I think it mistaken, for that S. Britons one of the name was Bishop
of Landaffe at that time, and was the man I doubt not. 12. Coenred. 13.
Guthard, he died 960. 14. Alfred, 960
he died 970. 970
15. Eadelm. 980
16. Ethelgar Abbot of the new Abbey at Winchester, consecrate May 6. 980.
translated to Canterbury 988. 988
17. Ordbright. 18. Elmar, he died 1019. 19. Ethelrike or Agelred (for so
Houeden calls him) died 1038. 1019.
November 5. 1039.
20. Grinketell being deprived of the Bishopric of the East Angles for S^mony,
obtained this, 1039. He died 1047 1047.
21. Heca Chaplain unto King Edward the Confessor, consecrate 1047. he died
1057. 1057.
22. Agelrike a monk of Christchurch in Canterbury. He was a man singularly
commended for his skill in the Laws and customs of the Realm, was appointed
by William the Conqueror to assist Gosfrid Bishop of Coustantia, in judging a
great controversy between Lanfranke the Archbishop, and Odo Earl of Kent the
kings brother, concerning title of diverse lands; and because being a very aged
man, he was unable to ride from Chichester unto P. kenden h^ath in Kent, where
the whole County in a manner were assembled about this matter: he was brought
thither in a wagon or chariot. In a Convocation holden at Windsor he was
deprived, and that (as Florent. Wigorn. supp^seth) unjustly the year 1070 and
imprisoned at Marleborough. ^. Stigard chaplain unto the Conqueror, translated
his See from Seol^ey (an obscure place at that time, and now eaten up with the
sea that every high water covers it) unto Ch^chester, 1070. V. Con. 5.
in old time called Cissancester, so he was the first Bishop of Chichester. He
died anno. 1087. ^. William.
2. Ralfe. A man of very high stature, and no less high of mind. He stood
very sto^tly in defense of Anselme the Archbishop: in so much as when the king
William Rufus threatened him for the same, he ^ffered him his ring and
^rosier, saying, it should better become him to leave his place th^n his duty.
Neither could he ever be induced to forsake the said Archbishop, until he
seemed to forsake his own cause by flying the country. After that, when the
king was content to wink at the marriage of many Priests in the realm (unto
whom (I mean married Priests) the Archbishop was a grievous and heavy
adversary) and received of them yearly a great sum of money for defending
them against the austerity of the other, (to wit Anselme) this Bishop resisted
the collection of that money in his Dioces, calling it the tribute of
fornication; and when (notwithstanding his resistance) it was paid, he
interdicted his own Dioces, commanding the Church-doores every where to be
stopped up with thorns. The king (a wise and gentle Prince, Henry the first)
whether not vouchsafing to contend with him, or taking his well meaning in good
part, was not only content to pardon this disobedience, but also bestowed the
money so gathered in his Dioces upon him, saying it was a poor Bishopric and
needed such helps. And certain it is, that before the coming of this man, it
was indeed exceeding poor. He increased it wonderfully, and yet
notwithstanding built his Cathedral Church of Chichester from the ground. It
was scarcely finished, when as May the fifth, 1114. it was quite defaced, and a
great part of the city consumed with casual fire. He found means to repair
it again, being helped much with the liberality of the king and some other.
This Bishop sat many years, (the certain time I know not) and drawing toward
his end, delivered unto the poor with his own hands whatsoever he had in the
world, leaving himself scarce clothes to cover him. He was ever a great alms
man, and notwithstanding his great building, a great house keeper also. Neither
was he less careful of the spiritual Temple of Christ th^n the material:
he was a very painful Pr^acher, yearly visiting his whole Diocese
(preaching in every place) thrice, reprehending and punishing sin severely,
and lastly performing such other pastoral duties as he thought unto his
charge might belong.

4. Seffridus Abbot of Glastenbury, 1125. Hen. 1.25.
was brother unto Ralfe Archbishop of Canterbury. He was consectate April 12.
1123. It seems by Wath. Westminster. this man died 1132.

5. Hilarious. This man of only all the Bishops in England was content
absolutely to allow of the declaration after published at Clarindon, without
mention of that odious clause, (saluo ordine suo) but was shrewdly baited of
his brethren for his labor, as in the life of Thomas Becket you may read more
at large.

1174. Hen. 2.21.
6. John de Greenford Deane of Chichester was elected the year 1173. consecrate
1174. and died 1180.

7. Seffridus the second succeeded. In his time to wit, October 19. 1187. the
Cathedral Church together with the whole City was once more consumed with
casual fire. The Church and his own Palace he both reedified in very good
sort.

1199. Joan. 1.
8. Simon de Wells was elected Bishop December 2^. anno. 1198.

1215. Joan. 17.
9. Richard Poor Deane of Salisbury was consecrate 1215. translated to
Salisbury 1217. and after to Durham. See Durham.

1218, Hen. 3.2.
10. Ralfe de Warham first Official, and then (as one says) Prior of Norwich
was confirmed by Gualo the Popes Legate, and had restitution of his
temporalties, December. 27. anno. Henry. 3.2. He gave to the Church a Windmill in
Bishopstone and died 1222.

1223 Hen. 3.7.
11. Ralfe Neuil al. de Noua villa was elected Nouemb. 1. 1222. and consecrate
the year following, being then lately made Chauncellor of England by the
consent and good liking of the whole realm, for the great opinion they had of
his vprightnes and sincerity; whereof indeed he yielded such proof in the
execution of that office, as never any man hold the same with greater
commendation. About the year 1230. he was chosen Archb of Canterbury, but was
so far from seeking that dignity corruptly, as he refused to give the monks
money to pay for their charges in certifying this election unto the Pope. How
he missed it, see Canterbury in the lif of S. Edmund. After that he was elect
Bishop of Winchester, and thereupon resigned his Chancellorship 1237. but was
induced to take it again soon after, and held it till his death. For the
success of his election to Winchester, See more in William de Raleigh of
Winchester. He died Feb. 1. 1244. at London in that house which is now known by
the name of Lincolns Inn He built it from the ground to be a house of receipt
for himself and his successors when they should come to London. After his time
(I know not by what means) it came to the possession of Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, who somewhat enlarged it and left it the name it now has This Bishop
moreover builded a Chapel, and dedicated it to Saint Michaell without the
Eastgate of Chichester, and was otherwise a great Benefactor unto his own
Church.

12. Richard de la Which. 1245. Hen. 3.50.
After the death of Ralf Neuil, the Canons of Chichester to curry favor with
the king. chose a Chaplain of his for their Bishop, one Robert Passelew, a man
wise enough, and one that had done the king much good service, but so
unlearned, as the Bishops of the realm disdaining much to be joined with him,
procured his election to be^ disanulled, and Richard de Wiche to be chosen.
This Richard de Wiche was borne at Wiche in Worcetershire, of which place he
took his surname, and was brought up in the universities of Oxford first, and
Paris afterward. Being come to man's estate, he traveled to Bononia; where
having studied the Canon Law seven years, he became public reader of the
same. After that, he spent some time at Orleans in France, and then returning
home, was made Chancellor unto Saint Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury as also
of the university of Oxford. He was consecrate by the Pope himself at Lions
1245. and so governed the charge committed to him, as all men greatly
reverenced him; not only for his great learning, but much more for his
diligence in preaching, his manifold virtues, and above all his integrity of
life and conversation. In regard of these things, as also of many miracles that
are fathered upon him, he was canonised and made a Saint some seven years
after his death. He deceased April 2. 1253. (as Math. Paris delivers) yet
our Martyrologies in which he is calendred say it was April 3. the ninth year
after his consecration, and of his age the fifty sixth. He was buried in his
own Church, and the year 1276. his body was removed from the first place of
burial and laid in a sumptuous shrine.

13. John Clypping a Canon of Chichester succeeded him. 1253 Hen. 3.38.
This man amongst other things, gave unto his Church the Manor of Drungwick,
upon which he built much at his own cost, even all the Manor house there.

1261. Hen. 3.46.
14. Stephen de Berksteed was restored to the temporalties of this See June 20.
Hen. 3.46. He was excommunicate the year 1265. for taking part with the
Barons against the king.

15. Gilbertus de sancto Leofardo Treasurer of Chichester, and an Oxford man
was restored to the temporalties of this See Iun. 18. Edw. 1.16. died the year
1305. He was (says Matthew Westminster) a Father of the fatherless, a
comforter of mourners, a defender of widows, a releeuer of the poor, a
helper of the distressed and a diligent visiter of the sick, especially the
poor, unto whom he resorted more often then unto the rich. He ascribes also
diverse miracles unto him, believe him as you list. He raised from the
foundation the Chapel of Saint Mary.

16. John de Langton brought up in the university of Oxford, sometimes
Chauncellor of England, builded a costly window in the south part of the
Church. This Bishop (or at least he that was Bishop of Chichester, the year
1315.) excommunicated the Earl Warren for adultery, whereupon the Earl came
unto him with armed men, and made show of some intent to lay violent hands upon
him. The Bishops men perceiving it, set upon them, and by their Masters
commandment put both the Earl and his men in prison.

17. Robert Stratford brother to John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury,
Archdeacon of Canterbury, Chauncellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, and Lord
Chancellor of England; at what time he was preferred to the Bishopric of
Chichester, made suite, he might with the kings good favor give over his
office, which was granted him; but not long after, it was laid upon him again,
while he was Chancellor of Oxford, he found means to drive away scholars from
Stanford that had begun to settle themselves there, by reason of the
troublesome factions between the Southern and Northren men, for reforming
whereof, he devised to appoint one of the ^roct^rs always to be a Southern
man, and the other a Northren, which long time after was observed. He died at
Aluingburne. April. 9. 1362.

1362. Edw. 3.36.
18. William de Lenne, alias Lulimere, Doctor of Law, and Deane of Chichester,
was consecrate about Midsomer, 1362. and translated to Worceter, 1368. See
Worceter.

19. William Read Provost of Wengham, and was sometimes fellow of Merton
college in Oxford, 1369. Edw. 3.43.
where he gave himself most part unto the study of the Mathematikes, and that
to so good purpose, as he has the reputation of the most excellent
Mathematician of his age. In his riper years he ^ell to Divinity, and proceeded
Doctor of that faculty. He built the Castle of Amberley from the ground, as as
also the library of Merton College, where he left his picture, many tables and
Astronomicall instruments, that (as I hear) are there yet to be seen, I find
his will proved, Nouem. 4. 1385.

20. Thomas Rushooke a Friar preacher, 138^. Ric. 2.9.
Doctor of Divinity, and Confessor unto the King, was first Bishop of
Landaff, and about the middle of October. 1385. removed thence to Chichester.
He was drouen away from the Court by the Barons, and his goods confiscate by
Parliament in March, 1388. It should seem also, that he was then put from his
Bishopric. For I find a record wherein shortly after, he is called, Thomas
late Bishop of Chichester.

21. Richard M^tford was translated to Salisbury the year 1395. See Salisbury.

22. Robert Waldby was translated from Dublin 1395. 1395. Rich. 2.19.
and from Chichester to York the year following. See York.

23. Robert Read, 1396. Ric. 2.20
a Friar preacher, became Bishop of Carlioll 1396. by the Popes gift, who
notwithstanding that one William S^irkland was elected lawfully, bestowed that
place upon him at the kings request. In the end of the same year he was
translated to Chichester, where he built a fair cross in the market place. It
seems he died about whitsontide 1417.

24. Stephen Patington translated from S. David's hither in December 1417. 1417.
Hen. 5.5.
He died soon after, or rather indeed (as I find by a record in the Tower)
before his translation could be perfected.

25. Henry Ware Doctor of Law, 1418. Hen. 5.6.
official to the Archbishop of Can^erbury, was consecrate, in May 1418.

26. John Kemp Bishop of Rochester, 1422. Hen. 5.10.
translated hither 1422. and hence to London the same year, afterward to
York and Canterbury. See Canterbury.

1423. Hen. 6.2.
27. Thomas Poldon^ first Bishop of Hereford was translated hence to Worceter,
1426. See Worceter.

1426 Hen. 6.4.
28. John Rickinpale Doctor of Divinity, and Chancellor of York, a Cambridge
man, and sometimes Chancellor of that Uniuersity, was consecrate in the
parish Church of Mortlake, Iun. 30. 1426. and died July. ^. 1426.

14^0. Hen. 6.9.
29. Simon Sidenham Doctor of Law, Deane of Salisbury, was consecrate, Febr. 12.
1430.

30. Richard Praty, sometimes Chauncelour of the Uniuersity of Oxford. He died
about S. James tide 1445.

1445 Hen. 6.24.
31. Adam Molins Doctor of Law, Deane of Sarum, as also of S. Berins in
Cornwall, and sometimes Clarke of the Council, was consecrate the year 1445.
in Nou. and then presently had the keeping of the privy seal committed to him.
He was slain at Portsmouth, of Mariners subborned thereunto by Richard Duke of
York, June 9. 1449. He gave to the high Altar certain rich clothes of
crimson velvet.

1450. Hen. 6.29.
32 Reginald Peacocke, was borne in Wales, brought up in O^iall College in
Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, became Chaplain unto Hu^srey
Duke of Gloceter, uncle and Protector of king Henry the sixth, and was preferred
by him unto the Bishopric of Saint Assaph: from when^e the year 1450. he
was translated to Chichester. Bearing himself bold upon the said Dukes fauou^
he doubted not to defend openly diu^rs doctrines, some true and some false (but
all strange in those times) which after the Dukes death, he was sain to recant
at Paul's cross, where before his face were burnt the books he had written
which were many. Much of the Scripture he translated into English, which I
perceive not to have been misliked. His opinions so retreated, were especially
four. 1. That it should not be of the necessity of salvation to believe that
Christ descended into he^l. 2. Or to believe the Communion of Saints. 3. That
the Uniuersall Church may err in matters of Faith. 4. That it is not necessary
to salvation to believe and approve all that is affirmed and determined by a
general Council. The recantation aforesaid was made December. 4. 1457. After
which, he was deprived of his Bishopric, having a pension assigned him to
maintain him in an Abbey, where soon after he died.

33 John Arundell Doctor of Physic succeeded. 14^8 Hen 6.37


34 Edward Story Doctor of Divinity, sometimes fellow of Pembrook hal in
Cambridge, 1477 Edw. 4.17.
and Master of Michael house there, was consecrate Bishop of Carliol, October
foure^eene, 1468. sat there nine years, and was translated hither, the year
1477. He built the New Cross in the Market place.

35 Richard Fitz-Iames was translaed from Rochester 1504. 1504. Hen 7.20
and removed hence to London. 1506. See London.

36 Robert Sherborne brought up in New College in Oxford, was translated from
Saint Dauid^, 1508. Hen. 7.24.
November 8. 1508. He sat Bishop of Chichester 28. years, and died August 21.
15^6. being 96 years of age, having then lately resigned his Bishopric. A
man very wise, often employed in Ambassages by King Henry the 7. a great
housekeeper, a great alms man, one that bestowed much money in beautifying his
Church, and increased the number of the Ministers belonging thereunto. It was
not without cause therefore that he used for his Poosy this of David, Dilexi
decorem domus tuae Domine, as also sometimes this, Credit operibus.

37 Richard Sampson, Doctor of law, consecrate June 9. 1536. 1536. Hen. 8.28.
was translated to Lichfield, 1543. March 12. See Lichfield.

38 George Day Doctor of Divinity, and for the space of ten years, 1543. Hen.
8.35.
Prouest of Kings College in Cambridge, was consecrate in May 1543. depriu^^
the year 1551. restored by Queen Mary, 1553. (...) had layen long prisoner in
the Fleet, and died August ^. 1556. He was brother unto W. Day, long after
Bishop of Winchester.

39 John Scory Bacheler of Divinity, consecrate Bishop of Rochester, Aug. 30.
1551. was shortly after removed to this Church. By Queen Mary he was
displaced, and by Queen Elizabeth preferred to Hereford.

1557 Mary. 5.
40 John Christopherson, Doctor of Divinity, Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and Deane of Norwich, was appointed Bishop of Chichester by Queen
Mary, soon after the death of Day. He was borne in Lancashire, and brough up
in Saint John's College in Cambridge. A man very learned, whereof he has left
many testimonies behind him. He was deprived by Act of Parliament in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth. In the mean time he bestowed much money in
furnishing the Masters lodging in Trinity College aforesaid, and gave unto the
College many books, Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.

1559. Eliz. 2.
41 William Barlow Doctor of Divinity, first Bishop of S. Assaph. then of Saint
David's, and after of Wells, was lastly confirmed Bishop of Chichester, December.
20. 1559. and sat there about ten years. See Wells.

1570. Eliza. 12.
42 Richard Curteise Doctor of Divinity, and sometimes fellow of S. John's
College in Cambridge was consecrate May 20. 1570.

158^. Eliz. 27.
43 Thomas Bickley Doctor of Divinity, Warden of Merton College in Oxford, was
consecrate about the beginning of the year 1585. He was born at Stow in
Buckinghamshire, brought up in Magdalen College, where he was first Chorister,
then one of the Demies, and lastly fellow. In Queen Mary's time he was feign
to forsake, not only his fellowship, but the Realm also. Most part of her
reign he lived in France; at Paris and Orleans. In the beginning of the reign
of Q. Elizabeth, returning home, he became Chaplain unto the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Mat. Parker by whos^ means he was preferred unto the Wardeeship
of Merton College. Thomas Bentam Bishop of Lichfielde his old acquaintance in
Magdalen College, and his companion in exile, bestowed upon him moreover the
Archdeaconry of Stafford, and a Prebend in Lichfield. Having governed the said
College twenty years, he was called to the Bishopric of Chichester, where he
sat 11. years. He lived always sole and unmarried, died at Aldingburne
April, 30. 1596. being well near 90. years of age, and was honorably
enterred in his Cathedral Church of Chichester. He bequeathed unto Merton
College in Oxford 100. pound, to Magdalen College 40. pound, and diverse other
sums of money to diverse other good uses.

44 Anthony Watson sometimes fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, 1596.
Eliz. 39.
now Deane of Bristow, and one of her Majesty's Chaplains was consecrate Aug.
15. 1596. and upon the displacing of Bishop Fle^cher, became Almoner unto her
Majesty. He died as his predecessor did, a Bacheler, in September 1605.

45 Lancelot Andrews Doc^^r of Divinity, and Dean of Westminster, was
consecrate Nouemb. 3. 1605. and translated to Ely, 1609.

46 Samuel Harsenet Doctor of Divinity and Archdeacon of Colchester, 1603. Iac.
3.
first fellow, then Master of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, was consecrate
December. 3. 1609.

The Bishopric of Chichester is valued in the Kings books at 677. pound,
15. pence. In the Popes books at 333. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF ROCHESTER
604
SAint Augustine having laid some good foundation of Christian religion at
Canterbury; for the farther propagation of the same, thought good to ordain
Bishops unto other Cities near adjoining, and therefore in one day consecrated
two, viz. Mellitus to London, and Iustus a Roman to Rochester. This was the
year 604. About seven years after, he was feign to sly the realm, together
with Mellitus Bishop of London, as in his life you may read more at large. The
year 622. he was translated to Cante^bury. S^e Canterbury.

622
1 Iustus therefore was the first Bishop of Rochester.

2 Ro^anus was the second. Traveling to Rome in a wessage between Iustus the
Archbishop, and Honorius the Pope, he was drowned by the way.

631
3 Paulinus the first Archbishop of York being forced thence by persecution,
was content to take charge of Rochester (as in York it shall be declared)
sat there thirteens years, and died October 10. 644. He was buried there in
the Church of Saint Andrew, which Ethelbert the good king of Kent built from
the ground.

4. Ithamar was then made Bishop of Rochester, an Englishman by birth and
education, yet nothing inferior either in life or learning unto any of his
predecessors. He was the first Bishop of our Nation, I mean the first
Englishman,

5 Damianus. 656
After his death the Sea continued long void.

6 Putta at last was consecrate thereunto by Theodore Archbish. of Canterbury.
669
He was a very good man, but very simple, and altogether inexpert in worldly
matters. Waxing therefore soon weary of his Bishopric, he was half
determined to leave it, when Edilred king of Mercia burning his Church and
City, resolved and settled him in that determination. So the year 676. he went
into Mercia, where he accepted the charge of a Pa^rish-Church under Saxulf
Bishop there, mending his living by teaching a song School; for he was a
great and cunning Musician. In that kind of life he spent the rest of his
time, and could never abide to hear of returning to his Bishopric.

7. Quichelmus or Gulielmus (so Beda calls him) a little while after his
ordination, 667
left his Bishopric also, being forced thereunto by want and poverty.

8 Gebmundus, Godmundus or Godwyndus accepted it, 681
and held it during his life. He died the year 692.

9 Tobias an Englishman succeeded. He was brought up under Theodore Archbishop
of Canterbury, 693.
and Hadrian Abbot of Saint Augustines. A great learned man, a painful
Preacher, and so well seen both in the Latin and Greek tongues, as he spoke
them no less readily then his own mother language. He died the year 726. (one
says 715.) and was buried in his own Church.

10 Aldulfus, he died 741.

11 Dun or Duina, 717
He was present at a Prouincial counsel held at Cliff by Rochester, 740
in Sept. anno 747. 747^


12 Eardulf. O^fa king of Mercia gave unto him and his successors Freindsbury
by the name of Eslingham about the year 770. Ecgbert a King of Kent gave him
certain^ land within the Castle of Rochester, the year 763. And Ethelbert an
other King of Kent, gave him Woldham, anno 751.

13 Diora, unto him the foresaid Ecgbert (that seems to have been but some
petty King, for it could not he Egbert the fourth christened King, that lived
100. years before these times (he I say, gave to this Dioram 10: plough-lands
in Halling, together with certain Deanes in the wealde or common wood.

14 Weremund. He died the year 800,

800
15 Beornmod, or rather Beornredus. He died, 804.

16 Tadnoth.

17 Bedenoth.

18 Godwyn the first.

It is here to be acknowledged, that the series or Catalogue of the Bishops of
Rochester from Beornmod to Siward, even for the space of eight score years, is
but very maimed and imperfect. William Malmsbury affoordeth us for all the time
between Beda and the Conquest (330. years) but nine Bishops. Florentius Wigorn:
mentions one more only. A Catalogue remaining in the Church of Rochester
inserteth at once seven other: unto which I must needs add this first Godwyn,
that was undoubtedly Bishop of Rochester the years 833. and 851. as
appears manifestly in two Charters, the one of Withlaf, and the other of
Bertulse kings of Mercia, bearing that date, and confirmed by hi^. Both of them
are exemplisted in Ingulphus. And therefore I should do ill not to allow him a
place although whether this be his due place and order or no, I am not able
certainly to say.

19 Cuther^ulf.

20 Swithulf appointed one of the Gardians of the realm to defend it against
the Danes, anno 897. which year he died.

21 Buiricus.

22. Cheolmund.

23 Chineferth.

24 Burrchicus. Unto him Edmund the brother of King Athelstane, gave the town
of Malling by the name of three plongh-lands in Mealings, anno 945.

25 Alfstane, He died 984.

26 Godwyne 2. 17 Godwyne 3. One of these confirmed a Charter of King Edgar
exemplified in Ingulphus anno 966. One of them also as I find^ noted, confirmed
a Charter concerning Wulfrunhampton the year 996. Again, it is delivered by
Florentius Wigorn^ H. Huntingdon and Houeden, that Godwyn Bishop of Rochester
was taken prisoner by the Danes, the year 1011. together with Alphage
Archbishop of Canterbury, And therefore whereas Matthew Westminster and others
report that King Ethelrede be^eged the Bishop of Rochester in that his own City
a long time, the year 983 and that being warned by Saint Dunstan, he should
take heed least h^e provoked against him Saint Andrew Patron of that Church;
yet he would not depart thence till he had wru^g from the Bishop one hundred
pound, we need not make any great doubt, but the Bishop so ransomed, was
called Godwyn, although I find not his name any where set down. Again, it
appears by a letter of King Edward the Confessor, directed unto Ead^i
Archbishop of Canterbury, Godwine Bishop of Rochester, and other, that about
the year 1040. Godwin was Bishop there, and how long after appears not. It
should seem then, that the Sea being become very poor, what through the
particular throubles of these men, and the general calamities of the times;
after their decease, it stood void a long time, viz. until the year 1058.

28 Siward Abbot of Abingdon (one says of Chertsey) was then consecrate. 1058.
Upon what occasion he was preferred to Rochester, you may see in Eadsine of
Canterbury, page 25. He died (faith William Malmsbury) at Abingdon the year
10^7. a few days after the Conquest of England by the Normans. Howbeit it is
manifest that the year 1072. he lived, and was present at that Synod gathered
together about Whitsontide, beg^n at Winchester, and ended at Windsor, as in
the third book of the same William de Regib. ye may perceive. And I find it
noted elsewhere, that he should die the year 1075. Whenever he died, certain
it is he left behind him a miserable poor Church, destitute of all things
necessary. It had not above four Canons, which lived very hardly, and that for
the most part by the alms of such well disposed people as took compassion of
their poverty.

29 Arnostus Lanfra^ke Arcbishop of Cant^rbury intending to reduce this Church
to some better order, consecrated Bishop unto this See one Arnostus a Donke of
Becco, a man well known unto him. He lived not to perform any great matter.
Within a year after his preferment he died, to wit, the year 1076.

1077. W. Con. 12
30. Gundulph, a Monk likewise, was placed in his room by the means of the
said Lanfranke, who also caused him to take into his Church (not secular
Priests, as ^it^erto had been accustomed) but monks. This Bishop was a man not
greatly learned, but wise and very industrious. For he handled the matter so,
as he procured not only his Church to be new built, but also the revenues to
be increased to that height, finding in the same only 6. secular Priests, as
at the time of his death, it did and was able to maintain fifty Monks, some
say 60. He was very much helped in these things by Lanfranke, that besides
diverse sums of ready money which he contributed, bought a certain manor
called Hed^re, and gave it to the Church of ^ochester. Moreover, whereas Odo
Earl of Kent had incroched upon diverse lands and possessions belonging to the
Sees both of Canterbury and Rochester; by law they recovered them from him;
namely, unto Rochester were restored by the means of Lanfranke, at the suit of
Gu^dulph, and by the judgment of Gosfiidus Bishop of Constantia, together with
Egelrike Bishop of Chichester, these manors, Dett^yng, Stoce, Preston,
Daniton, and diverse other parcels. This Trial was held upon Pikendon hethe,
where all the County were assembled at the Kings commandment to give in
evidence. Afterward he founded the hospital of Saint Bartholomewes in
Chettham, and the ^unry of ^alling valued at the suppression, at 245. pound,
10. shillings, 2. pence halsepeny yearly re^enue. Moreover he built a great
part of the Castle of Rochester, namely the great Tower which yet stands. In
recompense of that charge amounting to threescore pound, the King bestowed a
Manor upon his See: Lastly, he enshrined the b^dy of S. Paulinus his
predecessor, in a coffin of silver curiously wrought. He died March 7. 1107.

31 Ralfe Abbot of Say, 2108. Hen. 1.9.
was consecrate August 11. 1108 The year 1114. he was translated to
Canterbury, See Canterbury.

32 Earnulph was a Frenchman, 1115 Hen. 1.16
brought up a while under Lanfranke at Becco, and after became a Monk at
Beau^eyes. Lanfranke, understanding that he lived very male- content at
Beauueys (upon what occasion I find not) and knowing him to be a man of
excellent good parts, advised him to com to him into England. A while after his
coming over, he lived a private Monk in Canterbury, afterward became Prior
there, then was preferred to the Abbotship of Peterborough, and lastly had the
Bishopric of Rochester given him by his predecessor, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, by whom he was consecrate at Canterbury, together with Geoffrey
Bishop of Hereford, December 26. 1115. In all these places he so bestirred
himself, as he left diverse notable monuments of his industrious liberality.
The upper end of Christ church in Canterbury built by Lanfrank being fallen
down (as yet Prior there) procured to be built again most magnificently,
pauing it with marble, glasing and beauti^ying it with sundry kinds of stately
ornaments. At Pet^r, borough he increased the number of his monks, and built
exceeding much. A little before his coming away, that and all other edifices
of the monastery were consumed by casual fire, Now though the diligence and
long time of Gundulphus his predecessor, left nothing very needful for him to
perform at Rechester; yet would he never be idle, but still was either
mending, and repayring of old, or setting up some new building. He died in the
month of March 1124 being 84. years of age. I find it reported, that he
writ an history of the Church of Rochester, which (if it be not perished) I
wish it might be my hap to see.

1125 Hen. 1.26
3^ John Archdeacon of Canterbury was consecrate May 23. 1125, and died the
year 1137. which year June 3. the Church and City were burnt by casual fire.

1137. Steph. 2.
34 Ascelinus whom some call Anselme (but falsely) dyed 1147. To this man Saint
Bernard writes his 205. Epistle.

1147. Steph. 13.
35 Walter Archdeacon of Canterbury, was the first that ever was elected by the
Monks. The Archbishop of Canterbury was wont till this time to nominate to
this Bishopric whom pleased him. Theobald the Archbishop bestowed this
privilege upon them. In this man's time to wit April 10. 1177. the whole City
and Church of Rochester were again consumed by fire. He died July 26. 1182.
the 35. year after his Consecration.

1583 Hen. 2.30
36 Gualeranus, Archdeacon of Bayon succeeded, and died the year 1^84. After
his death a great controversy arose between the Monks of Christchurch in
Canterbury, and the Monks of Saint Andrews in Rochester; they of Canterbury
alleging, that the Crosier of Rochester after the death of every Bishop should
lie upon the altar with them, by them to be delivered to the next Bishop. This
the Monks of Rochester gainesayed in words, and de facto detayned the Crosier
with them, till at last each party deterring the matter so the Archbishop of
Canterbury: the Monks of Rochester deli^ered into his hands the Crosser, which
he presently delivered over again unto the Prior of Canterbury: and he soon
after unto Gilbert Glanuyll the next Bishop.

1^85 Hen. 2.30.
37 Gilbert de Glanuyll, Archdeacon of Luxonia, was Consecrate September 29.
1185. Between this man and his Monks of Rochester, was long and continual
debate. By occasion whereof, he took away from them all their mooueable
goods, all the ornaments of their Church, their writings and evidences, yea and
a great part of their lands, possessions and privileges. Wanting money to
follow their suites against him, they were forced to coin the silver of S.
Paulines shrine into money. These Controversies were ended no otherwise then by
his death, which happened June, 24. 1214. But their hatred against him was so far
from dying with him, as they would afford him no manner of obsequies, but
buried him most obscurely, or rather basely, without either ringing, singing,
or any other manner of solemnity. The Hospital at Strowde near Rochester
(called Neworke) was built, founded, and by him endowed with those possessions
it now enjoys, to wit, the value of fifty two pound yearly revenue.

38 Benedictus Chaunter of Saint Paul's Church in London, 1214. John 16.
was Consecrate February 22. 1214. He died 1226.

39 Henry de Sanford Archdeacon of Canterbury Consecrate 1227. 1227. Hen. 3.14.
Within two years after it happened that Richard the elect of Canterbury, Hugh
of Ely and Roger of London, were to be consecrated. Ioceline Bishop of Wels
challenged the performance of this Ceremony as due to him, for that he was the
most ancient Bishop of the Province of Canterbury. But this Bishop of Rochester
alleged it belonged to this See (Canterbury being void) to consecrate all the
Bishops of that Province. With much adoo, this agreement was made between
them, that Rochester should consecrate the Archbishop, and Ioceline of Wells
the other two. Another thing is remembered of this Bishop, scarce worthy the
rehearsal, which yet I will not omit, to show how apt men even of the grauest
sort were to be deceived, and deluded in those times. Preaching at Sittingborn
before a great audience, at a time when he gave general orders, he declared
openly, that God had revealed unto him now three several times, how that such
a day the souls of King Richard the 1. Stephen Langton late Archbishop, and
another Priest were delivered out of Purgatory, and no more souls that day but
only they three. He died February 24. 1235.

1238. Hen. 3.23.
40 Richard de Wendouer Parson of Bromley being lawfully elected Bishop of
Rochester, was rejected as a mau insufficient by Edmund the Archchbishop,
afterward canonized a Saint, and commonly called S. Edmund. He appealing to
Rome, was confirmed there in despite of the Archbishop, with whom the Pope was
very angry for withstanding his shameless and intolerable exactions. He was
consecrate 1238. died 1250, and was buried in the Church of Westminster by the
Kings special commandment, for that he was accounted a very holy and
virtuous man.

1250. Hen. 3.35.
41 Laurentius de Sancto Martino a Chaplain and counselor of King Henry the
third, was consecrate April, 12. 125^ at Lions. He obtained of the Pope a
dispensation to hold all his former livings in Commendan^ with this
Bishopric: and yet alleging that his Bishopric was the poorest of
England, much meaner then Carlioll, and therefore his living, yet unable to
maintain the port of a Bishop; he never coased til he had extorted from the
Clergy of his Dioces a grant of a fifth part of all their spiritual livings for
five years, and appropriated unto this See for ever the Parsonage of
Freindsbury. Boniface the Archbishop of Canterbury used this man hardly,
inuading his possessions, and violently taking from him without all right
diverse things of old belonging to his See. He complained unto the king, unto
whose Queen Boniface was uncle. The king answered him in plain terms, he
know he should offend his wife much, if he should become a stickler between
them, and wished him ^o seek some other remedy, signifying that if by
importunity he enforced him to interpose his authority, he should do him more
hurt then good. Hereupon he sought unto the Pope, but he was so near a
neighbor to the Duke of Sauoy, the Archbishops brother, as perceiving quickly
little good was to ^ee done there, he was feign to take patience for an
amends, and to sit him down. He departed this life, June 3. 1274.

42 Walter de Merton Lord Chancellor of England, 1274 Edw. 1.2.
long before he was Bishop (to wit the year 1264) began the foundation of a
College at Maldon in Surrey; but ten years after, changing his purpose, left
that and erected that which we now call Merton College in Oxford, indowing it
with (in effect) all the lands that it now possesses. About the same time,
viz. the year 1274. he became Bishop of Rochester; and living there but
only three or four years, died upon Saint Lukes day, 1278. as some, and
namely Mat. Westminster reports: Other say, he deceased October. 27. 1277, He
lies buried in the North Isle of his church of Rochester, almost over against
the Bishops See. In which place Sir Henry Sauile the now Warden, and the
fellows of his College, taking down an old marble toombe, erected over him of
late a very seemly monument of touch and Alabaster, bearing this inscription:
Waltero de Merton. Cancellario Angliae sub Henrico tertio, Episcopo Roffensi,
sub Edwardo primo Rege; vnius exemplo, omnium quotquot extant Collegiorum
fundatori, maximorum Europae totiusingeniorum ^oelicissimo parenti; Custos and
Scholares domus, Scholarium de Merton in Vniuersitate Oxon: communib. Collegij
^^pensis debitum pietatis monumentum posuere: Anno Domini 1598. Henrico Sauile
Custode. Obijt in vigilia Simonis and Iudae, Anno Domini 1277. Edwardi primi
Sancto Inchoauerat Collegium Maldoniae in agro Surr: Anno Domini 1264. Henrici
tertij 48 cui dein salubri consilio Oxonium, anno 1270. translatos extrema
manus soelicissimis (vt credi par est) auspicijs accessit anno 1274. ipfis Call.
Aug. anno Regni Regi^ Edwardi primi secundo.

Magne senex ^titulis, Musarum sede sacrata
Mayor, Mertonidum maxim progeny:
Haec tibi gratantes, post secula sera nepotes,
En uotiua locant, marmora, sancte parens.
43 John de Bradfeild, 1279.
a Monk and Chanter of the church of Rochester, was consecrate 1279. and died
April 23. 1283.

1282. Edw. 1.11.
44 Thomas Inglethorpe Deane of Saint Paul's church in London, consecrate 1282.
died the the twelfth of May, 1291.

1291 Edw. 1.21
55 Thomas de Wuldham, Prior of Rochester, died feb. 28. 1316.

1319. Edw. 3.17.
46 Haymo, Confessor to king Edward the second, surnamed at Heathe (or rather de
Heathe) of the town of Hythe in Kent where he was borne, was consecrate 1319
He built much at Hawling the year 1323. to wit, the Hall and high front of the
Bishops place there now standing, reedified the mill at Holborough near unto
it, and repaired the rest of the buildings in the same house, as he did also at
Troscliffe, an other Manor house belonging to this See. Moreover in the town
of Hithe before named, he founded the Hospital of S. Bartholomew, for relief
often poor people, endowing the same with twenty marks of yearly revenue.
The year 1352. he resigned his Bishopric into the Popes hands.

1352. Edw. 3.27.
47 John de Shepey Prior of Rochester, was made Treasurer of England, the year
1358. and died the nineteenth of October, 1360. at his Manor called the place
beside Lambhith.

1361. Edw. 3.36
48 William Wittlesey Archdeacon of Huntingdon, and Doctor of Law, cons. Feb. 6.
1361. was translated to Worceter, 1363. and after the Canterbury. See
Canterbury.

1363 Edw. 3.3.
49 Thomas Trillicke Deane of Saint Paul's Church in London, was consecrate the
year, 1363. and died 1372.

1^72.
50. Thon as Brenton sometimes a Ben^dictine Monk of Norwich, traveled in many
places, and lastly coming to Rome, preached in Latin before the Pope many
learned sermons, which he left in writing behind him. For them, and other
exercises wherein he showed himself to his great commendation, he was much
admired, and became very famous. The Pope also made him his Penitentiary, and
bestowed upon him the Bishopric of Rochester. He was Confessor unto King
Richard the 2. an^ a great benefactor unto the English Hospital at Rome. He
died 1389.

51 William de Bottlesham, or Bolthsam, 1389. Rich. 2.13.
whom Walsingham, Bale, and other call (but falsely) John Bottlesham, was borne
at Bottlesham in Cambridgeshire, from whence he took his name, He was a Friar
Preacher, a Doctor of Divinity, greatly accounted of for his learning, more for
his eloquence, and rare gift in preaching, for which also he was much esteemed
by King Richard the second, preferred by his means unto the Bishopric of
Landaffe, and after (notwithstanding the election of one Richard Barnet)
translated to Rochester. In Fox I find mention of one Bottlesham, a Friar and
Doctor of Divinity, entitled Episcopus Na^naton: July 25. 1382. It seems
this man wan translated from that See hither. He died in the beginning of
February, 1399.

52 John Boltsham or Bottlesham, 1400. Hen. 4.1.
Chaplain unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, was consecrate Iul. 4. 1400.
after the time of his consecration, never saw his Cathedral Church. He died in
the beginning of the year 1401. A good Benefactor unto the Uniuersity of
Cambridge, as also unto Peter house there.

53 Richard Young was translated from Bangor, 1419. Hen. 5.7.
being then prisoner 1404. March 2. made the windows of the Parish Church of
Freindsbury. He died the twenty seven of July, 1419.

54 John Kempe Doctor of Law, 1419 Hen. 5.7.
and Archdeacon of Durham, was consecrate in September following, and
translated first to Chichester, 1422. then to London, and after that to York
and Canterbury, See Canterbury.

55 John Langdon, 1422. Hen. 5.10
a Monk of Canterbury, was consecrate upon Trinity Sunday 1422. He was borne
in Kent and brought up in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity. A man
very well learned, in histories and antiquities especially he was very well
seen. Amongst other things, I find he writ a Chronicle of England, which
whether if he yet extant or no I know not. He died at the Council of Basil,
1434. This man was a benefactor unto the Bridge of Rochester.

56 Thomas Brown Deane of Salisbury was consecrate May 1. 1434. He being at
the Council of Basil, 1434 Hen. 6.^3.
was elected to Norwich, and shortly after translated thither, before he wist
of any such business toward. See Norwich.

1436. Hen. 6 15
57 William Wel^ Abbot of York. He died 1443. March second.

1443. Hen 6.22
58 John Low a White Monk, Doctor of Divinity, or as one says, a Doctor of
law of Oxford, and Prouincial of his order, was preferred unto the Bishopric
of Saint Assaph, by king Henry the sixth, in regard of his great learning and
painfulnes in preaching. After that, he also procured him to be translated to
Rochester, 1443. He writ diverse good works very well worth reading, and was a
careful searcher after good books, so as diverse Copies of some ancient
fathers had utterly perished but for his diligence. He died the year 1467. and
lies buried in his own Cathedral Church over against B. Merton, where he
has a fair marble toombe, the inscription being not yet altogether defaced.

1467. Edw. 4.8.
59 Thomas Rotheram, translated to Lincoln, 1471. and after to York. See York,

1471. Edw. 4.12:
60 John Alcocke, translated to Worceter, 1476. and after to Ely, See Ely.

1476. Edw. 4.17.
61 John Russell translated to Lincoln, 1480. See Lincoln. He had the tuition
of Edward Prince of Wales.

1480. Edw. 4.21.
62 Edmund Audley, translated to Hereford and Salisburie, See Salisbury.

1492. Hen. 7.8.
63 Thomas Savage, translated to London and York. See York.

1496. Hen. 7.12.
64 Richard Fitz James, translated to Chichester, 1504. and after to London. See
London.

1504. Hen. 7.20.
65 John F^l^er Doctor of Divinity, and Master of Queens College in Cambridge,
and Chancellor of that University, for denying to acknowledge the Kings
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters, he was beheaded on Lower Hill, June 22.
1535. being made Cardinal about a month before. His head was set on London
bridge, and his body buried in Backing churchyard.

1537. Hen. 8.27
66 John Hilsey, commonly called the Black Friar of Bris^ow, a Doctor of
Divinity of Cambridge.

67. Nicholas Heath, was consecrate Bishop of Rochester April 4. 1539. removed
to Worceter, 1539. Hen. 8.30.
1543. and after to York See. York.

68. Henry Holbech consecrate Bishop Suffragan of Bristoll, 1544. Hen. 8.36.
Marc. 24. 2537. was translated hither, Iun 9. 1544 and and hence to Lincoln,
1547.

69. Nicolas Ridley, 1547 Edw. 6.1.
consecrate September 5. 1547. was translated to London 1549. See London.

70. John Poynet consecrate Iun. 26. 1550. was translated to Winchester within
a year after. 1950. Edw. 6.4.
See Winton.

71. John Scory, 1551. Edw. 6^5.
consecrate Aug. 30. 1551 and shortly after removed to Chichester, was
deprived in the beginning of Q. Mary, and by Q. Elizabeth preferred to Hereford.

72. Maurice Griffin, 1554 Mary ^.
Arhcdeacon of Rochester, an Oxford man, was consecrate April 1. 1554. died
the year 1559. and was buried in Saint Magnus Church near London bridge.

73. Edmund Guest, 1559 Elizab. 2.
consecrate March 24. 1559. was translated to Salisbury, December 24. 1571.

74. Edmund Freake, 1571. Elizab. 14.
Doctor of divinity, consecrate Mar. 9 1571. was translated to Norwich, 1576.
and after to Worceter.

75. John ^^ers, 1576 Eliz. 19.
doctor of Divinity, Dean of Christ church in Oxford, consecrat March. 10.
1576. was translated to Salisbury, 1577. and after to York.

76. John Young, 1578. Eliz. 21.
doctor of Divinity, Master of Pembrook hall in Cambridge, cons. Mar. 16. 1577.
died in April 1605.

77. William Barlow Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Chester, Iac. 3.
sometimes fellow of Trinity hal in Cambridge, was cons. Iun. 30. 1605. and
translated to Lincoln 1608.

78. Richard Neyle Doctor of Divinity and Dean of westminster, Iac. 6.
brought up in Saint John's College in Cambridge, was cons. Oct. 9. 1608.
Toward the end of the year 1610. he was removed to Couentry and Lichfield.

79. John Buckeridge doctor of Divinity of S. John's College in Oxford, was
consecrate Iulie 9. 1611. together with the Bishop of Gloceter.

The Bishopric is valued in the Exchequer at 358, pound, three shillings,
seven pence ^arthing, in the Popes books at 1300. ducates.

THE BISHOPS OF OXFORD.
ABout the year of our Lord 730. there lived a Duke of Oxford, (our histories
term him so) called Didan or Didacus. He had a daugther of excellent beauty
named Frideswyde, who though she had many importunate suitors, men of great
wealth and nobility, yet desiring to serve God in such sort as she thought
might be most acceptable unto him, would needs dedicate her self unto a sole
and monastical life. Amongst the rest of her wooers, there was one, a young
Gentlemen of great power (some say he was king of Leicester) whose name was
Algarus. He not prevailing by entreaty, thought to use force, and upon a time,
getting company about him, had almost seized upon his desired pray: which he
had so narrowly be set, as she had no way to escape his his hands, but by
flying into a wood. Thither also he followed her, and that so near, an leaving
it, she had much adoo to recover Oxford. Perceiving then that neither she was
able to fly any further for weariness, nor yet to withstand him there, she
called unto God for assistance against this importunate lover, who thereupon
(as the story says) was miraculously stricken blind; And he continued in that
case, till by her prayers he recovered his sight again. Upon this occasion
(says William Malmsbury and the rest of our Histories) the Kings of England
took a conceit, that it was not safe for any Prince to enter Oxford, in so
much, as every one, being loath to venture the trial of it in himself, it was
ever avoided by them, till the time that King Henry the third proved it
altogether vain by his own experience. Howbeit it appears their report in
that behalf to be untrue, for that both before the conquest and after many
kings repaired thither, as Burchardus, Almedus, Canutus, Harold, K. Stephen,
Henry 1. and the second with some other. In this place, Didan, by the entreaty
of his daughter, built a Monastery for Nuns, and appointed her the Abbess.
It happened then about the year of grace 847. in the time of King Egelred,
that certain Danes flying into this Monastery to save their lives from the
bloody cruelty of the English pursuing them; when otherwise they could not be
gotten out, the Monastery was fired, and they all burnt in the same; But it was
reedified shortly after by the same kng, and further enriched with diverse
possessions. This notwithstanding, soon after it fell into wonderful great
decay, so as no body caring to inhabit the same, it was given by William the
Conqueror unto the Abbey of Abingdon for a Cell or remoouing house. They not
greatly esteeming it, were content that Roger Bishop of Salisbury their
Ordinary, should confirm it unto one Guimundus, Chaplain unto King Henry the
first, a man wise, learned, and religious, that took upon him to place Regular
Channons in the same. He did so the year 1110. became Prior of this new (or
rather renewed) Monastery himself, took other unto him, repaired in very good
sort the ruinous buildings, and by the favor of King Henry the first recovered
unto it what lands soever had been given heretofore unto the Nuns. In this
state then it continued, until that Cardinal Woolsey get license for convert
it into a College 1524. calling it by the name of the Cardinals College. He
leaving it imperfect, King Henry the eight gave it a foundation, the style
whereof he first appointed to be Collegium Regis Henrici octaui. But
afterward determining to place an Episcopal see at Oxford, and altering his
purpose for Oseney (where once he had seated it, entitling the Church,
Ecclesia, B. Mariae de Oseney) he translated that see to the foresaid college;
placing in it a Bishop, a Deane, eight prebendaries, a Quier, and other
officers, besides a hundred students to be maintained in the same, (of which
number my self sometimes was one) and finally enstiled it, Ecclesia Christi,
Cathedralis Oxon. ex fundatione Regis Henrici Octaui.

1. Robert King.
1567. Eliz. 9.
THis new erected Episcopal See was first established (as is before delivered)
in the Abbey of Osney, where Robert King the last Abbot of the same house, a
Doctor of Divinity of Oxford, and the first Bishop of Oxford had his
installation the year 1541. About five years after, to wit, an. 1546. it was
removed unto Church, then commonly called the Cardinals college, and Osney
suppressed. This Robert King being yet Abbot of Osney, was consecrate a
titulary Bishop by the name of Episcopus Roanensis, which is a See in the
Province of the Archbishopricke of Athens. He was translated from this
imaginary Bishopric to Oxford the year 1541. (as before is mentioned) taken
away by death, December 4. 1557. and is entoombed on the North side of the East
end of the quier in his own Church, where is this Epitaph to be seen.

Hiciacet Robertus King S. Theologiae professor and primus Episcopus Oxon. qui
obijt 4. die December. 1557.

2. Hugh Curwyn.
1589. Eliz. 32.
HHugh Curwyn, or Coren, Doctor of Law, an Oxford man, and first Archdeacon of
Oxford, and Deane of Hereford, then Archbishop of Dublyn, and Lord Chancellor
of Ireland, was translated from thence to Oxford (a place of less honor, but
more quiet) October 14. 1567. Having sat there little more then a year, he
died at Swynbrooke, near to Burford, and was buried in the parish church there
November. 1. 1568.

3. John Underhill.
AFter his death, 1589. Eliz. 32.
the Bishopric continued void many years. At last it pleased Queen
Elizabeth to bestow it upon a Chaplain of her own, John Underhill, Doctor of
Divinity, and Rector of Lincoln College in Oxford. He was consecrate
thereunto in December 1589. died in the beginning of May 1592. and was buried
in the middle of the quier of his Cathedral Church toward the upper end.

4. John Bridges.
ALl the time of Queen Elizabeth it then stood void again even for the space
of 11. years. 1603. Iac. 1.
The Kings majesty that now is, in the beginning of his rain preferred
thereunto John Bridges, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Salisbury, fellow
sometimes of Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge. He was cons. Febr. 12. 1603.

A Catalogue of the Deanes of Christ-Church in Oxford.
DOctor Higdon whom I find by some named John, by other Brian. He was after
Deane of York. Doctor Moore.

These two were of the first foundation.
1. John Oliver the first Deane of the present foundation. 2. Richard Coxe
after Bishop of Ely. 3. Richard Marshall. 4. George Carow. 5. Thomas Sampson
deprived by Q. Elizabeth for Puritanisme. 6. Thomas Godwyn 1564. He became
Deane of Canterbury 1566. and Bishop of Bath and Wells. 1584. 7. Thomas Cowper
1566. He was cons. Bishop of Lincoln 1570. and after translated to Winchester.
8. John Piers 1571. was cons. Bishop of Rochester, 1576. and after removed
first to Salisbury, then to York. 9. Tobias Matthew 1577. He became Deane of
Durham 1584. was cons. Bishop of the same Church 1594. and then translated to
York 1606. 10. William James succeeded him, first in Christchurch, then in the
Deanery of Durham 1594. and 1606. in the Bishopric of Durham also. 11. Thomas
Rauis 1594. He was cons. Bishop of Glo^^er, 1604. and translated to London
1606. 12. John King 1605. cons. Bishop of London Sep. 8. 1611. 13. William
Godwin. 1611.
This Bishopric of Oxford is valued at 354. pound, sixteen shillings, three
pence farthing.

THE BISHOPS OF GLOUCESTER.
OSrike king of Northumberland, 1541. Hen. 8.33.
founded a nunry in the city of Gloucester, about the year of our Lord 700.
Kineburg, Eadburg, and Eua, Queens of Mercia, were Abbesses of this monastery
one after another. It was destroyed by the Danes, and lay wast, until that
Aldred Archbishop of York began to reedifie the same about the year 1060.
replenished it with monks, and erected from the very foundation that goodly
Church, which is now the Cathedral See of that Dioces. Being given into the
hands of King Henry the eight by Parliament, it pleased him to alot the
revenues of it unto the maintenance of a Bishop, a Deane, six Prebendaries,
and other ministers.

1. John Wakeman, Abbot of Teuksbury, was consecrat^ the first Bishop of this
new erection Sept. 20. 1541. He provided a toombe for his place of burial at
Teuksbury in the Northside of a little Chapel, standing Southeast from the
high Altar. Part of it yet remains. But his body lies at Worthington (where
he died) in the beginning of December 1549.

1550. Edw. 6.5.
2. John Hooper an Oxford man cons. March. 8. 1550. held also the Bishopric of
Worceter in Commendam by license of King Edward the sixth. His life, actions,
and Heroical end are written at large by Master Fox.

3. James Brokes Doctor of Divinity, brought up in Corpus Christi College; but
after Master of Baylioll College succeeded him: and died about Candlemasse
1559.

1562. Eliz. 4.
4. Richard Cheyney, Bacheler of Divinity, a Cambridge man, was consecrate
April 19. 1562. He died the year 1578. Both he and his predecessor lie buried
in one vault with Abbot Parker the last Abbot. His toomb stands in a little
chapel on the Northside of the Presbytery almost over against the Bishops See.

1581 Eliz. 19.
5. John Bullingham, Doctor of divinity, brought up in Magdalene College in
Oxford, waa consecrate September 3. 1581. the Sea having been void almost
three years. He died about the 20. day of May. 1598.

1598 Elizab. 26.
6. Godfry Goldsborough, Doctor of divinity and Archdeacon of Worceter, was
consecrate November 12. 1598. He was sometimes fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and in remembrance thereof bequeathed to the same at his death
certain plate of good value. He deceased May 26. 1604.

1604. Iac. 2.
7. Thomas Rauis Doctor of divinity and Deane of Christ Church in Oxford, (in
which College he was brought up,) was consecrate March 19. 1604. He was
removed to London May 19. 1607.

8. Henry Parry Doctor of Divinity brought up in Corpus Christi College in
Oxford was cons. July 12. 1607. 1607. Iac. 5.
About Michaelmasse 1610. he was translated to Worceter.

9 Giles Tomson, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Windsor, 1611 Iac. 9.
sometimes fellow of All-Soules College in Oxford, was consecrate July the
ninth 1611. together with the Bishop of Rochester. He deceased the
thirteenth of June. 1612.

10 Miles Smith, Doctor of Divinity, Canon resident of Hereford, 1612. Iac. 10.
Chaplain sometimes of Christchurch in Oxford was consecrate Septem. 20. 1612.

The Bishopric of Gloucester is valued in the Kings Books at 315. pound, 17.
shillings, two pence.

THE BISHOPS OF PETERBOROVGH.
IN the middle of the river of Nen (which runs by the south side of
Peterborough) there is a whirlpoole of infinite depth, that by reason of
springs continually arising there, in the coldest winter was yet never quite
frozen over. This place in old time was called Medeswel, and the town
adjoining) taking name of it) Medeswell hamstead, or Medeshamstead. Peada the
son of Penda, the first Christian king of Mercia began the foundation, of a
Monastery th^re, the year 656. but was taken away by the treachery of his wife
before he could bring it to any perfection. Wolpher his brother was so far
from endeavoring to finish this work, as being an obstinate Pagan, he put to
death Wolfal and Ruffyn, two of his own sons, for no other cause then this,
that they were Christians. Afterward notwithstanding it pleased God so to
tou^h his heart, as of a persecuting Saul, h^ became a good Paul, and in token
of his grief and sorrow for his cruelty to his two sons, determined to build
up this Monastery in the most magnificent and stately manner he could devise,
which indeed he performed, being very much helped in the same by the
contribution of Ethelred his brother, as also of Kineburg, and Kineswith his
sisters, who as ( W. Malmsbury delivers) do ther^ lie buried. This Monastery
he dedicated unto S. Peter, and appointed one Saxulf (by whose persuasion he
took in hand this work) to be the first Abbot of the same. (He afterward
became Bishop of Lichfield.) Two hundred years after the first foundation, and
somewhat more, it flourished in wealth, and great prosperity, to wit, until
the coming of the Danes, who slew the Monks, and utterly destroyed all those
sumptuous buildings erected by Wolpher. Having then layen desolate 109 years;
Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester (a great Patron of Monkery) reedified it. He had
begun a new foundation at Oundale in Northamptonshire, when by chance coming
to this place, he thought good to omit that former and to bestow his cost
here. So he made a pa^ish Church of his building at Oundale, and reedified
this decayed Monastery of Medeshamstead. In digging up some of the old
foundation^, it is remembered there were found stones of such huge greatness, as
eight yoke of Oren were scarce able to draw one of them away. King Edgar holy
the Bishop much in this foundation, and Aldulf that was Chauncellor unto the
said King, partly for devotion, partly for malecontentment and grief, that he
had layen upon his only child and so stisled him in his sleep, bestowed all
his substance upon it, and betaking himself unto a Monastical life, became
Abbot there. After him Kenulsus another Abbot compassed this Monastery with a
strong wall about, the year of our Lord 1000. And then says W. Malmsbury)
because it bare the show of a town or borough, it began to leave the old
name, and to be called altogether Burgh or Borough; and sometimes (because it
was dedicated unto Saint Peter) Peterburrough. Through the liberality of diverse
benefactors it grew to that greatness of wealth and posse^sions, as all the
country round about belonged unto it. In that state it continued in that fatal
day of all our Monasteries, at what time it pleased King Henry the eight to
convert the same into a Cathedral Church, and to employ the revenues upon the
maintenance of a Bishop, a Deane, six Prebendaries, and other Ministers
necessary for the celebration of Divine service. Northamptonshire and
Rutlandshire were taken from Lincoln, and appointed the Dioces of this new
erected See.

1. John Chambers.
John Chambers Doctor of Physic, brought up in Merton College in Oxford,
1541. Hen. 8.33.
sometime Deane of S. Stephens in Westminster, and the last Abbot of
Peterborough, became the first Bishop there. He was cons. October 23. 1541.

2. David Poole.
David Poole Doctor of Law, brought up in All Souls College at Oxford, 1557.
Mary. 5.
Deane of the Arches, Archdeacon of Darby, and sometimes Chauncellor of the
Dioces of Lichfield, was cons. Aug. 15. 1557. and deprived the year 1559.

3. Edmund Scambler.
EDmund Scambler was consecrate Febru. 16. 1560. and the year 1584. removed
to Norwich. 1560. Eliz. 3.
See Norwich.

4. Richard Howland.
RIchard Howland Doctor of Divinity and Master of Saint John's College in
Cambridge succeeded. 1584. Eliz. 27.
He died in the month of June, 1600.

5. Thomas Dove.
THomas Dove Deane of Norwich, brought up in Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge, 1600.
Eliz. 42.
and Chaplai^e to Q, Elizabeth, was consecrate in the end of the year 1600.

This Bishopric is valued in the Exchecquer at 414. pound, 19. shillings, 11.
pence.

THE BISHOPS OF BRISTOLL.
RObert, surnamed Fitz-Harding, because his Father that was son unto the King
of Denm^rke) was called Harding; this Robert (I say) being a Citizen of
Bristoll, and some times Mayor there, founded the monastery of Saint Augustines
near unto the said city, and placed Channons in the same, the year 1148. being
ye 14. year of king Stephen. This foundation was afterward confirmed and
augmented by king Henry the second, who so greatly favored by author of the
same, as he preferred him to the marriage of the daughter and sole heir of
the Lord Barkley. Of them are descended all the Lord Barkleys since that time.
And many of them, as challenging an interest in this foundation of their
ancestors, have chosen the Church there for the place of their burial. In
that place it pleased King Henry the eight to erect an Episcopal See, and to
convert the revenues of the same unto the maintenance of a Bishop, a Deane,
six Pre^endaries, and other officers. The Diocese of this Bishopric is the
City and Deanery of Bristol, and the Country of Dorset.

1. Paul Bush.
PAul Bush a Bachelor of divinity of Oxford, 1542. Hen. 8.34.
and Provincial of the Bonhommes, was the first Bishop of Bristoll: a man well
learned both in Divinity and Physic, as his works yet extant may testify,
written in both kinds, some in prose, some in verse. He was cons. June 25.
1542. In the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, he was deprived for being
married, and died unhappily a few days before her. He lies entoombed on the
North side of the quier over against the Bishops See in a seemly monument thus
inscribed: Hic iacet D. Paulus Bush primus huius ecclesiae Episcopus, qui obijt
11. die October. an. dom. 1558. aetatis suae 68. cuius animae, etc.

2. John Holyman.
John Holyman sometimes a monk of Reading, but brought up in New College in
Oxford, was appointed Bishop of Bristoll by Queen Mary, his predecessor yet
living, and died about the same time that he did.

3. Richard Cheyny.
RIchard Cheyny Bachelour of Divinity and sometimes Archdeacon of Hereford,
1562 Elizab. 4.
was one of them that in the Convocation held in the first year of Queen
Mary, stoutly desended the truth against Weston, Feknam, and other Papists as
in Master Fox is to be seen more at large. He was consecrate Bishop of
Gloucester, April, 19^ 562. and allowed to hold Bristoll in Commendam with
Gloucester, and so did for the space of 16 years, viz. until his death, which
happened the year 1578.

4. John Bullingham:
John Bullingham Doctor of divinity succeeded him in both these Bishoprics.
1581. Elizab. 19.


5. Richard Fletcher.
1589. Eliz. 32.
RIchard Fletcher doctor of divinity, Deane of Peterborough, and sometimes
fellow of Bennet College in Cambridge, was consecrate Bishop of Bristoll
(Bishop Bullingham yet living) December. 14. 1589. when as the Sea had stood void
(otherwise then as it was held by Commendam) 31. years. In the end of the
year 1593. he was translated to Worceter, and soon after to London. See
London.

6. John Thornborough.
1603 Iac. 1.
John Thornborough, Bishop of Limbricke and Commendatory Deane of York,
brought up in Magdalene College in Oxford, was translated thither (retaining
still his Deanery) the year 1603.

Bristoll is valued at three hundred eighty three pound, 8. shillings four
pence.

THE BISHOPS OF S. DAVID'S.
THe British histories do all report that in this Island at the first
planting of Christian Religion here, there were established 28. Episcopal
Sees (as in S. Aug. of Canterbury I have before declared.) Of these 28.3. were
Archbishopricks, London York and Carlegion or Carleon upon Uske in
Monmouthshire. At Carleon (which was then a great and populous City) in the
time of K. Arthur, sat Dubritius the son of Eurdila a gentlewoman of great
birth, but who was his Father it was never known. He was a man of excellent
learning and singular integrity, in regard whereof, when first he had taken
great pains many years, as well in teaching and reading unto his scholars
(whereof he had a great number) as in preaching unto the people; he was made
Archbishop of all Wales, by Germanus and Lupus two Bishops of France, that were
entreated by Aurelius Ambrosius the king or ruler of Britain, to come over and
yield their best help for extinguishing the Pelagian heresy, that had then
taken great root in this Country. And they appointed his See to be at
Landaff, which soon after was removed to Caerlegion upon Usk in Monmouthshire.
Aurelius Ambrosius being dead, he crowned. Other Pendragon, and afterward
that great Arthur king of this Island, and waxing old, resigned his Bishopric
unto David a disciple of his. He died and was buried in the Isle of Enlhi, now
called Bardsee (where he led a solitary life many years) Nou. 14. anno 542.
His bones were afterward removed to Landaff by Vrbanus Bishop there, May 7.
1120 and laid before the altar of our Lady toward the North.

1. Saint David.
David before named, was uncle unto king Arthur, and son of Xantus a Prince of
Wales, begotten upon one Melearia a Nun. A man very learned, eloquent, and of
incredible austerity, of life and conversation. He was also very tall of
stature, and of a comely personage. By his diligence, Pelagianisme was quite
rooted out, and many earnest prosessors of the same converted unto the truth.
With the consent of king Arthur, he removed his See from Caerlegion to
Menenia, which ever since of him is called of the Welsh Twy Dewi, and of us
Saint David's. A place neither pleasant, fertile, or safe: For (as Giraldus
Cambr. reports of it) it is neither furnished with wood, watered with rivers,
beautified with meadows, nor enriched with any kind of fruitful soil;
affoording plentifully nothing but rocks and barren hills, vehement winds and
tempests, and lastly the dangers and injuries whereunto solitary places n^ere
the Sea are subject by Pirates and otherwise. It seems he misliked the
frequency of people at Caerlegion, as a means to withdraw him from
contemplation, whereunto that he might he more free, he made choice of this
place for his See rather then for any fitness of the same otherwise. He sat
long, to wit, 65. years, and died at last, ann. 642. (having first built 12.
Monasteries in the Country thereabout) being now 146. years of age, as Bale
out of the British histories reports. He was buried in his own Cathedral
Church, and some 5. hundred years, after Canonised a Saint by Pope Calixtus
the second. Many things are reported of him incredible, and therefore not worth
rehearsing, although I doubt not but God affoorded many miracles to the first
infancy of our Church, neither therefore would I be so peremptory in derogating
too much from such reports, as we see no reason why they may not be true, Of
him they say, that his birth was foretold 30. years before hand, that he was
always attended by an Angel that kept him company, that he bestowed upon the
waters at Bathe that extraordinary heat they have,) and (to repeat no more,
for this is much more then any discreet man will believe) that upon a time
preaching to a great multitude of people, at Breuy the plain ground grew up in
their sight, and increased under his feet unto a pretty hillock.

After Saint David sat successively these, as Giraldus sets them down.
2 Cenau^, who was first Bishop of Pattern. 3. Eliud, or Teilau. 4. Ceneu. 5.
Morwall. 6. Haerunen, or Haernurier. 7. Elwaed. 8. Gurnuen. 9. Lendiuord, anno
810. the Church of S. David was burnt by the West Saxons. 10. Gorwyst. 11.
Gorgan. 12 Cledauc. 13 Anian, He died anno 874, having for his successor one
Hubert as the Chronicle of Wales reports. 14. Eluoed. 15. Ethelmen. 16.
Elanc. 17. Malscoed. 18 Sadermen. 19 Catellus. 20 Solhaithnay. 21 Nonis. 22
Etwall, 23 Asser. 24. Arthuael.
A certain Antiquity belonging unto the Church of S. David, reports a
Catalogue somewhat different from this of Giraldus, to wit, this that
follows.
1. Saint David. 2. Eliud. 3. Theliaus 4. Kenea. 5. Moruael 6. Haernurier. 7.
Eluaeth. 8. Gurnel. 9. Lendywyth. 10. Gorwist. 11 Gorgan. 12 Cledaucke. 13
Eynaen. 14 Eludgeth. 15 Eldunen. 16 Eluaoth. 17 Maelschwyth. 18 Madenew. 19
Catulus. 20 Syluay. 21 Namys. 22 Sathueney. 23 Doythwall. 24 Asser, called in
the Chronicle of Wales, the Archbishop of all Wales, died the year 906. He was
uncle to Asser Bishop of Sherborne. 25. Athuael. 26 Sampson.
Of these foreuamed Bishops, until Sampson, there remains little or no
memorial, but their names only. In his time, the Sea of Saint David had seven
Bishops Suffragans subject unto it (as the foresaid antiquity declares) to
wit, Exceter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, Saint Assaph, and Fernes in
Ireland. Roger Houeden (which I account more likely) reckons these, Landaffe,
Lanpatern in Cardigan shire, Bangor, Saint Assaph, Chichester, Hereford and
Worceter. While he was Bishop it happened the people of all that Country were
wonderfully vexed with the Iaundise, so as great numbers of them died daily of
that disease. By the importunity of his Clergy and Disciples, he was induced to
fly the Country, and sailed into Britain, where the Bishopric of Dola being
void, he was straight way elected unto the same. He had brought thither with
him the Archiepiscopall pall of Saint David, and used it during his life, as
did also his Successors there for many years, until they were compelled by the
Pope, at the suite of the Arcbishop of Turon to leave it, and make profession
of obedience unto him, as in former times. By this occasion it fell out that the
successors of Sampson in Saint David's, what for want of their pall, or for
poverty or negligence, or by some other occasion, lost their title of
Archbishop, and to this day never recovered the same. Howbeit they used all
authority belonging to an Archbishop, by consecrating of other Bishops; etc.
Neither ever did they make profession of subjection unto Canterbury until the
time of Henry the 1. king of England, whereof we shall speak more hereafter.
He died at Dola and was buried there.

After Sampson succeeded these:
26. Kucline. 27. Rodherich, A Bishop of that name, dyed the year 961. as the
Chronicle of Wales reports. If this be the man he is misplaced. 28 Elguin.
29 Lunuerd, or Lywarch. 30 Nergu, or Vergw. 31 Sulhidir, or Sulhidw. or Hubert
died 942. 32. Eneuris, or Euerus died, 944. 33. Morgeneu. This man (says
Giraldus) of all the Bishops of S. David's, presumed first to eat flesh which
none of them had ever done before him. For punishment of which heinous offense,
he supposes it fell out that afterward he was murdered of Pirates;
reporting withal, how that after his death he appeared to a Bishop of
Ireland, using thief words; Quia carnes comedi, caro factus sum: For eating of
flesh, I am now become nothing but flesh. 34 Nathan. 35 Ieuan, He continued one
only night. 36 Argustell. 37 Morgenueth, Morgeney or Vrgeney, slain by the
Daues, the year 998. Chr. W. 38 Eruyn, or Hernun, a godly and learned man, died
ann. 1038. 39 Tramerin, or Carmerin, died 1055. having long governed the Dioces
of Hereford under Ethelstan the Bishop who was blind 13. years before his
death. 40 Joseph. 41 Bleithud. He died the year 1070. 42 Sulghein. He
forsook his Bishopric, the year 1076. 43 Abraham. The year 1078 or
thereabout, Saint David's was spoiled and destroyed by strangers, and Abraham
the Bishop, what through grief or sickness died. Whereupon Sulghein was
constrained to resume his Bishopric which notwithstanding he resigned again
about the year 1085. and 1088. died being 80. years of age, the godliest and
wisest man and the greatest Clerks in all Wales, so says the Welsh Chronicle
of him. 44 After him a son of his called Rythmarch succeeded (as the
Chronicle of Wales delivers) and died about the year 1100. the godliest,
wisest, and greatest Clerk that had been here in Wales many years before
saving his Father (says the Chronicle) who had brought him up, and a great
number of learned Disciples. 45 Wylfride. He died the year 1115. It seems
the Welsh Chronicle calls him Griffri. 46 Bernard, a Norman, Chaplain unto
King Henry the first, and Chancellor to his Queen, was consecrate by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, July 12. 1115. not chosen by the Clergy of Wales,
(as hitherto had been accustomed) but forced upon them by the King of England;
with whom this man being in great favor, and presuming upon the goodness of
his cause, began to take on him the title of Archbishop, and had his Cross
sometimes in Wales carried before him. After long suite and much money spent
between him and the Archbishop of Canterbury, he had prevailed at the last (as
Giraldus Cambr. seems persuaded) had not two suborned witnesses deposed a
flat untruth in the presence of the Pope. Giraldus afterward doubts not
confidently to pronounce that the power and wealth of the Archbishops of
Canterbury has ouerborn the poor Bishops of Saint David's in this matter
without all right. This Bishop (says Giraldus) was a man in some other
respects prayse-worthy, but unreasonable proud and ambitious, as most of the
Englishmen were, that in those times were thrust into Welsh Bishoprics.
Again, he was a very evil husband unto his Church, alienating diverse lands,
and letting others for the tenth penny of that his predecessors made of them,
so thinking to make a way by gratifying of Courtiers unto some better
Bishopric in England. He was deceived of his expectation: Having been
Bishop of Saint David's about the space of thirty three years, he died ann.
1148. 46 David Fitz Gerald Archdeacon of Cardigan, Brother to Siluester
Giraldus, that long after succeeded him, died Bishop of Saint David's, 1176. 47
Peter or Piers, (so the Welsh Chronicle calls him) a Benedictine Monk, Prior
of Wenlocke, was consecrate the same year. His Cathedral Church dedicated
unto Saint Andrew and Saint David, had been often destroyed in former times by
Danes and other Pirates, and in his time was almost quite ruinated: He bestowed
much in reedifying of the same, and may in some sort be said to have built the
Church which now stands. How long he sat I find not, Sept. 2. 1189. He was
present at the Coronation of King Richard the first. 48 Geffry Prior of
Lanthony, a Regular Canon, was preferred to this See by the means of Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury. He died the year 1198. 49 Syluester Giraldus
(commonly called Giraldus Cambr^nsis of his Country) was borne in
Pembrookeshire, near Tyaby of very noble parentage, being son unto Giraldus
de Winsor (that built the Castle of Penbrooke) and N^sta the sister of Griffith
ap Ries, ap Theodore, Prince of South Wales. A very comely and personable man
of body, and for his mind, witty, studious, virtuous, and well given; but a
little too credulous, in believing sucredible reports, and no less lavish in
delivering them. In his youth he traveled over most part of Christendom. At
Paris he read publicly in the English College with great commendation.
Returning home, he grew into good estimation with King Henry the second, in
whose service he spent ten years, and in that space was employed by him in
many Ambassages. At last he bacame Secretary unto John the said Kings son;
with whom he went into Ireland, and being there, writ a description of the
Country, as he did also of England and Wales. In the Preface of his book de
Principis instructione, he complains much of the Kings coldness, and manifold
delays in preferring him, as also of his unhappiness in being despised by the
English for a Welchman, and not only suspected, but hated by the Welsh for an
English man, as borne partly of English blood, and now altogether Anglized by
education and long continuance in England. Amongst other of his envious
adversaries, one Wibertus a Cistercian Monk accused him of treason, of which
he well acquitted himself. His first preferments were the Archdeaconries of
Brecknocke, and Saint David's. I fi^de mention, that he should also have been
Archdeacon of Laudaffe. Being elect unto this See, anno 1119. he made
challenge unto the title of an Archbishop at Rome, as Bernard had done before
him. How that controue^sie was debated and ended ye may read at large in
Roger Houed. his report of the year aforesaid. He lived till he was semewhat
more then seventy years of age, and dying the year 1198. was buried in his
own Church. Of many books he writ, you may find the Catalegue in Bale. 50
Iorwerth, or Edward an Abbot was consecrate 1215. He took great pains in
concluding a peace between the Flemings of his Dioces, and then ap Iornerth
Prince of Wales, an. 1219. 51 Alselmus: Ianuar. 28. 1228. This Bishopric was
void. 52 Thomas, Archdeacon of Lincoln, a Welchman and a great Clerk,
forsaking other good preferments, accepted of this Bishopric (being a
miserable poor thing at that time) the year 1247. 53 Richard Carren. 54
Thomas Beeke. The royal assent to his election, bears date, June 17. Edw.
1.8. He founded two Colleges, one at Aberg^ily, and an other at Lla^ dewy
breuy. One of this name about this time (to wit, the year 1320.) became Bishop
of Lincoln, whether he or no, I cannot guess, but I rather think no. He sat
13. year. 55 David Martyn. He died in the second year of Edward the third. 56
Henry Gower, brought up in Merton College in Oxford, became Bishop in the
second year of King Edw. 3. May, 26. He built the Bishops palace of Saint
David's, and died the year 1347. 57 John Theresby or Thorsby, Chaucellour of
England consecrated September 23. 1347. translated to Worcester, 1349. and
thence to York, 1352. 58 Reginald Brian, was confirmed the sixth of February
Edward the third 24. translated likewise to Worcester, 1352. 59 Thomas
Falstolfe, restored to his temporalties, June 4. Edw. 3.27. died the year
1361. 60 Adam Houghton, Doctor of Law, an Oxford man, succeeded by the Popes
authority, 12. Call. Octo. 1361. founded a College near to the Cathedral
Church of Saint David's, was Chancellor of England for a time, about the year
1376. and died about Easter, 1389. 61 John Gilbert Bishop of Bangor, was
translated to Hereford, 1376. and thence hither, May 13. 1389. He died July
29. 1397. 62 Guido de Mona, or Mohun, Keeper of the Privy Seal, became Bishop
the year 1401. and died August, 31. 1407. He was for a while appointed
Treasurer of England by king Richard the second, in the 21. of his reign, as
afterward also by King Henry the fourth, in his fourth year, but continued so a
very short time, whom while he lived (says Walsingham) was a cause of much
mischief. 63 Henry Chichley, was consecrated at Siena by the Popes own hands,
June twelfth 1409. sat 5. years, and was translated to Canterbury. 64 John
Keterich or Cataricke, sometimes Archdeacon of Durrey, was consecrate about
Midsomer, 1414. translated hence to Couentry and Leechfield, the year 1415.
and after to Exceter. 65 Stephen Patrington Doctor of Divinity, the Kings
Confessor, an Oxford man, and for fifteen years Provincial of the
Carmelites, was consecrate, June 19. 1415. at Maidstone, and being at the
Counsel of Constance, was by the Pope translated to Chichester in December,
1417. A man (says Walsingham) very learned. 66 Benet Nichols, Bishop of
Bangor, was translated hither by the Pope December 15. 1417. He was one of the
four Bishops that assisted the Archbishop in the condemnation of Sir John
Oldcastle, L. Cobham. 67 Thomas Rodburne a man of great learning, and
especially a great Mathematician, was Proctor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, anno
1402. and after Chancellor 14^0. and then Warden of Merton College there,
Archdeacon of Sudbury, and lastly consecrate Bishop of Saint David's. He writ
diverse works, amongst the rest an history or Chronicle. The year 1434. the
King endeavored to translate him to Ely, but could not effect it. He built
the Tower over the gate of Merton College. 67 William Lynwood, Doctor of Law
in Oxford, but sometime a Commoner of Gonuill-hall in Cambridge, was first
Chauncellor to the Archbishop of Canterbury, then keeper of the Privy Seal,
having been before that employed in Ambassages to the Kings of Spain,
Portugal and other Princes. He writ much. Amongst other his works he is
famous for putting in order such Provincial constitutions, as hade been made
by the Archbishops of Canterbury from the time of Stephen Langton unto Henry
Chicheley. He died the year 1446. He lies buried at S. Stephens in
Westminster. 68 John Langton M. of Pembrooke hall, and chancellor of the
Uniuersity of Cambridge, was consecrate the year 1446. and died within 15.
days after his consecration. 69 Io. Delabere Deane of Wells, cons. Nou. 13.
1447. He either builte a new, or was a great benefactor to the bridge rf
Dorchester. 70 Robert Tully, a Monk of Gloceter. He died in the 21. year of
king Edward the 4. 71 Rich. Martin was cons. in July 1482, He was of the Privy
counsel to K. Edw. 4. a great benefactor to the town of Prestay^e in
Radnorshire. 72 Tho Langton was cons. 1483. and translated first to Salisbury
the year 1485. and after to Winchester. 73 Hugh Pauy an Oxford man, He
impropried to the Uicars Chorall of S. David's, the Church of Lansanfred. 74 Io.
Morgan alias Young a Doctor of Law of Oxford, cons. 1503. died in the Priory of
Caermerthin, in June, 1504 and was buried in his own Church. 75 Rob. Sherborne
was translated to Chichester, Nou. 8 1538. 76 Edw. Vaughan a Cambridge man, was
cons. July. 22. 1509, He built a new Chapel in his Church of S. David, and
lies buried in the same. 77 Rich Rawlins brought up in Merton College in
Oxford, was cons. Apr. 26. 1523. 78 William Barlow cons. Bishop of S. Assaph.
1535. was removed hither in April, 1536. sat here about 13. years, and was
then translated first to Bathe and Wellos, and after to Chichester. 79 Robert
Ferrar Bacheler of Divinity, a Chanon regular of S. Mary in Oxford, was cons.
Sept. 9. 1547. violently thrust out of his Bishopric, in the beginning of
Queen Mary for being married, and ended his life in the fire, being burnt in
the market place of Carmarthen, March 30. 1555. the history whereof, and of his
whole life is to be read in M. Fox. 80 Henry Morgan, a Doctor of the Civil
law of Oxford never expecting the death or deprivation of his predecessor,
invaded his Bishopric, and himself pronounced the sentence of death against
him. He was displaced in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth, and died December 23
1559. 81 Thomas Young Doctor of Law, and Chanter of the Church of S. David's, was
cons. Ian. 21. 1539. and translated to York, Feb. 25. 1560. 82 Rich. Dauyes
Bishop of S. Assaph, brought up in Oxford, was translated hither, May 21. 1561.
83 Marmaduke Middleton translated from Waterforde in Ireland, died Nou. 30.
1592. 84 Anthony Rudde Doctor of Divinity, born in Yorkshire, fellow sometimes
of Trinity College in Cambridge, having been for the space of 9. years Deane
of Gloucester, was consecrate, June 9. 1594.
The Bishopric of S. David's is valued in the Exchequer at ^26. pound, 22.
shillings, two pence ob. and in the Popes Books at 1500. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF LANDAFF.
THe Cathedral Church of Landaff is reported to have been first built in the
time of Lucius, about the year of Christ 180. But I perceive not that any
Bishop sat there before Dubritius, that by Germanus Bishop of Altisiodore, and
Lupus of Trecasia (two Bishops of France) was first consecrate Archbishop of
those parts, and sat sometimes at Carleon, sometimes at Landaff. Of the
occasion of their double journey into those parts (for they were twice here)
and of Dubritius, whom former ages have made a Saint, see more in the beginning
of Saint David's. So we must account Saint Dubritius the first Bishop of
Landaff; not that I deny any other to have sat there before him, but because
he is the first whose name is remembered: And it is probable he had no
predecessors, because the memory of his successo^s is so carefully preserved.

2 Saint Teliau, alias Eliud, the second Bishop was borne of very noble
parentage, at a place called Eccluis Gunnian, and brought up under Dubritius
his predecessor, and Paulinus, together with Saint David. There is a very
ancient book belonging to the church of Landaffe, commonly called Saint
Telians book, reporting the greatest part of that which I deliver concerning
this See. In it I find a great discourse of a journey he made to Jerusalem
with S. David and one Paternus, and how he was there consecrate Bishop of
Landaff. Soon after his coming home, he was constrained by a strange disease
reigning in those parts to fly into France, whence after seven years, he
returned again, bringing home with him in three ships his Countrymen that had
fled with him upon the same occasion. Died at Llanteilio Uaur (as it seems.)
To let pass a number of fabulous narrations concerning his miracles, I cannot
omit one which I find mentioned in the Collect appointed for his holy day, how
that after his death three places striving for his body, Pennalum where his
ance^ters were buried, Lantolio Maur or Uaur where he died, and Landaffe his
See^ after prayer to God, to appease this contention, in the place where they
had left him there appeared suddenly three hearses with three bodies so like,
as no man could discern the right. So every one taking one, they were all
pleased: howbeit (says the book) by diverse miracles done at the place of his
burial at Landaffe, it appears that there the true body lies. In all our
Records he is called Archbishop of Landaff.

3 Oudoceus or Odoceus, succeeded Saint Telian. He was son unto Budic King
of little Britain, and Anaumed a sister of Saint Telian his predecessor. By
the consent of the Kings and Comminalty of the whole Dioces he was elected and
consecrate at Dorobomia. At his return thence, Mou^^c the king^ with his
Queen, sons and all the Nobility and Clergy of the Country, met him in
procession, and bringing him into his Church, granted unto him these
privileges to be fine consule: also very nobly borne, and after his death
reputed a Saint as was his predecessor. He died the second of July, the year I
find not.

In the time of these 3. Bishops, the Church of Landaffe had many benefactors,
whose liberalities I shall briefly recite, but to so much the less purpose,
because the names of the lands given, are in continuance of time changed in
such sort, as now by these names for the most part we can not discern them.
Thus much notwithstanding we may perceive, that if the Church at this time
enjoyed but the tenth part of that which has first and last been bestowed
upon it, it were one of the wealthiest Churches in Christendom (I suppose)
whereas now it has hardly sufficient to repair it self; and the Bishopric
(who^e lands till about the year were not severed from those of the
Cathedral Church, the Bishop having the managing as well of the one as the
other) it is now grown to that low ebb, that diverse Benefices in the Diocese
yield more profit unto their Incumbents, then that unto the now Bishop.

Tewdrick or Theodorike King of Morgannuc, about the year of our Lord 560. (as
near as I can guess) having resigned his Kingdom to Mowricke his son, and
betaking himself to a solitary kind of life, as an Heremite: Upon occasion of
an invasion made by the Saxons upon his Country, was taken out of his Cell, and
forced to become the leader of an army against them. At Tintern near the river
of Wye, he met the enemy, and joining battle gave him a great overthrow, but
himself was mortally wounded; which when he perceived, he hasted homeward,
giving direction unto his son, that if he died upon the way, in the same
place where he happened to decease, a Church should be built, and his body buried
in the same place. Within five miles of that place it was he departed, to wit,
over against the fall of the river of Wye into Seuerne, where according to his
desire before mentioned, was built the Church that of old was called Merthir
Tewdricke, as you you would say, the Martyrdom of Tewdricke, because he being
slain by Pagans, and in the defense of Christian Religion, was accounted a
Martyr, and called (as to this day he is) Saint Tewdricke. His bones lie
entoombed. Upon the North side of the said Church. And his son not contented
therewithal; gave moreover the lands and territory adjacent unto the same to
the Bishop, whose Successors in process of time built a house there, to
wit at Mertherne (or as now we term it) Matherne, being the only mansion
house now left unto him.

The same King, gave first of his own accord, Mochros upon the bank of Wye,
Porthcas^es, and the Church of Guruyd; and afterward Ruigraenauc, Nantanan,
LanSuluiu and other lands to expiate a certain treacherous murder committed
by him, upon one Cynvetu, after a truce solemnly sworn between them.

Arthruis K. of Gwent his son, gave S. Knimarkes with the appurtenances.

K. Morcant the son of the said Arthruis, having killed one Fri^c his uncle,
after the same sort as Cynvetu was slain by his Grandfather, and being
therefore excommunicate by the Bishop; Upon his absolution, (besides a grant
of diverse privileges unto the Church of Landaffe) gave Cyncyrill and certain
land called Cynfall, as also the churches of Y that-haffren.

Iuddail or Iuthiail King of Glewissig, or Wenllog riding by a place then
called Gwocob, now Saint Lithans) his horse fell with him dangerously, but hurt
him not. In thankfulness to God for that deliverance, he presently gave the
said Gnowcob with all the appurtenances, as also the Church of Elindon near
adjoining, unto Oudoceus and his Successors. He gave likewise Bertus. and
restored much land that through wars and troublesome times had been lost and
alienated from the Church, to wit, Cum-bartur, and Colcuch with the
appurtenances, Lancernu upon the bank of Dowr, Mafurn, Languoruoc, Lanlunubri,
Landeny, Mochros, Lauebrdil, Bolgrosse, Lanlloudeu, and Langarran.

Fernuail King Gwent, his son, gave Tryloc.

Ceincair, Queen of the said Fernuail, gave Bryn, Li^uni, and Mathenni.

Arthruis K. of Gwent, son of the said Fernuail gave Cair-riow.

Rotri and Grifud sons likewise unto Fernvail, and Kings of Gwent, gave Pen
celli guentuc beside Lisquerin, and the said Rotri gave Kemeri in ostio
fluminis Humri.

Rice an other son of the said Fernvail, gave Guerituc and otherlands.

The time of the gifts of these lands before mentioned, I cannot particularly
set down, nor of these three which follow. The rest are marshalled under those
several Bishops, in whose days I find them bestowed.

Merchgum the son of Gliuis made his daughter a Nun, and thereupon gave
unto the Bishop the Church of Landaffe Bishopston in Gowersland by the name of
4. medios terrae cum omni dignitate sua and liberate, and communione tota
Regionis Guhiri in campis and in siluis, and Noe or Noui the son of Arthur
gave Penalum and Lantelio mawu upon the river Tyui.

Augustus king of Breehinianc gave Lancors.

Tyrtuc, having by mischance slain a child named Typhei, nephew to Saint
Teliau the Bishop, in token of his grief for that fact, gave two manors,
Ciltutu and Penclecic.

4 Vbylwynus.
Bwchmayl the son of Guidgwentvai, gave unto him and his successors, Menechi
with other lands.

Gurvoduis king of Ercyng (which we call Vrchenfilde) after a victory obtained
against the Saxons, in thankfulness to God, gave Bolgross upon the river of
Wye.

5 Aidan.
King Cinvyn the son of Pepiau in this man's time gave Marfurn.

6 Elgistil.
The said Cinvyn and Guidei his Brother gave to Elgistil and his Church
certain lands in Cumbarrue.

7 Lunape^us.
Pepiau the son of Erb, gave May na^r garth bonni vsque ad paludem nigrum
inter syluam and campum and aquam and iaculum Constantini Regis soccri sui,
trans Cwy amnem, Deo and Dubritio Archiepiscopo Sedi Landaniae, and Lunapeio
consobrino suo. He gave also Lancer^in, Iunabu^ and other lands.

Gurca^r king of Ercyng, son of Gynuni, gave Lan-louden and Ian Budgwalan,
with other lands.

8 Comegern, alias Comerkgius, alias Gomergwnius.
King Iddon the son of Iuyr Gwent, gave Lanarth with all the lands there, and
Lantelio Porth-halawg with the territory unto the same belonging, and certain
lands at Lantelio Crissenny; all in thankfulness to God for a victory
obtained against the Saxons.

9 Argwistill.
The said King Iddon gave in his time Lancoyt.

10 Guruan.
T^udur king of Brechiniau^ (which we call Brecknocke) son of Rein, killed
Engistill an other king of that Country te^acherously, after a league solemnly
sworn between them. This Bishop excommunicated him for that face, and for
absolution had from him the gift of Lannihangel tres. cer^auc.

11 Guodloiu.
C^nheir the son of Gloui gave him a place called Hirpan, or the town of the
Ualley. About this time Maredudd son of Rein king of West-Wales, gave fix
Churches.

12 Edilbiu, alias Edilbnins.
One Gurcant gave him certain lands. So did an other called Bonus.

13. Grecielus.
In his time, Faun the son of Benjamin, gave the Church of Kilpedec in Ercyng
with the lands adjoining. Gulfter, Cinuin and Nir, the sons of Gurcan and
Bonus with his sons, gave certain lands.

Briteonha^l the son of Deuon gave six Churches in one day, Lanbudgwalan in
octio Circan, Merthircynfal with certain lands belonging to it, La^bocha
Lansipalli, Landinu^l, Masurn: and Mable Ci^uelin gave Lancum.

14. Berthygwn.
Gwidnerth slew his own brother Merchion; for which deed, he was, by this
Bishops predecessor excommunicate, and enjoined by way of penance before he
might be absolved to spend a year in pilgrimage to the Church of Dola in
little Britain. Before the end of that year, Grecialus dying, this Berthgwyn
became Bishop: who not without great suite of Morcant the King, absolved at
last the said Gwidnerth. He, upon his restitution, voluntarily gave unto the
Bishop, and his successors Laucadwallader (now called Bishton or Bishopston)
the only manner that remains in any sort entier unto the Bishopric at this
day.

Conuilius the son of Gurcenin, with consent of K. Morcant and Ithail his
son, gave the town of Conuc and Macrun.

Ma^su gave Iudbiu.

Conhae gave Lantissoy.

Elfin gave Pe^hellei and Tull coit, now (says the book) called Bella-aqua.

Guican the son of Guinan kept his own stepmother; and being excommunicate
for that incest suffered Marchynis to be wrested from him by the Bishop.

Iudon the son of Cer^an, bought of K. Iudhail, Guennonoe iuxta paludem
Maurici, for 22. wild horses, and gave it unto the Church.

15. Trychan.
Convur the son of lacoi bought of K. Fernuail the church of Gurthbirme and
some lands belonging to it, giving for the same an excellent horse (which cost
him ten kine) a spaniell prised at the worth of three kine, and an other
horse worth likewise three kine. This land so bought, he gave to Trychan and
his successors.

Erbic the son of Elfin, gave Ellcon and Catheuon.

Bru the son of Iudbin gave Mertir-teemed.

Catnuth the son of Coffro, Heuolennic upon the water of Amyr.

Eliud, Conun, Guoideen and Erdtibiu the sons of Eugen, gave a Castle and
certain lands called then (as it seems) Lan^helicon.

Bricon the son of Gwnicon bought of King Fernuail and his sons certain
lands, for which he gave 7. horses, worth 28. kine, a suit of apparel worth
14. kine: a sword worth 12. kine: a hawke worth 6. kine, and 4. dogs prised at
the value of 14. kine: the land so bought, he gave to this Bishop and his
Church.

Matoc the son of Guinan bought Turion of the same King for a hawke worth 12.
kine, two horses worth 6. kine, a silver horn of 6. ounces, worth 12. kine,
and linea coccinea. Having so bought it, he gave it likewise to the Church.

Conuil the son of Gurgon bought land of king Iudhail for two horses worth
eight kine, one trumpet worth 24. kine, a cloak for the Queen prised at 6.
ounces, (of silver I think the meaning is, though it be not expressed)
together with a horse of four ounces, and gave the same to the Church.

15. Eluogus.
He succeeded Trychan and sat in the times of Moric, Ris, and Fernuail the
sons of Rotri kings of Glewissig. The said king Fernvail died the year of
our Lord 763.

17. Catgwaret.
In his time Cors the son of Erbic gave Merthic maches.

Gabran the son of Cors gave Mamouric, afterward called Lannuvien.

Conuelin the son of Conuc bought Loouhai of K. Potri the son of Iuthael
for two horses of great price, and two robes, and then gave it to this Bishop
and his Church. He gave also Dinbirrion.

18. Cerenhir.
Houel king of Glewissig son of Ris, by perjury circumuented Gallun the son
of Cidrich, for which he was held under excommunication by the space of a
year. At the time of his absolution he gave Merthir-buceil, Merthirmiuor and
Tircollon.

Ili the son of Conblus upon the like occasion gave Guliple.

Kinuin the son of Gurgant gave Langulan.

Aquod the son of Iouaf falling out with the Bishop, drove him and his men into
the Church of Landaff, and threw stones at them into the very Church. For so
doing he was excommunicate, and to be absolved, was glad to give Pennoun with
the Church of Lantilul and certain other lands.

19. Nobis.
Of him or his time I find nothing recorded.

20. Gulfridus.
Loumarch the son of Casgwocaun was excommunicate by this Bishop for
violating the privileges of his Church, and after absolution and penance gave
Treficaru pont.

Asser the son of Marchiud having trecherously slain one Gulagguni, ad
expiandam caedem and pro anima defuncti (says my author) he gave Segan.

Catquocaun the son of Ouein gave Rett.

21. Nudd.
Guilferth, Hegoi and Arguistil the sons of Beli falling at variance in words
with Nudd the Bishop, and proceeding at last from words to blows, committed
diverse outrages upon his land and family: but quickly remembering themselves
^earing excommunication, they asked pardon, and submitted themselves to
penance. After which performed, they gave unto the Church for further
confirmation of their unfeigned repentance, the territory of Julius and Aaron,
that is, as I take it, the town of Caerleon.

Elgistill gave Cair-duicil.

Tutmap the son of Paul gave the Church of Dinc^t, now called Dingstew.

King Hiuel the son of Ris gave Peuereic and the Church of Strat-haffren.

Guorai the son of Iudic gave the Church of Ri^.

One Abraham gave Brannuc.

22. Cimeliauc.
Brochmail the son of Mouric gave the Church of Lanmeiri-Penros, and
Lanmihangel mawr. He gave also Yscuit cist, with privilege to use the haven at
the mouth of Pulmericke without paying any custom, as also to have the profit
of all wrackes upon the coast adjoining. Lastly he gave the Church and Castle
of Conscuit and the Church of S. Brides with privilege to use the haven in
octio Tarroci.

Nudd the son of Gurcinnis gave Cyrnir.

Eyset Yrsmym gave Trefylly.

March the son of Pepian gave Cyuiu, a parcel of land now belonging to
Merthir-Tewdricke.

Arthmael have Caer-birran.

This Bishop seems to be he whom Matthew. Westminster. calls Camalec Bishop of the
South Saxons, amongst whom he was taken prisoner by the Danes, anno. 915. and
was ransomed for 40. pound paid by K Edward the elder.

23. Libian.
He died the year 929.

In his time king Grisud the son of Yrgein gave certain lands not named.

24. Marchliuth. 25. Pater.
Nongui the son of Gurial king of Glewissig, called (if I mistake not)
Gwganwin in the Chronicles of Wales, robbed and took away violently many
things from one Aircot the son of Dissaith at Trileg, which in those days
was accounted a Sanctuary being also a principal limme of the Churches
possessions. Of that d^ede greatly repenting himself afterward, he gave for
amends unto Pater the Bishop and his Church, Guideon. The same man gave also,
or at leastwise caused to be given) as aforesaid Lambedui the year 955. and
that upon this occasion. A certain country fellow meeting a Deacon with a
sword by his side, asked him what a coward should do with weapons, and
striving to take away the sword cut the Deacons finger. Whereupon the Deacon
killed him and when he had done took Sanctuary in the Church of S. Iarmen and
S. Febric. There, by ssxe of the said kings household (although there wanted
not many that sought to defend the man in regard of the place) he was slain
even at the very altar of the Church. These 6. men were delivered at the city
of Gwentonia (now Caerwent) into the hands of Pater the Bishop, who kept them
in straight prison 6. months. and then forced them to give all their lands and
livings to Landaffe, besides seven l. of silver to the Church, which they had
polluted.

26. Gucan or Gogwan.
This Bishop was consecrate by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury the year 982.
In his time Merchiaun the son of Ride^ch gave Lancaruan, and in his deed
uses these words of the Bishop, that he was Vtrisque gemmis decoratus,
sapientia videlicet sacrarum scripturarum, diuinae and humanae, and regali
nobilitate parentelae, simul cum dignitate pontificialis Cathedrae, etc.

Arthmael the son of Nongui, king of Gwent, having slain his brother Elised,
gave Llannihangel Lichrit and other lands.

Laur having committed a certain murder, gave Segan.

27. Bledri.
This man chosen by the common consent of the King Clergy and people of the
country, was consec^ate by the Archbishop of Canterbury 983. and died anno
1022. In a fray that happened between his men and the servants of Edward king
of Went. he going between them to make peace, was lightly wounded: For which
he excommunicate the said King, and before he absolved him, made him glad to
give unto the Church a town or manor called Iunuluc.

Rotri and Grisud Kings of Went, gave Pencelligwen huc iuxa Lisgwern.

28. Joseph.
October 1. 1022. Joseph was consecrate Bishop of Landaff, by Aelnothus Archb.
of Cant. He died on the way between this and Rome at Augusta, the year 1046.

In his time Ritherch ap lestim granted many privileges to the church of
Landaff and confirmed the possessions of the same, setting down a Catalogue of
them which ends thus; De omnibus subscriptis vestita fuit ecclesia
Laudauensis, simul and ediscopus Joseph, pace quieta and tranquilla tempore
regnantis Ritherich per totam Gualiam and admonitione Aelnod Arch^episcopi
Cantuariensis simul cum literis commendati his Cnut regnantis Angliam.

In Cantref maur.
1 Lantelia maur cum suis duob. territorijs. 2 Lanteliau nant seru. 3 Lanteliau
garth teuir. 4 Lanteliau maur brumur. 5 Lanteliau bechan in diffrin teiui.
In Cantref guartan.
6 Lanteliau landibr guir mainaur. 7 Lantelian treficerniu. 8 Lantoulidauc
icair. 9 Lanteliau aper coguin. 10 Lanteliau penn tiuinn. 11 Lanteliau luin
guaidan, villa tantum, in euilfre. 12 Lanrath. 13 Lanconguern cum trib.
territorijs. Finis illarum Ofruit Gurcant Lutglanrath. 14 Tref^arn, Villa
tantum, sine ecclesia. 15 Layth ty teliau, villa tantum super ripam ritec iuxta
penalun. 16 Menechiarglann ritec iuxta penalun. 17 Pull arda iuxta mainaur pir,
villa tantum. 18 Luiu teliau, villa tantum. 19 Eccluis Gunniau, vbi natus est
S. Teliaus. 20 Porth medgen villa tantum. 21 Porth manacli mainaur mamithiel.
22 Din guenhalf inlonian, villa tantum. 23 Lantelian litgarth in findoucledif
hache mei mainaur. 24 Lantelia cil retin in emmlim.
In Ros.
25 Lan issan mainaur. 26 Bronu lann. 27 Langurfrit. 28 Telich elouuan.
In Pembro.
29 Ciltutuc. 30 Penclecir.
In Pepitia^e.
31 Mainaur mathru. 32 Cenarth maur.
In Brecua.
33 Languruaet mainaur.
In Cantref Selim.
34 Lancoit.
In Cantref Talacarn.
35 Lancors. 56 Laumihacgel meiuion gratlann. 37 Lan idoudec seith.
In Cliuail.
38 Lan meilic bah gueir. 39 Lanteliau iciliou idiffrin machagui.
Mouric king of Glamorgo^n restored Elcu that had been wrongfully taken away
by his predecessors. And being excommunicate for putting out the eyes of Etgum
the son of Guriat of Gueinscoit, in time of a truce to have his absolution
gave Pan^p^se. An other time upon a like occasion, he was feign to give Gulich,
Fabrus and four pound of silver unto the Bishop, beside other great gifts to
the Canons. He had broken the sanctuary of the Church of Landaff, by taking
away thence violently the wise of his enemy. For so doing he had been
excommunicate, and by these gifts made way to his absolution.

Caratuc one of his company in the last recited action, was forced to give
Henriu in Wencia.

Riugallan the son of Run being excommunicate for an assault made upon the
Bishop and his men, gave Riu brein and the third part of the wood of
Ynisperthan.

Merchiaun the son of Ritherch gave Carnon and Crucon Leiguirn.

Cutguallam the son of Guriat stro^ke one in the consistory, and in the
presence of Joseph the Bishop, who kept him the said Catguallan in prison till
he had made amends for that fault by giving the Church of S. Brides.

Seisil the son of Gistlerth gave Penros beside the bank of Mingui.

Caratocus the son of Tutbulch, upon no very just quarrel (as it seems)
came with a great power and spoiled the country of Lanmochan. Returning with
his booty, as he passed by a certain well called Oir, his horse started at the
leaping of a great fish in that well, and cast him to the ground, so as he
brake his arm. He taking it as a warning given of God, caused all the pray he
had gotten to be restored again to the true owners, and mor^ouer gave to the
Church Pennigelli.

29. Herewald.
Herewald, a Welchman born, but brought up always among the English, was made
Priest by Joseph his predecessor, and consecrate Bishop of Landaff in the time
of a convocation at London in Whitson week 1059. by Stigand the Archbishop. He
died Mar. 6. 1103. being an hundred years of age, and having continued in
this Bishopric 48. years.

Catgwa^aun king of Morganuc was excommunicate by him, for that one of his
followers in his drunkenness had laid violent hands upon one Berthutis,
Physician to the Bishop, (being also his nephew) and that upon Christmasse day.
Absolution cost him Henriu Gunnua.

Gistui the son of Gurcant being excommunicate for a rape committed by a
nephew and follower of his upon a Uirgin that he took violently out of the
very Church of Landaff, after absolution gave Miluc.

Caratoc the son of Ringuallaun, being sick and like to dye, in token of
repentance for his sinner, and especially for being a cause of the death of his
brother Cinon, that was slain by one of his company in his fight and in his
quarrel; undertook a pilgrimage to Rome, promised seven years penance, and
gave also to the church Gunhuc in Guarthacaun witnesses to this gift among
other, Abraham Archdeacon of Gwent and Lis^^cus the Bishops son, Archdeacon
of Gwlat Morcaut, and Magister Sancti Cataci de Lancaruan. So it seems in
those days there were two Archdeacons of this Dioces, whereas now there is but
one.

30 Vrbanus Archdeacon of Landaff, was cons. together with diverse other
Bishops, Aug. 10. 1108. being then but 32 years of age. At his first coming
he found his Bishopric in very poor and miserable estate. The Church
ruinated even almost to the ground in the time of the late wars under Will.
Conqueror; the revenues of themselves small, and yet so ill husbanded by the
negligence of his prodecessors, as they could now scarcely maintain two
chanons beside the Bishop whereas they were wont to be 24. Complaining hereof
to the Pope, Calixtus the second, at what time he was at the Counsel of
Rhemes, viz. the year 1119. he affoorded him his letters to the king, as also
to the Archbishop of Cant. and to the Clergy and gentlemen of his own Dioces,
earnestly praying them to yield him their best assistance for the reformation
of his Church so disordered. The Archbishop the ^ather to draw on the
liberality of men in contributing toward the new building of the Church, took
upon him to release the fourth part of all penance inflicted unto such as
should bestow any thing toward the same. By this means (no doubt) having
gathered great sums of money; he pulled down the old church from the ground
(which was but 28. foot in length, 15. in breadth, and 20. in height as by a
record it appears) and began the building of that Church which now stands
Ap. 14. 1120. and having finished it^ he built anew also, al ye housing
belonging to it. The next endeavoring to recover the lands lost or alienated
from his See, he chale^ged diverse parcels withheld by Barnard Bishop of S.
David's, and Richard Bishop of Hereford, and moreover complained that they had
usurped upon the jurisdiction of these places, Gwhyr, Cedwely, Ca^tref Bychan,
Ystrad Yw, and Erging. Upon deposition of 6. witnesses, that all these were of
the Dioces of Landaff, they were so adjudged by the Popes diffinitiue sentence,
who also writ unto the King and Archbishop, to restore that right unto the
Bishop of Landaff, and to the inhabitants, to yield their obedience to him and
his successors, as their Ordinary. Howbeit how it comes to pass I know not,
except happily by the death of Urban, and so indeed we may gather by certain
words of W. Malmsbury hist. nouel. l. 1 meto) those places are now, and long
have been esteemed, part of the Dioces of S. David's, and part of Hereford, and
none of them of Landaff This Bishop died beyond the Seas, traveling between
this and Rome an. 1133. following of these suites.

31. Vhtryd that succeeded was cons. by Theobald Archb. of Canterbury, together
with Mauritius of Bangor the year 1139 He had a daughter married to Iorwerth ap
Owen ap Caradocke, Lord of Caerlheon upon Us^^, a great and mighty man in those
parts. He died anno 1148.

32 Geffry died 1153.

33 Nicolas ap Gwrgant died 1183.

34 William de Salso Marisco was Bishop an. 1188. Giraldus Cambr. calls him
virum bonu^, discretum and honestu^.

35 Henry, Prior of Burgauenny was Bishop in the year 1199. and was one of them
that attended the Coronation of King John. It seems that until the time of
this man, the Bishopric and Chapter was one body, and their possessions not
severed. He laid out portions for 14. prebends, took unto himself and his
successors what they now have, or heertofore have enjoyed, and left the rest
unto the Chapter. He died 1218. Nou. 8.

36 William, Prior of Gouldcliffe, was restored to his temporalties, Iul. 16.
the third year of K. Henry the third, and died January 28. au. 1229.

37 Elias de Radnor, died May. 6. 1240.

38 William de Burgo, chaplain unto king Henry the 3. was cons. the year
1244. and died June 11. 1253. having lived blind 7. years before his death.

39 John de la Ware Abbot of Margan died Iun. 30. 1256

40 William de Radnor died January 9. 1295.

41 William de Brews prebe^dary of Landaff was restored to ye temporalties of
this See Mar. 17. an. Hen. 3. 50. and died in the end of Mar. 1287. and lies
buried under a marble engraven in the east end of ye church of Landaff toward
the North wall.

42 John de Monmouth, Doctor of Divinity was consecrate Febr. 10. 1296. at
Cant. He procured the parsonage of Newland in the forest of Deane to be
impropriate unto his See, and is recorded for a great b^nefactor otherwise as
well to his Church as to his See. He died April 8. 1323. and lies in the
midst of the east end of the Church, (elsewhere commonly called the Lady
Chapel) under a flat Marble, having a French inscription n^w somewhat defared.

43 John de Eglescliff, a friar preacher and Bishop of Co^ner in Ireland, was
translated to Landaff at Rome about Michaelmas 1323. and came to this Dioces
upon the eve of Trinity sunday following. He died at Lancadwallader (now
called Biston or Bishopstowne) January. 2. 1346. and was buried at Cardiff in
the Church of the Friar preachers.

44 John Paschall Do. of Divinity, a Carmelite of Ipswich, was a Gentleman
borne in Suffolk, of a family yet remaining there, and brought up in the
Uniuersity of C^mb. By Will. Bateman Bishop of Norwich was made a Titulary
Bishop, and his Suffrag^n, by the name of Episcopus Scutariensis. From that
imaginary See he was translated to Landaff by the Popes authority (who
disanulled the lawful election of John Couentree Archdeacon of Landaff) Iun. 3.
1347. He died Oct. 11. 1361. at Lancadwallader, and was buried at Landaff, in
the Lady chapel under a marble stone, he was a man of great learning (for
those times) whereof he left diverse monuments in writing behind him.

45 Roger Cradocke a Friar Minor, was translated to this Church (from Waterford
1362. and died the end of the year 1382.

46 Thomas Rushook a Friar Preacher, and Doctor of divinity was cons. May. 3.
1383. and translated to Chichester in Oct. 1385.

47 William de Bottlesham made Bishop of Bethlehem by the Pope, was translated
first to Landaff, and after (viz. the year 1389.) to Rochester. See more of him
there.

48 Edmund de Brumfield, was one of the most excellent learned men of his time,
a Doctor of Divinity, and Monk of Bury, where being known for a man of
somewhat too pragmatical and stirring an humor; that he might not trouble them
at home, the Covent thought good to maintain him at Rome for the dispatch of
their ordinary businesses there, taking first a corporal oath of him, never to
seek any office or preferment of their house without their priui^y and
direction. This oath notwithstanding, when shortly after it fell out that the
Abbot died, he found means that the Pope should by his omnipotent bulls in
title him to that Abbotship whereunto the Conent (with the kings good liking)
had now already elected an other man far more m^^te, called John Tymworth.
For this bad kind of dealing, as al^o because those prouisory bulls had
heertofore been forbidden by Act of Parliament, he was committed to the tower,
and there lay prisoner a long time. Neither durst the Pope yield him any
assistance for the justifying of his own gift, because there was then an
Antipope, whom if the Clergy of England should have been induced to follow (as
by the kings means easily they might) it must needs have been to his great
prejudice and hinderance. At the first therefore, the Pope was determined to
make him a Bishop in Ireland, who in the writ of restitution is called,
Edmundus nuper Abbas monasterij Siluae maioris ordinis S. Benedicti
Burdegalensis diocesis, and scholarum palatij Apostolici in s. Theol. Magister.
It bears date. Dec 17. Ric. 2.13. Thomas Brinton Bishop of Rochester dying,
with the kings good liking, he translated the Bishop of Landaffe to Rochester,
and gave Landaff to this Brumfield. He died the year 1391. and was buried in
his own Church.

49 Tydemanus Abbot of Beaulieu succeeded Brumfield and (if I mistake not) was
that Tydemanus de Winchecomb that ann. 1395. became Bishop of Worceter.

50 Andrew Barret, Doctor of Law.

51 John Burghyll a Friar preacher being Bishop of Landaff and Confessor unto
the king, was translated unto Lichfield in September 1398.

52 Thomas Peuerell a Caermelite and Doctor of Divinity, was first Bishop of
Ossery in Ireland, translated thence to Landaff 1399. and then to Worceter
1407. See Worceter.

53 John la Zouche, a Friar minor, and D. of Divinity, was cons. 1408. about
the beginning of August. It should seem that this man built the outer gate,
and happily the greatest part of the whole house at Mathern near Chepstow, the
only house that is now left the Bishop to put his head in. His arms fixed in
diverse places of the walls, and windows, (namely upon the said gate) to my
judgment import so much. By them also it appears that he was descended of
the honorable family of the L Souch.

54 John Wellys was likewise a Minorite, and D. of diuinitio, con^^ at
christmas the year 1423. and died about Alhallontide 1440.

55 Nicolas Ashby Prior of Westminster was cons. 1441.

56 John Hunden a Minorite Doctor of Divinity, and Prior of Kings Langley was
cons. 1458. He resigned.

57 John Smith D. of divinity succeeded. A note which I have seen reports
that he died Oct. 16. 1478. and was buried at Christ-Church in London, in the
Chapel of all Saints, being upon the North side of the high Altar.

58. John Marshall Doctor of Divinity, sometimes fellow of Merton College in
Oxford, had restitution of the temporalties of this See, Septem. 18. Edw. 4.18.
and sat (as I find 18. years, how much more I know not. There is a fair
monument in the Church of Landaff, almost over against the Bishops See, upon
which his arms are engraven, arguing that he should be buried there. The same
are likewise to be ^^^ne upon the Bishops See, as also upon the tower of the
Church at Mathern, which is built all of stone well squared, and that I believe
at his cost.

59. John Ingleby a Carthusian, sometimes Prior of Sheen was Bishop. Iun 30.
1497. as also Oct. 15. 1499. how long before or after these times, I cannot say.

60. Miles Saley, sometimes Almoner to the Abbey of Abingdon, and afterward
Abbot of Eynsham was Bishop, Nou. 5 1504. and died in the end of December 1516.
Old people are wont to say that this man made all the new building in the
house at Mathern, to wit the hall, parl^r or Chapel, with the kitchen and
rooms adjoining.

61. George de Athequa a Spaniard, a friar preacher, and Doctor of Divinity,
being Chaplain unto Q. Katherine, K. Henry's first wife, was cons. March. 8.
1516.

62. Robert Holgate a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, and master of the order
of Semphringam, was consecrate March 25. 1537.

63. Antheny Richen alias Dunstan Doctor of Divinity, was a Cambridge man,
cons. May 3. 1545. He was first a Monk of Westminster, and Prior of the
students in Gloucester hal in Oxford. After that, he became Abbot of Eynsham.
This man enduring all the tempestuous changes that happened in the mean time,
continued till the 5. year of Q. Elizabeth, and then died at Mathern, to wit,
Oct. 31. 1566. having so first impouerished the Bishopric by lavish and
unreasonable grants, as there was no great reason he should be so loath to
leave it. Although to say truth I rest persuaded, he was not so much to blame
that way as the world judges, in as much as it is in a manner apparent, many
deeds have bin forged since his death, that go current in his name until this
day.

64 Hugh Jones Bachelour of Law, brought up in Oxford, was consecrate May the
fifth, 1566. and was buried Nouem. 15. 1574. being the first Welchman that was
Bishop of his Church in almost 300 years before.

65 William Blethin an Oxford man, Bachelour of Law, and Archdeacon of
Brecknock was consecrate April. 17. 1575 and died at Shernewton about the
myddle of October 1590. These 3. last Bishop lie all buried (but without any
monument) in the parish Church of Mathern.

66 Geruase Babington doctor of Divinity, Treasurer of the Church of Landaff,
and sometimes fellow of Trinity college in Cambridge, was cons. Aug. 29. 1591.
then translated to Exceter in Febr. 1594. and after that to Worceter.

67. William Morgan a Doctor of Divinity, brought up in Cambridge (who first
translated the Bible into the Welsh tongue) was cons. Iul. 20. 1595. and
removed to S. Assaph. Septem. 17. 1601.

68. Francis Godwin Doctor of Divinity, Subdeane of Exceter and son unto Th.
Godwin sometimes Bishop of Bathe and Wels, born at Hauington in
Northamptonshire, and brought up a student in Christchurch in Oxford, collected
and writ this Catalogue the year 1600. which now this year 1614. he has
augmented, and was cons. unto the Church of Landaff. Nou. 22. 1601. by the
gracious appointment of Q. Elizabeth, in the ^ourth year of whose reign he
was borne.

This Bishopric is valued in the Exchequer at 145. pound, 14. shillings, and
a penny, and paid to the Pope for first fruits 700. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF BANGOR.
1. Heruaeus.
WHat time a Cathedral Church was first e^^ted at Bangor, or who was the first
Bishop there, I think it hard to define. For my part I scarcely find any
mention of any Bishop of Bangor before the Conquest, except happily of one
Marclois that died (as the Chronicle of Wales reports, the year 943. But I
assure my self upon many presumptious that he is mistaken, for Marchlrith
Bishop of Landaff: the first Bishop of Bangor Heruaeus, who being violently
thrust out of his Bishopric, accepted gladly of Ely the year 1109. the year
after his consecration, becoming (as at Bangor, so there also) the first
Bishop.

2. David. After Heuaeus, is commonly named for successor one Vrbanus, who also
was Bishop of Landaffe, and not of Bangor, consecrate thereunto the year 1107.
and was present at the consecration of this David, (as Matthew Westminster
reports) the year 1120. This man was a Scottish man borne, in his youth
traveled into Germany, and having spent much time at Wittenburgh, became
Chaplain unto Henry the fifth Emperor, by whose appointment he writ an
itinerary of his journey into Italy, and some other discourses, as Malmsbury
witnesses, de Reg. l. 5.

3. Mauritius or Meuric was cons. by Theobald Archb. of Canterbury, together
with Vhtred Bishop of Landaff the year 1139. He made scruple a while of doing
homage to the King of England, but understanding it was a thing required of all
other Bishops, was at last persuaded unto it. He died ye year 1161. After him
it seems the Sea was long void.

4 William Prior of S. Augustines in Bristoll (a man very religious, reverend,
and of great learning as the welsh histo^ies ^eport) seems to be the next
successor.

5. Gui^o whom Giraldus Iun. Camb. l. 2. c. 5 calls Guianus, which of those
two to place first I stand in great doubt. Robert Houeden reports that Guido
was consecrate in the Nunry of Ambrosbury 11. Call. Iunij 1177. and William made
Bishop by the gift o^ King Henry the second, the year 1184. Howbeit for that
Giraldus an eye witness says Gui^^us entertained Baldwin Archbishop of Cant.
at Bangor the year 1188. and some notes of antiquity that I have received from
Bangor place William first, I rather incline to this order which I have
followed.

6. Albanus Prior of the Hospital of Jerusalem was cons. April 16 1195. and
died the year following.

7. Robert of Shrewsbury was cons 1197. the year 1210 he was taken prisoner in
his Cathedral Church by K. John und ransomed for 200. hawks The year 121^ he
died, and ^y his own appointment (says Mat Westminster) was buried in the market
place at Shrewsbury, after him the Sea continued void the space of 2. years by
reason of the wars between K. John and Leolin Prince of Wales.

8. C^dwgan or Caducanus Abbot of Llandefid, a man of great le^rning, was cons.
1215. as the Chronicles of Wales report. The year 1236. he was released of
his Epi^copall change by Pope Gregory the 9. and became a monk in the Ab^ey of
D^r. He writ certain hemilies which he entitled ^^^culum Christianorum.

9 Howel consecrate 1236. did hallow a Monastery for the bare foot Friars,
built in honorem beatae virginis, by Leolin Prince of Wales, at Lhanuais in
Anglesey upon the Sea shore, over the grave of Joan his wife, that was daughter
to king John, whose pleasure it was to be buried in that place.

10 Richard consecrate 1250. did excommunicate David ap Lhewelin Prince of
Wales, for that contrary to his oath he took prisoner his brother Gryffith,
who was content upon the Bishops word to go to his brother; and when he saw
that course would not reform him; he never linne complaining, first unto the
King of England, then the Pope, until he so incensed them, as the one
excommunicating him, the other making war^e upon him, he was feign to deliver
his said brother into the Kings hands, who caused him to be kept in the Tower
of London, till he endeavoring an escape, by misfortune he there brake his
neck. This Bishop the year 1248. (says Matthew Paris) came to the Abbey of
Saint Albons, that the bosom of mercy might be opened unto his poverty, and
he abiding there, until his Bishopric wasted and spoiled, with continual
wars should recover some better state, might together with his Chaplain there
breath and rest themselves from those calamities wherewith they had been long
afflicted, in like sort as heretofore the Bishop of Hortford had done, who was
honorably entertained there the space almost of twenty years together.

11 Anianus or Eneon Archdeacon of Anglesey, was restored to his temporalties,
December 12. Henry 3.52. He did his homage with the Nobles of Wales unto Edward
of Caern^r^^^ Prince of Wales at Chester, the twenty ^^g. ^ of April. 1200.

12 Caducanus was Bishop of Bangor, the year 1306.

13 Gruffin was cons. 1306.

14 Jews. 1320.

15 Matthew, 1334. He died the twenty fifth of April, 1357.

16 Thomas de Ringstead an Oxford man, had the jurisdiction of Bangor,
committed unto him December. 16. 1357 was consecrate Aug 21. following, and died
in the house of the Friars Preachers at Shrewsbury, Ian. 8. 1565. I have seen
the copy of his will, wherein he gave unto the Friery of Huntingdon, 10. pourd,
wishing he might be buried there as his Father and Mother had been before
him. Moreover he gave toward the building of his Cathedral Church a hundred
pound, to buy copes and vestments in poor Parishes where they were wanting 40.
pound, and to poor Scholars a hundred pound, appointing in any wise that an
Englishman should be the distributer of all these moneys. And then amongst
diverse small sums he also bequeathed 20. pound unto the Uniuersity of
Cambridge to be kept in a th^st, that any Scholar upon a sufficient pawn
might borrow of the same ten shillings.

10 Geruasius de Castro, a Friar preacher, and Doctor of Divinity received the
jurisdiction of Bangor Febr. 26. 1366. and was afterward consecrate at Rome.
His will bears dat^ Sept. 24. 1370.

18 Howell was constituted Bishop of Bangor in the month of Ian 1370. and died
in the beginning of February the year following, as I find in the records of
W. Wittlesey Archb. of Canterbury where also it is to be observed, that
Geruasius is called his last predecessor. Yet some notes that I have seen,
place between Geruasius and this Howell one Auxanus, whom upon so good
authority I have thought ^itt to omit.

19 John Gilbert a Friar preacher succeeded, and the year 1374. was translated
to Hereford, after that to S. David's.

20. John, called Episcopus Clouensis which is a Bishopric in Ireland in the
Province of Cassills) was translated to Bangor by a bull bearing date 6. Nou.
Iul, 1376.

21 John Swaffham a Carmelite or Chartexhouse Monk of Lynn brought up in
Cambridge (as Bale says) was appointed Bishop by Pope Greg. 11. who died 1378.
so it seems this and the former John should be one man.

22 Richard Young became Bishop of Bangor 1400. and (...) (upon what occasion I
discerue not) was translated to Rochester by a bull dated 3. Io. Nouemb 1404.

23. Jews he sat Bishop of Bangor a little while and was translated to some
other place, but whether I find not. The year 1408. the Bishop of Bangor
(says T. Walls.) was taken prisoner in the battle in which the Earl of
Northumberland and the Lord Bardolf were slain: But he was pardoned by the
King, because he bare no weapon against him, I assure my self this Lewis was
the man, and that the Pope preferring him from the hall to the kitchen,
translated him to some shadow of a Bishopric, in like savor as he did
Thomas Marks Bishop of Carlisle some three years before, at the request of
King Henry the fourth.

24 Bennet Nichols Bacheler of Law, and Parson of Staplebridge in the Diocese
of Salisbury, was consecrate 1408. and translated to Saint David's, December 15.
1417.

26 William Barrow Doctor of Law, and Cannon of Lincoln, became Bishop of
Bangor the year 1418. and was translated to Carlisle 1423.

26 Nicolas, is named for the next Successor. Howbeit I find by a record in
the Tower that John Canon of Chichester was appointed to this See then void by
the translation of William Barrow, and his temporalties restored Ian. 15. 1424.

28 Thomas Cherroton, 14^6.

29 John Stanbery a Carmelite consecrated, 1448. was translated to Hereford,
1452. See Hereford.

30 James called Episcopus Achadensis succeeded. He died in Sept. Edw. 4.4,

31 Thomas Ednan, 1464.

32 Henry Deane Abbot of Lanthony consecrate 1496. translated to Salisbury,
1500 and after to C^nterbury. A great benefactor to this Church, whereof see
more in Canterbury.

33 Thomas Pigot 1500. He died the 15. of August; 1504.

34 John Penny Doctor of Law, 1504. He was translated to Carlisle, 1509.

35. Thomas Skeuington was consecrate June 17. 1509 He built all the Cathedral
Church from the Quire downwards (excepting that the two sides were partly
standing.) So a writing upon the out side of the Steeple witnesses. He died
before he had finished the Tower, but took order his executors should do it,
who notwithstanding builte it not so high as was by him intended, as by the
foundation it may partly appear.

John Capon, alias Salcot Doctor of Law, and late Abbot of Hyde, was consecrate
at Croydon, April 19. 1534. and translated to Salisbury Aug. 14. 1539.

37 John Bird a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, and Provincial of the
Carmelites, was first Bishop of Ossery in Ireland, translated to Bangor the
third of September, 1531. and two years after to Chester. See Chester.

38 Arthur Bulkley Doctor of law, was confirmed Bishop of Bangor, the twentieth
of December, 1541. This man sold away five fair belles out of the steeple of
his cathedral Church. And it is certainly reported that going to the sea side
to see them shipped, he had not set three steps of his way homeward before
he was stricken with blindness, so that he never saw after.

39 William Glyn Doctor of Divinity, sometimes fellow of Queens College in
Cambridge, was consecrate 155^. He died in the last year of Q Mary.

40 Rowland Mericke Doctor of Law, and sometimes priucipall of New Inn in
Oxford, was consecrate the 21 of December, 1559. He was father to Sir Gelly
Mericke, that was executed for matters concerning the Earl of Essex, anno 1600.

41 Nicholas Robinson Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, was consecrate the
twentieth of October 1566.

42 Hugh Bellot Doctor of Divinity, was consecrate Ian. 25. 1585. and
translated to Chester 1595.

43 Richard Vaughan Doctor of Divinity, consecrate Ian. 25. 1595. was
translated likewise to Chester, 1597. and thence to London, 1605. in January.

44 Henry Rowlands was consecrate the twelfth of November 1598. He bestowed of
his own charge 5. belles, upon his Cathedral Church, in stead of those that
were sold away by Bishop Buckley. The biggest of them cost a hundred pound. He
also gave two Fellowships unto Jesus College in Oxford.

The Bishopric is valued in the Exchequer at a hundred thirty two pound,
sixeteene shillinges four pence ob. and paid to the Pope for income, only
126. ducats.

THE BISHOPS OF S. ASAPH.
Kentigern.
ABout the year of our Lord 560. one Kentigernus Bishop of Glascow in Scotland,
being driven out of his own Country, found means to erect a Monastery for
himself and his company, between the rivers of Elwyd and Elwy; where in
process of time having builded a Church and some other edifices fit for his
intertainement there flocked unto him such multitudes of people as the number
of his Monks at la^^ amounted unto no less then 660. whereof it is said he
appointed 300. that were utterly unlearned to tillage and husbandry abroad;
other 300. he employed in sundry kind of labors and handy works within the
Monastery at home; and the rest being divided into companies, attended the
service of God in the Church in such sort, as day and night perpetually service
was there continued, some while by some, and other while by other, according to
an order by him established and set down. His Church was first built of
timber, and as^ar of stone, not without some resistance of Malgo or Maglocunus
a British king dwelling then at Deganwy about a dozen mile from thence, who by
means at last was so well appeased, as he was content to allow the same
Church to be an Episcopal See, and moreover to bestow upon it diverse
Lordships, Manors, immunities and privileges. The Bishop of this See was then
called Elguensis, Eluensis and Lanalwenses of the River Elwy near which it
stands, and this Kentigerne became the first Bishop of the same. He is said
to be the son of Thames that was daughter to Loath King of the Pi^^es: who
his father should be was never known: and many ignorant people there were in
old time, persuaded, he was concealed and borne of his mother being a pure
Uirgine. How long he governed this See it appears not. Having continued here
some good number of years, he was called home into Scotland, whereupon he
gave over this Bishopric unto a Disciple of his named Assaph, and returned to
his first charge, in which he lived so long, that his age (if we may believe
it) amounted unto 185. years. So our histories report of him. This Bishopric
although it were always poor in respect of other ( Giraldus anno 1188.
calls it pauperculam sedem Lanelwensem) yet about the time of King Edward the
second Edward the second, there were 5. capital or mansion houses belonging to
it, in which the Bishops used to reside, viz. Lanelwy, Altmaliden, Landegla,
Nau^e^g, and Saint Martins, of all which there remains unto them in these
days Lanelwy only. For the rest and other lands and Mannours a small rent is
paid. As for the Church, it was often burnt and spoiled, together with the
houses of the Bishop and Canons, by reason of the continual wars, that were
between the kings of England and Princes of Wales, who always dwelled nere
this place. But ^he greatest havoc of all was made by Owen Glindower in the
reign of King Henry the fourth, since which time the Canons houses were never
repaired.

2 Saint Assaph.
Assaph.
Of Assaph that succeeded Kentigern, the Cathedral Church was ever after, even
^o this day called Ecclesia Assaphensis, He was a man of great virtue and
learning. Bale out of Capg^ane reporte^h, this saying would be often in his
mouth, Qui^unque verbo Dei aduersantur, saluti hominum inuid^^^ He writ
Ordinationem Ecclesiae suae, and the life of his Master Kentigerne: what time
he ^ate, and when he died, appears not, no nor who succeeded him for many
hundred years after. And in deed it seems that for a long time this had no
Bishop. For H. Huntingdon who writ about the ye^re 1150 makes mention of
three Bishoprics only, Saint David's, Bangor and Lan^affe, the Bishop
whereof he calls Bishop of Glamorgan.

Galfridus.
The next I find any mention of is Galfridus, surnamed of some Arthurus
(happily of his father, peradventure because he writ so much of that famous
King Arthur, which is the opinion of many) but commonly called Galfridus
Monumensis, for that (as I suppose) he was borne at Monmouth of a Benedictine
Monk, he ^ecame Bishop of S. Assaph, the year ^151. He it is that writ in
Latin the British story from Brute downward, delivered heretofore from hand
to hand, partly by tradition, partly by the songs and verses of the Bardi,
never written before, in such sort at least wise, as the public notice was
taken of it. What time this man died, or what became of him afterward I cannot
for certain deliver: but I find a report that he should die Bishop of Saint
Assaph. anno 1165 which appears to be untrue by the testim^ny of an old
Chronicle mentioned by Bale in the appendix of his life, affirming that the
said Monumethensis writ a history of his own times the year 1170. Again,
Roger Houeden in his report of the year 1175, p. 311. declares that in a
Convocation then held at Westminster, the Clergy of the Dioces of Saint
Assaph, besought the Archbishop of Canterbury, he would require Godfridus
their Bishop ( Godfridus and Galfridus are often usurped the one for the
other) in vi obedientiae, to return home to his bishopric, or else to resign
and forsake the same. For he being compelled, paupertate and infestatione
Wallensium (says he) to leave the Country, found gracious and honorable
intertainement at the hand of K. Henry the 2. who permitted him to receive the
fruits of the Abbotship of Abingdon then void. In regard whereof, when the
Archbishop pressed him to condescend to the reasonable motion of his Clergy,
he was content to give over his Bishopric, in hope to retain his Abbotship
still. But therein he was deceived: for whether it were that the King
intending the Abbey to another, directed his Clergy at first to this course,
so thinking to hound him thence, and drive him home to his Bishopric, or else
that he suffered him to hold the Abbotship only upon hope it should be an
encouragement unto him to do him faithful service at his return into Wales:
No sooner had he forgone the one by delivering up his King and Crosier to the
Arch. but he presently thrust him out of the other also, by putting in a new
Abbot. Now whether this man ^o resigning, and called by Houeden Godfridus be
not mistaken for Galfridus before mentioned, I may not take upon me to define;
but I think rather yea, then otherwise. Ponticus Vir^nnus, delivers of this
Galfridus, (qua fide multa alia) that he was forsooth, Cardinalis and Britaniae
per plures annos gubernator generalis, apud Robertum Regem ipsius, whether ever
he were a Cardinal or no I know not; Ciaconius (who takes upon him to write
the lives of all our Roman Cardinals) affirms it; and he cites for his
Authors in that behalf, Leland, Io. Rossus and Bostonus Buriensis: But sure it
was not the Popes fashion in those days to fetch his Cardinels so far off, or
to prefer unto those places any but such as had spent much time in or near to
the Court of Rome. And if this report should be true, much I should marvel,
that none of the writers of those times should mention the same. Even so true
undoubtedly it was, as that one Robert was sometimes king of this realm, and
that the same Galfridus was the Dominus fac-totum under him.

After Galfridus it is said that Gulielmus Newbrigensis (whom many do call
Gulielmus paruus, Adam.
and the Britons Guillim Bach, because belike he was a man of a low stature)
was an earnest suitor to be Bishop of Saint Assaph, but had the repulse, and
moreover found in the Country some rough entertainment at the hands of David,
son to Owen Guyneth, that was then Prince of Wales. He it is, that writing
an history of English matters falling out in his time: in the preface of the
same, inueigheth bitterly against the forenamed Galfridus, as author of a work
fraught altogether with lies and falsehood, and moreover in the process of his
story uses many reproachful and unseemly speeches of the Welsh, whereunto
some suppose he was the rather provoked by the evil welcome he found in Wales;
whereas contrariwise it may be, his writing provoked the Welsh to that kind of
usage: Howsoever it fell out, sure it is, he missed in his footing; as also,
that soon after the resignation of the forenamed, whether Galfridus or
Godfridus, one Adam a Welchman was appointed unto this Bishopric by the King;
the which Adam died at Oxford, the year 1180. and was buried in the Abbey of
Osenay.

Reynerus.
It seems then that one Reynerus succeeded. For in the year 1188. at which
time Baldwyn Archbishop of Canterbury visited all Wales. He was Bishop (as
Giraldus testifies) who also reports of him, that before the coming of the
said Archbishop, he persuaded many of his Diocese to take on them the Cross,
to fight against the Saracens. This Bishop had a house at or near unto
Oswestry (of old called Oswaldcestre) where he much resided. He bestowed all
the tithe hay and corn of Blanch Monastery and the Chappells thereunto
belonging (wherewith were wont to be maintained 12. secular Priests, that for
the most part had their lawful wives) upon the Monks of Shrewsbury, and by the
Popes authority expelled the said seculars. He gave also half the tithes of
Wrexham to the Abbey of Llangwest, commonly called Valle crucis, which in an.
1100. was founded by Mad^g ap Gryssith L of Brumfield. He lived till the year
1220. but how much longer I find not.

The year 1232. one Abraham died Bishop of this Church. Abraham.
He confirmed the grant of his predecessor upon half the tithes of Wrexam,
and moreover bestowed upon the said Abbey of Valle Crucis, the other half
also, anno 1227.

The year 1235. Howel de Edneuet a Friar, Howell ap Edneuet.
became Bishop of Saint Assaph. In the year 1239. he gave to the Nuns of
Llanligan in Powys land; the tithe of the Rectory of Llanuayre in Caerenion,
he impropried also Langollen unto the Abbey of Valley Crucis anno 1236. and
the Rectory of Lanasaph, unto the fabrike of the Cathedral Church. Anno 1247.
he died at Oxford, and was there buried.

Anyanus was consecrate 1248. Anianus ^
He ended a great controversy between Richard Bishop of Bangor, and Lleolin
ap Gryffiyth Prince of Wales, The agreement bears date at Rhydyrarw, anno
1261. He impropriated to the Nuns of Lanlligan the Rectory of Llanllwghayarn,
ann. 1263. and anno 1265. the Rectory of Aberrew to the Abbey of Pole. He sat
17. or 18. years.

After him the Sea was void two years. Anianus 2.
Then succeeded an other of the same name, Anan de Sehonaw a Dominican Friar
called commonly y braud du o Nanny. Anian the black Friar of Naney, who was
consecrate in the church of Saint Mary Oueries, in October 1268. and attended
K. Edward the first in his voyage out of the holy land, as Bale supposes, and
was his Confessor. To him and his Successors, John Fitzallen Earl of Arundel,
gave certain land at S. Martins to the value of 100. acres and somewhat more,
paying therefore yearly for ever one pair of guilt spurs at midsommer, with
condition it should not be lawful for the Bishop or his successors to
alienate the same, that grant bare date apud Album Monasterium in crastino
Paschae 1271. and was afterward confirmed by Richard the son of the said
John Fitzallen, who also gave 44. acres of land more, together with the site
of the manor and a house to the same belonging. Between this Bishop and the
Abbot of Salop there was much contention, and a long suite at Rome about the
placing of a Uicar in Blanch-Monastery (the tithe whereof his predecessor had
given to the said Abbot.) The issue thereof was, that the Abbot, for the quiet
enjoying of his tithes, was feign to pass all his lands in S. Martins unto the
Bishop. The like controversy fell out between him and the Abbey of Valle
Crucis concerning the Uicarages of Llangollen, Wrexham, Ruabon, Chirke,
Llansanffcayd and Landegla, the patronage of all which Churches by sentence of
the Official of Canterbury, and the Abbot of Tallelechew the Popes Delegates,
was adjudged unto the Bishop and his Successors. He gave two third parts of the
title of Brineglwis to Valle Crucis: In regard whereof Llandegla was wholly
restored to his patronage, in a suit against Thomas Cantilupe Bishop of
Hereford, concerning the jurisdiction of the Territory of Horddor, he had not
so good success as in the former. The said Thomas dying, Richard de Swinfield
his next successor was content to compromit this matter to the arbitrament of
Richard Bishop of London, who awarded the jurisdiction to Hereford, and the
Bishops of Hereford to this day do hold the same. To this Bishop and his
Successors for ever, Gruffith Vaughan ap Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Yale, gave
the Lordship and Manor of Llandegla. anno 1278. He the said Anian was once
minded to translate his Episcopal See from Lanelwy to Ruthlan (which is two
miles off) in regard that Lanelwy was but a Countery village, where the Canons
could not dwell in any safety, by reason of the continual wars. King Edward
the first promised ground to build a Church upon there, and a thousand Marks
toward the charges of building. And letters were written to Pope Martyn the
fourth the year 1485. to crave his license for this translation. What should
be the impediment and let of proceeding according to this project, I cannot
guess, except happily the Popes death, who deceased 1286. As for the Bishop
he died the year of our Lord 1292.

Llewelin ap Llewelin ap Yuyr, Ll. ap Ll. ap Yuyr.
otherwise called Llewelin de Bromfeild, a Canon of Saint Assaph succeeded him,
and was consecrate in Summer 1293. anno 1310. he gave four parts of the tithe
of Lanelwy to the 4. Uicars Chorall, for serving of the Cure infra 4. cruces,
which so remains He impropried the rectories of Lansilin and Ruthlan to the
Chapter, or rather confirmed and renewed the impropriation thereof made by his
predecessor Anian, for that the writings containing the grant thereof near
lost in time of the wars, as were also they that concerned Lanassaph, made
for the fabrike of the Church, which he likewise renewed; in lieu thereof,
making the portion of Corwen (which before was belonging to the fabrike)
presentatiue. He made ordinances for singing, and other service of the Church,
that yet stand in force. Having obtained license of King Edward the 1. by his
grant bearing date, October 12. an. regni sui, 22. to make his will, he
bequeathed much plate, books and ornaments to his Church, to the Canons, and
to his Chaplains, affoording also good Legacies to his servants and other
friends. Soon after which he died, to wit, the year 1313.

David ap Blethin had the Kings royal assent unto his election, D. ap Blethin^
the year 1314. yet it seems he was not consecrate till the year 1319. and
that he died about Michaelmasse, Edward 3.19. For I find that October 9. the
year the King writ his letter to the Deane and Chapter of Saint Assaph,
earnestly requiring them to elect for their Bishop, one John of Lincoln a
Friar Preacher, and Confessor to the Earl of Warrien.

I find reported in the Chronicle of Wales, Ephraimi
that one Ephraim should die Bishop of Lanelwy the year 1332. If any such
were about this time, it must needs be somewhat later, I guess it might be
mistaken for 1352.

It appears then by a Record in the Tower, Henry.
the first year of Richard the second, that one Henry was Bishop of Saint
Assaph in the time of Edward the third, and it seems he should be next
predecessor to John Treuor that follows.

Io. Treuor.
The said Ephraim and Henry (if there places be not mistaken) sat so short a
time, as they were not thought worthy the mentioning. For I find in the
Register of Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury, the examination of a witness
taken in April 1357. where it is affirmed by one that took upon him to know
all the Bishops of Saint Assaph for a long time, how that Eynion Bishop of
Saint Assaph died about threescore years then past, that Llewelin succeeded
him, then David, John Treuaur, by whose death (says he) the Bishopric
aforesaid is now void. And true it is, that the year 1356, he died.

Ll. ap. Madoc.
Llewelin ap Madoc ap Elis was appointed to this Bishopric by Pope Innocent
6. at A^^nib in July, 1357. and died intestate, 1375. For I find the
administration of his goods granted 8. Calend. Iun. 1376.

William de Spridlington.
William de Spridlington Deane of Saint Assaph; was consecrate May 25. 1376.
Before the time of this Bishop, the tenants of the Lordshippe of Lanelwy were
to find six laborers every working day in the year to work in the quarry,
called y Garreg goch (the red rock) or such other works as they should be
appointed to, especially for the Cathedral Church, and for every default to
pay four pence to the use of the said Church. But now upon pretense that the
Tenants were become sewer and poorer then they had been, and that the said
service and work was not so needful as in times past: This Bishop
consented that in lieu of all that service, only ten marks yearly should be
accepted. This rent to this day is called ardreth y garreg goch, the rent of
the red rock. But by what means I know not, it is now fallen from 10. marks
to 10. Nobles. He died at Altmeledin in the ninth of April, 1382.

Lau. Child.
Laurence Child a Monk of the Abbey of Battle, licentiate of the Canon Law,
succeeded in the month of August following. He died September 20. 1389.

Alexander Bach a Friar Preacher, Alex. Bach.
and Doctor of Divinity, had the jurisdiction committed unto him as Bishop,
April 6. 1390.

October 15. 1395. a second John Treuaur had the I. Treuor 2.
jurisdiction committed unto him He pronounced the sentence for the deposing
of King Richard the second, and was sent Ambassador into Spain, to show the
King th^rethe rightfulnesse of King Henry the fourth his title to the Crown of
England. Soon after his return, to wit, the year 1404. he revolted from the
said kings obedience, and betook him unto the party of Owen Glendowr. Stow
says, this man was Bishop of S. David's, which cannot be. For certain it is,
ihat Guido de Mona was then Bishop of Saint David's. And these things that I
have set down concerniug him, are delivered of him by the name of John Treuor
Bishop of S. Assaph, in Th. Walsingham and others. The year 1406. it seems he
died. For at that time (as I find) the Sea was void.

One Robert was consecrate at Lincoln by Tho. Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury, Robert.
June 28. 1411. May. 26. 1433. the Sea (as I find was void by his death.

John Low Doctor of Divinity an Cremite Friar, Ioh. Low.
was by King Henry the sixth preferred to this See, and that before the year
1439. The year 1443. he was translated to Rochester.

Raynold Peacocke Doctor of Divinity, Rayn: Peacocke.
was consecrate the 14. of June, 1444. at Croydon, and translated to Chichester
1450.

Thomas succeeded the same year, Thomas.
the twenty seven of January, 1462. and the twenty eight of January the Sea was
void.

R. Redman
Richard Redman was Bishop of Saint Assaph, 1485. (How long sooner I know not)
and translated to Exceter, 1495. It seems he did much repair the Cathedral
Church of Saint Assaph, heretofore burnt and spoiled by Owen Glendowre. His
arms fixed in diverse parts of the Church, (as upon his Se^oner the quier door,
and in the East window may seem in my judgment to import so much)

D. ap Owen
David ap Owen, first Abbot of Strat-Marchell, and after that of Conway (a very
bountiful and liberal man) was cansecrate the year 1503. and died in the
beginning of February, 1512. The Bishops house at Saint Assaph burnt down to
the ground by Owen Glendowre, he built in such sort as now it stands.

Edm. Brikhead.
Edmund Brikhead a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, was consecrate May 29.
1513. and died about the beginning of April, 1518.

H. Standish
Henry Standish a Doctor of Divinity of Cambridge, was consecrat^ at Oxford,
July 11. 1519. and sat about sixeteene years.

W. Barlow.
William Barlow Doctor of Divinity, Prior of the Canons regular at Bisham,
consecrate Feb. the 22. 1535. was translated to Saint David's in April. 1536.
afterward to Bathe and Wells, and lastly died Bishop of Chichester.

R. Parfew
Robert Parfew, alias Warbnigton, or rather Warton Bacheler of Divinity, and
Abbot of Bermondsey, a Cambridge m^n, was consecrate July 2, 1536. at Lambith,
and held the said Abbotship in Commendam. He dwelt much at Denbigh, sometimes
at Wrexham, seldom or never at Saint Assaph, and kept in great a house and
retinue, that he was feign to set out in long Leases all the lands belonging to
the Bishopric, to the great impouerishment of the same. Having sat 18.
years, anno 1554. by Queen Mary translated to Hereford.

Thomas Goldwell was cons. about the beginning of Oct. T. Goldwel
1555 and about Midsommer 1559. being the first year of Q. Elizabeth, suddenly
he left his Bishopric and secretly conuaied himself beyond sea. He died at
Rome about 20. years after. Magno conatu magnas nugas. With great suit he
obtained of the Pope for a great favor an enlargement of the patent for
pilgrimage and offering to S. Winefrides well in Flintshire.

Richard Dauies lived beyond the seas in Q. Mary's days; Ric. Dauies
returning into England primo Eliz. Ian. 21. 1559. he was cons. B. of S.
Assaph, and May 21. 1561. was translated to S. David's.

Thomas Dauies doctor of Law a Cambridge man was con. the same year, Th. Dauies
sat 12. years, and died soon after Michealmasse 1573.

William Hughes doctor of Divinity was cons. Dece. 13. 1573. and died Nou. 18.
1600. William Hughes.


William Morgan Doctor of divinity cons. Bishop of Landaff. W. Morga^.
July 20. 1595. was trans to S. Assaph, Sep. 17. 1601. He died Sept. 10. 1604.
He it was that first translated the Bible into the Welsh tongue.

Richard Parry Doctor of Divinity, Ric. Parry.
and Deane of Bangor was cons. Dec. 1604.

This Bishopric is valued in the Exchequer at 131. pound, 16. shillings,
sour pence ob. and paid to the Pope for income, only 126. ducats.

THE ARCHBISHOPS OF YORK.
1. Paulinus.
625.
NOt to say any thing of the manifold Testimonies of very credible authors who
witness, that the Faith of Christ was received in diverse particular places of
this Island presently after the asce^ision of Christ, or at least while the
Apostles yet lived; it cannot he denied, but Elentherius Bishop of Rome at the
request of Luciu then K. of Britain, sent Damianus, Faganus and other learned
Preachers to sow the seed of the Gospel here, about the year of our Lord 180
And it should seem (which our histories also witness,) that God so far
forth blessed their labors, that they not only converted many to the faith
of Christ themselves, but also left a posterity of other, which with like
painfulness continued the same doctrine in this Island, till by diverse
tyrants, they were in diverse places oppressed and consumed. Notwithstanding
whether it were that the Church by them planted had many notable wanes and
intermissions, or rather eclipses, in which the light of heavenly doctrine was
altogether darkened by great persecution, and so no Ecclesiastical history
preserved; or whether the same being preserved, was destroyed by persecutors,
scarcely any mention remains of any of their Bishops. Only of London, there
are remembered 15. Archbishops, and of York 4. The first of these, and the
first Archbishop that ever York had, our histories say was one named Sampson,
appointed by the foresaid king Lucius, the verity whereof I cannot but suspect
in regard of the name. For I find not that the names of the old Hebrews or
Christian Saints were yet in use It is then also reported that Constantius
Chlorus the Emperor appointed Taurinus Bishop of Eureux to be Archbishop
there, as also that King Arthur made choice of one Pyrannus; and lastly that
Tadiacus was the last Archbishop before the coming of the Saxons. When they
had gotten possession of this Realm, the Britons (that were the old
inhabitants) being drouen into a corner thereof (Wales and Cornewal) the rest
of England was without any knowledge or inkling of the Gospel, until the
coming of Saint Augustine. And after him a great while the North parts of this
realm remained in the darkness of their wonted ignorance, till God looking
upon them with the eye of his mercy, gave this occasion of their conversion.
Edwyn King of Northumberland, was very desirous to marry Edilburge ye sister of
Eabald king of Kent. She being not only a Christian, but a very virtuous Lady;
utterly refused to match with him so long as he was a Pagan, but signified,
that upon condition he would promise to become a Christian, she would accept
him for her husband. He answered, he could be very well content to do nothing
in prejudice of her faith; and to suffer that not only herself, but her
servants and train should practice what religion they would: And professed
with all that it upon consideration and conference with wise men, Christian
religion should seem more holy and worthier of God then his own, he would not
refuse to embrace the same. Upon these conditions Edilburge was sent unto him
to be his Queen. And least by keeping company with the Heathen people, she and
those that went with her might in time be defiled with their Paganism; it was
thought convenient to send some learned and Godly man with her, that might not
only instruct and admonish them daily, but also minister the Sacraments unto
them, yea, and preach the Gospel unto Infidels. Paulinus a reverend man was
made choice of, who^ they thought good to consecrate Archbishop of York, which
was done by Iustus Archbishop of Canterbury the 21. day of July, in the year
of our Lord 625. or as some account, 622. He mindful of his vocation, as soon
as he came into the country, labored diligently to win souls unto Christ,
but without any profit at all a great while: Regis ad exemplum totus componitur
orbis.


So long as the King remained obstinate, little good was to be done with the
rest of the people. Him therefore he often exhorted to embrace Christ; and
prevailed at last so far with him, as he promised to do it, if it might
please God to send him victory against Guichelm King of the West Saxons, that
had conspired his death. This victory being obtained according to his desire;
He yet kept not promise, but delayed the matter, under pretense of persuading
his Nobles first to be content therewith; And longer still he would have
delayed it, had not God by Paulinus put him in mind of a vision, he had seen
long since (as Beda reports) and it is this. Elfridus that reigned over the
Northumbers next before him, sought nothing more then the death of this Edwin,
to whom indeed the Crown of right appertained. He therefore slying from his
enemy, ranged up and down in many Countries, and that in the most secret
manner he might, till at last he came unto Redwald King of the East Angles,
humbly beseeching him that he would save his life by sheelding him from
Edilfrid his cruel enemy. The king bid him welcome, and promised to fulfill his
request. Nothwithstanding which his promise, being offered a great sum of
money by Edilfrid to betray him, and threatened with war, if he condescended
not unto him; he yielded at last, and determined to gratists him therein, though
contrary to his word and faith given. This resolution of the Kings being
understood by a companion of Edwins, he called him out of his bed late in the
night, told him how the world went, and bid him shift for himself; whereunto
he answered courageously, that for his part he would not first break with
the king; if the king esteemed so little of his honor as to sell it for money,
better it was for him to dye by the appoitment of him that he knew loved him
(though he loved money better) then by the appointment of his deadly enemy,
whom by flying he well saw he could no longer avoid. Hereupon his companion
departed from him, leaving him very pens^ue, sitting without door upon a
stone. Soon after he was gone, Edwyn espied one coming toward him that he
knew not, who demanding of him why he sat there at that time of the night,
other men being asleep? What is that unto you says Edwyn whether I spend the
night within door or without? Heereunto the other answered, think not my
friend that I am ignorant of thy sadness, and the cause of thy present grief,
I know them very well: But tell me (quoth he) what reward would thou give
unto him that should rid thee of all this care and trouble, and persuade
Redwald neither to hurt thee himself, nor to suffer other to do it. When he
promised to do any thing in the world that lay in his power to perform, the
other added; what if he should also promise thee the kingdom due unto thee,
and the overthrow of thine enemies that seek thy life; yea and moreover that
thou shall be the mightiest king, not only of all thy progenitors, but of all
the Saxons that ever were in this Isle? Hereunto he answered in effect as
before, he would do his best to requite so great a benefit. Why then (quoth
the other, and withal laid his hand upon Edwyns head) when all these things
shall come to pass, and that thou shall be showed a more excellent way to
direct the course and manner of thy life, then ever was imparted unto any of thy
predecessors; Remember by this token (of laying my hand on thy head) to follow
without delay the directions that shall be given thee. This having said, he
vanished away to the great wonder and astonishment of Edwyn, who had not sat
there long; but his companion before mentioned, came running forth unto him
with great joy, and told him that Redwald by the persuasion of the Queen had
altered his determination, and was resolved (whatsoever came of it) to stand to
his word, and to be true unto him. To make short, God so moved his heart that
he was not only content to defend Edwyn as heretofore; but also gathered
suddenly a great army, and going in person against Edilfrid, he overcame and
slew him in the field: whereby it came to pass, that Edwyn with one consent of
all his subjects was made king. Now this vision (says Beda) God revealed unto
Paulinus the Archbishop, who coming unto Edwyn the king, at a time when he
chanced to sit alone, deliberating with himself what religion it were best to
follow; he stepped unto him, and laying his right hand upon his head, asked him
if he knew that token? Presently the King forgetting all Pri^ncely majesty,
fell down trembling at poor Paulinus feet, and said he knew it very well, in
so much as, hereafter he would follow his direction (for matters of Religion)
in all things. The King being thus won unto Christ, and having received his
badge and cognizance by Baptism; the rest of the nobility first, and then the
commonalty gave diligent ear unto the Bishops preaching, and were converted
daily in great numbers. It is said that for 36. days together Paulinus the
Archbishop never rested one moment, but either instructed the people by
preaching that flocked continually about him; or else imparted Christ unto them
in Baptism, which he ministered in the open fields and rivers, Churches being
not yet built. King Edwin against the time of his own Baptism, had caused a
little Church to be erected of boords and timber in the City of York, and
dedicated the same to S. Peter. Afterward he laid the foundation of a very
stately building round about the wooden Church, which (he being taken away by
untimely death) his successor Oswald finished. Sedwall king of Wales, and Penda
of Mercia or Mid England came against this good king, and (God in his secret
judgment permitting the same) overthrew him in the field and slew him. The
Country by reason here of being full of trouble, Paulinus (that saw he might
not with safety abide any longer there) six years after his coming thither,
returned by water into Kent again, and there was entreated to take on him the
government of the Sea of Rochester then void. He sat there 13. years, and
October 10. 644. was called away to receive the glorious reward of his blessed
labors, 19. years, two months and 21. days after his first consecration: He
ws a man of a tall stature (as Beda) describes him) a little stooping,
blacke-haired, leane-faced, his nose thin and hooked, of a countenance both
terrible and very reverend. He was buried after his death in his Cathedral
Church of Rochester.

2. Cedda.
AFter the departure of Paulinus, 666
the Church of York was twenty (some say thirty) years without a Pastor by
reason of the continual wars and other troubles that happened by the
persecution of Pagans. Aidanus, Finnanus Colmanus and Tuda, succeeding one
another in the Bishopric of Lindisfarne, governed all Northumberland as well
as they could during the time of this troublesome vacancy. At last Egfrid king
of Northumberland appointed one Wilfride unto the Sea of York, sending him to
Agelbert Bishop of Paris (sometime of Winchester) to receive consecration of
him; where Wilfrid staying very long, and not giving any hope of speedy
return, the same king enforced Cedda (a very holy man) without all right unto
the same to thrust himself into the place due to Wilfrid. Having carefully
attended that charge not pertaining to him the space of three years, he was
admonished by Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury that he was not rightly and
lawfully called to that See, whereupon he presently forsook it, and was made
by means of the same Theodorus Bishop of Lichfield.

3. Wilfridus.
THis Wilfrid was borne in the North Country of mean parentage. 666
The time of his Childhood he lost in his Fathers house, being untaught until
he was fourteen years of age; at what time not sustaining the frowardnes of
his stepmother, he went abroad to seek his fortune as they say. And first, he
light upon certain Courtiers that had been beholding unto his Father for
diverse courtesies. By them he was presented unto the Queen, as a child for wit
and beauty not unfit to do her service; She by questioning sound the
inclination of the boy, that he was desirous to become a Scholar. Therefore
she sent him to one Cedda, that of a Councellor and Chamberlain to the King,
had become a Monk at Lindisfarne, whether it might not be the man before
mentioned, I discern not. By him he was diligently instructed, and being very
sharpe-witted, profited wonderfully under him. At that time there was a great
contention in the Church about the observation of Easter; whereof this youth
being desirous to be fully informed, determined to go to Rome, and study
there a while. By means of Eanfled the Q. aforesaid, and Ercombert K. of kent,
he was furnished for this voyage and sent along with one or two other. In the
way he fell acquainted with Wulsinus Archbishop of Lions, who made very much of
him, and stayed him with him a time, to the great increase of his knowledge.
Continuing then no long time at Rome, in his return homeward, he was ordered
by the Archbishop of Lions aforesaid, who also adopted him to be his son. He
meant not to have returned into his own Country, but that this Archbishop was
taken from him being murdered by Brunechildus the Queen that had cruelly
slain 9. other Bishops before. Presently upon his return home, king Egfrid
gave him a house and maintenance, and many noblemen admiring much his learning
and eloquence, bestowed diverse things upon him; at last with great applause and
liking of al men, he was chosen Bishop, and sent into France, where he was
consecrate by 12. other Bishops: for he refused to take consecration at the
hands of the Scottish bishops, that were counted schismatiques in not agreeing
with the church of Rome concerning the time and observation of Easter. Beyond
the seas he stayed somewhat longer then he needed, being delighted with the
company of many learned men of that country: and when he would have returned,
by tempest of weather he was driven into far countries, where he wandered a
long time. Coming home, and finding another man in his place, he lived a while
a private life. In which mean space he was often invited by Wulfher king of
Merceland unto the Bishopric of Lichfield. In the end Cedda being removed
(as before is said) he settled himself at York, and posted Cedda to Lichfield.
Then, the first thing he went about was to finish his Cathedral Church left
imperfect by Paulinus, and since his departure very much decayed (for the roof
was fallen, and the walls in many places ruinous) this his Church I say he
repaired, and finished, mending the walls, covering it with lead, glasing the
windows, and moreover beautified the same with many goodly ornaments. He was
so greatly beloved of al sorts of people for his gentleness, affability and
liberality, as many men living, but more at their death (especially Clergy
men) would put their goods and children into his hands; the one assuring
themselves of a faithful keeper, the other of a discreet and conscionable
dispender. Hereby it came to pass that in short time he became exceeding
rich, having many seruitors to attend upon him, and great store of plate, and
other houshould-^tuffe very sumptuous. The report whereof coming to the ears
of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury: it put him in mind of the greatness of
that Dioces and the ability of the Country to maintain more Bishops. Wherefore
he went about to appoint two or three other Bishops under him. Which when
Wilfride obstinately refused, and the other ceased not to urge very earnestly;
he appealed unto the Pope, and went unto him in person. Some report (I think
untruly) that he went about to persuade the Queen to forsake her husband, and
betake her self to a monastery; and that the king being greatly displeased
heerwith, first sought to diminish his authority by making more Bihops, and
afterward made diverse complaints unto the Pope against him, seeking to have
him deprived. Whosoever caused it, certain it is, that to the Pope he
traveled. In passing of the Sea, he was driven by a contrary wind into
Frizia, and stayed there all winter preaching the Gospel (never heard of in
that country before) unto the king and people, whom before his departure he
converted unto Christ. The Pope was then at the Council of Constance; where,
both by him and his Council it was ordered, that the state of the Bishopric
of York should not be altered without Wilfrids own consent. But Egfride the
king so favored Theodores devise, as Wilfride at his return perceived well, he
must either yield unto it or forsake the country Heerin methinks he was to
blame: Not enduring to take a repulse in a matter he had traveled so much in;
He rather chose to leave Bishopric, country and all, and to live in poverty
and exile. He went into Sussex, and there indeuouring to convert the people of
that country unto the faith of Christ, became their first Bishop, and laid the
foundations of a Cathedral church, the Sea being afterward removed to
Chicester. See more hereof in Chicester. After ten years banishment, K.
Edfrid dying, Alfrid that succeeded him sent for Wilfride and desired him to
return to this See of York: which he did. But after five years, the king
fell out with him, and forced him to Rome again. There purging himself of all
the accusations laid against him by the king, he obtained the Popes letters in
favor of him; by means whereof, and intercession of many friends, with much
ado, at last he was restored once more unto his first charge; in which after
this his last restitution, he lived peaceably the space of four years, and
died then, being seventy six years of age, October the twelfth the year 711.
forty five years after his first consecration. He was buried in the monastery
of Rippon which himself built: The Church there being fallen down for want of
reparation, Odo Archbishop of Cant. removed his bones to Cant. about the year
940. Many other things are at large reported of him by Beda, lib. 5. cap. 20
Amongst the rest his Epitaph there set down I thought good to insert.
Wilfridus hic magnus requiescit corpore praesul,
Hanc domino qui aulam ductus pietatis amore
Fecit, and eximio sacrauit nomine Petri,
Curclaues coeli Christus dedit arbiter orbis,
Atque auro ac ^^rio deuotus vestijt ostro.
Quinetiam sublime crucis radiante metallo
Hic posuit trophaeum, nec non quatuor auro
Scribi Euangelij praecepit in ordine libros,
Ac thecam ^ rutilo his condignam condidit auro.
Paschalis qui etiam solemnia tempora cursus
Catholici ad iustum correxit dogma Canonis.
Quem statuere patres, dubioque errore remoto.
Certa suae genti ostendit moderamina ritus;
Inque Iocis istis monachorum examina cr^bra
Colligit, ac monitis cauit quae regula patrum
Sedulus instituit, multisque domique forisque,
Iactatus nimium per tempora longa periclis,
Quin decies ternos post quam egit episcopus annos,
Transijt and gaudens caelestia regna petiuit,
Dona Jesus, Grex vt pastoris call sequatur.
See more of this Wilfride in Theodore of Canterbury.

4. Bosa.
AFter the first departure of Wilfrid from York, Theodore proceediug in his
intended platform, divided his Dioces into 4. placing one Eata at Hagustald
whom afterward he removed to Lindisfarne (another of his new erections)
appointing Tumbert to succeed him, in the Province of the Picts Trumwyn, and
lastly in the ancient See of York Bosa. At the return of Wilfrid, Bosa was
feign to give place as also John that had succeeded Eata (dead in the mean
time.) Wilfrid being expelled the second time, they were both restored.) Before
then the second restitution of Wilfrid, Bosa died, and John succeeded him. This
John, Wilfrid would not displace but contented himself in his latter time with
the government of Hagustald. Bosa has the report of a very meek and devout
man. He lived ten years after his consecration, and dying, was the first
Archbishop that was buried in York

5 John.
THis John (called afterward Saint John of Beuerley, 687
) was a gentleman born of a very good house, and brought up first under Hilda
that famous Abbess, then under Theodore the fifth Archbishop of Canterbury,
who also preferred him to the Bishopric of Hagustald; and was sometimes a
student in the university of Oxford. He always had a reputation of a
wonderful holy man, and Beda reports many miracles to be done by him, lib.
5. cap. 2.3.4.5. and 6. as the curing of diverse folks desperately sick, by
prayer; opening the mouth of a dumb man, etc. which things either they were
true. or Beda was much to blame: For he not only lived in his time and
Dioces. But knew him and received the order of priesthood at his hand. Waxing
very old, and having been a Bishop now 33. years, 8. months and 13. days,
with the consent of his Clergy, he resigned and procured another Wilfred his
Chaplain to be consecrate in his room. After which he lived privately at
Beuerley, in the College there built and founded by himself for Priests, and
dying the seventh day of May, the year 721. was buried in the Porch of the
Church belonging to that College. In a Convocation held at London the year
1416. the foresaid day of his death was appointed to be kept holy day yearly in
memorial of him. Amongst many privileges granted by diverse kings unto the
College of Beuerley for his sake, it is remembered that king Athelstan made it
a Sanctuary, and placed a certain chair of stone in the Church there, upon
which he caused this inscription to be engraven, Haec seeds lapidea dicitur
Freedstooli. pacis Cathedra ad quam reus fugiendo perueniens, omni moda^ habet
securitatem. This chair of stone is called Freedstoole, that is the stool of
freedom, unto which who so comes, has all manner of security.

6 Wilfridus.
THe foresaid Wilfride sat 15. years (as some say) others deliver but 11. and
that he died the year, 731.

7 Egbert.
^71
AFter him succeeded Egbert the brother of K. Eadbert, he sat 36. years, and
died Nou. 19. 766. This man by his own wisdom and the authority of his
brother, amended greatly the state of his Church and See; He procured the
Archiepiscopall pall to be restored to his Church again, and erected a famous
library in York, (burnt down to the ground in the time of K. Stephen) which
he furnished plentifully with an infinite number of excellent books. This Library
is honorably mentioned by Flaccus Albinus or Alcuinus (sometime keeper of the
same, but then schoolmaster unto Charles the great) in an Epistle to the
Church of England in these words. Date mihi eruditionis libellos quales in
patria mea Anglia per industriam magistri mei Egberti habui, and remittam vobis
aliquos ex pueris nostris vt excipiant inde necessaria and reuchant in Franciam
flores Britanniae, and non sit tantum in Eboraco hortus conclusus, sed etiam in
Turone emissiones Paradisi, etc. Neither was this man only a favorer of
learning in others, but himself also was very learned, and writ many things, a
Catalogue whereof you may see in Bale. He was buried at York by his brother
the king in the church Porch.

2 Caena, alias Albertus, alias Adelbert.
ALbert, called by Florentius, Caena, sat after Egbertus 14. years. For he
was cons. together with Al^mund Bishop of Hagustald April 24 767. and died at
Chester the year 781.

9 Eanbaldus.
COEna yet living (whether he resigned or took him to him for a Co^^i^tor,
780.
it appears not) Eanbald, being an old man, was consecrate Archbishop, and
lived after his consecration 17 years. He died in a monastery called Atlete or
Edete, the year 796. and was buried in his own Church.

10 Eanbaldus. 2.
ANother Eanbaldus became Archbish. after him, a priest of the Church of York,
and was cons. in the monastery of Socaberg Nou. 19. 797. 797.
Before the end of which year, he called a Synod or convocation of his Clergy
at Pincauhalch in which he caused diverse things amiss to be reformed. What
time he died, or how long he sat, I find not. One of these two (I know not
well which) is much commended of Leland and Bale, for a man of great learning
and estimation.

11 Wulsius.
A Little time Wulsius enjoyed his honor, and died the year 832.

12 Wimundus.
831
WImundus succeeded Wulsius, and sat 17. years. He died (as Matthew
Westminster reports) the year 854.

13 Wilferus.
854
AFter him Wilferus was Archbishop a long time, 46. years and upwards. The
year 873. his Diocesans drove him out of the country together with Egbert
their king who went unto Burrhede King of Mercia, and of him were honorably
entertained, till that the year following, K. Egbert died, and by the help of
king Ricsinus his successor, Wulferus was called home again. He deceased
about the year of our Lord 900. or as Matthew Westminster has it (whose
computation I find very uncertain) 895. In his time the Danes made such
havoc in the North country, as a great while after the Archbishopricke was
little worth, and was feign often times to be mended with the Commendam of
Worceter.

14 Ethelbald.
895
Then followed these: Ethelbalde.

15 Redward.
And after him Redward, whom Stubs calls Lodeward.

16 Wulstanus.
BY the favor of K. Athelstan, Wulstanus was then preferred to this See: In
whose time the same K. gave unto the Church of York Agmundernes which he
bought of the Danes. This Bishop was convict of a heinous crime forgetting the
dutiful affection that he ought to bear unto Edred his king, if for no other
cause, yet for Athelstane his brothers sake that preferred him; forgetting his
oath and allegiance unto the same king being his natural Prince; yea,
forgetting that he was either an Englishman or a christian: He was not ashamed
to clean unto the Danes, and favor them, a heathen people; and such as sought
not only to destroy his country, but also to root out Christian Religion. For
this treason deserving a thousand deaths) he was only committed to prison the
year 952. and a year after enlarged again. This is the report of William
Malmesbury, Matthew Westminster says, he was punished in this sort for killing
diverse Citizens of Thetford in revenge of the death of one Adelm an Abbot, whom
they had slain and murdered without cause: two years after his enlargement,
he died upon S. Stephens day, the year 955. He was buried at a place called
Undalum near Stanford.

17 Oskitell.
OSkitell then succeeded, a man of good life and well learned, 955
who governed his See laudably 19. years, and died the year 971.

18 Athelwold.
NExt followed Athelwold, that having as it were a taste only of this honor,
972
was quickly weary of it, and after a very short time gave it over, choosing
rather to live obscurely, so he might live quietly.

19 Oswald.
971.
WIthin the compass of one year, viz the year 971. York had three
Archbishoppes; O^kitell that died, Athelwold that resigned, and this Oswald.
He was near of kin unto O^kitell his predecessor; but nearer unto Odo
Achbishoppe of Canterbury, being his brothers son. By his means he was
first made Canon of Winchester, after Deane: for at that time, the Cathedral
Church of Winchester had no monks, but maintained a company of secular Priests,
whereof many were married men. Perceiving the monks only were now in price, and
other Clergy men little esteemed; by the advice of his Uncle he left his
place in Winchester, and traveled to Flor^ake in France, where he became a
monk. Having continued there some five or six years, his uncle writ often
very importunately unto him to come home; but could never prevail, till he
sent him word of his last sickness, whereof soon after he died. Oswald then
desirous to have seen him once more, made haste into England, but came too
late; the old Archbishop was dead first. Oskitell then his other kinsman
gave him entertainment, till that by the means of Saint Dunstan, he was
preferred to the Bishopric of Worceter, viz. the year 960. two years after
his arrival in England. He built there the church dedicated to the blessed
Uirgin Mary, hard by the Church of Saint Peter, and placed monks in the same;
to the end that the priests of Saint Peter's Church being continually disgraced
by the people (that very much reverenced the monks) might become a weary of
their places. He was not deceived of his expectation, the people stocked all
unto the monks and left the Priests of S Pe^ers alone. Partly for shame, and
partly for grief thereof (being peradventure molested otherwise) the most of
them departed thence and the rest were feign to take coules unto them and
become monks. The Sea of York being void, K. Edgar careful to place a fit man
in the north country (which was then very rude and barbarous) and thinking none
so fit as Oswald^ made offer of the same unto him: and when he seemed loath to
forsake Worceter, was content he should hold both. This man was the first
founder of the Abbey of Ramsey in the Isle of Ely, and a very liberal
benefactor unto the Abbey of Floriake where he was brought up; A great patron
of Monks, and a terrible persecutor of married Priests, whereof there were many
in those days. He died at Worceter suddenly, having washed the feet of
certain poor men, (as daily he accustomed) After which kneeling down to
pray, without any sickness precedent, he gave up the Ghost. William Malm-bury
(who reports this) adds, that the day before his death, he told diverse of
his friends that he should die. He was very learned, and left some testimonies
thereof in writing, not yet perished: for the integrity also of his life and
conversation, he was much reverenced. The greatest fault I find in him is, that
he was very earnest in setting forth that doctrine of Devils that debarreth men
of lawful marriage. The time of his departure was February 27. an. 992. 32.
years after his first consecration, when he had enjoyed York twenty two
years. He was buried at Worceter in the church himself had built. Many
miracles are reported to have been done at his tomb, in regard whereof the
posterity would needs make him a Saint, and his next Successor bestowed a
costly shrine upon him.

20 Aldulfe.
ALdulfe Abbot of Peterborough, succeeded Oswald in both his Sees, 993.
viz. of York and Worceter, a holy and reverend man (says Malmesbury) and one
that striued with his predecessor in liberality toward the monastery of
Floriake. He died May 6. 1002. and was buried in Saint Mary's Church at
Worceter.

21 Wulstan. 2.
ANother Wulstan then by the favor of the King Knute, 1003.
held also both the said Sees of York and Worceter: for which cause Malmsbury
finds great fault with him, that in Aldui^ and Oswald liked it well enough
And all the exceptious he takes against him is this. That he was not of so
holy a profession as they; that is, he was not a Monk. Having been Archbishop
20. years. He died May 28. the year 1023. and was buried at Ely.

22. Alfricus Puttoc.
1023
ONe Leo^fius then obtained Worceter, Alfricus Puttoc Provost of Winchester
being made Archbishop of York. He was very angry with Worceter men, for not
admitting him to that See also, which three of his predecessors had held in
Commendam before him. And in revenge of this repulse, caused Hardeknute the
king (with whom he could no much.) At a time when they had bin somewhat
backward in payments to be made unto him, to ^ire that goodly City. He is
blamed also for another barbarous part of the same king, that caused the dead
body of his own brother Harold to be dug up, beheaded, and then cast into
the Thames. This they say was done by Alfricus the Archbishops counsel. He
bestowed much money upon the College of Beuerley, first in a new and sumptuous
shrine for the body of S. John his predecessor, and then in purchasing lands to
increase the revenues thereof, viz. some at Milton, other at Holme, and again
at Frideiffhorp. Moreover he built there a high steeple, and furnished it with
two great belles, like unto which he gave 2. other of the same mould unto
Southwell, and two unto Stow. He died at Southwell the year 1050. and was
buried at Peterborough.

23 Kinsius.
A Chaplain of King Edward the Confessor one Kinsius succeeded Alfrike. 1050
He built very much at Beuerly, to wit, the Hall, the Church, and diverse other
edifices, gave many books and ornaments to Shyrstone, and other Churches of
his Dioces, sat ten years, died at York, 1060. December 22. and was buried at
Peterborough where he had sometimes lived a Monk.

24 Aldredus.
The Sea of York falling void by the death of Kinsius, 1061
Aldredus that being first a Monk of Winchester, then Abbot of Tauestocke, was
consecrate Bishop of Worceter, the year 1046. making his way by money and
bribes liberally bestowed amongst Courtiers, found a means to circumuent and
abuse the simplicity of king Edward the Confessor, and by alleging the
example of his predecessors that had held Worceter in Commendam with York,
obtained license of him to hold them both, wherein so holy a man as S. Edward me
thinks should have been more precise. Having prevailed thus far, he went to
Rome for his pall, together with the Earl Tosti Brother to the Queen, Giso
after Bishop of Wells, and Walter of Hereford. The Pope at that time was Nic.
the second, a great enemy to simony, which in this age began to grow very rife.
Whether he had hard somewhat of Aldredes bribing in obtaining this preferment,
or whether he ^isht it out by strict examination (which is delivered) he not
only re^used to establish him in his Archbishopricke, but also deprived him of
the Bishopric he had before. Homewards they came together in one company,
but with diverse affections; Giso and Walter joyful ^or the honor newly done
unto them: for being sound men not only learned, but of good conversation, and
not culpable of any corruption: they were consecrate at Rome with all favor
and honor that might be: Tosti the Earl pensive for his friend, whose bribes
he had received to the others overthrow; and lastly, Aldred almost desperate for
so great a calamity, as was fallen upon him. See the power of Almighty God,
that not only raises as it were in a moment from the bottom of misery unto
the top of happiness: but also does it by such me^ns oftentimes as we think
more likely to cast us down farther, then to relieve us any thing at al. These
jolly companions, traveling from Rome toward the Alps; by the way were
encountered with a company of good fellows (in a happy hour for Aldred) that
spoiled them of all they had about them, leaving them neither horse nor money,
nor any thing money-worth but their apparel. So there was no remedy but back
to Rome they must again to furnish them a new for their journey. There Tosti
with open mouth exclaimed against the Pope saying, there was no reason that
far remote nations should so greatly stand in awe of his excommunications,
which thieves and robbers cared not a half penny for, but contemned openly and
derided even under his nose: that amongst poor Priests, he would play Rex, but
let rebellious varlets do what they list. If by his means (quoth he) our
goods be not restored to us again, let him give us leave to say, that by his
fault and misgouernment we have lost them, and we hope that our King will
have such c^nsideration of us, as in the end this journey (when he heare^h of^)
shall prove a greater loss to the pope then to us For my part, I will not fail
to certify him of the truth, and to importune him daily for recompense, which
out of the tribute the Pope has of England will soon be made. And except he
deserve it better, why he should have any at all, I see not. Partly, by means
of these threats, partly in commiseration and pi^^y, partly by importunity of
suite, Aldred at last obtained his Archbishopricke, and had his pall given him
upon condition that he should leave Worceter: into which See at his return he
wrought Wulstan, but hampered him so, as he retained almost all the commodity
to himself, leaving Wulstan only 12. manors to maintain his state. In
defense of which dealing he alleged, that the lands and possessions of the
Arcbishopricke were so wasted and spoiled by the Danes and other in the time of
Wulfere, and since that they yielded little or no profit. It could be
altogether true: for Alfrike and Kinsius (as before I have shown) built and
purchased much, having no Commendam at all. This Aldred likewise built much: A
Hall for the Canons to dine in together a York, and another at Southwell; At
Beuerley the Hall begun by his predecessors, and le^^ imperfect, he finished;
the Presbitery there he raised from the very foundation, as also a goodly
Church at Gloucester, even the same which is now the Cathedral Church. This
likewise is commended in him, that whereas the clergy of those times were very
indecently appareled nothing differing from Lay men, he brought all the
ministry of his Province to an uniform and seemly kind of habit. It is also
recorded of him that he was King Edwards Ambassador in Germany for a whole
year: and that the year 1058. he made a voyage unto Jerusalem, through
Hungary, a thing that no Archbishop of this Realm (as Houeden notes) did ever
attempt before him: Not many years after his return King Edward the Confessor
died, and Harold inuading the dignity royal no way due unto him, was crowned
by Aldred. William the Conqueror also refusing to receive the Crown at
Stigands hands (whom he called the usurper of Canterbury) desired him to
perform that solemnity, which he did, requiring first an oath of him to
defend the Church, minister justice (and amongst other things) to use
Englishmen as favorably as Normans. This oath it seemed unto Aldred the king
had broken, and therefore (like a courageous Prelate) he stuck not to thunder
out an excommunication against him, saying, that now worthily he had cursed,
whom once unworthily he had blessed. This bold prank being reported unto the
King, incensed him very much at first; but thinking better of it, he determined
to give fair words a while, and so sent some to entreat for his absolution.
These messe^gers came too late; for the Bishop being troubled much in mind
after the performance of that action, and either amassed with fear of what
might happen after it, or overcome with grief and repentance of that he had
done; never could be merry after, add so by conceit was cast into a di^ease
whereof he died. September 11. 1069. This is the report of W. Malmsbury. Others
say (namely Florentius Wigorn) that he was so grieved with the coming in of a
Navy of the Danes, as he prayed God to take him out of this life, that he
might not see the slaughter and spo^le which he thought they would make; And
that this grief was the cause of his death. He was more reverenced afterward
then while he lived a great deal. No English man succeeded him in many years
after; And the Normans being odious unto the people they gladly reprehended all
their actions, and comparing them with such English Bishops as they could
remember, made most favorable report of them. One thing also increased his
credit much: Vrsus Earl of Worceter had built a Castle there to some
prejudice of the monks, insomuch as the ditch of the said Castle empaired a
little of the Churchyard. Aldred went unto the Earl (having before admonished
him to right the wrong) and having demanded of him whether it were done by his
appointment (which he could not deny) looking steadfastly upon him, he used
these words; Hightest thou Vrse? Have thou Gods curse and mine, and of all
hallowed heads, except thou take away this Castle; and know thou assuredly,
that thy posterity shall not inherit the land and inheritance of Saint Mary.
This his curse seemed to take effect; for Vrsus died soon after, and Roger his
son a very small time enjoying his fathers honor, lost the same and was
feign to fly the realm for killing an officer of the Kings. Thus much for
Aldred, who after his death was buried in his own Church.

25 Thomas.
1070. W. Con. 5.
THe King then appointed Thomas a Cannon of Bayon to be his Successor, a Norman
by birth, but he was brought up altogether in the schools of the S^xons in
France except a little time he spent in Spain. He was the son of a Priest
(a married Priest I take it) and brother unto Sampsom Bishop of Worceter, whose
son Thomas succeeded, afterward this Thomas in this See of York: Presently
upon his return home after travel, he became Chaplain unto Odo Bishop of
Bayon William Conquerours half brother, who made him Treasurer of Bayon, and
then preferred him unto the service of his brother the King. He was a man very
learned, gentle both in countenance and words, of a very sweet and amiable
behavior, chaste and of a goodly personage, being in his youth beautiful, in
his latter time well colored, and his hair, both head and beard as white as
snow. At his first entrance he had somewhat to do with Lanfranke Archbishop of
Canterbury, unto whom he would not make profession of obedience never (as he
alleged) before that time required. And indeed before the coming of Will. the
Conqueror (says one) the two Metropolitanes of England, were not only in
authority, dignity and office, but also in number of suffragan Bishops equal.
But at this time (says he) they of Canterbury persuaded the new king, that
York ought to be subject unto their See, and that it was for the good and
safety of the King, that the church thereof should be obedient principally
unto one, for that otherwise one might set the crown upon one man's head, and
the other do as much for some body else. This controversy is more at large
debated in Canterbury. The end for that time was, that Thomas ouerborne by the
Archbishop of Canterbury Lanfranke and the King (who favored him) was feign
to appeal unto Rome; both of them being there in person before the Pope, they
fell (as commonly it happens in like cases) from the chief point, into by
matters and articling one against another. What Thomas laid against Lanfranke I
find not. And all that Lanfranke had to say against him, was, that he was
Priests son (magnum scilicet crimen) and that the king for his faithful
service had promi^ed him a Bishopric before his coming into England. These
were so great matters in the Popes judgment as Thomas must be deprived of his
King and Crosier and not restored to them but by the entreaty of Lanfranke. As
for the matter of Primacy, he le^t it to the ordering of the King and Bishops
o^ England, who forced Thomas to yield, making then his repair to York, he
found the whole state of his Dioces (the City and Church especially) most
miserable. The Danes before mentioned coming against the city; the Norma^s
that held the Castle, thought good to burn certain houses near it, lest they
might be a furtherance unto the enemy. This ungentle fire would not be
entreated to stay just where they would have it, but proceeding farther then
his commission, destroyed the monastery and Church of S. Peter, and in ^^ne the
whole City. Before the fire was out, the Danes came, and took both City and
Castle by force, putting to the sword, all the Normans they sound there (to the
number of three thousand) saving none alive, but one William Mallet, his wi^e,
children and a few other. Soon after the destruction of this goodly City, the
King came into these parts with a puissant army against the Danes, not ceasing
to make all manner of spoil, as if he had been in the enemies Country. So
between the Danes and the Normans, such havoc was made, as all the land from
the great river of Humber, unto the river of Tine, lay waste, and not inhabited
by any man for the space of nine years after. In the Church of York there
were only three Cannons left, the rest being all either dead, or fled away,
and they had left unto them neither house to put their heads in, nor any good
means how to live and maintain themselves. All these faults this industrious
Bishop endeavored to amend. First he new covered and repaired his Church as
well as he might to serve the turn for a time, But afterward he pulled down
all the old building, and erected from the very foundation a new, to wit the
Minster that now stands. His Cannons dispersed abroad, he called home again,
and took order they should be reasonably provided for. He built them a hall
and a dorter, and appointed one of them to be the Provost, and governor of the
rest. Also he bestowed certain Manors and lands upon them, and caused other
to be restored that had bin taken from them. And the twelve Manors taken from
Worceter, the King (pe^swaded thereunto by Lanfranke) caused him to render
back again. The Church then having continued in this state a good while, I
know not by whose advise, the Archbishop thought good to divide the land of
Saint Peter's Church into Prebends, and so to allot a particular portion unto
every Canon, whereas before they lived together upon the common charges of the
Church at one Table, much in like sort, as fellows of houses do now in the
Uniuersities. At the same time also he appointed a Dean, a Treasurer, and a
Chanter, and as for the Chancellorshippe it was founded of him before. The
Church newly built by him he furnished with books, and all kind of ornaments
necessary; but his special care was to replenish the same, and the rest of
his Dioces with learned and honest men, with whom he was w^nt conti^^ally to
confer and reason (sometime with one, and sometime with another) partly for
his own exercise, and partly to see what was in them, and to raise them up
to a diligence in increasing their knowledge. Himself was very learned, and
writ diverse things both in prose and verse. He was also a very good Musician,
and could not only sing, but play very well upon the Organs, and did set many
songs. Having crowned King Henry the first, August 5. 1100. with the help of
Maurice Bishop of London (because Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury lived then in
banishment) the 18 of November following, being Sunday, he died at Rippon, and
was buried at York, in the Minster himself had built, next unto Aldred his
predecessor. The Epitaph here following is ascribed by S^^bbs unto Thomas the
second, this man's nephew; but by diverse things in the same, I discern it to
belong unto this former Thomas, as namely by the date of his death, the
description of his person, and some other things.

Orba iacet viduata bono pastore patrono,
Vrbs Eboraca dolet, non habitura parem.
Qualia vix vni, persona, scientia, vita,
Contigerat Thomae, nobilis, alta, ^ona.
Canicies hilaris, facies, statura^ venusta,
Angelici vultus splendour and instar erat.
Hic numero modico doctrinae se^ probitatis,
Clericus omnis ^rat, vel magis omnis homo.
Haec domus and Clerus, sub tanto Praesule foelix,
Pene quod est and habet, muneris omne sui est.
Octauis igitur Martini transijt ille,
Qui pietate Deisit comes in requie.
26 Gerard.
AFter the death of Thomas Gerard nephew unto Walkelin Bishop of Winchester,
1101. Hen: 1.2.
and Chancellor of England (under William the Conqueror, and Rufus his son)
having been Bishop of Hereford no long time, he was elected unto York, but
obtained not confirmation a great while. For he refused to make profession of
obedience unto Canterbury, till being commanded by the Popes letters, he
performed the same. He sat Archbishop seven years, and almost six months,
and May 21 died suddenly in his garden at Southwell, at a time when no body was
with him. He was a good benefactor unto the Church of York: for he was a
means unto the King, the bestow the Church of Laxton upon the Chapter, and
himself having obtained of him the Churches of Dryfield, Kilne, Pockington,
Pickering, and Burgh, he gave them all likewise to the Chapter. This
notwithstanding, after his death they would not suffer him (dying so suddenly)
to be buried within their Church (hardly in the Churchyard.) So he was laid
at the entrance of the Church porch. But Thomas his Successor not enduring that
such an indignity should be offered unto an Archbishop, removed his bones into
the Church afterward, and caused them to be honorably in toombed. He was a man
of great learning, and for eloquence admirable, but somewhat too eager against
married Priests, whom by no means he could abide. Bale charge him with
sorcery and coniuration, because forsooth, that after his death, there was
found in his Chamber a Uolume of Firmicus, who writ of Astrology indeed, but
of coniuration nothing that ever I heard.

27 Thomas, 2.
^101. Hen: 1.^.
A Second Thomas succeeded, a Chaplain of the Kings, nephew unto the former
Thomas, Son unto Sampson Bishop of Worceter, and brother to Richard Bishop of
Bayon. He was a very fat man of body, and young of years, yet of so good
parts and sufficiency, as being Provost of Beuerley, he was elected unto the Sea of London, void by the death of Mauritius, which election he had scarce
accepted, and approved of, when he was called to York. Even as his
Predecessor, he was very loath to make his profession unto Canterbury. Being
required thereunto by Anselme the Archbishop: He made many excuses. Wherefore
Anselme lying very sick, and perceiving his end to be near, writ unto all
the Bishops of England, commanding them not to consecrate him before he had
made his profession, laying a terrible curse and excommunication, upon
whomsoever should ^oe it. The King after Anselmes death commanded the Bishop of
Worceter (whose son the Elect was) to consecrate him: But the Bishop his
father answered, that he would not have the curse of Father Anselme for any
worldly good. So in the end being persuaded to yield, as other had done before
him, consecration was affoorded unto him, and performed by his Father Sampson
the foresaid Bishop of Worceter (as some report by the Bishop of London) the 27
of June, 1108. This man erected two new Prebends in his Church of York, he
placed Cannons regular at Hagulstad: he gave diverse parcels of land unto the
College of Southwell, and purchased of the King the like liberties and
privileges for them, that the Prebends of York, Beuerley, and Rippon had. He
sat little above five years, and died (after a sort) a Martyr. Lying
dangerously sick, he was advertised by the Physicians, the nature of his
disease to be such, as if he used the company of a woman, he need not doubt of
his recovery: otherwise nothing was to be looked for but death. He chose rather
to die, then to pollute so high and sacred a calling with so foul and heinous
offense. So he ended his life Feb. 19. 1114. and was buried beside the former
Thomas his uncle.

28 Thurstan.
THomas the Archbishop being taken away (as before I have declared) Thurstan a
Cannon of Paul's, 1108 Hen: 1.10.
and the Kings Chaplain was chosen to succeed him. He when by no means he
could obtain consecration of Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury, without making
profession of subjection, renounced and forsook the benefit of his election.
Yet remembering himself at last, he went to Rome, to plead his cause before the
Pope, and obtained letters to the King, and Archbishop of Canterbury in
commendation of his cause. These letters preuayling nothing with the Archbishop
that would be won by no means, and Thurstan continuing as obstinate in his
resolution: The Sea remained void a long time. At last it fell out that a
Council was summoned to be held at Rhemes, Thurstan craving leave of the King
to go thither, could not obtain it before he had promised that he would not
receive consecration there. Which promise notwithstanding, so well he followed
his business, that before the coming over of other English Bishops to the
Council, he was a Bishop ready consecrate as well as they, and that by the hand
of the Pope himself. So he (and he only I think of all the Archbishops of
York since the Conquest) never made profession of subjection to the
Metropoliticall See of Canterbury. The king hearing of this dealing, was very
greatly offended with Thurstan, and forbad him England. Neither could the Pope
(meeting with the King at Gisors. and entreating for him) so pacify his
displeasure, as that he would suffer him to return. After five years
banishment, the Pope writ a very sharp letter unto the king, signifying that
he would excommunicate both him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury also, if
Thurstan were any longer kept from his See and charge. Hereupon he was called
home, and some after reconciled unto the King. This man is much praised first
for his learning, then for his great wisdom and discretion; and lastly, for
his industry and diligence, his care and painfulnesse, in well governing the
charge committed to him. He was a very kind man to his Canons, unto whom
amongst other things, he affoorded this privilege, that the yearly profit of
their Prebends, being divided into three parts, it should be lawful for any
Canon to bequeath two parts of the year next ensuing his death, allotting the
third unto the fabric, that is, toward the reparation of the Church. This
order he set down not only at York, but at Beuerley also, at Southwell, at
Rippon, and at Gloucester; all which were Colleges founded by Archbishops of
York. Moreover it is to be remembered, that he either founded a new, or
renewed and repaired eight Monasteries. One of them was that of Fountains for
white Monks, valued at the suppression in 1173. l. 7. d. ob. yearly reuenew.
In the latter end of his time, to wit, June 4. 1137, a lamentable chance befell
his Church and City. By casual fire Saint Peter's Church in York, Saint Mary's
without the walls, a hospital of his own building, and nine and thirty other
churches were destroyed, and the whole city almost utterly consumed. The year
following (to wit, 1148.) when as David king of Scots entering our borders with
a very great army, burnt and spoiled all the Country as far as the river of
Teyse: this Archbishop gathering together such power as he was able to raise
v^on the sudden, met them at Aluerton, and setting on them, slew to the
number of 12000. This of Walsingham. Howbeit Houeden says, that at the battle
he was not himself present, being hindered by sickness. Having continued in
that See six and twenty years, from the time of his election, and being a
very aged man, he determined to forsake the world, and become a Monk at
Pontfract which he did, resigning his Bishopric, January 15. 1140. His cowle
was scarce warm upon his back when death appointed him the use of another
garment. Eleven days after his resignation he died, viz. the fifth of February,
the year aforesaid.

25 Henry Murdac.
KIng Stephen had a kinsman named William (that was son unto Emma his sister
by Earl Herbert, 1142 Steph. 8.
a man no less noble in mind and virtue, then stock and lineage. He being
Treasurer of York, was now elected unto the Archbishopricke, and having
obtained consecration also, sent to Rome for his pall. His speed there, was
not so good as he looked for: By some adversaries many exceptions were taken
against him, whereby it came to pass not only his suite was put off and staid
for that time, but also Process awarded to admonish him to come thither in
person to answer the accusations laid against him. At his coming to Rome,
he found his adversaries many and mighty. And amongst the rest it is remembered
that Saint Bernard then living was very earnest against him. Eugenius the Pope
had been brought up in the Abbey of Clareuall under S. Barnard, together with
Henry Murdac, whom Williams adversaries had set up to be a suitor for his
Archbishopricke. The Pope being thus carried away with the persuasion of his
old acquaintance, and some show of matter, was content to deprive William, and
to place Henry Murdac in his room, whom he caused to be consecrate presently,
and sent him home into England with his Pall. King Stephen hearing this news,
was much grieved with the disgrace of his nephew, which all men judged
undeserved. Therefore he stood upon terms with the new Archbishop, and
required him to swear unto him fealty in some extraordinary manner, and when
he denied, easily took occasion of displeasure against him. The townsmen of
York that loved William exceedingly for his gentleness and virtuous behavior
amongst them; hearing how the king was affected; refused to receive Murdac into
their City. For this resistance he suspended them: which notwithstanding,
Eustach the kings son, commanded service to be said as at all other times
was accustomed. By means hereof, as also by reason that the Kings officers
were very terrible and heavy enemies unto all that had labored for the
deprivation of William: seditions and tumults were daily raised in the City,
amongst which a certain Archdeacon, a friend of the Archbishoppes was slain.
Two or three years these stirs continued, till at last, the Kings wrath by
means being appeased, York men were content to receive their Archbishop
peaceably. He governed very austerely the space of ten years, died October. 14.
1153. at Sherborne, and was buried in his Cathedral Church.

3. Saint William.
William immediately after his deprivation, got him home into England, and in
great patience awayting the pleasure of God, 11^3. Stephen 18.
betook himself to the Monastery of Winchester, living much in the company of
Henry the Bishop, that did first consecrate him. Now ye shall understand,
that a little before the death of Henry Murdac, Eugenius the Pope his old
companion, and Saint Bernard the Master of them both (for they had been his
scholars) were taken out of this life. William then was greatly animated by
his friends to make complaint unto Anastasius the new Pope of the wrong
heretofore done unto him, and provoked by their importunity, did so indeed,
traveling to Rome, in his own person. He had scarce commented his complaint,
when news was brought that H. Murdac also his old adversary was likewise
departed this life. Following then the advice of Gregory a Cardinal, a very
politic and subtle fellow: without any great suite he was restored unto all
his honors and had the pall delivered unto him. He was returned into England
before Easter, which he kept with his old friend Henry the Bishop of
Winchester. Hasting then home to his own Church, he was met upon the way by
Robert the Dean and Osbert the Archdeacon of York, who forbad him entrance in
the Church, and appealed unto Rome against him, which he little esteemed, but
went forward notwithstanding. All the rest of the Clergy and Commonalty received
him with wonderfullioy. Pol. Virg. reports, that passing over the river
beyond Pontfract, the number of the people that followed him to do him honor,
was so infinite, as the bridge being but of timber, brake even just as the
Bishop was over, and threw them all into the water. But the blessing and prayer
of this holy man (he supposes) prevailed so much with God, as they were all
miraculously preserved from drowning. Into his City he was honorably received,
and began a very mild and gentle government, showing no token of gall or malice
toward his ancient and most bitter enemies, but he was taken away by death
before he could perform any great matter otherwise. Soon after Whitsontide he
fell sick (as it seemed) of a kind of ague, and within a day or two after
departed this life. The common report is, that he was poisoned in the challice
at Mass. And so says the Antheme appointed to be sung upon his holyday (for
anon we shall have him a Saint) wherein are contained these verses: Eboracum
praesul redit,
Pontis casus nullum laedit
De tot turbae millibus.
In Octauis Pentecostes
Quidam malignantes hosts,
In eum pacificum,
Et vt ipsum priuent vita,
Celebrantis aconita.
Propinant in calice,
Toxicatura prophanis,
Ille potus, ille panis,
Per quem perit toxicum, etc.
Some (as namely Houeden) say that poison was con^aied into the water, in which
he should wash his hands at Mass time. But Newbrigensis confuteth both these
opinions at large, lib. 1. cap. 26. Certain it is, that not only after his
death, but also while he yet lived, in his sickness time, many suspected
vehemently that he was poisoned. Insomuch as one of his Chaplains advised him
to take some Antidotum or remedy against poison, which he also did, as one
affirms; but other say, he answered, quod antidotum humanum adijcere nollet
diuino, that he would not add the preservative of the body unto the
preservative of the soul, because forsooth he had then lately received the
Sacrament. Howsoever it was, he died very suddenly, his teeth waxing black a
little before his death, and not without some other notes and significations of
poison. The time of his departure was, June. 8. 1154. After his death he was
Canonized, and the day aforesaid, June 8. appointed unto the celebration of his
memory. Many miracles are said to have been wrought at his toombe in the
Cathedral Church of York. Believe it that list, I cannot. To say no more, me
thinks the man whose deprivation S Barnard procured, should not be worthy to be
reputed a Saint, or like to work miracles.

31 Roger.
1154. Steph. 19
NO sooner was William dead, but Robert the Deane and Osbert the Archdeacon,
laid plots for the election of Roger Archdeacon of Canterbury; and procuring
the Archbishop and the Popes Legate to become suitors for him, with much adoo
they induced the Chapter to choose him. He was consecrate by Anastasius the
Pope, about the middle of October. 1154. This man is not gracious in our sto^ies,
yet he is confessed to have been very learned, well spoken, passing wife and a
great agmenter of the state of his Bishopric, both in revenues and buildings.
The reason is, he favored not monks, by whom in a manner all our histories
are written. He was wont to say, that Thurstan never did a worse deed then in
erecting the monastery of Fountney. And that it may appear he feigned not
this mislike, you shall find in Newbridg. lib. 3. cap. 5. That a certain
religious man coming unto him when he lay upon his death bed, requested him
to confirm certain graunts made unto their house: to whom he answered, you
see my friend I am now upon the point of death, it is no time to dissemble; I
fear God, and in regard thereof refrain to satisfy your request; which I
protest I cannot do with a good conscience; A strange doctrine in those days;
but being a wise man and learned, he must needs discern, that the monks of
his time were so far swarned and degenerate from the holiness of those first
excellent men of the primitive Church, as they resembled rather any other kind
of people, then those whom they pretended in profession to succeed. Those men
(the monks I mean) to be revenged upon him, hame stamped upon him two notable
faults, one, that he preferred whipping boys unto the chief dignities of the
Church, wherein (were it true) no body can excuse him; The other thing they lay
to his charge is manifestly false; They say he was miserably covetous, and how
do they prove it? Because forsooth he left a certain deal of ready money
behind him. Many wise men think him unwise, that having ability, will not
keep somewhat beside him whatsoever happen. He was sparing also; a happy world
it were if all men were so: Bonus Seruatius facit bonum Bonifacium, (according
to the Dutch Proverb.) A good ^auer makes a well-doer. The truth whereof in
him notably appeared He built a new the Quier of the Cathedral Church, and
the vawtes of the same decayed with fire; As also his palace in York that was
burnt down to the ground when the Cathedral Church was so defaced. Again he
erected and built from the foundation, the Chapel of S. Sepulcre near the
pallace-gate upon the North side of the Cathedral Church, and impropriated 11.
benefices (5. of his own gift) to the maintenance of ministers in the same,
viz. a Sextane, 4. Priests, 4. Deacons, and 4. Subdeacons. All these things he
performed, and many other of less moment, that the monks find no fault with
at all. He continued Archbishop 27. years, and being a very aged man, sickned
at Lo^d, whether calling unto him many Abbots, Priors, and other religious
persons, by their advice he bestowed his goods, delivering out presently great
sums of money to the use of the poor, and other good purposes, as unto the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Rhemes and Roane, 500. pound a piece, and to almost
every Bishop of England and Normandy a certain portion. This done, he removed
to York, (says Houeden) other say to Sherborne, and there died upon sunday
Nou. 22. 1181. and was buried by Hugh Bishop of Durham in the middle of the
Quire of the Canons regular which himself had built. Now whereas in his
lifetime he had procured Alexander the Pope to grant this privilege, that if
any Cleergy-man died in his Province, and delivered not his goods away by hand
before his death, the Archbishop should have the disposition of them; it
pleased God that the same measure he meat unto other, he should be served
withal himself. He left behind him (or had at least wise what time he
sickned) 11000. pound in silver, and 300. pound of gold, beside an infinite
deal of plate, and sumptuous household stuff. All this (though he had
bestowed it (as aforesaid) the king notwithstanding seized upon, and converted
it to his own use, saying, it was no reason that his will should stand for
good, that had disanulled the Testaments of so many other. See more of him in
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury.

32 Geoffry Plantaginet.
1191. Ric. 1.3.
The Sea of Lincoln happening to be void by the death of Robert de Chisueto the
year 1167. king Henry the second procured Geoffry his base son, a young
tender delicate youth, yet Archdeacon of Lincoln, to be elected to the
Bishopric. He content with the large revenues of the same, made no have to
receive consecration, as having more care of sheering the sheep, then feeding
them, which he knew he might do without consecration as well as with it. Seven
years he held the Bishopric after that sort, and at length by the persuasion
of his Father, desirous to have his son near about him (as some say) or
perceiving him unfit to make a Clergy man (as other say.) He resigned his
interest in the Church of Lincoln, and got him to the Court, where he was made
Lord Chancellor of England, and held that office about 8. years, viz. until
the year 1189. at what time his Father died. Many Bishoprics at that time were
void, and had bin some of them a long season, as York now 10. years, and
Lincoln 17. K. Richard therefore understanding the people murmured and grudged
much at these long vacations, and knowing also it imported him to see his
brother provided for, he thought to stop 2. gaps with one bush, and at once to
furnish York with an Archbi. and his brother with a living. So he writ his
letters to the Chapter of York in his brothers behalf, who (not without some
difficulty) elected him. He was cons. at Tours in France, by William Archb. of
Tours, in the month of Aug. 1191. Presently after his consecration, he hied
him over into England, although he had taken an ^ath when his brother King
Richard began his voyage into the holy land, not to set foot in England within
3. years after. Presently therefore upon his arriual, he was imprisoned
William B. of Ely the Chancellor, being drawn from the very altar of S. Martins
church in Dover; but he was quickly set at liberty again; This man proved a
better Bishop than was expected, governing his Province (if not somewhat too
stoutly, according to the courage requisite in a man of so high birth and
nobility) very well and commondably. He is praised much for his temperance,
sobernes and gravity both of countenance and behavior. All the time of his
brother Richard he had much ado with his Canons of York who by complaints
unto the Pope and the K. troubled him much. Between him and K. John (who was
his brother also) there was likewise much ado. In the second year of his
reign, he commanded the Sheriff of Yorkshire to sei^e upon all the goods and
lands of the Archb. and his seizure to return into the exchequer, which was
done accordingly: whereupon the said Archbishop excommunicated, not ea^ly the
Sheriff that had done him this violence, but all those in general that were
the authors of the same, and that had been any means to stir up the kings
indignation against them. The cause of this trouble is diversely reported: some
say, that he hindered the kings officers in gathring a kind o^ ^^xe through his
Dioces; others, that he refused to sail into Normandy with him, when he went
to make a marriage for his niece, and to conclude a league with the French
King. Whether one of these were the cause, or both, or none, I cannot tell; But
certain it is, that one whole year his temporalties were detained from him,
his mooueable goods never restored, and yet moreover he was feign to pay a
thousand pound sterling for his restitution. This was a greater wound then it
might easily be cured. Six or 7. years after it brake out again, to wit, an.
1207. King John then being at Winchester required such of the Clergy and
nobility, as were there present to consent, that payment should be made unto
him, of the thirteenth shilling of all the mooueable goods in England; this
motion no man gainesaid, but Geffry the Archbishop his brother. After this,
whether it were he were guilty of some greater attempt, or that he understood,
his brother to be grieuouslie offended with him for withstanding, this his
desire; well perceiving England was too hot for him, secretly he avoided the
Realm, excommunicating before his departure such of his jurisdiction, as
either had paid the said tax, or should hereafter pay it. He lived then in
banishment 5. years even until he was called to his long home by death, which
was the year 1213. So he continued Archbishop somewhat more then 21 years.

33 Walter Gray.
1217. Hen. 3.1.
The Sea was void after the death of Geffry, the space of 4. years. In the
mean space, Simon de Langton, brother unto Stephen Langton, Archbishop of
Canterbury, was elected by the Chapter of York. But king John being latelye
become tributary unto the Church of Rome, easily found means to Cassire and
disanull that election. If the old quarrel between the Archbishop and him,
stuck something in his stomach, I marvel not: but he alleged that he
thought it dangerous and very inconvenient the whole Church of England should
be ruled by two brethren; one at Canterbury in the South, and an other at
York in the North. He labored then very earnestly to have Walter Gray his
Counselor removed from Worceter to York. The Cannons there refused him for
want of learning (as they said, albeit I find he spent some time in the
University of Oxford,) but at last they were content to accept him, in regard
(forsooth) of his singular temperance and chastity: they seemed to be
persuaded that he had continued till that time a pure maid. The matter was
they durst do no other but yield, and then thought good to make a virtue of
necessity. This man was first Bishop of Lichfield, consecrate the year 1210.
translated thence to Worceter 1214. and lastly, the year 1215, to York; but
upon such conditions, as I think he had been better to have staid at
Worceter still. The Pope would have no less th^^ ten thousand pound for
wresting him into the Archbishopricke: for the gathering of which money he was
feign to be so thrifty, as in all our histories he is infamous for a miserable
covetous wretch: for proof whereof, I will recount unto you a strange report
of Mat. Paris. The year 1234 there was great dearth and scarcity of corn,
(and by reason that the dearth had continued then three years) mortality of
people also, as well by pestilen^e as famine. Amongst many rich men that were
nothing moved with compassion toward the poor daily perishing for want of
relief, this Archbishop is especially noted, that had five years corn in
store and would not thresh it out. Being told at last by his officers, that it
was much to be feared, it was consumed by mice, or some other way much the
worse for so long standing: he bid them to deliver it to the husbandmen that
dwelt in his Manors, upon condition they should pay as much new corn for it
after harvest. They intending to do as he commanded, went about to take down
a great mow of corn he had at Rippon. And first coming toward it, they saw
the heads of many serpents, snakes, toads, and other venomous creatures peering
out at the ends of the sheaues. This being told unto the Archbishop, he
sent his steward, and diverse of good credit, to enquire the truth thereof: who
seeing that which the other had seen, enforced notwithstanding certain poor
men to go up into the top of it with ladders. They were scarcely up, when they
saw a black smoke rise out of the corn, and felt a most loathsome stink,
which compelled them with all haste possible to get them down again.
Moreover, they all heard an unknown voice saying unto them, Let the corn
alone; for the Archbishop and all he has is the devils possession. To make
short they were saine to build a wall about it, and then to set it on f^re,
fearing least such an infinite deal of venomous creatures might infect and
poison, or at least greatly annoy the whole Country. The credit of this report
I leave unto the Readers discretion. Matthew Westminster commends the man
greatly for his wisdom in government and his loyal fidelity unto his
Prince: and that he deserved this commendation, I account it no slender
proof, that Queen Elianore (to whom her husband King Henry the third had
committed the charge of the Realm traveling into France) she (I say) having
occasion to cross the seas to con^e^ with her husband, committed the rule and
government of the same unto this Archbishop. It was in the year 1253. at what
time he being a very aged man and sickly, was exceeding loath to take it upon
him. He sat Archbishop above nine and thirty years, in which space he did
many things to the good and benefit, both of his See and Church. The manor of
Thorpe he purchased and the Church of the same, both which he gave in effect
unto his See, but verbo tenus unto the Deane and Chapter; taking assurance of
them, that they should always grant it over unto the Archbishop for the time
being. And this course he took to the end, that if the temporalities of the
Archbishopricke should be ^^^sed into the Kings hands, either sede plena (which
sometimes happened) or vacant (which is very usual) with this the Kings officers
should not meddle. He erected many cha^tries in diverse places. He gave unto his
Church thirty two wonderful sumptuous coapes, and left a goodly stock of
cattle unto his Successors; procuring the King to confirm the gift, and to
take order that every Archbishop should be bound to leave it as he found it. He
bought unto his See the house now called White Hall (and heretofore York
place.) Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent built it, and gave it unto the Friar
preachers in London, who sold it unto this Archbishop. In the time of Cardinal
Woolsies disgrace, the King required it of him; and he either for fear, or
else hope of currying a little favor with the King that way, yielded by and
by. As for this man he died at last on May day 1255. and was buried in S.
Peter's Church.

34 Sewall.
WHen the King heard of his death, 1259. Hen: 3.40.
he determined not to suffer his place to be filled over hastily. All other
Bishoprics of England (says he) have been in my hands heretofore, but this
never: Therefore I must be advised how I let it pass out of my fingers. The
Chapter after a convenient space, made choice of Sewall their Deane that was
brought up in the University of Oxford, a man modest, virtuous and learned;
being well seen not only in Divinity, but in Law also and much other good
learning. Diverse of his writings remain and are remembered by Bale in his
Centuries. He was a diligent hearer of Edmund of Abenden (after Archbishop of
Canterbury, and canonized a Saint) at what time he read the Divinity lecture
in Oxford. This Saint Edmund (as Matthew Paris reports) would often tell his
scholar Sewall, that out of all question he should die a Martyr. How far
forth this prediction fell out true, you shall hear anon. Now the King not
liking this speed of the Chapter-men, as not being for his profit, hindered the
new elect what he might; and for want of better matter, alleged against him
that he was a bastard, and so by the Cannons incapable of that honor. It was
true enough, and how he salued that sore, I cannot tell: A dispensation belike
from Rome (where all things were then to be had for money) took away that
obstacle. I find he was consecrate by the suffagran Bishops of his own
Province, July 23. 1256. a year and almost three months, after the death of
his predecessor. His Deanery being thus void, the Pope took upon him to bestow
the same upon one Jordan a stranger, that understood not one word of English,
and otherwise utterly unworthy of that goodly preferment. This Jordan,
doubting least in taking possession he might happily be resisted, ^ame into
the Church of York, at dinnertime, and inquiring of one (whom by chance he
found then at his prayers) which was the Deanes stall, caused two of his own
company to deliver him possession thereof. This being done, though in hugger
mugger, was quickly brought unto the Archbishops ears; who grieved infinitely
at the same, and sought by all means possible to disanull and make void the
Popes gift. The Cannons and Churchmen were so amazed with this strange and
extraordinary course (strange in those days, but afterward too common) as
they knew not what to do or say. It seemed most absurd and detestable unto
them, that so high a dignity, and an office of such importance, in place and
authority next unto the Archbishop, should be conferred upon a base, obscure
and contemptible fellow. But they stood so in awe of the Popes tyranny,
whereunto the King had subjected, and as it were, prostrate himself, that they
durst not make any profession of mislike. About the same time the Pope sent a
commandment into England, that three hundred of the next benefices that fell
should be bestowed upon certain Italians that he named; men ignorant of the
English tongue, and though otherwise perhaps worthy the places appointed them
(which is greatly to be doubted) yet in that respect most unfit here to have
cure of souls committed unto them. In this injurious course, our Sewall
courageously withstood him; and not only by word and letter sharply
reprehended the Pope, but also in deeds resisted this his tyranny, utterly
refusing to admit either Jordan unto the Deanery, or any other of his Italians
to any other promotion in his Diocese For his labor he was quickly suspended.
Wherewith he was so little terrified, as that notwithstanding, he stood still
stoutly to his tackling, and yielded not one inch. Jordan therefore, whether
doubting of good success, or wearied with trouble, or in regard that he
perceived himself very odious in York, resigned his Deanery, accepting a
pension of a hundred marks out of it. This composition with Jordan, nothing
appeased the Popes fury: determining belike to make him an example to other,
he first caused his cross in contumelious manner to be taken from him, and
soon after thundering out his greatest excommunication, causing him to be
cursed throughout England with b^ll, book and candle. By those, and inf^nite
other vexations (says Matthew Paris) he was much disgraced in the sight of
the world; but became no doubt far the more acceptable in the sight of God.
So long he denied to bow his knees unto this Baal, as overcome with care, and
not enduring those continual molestations, he died at last hart-broken, much
better deserving the name of a Martyr, then many other to whom the Church of
Rome has afforded that title. Lying upon his deathbed, and perceiving his end
to approach, with watery eyes looking steadfastly toward Heaven, in the
bitterness of his soul he made this prayer, which I think not unworthy in this
place to be inserted: Lord Jesus Christ thou most just judge, from whose
omnise^ent wisdom nothing is hid, thou know how the Pope (unto whom thou
have suffered the government of thy church to be deliuerd) has with manifold
injuries overwhelmed my innocence, for no other cause (as thou can wi^^^s,
and the world doubts not) then this, that I would not admit men altogether
unknown, yea and most unfit, unto the cure and care of those Churches, the rule
and charge whereof unto me (though unworthy) thou have committed:
Notwithstanding least by my contempt the Popes unjust sentence of
excommunication become just and deserved, with all humility I crave to be
ab^olued from the same. But I appeal unto thee the supreme and incorruptible
judge; and both heaven and earth shall be my witnesses, that he has most
unjustly vexed and many ways as grievously as wrongfully offended me. Before
his en^ also he writ unto the Pope a very effectual, and pithy letter, wherein
he laid before him at large the miserable estate into which the tyranny of
him and his predecessors had brought the Church; praying him to have a care to
mend what was amiss, and to remember that Christ repeated unto Peter thrice,
Feed my sheep; but not so much as once or half once bid him either to s^ay
them or to sheere them, much less to tear out their very bowels, to devour
or destroy them, as he did. But the Pope was so far from following this good
advise, as he not only contemned the same, but first derided the good Bishop
for his savor; and afterward grew iuto great choler, taking it hainously,
that any mortal man should be so presumptuous^ as to admonish him of his duty.
He sat Archbishop only two years, in which time he re^ormed many things
amiss in the state of his Church. He caused the stipend of the Ministers of
Saint Sepulchers chapel to be increased, and appointed them to be called
Cannons: He erected Uicari^ges in diverse impropriate Churches, which til that
time were very ill served; and did many other things worth memory, but more
would have done if his time had bin either longer or more quiet and peaceable.
He died upon, or near unto Ascen^on-day, 1258. and was buried in his
Cathedral Church: The place of his sepultu^e there, was much frequented of the
ignorant people that esteemed him a Saint. Notwithstanding the great conflicts
between him and the Pope, our monks doubt not to father upon him a miracle
of turning water into wine, by blessing it in time of his sickness. The
credit whereof I leave unto the Reader.

35 Godfry de Kinton.
1258. Hen. 3.42.
ABout this time (says Matthew Paris) an order was taken at Rome that every
elect Bishop of England must before his consecration fetch the Popes
approbation at Rome, whence (if his purse helped him not the bet^e^) he was
sure to return home, as wise as he went forth. The first that was enforced to
his vagare was Godfry de Kinton, or (as some write him) Godfry de Ludham. He
was Deane of York, and being elect at home, traveled to Rome, where he
received consecration September 23. 1258. This man (I know not upon what
quarrel interdicted the whole City of York, in the beginning of Lent, and
restored it not till the third of May following, which was in the year 1261.
He sat six years three months, and eighteen days; dying then about
Twelfe tide 1264. he was buried in his own Church.

36 Walter Giffard.
AFter the death of Godfry, 1265. Hen. 3.49.
William de Langton Deane of York was elected to succeed him. But the Pope
(for what cause I know not, peradventure, because he brought not money enough
in his purse) rejected him, and translated Walter Giffard from Bathe and Wells
to York. He was the Popes Chaplain, and Cannon of Wels, first treasurer, then
Chauncellor of England; Elected to Bathe May 22. 1264. from whence he was
removed Oct. 15. 1265. having continued there only two years. He lived at
York thirteen years departed this life April 25. 1279. and lies buried
there in S. Peter's Church.

37 William Wickwane.
IT shall not be amiss, here to remember, that Onuph^ius reports, 1279.
Edw. 1.8.
Saint Bonauenture (whom he calls Bonauentura Fidanza) to have been preferred
about this time from the Archbishopricke of York unto the place of a
Cardinal, viz. in the year 1274. Paulus Aemilius de gestis, Franc. says that
at what time diverse Grecian prelates came to the council of Lions, to confer
with the learned men of our Western Church concerning the difference of
opinions between us and them; Thomas Aquinas (who then read Divinity at
Naples) was sent for as the fittest man of that age to deal with them; but he
died by the way. Bonauenture was then appointed to supply his place, and least
the Grecians should despise him being but a Friar Minor; The Pope off^red him
the Archbishopric of York. He was loath (says Paulus Aemilius) to take so
great a charge upon him, and upon his refusal was made a Cardinal. I cannot
see how either of these reports should be true. For the Sea of York at that
time and long both before and after was full, being possessed by Walter Giffard
from the year 1266. till 1279. Now to leave Bonauenture as we found him, ye
shall understand, that the Deane and Chapter of York soon after the death of
Walter Giffard elected for their Archbishop William Wickwane, one of their own
company, and Chauncellor of their Church. Of him little is recorded, but that
the first year of consecration, he removed the bones of Saint William h^^
predecessor, and caused them to be placed in a costly shrine with great
solemnity, the King, Queen, eleven Bishops and many nobles being present.
Having sat 6. years and a half he resigned his Archbishopricke and got him
beyond the Seas, and falling sick at Poutiniac, died there Aug. 27. 1385. The
people of that Country esteemed him an holy man and fathered diverse miracles
upon him.

38 John Roman.
1285. Edw. 1.14.
THe 28. of November following, viz. 1215. John Roman Chanter of York was
elected Archbishop, and shortly after consecrate at Rome. Because his Father
(sometimes Tresurer of York) was a Roman borne, he was called by the name of
John Roman, a man wise, stout, and very learned. He built the cross I Will on
the north side of the church toward the palace, and a goodly steeple in the
middle of the Church, all at his own proper costs. He built much also in the
hospital of S. Peter, and with his own hands laid the first stone of the
great body of the Church upon the South side of the same. April 6. 1260. He
lived not to bring that noble work to any perfection, being taken away ^y death
Mar. 15. 1295. when he had continued in that See little more then 10. years.
The year before he died, he excommunicated Anthony Beak Bishop of Durham,
being one of the Kings Council, and at that time beyond the seas in his
service: Whereat the King being highly displeased, the Archbishop thought it
his best course to put himself to his mercy. He did so, and was feign to
redeem the Kings favor with 4000. marks. The indignation of a Prince is death
(says the Wise man.) And likely enough it is, that the grief of his
displeasure, and the trouble that ensued it, might soon cause some incurable
disease that took him away. He died at Burton near Beuerly, and was buried in
his Cathedral Church, which with goodly building he had much augmented and
beautified.

39 Henry Newerk.
THe Deane of York (Henry de Newerk) was then chosen Archbishop the seventh
day of May following. 1298. Edw. 1.26.
He was consecrate at home in his own Church about two years after, to wit
upon Midsommer day 1298. by Ant Bishop of Durham. Little more then one year he
enjoyed that honor, for he died Aug. 15. 1299.

40 Thomas de Corbridge.
AFter him succeeded a great learned Divine Thomas de Corbridge Cannon of York,
1299 Edw. 1.28.
and Custos of the Chapel of S. Sepulcher. That place the Pope (upon his
consecration) gave unto a kinsman of his own, that soon after died; but upon
his death bed he seemed greatly burdened in conscience for accepting a charge
that he could afford so little attendance unto, and therefore besought the
Pope that he would take a course the said proportion after his death might be
bestowed upon some worthy man that might make amends for that which in his time
had hitherto been wanting. Hereupon the Pope presently after his kinsmans
death, writ his letter to the Archbishop requiring him to appoint unto that
place some worthy Divine that would undertake always to reside upon it. He did
so, and made choice of Gilbert Segraue that was after Bishop of London. In the
mean space the King had written his letters in behalf of one John Bush his
Secretary, and accepting no excuse or satisfaction, for not satisfying his
desire therein, in great displeasure he took away from him three Baronies (as
one says I think he means Manors) appertaining of old unto his S^e, and
detained them so long as the Archbishop lived, which was indeed but a short
time. He sat in all but three years, seven months, and ten days. Whether
it be that few men's minds are so great, as to sustain the burden of a Princes
displeasure, or that God which promises a reward of long life unto those that
yield honor unto their superiors, in his just judgment do soonest cut of
such as are backward in this duty: So surely it has fallen out for the most
part, that those Bishops that have presumed most in opposing themselves against
their Princes, have least time endured, and ever quickly been taken away;
whereof I could yield many examples. This Thomas Corbridge died at Lanham
Septem. 22. 1303. and was buried at Southwell. In his time (to wit the year
1303. (the Courts of the Kings bench and Exchequer which had remained at York
7. years, were now brought back to London again.

41 William de Greenfield.
1305. Edw. 1.34.
HE that then succeeded (William de Greenfield) was Canon of York and
Chancellor of England under king Edward the first. A great and wise
Councellor, very eloquent, and not unlearned. After his election he was feign
to awaits the Popes pleasure two years, before he could obtain consecration,
which at last he received, his election being confirmed by Pope Clement the
fifth anno 1305. But it cost him 9500. marks beside the charge that he was at
while he lay in the Popes Court a suter. By reason of these immoderate
expenses, he became so bare, that at his first return into England he was
feign to make two collections amongst his clergy in one year; the first he
called a benevolence, the second an aid. He was a great favorer of the
templers every where oppressed in those days, especially by the Pope and
Philip the French king. The year 1311. he was present at the Counsel of
Vienna, where he had place allotted him next unto the Archbishop of Treuer.
When he had sat 9. years, eleven months, and two days, he departed this
life at Cawood December 13. 1315 and was buried in his Cathedral Church in the
Chapel of S Nicolas.

42 William de Melton.
1^17 Edw. 2.1^.
Soon after Greenfields death, to wit, January 21. the year 1315. William de
Melton Provost of Beuerley, and Canon of York, and was elected at the instance
and earnest request of king Edward the second. With the Pope he found no more
grace, then his predecessor had done, under two years suit consecration could
not be had. It was at last affoorded him September 25. 1317. at A^inion. Almost
23. years he go^erned the Sea of York, and that very worthily: attending
diligently not only the affairs and business of his Church, but also his
own private actions, indeuouring by chastity, fasting, praeer, almesdeeds,
hospitality, and virtuous behavior, like a good pastor to teach and instruct,
as well by example of life, as preaching and doctrine. He was very good to his
Tenants, but careful to preserve, and rather to increase, then any way to
impair the state, liberties and revenues of his Church. Yet was he not
careless of the preferment of his servants and kindred, whom (as occasion
served) he pleasured and advanced to very good places. Amongst the rest, and by
the Popes license, he purchased to a brothers son, the Manors of Kingskiln,
Kingsclere, and Wentworth, which till that time belonged to the Archbishops of
Kean. He bestowed great cost upon the shryne of S. William, and finished the
west part of the body of his church, with the expense^ of 700. marks He
enclosed also a place called the old Byaly at York, with a goodly wall. He
compounded along and tedious controversy between the Deane and the Chapter of
his Church, procuring the order set down by him to be confirmed by the Pope
anno 1328. Lastly he deceased April 22. (or as one delivers April 5.) 1340.
at Cawood, having sat 22. years and almost 7. moueths, in which time he had
been successively Treasurer and Chauncellor of England. His body lies buried
near the font in Saint Peter's Church.

4 William le Zouch.
WIlliam de la Zouch Deane of York succeeded. 1342. Edw. 3.17.
He had much to do with one William Kilsby that contended with him two whole
years for this Archbishopricke. He at last was consecrate by Pope Clement the
sixth at Auinion, an. 1342. The year 1346. King Edward going into France, left
this man his Uicegerent here. The Scots taking advantage of the Kings absence,
came with a great army into England. At a place called Bewre Park near Neuils
cross, they were met by this Archbishop and diverse of our Nobility, October
17. where our men so valiantly behaved themselves, as the Scots were
overthrown, two Earls, 21. knights, and an infinite number of other slain,
many also taken prisoners, and amongst the rest, David le Bruise then king. This
Bishop a little before his death began the foundation of a Chapel, on the
south side of the Church, intending to be buried in the same; but by a long
languishing sickness being taken away before it could be brought to any
pefection, he was la^ed before the altar of S. Edmund the Confessor. H^ died
August 8 1352.

44 John Thursby.
1352. Edw. 3.27.
THe year 1349. John Thursby Bishop of Saint David's was translated to Worceter,
and about the middle of October 1352. (being then Chancelour of England) to
York. He was brought up in Oxford, where he was very much esteemed for his
learning, being a great Divine, and a very good Canonist. He writ diverse
things, both in English and Latin: amongst the rest he published an exposition
upon the ten Commandments in his mother tongue, which he required all the
Clergy men in his Dioces to ^ead diligently unto their Parishioners. That
work I have and keep as a monument worthy to be esteemed. Divinity books
in the English tongue were geason in those days. I pray God they be not now
too common. Bale (upon what ground I know not) says he was created a Priest,
Cardinal at Saint Sauin^ by Pope Urban the fifth, whom Thomas Walsing (...)
reports to have been an Englishman, and so was li^^ly to be more liberal in
affoording that kind of honor to his Countrymen, then his predecessors had
been. ^ut of the said Pope I think Bales report to be the truer, af^^ain^^
that he was a Frenchman borne, but the son of an ^nglishman one Will Grisaunt
a physician. And for the Archb. because that in Onuphrius and C^aconius I find
no mention of him, we must say, that either he was no Cardinal, or else that
their collections are not so perfect and absolute, as they would make the world
believe. In the tenth year after his translation, he began to build a new the
quier of his cathedral church, laying the first stone himself the twenty nine
of July, toward the charge of which work, he presently laid down a hundred
pound, (or as some report five hundred pound) and promised to contribute
yearly 200. marks, or as others say, 200. l. till it were finished; which so
long as h^e lived, he faithfully performed. He bestowed great cost in
beautifying the Lady Chapel with images, and pictures of excellent
workmanship; and remoouing the bodies of diverse of his predecessors that lay
buried else where about the Church, caused them to be entoombed in the said
Chapel in very seemly manner, le^uing a place for himself in the middle
thereof, where dying, November 6. 1373. at Thorpe, he was soon after solemnly
enterred.

45 Alexander Neuil.
Unto this See the Pope then appointed Alexander Neuill a Cannon of York, 1373
Ed. 3.48
a man greatly favored of King Richard the second, which was his destruction.
Diverse of the Nobility malecontent, took Arms against the king, caused many
whom they misliked to be condemned by Parliament, some to death, some to
prison, etc. Amongst the rest, this Archbishop was accused to be one that
abused the kings youth by flattery, and with whispering tales entised him
against tho Nobility, and for this cause he was condemned to perpetual prison,
and appointed unto the Castle of Rochester there to be kept. But he, foreseeing
the tempest that grew toward him, fled out of the Realm. The Pope then ( Vrbane
the flit) whether in commiseration, thinking to relieve him, or else using it
as a means to make his Archbishopricke void, that he might bestow it;
translated him from York unto Saint Andrews in Scotland. Howsoever it was
meant, sure it fell out to be a very bad exchange for his part. Scotland at
that time re^used to acknowledge Vrbane for Pope, and yeeld^d obedience to the
Antipope. By means whereof Vrbans gift was not of sufficient force, to inuest
him in Saint Andrews and yet quite cut him off from York, at home. Hereby it
came to pass, that having the revenues, neither of the one, nor the other, for
very want he was feign to become a parish Priest, and so lived three years at
Louaine, even until his death. He was banished the year, 1386. lived in exile
almost five years, died 1391. and was buried in the church of the Friar
Carmelites there. This man bestowed much cost in repayring the Castle of Cawod,
building diverse towers, and other edifiees about the same.

46 Thomas Arundell.
1388 Ric. 2.12
ALexander Neuill being thus displaced under pretense of preferment to a new
place; The Pope took upon him to bestow York; And least if he should advance
one to it, not greatly preferred before, the old incumbent might chance in
time to recover it from him again; He thought good to bestow it so, as
benefiting many he might procure so many adversaries unto Neuill, whereof any
one alone might hardly seem able to withstand him, but all these together he
knew very well. To this end (or rather happily to gain the more in the first
fruits) he called Thomas Arundell from Ely to York, translated the Bishop of
Durham to Ely, Bath to Durham, Salisbury to Bathe, and gave Salisbury to John
Waltham the kings Chaplain, a man very gracious with him, and Keeper of his
Privy Seal. This Thomas Arundell the year 1396. was removed to Canterbury,
the first that ever was translated from York thither. While he was at York,
he bestowed much in building upon diverse of his houses, and unto the Church he
gave, besides many rich ornaments, two great basins of silver and gilt, two
great Censers, two other basins of silver, and two Crewettes. He gave to the
use of the Uicars a silver cup of great weight, and a bowl of silver very
massiue and costly unto the Canons. Being yet Bishop of Ely, he was Lord
Chancellor of England, and so continued till the year, 1396. at what time
being removed to Canterbury, he gave over immediately that office. In the
mean while, the year 1393. being yet at York, it is remembered, that he
removed all the Kings Court from Westminster to York, pretending a desire to
punish the pride and presumption of the Londoners, who were then in great
disgrace with the King, alleging also peradventure that those Courts had
been held there about fourscore years past, the space of seven years
together, as in T. Corbrldge I have remembered. Howeit the Londoners affirmed,
that whatsoever he pretended, he did it to no other end but to help his
neighbors of York. Whatsoever his purpose was, that nouelty continued a short
time: For after a term or two the Courts were brought back to their
accustomed place. See more of him in Ely and Canterbury.

47. Robert Waldby.
RObert Waldby Bishop of Chichester succeeded Thomas Arundell in York. 1396.
Ric. 2.20
Being yet a young man, he followed Edward the Black Prince into France, where
he continued long a Student, and profited so much, as no man in the Uniuersity
where he lived (Tholous being notwithstanding an Oxford man also) might be
compared with him for all kind of learning. He was a good Linguist, very well
seen in Philosophy, both natural and moral, in Physic, and the Canon Law
also; very eloquent, an excellent Preacher, and esteemed so profound a Divine,
as he was thought meet to be the professor of Divinity, or Doctor of the
Chair in the said Uniuersity. For these his good gifts he was much favored of
the Black Prince first, then of K. Richard his son: and by their favor
obtained first a Bishopric in Gascoign, (as Bale reports) but by an
Antiquity that I have seen; it appears he was first Bishop of the Isle of
Man, whose style is Episcophs Sodorensis, and his Epitaph says, he was first
praesul Adurensis. From that first preferment whatsoever it was, he was
translated, a. 1387. to the Archbishopric of Dublin in Ireland; thence to
Chichester, 1395. and the year following, became an Archbishop once more, viz.
of York. There he sat not fully 3. years but he died May 29. 1397 and was
buried in Westminster almost in the middle of the Chapel of S. Edmund, where
an Epitaph is to be seen upon his grave, partly defaced, and otherwise not
worth the reciting.

48 Richard Scroope.
RIchard Scroope that succeeded Robert Waldby, though a gentleman of great
blood, being brother unto William Scroope that was Earl of Wiltshire, 1397.
Ric. 2.2^.
and Treasurer of England under king Richard; yet obtained not this high
promotion without desert, in regard of many good parts in him. For he was
incomparably learned (says Thomas Walsingham) of singular integrity for his
life and conversation, and (which is not altogether to be neglected) of a
goodly and amiable personage. He was brought up in Cambridge (as Bale
delivers, Gul. Monestriensis says it was in Oxford) and proceeded there
first Master of Art, then Doctor of Law, thence he traveled through France
into Italy, and became an advocate in the Popes Court, until that at last
returning home he was made Lord Chancellor of England, in the 2. years of king
Richard the second, but continued not above one year in that place, August 9.
1396. he was consecrate Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, managed that charge
laudably, and is commended as well for his own private manners and behavior,
as his public government. His end was unhappy and very miserable. King Henry
had lately deposed King Richard, by whom this man was preferred, and had
caused his brother aforenamed the Earl of Wiltshire to be beheaded at Bristow.
Whether it were desire to revenge these wrongs done to his friends, or some
other respect^ I know not, certain it is, that the year 1405 he joined with
the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl Marshall, the Lord Bardolph, and other
in a conspiracy against King Henry. The Earl of Westmerland, and John Duke of
Lancaster, the kings son, were then in the North Country, when these men
began to stir, and gathering what forces they could, came against them. But
finding the other too strong for them, they enquire of them in peaceable manner
what their intent should be in taking Arms. The Archbishop answered, that he
meant nothing but the good of the Realm, as he would gladly certify him, if
he had secure and safe access unto him. And therewithal showed a writing,
wherein he charged the now king with treason against his Sovereign King
Richard, oppression of the Church and Commonalty, whose Liberties he had sworn
to defend, tyranny and cruelty in putting to death the said king, many of the
Nobility and great numbers of the Commons; with impiety and sacrilege in
defrauding the Church of Rome of her rights; and lastly with evil government,
perfidiousnesse, perjury, and diverse other like heinous crimes, for which he
pronounced him excommunicate; requiring all men to join with that company,
whose endeavor should be, but to reform what was amiss; to feate and settle
in the kingdom the right Heir; to establish peace in Wales and Ireland, and
to free the Realm from the great and intolerable burden of exactions, no
longer to be endured. The Earl of Westmerland having read this writing,
professed to allow of the enterprise, and praised it for honest and reasonable,
insomuch as meeting with the Archbishop at a parley, after a very few speeches,
they seemed to become friends, shaking hands together, and drinking to each
other in sight of both their armies. The Archbishop now doubting of nothing
suffered his men to disperse themselves for a time: But the Earl contrariwise
waxed stronger and stronger^ and at least seeing himself well able to deal
with the Archbishop, came upon him suddenly, and arrested him little thinking
of any such matter. The king by this times was come Northward as far as
Pomfret. Thither the Archbishop and other prisoners arrested with him, were
also brought, and carried with the king bark to York again (or as one
delivers) to Thorpe, where Sir William Fulford, a knight learned in the Law,
and another Justice called Gascoyne, sitting on a high Stage in the Hall
condemned him to be beheaded Whether he were tried by his Peers or no I
find not: and much less can I pronounce, whether it be explorati^uris that
he ought to be, M. Camden a man of greater judgment in those things then my
self, has de^^ed it; But first, whether he was a Peer of the Realm or no, I
must refer my self to an Act, Edward 3.25. where Bishops are termed Peers of
the land. And certain it is, by the report of the Author of the Book,
entitled Antiquitates Britannicae that John Stratford Archbishop of
Canterbury, being shut out of the Parliament house, upon the Kings displeasure,
alleged he was mayor pars regni post Regem, etc. and was not gaine-said. Then
for the other point, there is an Act, that all and singular Lords of the
Parliament for the offense in that Act mentioned shall be tried by their
Peers. And we have an example where the said John Stratford being accused by
the King of diverse hai^ous crimes, was appointed to be ordered by four
Bishops, four Earls, and four Barons. But to return to my story, presently
after the judgment given the Archbishop was set upon an ill-sauoured Jade,
his face toward the horse tail, and carried with great scorn and shame to a
field hard by, where his head lastly was stricken off; by a fellow that did his
office very ill, not being able to dispatch him with less than five strokes.
He was executed upon Whitson monday, being the eight of June, 1405. and was
buried in the East part of the new works of his Church of York; in which
place, as also the field where he died, certain miracles are said to have
been done, and are ascribed unto his holiness. It is delivered also, that the
king presently after his death was stricken with a leprosy. He was the first
Bishop that I find put to death by order of Law. No marvel if an execution so
unwonted and extraordinary, performed in so odious and contumelious a manner,
gave occasion of many tales and rumors. Amongst the rest I find a report
laying an imputation upon the posterity of the Judges, who gave sentence
against him. I will not do them the wrong to mention it. The Pope
excommunicated the Authors of his death, but was easily entreated to absolve
them again.

49 Henry Bowet.
THe space of two years and a half the Sea was void after the death of
Richard Scroope. 1406. Hen. 4.8.
The Pope had once placed in the same Robert Halam Chancellor of the Uniuesity
of Oxford. But understanding that the King was greatly displeased therewith,
he was content (according to the kings desire, to gratify Henry Bowet then
Bishop of Bathe with this preferment, and made Halam Bishop of Salisbury.
This Henry Bowet was a Doctor of Law, and first a Cannon of Wels, had traveled
much in France and Italy, and was preferred to Bath also at first by the King,
who favored him much. He was consecrate to that Church, November 16. 1401.
and translated to York, December first, 1406. About the year 1403 he was
Treasurer of England the space of one year. He continued Archbishop almost 17.
years, in which time viz. the year 1417. it happened that king Henry the 5,
being absent and busy in the conquest of France, the Scots came with a great
power into the Realm, and besieged Barw^cke and the Castle of Rokesborough.
This Bishop was then a very aged man, and so impotent, as he was able neither
to go nor ride, yet would he needs accompany his Countrymen that went
against the Scots, and caused his men to carry him in a chair, that so at
least by words and exhortation he might do his best, though he were not able
to fight, nay not so much as to stand or go. This man is said to be the
greatest housekeeper of any Archbishop that ever sat in York before him. For
proof whereof it is alleged, that he spent usually in his house, of Claret
wine only 80. tuns. He departed this life at Cawood, October. ^0. 1423. and was
buried in the East part of the Minster at York by the Altar of All Saints
which himself built and furnished sumptuously with all things that might
belong unto it. He built also the Hall in the Castle of Cawood, and the
kitching of the Manor house of Oteley.

50 John Kempe.
1425. Hen. 4.6.
THe Pope of his own absolute authority, placed then in York Richard Fleming
Bishop of Lincoln. Many statutes and laws had been made to repress this
tyrannical dealing of the Pope. But his excommunications were such terrible
bugs, as men durst rather offend the laws of their country, then come within
the compass of his censures. Yet the Deane and Chapter of York taking
stomach unto them, used such advantage as the Law would affoorde them, and by
force kept out the new Archbishop from entering his Church. Much ado there was
between them. The event was, that the Pope unable to make good his gift, was
saine to return Fleming to Lincoln again, and to translate John Kempe Bishop
of London, (a man better favored of the Deane and Chapter) to York. This John
Kempe was first Bishop of Rochester (consecrate the year 1418.) removed
thence to Chichester 1422. from Chichester to London the same year, and from
London to York 1425. when the Sea had been void 2. years. At York he
continued almost 28. years, and in his old age, even one year before his
death, was content to remove once more, viz. to Canterbury. The year 1449. He
was made Cardinal Sanctae Ruslinae, and was twice Chancellor of England. See
more of him in Canterbury.

52 William Boothe.
1453. Hen. 6.23.
HE that succeeded him (William Boothe) was sometime a Student of the common Law
in Grayes June, and upon a sudden forsaking that course, became Chancellor of
the Cathedral church of S. Paul in London, July 9. 1447. he was consecrate
Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. Having continued there six years, he was
removed presently upon the translation of John Kempe unto York. He sat just
12. years, died at Southwell, September 20. and was buried in the Chapel of
our Lady there, nigh to the Archbishops palace, 1464. He bestowed much cost in
repayring the palace of York. About the latter end of his time, viz. the
year 1464. the Minster of York was burnt, I know not by what chance.

52 George Neuill.
RIchard Neuill that great Earl of Warwick, 1466. Edw. 4.7.
that set up and pulled down Kings at his pleasure, advanced unto great and
high places George Neuill his brother, being yet but a very young man; that
was sometimes Chancellor of the Uniuersity of Oxford, and brought up for a
time in Baylioll College there. By his means he was consecrate Bishop of
Oxceter, the 25. of November, 1455. at what time he was not fully twenty
years of age. The year 1460. he was made Lord Chancellor of England, the
youngest Chancellor I think that ever was, either before or since his time.
In that office he continued till the year 1464. viz. until the marriage of
K. Edward the 4. In which action, the king well knowing he had given cause of
offense unto the Earl of Warwick (for it was done whilst the Earl was
Ambassador in France, and busy in a Treaty for a match between the King and
the French Queens sister.) He thought it necessary to weaken him what he
might, and so first removed this his brother from the office of Chancellor,
and bestowed it upon Robert Stillington Bishop of Bathe. Notwithstanding this
alienation of the king from him, the year 1466. he obtained the
Archbishopricke of York, and held the same, (but with great trouble) until
his death. The coffeehouse of the dishonor done to the Earl by the kings
marriage, sticking still in his mind, and having peradventure continual
occasions of new griefs, he made a confederacy with his brethren to pull
down king Edward that had reigned now almost nine years, and to set up king
Henry the sixth again, who had lain in prison all that while. This indeed they
performed partly by the help of George Duke of Clarence king Edwards brother.
And it was the hap of this Archb. to take K. Edward prisoner, at Owlney in
Northampton shire. He carried him thence first to Warwick castle, then to
Middleham Castle in Yorkshire But being of too good a nature to be a good
Iaylor, used him with such courtesy, suffering him to walk abroad, and often
to hunt with a few Keepers to attend him, as (were it by the negligence, or
unfaithfulness of those that had the charge of him, I know not) away he
escaped, being met upon a plain where he hunted by a troop of his friends,
and wasted by them into a place of safety. Within half a year that K. Henry
was restored to his crown again, K. Edward so handled the matter, as coming
suddenly to London, and entering the Bishops palace by a posterne gate, he
surprised at once K. Henry and the Archbishop that had not long before taken
him. They were both carried thence to the Tower of London, where the good King
was soon after pitifully murdered. But the Archbishop upon the 4. of June
following was set at liberty. About a year after his enlargement, he chanced
to be with the King a hunting at Windsor, and upon occasion of the sport they
had seen there, made relation unto the King of some extraordinary kind of
game, wherewith he was wont to solace himself at a house he had built, and
furnished very sumptuously, called the Moore in Hartfordshire. The king seeming
desirous to be partaker of this sport, appointed a day when he would come
thither to hunt, and make merry with him. Hereupon the Archbishop taking his
leave, got him home, and thinking to entertain the king in the best manner it
was possible for him, he sent for much plate that he had hid during the wars
between his brethren and the king, and borrowed also much of his friends. The
Dear which the king hunted being thus brought into the toil, the day before
his appointed time. he sent for the Archbishop, commanding him, all excuses
set a part, to repair presently unto him being at Windsor. As soon as he came,
he was arrested of treason; all his plate, money, and other moveable goods (to
the value of 20000. l were seized upon for the king, and himself a long space
after was kept prisoner at Calis and Guisnes: during which time, the king took
unto himself the profits and temporalties of his Bishopric. Amongst other
things then taken from him, he had a Myter of inestimable value, by reason of
many rich ^tones wherewith it was adorned, that the King brake and made thereof
a Crown for himself. This calamity happened unto him the year 1472. By
intercession and entreaty of his friends, and much adoo he obtained his liberty
the year 1476. and a little while inioying the same; with grief and aug^ish
of mind (as was thought) died at Blithlaw coming from York. He was buried in
the Minster there. In this man's time Sixtus the fourth made the Bishop of Saint
Andrews Private of all Scotland, and appointed twelve Bishops to be under him,
that until that time were of the Province of York. The Archbishop with stood
it what he might. But the Pope alleging it was very unfit, that such a one
should be the Metropolitan of Scotland, as for the most part (by reason of
wars) was an enemy unto the same, ouerruled it, and would needs have it so.

The feast that was made at this man's installation, was exceeding great, and
such as our age has seldom (I will not say never) seen. And therefore I have
not thought it amiss to impart unto the Reader an ancient note that I have
light upon, describing the particulars of the same.

The Provision for the said feast.
Inprimis wheat, 300. quarters. Ale, 300. Tuns. Wine 104. Tuns. Ipocras, 1.
Pype. Oxen. 80 Wild Bulls 6 Muttons 1004 Veales 300 Porkes 300 Geese 3000
Capons 2300 Pigges 2000 Peacockes 100 Cranes 200 Kiddes 200 Chickens. 2000
Pigeons. 4000 Conies 4000 Bitters 204 Malards and Teales 4000 Hearnsewes 400
Fesants. 200 Partridges. 500 Woodcockes 400 Plouers 400 Curlewes. 100 Quayles
100 Egrets 1000 Rees 200 Hearts 400. and od Bucks 400. and od Roes 400. and od
Pasties of Venison cold 4000 Pasties of Venison hot 1506 Dishes of gelly
pacted 1000 Plain dishes of gelly 4000 Cold Tarts baken 4000 Cold Custards
4000 Custards hot 2000 Pykes 300 Bteames 300 Seals 8 Porposes 4
The names of the great officers serving at the said feast.
The Earl of Warwick Steward of the same. The Earl of Bedford Treasurer. L.
Hastings Controller. L. Willoughby Caruer. L. John Buckingham Cupbearer. Sir
Richard Strangwayes Sewer. Sir Walter Morley Chief Marshall of the Hall, with
eight other Knights Marshals, besides Esquiers and Grooms. Sir John Maluery
Panter. Sergeaut of the Kings Ewry Ewer. John Graystocke, and John Neuill,
Keepers of the Cubbord. John Breynocke Surueyor per aulam.
Sitters at the high boorde in the Hall.
The Archbishop in his Estate. Bishop of London on his right hand. Bishop of
Ely on his right hand. Bishop of Durham on his right hand. Duke of Suffolk on
his left hand. Earl of Oxford on his left hand. Earl of Worceter, on his left
hand.
Sitters at the second Table.
The Abbot of S. Mary Abbey. Abbot of Selby. Abbot of Whithy. Abbot of Biland.
Abbot of Renaulx. Abbot of Furn^se. Abbot of Crystal. Abbot of Meux. Abbot of
Whally, Abbot of Salley. Prior of Durham. Prior of Budlington. Prior of
Gisburgh, with eight other Priors at the same hoorde.
Sitters at the third Table.
L. Mountagew. L. Cromwell. L. Scroope. L. Dacres. L. Ogle. and 48. knights at
the same Table.
Sitters at the fourth Table.
L. Deane of York. Deane of S. Seuerins, with the brethren of the Minster.
Sitters at the fifth Table.
Mayor of the City of York. Mayor of the Staple of Calis. with the worshipful
Burgesses of the City.
Sitters at the sixth Table.
4 Barons of the kings Exchequer, and 26. learned men of the Law.
At the last Table in the hall.
49 Esquiers wering the kings Livery.
The names of the estates sitting in the high Chamber.
The Duke of Gloucester. The Duke of Suffolkes sister at his right hand. The
Countes of West merland. at his left hand The Countess of Northumberland. at
his left hand 2. of the Earl of Warwickes daughters at the same table.
Sitters at the second Table in the high Chamber.
The Baron of Greystocke, with three other Barons and 12. Ladies with them.
At the third Table.
18 Gentlewomen of the said Ladies.
Sitters at the first Table in the second chamber.
The Duchess of Suffolk the elder. Countess of Warwick. Countess of
Oxford. Lady Hastings. Lady Eitzhugh.
At the second table there.
Lady Lumley. Lady Strange. And 8. other Ladies with the^.
Sitters at the boorde in the great Chamber.
Bishop of Lincoln. Bishop of Lichfield. Bishop of Exceter. Bishop ^f Carlisle.
Sitters at the second table there.
Earl of Warwick. Earl of Westmerland. Earl of Northumberland. L. Fitz
hugh. L. Stanley. And 10. Baronets with them.
Sitters at the third table.
14 Gentlewomen. 14 Gentlemen.
Sitters in the Hall.
Gentlemen, Franklins, and head Yeomen 412. twice filled and served.
Sitters in the Gallery.
Lords servants 400. twice filled and served.
Sitters at dinner elsewhere.
1000. Officers and sernants. Chief Cooks 62 Necessary servants to the
kitchen and broachturn^rs. 515
First Course.
Brawne. Furmenty Viant potage. Pennade purpill potage. Hear powdered for
stand^rd. Roo powderd, Fesant entraille. Swans. Capons in half grease.
Heronsewes. Carpett of Venison. Pike in harblett, Leach cant. Fruter. Venison
bake. Custard planted. A Suttlety.
Second Course.
Gelly pacted potage. Ra^^ens potage. Venison hakte. Peacocke in Rapill. Cony
reuerse. Lardis of Venison. Partrich. Woodcocke. Plouers. Breames in spile.
Pummis Verte. Leiche Sipers. Fruter napkin. Dates in molde. Scatine^ ryall.
Suttlety.
Third Course.
Blanke desire, Dates in compost. Bitters roste. Fesant: Egrets. Rabets.
Quayles. Martin^. Great birds. Larks. Porpose roste. Leach blanke. Fruter
crispin. Quince baked. Chamblet vial. Suttlety. Wafers and Ypocras plenty.
53 Lawrence Boothe.
THe Bishop of Durham, 1477. Edw. 4.18.
Lawrence Boothe, half brother unto William Boothe George Neuils predecessor,
succeeded them in the Sea of York. He was first Master of Penbrooke Hall in
Cambridge, consecrate Bishop of Durham, September 25. 1457. and twenty years
after, viz. the year 1477. removed to York. In August 1472. he was made
Lord Chancellor, and continued in that office two years. This man bought the
Manor of Batersey of one Nicolas Stanley, and built the house there, all which
he gave unto his See. He died at Southwell the year 1480. when he had been
Archbishop three years and nine months, and was buried beside his brother.

54 Thomas Rotheram, alias Scot.
THamas Scot otherwise called Rotheram, 1480. Edw. 4.21.
was borne at Rotheram in Yorkshire, and according to the manner of religious
persons in old time, would needs take his surname of the place where he was
borne. Having such education as the Country could affoorde him, being now ripe
for the Uniuersity, and towardly, was sent by his friends unto Cambridge, and
was chosen first fellow of Kings College, then Master of Pembrooke Hall, in
which place he continued till he was called away by preferment. King Edward
(whose Chaplain he was) procured him first the Prouostship of Beuerley, made
him keeper of his Privy Seal, and then Bishop of Rochester, the year 1467.
Staying there scarce four years, he removed to Lincoln, anno 1471. The year
1474. he was made Lord Chancellor, and continued long in that office, even
until the reign of Richard the usurper, at what time (or a little before) he
delivered the great Seal unto the Queen, and is blamed for committing it unto
her, of whom he received it not, and had no right to require it. For which
cause (as was alleged) he was committed to the Tower by Richard the Duke of
York the Protector. But it is to be thought that he was rather imprisoned
indeed, to the intent that being known to be too true unto R. Edward the young
king, he might not hinder the false Protectors traiterous designements. Being
yet at Lincoln he bestowed great cost in building the goodly beautiful gate
of the Schools at Cambridge, the walks on each side thereof, and the new
Library that is at the East side of that building, which he caused to be done
of his own charge, with some very little contribution of the Uniuersity,
whereof he was Chancellor. It was begun the year 1470. and quite finished,
1476. Having beeue at Lincoln nine years, he was translated to York, and
enjoyed that honor 20. years la^king one quarter. In which time he did many
notable things worthy memory. At Rotheram (where he was born) he founded a
College, by the name of Jesus College, for a Provost that should be a
Preacher, five Priests, six choristers, and three Schoolemasters, one for
Grammar, one for song, and another for writing This College at the time of the
suppression of the same, was valued in 58. l. 5. s. 9. d. ob. q. yearly
revenue. He moreover finished Lincoln College in Ox^ord, (left very imperfect
by B. Fleming the first faunder) and added five fellowships unto the same,
beside those seven which the founder had ordained. He gave to the Church of
York a wonderful rich m^ter in stead of that which K. Ed. had taken away. In
diverse of his houses he built much, at White Hall (which then belonged to the
Bishops of York) he built the great kitchen, at Southwel the pantry, bakehouse
and new chambers adioining to the river, and at Thorps the p^intry, ^akehouse
and chambers on the north side toward the woods He was very careful to prefer
those which either for good service or kindred might challenge any interest in
him; of whom he greatly advanced diverse, some by marriage, some by gift of
offices, and other temporal living, and many by spiritual promotions. He
died of the plague, May 29. 1500. at Cawood, being 76 years of age, and was
buried in the Northside of our Lady chapel in a marble toombe, which himself
caused to be built in his life time.

55 Thomas Savage.
HIs next successor in York, was also (but long after) Bishop of Rochester,
1501 Hen. 4.17
removed thence to London the year 1493. and soon after Thomas Rotherams
death unto York. This man was a Gentleman borne, and (as I take it) a knights
son; not preferred for any extraordinary great learning, (yet he was a Doctor
of Law of Cambridge) but as it should seem in regard of ser^ice. He spent his
time in a manner altogether either in temporal businesses (being a great
courtier) or else in hunting, wherewith he was unreasonably delighted. He built
much at Cawood and Scroby, and maintained a great number of goodly tall
fellows to attend him. Before his time, it was always the custom that the
Archbishop at his installation should make a very magnificent and sumptuous
feast. This custom for saving a little money he brake and stole his
installation by a deputy in secret manner. Having been seven year Archbishop,
he died at Cawood, and took order that his body should be buried at York, but
his heart at Maklesfield in Cheshire where he was borne, in a Chapel of his
own building which he minded to have made a College, but death prevented him.

56 Christopher Bambridge.
CHristopher Bambridge succeeded He was a gentleman likewise of an ancient
house, 1508. Hen. 7.24.
borne near Appleby in Westmerland, brought up in Queens College in Oxford,
a doctor of both Laws, first Master of the Rolls; then Deane of York;
consecrate Bishop of Durham in the beginning of the year 1507. and the next
year was translated to York. He being Ambassador from King Henry the 8. to
the Pope, great dissension, and thereupon war fell out between the Pope, and
Lewis the 12. King of France, In that war king Henry upon the persuasion of
this man, (says Ciaconius) was content to take the Popes part. For which
service, the year 1511. in the Month of March, the Pope made him a Cardinal
at S. Praxedis. Whether he stayed so long at Rome or made a second journey
thither I cannot tell: But certain it is, that being there, the year 1514. he
was poisoned by one Rinaldo de Modena an Italian Priest his steward, upon
malice and displeasure conceived, for a blow his Master gave him, as the said
Rinaldo (being executed for that fact) confessed at the time of his death. So
P. Iouius reports. He died July 14. and was buried there in the Church
belonging to the English house, dedicated to the holy Trinity.

57 Thomas Woolsey.
1515. Hen. 8.7.
THat famous Cardinal Thomas Woolsey (of whom we are next to speak) was
borne in Ipswich, being the son of a poor man, and (as I have often heard)
a butcher. He was sent to Oxford very young, and was brought up there in
Magdalene College: being proceeded Master of Arts, he became schoolmaster of
the Grammar school belonging to that College, where he was first preferred by
the Marquis Dorset (to whose sons he was Tutor) unto a benefice in
Somersetshire called Limington. There one Sir Amyas Pawlet a knight of that
country, did him a great disgrace, setting him in the ^^ockes, upon little or
no occasion as I have heard. Of that injury the knight much repented him
afterward, at what time this poor scholar being advanced to the high honor
of Lord Chancellor, not only rebuked him sharply in words, but also made him
dance attendance five or six years in London, until by great suit he
obtained license of departure. His Lord and Patron the Marquis dying, he saw
himself without all likelihood of further preferment, especially if he should
settle himself upon his Benefice. Leaving it therefore and determining to
seek some better fortune, abroad in the world; he happened to be entertained
of an ancient knight called sir John Naphaunt, who had an office of importance
in Callis; wherein (being very aged himself) he altogether employed this
Woolsey his chaplain, until such time as weary of it, in regard of his own
weakness and impotency, he gave it over. But mindful of his Chaplains good
service, he never left him until he had found means to make him the kings
Chaplain. Now was he where he would be. Many times he was wont to say (as I
have heard) if he could once set but one foot in the Court, he would not doubt
but attain what he list. And to speak but the truth, it was not only his
good fortune that exalted him to that wonderful greatness, but much deal his
own industry, and many extraordinary parts in him: He was mar^ellous witty,
well learned, fair spoken, and passing cunning in winning the hearts of those
whose favor he affected. The first thing he endeavored (being now a Courtier)
was to make himself known unto such as were nearest about the king: and the
man be specially followed, was Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester^ upon whose
Council he saw the king did most rely. He soon perceived what was in
Woolsey, and at a time when the king bethought him of some witty fellow to
dispatch certains affairs with the Emperor, mentioned him as a fit man. The
king upon his commendation, sent for this chaplain, and committed the business
unto him. The Emperor lay then in the Law Countries, whether Master Woolsey
made such haste (wind and weather lauouring him) as within less then 4. days
after his dispatch, he was back at the Court again, having ordered all the
kings businesses to his contentment. By this time, the king saw him to be a
man meet for imploiment, and determined hereafter to use him. It was not long
then before he preferred him to the Deanery of Lincoln, and a little before his
death made him Almoner. That wise and excellent Prince being taken away, he
soon crept so far into the favor of the young king, by applying himself to
his humor; as he possessed him altogether, and in a manner at the first dash
was made one of his privy Counsel. Being very eloquent and well spoken, the
rest of the Counsel used him many times as their Rese^endary to signify their
determinations unto the king. He then having this opportunity of perceiving the
kings inclination, followed ever that course which he saw him willing to have
taken, and advanced earnestly that part whereunto the King inclined, without
respect unto the matter otherwise. Again, whereas the rest of the Counsel
called often upon the King, to acquaint himself with matters of state, by
resorting to the Counsel, and affoording his presence at their deliberations^
he would advise him to follow his pleasures, and let Counsel matters alone to
him, assuring him that at night he should hear as much of him in one quarter
of an hour, as if he had been present all day at those tedious and wearisome
consultations. By this trick he won himself such authority with the king, as
he did even what he lift a long time. No marvel now if what preferment soever
fell, stood at his refusal. The King having taken Tourney, and banished the
Bishop as addicted unto the French party, gave all the revenues of the
Bishopric unto him ( Woolsey I mean). Within less than one year after,
fell first Lincoln (whereunto he was preferred the year 1514.) and then
immediately after York; which also was presently bestowed upon him. Following
the stream still of this good fortune, and thinking it best to take his time,
he procured the Pope to make him first his Legate a Latere, and soon after
(viz. Sept. 7. 1515) Cardinal. He handled the matter also in such sort with
the King, as he was content to discharge the Archbishop of Canterbury from the
office of Chauncellor and to bestow it upon him. Then ^s though the
Archbishopricke of York and Chauncellorship of England were not sufficient for
maintenance of a Cardinal, he took also unto him the Bishopric of Bathe
the year 1518. holding it and the Abbey of Saint Albons with diverse other
ecclesiastical livings in Commendam. Four years, and 7. months, he held
Bathe and then resigned it to take Durham. Durham also he lastly gave over the
year 1529. in exchange for Winchester. Now you see him at the highest. It was
impossible this greatness should be able to bear his own burden. Presently
after his acceptance of Winchester, he began to fall, and fell so fast, as if
death had not happily staid him; he had quickly fallen from much, to much
less then nothing. The king upon a displeasure (how just God knows)
discharged him suddenly from the office of Chancellor. His goods were all
seized to the kings use, and himself ready to he attaint by Parliament, had
not Thomas Cromwell (after Earl of Essex, then his servant) taken great pains
in defending him. When that course succeeded not, he was charged to have fallen
into a Praemunire by exercising his power Leganti^e without the kings license.
Heereunto he answered that he had authority thereto from the King under his
broad seal (as it was well enough known he could prove) though that amongst
the rest of his writings were now in the hands of his enemies. But (quoth he)
I will never stand upon that point. Whatsoever I have, I have it from the king;
if it be his pleasure to have me in a Praemunire, let it be so, I must and will
be at his mercy. Almost half a year he lived near London to great penury;
one while at Asher (a house belonging to the Bishopric of Winchester) and
another while at Richmond; the which house, the King had lately given him in
exchange for Hampton Court All which time, he had scarce a cup to drink in,
or a bed to lie in, but what was lent him; for his mooueables and household
stuff of inestimable value, were all taken away to the Kings use. At last he
was sent down into Yorkshire, and there lived all a summer in reasonable good
sort. About the beginning of November that year, which was 1536. the Earl of
Northumberland arrested him of high treason, and took order to have him
brought up to London: but he sell sick by the way, and died in the Abbey of
Leicester, (as it should seem of a flux whereunto a continual fever was
joined) when he had been sick the space of 8. days, viz. November 29. 1530.
having been Archbishop 15. years, and being within four months of 60.
years of age. His last words are said to be these: If I had served God as
diligently as I have done the king, he would not have given me over in my gray
hairs; but this is the just reward that I must receive for the pains and
study that I have had, to do him service, not regarding my service to God, so
much as the satisfying of his pleasure. In his flourishing time, he began
the building of two most stately Colleges, one at Ipswich, the other at
Oxford; and it is great pity he finished them not. Had they been perfected, I
think they would have been two of the goodliest monuments of the world. And
surely it were a wonder that any private man should take two such pieces of
work in hand at one time, whereof any one might seem a great matter for a
Prince to finish^ had not his receipts been infinite, and his helps otherwise
very great. I think verily (and am able to yield good reason of my surmise)
that if one man had now in his hands the revenues of all the Bishoprics and
Deaneries also in England, his rents would not arise to so high a reckoning, as
the yearly receipts of this Cardinal. Yet was it not his own purse that gave
him courage to so great an enterprise: for his bounty was such as he could not
but spend all he received. The number of his servants daily attending in his
house were well near four hundred, of which there were one Earl, nine Lords,
a great number of Knights and Esquires. I reckon not all this while his
servants servants, which it is thought grew to a far greater number. He
obtained leave of the Pope to dissolve forty small monasteries; the spoil
whereof furnished him principally for the building of his Colleges, but opened
a gap withal to king Henry, to destroy all the rest, as soon after he did.
Before the building of this College, he erected in the same Uniuersity seven
Lectures, as namely amongst the rest one for Divinity read by Th. Brinknell;
another for the Mathematikes, by one Lupset, and a third for Law by that famous
Lud. Viues, to whom it pleased the King and Queen to afford audience, reading
in the hall of Corpus Christi College. These and the rest he determined by the
advice of D. Veysey Bishop afterward of Excetex to have settled together (as
Master Twyne delivers) in his new College, allowing large stipends for them
and their successors for ever, as also maintenance for 200. st^dents in the
same. But his fall overthrew this design. Howbeit the lands provided for this
College (though confiscate by the praemunire aforesaid) the king was content
to leave unto that college (or at least wise other for them) and so became the
founder thereof, calling it, Collegium Christi ex fundatione Regis Henrici
Octaui. Who so desires to know more of this great and famous Cardina^l let him
have recourse unto John Stowes Annals of England, where his whole life actions
are largely described. To make an end, this out Cardinal was buried in the
Abbey of Lecester (where he died) in the body of the Church before the quier
door.

58 Edward Lee.
The Sea having been void by the death of Cardinal Woolsey almost one year,
1531 Hen. 8.23.
the king preferred unto the same, Edward Lee his Almoner, a Doctor of divinity
brought up a while in Magdalene College in Oxford, where he proceeded
Bachelour of Art, but remoouing to Cambridge, took his other degrees there. A
great Antagonist of Erasmus, but (though well learned) no fit match for him.
He was much employed in embassages, both before his preferment, and after.
Having sat Archbishop thirteen years, he died September 13. 1544. and was
buried in his own Church, where is this Epitaph to be seen engraven upon his
tomb. Edwardus Leus Archiepiscopus Ebor. Theologus eximius, atque
omniliterarum genere long ^ruditissimus, sapientia and vitae sanctitate
clarus, Euangelicae doctrinae praeconem semper agens, pauperibus beneficus,
omnibus ordinibus iuxta charus, magno de se apud omnes desiderio relicto, hic
sepultus jacet. Sedit Archiepiscopus annos paulominus 13. obijt Ibid Sept.
aetatis suae anno 62. anno Christi 1544. In English thus: Edward Lee Archbishop
of York, a great divine, and very well seen in all kind of learning, famous
as well for wisdom as virtue and holiness of life, a continual preacher of
the Gospel, a man very liberal unto the poor, and exceeding beloved of all
sorts of men, who greatly miss and be mo^ne the want of him, lies buried in
this place. He deceased Sept. 13. in the sixty two year of his age, the year
of our Lord 1544

59 Robert Holgate.
BEfore the end of the same year (to wit January 16 1544. Robert Holgate
Doctor of Divinity, 1541. Hen. 8.3
was translated from Landaff (where he had been seven years Bishop) unto
York. He was sometimes of the order of Sephringam and being put out of his
monastery, obtained a benefic^ in a place where one Sir Francis Askue of
Linconshire dwelt, by whom he was much troubled and molested in law. Upon
occasion of those suits he was feign to repair to London, where being, he
found means to become the Kings Chaplain, and by his favor obtained first
the Bishopric of Landaffe, and after the Archbishopricke of York, and was
appointed President of the Kings Council for the North. It is remembered (and I
think it not unworthy the mentioning) that the Knight before named happened to
have a suite before the Council there, and doubted much of hard measure from
the Archbishop, whose adversary he had been. But he remembering the rule of the
Gospel, to do good for evil, yielded him al favor that with Justice he
might; saying afterward merrily to his friends, he was much beholding to Sir
Francis Askew; for that had not he been, he must have lived an hedge Priest
all the days of his life. In the beginning of Queen Mary he was committed to
the tower, where he lay a year and a half, and was at last deprived, for
being married (as I take it.)

60 Nicolas Heath.
1553. Mary 1.
ABout the year 1539. Nicolas Heath, a Londoner borne, a Doctor of Divinity of
Cambridge, and Almoner unto the King, was made Bishop of Rochester. Within 4.
years, he was removed to Worceter: the year 1551. he was displaced, and M.
Hooper appointed Bishop there. But Q. Mary restored him again in the beginning
of her reign, and made him President of Wales. Soon after, to wit, the
year 1553. he was translated to York, and upon the death of Stephen Gardner
made L. Chancellor of England. These places he held until the reign of
Queen of Elizabeth, at what time he thought good to resign them both, and
lived afterward quietly upon some lands that heretofore he had purchased.

61. Thomas Young.
THomas Young sometime Bishop of Saint David's, 1561. Eliz. 3.
was the first Archbishop of York in Queen Elizabeth's days. He was confirmed
therein February 25. 1561. and about the same time made Lord President of the
North. This man (for what cause or purpose I know not) pulled down the great
hall in the palace of York. anno. 1562. which was sumptuo^sly built by Thomas
the elder his predec^ssor almost 500. years before. He died June 29. 1568. at
Sheffield and was buried in the minster of York.

62. Edmund Grindall.
Upon the deprivation of Edmund Bonner, 1570. Eliz. 13.
Edmund Grindall sometimes Master of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, was appointed
unto the Sea of London, whereunto he was elected July 26. 1559. and sat there
about 11. years. May 22. 1570. he was translated thence to York; there he
continued till the year 1575. at what time he was promoted unto the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury.

63. Edwyn Sands.
EDwyn Sands Doctor of Divinity, 1571. Eliz. 18.
and Master of Katherine hal in Cambridge, was Uicechauncellor of that
Uniuersity when the Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen; about which matter he
endured much trouble and long emprisonment (The history whereof is reported at
large by Master Fox, unto whom I refer the Reader) In the beginning of the
reign of Q. Elizabeth, to wit, December 21. 1559 he was cons. Bishop of
Worceter, and succeeded Edmund Grindall both in London (whereunto he was
confirmed July 13. 1570.) and also in York. He continued there Archbishop
about 12. years, and dying August 8. 1588. was buried at Southwell.

64. John Piers.
1588. Eliz. 31.
John Piers Doctor of Divinity, being Deane of Christ-church in Oxford, was
made Bishop of Rochester and Almoner the year 1576 translated to Salisbury
(continuing still Almoner) the year following; and upon the death of Bishop
Sands preferred to York. This man lived always unmarried, and departed this
life September 27. or thereabouts. 1594.

65. Matthew Hutton.
1594. Eliz. 37.
IN the beginning of March following, Matthew Hutton Doctor of Divinity, Master
of Pembrooke Hall and sometimes fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, first
Dean of York, and cons. Bishop of Durham the year 1589. was advanced to the
Metropoliticall See of York. He died about the middle of January 1605. Toward
the charge of the new buildings in Trinity College he contributed 100. marks.

66. Tobias Matthew.
1606. Ia^. 3.
AUgust 18. 1606. Tobias Matthew Bishop of Durham was confirmed Archbishop of
York, a man (as most truly writes another of him) Virtutum and pietatis
ornamentis, erudita facundia, and docendi assiduitate reuerendissimus.

The Archbishopricke of Yorkes first fruits to the King is 1609. pound, 19.
shillings two pence, and was to the Pope 10000. ducats, beside 5000. ducats
that he was wont to pay for his pall.

THE BISHOPS OF DVRHAM.
1. Aidanus.
THe Noble and Uertuous Prince Oswald, having attained the kingdom of
Northumberland the year 634. and desirous that his countrymen and subjects
should not only be governed by the sword for their temporal good, but also
directed by the word and preaching of the Gospel to the everlasting salvation
of their souls, he sent his Ambassador unto his neighbors the Scots (amongst
whom were then many godly and well learned preachers) requesting them to send
unto him some good man that might instruct his people in the faith and fear of
Christ. To this his most reasonable request, they quickly condiscended; and
sent unto him first a man, that doing his best endeavor a while amongst them,
and perceiving he could do no good, returned shortly into his own country
again, complaining that they were a barbarous and intractable people, amongst
whom he had been, and such as he thought he could not spend his time worse,
then in seeking to instruct them, that seemed, neither desirous nor capable of
knowledge. They that sent him, very sorry for this tidings, and consulting
amongst themselves what course were now to be taken, it chanced one of them
named Aidanus to use these works. It seems to me (quoth he) that this our
brother dealt somewhat too roughly with his unlearned Auditors, not feeding
them first with the milk of gentle words, and easy doctrine, according to the
Council of the Apostle, until such time as they were able to digest stronger
meat: And this I take to be the cause of the ill success his preaching had
amongst them. All the rest of the company thought it very probable which he had
said, and these his words occasioning them to remember (besides his learning
and godliness) his notable discretion and known wisdom, they agreed all, that
questionles no man was so likely to amend that fault, as he that had so quickly
found and discerned it in the other; and so with one consent ordained him
Bishop of Northumbers. This Aidanus an humble minded man a lover of silence and
poverty (says William Malmsbury) avoiding of purpose the pomp and frequencie
of York, chose ^or his See a little Island called Lindisfarne (now Holy
Island) where he and diverse of his successors much deal lead their lives. He
was Bishop seventeen years, during which time he neglected no duty of a good
Pastor, traveling up and down the Country even on foot to preach the Gospel,
giving whatsoever he could get unto the poor, and by the example of his own
abstinency, chastity, sobriety and all manner of Episcopal virtues,
instructing, as well, as by word and doctrine. He departed this life August 31
anno. 651. for grief (as it is supposed) of the death of King Oswald that was
traitorously slain 12. days before. Beda makes report of diverse miracles to
be done by him, which who so desires to read, shall find them and many
things more concerning him Eccl. hist. lib. 3. c. 3.5.14.15.16. and 17. Where
he was first buried I find not; but William Malm^bury delivers, that
afterward part of his bones were carried into Scotland by Colman, and the rest
left at Glastonbury.

2. Fina^.
FInnanus (sent likewise thither out of Scotland) was Bishop of Lindisfarne
after Aidan the space of ten years. He first built a Church for his See in
the Island all of Timber, and covered it with reed. He had much to do with
one Conan and other about the observation of Easter, which they would have had
him to celebrate according to the manner of the Church of Rome. He would not
be induced by any means to any alteration. He died the year 661.

3. Colman.
HIs successor Colman (a ^ Scot also) was no less obstinate in the same
matter. After many private conflicts, the year 664. this controversy was
discust in a solemn disputation before the king and all his nobles, who
adjudged the victory unto his adversaries. The discourse of that disputation is
set down at large by Beda. lib. 3. cap. 25. Colman not enduring the disgrace
of this foil, gave over his Bishopric and returned into Scotland again.

4. Tuda.
AMongst diverse that came out of Scotland with Colman this Tuda was one, who
having given proof of his sufficiency for the place, by diligent preaching,
and virtuous behavior under Colman, upon his departure was chosen to succeed
him. He was content to reform the observation of Easter, and to yield to
some other things which had been much stood upon and controuerted between the
Scots and Saxous. Having been Bishop scarce one whole year, he died of the
plague anno. 665.

5 Eat^.
MAny of the Scots that came with Colman returning with him, the rest chose
Eata for their Abbot, and lived at Mailros, which place King Oswyn gave unto
them at the request of Colman. This Eata after the death of Tuda was chosen
Bishop both of Lindisfarne and Hagustald, and governed them jointly the space
of three years. After the end of which term, he gave over Hagustald unto one
Tumbert. But Tumbert being deposed by a Synod gathered at a place called
Twiford, Cuthbert was elected unto his See of Hagustald. Eata then perceiving
that Cuthbert had rather be at Lindisfarne, took on him once more the
government of Hagustald, and resigned Lindisfarne unto Cuthbert. This was the
year 684. The year following it seems Eata died. For I find that one John
was then consecrate Bishop of Hagustald, after whom succeeded (to note that by
the way).

1. Aca the year 709. A man brought up under Bosa Archbishop of York. He was
very learned, writ diverse books mentioned by Bale, ordained a famous library
at Hagustald, died anno 740. having been driven forcibly from his said
Church, anno 732. upon what occasion I find not, and lies entoombed at Durham.
Hector Boethius writes he was sometimes Bishop of Candida casa. After him
succeeded in the foresaid Bishopric of Hagustald these that follow. 3
Frithe^ertus, anno 734. He died 766. 4 Alhmundus consecrate April. 24. 767. A
man says Houeden of great virtue and holiness. He deceased September 7. 781. 5
Tilherus 781. 6 Athelbertus removed from Witern 789. 7 Heandredus cons. 797. at
Woodford. He died anno 800. 8 Eanberrus 800. 9 Tidserthus the last Bishop of
Hagustald.
6 Saint Cuthbert.
THis Cuthbert is said to be descended of the blood royal of the kings of
Ireland, being son of one Muriardach, and Sabina his wife, that was daughter
unto a king there. He was brought up in the Abbey of Mailros, first under his
predecessor Eata, and afterward under Boisill, that succeeded Eata. After the
death of Boisill, he was made Abbot of that monastery, which he ruled with
great care and sincerity. And not content to look unto those only, the
government of whom was especially committed unto him; He used often to
travel into the country near adjoining, sometimes on horseback, sometimes on
soote, preaching diligently the word of God, instructing the ignorant in the
way of life, and sharply reprehending vice where he saw cause. And his manner
was to frequent especially, the most rude and barbarous places, to which he
thought no body else would resort, least the people there being altogether
neglected, might perish for want of their spiritual food. He was a very
personable man, well spoken, and so mighty in persuading, as none that over he
dealt withal was able to withstand the force of his words. Having continued
this manner of life at Mailros many years, at the importunate request of his
old master Eata, he was content to leave the place and to live once more under
him at Lindisfarne. But affecting much an Eremeticall and solitary life, he
refused to live with the rest of the monks, and seated himself in the Island
of Farne, a desert place 9. miles within the sea, having in it neither house
nor water. Yet there he made a shift to live, laboring with his own hands
till he was chosen Bishop. A great while he refused obstinately to forsake his
solitary life, even until the king himself coming over unto him partly by
force, and partly by entreaty, induced him thereunto. So with much adoo he
accepted consecration at last, and received the same at York upon Easter day,
at the hand of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury (6. other Bishops assisting
him) the year 684. in the presence of king Egfride, and many of his nobles.
After he had been Bishop two years, he would needs resign, and returned to
this Island again, where soon after he ended his life. The day of his
departure (to wit March 20.) is consecrate unto his memory. He was first buried
at Lindisfarne, but afterward removed to Durham as hereafter shall be
declared. The miracles that are ascribed unto him and many ot^^^ things not
unworthy the reading, you shall find in the latter end of the fourth book of
Beda his Ecclesiastical history.

7. Eadbertus.
ONe year after the resignation of Saint Cuthbert, the Church of Lin^isfarne
was without a Bishop. Edbert was then chosen to succeed him. He covered his
Cathedral Church with lead, not only the roof (which before was thatche^ with
reed) but the walls also, which were then of timber. He sat 10. years, and
dying May the 6. 698. was buried beside, or rather under Saint Cuthbert his
predecessor, whose body the monks had now placed in a shryne above the
pauement of the Church.

After Eadbert followed in order successively these.
8 After him succeeded Egbert, whom some call Edferth and other Egfride. To
him Beda writ a sharp Epistle, reprehending him for remissness and
carelesnes of his charge; which he taking in good part, framed himself to
some better diligence and besides some other writing, translated diverse parts
of the Bible into the English or Saxon tongue. He died 721. 9 Ethelwold Abbot
of Malros, who died the year 738. 10 Kenulfus, He was taken prisoner by King
Edbert the year 750. and committed to the Castle of Bobba. He died 781.
11 Higbald.
HIgbald sat twelve years, and died anno 803. In his time the Danes often
spoiled the Church and Monastery of Lindisfarne, so as the Bishop and Monks
were feign to forsake it. Taking therefore the body of Saint Cutbert with them,
they determined to seat themselves in Ireland, but being often driven back by
tempest, so as attempting diverse times to cross the seas, they could never
land there, they gave over that enterprise, and rested themselves, sometimes in
one place, sometimes in an other, during the time of all these Bishops.

12 Egbert consecrate June 11. 802. died 819. Fl. Wig. says Ethoredus
succeeded. 13 Egfridus, he died. an. 845. 14 Eanbert or Egbert, he died an,
854. 15 Eardulf, he died 900. In this man's time (says Houeden) the Sea
Episcopal of Lindisfarn was settled at Cestre, anciently called Cunecestre, now
Chester upon the S^reete, and by Elfred and Guthred Kings of Northumberla^d, all the Country between Tine and Teiseam were given to the same See. Moreover he
says, that of old belonged unto the same, Carliol, Northam, and all the
Churches from the river of Tweed^ unto Tine Southward, and Westward unto the
wast or desert, as also these mansions, Carnham, Cultherham, Gedwerd, Neilros,
Tigbry, Tiningham, Collingham, Brigham and Werkword. Geniford also was given by
Egred the Bishop, (I think he means Eardelf) after that he had built a
Church there. 16 Cuthard, he died, anno 915. 17 Tilred, he died, an. 927. 18
Withred, he died 944, 19 Vhtred. 20 Sexhelm. 21 Aldred, he died anno. 968. at
Chester upon the street. 22 Alfrius or Elfsnius, he died, anno 990.
23 Aldhunus, or Alduinus.
ABout the year of grace 990. this Aldhunus was consecrate Bishop. The year
995 (or near thereabout, he came to Durham, or rather (for so is the right
name) Dunholme, which is compounded of two Saxon words, Dun, signifying a hill,
and Holme an Island in a river. Before his coming thither it was a place wild
and not habitable being all a wood, full of thick bushes and trees, saving
only a little plain upon the top of the hill, that was wont to b^e sowed, and
is the very place where the Church now stands. With the help of the country
people, and Vthred Earl of Northumberland, he cut down the wood, cleansed the
place, and in short time made it habitable. All the people, dwelling between
the rivers of These and Coqued, came then and afforded most readily their best
help unto the building of a church there, never ceasing until in the time of
this Bishop (who principally caused the same) it was quite finished. He was
Schoolmaster unto the children of K. Ethelred, Elfred, and Edward that after
reigned, and is commonly called Edward the Confessor. The king their father
being driven out of his kingdom by Swanus the Dane, the year 1013. he sent
him with Emma his wife and his two sons before named unto Richard Duke of
Normandy their uncle. How soon the Bishop returned I know not, but I find that
he died within three years after, to wit, the year 1017. having continued
Bishop almost nine and twenty years.

24 Eadmund.
THree years after the death of Aldwine the Sea remained void; by reason of
the great troubles and continual wars wherewith the Realm was vexed by the
Daues. At the last, God sending a more peaceable time, the Clergy of Durham
determined to proceed unto an election. As they were conferring about the
business they had in hand it happened a certain grave Priest to come into the
place where they were gathered together, (and understanding what they were
about) to say merrily unto them, that they were best choose him. These words
used by him in ^eft, were hearkened unto by them in good earnest, insomuch as,
upon a little deliberation, they agreede indeed to elect him for their Bishop,
and so did. Matthew Westminster adds, (credit him as you list) that the
Monks fasting three days and praying unto Saint Cuthbert to show some token of
his approbation or dislike of this election; there was a voice heard out of his
shrine (the Priest being at Mass) that three times named Edmund to the
Bishopric. He was elected the year 1020. but not consecrate in five years
after. He sat after the time of his consecration 23. years, and dying of
Gloucester, anno 1048. was carried thence to his own Church of Durham^ and
there buried. William of Malmsb. commends him much for his industry, in
adorning his church and City with buildings and otherwise.

25 Eadred.
PResently after his death, Eadred was made Bishop, enjoyed that honor a very
short time, to wit, 10. Months only and then died.

26 Egelric.
EGelricus a Monk (or as I find also reported Abbot) of Peterborough,
succeeded him, by the means and endeavor of Godwyn Earl of Kent. He builded
a Church at Cuneagecester (now called Chester upon the street) in memory that
the Bishops of Lindisfarn had rested themselves there, together with the body
of Saint Cuthbert 113. yeare^ during the time of the Danish wars. In digging
the foundation of this Church, he found such an infinite deal of money, as
after that time, not caring for the revenues of his Bishopric; he resigned
the same unto Egelwyn his brother and returned himself to the Monastery of
Peterborough whence he came. There he bestowed great cos^ in building and
repayring the Church and monastery, as also in making a caws^e with timber,
lime and sand, through the fens between Deeping and Spalding, a work very
necessary, and of infinite charge. This caws^e was called after the name of the
maker Elrichrode. He resigned the year 1056. and having led a priuat^ life now
13. years, in his old age, to wit the year, 1069. he^ was charged (I know
not how justly) with treason and conspiracy against the Conqueror, who drew
him out of his Cloister at Peterborough, and imprisoned him at Westminster.
There (says W. Malmsbury) by continual fasting and abundance of tears,
washing away the guilt of his former misdeedes, he wanne unto himself such
reputation of holiness as the place of his burial was much frequented after his
death He died October 15. 1072. and (if I mistake him not for his brother, as
many of our Writers do, who confound the history of these men, and attribute
diverse actions of the o^^ unto the other) was buried in the Chapel of Saint
Nicholas in Westminster.

27 Egelwyn.
THis Egelwyn was Bishop at the coming in of the Conqueror, against whom
he always opposed himself. At the last seeing himself not able to withstand
him, and fearing to be too near him, he forsook Durham in the end of the
year 1069, and carried his Clergy with him unto the Church of Lindisfarne. But
it was not long before they returned again. The King having withdrawn his
forces out of that Country, and the Bishop (belike) being taken into favor,
about the beginning of Lent the Church was furnished again and the Bishop
himself entered the same, April 6. within two years after which time, whether
it were the ancient hatred he bore unto the king that now reboiled in his
stomach, or a vain hope of recovering the liberty of his country enthralled
unto the Normans, or offense taken at the unreasonable oppression of the same,
and especially of Clergy men (as Stigand and diverse other that were deprived of
their Bishoprics and other promotions): he joined with certain English Noble
men, in a flat rebellion, alleging at first that they feared imprisonment and
hard measure, but indeed purposing to depose the king, and set up some
Englishman. When things succeeded not according to their expectation, they were
fain to hide themselves in woods and secret places, doing great spoil in the
Country, till at last they took the I Will of Ely, which they defended against
the Kings power a long space. In the mean time Egelwyn our Bishop took ship
and departed (as Mat. Westminster says) into voluntary exile. But William
Malmsbury charge him with piracy and robbery upon the sea. He set his course,
(as Stubs says for Colon, but was forced by contrary winds to land in
Scotland. Thence returning again to Ely, in the end he was taken and committed
to straight prison at Abingdon, where he died the year 1071 in winter,
refusing, (as Flor. Wigorn delivers) for grief and anger to take any
sustenance: Howbeit other think his abstinence was of constraint, and that he
gladly would have eaten if he could have gotten meat. It is said he was buried
in Saint Nicholas Chapel at Westminster. But I think him mistaken in that
point for his brother Agelricke.

28 Walter, or Walcher.
EGelwyn yet living (but in prison) the king caused one Walter borne in
Lorraine (but brought up in the Church of Leodin) to be consecrate Bishop. He
attending more worldly affairs then the c^arge of his flock, gave himself
altogether to temporal business, wherein he wholly occupied himself. He
bought of the king the Earldom of Northumberland, and then making himself a
secular Judge, took upon him to sit in the Court, and to determine all causes
at his pleasure, dealing withal very corruptly, and taking still the course
that might be most for his own gain. Hereupon he greatly enriched his
coffers, but purchased unto him self extreme hatred amongst the common
people, which was his destruction in the end. There was a certain gentleman of
great account named Leulfus that married Algitha the daughter of Aldred
sometime Earl of Northumbe^land, from whom the Lord Lumly that now lives is
lineally descended This Leulfus, to the end he might live near the Church in
his latter time, and for very devotion, came to Durham to dwell there, and kept
company very much with the Bishop, who loved him entirely, for many good parts
he saw in him, as namely, his wisdom in discerning, his equity in deciding,
and his discretion in ordering and handling such causes as he committed unto
him; in which respect also he used him very familiarly, employed him often, and
gave him what countenance he could. Now you shall understand, that unto the
same Bishop belonged two men, unto whom for the most part he committed the
ordering of all his affairs; Leofwyn or Leobwyn his chaplain whom he trusted
with all household matters, and Gilbert a kinsman of his own that dealt in his
causes of temporal government. In these offices they behaved themselves so; as
the Bishop had cause to commend their diligence, but to blame their rashness and
wilfulnes in many things. Which notwithstanding, he bare withal, either
because their industry and care of his affairs, so blinded his eyes as he
could not espy their misbehauiour otherwise, or else being loath to deiect them
whom he had once advanced, These men, and especially Leofwyn did greatly envy
the credit that Leulfus had gotten with the Bishop, and every where opposed
themselves against him, not only in words, traducing his actions, but in
deeds, also still thwarting and crossing his endeauours. Whereby it came to
pass, that many iarres fell out between them. One day amongst the rest, a
court being held in the presence of the Bishop, Leofwyn or Leobwyn (for so also
I find him called) according unto his wonted manner, gave Leulfus ill
speeches, which he not enduring to hear as heertofore he had done (furor sit
saepius laesa patientia) answered this salvey Chaplain somewhat more roundly
then he had accustomed. Whereupon he rose straight from the Court in great
indignation ( Leofwyn I mean) and calling Gilbert aside, with little ado
persuaded him to carry a certain number of armed men to the house where Leulfus
lay, and in a night to kill him; which indeed he performed with great
cruelty, murdering not only the innocent gentleman himself, but also his
servants and whole household. The news of this horrible and outrageous cruelty,
coming unto the ears of the Bishop, amassed him very much and suspecting it
was done by the advice of Leofwyn, turning him about unto him. O Leofwyn says
he, thou have already ^laine me by thy tongue. So not doubting it would breed
much danger unto him, he got him into his Castle, and presently dispatched
messengers unto the friends and kindred of Leulfus that was slain; protesting
that the fact was committed without his knowledge that he was marvelous sorry
for it, and if any man suspected him, would be ready to submit himself to any
order of law, whereby he might clear himself. Herewith they seemed to be
satisfied; but for conclusion of a firm peace amongst them, it was thought sit
they should meet and confer of the matter. They met at a place called
Goates-head. The Bishop for his better safeguard betook himself unto the
Church with his company. The people (whereof an infinite number were gathered
together) abode without. Messages a while passed between them, but the more
the matter was debated (being very odious of itself) the more the people were
incensed. At last it was told them how not only Leofwin but also Gilbert had
been harbored in the Bishops house and affoorded countenance of him since the
murder: which being once heard (and it was true enough) they all cried out, it
was manifest that the Bishop was ye author of this fact. It is furthermore
delivered by Matthew Paris, that the Bishop not long before this, amongst many
intolerable exactions laid upon the Country by him, had commanded the sum
of 400. l. to be levied at this time That being also remembered, while as all
the company stood in a mammering, doubting what course to take, one of some
special regard among them stepped up, using these words, Short read, good read,
slay ye the Bishop. Hereupon without more ado they ran all unto the Church,
killed so many of the Bishops retinue as they found without doors, and with
horrible noise and out cries bid him and his company to come out unto them. Too
late then he repented that he had committed himself unto the fury of
adiscontented multitude, with whom he knew himself before that time nothing
gracious. But to make the best of a badde match, and to try all means of
ridding himself from the danger eminent, he persuaded his kinsman Gilbert
there present to go forth unto them, if happily his death (which doubtless
he had well deserved) might satisfy their ^u^y, and purchase safely unto his
Lord and Master. Gilbert was content, and issuing out, with diverse of the
Bishops company, were all slain except only two English men servants unto the
Bishop (all the rest were Normans) They being not yet pacified, he besought
Leofwin (whose life he knew well was principally sought) to go out also. But
he utterly re^used so to do. The Bishop therefore going unto the Church door,
entreated them not to take his life from him, protesting himself to ^e utterly
guiltless of the blood of Leulfus, and showed them at large, how dangerous it
would be unto them in particular, and what inconveniences would follow unto the
whole Country in general, if they should de^ile their hands in shedding his
blood, an unarmed Priest, a ^a^^ed and consecrate Bishop, their ruler, their
governor, their magistrate. Hoping lastly that his very countenance, his
gravity, his age, and the sight of his person might somewhat move them to
compassion (for he was indeed a very reverend man to see to, very tall of
stature, head and beard as white as snow, his face ^^^sh and well colored, and
every way very personable^) he went out carrying a green branch in his hand,
that so also he might testify his desire of peace. When he saw that all this
auailed not, and the people ran ^uriously upon him he cast his gown ^uer his
own head in like sort as we read Iuliu^ Caesar did in the like case, and
permitting himself to their ^ury, with innumerable wounds was pitifully
massacred, together with all his people and retinue, to the number of an
hundred, only Leofwyn yet remained within the Church, and being often called
would not come forth. So they set the Church on ^ire. Not enduring the ^ire he
leapt out at a window and was immediately hewne into a thou and pieces. This
barbarous slaughter was committed the foureteenth of May, 1080. The Monks of
Yarrow came and fetched away the Bishops body (which they found stark naked)
and could hardly know it for the multitude of wounds; they carried it to their
Monastery, from whence it was conuaied to Durham, and there buried on the south
side of the Chapterhouse, but secretly for fear of the murderers that roued
up and down the Town, and once assaulted the Castle: when they could not
prevail there, they dispersed themselves, and for thr most part came to evil
and unhappy ends. The King in the mean time hearing of this tumult, sent his
brother Odo Bishop of Bayon; with many of his Nobles, and a great army to
take punishment of this murther^ which while they sought to revenge, they
brought the whole Country to desolation. Those that were guilty prevented the
danger toward them by flight, so as few of them could be taken. Of the rest
that stayed at home, some were unjustly executed, and the rest compelled to
ransom themselves to their utter empouerishing and undoing. The chiefest doer
in this outrage, was one Eadulfus surnamed Ru^, descended of the Earls of
Northumberland, who (as some say) ^^ue the Bishop with his own hands, and
afterward by the just judgment of God, was himself slain by a woman, and his
^ody though once buried in the Church of Gedworth, was taken up by the
commandment of Trugost Prior of Durham, and forbidden Christian burial. At
this time the surnamed Odo took away from the Church of Durham certain
ornaments of great value, amongst which is especially remembered a certain
Crosser of inestimable price. In this Bishops days and by his endeavor,
secular Clerks were displaced, and the Church of Durham replenished with Monks;
the Pope, the King, and the Archbishop allowing this alteration.

29 William Kairlipho.
The Sea of Durham having been void six months after the death of Walter,
1081. W. Con. 16
the ninth of November following, William Kairlipho Abbot of Saint Vincent, was
elected, and received consecration at the hands of Thomas Archbishop of Yorke^
January 3. following at Gloucester, the King and almost all the Bishops of the
Realm being present at that solemnity. The monks (whom he sauoured much, for
he expelled diverse married priests out of his Church of Durham, whom Walter
was content to bear withal, and suffered only Monks there) they praise him
for a man of great wisdom, learning and virtue. Certain it is, that he was
very subtle, whereby (as also by the volubilitie of his tongue, which he had
passing ready at commandment) he got very far into the favor of the king
William the Conqueror, and afterward of his son William Rufus, under whom
he did even what he list. Unto the latter of these he proved very
unthankful, joining himself with Odo Bishop of Bayon in a rebellious
conspiracy against him. The Rebels being overthrown, he was feign for his
safeguard to shut himself up within the walls of Durham. The king hasting
thither by greatiournies, besieged him, and after a short time had the town
yielded by composition, wherein it was conditioned, that the Bishop and his
company should depart in safety. So he got him beyond the seas, and lived in
exile three years, viz. until September 11. 1090. at what time the King
coming to Durham, received him to grace, and restored him to his former
dignity, that very day three years that he departed thence. After that time
he omitted nothing, whereby he might curry favor with the King, ever
applying himself that way whither he saw him to incline. In all the broile
between the king and Anselme, he was the chief stirrer against the
Archbishop, hoping belike, so to assure himself of the Kings favor, and if
Anselme should be displaced (which he endeavored) he thought no man so likely
then to succeed him as himself. But he failed in both of these purposes; for
the kings displeasure was his death. He was summoned to appear before the King
at Gloucester, at a day, before which time (for grief as it is thought) he
fell sick. When he appeared not, and it was told the king he was sick: he
swear by Lukes face (that was his usual oath) he lied, he did but
counterfeit, and he would have him fetched with a vengeance. It appeared the
excuse was true enough; for soon after; viz. the second of January, 1095. he
died at Windsor, having been Bishop 15. years. This man pulling down to the
ground the Church of Durham, that Aldwinus had first built, began to erect
another far more magnificent but lived not to finish it. Himself Malcolme K.
of Scots, and Turgot Prior of Durham, laid the first three stones, July 30. or
(as some deliver, Aug. 11.) 1093. It is said, that lying upon his death bed,
and thought to be past memory (if not dead) diverse Prelates that were in his
Chamber, conferred about the order of his funerals, and amongst other things
appointed the place of his burial to be in the church upon the building
whereof he had bestowed so much. The supposed dead man euerheard them, and
gathering his forces together, made shift to breath out these words: God
forbid (says he) that by my burial you should prejudice the honor of Saint
Cutbert, for reverence of whom, never any of my predecessors would endure to
be laid there. Bury you me therefore in the Chapter house. It was performed
accordingly: his body was conueighed from Gloucester, where he died, unto
Durham, and on the North part of the chapter house there solemnly interred
over against Bishop Walcher, Turgott Bishop of Saint Andrews in Scotland,
and sometimes Prior of Durham, lying in the middle Isle between them. Within a
year or two after his first being Bishop, he traveled to Rome, and
obtained there license of Pope Gregory the seventh to bring the Monks from
Yarrow and Wermouth into the Cathedral Church of Durham. He also bestowed
upon them, not only Books and diverse Ornaments for the furnishing of their
Church, but Lands and Revenues in sundry places: for the confirmation of all
which gifts he procured the Charter of William the Conqueror under Seal.

30 Ranulf Flambard.
1099. W. Ruf. 13
AFter the death of William, the Sea of Durham stood void three years and
four months. The King at last bestowed it upon one Ranulf, rather for the
service he had done him, then for any special service he could hope he would
do, either to God or his Church. For he was a very wicked man, but such a one
as had served his turn notably: yet it is said the king was content to take of
him a thousand pounds to inuest him in this Bishopric. He was first
Chaplain unto Maurice Bishop of London, of well favored of him, but not so
well as that he would let him have the Deanery falling void, which he taking
very ill, in a chafe left him, and (by what means I know not,) woonde himself
into the Court. Being passing subtle and shrewde witted, fair spoken, and
nothing scrupulous, but ready to do any thing for preferment; It was no hard
matter for him to obtain any thing of the King (William Rufus) a very corrupt
and vicious Prince. His first praise was, to f^rme the vaca^cies of Abbotships
and Bishoprics of the king, whereby he not only enriched himself, but
brought great sums of money into the kings coffers that never were acquainted
with that kind of profit before. The king perceiving him to be a ^it
instrument for his purposes, employed him daily more and more, and at last made
him chief governor of all his realm under him, so as he had all that
authority which now the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and diverse other officers
have divided amongst them. For it seems unto me, that few of those offices
were then so precisely distinguished, as soon after. This authority he abused
very impudently, not caring whom he offended, so he might enrich either the
king or himself. Many times when the King gave commandment for the leuying of
a certain sum of money amongst his subjects, he would require of the Commons
twice so much, whereat the king being very well content, would laugh, and say
that Ranulf was the only man for his turn, who cared not whom he displeased,
so he might please his master. It was impossible, but he should be very odious,
both unto the common people and nobility also. And no marvel if many
complaints were made unto the King of him, against all which he shut his ears
obstinately. When therefore that way succeeded not, some of those his
discontented adversaries determined to wreak their malice upon him by killing
him. They fained a message from the Bishop of London his old Master saying that
he was very sick and ready to depart the world, that he was wonderful
desirous to speak with him, and to the end he might make the better speed,
had sent him a barge to conueigh him unto his house being then by the water
side. He suspecting no fraud, went with them in great haft, attended only by
his Secretary, and some one or two other; they having him thus in their
clutches, carried him not to the appointed stairs, but rowed still on (say
what he would) till they came unto a ship provided for him, ready to set sail.
As soon as he perceived how he was entrapped, he cast away his ring or manuell
seal, and after his great Seal (whether the broad Seal of England or no, I
know not) into the river, least they might give opportunity of forging false
graunts and conueyances. Then he fell to entreating and persuading but all to
no purpose, for they were determined he should die, They had appointed two
Mariners to dispatch him, either by knocking out his brains, or heauing him
alive over boorde, for doing whereof they were promised to have his clothes.
These executioners could not agree upon the division of this reward, for his
gown was better worth then all the rest of his apparel. While they were
reasoning upon that point, it pleased God to raise a terrible and fearful
tempest, such as they looked every minute to die themselves, and therefore had
no very good leisure to think of putting another man to death. Ranulf then
omitting no opportunity of his deliverance, like another Arion, by the music
of his eloquence seeks to alay their malice, and to dissuade them from the
execution of their bloody determination, laying diligently before them, the
danger that was like to ensue unto them by so cruel a murder which could not
be hid, promising mountains of gold if they saved his life; and lastly wishing
them to consider, how God by raising this tempest, had threatened to revenge his
death, and had as it were set the image of his vengeance before their eyes.
Whether it were the fear of God or of man, or else the hope of reward that
wrought with them, of such effect were these his persuasions, as first diverse
of the company refused to be partakers of his murder; one of them then stepped
forth, and vowed to defend him to his power, so as he would live or die with
him. And at length, his greatest enemies were so pacified, as Girald the
author of this conspiracy, was content to set him a land, and to conduct him
to his own house. But not trusting a reconciled foe, as soon as he had so
done, he got him out of the realm, and durst never come in England after. So
by one danger this man escaped another, and might well say as Themistocles, when
banished his country, he found better entertainment of his enemy the King of
Persia, then he could have given himself at home, Perijssem nisi perijssem, I
had indeed been utterly undone, had I not been upon the point to be undone.
Soon after his return from this brave voyage, to wit, June 5. 1099. he was
consecrate Bishop of Durham, in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul. He was
scarce warm in his seat, when his Master the king being slain by the glance
of an arrow, as he was hunting, Henry his brother succeeded in the kingdom.
This Prince not able to withstand the importunity of his Nobles, and the
innumerable complaints daily made against this our Bishop, clapped him up in
the Tower: But he so enchanted his keepers with money and fair words, as they
were content to let him go, and to run away with him themselves. William of
Malmesbury says that he procured a Water-bearer, in his Tankerd to bring him a
rope, by which he slid down from the wall to the ground, and so (although he
hurt his arm, and galled his hands, to the bone) away he escaped, getting
himself into Normandy, where he arrived in the beginning of February 1101.
There he never linne buzzing into the ears of Robert Duke of Normandy, telling
him the kingdom of England was his by right, till he pro^oked him to attempt
the invasion of this Realm, but to small purpose, as in the Chronicles you may
see more at large. How long he lived in exile I find not, it seems not to
be very long, for he had leisure to bring many great things to pass at home
afterward. He raised the walls of the Body of his Church unto the roof, he
translated the relics of Saint Cuthbert into the new Church, and bestowed a
shrine upon him, he compassed the City with a wall, he caused a number of
houses to be pulled down that were near the Church, and might have been
either noisome unto it, or dangerous by fire happening among them: he continued
diverse banks along the river of Wers, with great charge he built the Castle of
Norham upon a steep hill near the river of Tweed, the hospital of Kepar, and
the bridge of Frammoldgate. He was the first Founder of the Priory at
Mottes^ount near Winchester for black Canons, valued at the suppression in a
hundred sixty seven pound, fifteen shillings, eight pence half penny, and
lastly, whereas he had been sometimes Deane of the College of Christ church
in Hampshire, he reedified and much increased the state thereof. Having sat
Bishop 29. years, or thereabouts, he died Sept. 5. 1128.

31 Geoffry Rufus.
GEoffry surnamed Rufus, 1128. Hen. 2.29.
Chancellor of England was then preferred unto the Sea of Durham, whereto he
was consecrate Aug. 6. 1129. He sat 13. years, and died May 6. 1140. He built
the Castle of Alnerton, and gave it to one William a nephew of his, who married
a Niece of the Earl of Albemarle.

32 Will. de Sancta Barbara.
NExt after him succeeded William de Sancta Barbara, 1143 Steph. (...)
Deane of York, a devout and very religious man. He was consecrate by Henry
Bishop of Winchester the Popes Legate, the twenty of June, 1145. continued in
this See nine years. and died the foureteenth of November, 1153.

33 Hugh Pusar.
1153. Steph. 19.
HVgh Pusar, Pudsey, or de Puteaco (for thus diversely I find him called)
Treasurer of York and Archdeacon of Winchester, was elected unto this See of
Durham after the death of the foresaid William, rather in respect of his
nobility and greatness of blood, then of any special worthiness otherwise.
For king Stephen was uncle unto him. He was very wise in ordering of temporal
matters, and (considering he was not learned) wonderful eloquent, exceeding
covetous, and as cunning in gathering money, as thirsty and desirous of it.
Henry Murdac Archbishop of York, not only refused to consecrate him himself,
taking exceptions both against his want of years and lightness of behavior,
but also sent to Rome to have a Caveat laid in against him there. Eugenius was
Pope at that time, an old acquaintance of the Archbishops, who both were
brought up at Clarenall under S. Bernard. But such was the good hap of this new
elect, as a little before his arrival there, (I mean at Rome) Pope Eugenius
was dead, and soon after came certain news thither of the death of the
Archbishop also. Anastasius that succeeded Eugenius, without much ado
affoorded him consecration, Dec. 30. 1153. He sat Bishop long, even almost 42.
years; in which time he built diverse houses upon his manors out of the ground,
and bestowed much in repairing the rest. He built a fair house at Derlington,
as also the Church there: He founded the Priory of Finchal: he bought Sadbury
of K. Richard 1. and gave it unto his See. He ^uilt the bridge of Eluet, and
the Gallery at the west end of his cathedral Church in which he placed the
bones of venerable Beda. Lastly, he^ built two hospitals, one at Allerton,
another called Sherburne at the east end of Durham. To Sherburne he allotted
liberal allowance for the maintenance of 65. poor Lazers; and a certain
number of Priests. Neubrigensis ascribes this good work, partly unto other
men, whom he enforced to become benefactors unto this foundation, being loath
to be at the whole charge himself. At what time King Richard made provision
for his iourny into the Holy land, he also took on him the cross, and vowed
to be one of that company. The King understanding that he had prepared a great
mass of money to carry with him, persuaded him to stay at home, and to af^oord
him his money; which if he would do, he promised to make him Earl of
Northumberland. The Bishop long since repenting the vow he had made, quickly
condiscended to his offer, and accepted the same. The King having created him
an Earl, turned him about unto the company, and laughing, said, he had
performed a wonderful exploit; for (quoth he) of an old Bishop I have made a
young Earl. Now that he might have some colorable excuse of not performing
his how, he caused the King to allege that he might not be spared out of the
realm in his absence: and to make this the more probable, giving the king
1000. marks, he persuaded him with that kind of golden Rhetoric to make him
chief Justice of England. The like Rhetoric it was that induced the Pope to
dispense with his vow, unto which the excuses before alleged made some way, but
could never have effected the business without that help. At the return of K.
Richard from Jerusalem; he found him not so favorable as he expected, and
thinking that he grudged him his Earldome, resigned the same into his hands.
After which, notwithstanding he loded him sore with many grievous exactions,
well knowing the Bishops bags to be notably stuffed, for that he had offered him a
great sum of money for the redemption of his Earldome. The king therefore being
beyond the seas, sent unto him for his money as condiscending to his request.
But the old For well enough perceiving his drift, humbly besought him by
letters, either to afford him the Earldome first, or else to suffer him to
enjoy his money quietly. Whereupon the king that knew how to use him in his
kind, writ letters unto him full of reverent and gracious speeches, wishing him
to bring up his money to London, and there to receive the government of the
whole realm which he would commit unto him, and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Being very joyful of this favor, toward London he comes about Shrouetyde.
Thinking then to take his farewell of flesh, he surffeted upon the way at
Doncaster, and finding himself sick, returned home to Houeden by boat where
he died March 3. being the saturday in cleansing week. He was 70. years old
at the time of his death; and yet would hardly believe his Physicians,
certifying him a little before he died in what danger he was. An old ^ermit
named Godricus. esteemed of many, a very holy man, had told him he should be
blind seven years before his death, which (say our stories) Godricus meant the
blindness of his mind; and he understanding him of the blindness of his
bodily eyes, never cared to provide for death assuring himself he had that 7.
years at least to come. Being yet Treasurer of York he begot three bastards,
all sons; the first, borne of a gentlewoman of great blood, became a soldier;
the second he made Archdeacon of Durham, and loaded him with many other
ecclesiastical promotions, which he enjoying but one year after his Fathers
death, was also taken away himself. The third (whom the old Bishop loved most
tenderly of all) by his Fathers great suit and no less expense, became
Chauncellor to the French king. He was so unhappy as to see that his best
beloved son vncle^. He it was (if I mistake not) that Roger Houden calls
the Earl of Bar, that deceased at Adet in France the year 1189. and was
buried in the Galily at Durham. Himself departed this world (as before is
said) March 3. 1195.

34 Philip of Poitiers.
1217. Hen. 3.2.
KIng Richard the first favored much one Philip (born^ at Poitiers in Aquitane)
for the long and acceptable service he had done unto him: In reward whereof, he
besought him to prefer him to the Bishopric of Durham being void. The king
well knowing he could not do for him any other way better cheap, commended
him so effectually unto the Covent, as they durst not but choose him. He was
elected December 30. 1195. and cons. May 12. 1197. by the Pope. The next year
he was sent Ambassador to the Pope together with William Lougshamp that famous
Bishop of Ely who died in the way of Rome-ward. There (to wit at Rome) he was
consecrate May 12. 1197. The year 1200. he went in pilgrimage to Saint James
of Compo^^ella. He was a great hartner of King John against the Pope, aduising
him ever to make no reckoning of his excommunications. The Pope understanding
thereof, excommunicated him also together with the king: being not yet absolved
he died April 22. 1207^ and was buried without the Church, by the hands of lay
men because he stood excommunicat at the time of his death. This Bishop by
the license of king Richard the first, set up a Mint at Durham, and began to
coin many there the year 1196.

35 Richard de Marisco.
IT seems the Sea was long void after the death of Philip. 1197. Ric. 1.8.
For Richard de Marisco, Lord Chauncellor of England Deane of Salisbury and
Archdeacon of Northumberland an old Courtier, was thrust into this See by Gualo
the Popes Legate, and consecrate by the Archbishop of York Iun. 22. 1217.
During the time of the vacancy, I find that one Morgan Provost of Beuerley was
elected unto this Bishopric. He was bastard brother unto king John, and
begotten upon the Lady of a knight called Sir Ralfe Blowet or Blewet.
Exceptions were taken against him, that he was a bastard and so by the Canon^
not capable of Ecclesiastical preferment with out special dispensation; which
the Pope being loath to grant, advised him to call himself Blewet, and to
allege that he was borne in lawful wedlock, promising upon that condition
to afford him consecration. But he an^wered that for any worldly preferment
whatsoever, he would not renounce his Father or deny himself to be of the
blood r^iall. So he lost his Bishopric, and (for ought I find) never attained
other preferment after. This Richard was a very prodigal man, and spent so
liberally the goods of his Church, as the Monks doubting he would undo them
and himself also, went about by course of Law to stay him and force him to a
moderation of expense. But it fell out quite contrary to their expectation. For
he being wilfully set, not only continued his old course even until his
death, but added much unto his former expenses by maintaining suite of Law
against these complainers. The year 1226. in the beginning of Easter term, he
rid up to London with a troop of Lawyers attending on him. At Peterborough he
was entertained in the Abbey very honorably, and going to bed there in very
good health, was found on the morning by his chambe^laines stark dead He
deceased May the 1 leaving his Church 40000. marks indebted. A monk of Durham
bestowed this riming Epitaphe upon him.

Culmina qui cupitis, lauds pompasque sititis.
Est sedata sitis, si me pensare ve^itis.
Qui populos regitis, memores super omnia sitis.
Quod mors immitis, non parcit honor potitis.
Vobis prepositis, similis fueram been scitis.
Quod sum vos critis, ad me currendo venitis.
26 Richard Poor.
1228. Hen. 3.13.
THe King earnestly commended one Luke his Chaplain unto the Bishopric of
Durham now void, swearing unto the Monks that were sent to crave a Conge
de'lier, they should have no Bishop in seven years after if they would not
be content to elect him. The Covent thinking him unworthy so high a
preferment, chose one William Scot, Archdeacon of Worceter, a grave learned
man, and the kings Chaplain: Howbeit the king offended that his desire was not
satisfied, refused in great displeasure to ratify this election. And
understanding that they sent unto Rome to entreat the Pope to put him in
possession of that See; he sent likewise his Ambassadors, the Bishop of
Lichfield and the Prior of Lanthony to cross and hinder that designement,
which they easily performed. Within a year or two after, they chose (with the
Kings good liking) Richard Poor Bishop of Salisbury, a notable man. He was
first Deane of Salisbury, consecrate Bishop of Chichester the year 1215.
translated thence to Salisbury 1217. and lastly to Durham 1228. Being Bishop of
Chichester, he purchased unto that Church Amport which he bought of the Church
of Winchester. At Salisbury he is famous for remoouing his See from old
Salisbury, to new Salisbury, where he began the building of that stately
Church. See more of him in Salisbury. He founded a monastery of Nuns called
the Charnell at Tharent in Wiltshire, and gave it unto the Queen, who chose
that for the place of her burial. He builded also an Hospital for poor
people, near the College of Uaulx in Salisbury. Coming to Durham, he had
enough to do to pay the huge debt of 40000. marks that Richard de Marisco
left the lands of his See bound for. He was a man of rare learning in those
times, and of notable integrity for his life and conversation. A little before
his death perceiving his end to draw near, he caused the people to be called
together, and going up into the pulpit, made a very godly speech unto them,
desiring them to mark well that his exhortation, for he was now shortly to be
taken from them. The next day he did the like, and bidding them farewell,
prayed them if he had offended any to forgive him and to pray for him. The
third day he sent for all his particular acquaintance, called all his family
and servants before him, and distributed unto them presently by hand, such
sums of money as either he ought, or was willing to bestow upon them: which
done, and having set every thing in perfect order, he took his leave of his
friends one after an other: and then falling to his prayers, when he came unto
these words (says M. Paris) In pace in id ipsum dormiam and requiescam, he
gave up the ghost. He died April 15. 1237. and was buried in the Nunnery of
Tharent which he had founded.

37 Nicholas de Farnham.
THomas, 1239. Hen. 3.24.
Prior of Durham was chosen Bishop upon the death of Poor. Through the Kings
backwardnes and dislike, that election was cassate and disannulleo. A long time
the monks had labored this suit for their Prior, and had spent much money in
it. At last, perceiving they strove against the stream, they gave it over, the
elect himself himself first yielding. Then chose they Nicholas de Farnham,
one greatly commended both for his manners and learning. This man spent his
younger years in Oxford, and having furnished himself there, with the grounds
of all good learning especially Logike, and natural Philosophy; he traveled
beyond the seas, and studied Physic at Paris and Bo^^nia a great while.
Returning into his native Country, he gave himself much unto the study of
Divinity, and profited therein so well, as he was esteemed worthy to be a
Doctor. By the counsel of Otto the Legate, the Bishop of Carlisle and other,
the King entertained this man into his service, And first he was (as it seems
unto me) Esquire of his body, ( custos corporis regij says Matthew Paris,)
then Physician to the Queen, and (she being yet very young) her instructor or
directer in matters of manners and behavior. When he had now a long time
been a Courtier, it happened, the Sea of Lichfield being void, the monks of
Couentry very careful of choosing a sufficient man (as assuring themselves
their doings would be ^ifted) the year 1239. elected him whom they knew to be
a man learned, graue^, virtuous, discreet, very wise, well spoken, and (which
makes a man somewhat the more gracious) tall of stature, personable, and of a
goodly presence. He thanked them for their good will, but conside^ing with
himself that his title to that Bishopric was like to prove litigio^s, (for
the Chapter of Lichfield pretended a right to the election that time) as also
the great burden and charge of the office pastoral, refused in any sort to
accept of the same. The Chapter of Lichfield (who had chosen their Deane)
hearing of this refusal; by the exhortation of the same their Deane (who
resigned his right) for their part also elected him. Which notwithstanding, he
persisted in his former determination, telling them that he felt the burden
already so heavy of a Benefice or two which he had, as he was resolved never to
accept any greater charge of souls. So they were enforced to choose another.
Understa^ding within two years after how the Covent of Durham with one consent
had also chosen him for their Pastor, he likewise refused, and that more
earnestly now then the last time, adding unto the former reasons this also,
that if he should accept of this place, men would say, how the hypocrite had
refused a poor Bishopric, under color of conscience to stay for a better.
In this mind he continued, till Robert Grosthead (that famous Bishop of
Lincoln) reprehended him sharply for this his backwardness. See thou not
(quoth he) how the monks of Durham, destitute of that comfort which a good
pastor should yield them, entreat thee with tears to afford the same unto
them, knowing well that if thou accept not the place, the King will immediately
thrust in some unworthy stranger to their great grief, and the no less
dishonor of Almighty God? I adjure thee therefore by the blood of Jesus Christ,
that thou be content to put thy neck under this yoke, and to employ thy
talent according to the occasion offered. Persuaded thus, with much ado^, at
last he yielded. The K. very readily allowing their choice, he was consecrate
at Gloucester, in the church of Saint Oswald, by the Archbishop of York, June
9. 1241. in the presence of the K. Queen, many Prelates, and other personages
of honor. He was not more unwilling to take this honorable burden then ready
and desirous to leave the same. The year 1249. he obtained license of the Pope
to resign this his Bishopric, and about Candlemasse indeed gave it over;
reserving only unto himself for his maintenance during his life, three
Manors, with the appurtenances, Houeden, Stocton, and Ensington. His successor
began a little to wrangle with him about that reservation, but could not
infringe it. After he had lived a private life the space of 8. years, giving
himself altogether to prayer and contemplation, about the beginning of
February 1275. he departed this world at Stocton. He that is desirous to read
more of this man in Matthew Paris he shall find often mention of him, viz page
768. where he tells how by his means especially the K. was content to receive
into favor Walter Marshall, and to give him the Earldome of his brother lately
deceased; again, page 988. he makes a large report of a great controversy
between him and the Abbot of Saint Albones; and lastly page 847. an incredible
tale of his miraculous recovery, being desperately sick of a dropsy joined
with other diseases. He lies buried in the Cathedral Church of Durham, which
together with Thomas Melscomb prior, he covered with a new roof the year 1242.

38 Walter de Kirkham.
1249. Hen. 3.34.
NO sooner had Nicholas Farnham resigned, but the king was in hand with the
Monks to elect for successor Ethelmare his own half brother. They would in no
sort condescend to this request; but told him plainly (yet in as good terms
as they could devise) how that his brother was such a one, as they could not
with a safe conscience commit so great a charge unto him, being as yet very
young and not endued with any competency of learning. The King answered, that
he would keep the temporalties eight or nine years in his hands, and by that
time (quoth he) he will be old enough. He was not as good as his word; for I
find that one Walter de Kirkham was cons. the year following, held that place
almost 11. years; and died in the month of August 1260.

39 Robert Stitchell.
1260 Hen. 3.45.
RObert Stitchell Prior of Finkhall succeeded, and had restitution of his
temporalties. December. 5. anno R. Henr. 3.45. He founded the Hospital of
Gritham, valued in the kings books at 97. pound, fix shillings, three pence
halfepennie. The king had seized upon all the lands of Simon Mountford Earl of
Leicester wheresoever. But whereas he had something of good value in the
Bishopric of Durham, this Bishop challenged it as eve unto him by the Earls
attainder, and at last recovering it from the King by law, employed it in the
erection of that hospital. He sat fowerteene years, and died August 4. 1274.

40 Robert de Insula.
1274. Edw. 1.2.
ANother Robert obtained the place after him, Robert de Insula. He continued in
the same nine years, and dying June 13. 1283. was buried in the Chapterhouse
at Durham, where he is covered with a stone very curiously wrought.

41 Anthony Beak.
BEfore the end of that year, 1283. Edw. 1.11.
it seems Antony Beak was invested in the Bishopric of Durham, in which he
so flourished, as ( Cardinal Woolsey excepted) never I think any either of
his predecessors or successors came near him. He was wonderful rich, not
only in ready money, but in lands also and temporal revenues: For he might
dispend yearly (besides that which belonged to his Myter) 5000. marks. Much
of that he had of the Lord Ve^^y, who thinking so to conueigh it unto his base
son William (for that he had no other issue) passed it over to this Bishop in
trust; which trust men say he never answered. The Kings house at Eltham was
part of that land. He built the house and gave it unto Elianor Queen to King
Edward the first, as also unto the king the Castle of Sourton beside York,
which likewise he built. A man now of this extraordinary wealth must not
content himself with ordinary titles: Therefore he procured the Pope to make
him Patriarch of Jerusalem, and obtained of the King the principality of the
Isle of Man, which he held during his life. The year 1294. being Ambassador
to the Emperor, the Archbishop of York John Roman (upon what quarrel I know
not) excommunicated him. It cost the Archb. 4000. marks fine and his life in
the end. He died (as it is said for thought.) See more in York. Great sturres
there were between this man and his Covent of Durham. He informed the Pope
that the Prior there was a very simple and insufficient man to rule that house,
and procured the government thereof for all matters both spiritual and
temporal to be committed unto him. Hereupon he sent certain officers to
execute in his name that new obtained authority, which when they came to the
monastery, were shut out of the gates and not suffered to enter. The Monks
appealed unto the Pope, and alleged, that the king also had required the
hearing of these controversies between the Prior and the Bishop. This
notwithstanding the Bishops officers made no more adoo, but excommunicated
Prior, Monks, and all, for not obeying their authority immediately. Herewith
the king greatly offended, caused these officers to be fined, and summoned the
Bishop himself to appear before him at a day appointed; before which time
he got him to Rome, never acquainting the King with his determination. The
King therefore seized into his hand the Bishops liberties, and appointed a
new Chauncellor, new Justices and other officers. He writ also unto the Pope,
in favor of the Prior, who delivering the kings letters himself, was adjudged
a sober and discreet man, whatsoever the Bishop had reported of him. So he
was restored to his place again, but died before he could get home. During
the time of the Bishops disgrace, amongst many other things wherein the
liberties of the Bishopric were infringed, it is specially to be remembered,
that the king took from him diverse Castles, and lands forfait unto him by John
Bayliol king of the Scots and other, (to wit Werk in Tiuidale, Perith and the
Church of Simondbury, but Lewis Beaumont one of his successors recovered them
again by Law. These broils ended, he gave himself very much to building.
The ancient manor place at Aukland he did encastellate. He built the great
hall there (in which are diverse pillars of black marble speckled with white)
the great chamber likewise, and many other rooms adjoining. He also erected
that same goodly. Chapel there; and placed in the same a Deane and
Prebendaries, allotting the quadrant in the West side of the Castle (built
likewise by him) for their habitation. He built or repaired with great charges
Barnard Castle, the Castles of Alnwike (part of the L. Vessyes lan^, which he
sold afterward to H. Piercy) Gainfoorth, Cuncliff, Somerton, (which he gave
unto the king) and the house at Eltham bestowed (as aforesaid) upon the Queen.
He founded the priory of Aluingham in Linconshire, valued at the suppression,
141.15. s. yearly revenue. And lastly, he procured with great charge William
sometimes Archbishop of York to be Canonised a Saint at Rome. Having sat
Bishop of Durham 28. years, he deceased at Eltham: March 28. 1311. and was
buried in his own Cathedral Church. I find it reported that he should have
founded a College for a Deane and 7. prebendaries at Chester upon the street
which seems to be mistaken.

42 Richard Kellow.
RIchard Kellow sat Bishop five years, 1311 Edw. 2.5.
in which short space he bestowed very much in building at Middleham, Storton,
and Welhall. He died the year 1316.

43 Jews Beaumont.
THe Covent then chose for their Bishop Henry Stamford, 1317 Edw. 2.11.
Pryor of Finchall, and sent him to Rome to be confirmed by the Pope. But
before he could get thither, at the importunate suit of the kings of England
and France, the Pope had given that Bishopric unto one Lewis Beaumont, a
French man borne, and of the blood royal there. He was ^ame of both his
legs, and so unlearned, that he could not read the bulls and other
instruments of his consecration. When he should have pronounced this word (
Metropoliticae) not knowing what to make of it (though he had studied upon it
and labored his lesson long before) after a little pause, Soyt purdit (says
he) let it go for read, and so passed it over. In like sort he stumbled at
in aenigmate.) When he had fumbled about it a while, Par Saint Lowys (quoth
he) iln'est pas curtois quiceste parolle ici escrit, that is, by Saint Lewis it
was ungently done of him that writ this word here. Not without great cause
therefore the Pope was somewhat strait laced in admitting him. He obtained
consecration so hardly, as in fowerteene years he could scarce creep out of
dept. Riding to Durham to be installed there, he was robbed (together with
two Cardinals that were then in his company) upon Wiglesden Moore near
Derlington. The captains of this rout were named Gilbert Middleton and Walter
Selby. Not content to take all the treasur^ of the Cardinals, the Bishop, and
their train, they carried the Bishop prisoner to Morpeth, where they
constrained him to pay a great ransom. Gilbert Middleton was soon after taken
at his own castle of Nitford, carried to London, and there drawn and hanged
in the presence of the Cardinals. After this, one Sir Goseline Deinuill and his
brother Robert, came with a great company to diverse of the Bishop of Durhams
houses in the habits of Friars, and spoiled them, leaving nothing but bare
walls, and did many other notable robberies, for which they (I mean the
captains and diverse of their company) were soon after hanged at York. This
Bishop stood very stoutly in defense of the liberties of his See, recovered
diverse lands taken away from Anthony Beak his predecessor (as before is
mentioned) and procured this sentence to be given in the behalf of his church,
quod Episcopus Dunelmen. debet habere forisfacturas guerrarum intra libertates,
lient Rex extra, that the Bishop of Durham is to have the forfeitures of war
in as ample sort within his own liberties as the king without. That which by
some is attributed to Ranulf Flambard, I find by other reported of this man,
to wit, that it was he who compassed the city of Durham with a wall, certain
it is that he built a hall, kitchen, and chapel at Middleham. But before he
could quite finish the chapel he did, to wit, September 22. or (as one
delivers) September 28. 1333. He lies buried before the high altar at Durham
covered with a marble stone curiously wrought and inlayd with brass provided
by himself in his life time.

44 Richard de Bury.
1333. Edw. 3.7.
IN great haste (but with no great good speed) the Covent of Durham proceeded
unto the election of a new Bishop (the old being yet scarcely buried) and they
made choice of one of their own company a monk of Durham. This election the
Archbishop of York confirmed; yea the matter grew so forward, as the same
Archbishop was content to give him consecration also. All this while the kings
good will was not sought, no nor (which was a greater oversight as the world
then went) the Popes neither. The king therefore not only refused to deliver
possession of the Temporalties unto this elect, but also labored the Pope, ex
plenitudine potestatis to conf^rre the Bishopric upon a chaplain of his
named Richard de Bury, then Deane of Wells. Partly to pleasure the one that
requsted, partly to displeasure the other for not requesting, he did so, and
commanded the Bishop of Winchester to consecrate him, which being performed at
Chertsey soon after Christmas, the king presently invested him in the
temporalties belonging to that See. Now was the monk a Bishop without a
Bishopric. Having no other home he was feign to return to his cloister, and
there for very grief (as it is to be supposed) within a few days after died.
This Richard de Bury was borne at Saint Edmunds-Bury in Suffolk, whence he
took his surname; for he was the son of one sir Richard Angaruill knight.
His father died leaving him very young, and committed him to the tuition of
John Willoughby a Priest, his Uncle, who brought him up carefully, and that for
the most part in the Uniuersity of Oxford. From thence he was called to teach
Edward of Windsor Prince of Wales. At what time the said Prince fled into
France with his mother, he was principal receiver of the kings revenues in
Gascoigne. Their money failing, he aided them secretly with a great sum of
that he had received for the king. It had almost cost him his life; he was so
narrowly pursued by some of the kings friends that got understanding of it, as
he was glad to hide himself in a steeple in Paris the space of seven days.
King Edward the third his scholar being come to the crown, made him first his
Coserer, then Treasurer of the Wardrobe, and keeper of the privy Seal. In this
last office he continued five years; in which space he was twice sent
Ambassador unto the Pope. The year 1333. he was made Deane of Wels, (a goodly
preferme^t in those days.) He had not enioied that place one whole year, when
he was called unto the Bishopric of Durham, whereunto he was cons. Dec. 19.
1333. (not 1334. as some deliver) in the presence of the king, the Queen,
Edward K. of Scotland, 2. Archbishops, 5, Bishops, 7. Earls, and a number
other noble personages both men and women. The year following he became
Chancellor, and within two years after that Treasurer of England. Being Bishop
he was often implosed in ambassages of the greatest importance. What time of
leisure he had, he spent either in prayer or conference with his Chaplains
(whereof he had many about him, and these great learned men) or else in study,
wherewith he was wonderfully delighted. He writ many things not yet perished,
amongst the rest, in one work which he called Philobiblos, he says of
himself, extatico quodam librorum amore potenter se abreptum. That he was
mightily carried away, and even beside himself with imm^derat love of books,
and desire of reading. And indeed his study was so well furnished, as it is
thought he had more books then all the Bishops in England beside. He was much
delighted with the company and acquaintance of learned men. Many letters passed
between him, Francis Petrarke, and diverse others then famous for learning. He
had always in his house (as before I have said) many Chaplains, all great
Scholars: of which number were Th. Bradwardin, after Archb. of Canterbury,
Rich. Fitzralph Archbishop of Armagh, Walter Burley, I. Mandut, To. Holcot and
R. Killington, Doctors of Divinity; Richard Bintworth and Walter Segraue, the
one afterward Bishop of London, the other of Chichester. His manner was at
dinner and supper time to have some good book read unto him; whereof he would
disco^rse with his Chaplains a great part of the day following, if business
interrupted not his course. He was very bountiful unto the poor. Weekly he
bestowed for their releese 8. quarters of wheat made into bread, beside the
offall and fragments of his Tables. Riding between Newcastle and Durham, he
would give 8. l. in alms, from Durham to Stocton, 5. l. from Durham to Aukland
5. marks, from Durham to Middleham 5. l. etc. I find it reported that he
founded a Hall in Oxford, and endued it with some revenues for the maintenance
of Students in the same but I think it mistaken for that which was done by his
next s^ccessor. Certain it is, that he notably furnished a library in that
Uniuersity, and took order that the keeping thereof should be committed unto 5.
scholars, ^o whom he made a certain allowance for their labor. He also
bestowed many sumptuous ornaments on his Church of Durham. Having continued
Bishop there eleven years, and almost 3. months, he departed this life at
Aukland, April 24. 1345. being 58. years of age. He lies buried in the South
Angle of his own Church.

45 Thomas Hatfield.
THe Pope had now many years taken unto himself the authority of bestowing
all Bishoprics: 1345. Edw. 3.19.
which the king and nobility of this realm being much agreeued with all, made
diverse Laws and statutes to restore Churches and couents to the liberty of
their ancient elections. When the king therefore had labored a while in this
matter; he being desirous of preferring this Hatsield his Secretary unto Durham
(a man that he knew the Pope might justly except against; and peradventure
doubting the Covent would not choose him) was content to request the Pope to
give it unto him, and thereby opened a passage unto him, whereby he entered into
possession again of his wonted usurpation. The Pope glad of this opportunity,
without any regard or examination of his worthiness, by and by accepted of him:
And when some of the Cardinals took exceptions against him, saying that he was
not only a mere lay man, but a fellow of light behauior, and no way fit for
that place: He answered, that if the King of England had requested him for an
ass at that time he would not have denied him. This man it was that built
Durham college in Oxford and purchased certain lands unto the same for the
maintenance of such Monks of Durham as should be thought fit to study there.
That College is now called Trinity College, so named by Sir Thomas Pope that
bestowed a new foundation upon the same. He built also Durham palace in London
to receive himself and his successors when they should have occasion to
repair thither. He was consecrate the tenth of July 1345. and died in the
beginning of May 1381. So he sat Bishop six and thirty years lacking only
two months. Lastly he was a principal benefactor if not the founder of the
Friery of Northallerton in Yorkshire, being for Carmelites or white Friars.

45 John Fordham.
1381. Ric. 2.4.
John ^ordham Deane of Wells obtained consecration to the Bishopric of Durham
May 29. 1381. and was inthronized there in September 1382. Seven years he
continued in the same, and the year 1388. was by the Parliament banished the
Court. Howbeit before the end of that year, to wit, September 27. he was by
the Kings means translated to Ely. In the mean time (as I find) to wit the
ninth of Rich. 2. he was appointed L. Treasurer of England, but the next year
displaced. See more of him in Ely.

47 Walter Skirlaw.
1388. Rich. 2.22.
January 14. 1385. Walter Skirlaw a Doctor of Law of Oxford, was consecrate
Bishop of Lichfield. He sat there one year, and was translated to Wells.
There also he continued but two years, and the year 1388. removed to Durham
in the month of September. The Cloisters of the Monastery there were much deal
built at his charges. He gave toward that work 2^0 l. in his life time, and
400. l. in his Will. He bestowed also ^20. in the building of the Dir^bitory.
He new built the bridges of Shinkley, Yarrow and Aukland, and the steeple of
Hulme, he repaired the Church and the Hall of the manor there. He built a
great part of the Lantern at York where his arms are fixed, and raised from
the very foundation a fair chapel at Swine in Holdernesse, where he was
borne. Lastly he ^equeathed in his Testament great sums of money to the
Churches that he had governed for the buying of ornaments, as namely, to the
Church of Wels the value of 150. l. He sat Bishop of Durham 18. years, and
died in the beginning of the year, 1406.

48 Thomas Langley.
140^. Hen. 4.7.
THomas Langley Priest, Lord Chauncellor of England, was consecrate Bishop of
Durham, August 8. 1406. at what time he gave ^uer his Chauncellorship. But 11.
years after, to wit, the year 1417. it was laid upon him again, after
which time he continued in that place about six years. In the mean space,
viz the sixth of June, 1411. he was made Cardinal together with Robert Halam
Bishop of Salisbury, by Pope John 23. This man bestowed the sum of four
hundred ninety nine pound, six shillings seven pence, in repairing of that
Gallery in the West end of his Church, which was first built by Hugh Pudsey his
predecessor. He also founded two Schools in the Place-greeue, one for Grammar,
another for Music: thirty one years he continued Bishop here, and dying the
year, 1437. was buried (as I am informed) in the Gallery, and lies entoombed
before the altar there under the Table of the Consistory. I find noted (by the
way) that about this time, to wit, between the years 1408. and 1498. was
bestowed upon the Cloister of Durham the sum of 838. l. 17. s. ob.

49 Robert Neuill^
RObert Neuill was consecrate Bishop of Salisbury, the year 1427. and
translated thence to Durham; 1438. Hen. 6.17.
1438 He built the Checquer at the Castle gate there, and died an. 1457,

50 Laurence Boothe.
LAurence Boothe Master of Penbrooke Hall, and a good benefactor to the same,
1457. Hen. 6.6.
as also Chancellor of the Uniuersity of Cambridge, was consecrate unto the Sea
of Durham, Sept. 25. 1457. and made the Lord Chancellor of England, the 13.
year of K. Edw. 4. He built the gate of the College at Aukland, with the
edifices adjoining. Having sat here 20. years, he was translated to York
the year 1477. See more of him in York.

51 William Dudley.
WIlliam Dudley Deane of Windsor succeeded, 1467. Edw. 4.16
and had restitutio^ of his temporalties, Oct. 14. Edw. 4.16. He was brought up
in the university of Oxford, being the third son of John Dudley, alias
Sutton, the eight Lord Dudley, as the Epitaph yet to be seen upon his toombe
does witness. He lies buried at Westminster in the Chapel of S. Nicholas,
to wit, that which is South from the monument of K. Edward the third. His tomb
stands in the Southwall of the said Chapel. He died an. 1483. and sat 6.
years.

52 John Sherwood.
1483. Ric. 3.1.
John Sherwood, brought up at Oxford in Uniuersity College, became Bishop of
Durham, 1483. A great learned man, an excellent Poet, a Grecian, and so good a
Lawyer, as for a certain time before his preferment to this Bishopp^rick, he
was the solicitor of all king Edward the fourth causes in the Court of Rome.
He brought many copies of diverse rare Greek authors out of Italy with him.
Having continued at Durham about 11. years, he died the year 1494.

53 Richard Fox.
1494. Hen. 7.10.
RIchard Fox was consecrate Bishop of Exceter, an. 1486 translated to Bathe and
Wels, 1491. thence to Durham 1494. and lastly 1502. to Winchester. He changed
the hall of the Castle of Durham from better to worse; where there were two
seats of regality, he made but one. See more of him in Winchester.

54 William Seuerus.
1502. Hen. 7.18.
WIlliam Seuerus as I have heard reported, was borne at Shinkly, being the
son of a poor man there, a Syueyer or Syuemaker by his occupation, and
thence took his surname. He was first Warden of Merton College in Oxford,
then Provost of Eaton, after that Bishop of Car^^le, translated to Durham
1452. and enjoying that preferment only two years, (or thereabout) died an.
1505.

55 Christopher Bambridge.
AFter the death of Bishop Severe, 1507. Hen. 7.23.
it seems the Sea was void two years, Christopher Bambridge obtained
consecration thereunto, the year 1507. sat there but one year, and was
removed to York. See more of him in York.

56 Thomas Ruthall.
THomas Ruthall was borne in Cicester in Glocestershire and brought up in
Cambridge, 1508. Hen. 7.24.
where he proceeded Doctor of Law. He was preferred to the Bishopric of
Durham by King Henry the 7. after whose death he was made one of the Privy
council unto the young king, Henry the 8. who esteemed greatly of him for his
wisdom and learning, and employed him often in ambassages, and other
businesses of importance. Amongst the rest, it pleased the king one time to
require him to set down his judgment in writing concerning the estate of his
Kingdom in general, and particularly to inform him in certain things by him
specified. This discourse the Bishop writ very carefully, and caused it to be
bound in Uelime guilt, and otherwise adorned in the best manner. Now you shall
understand, how that it chanced him about the same time to set down a note of
his own private estate; containing an inuentory not only of his vtensiles and
household stuff in every of his houses, with their value, but also of his
moneys either owing unto him, or deniers contans ready in his coffers, which
amounted unto an infinite treasure, no less then 100000. l. This account was
written in a paper book of the same fashion and binding that the other was,
which was provided for the king, whereby it happened, that the King sending
Cardinal Wolsey for the other draught that he had so long before required of
him, the Bishop mistaking, delivered that which contained the report of his
own wealth and private estate. This the Cardinal soon espying, and willing
to do the Bishop a displeasure (for there had been long and great emulation
between them) delivered it as he had received it unto the king, showing how the
Bishop had very happily mistaken himself; For now (quoth he) you see where
you may at any time command a great mass of money if you need it. As soon as
the Bishop understood his own error, the conceit thereof touched him so near,
as within a very short space after he died. In his time the parish Church of
Cicester was built for the greatest part: and he promised to contribute much
thereunto, but prevented by death, performed nothing Anne Aueling his aunt by
the mothers side^ gave 100. marks toward that work. This Bishop himself built
the third part of the bridge over the river of Tyne toward the South. He also
raised from the foundation the goodly dining chamber at Aukland, and dying
before it might be finished, took order with one Stranguidge that was his
administrator to perfect it. He deceased at London the year 1523. and lies
buried at Westminster almost over against the monument of K. Henry 3. in a very
seemly toomb upon which are these words to be read.

Hie iacet Tho. Ruthal Episcopus Dunelmen: and Regit Henrici septim^
Secretarius, qui obijt 1524.

57 Thomas Woolsey.
IMmediately after the death of Bishop Ruthall, Cardinal Woolsey resigning
Bathe (which he held in commendam with York) took Durham in stead thereof,
1523. Hen. 8.15.
and held the same about the space of seven years. In the latter end of the
year, 1529. he gave it over to have Winchester, which he held little more then
one year, and died Nouemb. 29. 1530. See more of him in York.

58 Cutbert Tunstall.
IN the Sea of Durham a notable man succeeded him, and one no less famous for
his virtues, 1530. Hen. 8.22.
then the other for his fortune, Cutbert Tunstall Bishop of London. He was
bor^e at Hatchford in Richmondshire, and was the base son of one Tunstall a
Gentleman of a very ancient house. It is reported, that their first ancestor
attended William Conqueror as his Barbor, and being raised by him unto some
better fortune, in memory of his former estate, took for his arms S. 3 combs
A. But I take this for a fable. The special use of arms is to express unto
posterity the virtues of such as are raised unto Gentry, and not to remember
any thing that may ^ee to the disgrace of the bearer, and make him less
honorable. Were the first of his race as he is supposed, because he was not
advanced for being a Barbor but for his faithful and loyal service, such
arms should rather have been given him, as might have registered that virtue,
then twighted him with the baseness of his first trade and manner of life.
Rather therefore should I guess some other occas^ons of these arms, which as
they were born by him, may have many very honorable significations. But to
leave his arms and speak of himself. He was a very rare and admirable man, in
whom I think no man will blame or reprehend any thing but his religion. There
was scarce any kind of good learning in which he was not excellent. A very good
Grecian, well seen in the Hebrew tongue, a very eloquent Rhetorician, a passing
skillful Mathematician (famous especially for Arithmetiks, whereof he writ a
work much esteemed) a great Lawyer (in that faculty he proceedrd Doctor) and
a profund Divine, as diverse his works yet extant do very well testify. But
his greatest commendation of all is, that which I find given him by Bale out
of sir Thomas More, that, as there was no man more adorned with knowledge and
good literature, no man more severe and of greater integrity for his life and
manners; so there was no man a more sweet and pleasant companion, wi^h whom a
man would rather choose to converse. In regard of these manifold good parts
the Archbishop of Can^erbury, William Warham, not only made him vicar
General, but also commended him so effectually unto the King, as he thought
good to employ him in many Ambassages of great ^^^ight, and diverse temporal
offices of no less trust. He was ^i^st Master of the Rolle^, then (as I find
recorded) keeper o^ the Privy Seal, made Bishop of London the year 1521. and
translated to Durham March 25. 1530. B^ing yet at London he bestowed much money
in furnishing a certains Library in Cambridge with good books both written and
printed. He built from the ground a most beautiful porch or gatehouse (with a
chapel annexed thereunto) of fair stone, in the castle of Durham, and added
to the said castle certain gates with iron bars and portcullises, supported
with strong walls on each side. He brought water thither with a conduit, whereas
before time it was served with well water. He made the gatehouse at Alnewike,
and built the Tolebooth in the market of Durham, all of stone, with diverse
edifices near the hinder part of the said Tolboothe, which he gave also to the
City of Durham. Lastly, he repaired with great charge the third part of
Tine-bridge. Having continued in this See the space of one and twenty years
with great honor. December 20. 1551. he was committed unto the Tower of
London, and remained prisoner there all the rest of the reign of King Edward,
viz. nineteen months. In which time, amongst many other horrible sacrile^ges
(whereunto the nonage of the king gave opportunity) means was found that the
Bishopric of Durham should be dissolved by Act of Parliament. This morsel
was ready dished, and in certain hope already swallowed, when it pleased God^
to punish the devouring covetousness o^ those times, by taking away that
admirable young Prince king Edward. Queen Mary that succeeded took this bit
from the trencher of those ravening Atheistes, and by like authority, the first
year of her reign, restored it unto the former estate, and the old Bishop
both to his liberty and the possession of the same. Queen Mary dying: for his
contumacy and disobedience unto the Q. now deceased, he was justly deprived of
his Bishopric in the month of Iul. 1559. He was then committed unto the
custody of the Archb. of Canterbury, who entertained him most kindly, and
seemed very glad of his company. But he enjoyed it a very little while for
within four months after his deprivation, viz November 18. following, being
eighty five years of age, he departed this life at Lambhith, where he was
first consecrate almost forty year before. His body was buried in the Chancell
of the Parish church there, and covered with a fair marble stone; upon which
is engraven this Epitaph written by Doctor Haddon.

Anglia Cutbertum Tunstallum moesta requirit,
Cuius summa domi laus erat atque foris.
Rhetor, Arithmeticus, iuris consultus and aequi,
Legatusque fuit, denique praesul erat^
Annorum sa^ur, and magnorum plenus honorum,
Vertitur in cineres aureus iste senex.
James Pilkinton.
MArch 2. 1560. 1560 Eliz. 3.
James Pilkinton Bacheler of Divinity, lately come from beyond the seas,
(where he lived all Queen Mary's time) was consecrate Bishop, and continued in
the same See about 16. years. He died anno 1576. and lies entoombed in his
own Church before the high altar, west from Bishop Beaumont.

60 Richard Barnes.
RIchard Barnes was brought up in Brasenose College in Oxford; 1577. Eliza. 20.
first consecrate Bishop Suffragan of Nottingham, preferred to Carlisle the
year 1570. and the year 1577 translated to Durham, where he sat Bishop about
11. ye^res.

61. Matthew Hutton.
AFter the death of Bishop Barnes the Sea was void almost two years. 1589.
Eliz. 32.
The year 1489. Matthew Hutton Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of York (in
which place he had continued 21. years,) was preferred thereunto. He held the
same about 5. years, and in the end of the year, 1594. was translated to
York.

62 Tobias Matthew.
OF him that presently succeeded (Tobias Matthew) I will say no more but what
remains to be seen in public Records, 1594. Eliz 37.
that he was borne in the City of Bristoll, brought up in Christ Church in
Oxforde, and being Doctor of Divinity, by many steps of preferment (as
namely, the Archdeaconry of Bathe, the Presidentship of Saint John's College in
Oxford, a Canonry first, then the Deanery of Christchurch there, and lastly, the
Deanery of Durham) he ascended unto this place, unto which he was consecrate in
March 1594. By the gracious appointment of our now Sovereign King James, he
was translated to York, and confirmed in that See, the eighteenth of Aug.
1606. See York.

63 William James.
1606. Iac. 4.
WIlliam James Doctor of Divinity, borne in Cheshire, brought up in
Christchurch in Oxford, and afterward Master of Uniuersity College there,
succeeded his Pred^cessor, in the Deanery first of Christchurch, then of Durham,
and now also in the Bishopric of the same, unto which he was consecrate Sept.
7. 1606.

This Bishopric in the Kings books is valued at 1821. l. 17. d. farthing, and
in the Popes books at 9000. ducats.

CARLISLE.
THE City of Carlisle, called by the Romans and old Britons Luguballia, by
Nennius, Caer Lualid, by the Saxons (as Beda writes) Luel, by our Chronicles
(as Roger Houeden and others) Carlwell, by us now a days Carleolum, Carlisle,
an^ Carlioll (a City no doubt of great antiquity) was wasted, and in a manner
utterly destroyed by the Danes about the year of our Lord 900. The year 1090.
it happened the King of England (William Rufus) to pass that way into
Scotland. He considering the natural strength of the place, the pleasantness
of the seat, the fertility of the soil, and the necessity of a fortification
for defeuce of the Country thereabout; thought good to reedifie it, and
according to this determination about three years after, not only raised
again the walls (then flat to the ground, in so much as great trees grew in
the ruins of them) but also bestowed the building of a fair and strong Castle
in the same, and then enpeopled it, at first with Dutchmen, (whom soon after
he removed into Wales) and afterward with Englishmen of the South parts, he
affoording many great and singular privileges unto them The government of this
new e^ected City (as it should seem) was committed unto a certain Norman
Priest named Walter, that came into England with the Conqueror. This man
being very rich, began to build in Carlisle a goodly Church in the honor of the
blessed Uirgine, intending to bestow upon it such possessions as God had
endowed him withal, for the maintenance of either Prebendaries, or some other
kind of religious persons in the same. But being taken away by death before
the accomplishment of this so good a purpose. Adelwald or Athelwulf, the first
Prior of Saint Oswald in Nostlis and Confessor unto K. Henry the first (that
then reigned) persuaded the said King to employ the land and revenues that
Walter left behind him in the ^oundation of a College (not of Prebendaries,
but of Regular Canons) to be annexed unto the Church of our Lady before named.
He did so, and more over bestowed upon the said College 6. churches with their
Chapels to be impropriated unto the same use, to wit, Newcastle, Newburne,
Warkeware, Robery, Wichingham and Corbridge. Of this College or Monastery thus
founded and endowed, he appointed the said Adelwald his Confessor to be Prior.
Now you shall understand that not only the jurisdiction spiritual, but the
revenues and temporalties also of the City of Carlisle, and all the Country
round about within fifteen miles, belonged in former times unto the Bishops of
Lindis^arne, by the gift a^ Egfrid King of Northumberland who bestowed all that
territory upon Saint Cutbert the year 679. But the Bishops of that See being
drouen from place to place by the Danes, at what time Carlisle was destroyed and
moreover all that Country so wasted, as hardly a man was to be ^ound in many
miles compass, exc^pt here and there a few of the Irish; The Archdeacon of
Richmond by little and little encroched upon the iuri^diction of all
Cumberland, Westmerland, and Aluedale, now a long time neglected by the
Bishops of Li^disfarne, that in this mean space h^d seated themselves at
Durham. It happened therefore sometime after the foundation of this college, that
Thurstan Archbishop of York visiting this part of his Province, ^eeing the
beauty of the Church of Carlisle, considering how fit it were to be the Sea of a
Bishop, and knowing how little right the Archdeacon of Richmond had unto the
jurisdiction o^ all those countries, yea, being willing also peradventure to
have a Suff^agan the more within his Province, thought good to endeavor the
erection of a Bishopric there. The king favoring much his own foundation,
easily cono^f^^^nded to grace the same with an Episcopal See, which being
established there by the Pope, license was given to the Cannons to elect for
their Bishop whom they list, and Cumberland, Westmerland with Aluedale
appointed to be his Dioces.

THE BISHOPS OF CARLISLE.
1 ADelwald (whom most of our Writers call Athelwulph) the Prior above named,
with one consent of his Canons, was chosen for the first Bishop of this new
Cathedral Church, and consecrate at York by his Metropolitan, the year 1133.
Now long he held it, or when he^ died I find not.

2 Barnard succeeded him. It seems he died about the year 1186 For Roger
Houeden reports that king Henry the second coming to Carlisle at that time,
procured one Paulinus de Leedes to be elected Bishop, and when he (upon what
consideration I know not) refused to accept the place the king offered him 300.
marks of yearly reuenew for the increase of his living there, to wit the
Churches of Banburge and Scathburge with the Chapel of Tickhill, and two
manors of his own, near Carlisle. This notwithstanding he pe^s^sted still in
his refusal.

3 Hugh Abbot of Bat^ell was appointed Bishop of Carlisle by Gualo the Popes
Legate, the 24. of January, Henry 3.3. and died the year 1223. In the mean
time I find a commandment had been given unto the Shiriffe of Cumberland,
that he should deliver unto the elect of Carliol such seas^^ of all the the
lands and tenements belonging to the Sea of Carlioll, as had been heretofore
delivered unto Leonard whom he called Archiepiscopum Sclauorum. This was i^ the
second year of the said Kings reign.

4. Walter Malclerk the year 1223. was consecrate unto the Bishopric of
Carlisle, which he acknowledged to hau^ obtained by evil and corrupt means,
and therefore resigned the same (moved in conscience to do so as he
alleged) June 29. 1246. and took o^ him the habit of a friar Preacher, at
Oxford, in which he continued till his death. Being Treasurer of England under
king Henry the third, the King upon a sodain^ not only displaced him from that
office, but revoked certain graunts made unto him heretofore, and charged him
with the debt of 100. l. which he acknowledged not. For redress of the wrongs
(as he took them) he determined to travail to Rome; but was stayed at the
waters side by the kings officers, whom Roger Bishop of London excommunicated
for the same, add riding presently to Worceter where the Court lay, renewed that
excommunication in the Kings presence. How he thriued with these businesses
afterward I find not: but likely enough it is, that these troubles rather
made him weary of the world, then any such scruple induce him to leave his
Bishopric. He died October 28. 1248.

5 Siluester de Euerdon Archdeacon of Chester, that was then and long after
Chancellor of England, was elected the year 1246. but not consecrate till
the fifth of February 1247. A while he refused to accept of the election,
alleging his own unworthiness, but at last upon better deliberation
yielded. He was one of them that joined with Boniface the Archbishop, and
Ethelmare the Elect of Winchester in their request to the King, that remembering
his promise often made; hereafter he would not impeach the liberty of
Elections by interposing his armed requests, etc. (of which matter see more in
Boniface of Canterbury.) The king acknowledged he had indeed offended that
way, and that especially (quoth he) in making means for you your selves, that
therefore of all other should least find fault with it. To this man particularly
he used th^se words, Ette Siluester Karliolensis, qui diu Lambens Cancellariam,
Clericoru^ meo rum clericulus extitisti, qualiter postpositis multis Theologis
and personis reuerendi^, te in Episcopum sublimaui, etc. I remember (says he)
how I exalted thee Siluester of Carlisle unto a Bishopric, having hankered a
long time about the Chancery, and being a p^tty Chaplain to my Chaplains,
preferred thee before many grave and reverend Divines, etc. His conclusion was,
that if they would give over their places which they had obtained by so undue
means, he would hereafter forbear to commend any so unworthy. This was the
year 1253. The year following May the 13. this Bishop riding a horse
somewhat too lusty for him, was cast, and so bruised with the fall, as he died by
and by, to wit, May 13. 1257.

6 Thomar Vipont, or de Veteri ponte (a gentleman of the house of the Viponts
that about this time were Lords of Westmerland) was chosen soon after
Siluesters death, notwithstanding that the K. made earnest request in the
behalf of one John a counselor of his that was Prior of Newborough. Having
enjoyed this preferment little more then on^ year he died in the beginning of
October, 1256.

7 Robert de Chause Chaplain unto the Queen, was consecrate by the Bishops of
Bathe and Salisbury at Bermondsey beside London, April 10, 1258. and sat
fourteen years, He died about Michaelmas in the sixth year of king Edward
the 1.

1 Ralfe de Ireton Prior of Gisburne, had restitution to his temporalties, Iul.
10. Edw. 1.8.

9 John de Halton a Canon of Carlisle, consecate 1288. sat 32. years.

10 John de Rosse Doctor of law, thrust into this Bishopric by the Pope
without any election, was consecrate, 1318 and sat 13. years.

11 John de Kirkby Canon of Carlisle, and orderly elected there, was consecrate
1332. Of him it is to be remembered that whereas the year 1345 an Army of
Scots to the number of thirty thousand, invaded the North of England vnde^ the
conduct o^ William Dowglasse, and amongst many other Towns and villages, burnt
Carlisle: for revenge of that wrong, and defense of his country, he together
with Thomas Lucy Knight, and Robert Oglea valiant Esquier gathering together
what forces upon the sudden they might, beset the Scots round about, and at
last compelling them for want of victuals to fight upon disadvantage, gave them
a great and memorable overthrow, and sat twenty years.

12 Gilbert de Welton Doctor of Law, made Bishop by the Pope, was consecrate
1353. and sat ten years. By warrant of the Kings Conge d'Elire, one John de
Hornecastle Prior o^ Ely had been lawfully elected, and procured not only the
Kings royal assent unto his election, but also restitution of the
temporalties. All which notwithstanding was made frustrate by the tyranny of
the Pope, who by way of provision thrust into this Bishopric the said Welton,
who thereupon was restored to the temporalties, and the former grant revoked,
the twenty sixth of Inn, Edward the 3. 27.

13 Thomas de Appleby Canon of Carlisle, elected there, was glad to fetch the
Popes approbation at Rome and th^n was consecrate, 1393. He sat thirty three
years, and died December. 5, 1395.

14 Robert Read a Friar Preacher was consecrate at the commandment of the
Pope, and the request of K. Richard the second, 1396. notwithstanding that
William Strikland was chosen by the Chapter. Having sat scarsely on year, he
was translated to Chichester.

15 Thomas Merkes a Monk of Westminster was likewise thrust into this
Bishopric by the Pope at the king^ request, and consecrate 1397. Amongst many
unworthily preferred in those days, he undoubtedly was a man well deserving
that honor, for he was a man both learned and wise, but principally to be
commended, first for his constant and vnmooneable fidelity unto his patrons and
preferrer Richard then, for his excellent courage in professing the same, when
he might sately, yea and honestly also have concealed his affection. Some other
there were (of the nobility) that remembering their duty and allegiance, when
all the world beside forsook that unfortunate Prince: followed him with their
best assistance, even till the time of his captivity. This man nothing
regarding the danger might ensue, not only refused to forsake him when he had
forsaken himself, but defended him and his cause the best he could, when he
might well perceive his endeavor might hurt himself much, without any
possibility of helping the other. When the furious and unstable multitude, not
contended that K. Richard had resigned his Crown to save the head that ware it,
and their darling Henry 4. seated himself in his royal throne, importuned the
Parliament assembled to proceed yet further against him, desiring no doubt,
that to make all sure, his life might be taken from him: This worthy and
memorable Prelate stepping forth, doubted not to tell them, that there was
none amongst them meet to give iudgem^nt upon so noble a Prince as K. Richard
was, whom they had taken for their Sovereign and lieg^ Lord by the space of
22. years and more: And proceeding further, I assure you, quoth he (I report
his words as I find them in our Chronicles) there is not so rank a traitor,
nor so errand a thief, nor yet so cruel a murderer, apprehended or detained
in prison for his offense, but he shall be brought before the Justice to hear
judgment; and will you proceed to the judgment of an anointed king, hearing
neither his answer nor excuse? I say, and will avouch, that the Duke of
Lancaster (whom ye call king) has more trespassed to king Richard and his
Realm, then K. Richard has done either to him or us: For it is maniffest and
well known, that the Duke was banished the Realm by king Richard and his
counsel, and by the judgment of his own Father, for the space of 10. years,
for what cause ye remember well enough. This notwithstanding, withoutlicence of
K. R. he is returned again into the realm, and (that is worse) has taken
upon him the name, title and preeminence of K. And therefore I say that you have
done manifest wrong to proceed against K. Richard in any sort without calling
him openly to his answer and defense. This speech scarsely ended, he was
attac^ed by the Earl Marshall and for a time committed to ward in the Abbey of
Saint Albones. Continuing yet his loyal affection unto his distressed ma^ter;
soon after his enlargement, he joined with the Hollands and other in a
conspiracy against king Henry; which being bewra^ed to the destruction of all
the rest; he only was pardoned: peradventure in regard of his calling (for it
had never been seen hitherto that any Bishop was put to death by order of
law) peradventure in some kin^e of favor and admiration of his faithful
constancy (for virtue will be honored even of her enemies) peradventure else
to this end, that by forcing him to live miserably, they might lay a
punishment upon him more grievous then death, which they well saw he despised.
The Pope (who seldom denied the king any request that he might afford good
cheap) was easily entreated to translate forsooth this good Bishop from the Sea of Calile, that yielded him honourabl^ maintenance, unto Samos in Greece,
whence he knew he^ should never receive one penny profit. He was so happy as
neithe^ to take benefit of the gift of his enemy, nor to be hurt by the masked
malice of his counterfeit friend: Disdaining (as it were) to take his life by
his gift, he took away from his Master both life and kingdom, he died
shortly after his deliverance, so deluding also the mockery of his translation,
whereby (things so falling out) he was nothing damnified.

16 William de Strikland before mentioned (a Gentleman of a great house in
those parts) was appointed his Successor by the Pope at the request of king
Henry, and consecrate at Cawood by the Archbishop of York, August 24. 1400.
He died Aug. 30. 1419.

17 Roger Whelpdale Doctor of Divinity, an Oxfo^d man, and Proctor of the
Uniuersity, anno 140^. as also Provost sometimes of Queens College there but
brought up in Baylioll College, was elected by the Chapter, and consecrate at
London by the Bishop of Winchester, the year 1419. He was brought up in
Balioll College in Oxford, Writ much in Logic, Philosophy and Divinity (in
which, as also the Mathematikes, and other good learning he was very well
seen) died in his house at London February 4. 1422. and was buried there in
the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul. His works (I hear) remain yet to be
seen in Baylioll College library.

18 William Barrow Bishop of Bangor was translated to Carlisle 1423. died at
Rose Castle September. 4. 1429. and was buried at Carlisle.

19 Marmaduke Lumley was chosen by the Chapter, consecrate 1430. and having
sat twenty years, was translated to Lincoln. In the mean time (to wit,
about the 25, of K. Henry the sixth) he was for one year Treasurer of England,
as also for some time Chauncellor of the Uniuersity of Cambridge.

20 Nicolas Close consecrate 1450. sat two years and was removed to Lichfield.

21 William Piercy son to the Earl of Northumberland sometimes Chauncellor
of the Uniuersity of Cambridge was cons. 1452. and sat ten years.

22 John Kingscote Doctor of the Canon Law was consecrate 1462. and sat only
one year.

23 Richard Scroope consecrate at York by George Nethen Bishop of Exceter June
24. 1464. sat four years and died May 22. anno Edw. 4.8.

25 Edward Storey Doctor of Divinity, and Chauncellor of the Uniuersity of
Cambridge consecrate at Westminster by the foresaid George Neuill now
Archbishop of York October 14. 1468. sat 9. years and was translated to
Chichester.

25 Richard, Prior of Durham consecrate at the Popes commandment without any
election, by the hands of his predecessor had restitution of his temporalties
April 24. Edward 4.18. and sat eighteen years.

26 William Sever Abbot of Saint Mary's in York, consecrate 1496. was
translated to Durham the year 1503.

27 Roger Layburne Doctor of Divinity Master of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, a
gentleman of a very ancient house borne near Carlisle, was consecrate in
September. 1503. and sat there six years.

28 John Penny a Doctor of Law, consecrate Bishop of Bangor 1504. brought up in
Lincoln College at Oxford, removed hither the year 1509. and sat 10.
years.

29 John Kite a Londoner borne, and sometimes the kings Ambassador into Spain,
was first consecrate an Archbishop of a See in Greece, and then made Bishop of
Carlisle the yeer^ 1520. He died June 19. 1537, and was buried at Stepney beside
London, in the middle of the chancell toward the north sidewhere is to be seen
a rude Epitaph upon the marble that coue^eth him.

30 Robert Aldrich Doctor of Divinity, was brought up in Eaton and Kings
Colledg^ in Cambridge, and became first schoolmaster of the one, and then
provost of the other. He was elected Bishop of Carlisle, July 18. 1537. and
soon after cons. Erasmus (who writes diverse Epistles unto him) callet him
blandae eloquentiae iuuenem. He died at Horne-castle March 5. 1555.

31 Owen Oglethorp, Doctor of Divinity, Deane of Windsor, and President of
Magdalen College in Ox^ord, a gentleman well borne, was consecrate 1556. He
was so happy as to set the crown of this realm upon the head of her Majesty
lately deceased. He was deprived with diverse other Bishops for withstanding
reformation the year 1559. and soon after died suddenly of an Apoplexy.

32 John Best, Doctor of Divinity an Oxford man, was consecrate March 2. 1561.
died May 22. 1570. and was buried at Carlisle.

33 Richard Barnes, Bishop of Nottingham, Suffragan unto the Archbishop of
York, was translated to Carlisle July 23. 1570. and the year 1573. was
removed thence to Du^ham.

34 John Mey Doctor of Divinity, Master of Katherine Hall in Cambridge, was
consecrate by John Elmer Bishop of London, deputed thereunto by the Archbishop
of York, September 29. an. 1577. He died in the month of April. anno. 1598.

35 Henry Robinson, Doctor of Divinity, Provost of Queens College in Oxford,
was consecrate the 23. day of July. 1598.

Carlisle paid for first fruits to the Pope 1000. ducats, and is now valued to
the King in 531. pound 4. shillings 11. pence half penny.

THE BISHOPS OF CHESTER.
IN the City of Chester there was of old a Nunry, the Church whereof (first
built by that famous Earl Leofricus, and dedicated unto Saint Werburg) being
now becomme very ruinous, Hugh Lupus the first Earl of Chester after the
Conquest, repaired the same the year 1094. and by the persuasion of S. Anselme
(whom being dangerously sick, he had sent for into Normandy to be his
ghostly Father) replenished it with monks. About the same time (or a little
before, to wit the year 1075.) Peter Bishop of Lichfield removed his See
thither. But his next successor Robert de Lymesey, forsaking Chester; made
choice of Couentry, whence not long after the succeeding Bishops, returned
again to Lichfield. King Henry the eight restored unto this City that honor,
and converting the Monastery aforesaid into a Cathedral Church, erected a new
Bishopric there, appointed the Counties of Chester, Lancaster, and Richmond
to be the Dioces of this new See, and the same to be esteemed in the Province
of the Archbishop of York.

^ John Bird.
THe first Bishop of Chester was John Bird, born in Couen^ry and brought up in
Oxford. Being Doctor of Divinity, the 32. and last Provincial of the
Carmelites, he^ was preferred by King Henry the eight to the Bishopric of
Offery in Ireland. From thence seen after he was removed first to Bangor, and
lastly unto Chester. Certain Sermons preached before the King against the
Popes supremacy, we^e the occasion of his advancement. In Queen Mary's dai^s
he was deprived for being married, and di^d at Chester the year 1556.

2 John Coats.
John Coats succeeded him, was brought up in Magdalen College in Oxford,
became Master of Baylioll College, and died soon after his preferment in
Queen Mary's days.

3 Cuthbert Scot.
SHe then preferred unto this See one Cuthbert Scot, Doctor of Divinity brought
up in Christ's College in Cambridge, who sitting not past two or three years
in the beginning of the reign of Q. Elizabeth was displaced, and for his
disobedience committed to the Fleet; thence (I know not by what means)
escaping he fled to Louayne, and there died.

4 William Downham.
WIlliam Downham, brought up in Magdalen College in Oxford, and Chaplain to Q.
Elizabeth before her coming to the Crown, was cons. May 4. 1591. and died in
November 1677.

5 Willaim Chaderton.
WIlliam Chaderton Doctor of Divinity, sometim^ fellow of Christ's College, and
Master of Queens college in Cambridge was con. Nou. 9. 1579. and translated
to Lincoln the year 1595.

6 Hugh Billet.
HVgh Billet, or Bellot Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Bangor, brought up in
S. John's College in Cambridge, sat not ^ully one year. He died about
Whitsoutide, ann 1596.

7 Richard Vaughan.
RIchard Vaughan Doctor of Divinity, brought up in S. John's College in
Cambridge, succ^^ded Bishop B^l^t in both those places, being translated ^ether
in June 1^97. About Christmasse the year 1604. h^e was remooue^ to London.

8 George Lloid.
GEorge Lloid Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of the I^^e of Man, sometimes
fellow of Magdalene College in Cambridge, was confirmed in Chester. Ian. 14.
1604.

This Bishopric is valued at 420. l. 20. pence.

A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING SVCH Englishmen as have either been, or in our
histories reputed, Cardinals of the Church of Rome.
1. Pope Ioane.
THe (...) leader and captain of this band (...) Pope Ioane, called by
Sabelli^^^ and some other Ioannes 7. but by ^latina and other writers for the
most ^^rt Ioannes 8. who being but a Woman, became not only Cardinal, but
Pope of Rome. She was born (as most deliver that affirm her history for a
truth) at Ments in Germany, although there want not that report she was borne
in England. But I rather believe that which Bale has delivered unto us from
Jacob Curio, that she (if any such there were) at least by progeny was English,
being the daughter of an English Priest, that having a wife, whose parents
dwelt at Ments, bringing his said wife to see her friends, stayed there so
long, till it was her hap to be delivered of this feminine prelate, named in
her baptism Ioane as most say, as other Gilberta, or (as Fulgosus delivers)
Agnes. In her youth she fell acquainted with an English monk to the Abbey of
Fulda, with whom traveling in man's apparel of diverse Uniuersities and
Monasteries, as well Greek as Latin, she settled in the end at Athens, where
she became famous for learning, and continued there with him, until the death
o^ him her said paramour. Then coming to Rome, and by reading, disputing and
other exercises, having purchased unto herself the reputation of a great
Clarke; upon the death of Leo the 4. she was chosen Pope anno 855. and held
that place two years, five months and 3. days. In which mean time, she was
gotten with child by a certain Cardinal, and going in procession, happened
to be delivered of her burden in the open street, in which place she
instantly died, to wit, between the Colisco and S^ Clements Church. The shame
and turpitude of which disgrace unto that holy See, has moved all the Bishops
of Rome since that time, to lengthen a little the walk of their procession,
and to go a way much farther about, rather than they will endure to pass by
that place. And to prevent the like inconvenience in time to come, they have
ordained every Pope after his election to be searched by the Junior Deacon, in
a Marble chair made hollow for the same purpose, Spectatur adhuc (says
Sabellicus) in Pontificia domo, marmorea sella, circa medium inanis qua nobis
Pontifex continuo ab eius creatione residat, vt sedent ^is genitalia ab vltimo
Diacono attrectentur This history (howsoever much impugned of late by the
Papists) is delivered by these, Marianus Scotus that lived anno 1320. Martinus
Polonus who lived anno 1320. Sabellicus. Ioannes Parisiensis. Antonius.
Fasciculus temporum. Fulgosus. Theodoricus a N^em. Rauisius Textor. Laonicus
Caldondylas. Petrark. Boccace. Ranulf Cestr. Io. Lunidus. Alph. a Cartagena.
Th^a Niem. Palmerius. Trite^ius. Bergo^ensis. Mantuan. Sigibertus Gemblacen.
anno. 1100. Volaterranus. Nauclerus. Constantinus Phrygio. Christ. Maslaeus.
Matthew. Palmerus. Anselmus Ryd. Supplementa Chronicor. Chronica Chronicot.
Gotefridus viter^ensis, and diverse others.


But for all the rest, the testimony of Platina shall serve, who recounting
this story, says of it, Quod omne^ fere affirmant. In a manner by all writers
it is observed.

2 The next in time is one Vlricus or Odolricus (so Malmsbury calls him) an
Englishman (says Ciaconius) that being Cardinal came into England as the
Popes Legate anno. 1109. (Malms. Houeden, Florent Wigorn.) end not 1107. as
Ciaconius; brought the Archiepiscopall pall unto Thomas the younger Archbishop
of York, and caused him to consecrate Turgod Prior of Durham unto the
Bishopric of S. Andrews in Scotland.

3 Robert, surnamed by some Polen or Pulley, by other Bullen or Pulcy, was
undoubtedly our countriman, a man of great fame for learning in his time. Unto
him the Uniuersity of Oxford is much beholding; for whereas in the reign of
King Harold it had been so wasted and destroyed, as that for many years it
lay desolate and forsaken of scholars, he was a means so draw them thither
again, and leaving the Uniuersity of Paris, took great pains in reading,
disputing and writing diverse learned books, whereby he became so famous even
in foreign natious, as by Innocentius the second he was sent for to Rome, by
Celestinus the second made a Cardinal, tt. S. Eusebij the year 1144. and by
Lucius the second appointed the Popes Chauncellor. He died about the year of
our Lord 1150. vide plura Twyne p. 108. and 225.

4 Some two years after the preferment of Pulley, Nicolas Breakespeare was
made Bishop Cardinal of Alba, and a while after, Pope. He was borne in
Hartfordshire at Abbots Landley, near unto S. Albones, a younger brother of the
house of Breakespeare, and the son of one Robert, a married priest the which
Robert waxing old; and having lost his wife, became a monk in S. Albones, at
what time his son Nicholas was yet but a tender youth, resorting unto his
Father for releese and maintenance, the old man out of a superstitious
conceit, that the next way to heaven, was to renounce all ca^e of friends,
children and all things else, save what by the rule of their order was
enjoined; in a rude and churlish manner cast him off, willing him to try his
fortune abroad, without expecting from him any manner of succor: whereas Saint
Paul tells us, that he that is not careful of his own especially such as
are of his own household, is worse then an insidell. He being thus turned ^if
to the wide world, without all means of liuelihood, choosing rather to beg any
where then where he was best known, got him into France, and traveling
through the country, found no intertainment, till he came to Ualentia in
Province, where the Monks of the Abbey of Saint Rusus, seeing him a beautiful
and towardly child, witty, and for his age very industrious, took him in, and
in process of time not only admitted him into their fraternity, but also
chose him first Prior, and afterward Abbot having in the mean time by
painful study, attained much good learning. It was not long then before envy
or happily some misgouernment of his, bredde many differences between him and
his monks, who accused him of many things unto the Pope that then was,
Eugenius the third. He, after examination of the cause, acquitted the Abbot,
and reprehended sharply the monks as froward and mutinous fellows, charging
them hereafter to yield unto him as their governor, all dutiful obedience,
which notwithstanding, after a little while they renewed their complaints. As
before, so now the Abbot answered all their accusations, and that with such
eloquence, discretion and modesty (says my Author) as the Pope taking a great
liking of the man, he told his accusers they were unworthy of him, and
therefore willing him to seek some other for his place with whom they might
better agree; he created him Bishop Cardinal of Alba. This was the year
1146. Soon after which time, upon experience of his wisdom and great
learning, he sent him as his Legate into the countries of Denmark and Norway,
the inhabitants whereof, being then Pagans he converted unto Christian
religion. At his return out of those parts. Anastasius the Pope, (who,
Eugenius being dead, in the mean time, had succeeded him) together with his
Cardinals, received him with great honor, much aprouing and commending his
doings. It happened then within a few months after his return, the said Pope
died also, and this man also taking on him the name of Hadrian the 4. was
chosen Pope in his room. For his carriage in that place, how he brought under
his entire obedience the citizens of Rome, endeavoring earnestly to shake off
the Popes yoke of bondage, how he suffered or rather compelled with
intolerable insolency, Frederike Barbarossa the Emp. to hold his stirrup, and
what stirs were between them afterward, I shall refer you unto the stories of
those times. This concerning him, I must not omit, that he appointed the
Abbot of S. Albones to be the first Abbot of England as S. Alban (to whom the
Abbey was dedicated) was the Protomartyr or first Martyr of England. Having
sat 4. years nine Months, he died at Anagnia. Septem. 1. 1159. being choked
by a fly in his drink, as most affirm. Howbeit, Ciaconius says, he died of
a squinancy or anguina. He lies buried in Saint Peter's Church at Rome by his
patron Eugenius the third.

5 One Ponticus Virunnius an Italian Pedante (upon what authority I know not)
reports that Galfridus Monumethensis author of the British history was a
Cardinal of Rome. And Ciaconius affirms the same, citing for his authors in
that behalf, Leland, Joan. Rossus and Bostonus Buriensis. It seems to be
untrue, as may partly be gathered by those things that are noted of him by me
in the Catalogue of the Bishops of S. Assaph, to which Church he was cons.
Bishop 1151. See more of him there.

6 Bosa an Englishman (says Bale) and (as another reports nephew unto Pope
Hadrian, was made a Cardinal and the Popes chamberlain in December 1155. His
titles were first, SS. Cosmae and Damiani; then S. Crucis in Jerusalem,
afterward S. Pudentianae. Through his endeavor chiefly Alexander the third was
chosen Pope by the voices of 19. Cardinals, yet could not carry the matter so
cleanly but that another Antipope was set up against him, having 4. voices
only, under him the said Alexander lived in great authority and favor, and
died about the year 1180.

7 The book entitled Antiquitates Britannicae, commonly ascribed to the late
reverend Archbishop, M. Parker rerorteth how that William Corbell Archbishop of
Canterbury being deceased; Henry de Bloys Bishop o^ Winchester, and brother
unto King Stephen, procured himself to be made a Cardinal, and appointed
Legate a Latere from the Pope. Elsewhere I find no mention of that matter. More
concerning him, see in Winch,

8 Herebert borne at Bosham in Sussex, brought up in Oxford (where he proceeded
Doctor of Divinity) was Secretary unto Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canturbury
at the time of the said Beckets slaughter, the history whereof he writ, beside
diverse other works mentioned by Bale. Pope Luc. 3. made him Cardinal the year
1178. and bestowed upon him the Archbishopricke of Beneuentum. What time he
died I find not.

9 John Cummin an Englishman and Archbishop of Dublin was created a Priest
Cardinal by Lucius 3. at Velitum the year 1183. as witnesses Giraldus
Cambrensis a man of great virtue, learned and very eloquent.

10 Stephen Langton after Archbi. of Canterbury was created Cardinal tt. S.
Chrysogoni December 15. 1212. See Canterbury. About the same time ^or happily
sooner, Onuphrius says it was 1211. Robert Curson a gentleman well borne and
an Oxford man, was made Cardinal tt. S. Stephani in Coelia monte, a Divine and
preacher of great excellency (says Matthew Westminster.) He studied first at
Oxford and then at Paris, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity. The year
1219. he was with Lewis the French King (afterward called Saint Lewis) at the
taking of of Damiata in Egypt. After that, to wit in the time of Honorius the
third, he was here in England as Legate. What became of him afterward, or
when he died appears not. He left behind him a sum of Divinity, also a
discourse touching the salvation o^ Origin, certain solemn lectures, and some
other works much esteemed.

Robert Somerscot was made Cardinal tt. S. Eustachij (as has Onuphrius) in
December 1234. Ciaconius mentions him twice, once as being created by Honor:
the 3. 1216. and afterward by the name of Rob. Vmmercot as preferred to the
said title in September 1231. He was a man (says Matthew Paris) discretus
and circumspectus, omnibus amabilis merito, and gratiosus, wherefore Pope
Gregory the ninth being dead, he was thought the fittest man of all the College
of Cardinals to succeed him in the Papacy, and accordingly in all likelihood
was to have been elected, but that some of that holy company, much scorning
that any other then an Italian should sit in Peter's chair, caused him to be
poisoned in the very Conclaue (as they call it) where the Cardinals were
assembled to make the election. This is the report of Thomas Eckleston in his
history of the coming of Friars Minors into this Realm, as also of diverse
others. He died insort as aforesaid, the year 1241.

12 Matthew Paris in his report of the year 1247. makes mention of an English
Cardinal named John, that when the Pope was in a great chase because King
Henry the third withstood a certain intolerable exaction of his, and
threatened to do great matters against him; sought by many effectual reasons
to divert him from his intended course, and to assuage his fury; but to no
purpose, till that at length the King for fear of his terrible thunderbolts
was feign to yield. This man died at the Council of Lions the year 1274. He
is mentioned as it seems of Ciaconius by the name of Ioannes Franciogia, that
was (as he says) a Burgundian and ordained to the title S. Laur. in Lucina,
and was at last Cardinal Bishop of Portua.

13 Aucherus Archdeacon of London (in which City Bale says he was borne) was
created Cardinal tt. S. Praxedis in December 1261. Ciaconius and Onuphrius
affirm he was a Frenchman, and nephew unto Pope Urban the fourth. He died at
Rome, Noue. 1. 1286. and was buried in the Church to which he was entitled.

14 One William Bray Doctor of Divinity, an Englishman, between whom and the
said Archerus had been a long continued band of friendship even from their
childhood, (as the foresaid Bale delivers) being Archdeacon of ^hemes, was
created Cardinal by the same Pope it. S. Marci the year 1262. He died at
Cincta-Vccechio April 29. 1282. in the time of the vacacy, and was buried in
the Church of the Friar preachers there, Ciaconius and Onuphrius say he was a
Frenchman.

15 Robert Kilwardby being Archbishop of Canterbury, resigned his said
Archbishopricke to be Bishop Cardinal of Portua, whereunto he was appointed by
Pope Nic. 3. an. 1278 See more of him in Canterbury.

16 Hugh de Euesham called also Hugo Attracus, being a Physician of the
greatest renown of any then living in the Christian world, as also very well
seen in the Mathematics (especially Astrology) was sent for to Rome by Pope
Martin the fourth to give his opinion in certain doubts and questions of
Physic, which he performed so learnedly and readily as gave great
satisfaction. He was created Cardinal tt. S. Lawrentij in Lucina Mart. 23.
1280. and was poisoned like Rob. Somercot in the canuassing time, to wit, after
the death of Honor 4. So Bale. Ciaconius says he died of the plague at Rome,
and was buried in the Church of his own title near the ves^ry, where he has
yet standing a very seemly toombe of marble.

17 Bale Cent. 13. c. 85. descript. Angl. makes report of one Theobaldus an
Englishman, that (as he says) was created Cardinal tt. S. Sabinae in Anentino
by Martin. 4. the year 1289. Else where I find no mention of any such.

18 A Catalogue of English Cardinals in the history ascribed to M Parker,
mentions one Bernardus de Auguiscello, that being Archbishop of Arles was
made Bishop Cardinal of Portua 1281. and died 1290. It seems he was a
Frenchman, and so says Ciaconius.

19 In the said Catalogue I find also one Berardus made Bishop Cardinal of
Praenest^ upon Whitson eve 1288. of whom I find only this further likelihood
that he was an Englishman, that Ciaconius (who affirms that he was a
Frenchman) says he was sometimes Canon of York. He died in the month of June
1291.

20 The Register of Ralfe Baldock containing a Catalogue of the Deanes of
Paul's, reports that one Arnoldus de Cantilupo Deane of Paul's was a Priest
Cardinal about the year 1306.

21 One Leonardus Guercinus is likewise in the same catalogue mentioned.
Onuphrius remembers such a one but accounts him a Frenchman, and says, he was
made a Priest Cardinal by Clem. 5. 1310. Ciaconius calls him Leonardus
Patrassus de Guercino, delivering that by Bonif. 8. (unto whom the said
Cardinal was Uncle) he was made Bishop Cardinal of Alba in the month of
March 1300. Moreover that he was a Frenchman, and that being appointed one of
the four commissioner^ that should crown Henry the seventh Emperor, in his
return homeward he died December. 5 1311.

22 Benedictus 11. that himself had been a Friar preacher, and general of
that order, remembering some old acquaintance he had with one William
Maklesfield, a Frye^ Preacher likewise, made Bachelour of Divinity at Paris,
and Doctor at Oxford, a man of great learning, (as those times were.) He
declared him Cardinal, tt. S. Sabinae in Dec. 1303. whereas he had be^^e dead
then four months before. His Cardinals hat notwithstanding was carried to
London, (where he was buried) and with great solemnity set upon his hearse. He
was borne near Couentree.

23 Upon the news of Maclesfields death, the Pope ordained in his place and to
the same title one Walter Winterburne, borne in Salisbury, a Friar preacher (as
was the other) a Doctor of Divinity, Provincial of his order, and confessor
unto K. Edward the 3. he was present at the election of Clem. 5. and enjoying
his honor not past 15. months died 80. years of age in the year 1305. He was
buried at London. A man of great learning whereof he lest some monuments in
writing not yet perished.

24 Thomas Joyce the next Provincial of the Friar preachers in England,
succeeded Winterburn, not only in that place, but in his Cardinalship too,
being likewise confessor unto the King, and a Doctor of Divinity. After he
had been Provincial seven years (says Ciaconius, but that could not well
be, for Winterburn was made Cardinal but two years before) in December 1305.
He was appointed to that foresaid title Saint Sabinae, being employed in an
Embassage unto Henry the seventh, Emperor. He died upon the way in Sauoy the
year 1311. and was buried in the Church of the Fryer-Preachers, at Oxford,
where he had bin brought up. He had 6. brethren by the same mother,
Preacher-Fryers, whereof one named Walter became Archbishop of Armagh. Diverse
of his works are remembered by Bale.

25 Sextorius, otherwise called Fortauerius Vasallus, was a Welchman, that in
his youth became a Franciscane Friar, of which order he was chosen the
ninteenth General the year 1339. Then by Pope Innocent, he was appointed
first Bishop of Massilia, after that Archbishop of Rauenna, then Patriarch of
Grado, and lastly September 17. 1361. Cardinal, but it was his chance to die
before he had possession of his hatte, to wit, before the end of the same
month. He writ a Commentary upon Saint Augustine, de ciuitate Dei,
expositions upon diverse parts of the Bible, Sermons, Lectures, and diverse
other discourses.

26 Pope Urban the fifth, named William Grisant, was (as Walsingham affirms)
an Englishman. His words are these: Obijt hoc anno (1362) Mense Augusti PP.
Innoc. 6. cui successit Dominus Gillelmus Abbas ordinis S. Benedicti Marsiliat.
patria Anglicus, Doctor egregius, and Auditor in Curia, and 2. Call. Nou.
consecratur and vocatur Vrbanus, 5. There follows then of him, this also, Hic
cum longum tempus in Curia transigisset, and nullum a. PP. gradum accepisset,
cuidam amico suo conquestus est dicens, puto inquit veraciter O amice, etsi
omnes Ecclesiae mundi caderent, nulla caderet super caput meum. Cum coronatus
suisset, accedens ad illum dictus amicus suus ait: Dudum conquesti estis pater
beatissime dicens: Etsi omnes Ecclesiae mundi caderent, nulla caderet super
caput vestrum: Ecce quomodo Deus disposuit in hac part: omnes siquidem
Ecclesiae mundi modo super caput vestrum pariter ceciderunt^ Platina, Cia^onius
and the rest of our Writers say, he was a French man, the son of a French
Soldier named Grundarde. The truth I think to be that which Bale out of
Bostonus Buriensis a man living in those times has delivered us, to wit,
that he was a French man borne, but the son of a certain famous English
Physician, named also William Grisant, brought up in Merton College in Oxford.
This Pope whether English or French, died the 19 of December, 1370.

27 The first Cardinal created by the said Vrbanus was one they call Anglicus
Grimaldi de Grisacco; and diverse suppose him also to have been an Englishman.
Ciaconius and the rest acknowledge (that which Bale affirms, and I take it to
be a truth, how that he was the Popes brothers son, and so by descent
English, although not by the place of his birth. He was first a Regular Cannon
of S. Rufus by Ualentia, as Hadrian the fourth was, the Bishop of Auinion,
Cardinal tt. S. Petri ad vincula, first and after Bishop Cardinal of Abba. He
died at Auinion, April 16. 1387 having held in Commendam many years the Deanery
of York.

28 About these times Bale supposes John Thoresby Archbishop of York to have
been created a Priest Cardinal tt. Saint Sabinae: and I believe it to be true
enough, although that neither by Onuphrius nor Ciaconius he is remembered, See
more of him in York.

29 Simon Langhan Archbishop of Canterbury, was created a Priest Cardinal by
the foresaid Urban in Sept. 1368. and after preferred to be Bishop Cardinal
of Preneste, by Greg. 11. See more of him in Cant.

30 Adam Easton a Benedictine Monk of Norwich, born of mean parentage, and
that (as it seems) in Herefordeshire, proceeded Doctor of Divinity in Oxford,
writ much, and was a man of great both wisdom and learning, well seen both in
the Greek and Hebrew tongues, which considering the times wherein he lived
may seem strange, only for his worth, without any respect of favor. He was
created a Cardinal tt. S. Caeciliae, but by whom it is doubtful: Some say it
was by Urban the sixth in his first year, other by Gregory 11. Howsoever,
certain it is, that an Antipope being set up against Urban by the name of
Clement the 7. Urban being forsaken of all his old Cardinals, grew at last
jealous of diverse of those that himself had preferred, and especially of such
as were most eminent for their virtues. Therefore no less then seven he
apprehended at one time, to wit, the second of January, 1285 (this Cardinal
being one) and after torture and long imprisonment, sailing from Nuceria to
Genua, he caused five of them to be sowed into sackes, and with barbarous
cruelty to be thrown into the sea. As for this man (whose good fortune it was
to escape that washing, committed him to close prison, till that by the earnest
entreaty of King Richard the second, he was allowed some more liberty; Marry
his livings were all taken from him. In that poor estate he continued about 5.
years, even all the time of Vrbans reign. His next Successor Bonifacius 9. set
him quite at liberty^ and restored him to all his preferments again: which
thing was solemnly declared to the Estates assembled in Parliament at
Westminster, the year 1390. after which time, 7. y^ares he lived in great
prosperity, and deceas^ng Sept. 19. 1397. was buried in his own title, where
he has a monument of Marble, with his arms and picture, and this rude
Epitaph. Artib. iste pater famosus in omnib. Adam Theologus summus,
Cardiquenalis erat. Anglia cui patriam titulum dedit ista beatae,
Caecilliaeque, morsque suprema polum. Anno 1397. mense Sept.

He left in writing abo^e 20. several volumes, whereof the greatest part were
either written in Hebrew, or translations out of Hebrew, or at least some
discourses concerning the Hebrew tongue. Amongst the rest it is said, that he
translated all the old Testament out of Hebrew into Latin. Ciaconius and
Onuphrius say he was then Bishop of London.

31 More likely it is, (that which T. Walsingham affirms that William
Courtney then B. of London, was also made Cardinal by the same Urban, whereof
see more in London.

32 William Repingdon D. of Divinity, sometimes Abbot of Leicester, cons. B. of
Lincoln, March 29. 1405. having been heretofore a great defender of the
doctrine of Wickliff, was created Cardinal tt. SS. Neuei and Achillei, Sept.
18. 1408. by Greg. 12. who before had taken a solemn oath, to make no more
Cardinals, till the controversy concerning the Papacy were ended. But being
forsaken by all his Cardinals, except only 5. the better to strengthen
himself, he created 10. in one day, whereof this man was one. See more of him
in Lincoln.

33 Thomas Langley B. of Durham was created a Priest Cardinal Iun. 6. 1411. by
Pope Io. 22. He died an. 1437. See Durham.

34 Rob. Halam Bishop of Salisbury was also created a Priest Cardinal the same
day. He died in the Castle of Gotlieb near Con^tantia being at the general
council there Sep^ 4. 1417. having sat Bishop of that church ^. years.

35 Henry Beaufort brother to K. Henry the fourth, and Bishop of Winchester,
was created Cardinal of Saint Eusebius by Martin the S. June 23. 1426. He
died the eleventh of April, 1447. and was buried in his own Church. See Wint.

36 Henry Chichley (as says the Author of Antiquitates Britannicae) was
created Cardinal the year 1428. and he delivers his title to be S.
Eusebij, whereunto the Bishop of Wint: was appointed (as aforesaid) but two
years before. Elsewhere it is not mentioned, and therefore I hold it for an
error, by mistaking ^he one Henry for the other; whereof me thinks it may be
a sufficient argument that in the Epitaph engraven upon his toombe, where all
his preferments are expressed, of his Cardinals hat there is no mention.

37 In like sort Ioh. Stafford sometimes Bishop of Bathe and Wells, is by
the same Author mistaken, as appointed a Cardinal tt. S. Balbinae 1434.

38 It was an other John, to wit, John Kempe Archbishop of York, ordained
to the foresaid Title, the ninth of August, 1439. Long after being
Archbishop of Canterbury, he was removed to the Title of S. Rufine. He died
Mar. 22. 1453. See Cant.

39 Thomas Beauchier Archbishop of Canterbury, was created by Pope Paul the
second, Cardinal tt. S. Cyriaci in The^mis, Sept. 18. 1464. He died the 30.
of March, 1486 See Cant^r

40 John Moorton Archbishop of Canterbury, was by Pope Alexander the sixth,
created Cardinal tt. S. Anastasij, the twentieth of September, 1493. He died
1500. See Canterbury.

41 Christopher Vrswike Deane of Windsor, and Almoner unto King Henry the
seventh, was created Cardinal titulo S. Praxedis, as Bale affirms, citing
for his Authors Pol. Virgil and Onuphrius. Howbeit in neither of them I find
any such thing, and I doubt not, but as in diverse other, so in him, the name
gave occasion of a mistake.

42 True it is, that one Christopher an Englishman, to wi^te Christopher
Bambridge Archbishop of York was made a Cardinal tt. Saint Praxedis by the
same Pope, viz. the year 1511. in the month of March; but no other as I
think. He had the like welcome that Robert Somercot, Hugh Euesham and other
of our Countrymen have had at Rome. He was poisoned as in York you may read
more at large) and died July 14. 1514.

42 Thomas Woosey Archbishop of York, was created Cardinal tt. S. Caeciliae
the seventh of September, 1515. He died the twenty nine of November, 1530. See
York.

44 John Fisher Doctor of Divinity, and Bishop of Rochester, for refusing the
Kings Supremacy, and disallowing his marriage with the Lady Anne Bullein, was
beheaded on the Tower hill, the two and twentieth of June 1535. having been
made a Cardinal tt. S. Vitalis the twenty one of May then last past. It was to
him titulus parum Vitalis. For it is very likely that this unseasonable honor
was ^o small inducement to hasten his end.

45 Reginald Poole, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, was created Ca^dinall
by Pope Paul the third, the two and twentieth o^ May, 1536. and had 3 several
titles, first SS. Nere^ and Achillei, then Sanctae Marie in Cosmedin, and
lastly, S. Pri^cae. He died the 17. of Nouem. 1558. See more o^ him in Cant.

46 How Peter Petow a Franciscan Friar, was made a Cardinal, and (...)
thirteenth of June, 1557. Pope Paul the fourth, as al^^ nominate by him unto
the Bishopric of Sarisbury, and all to cross and disgrace Cardinal Poole.
See in Canterbury. He died in France, within the compass of the same year,
or soon after, and might never sot foot in England to make show of his red
hat, as no doubt he greatly desired to have done.

47 The last now to be remembered of this rank is William Allen; a man by birth
English, but so ill deserving to be accounted English, as that like unto
another Herostratus, he endeavored, by raising a Combustion in our Church, the
most glorious and renowned of the world, to make himself known to posterity. In
which respect I should not afford him any remembrance by my pen, il my
omission might bury him in oblivion. This fugitive was borne in Lancashire, and
brought up in Oriall College in Oxford, running away beyond the Seas^ for his
treasonable practices against his Country, was by the Pope and other enemies of
the same, promoted to diverse Ecclesiastical preferments, and lastly had a
Cardinals hatte bestowed upon him in August 1587. He died a Priest Cardinal
tt. S. Martini in montibus October. (according to our style) 1594. and was buried
in the Church of the English College at Rome.

A NOTE OF THOSE Monasteries, whose Abbots had voice in the upper house of
Parliament, as appears in the Records, Anno 1514.
S. Petri Weston. S. Albani. S. Edmundi de Bury. Glaston. Abendon. Euesham.
Gloceter. Ramsey. B. Mariae Ebor. Tewksbury. Reading. Bello. Winchcomb. Hyde
iuxta Winton. S. Benedicti de Hulm. Berdney. Salop. Crowland. Cirencester.
Waltham. Malmsbury. Thorney. S. August. Cant. Selby. Burg. S. Petri. S. Io.
Colchester. Couuentr. Tauestoke.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 3. for Rom^, also read, Rome, so also. Page 5. lin. 18. for
settled read setling^ Ibid. line. 13. for who read whom. Ibid annot. for ad
decent. did 11 Qu. praef. read ad decent. did. 11. ^. Quis nescia^
Pras^rtim. Page 9. l. 33. dele and P. 13. l. 12. great r. greater. Ibi. l. 23.
tuenda r. tenenda. 14. annot. receptu^ r recepta^. Ibid. semel and r. semel
est. Pa. 15. l. 5. Celestius r. Celestinus. Pa 21 l. 12 wild r. wide P. 22. l.
28. Antonius r. Antoninus P. 28. l. 27. note by r. note that by. P. 32. lin.
vlt. disciplings r. displings. P. 34. l. 31. successor r. successors. P. 59. l.
17. continued r. continuing. P. 62. l. 6. come r, bec^me. P. 70. l. 71. and
Helmham r. at Helmham P. 88. l. 1, by him r. by and by. P. 93. l. 12 referred
r. deferred. P. 98. l. 10. Episcopus and r. Episcopus quam. P. 116. l. 1. hewn
all r, hewn him al. P. 118. l. 26. acceptions r. exceptions. P. 120 l. 23. his
increase r. the increase. P. 1^1. l 12. there r. in Oxford. P. 132. l. 14. unto
r. upon. P. 154 l. 21. clyen r cleyn P. 156. l. 29. benefices r. benefits
College there then the r. College there the. P. 160. l. 8 patui r. patris P.
166. l. 12. 140. r. 150 P. 170. l. 26. 1553. r. 1533. P. 182. l. 14. was mas r.
was. Io. l. 15. Guitelnius r. Guitelinus. P. 183. l. 22. Osway r, Oswy. P. 213.
l. 2^ the Lord r, Athela^d. P. 222. l. 28. intending no r. intending to leave
no. P. 223. l. 1. him did r. him up did. P. 241. l. vlt. the r unto the. P.
244. l. 8. Sidney r, Courtney. P. 257. l. 16. his r. this. P. 261 l. 12 mihi r.
milii. P. 300. l. 32. tumbo r. tumba. Pa. 303. l. 6. Burwash r. Burwash was. P.
304. l, 24 95. r. 140. P. 314 l. 29. 228. r. 286. P. 321. l. 18. accused r.
accursed. P. 322. l. 5. ligious r. li^igi^us. P. 340. l. 12 and this r. and
especially this. P. 341. l. 26. have it r. take it. Ib. l. 38. men sl^ine, r.
men being slain. P. 342. l. 8. black r. back. P 354. l. 14. al. ex. p. pot.
gave r. alatere, explenitudine potestatis gave. P. 360. l. vlt. modesty r.
Modesly. P. 378. l. 20. the time, r. that time. P. 379 l 9. succeeded r.
succeeding. P. 380. l. 4. Henrici r. Henricum. P. 386. l. 4. Bathonum d. ac
We^inum r. Bathon. d^mum ac Wellen. Ib. l. 11. Exonum r. Exon. P. 416. l. 31.
these, r. after these. P. 4^3. l 12. Norwich, was r. Norwich, who was. P. 429.
l. 29. consecration r. translation. P. 427. l. 33, return r. his return. P.
428. l. 9. called the r. called him the. P. 429. l 1. by him he, r. by that
time he. P. 431. l 5. and President of, r. of. P. 452 l. 1. they, r. that. P.
46^. l ^ battle (...), r. battle of. P. 465 l 22. principal r. prouincial.
Ib. l. 35. that S. Briton^, r. the S B^itons for that. P. 471. l. 2. Read
Provost r. Read was Provost. P. 475. l. 10. now Deane r. D^ane. P. 479. vlt.
25. r. 68. P. 480. l. 26. f. i ye s. o. 6 Priests^ ^s r. as finding in the same
only (...) secular Priests. P. 418. l. 34. down, r. down. he. P. 485. l. 25.
sancto r. quint^ P. 489. l. 34 diuin^ty of, r. divinity and President of. P.
499 l. 6. in that r. till that P. 507. l. 7. Ch^chester r. Chester. P. 509. l
15. afterward r aforesaid. P. 511. l. 10. then ap Iornerth, r. (...)we^th. P.
516. l. 14. died, r. he died. Ib l. 36. consule, r. consule, etc. He was. P.
517. l. 12. year, r. year 1200. P. 526. l 5. commendati^ns r. commendati ijs.
P. 5^9. l. 25. the next, r then (...) P. ^33. l. 18. or, r. and. Ib. l 32 1356,
r. 1563. P. 534. l. 26. 145 r. 154. P. 535. l. 16. the first Bishop r. I shall
therefore reckon for the first Bishop. Ib. l. 18. 1109. they. a^h. cons. 1109.
P. 544. l 11. this had r. this See had P. 548. l. 14. the tithe. the tithe. P.
550. l. 11 David r. then David and after him P 551. l. 32. 1462 and r. and
1462. P. 563. l. 30 a ^eput r. the reput. P. 571 l 34. companions r. company.
P. 574 l 24 after trauel^. after his travel. p. 579. l. 20 offense r. an
offense. page 581. l. 6 this of r this is the report of. p. 583. l. 11. to r,
into. p. 587. l. ^3. imprisoned W. r. imprisoned by W. p. 597. l. 16 proportion
r. promotion p. 599 l. 1. and was r. was. p. 600. l. 29 at S. Sauinae r tt. S.
Sabinae. p. 611. l. ^. and much r. with much. p 611. l. 3. pacted r. parted. p.
6^8. l. 4. at S r. tt. S. Ib. l. 21. when r. whence. p. 637. l. 26. Leodin, r.
Leodium. p 640. l. 4 eminent r. imminent. p. 641 l 24. Trugost r. Turgo^. Ib. l
25. surnamed r. forenamed. p. 648 l. 28. Gallery r. Galiley p. 655. l. 23.
1275. r. 1257. p. 6^8. l. 32. 41 r. in 141. p. 600. l 19. did 1. died. p. 665
l. 7. Gallery r. G^liley. p. 678. l. 10. and r. l. c. Ib. l. 35 a man both r.
both. p. 688. l. 10. u^bis r. (...) Ib. residato r resid at Ib. l. ^1.
seden^a^^ r sedenti^ p. 694. l. 6. Ci^cta Vec^hi^ r. Ciuita-vecchiv. p. 6^6 l.
^1. Seatorius r. Se^torius. p. 697 l. 20. the B^ then B. p. 698. l. 12. str. o.
f. h. w. w. a. r. favor, he, r ad strange. Only for his worth without my
respect of favor, he. Ib. l. 26. washing, r. washing) he. p. 701 32. and Ia^.
1^. 1557. read Ian. 13. 1557. by.


