LONDONS CRY: ASCENDED TO GOD, AND entered into the hearts, and ears of men for
Revenge of Bloodshedders, Burglaiers, and Vagabounds.

MANIFESTED THE LAST SESSIONS, holden at Justice Hall in the old Baily the 9.
10. 11. 12. of December, Anno Dom. 1619.

Likewise herein is related, the Courts legal proceedings, against the
Malefactors that were executed at Tiburne and about London, and the chiefest
Offenders, there Offenses and confessions at large expressed.

a man hanged on gallows

Printed at London by Barnard Alsop, and are to sold at his House by Saint
Annes Church near Aldersgate* 1620

TO THE HONORABLE DESCENded and Generous Knight Sir Edward Sackneile, increase
of Grace, Honor, and favor with God and men.
RIght Worshipful, our most Illustrious, gracious Sovereign Lord and King, in
that his most joy all Title, of King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
rancketh in the forefront thereof (God, and Gods grace) by it his anointed
elected King, and our Supreme head and governor, in lieu unto God for thus
anointing him with the oil of gladness, above all that he has no fellows,
and exalted him so high, that all the people to him, as unto God, shall bend,
kneel, obey, and fulfill his Royal will, and observe his Laws, and Statutes,
his Majesty to the whole world professes publickely, to honor, serve, and to
set forth the praise of this God, who has so honored him: he writes himself
therefore, A defender of the Faith, and a maintainer of his Truth. Opposing all
the Enemies of the same by sword, word, and pen, and nothing more does his most
royal heart delight in, and with any to be conversant, then with the most
Reverend Archbishops, Bishops and others thereof to dispute, and with David's
Blessed man day and night, to be exercised therein, sollacing his soul with
that sweet refreshing green pastures of Scriptures, when as others were
passing there time in sports in giving content to the flesh, yet his Majesty to
the soul, witness that most learned and godly Book of the Lords prayer,
written by his Majesty the last Christmas. Such a most blessed Lord and King,
I hope such attendants, that affect Gods honor and service, and preservation
of there country wherein they live.

Amongst many of those Honorable, and Worshipful attendants on that most
sacred person of his Majesty. I humbly attend you noble Sir, to patronize like
your good Master Truth. There has been many untruths diunlgd in the world of
Malefactors, that should come this Sessions, such as a Chaundler, that should
lend money, and them to whom he lent it, by the high way to rob them of it
again. Likewise a speech of an Inholder at Saint Albons which should Rob,
and kill his Guests in London highwayes all which, your Worship knows right
well to be most gross untruths. To give the world satisfaction I have hastily
written this small Pamphlet, wherein is nothing but truth, your self being an
eye, and ear witness being, on the Bench a Commissioner in London: I humbly
crave pardon at your Worships hands, for what in this shall seem amiss to
your learned Judgment by Gods grace I hope ere long in another nature, to your
vewe shall be presented to be amended vouchsafe your kind acceptance, and
Patronage of this for this time, and I will rest.

At your service, Henry Goodcole.

LONDONS CRY FOR REVENGE.
Law is the principal foundation, (whereon the welfare of every good man
consists and depends, and true execution, the life of the same, without
which, no peace or safety, can be either unto the Church or Commonwealth: but
Iniquity would in a most high nature flourish, yea, to the utter extirpating of
all the godly, and virtuous were they not by them suppressed, who are the true
Contradicters, and opposers thereof. Whithin the bounds and lymites of Law,
the person, goods, lands, houses, chattels, and possessions, are confined, and
under the wings of the same sheltred, thither to fly for redress against all
the outrageous and wilful violaters of the same. Therefore by all Christian
Kings, and Princes, Statuts and penal laws, were conceived, and enacted,
debellare superbos, and parcere subiectis, to subdue, and subject enormious
offenders, and to patronize submisse and humble minded good Christians, whose
protection, and preservation of life, state, and person: wholesome and good
laws, do as with a hedge inuiron, and enclose all the exclude all intruders
into any of the least lists or limits. Christians Kings and Princes, whom none
but God alone makes chief and electeth to bear rule over his people, it has
pleased him to style them with this most glorious Title: I said ye are as
gods, all men whatsoever, shall honor, fear, and obey you: and as gods here
on earth ye shall behave your selves in your Royal authority from me derived
(save and destroy) spare and punish, honor and dishonor, exalt the virtuous,
and love them for there virtuous integrity, and rebuke shame and confusion put
to the wicked. And in them there is an external Majesty, whereon steadfastly
looking, it stricketh terror and amasement to the heart) stupidity to the
senses, as not daring to behold the glorious luster of that brightness;
reason, valor, fortitude, strength, understanding, all with Joshua son
standing still in the valley of Aialon, and like a Giant refreshed at there
command swiftly running.

There shining glorious faces, are like the Sun in a man's eyes, which at the
first much dazeleth them: but with use and continuance, they can the better,
and oftener looked thereon.

Behold, it has resemblance to God, whom for to see, to flesh and blood,
nothing more intolerable, yet most especially terrible to the wicked and
ungodly: the contemptuous neclectors of his will, rebels to his Laws,
Malefactors dares not behold the face, nor cannot endure to hear speak of a
private Magistrate, which is in them apart, and little glimmering light of that
Deity: these secondary means are subordinate, like the Moon, and Stars,
from the glorious Sun: namely do receive light, and heat from thence.
Reverend Judges, and Magistrates, do shinne in there kind expound the Law,
and to speak unto the people, in truth equity and vprightnes. They as from a
living spring derive there sweet issuing streams, which do run through out
all the parts, and coasts of this Kingdom, to give each there refreshing in
due time and season, namely unto the oppressed, to yield remedy and redress,
and unto the fatherless, and friendlesse, to be a sure refuge, in the time of
there troubles, that great and vild mightines, may not get the upper hand of
the virtuous, to trample them under there feet. The Sun is no whit abased,
though his radient Beams be splendeth on the stinking dunghill, as well as on
the sweetest flower on the Garden, to each according to nature, he extracteth,
and good or bad, neysome or wholesome sents, disperseth. Though the Sun
shinne, on the bad as well as the good, on that which is loathsome, as well as
oderiferous is the insperion thereon, any way there unto preiudicious no whit
at all, for every thing whereunto the heat thereof extends, it cherishes,
making it to yeald forth the fruit, in dead time, season, and place, Because
where the corn grows, and by the Sun is rypened, the Cockle does likewise
prosper, is that in the Sun, or in the Garden? the flower, nettle, and the
thorn the sweet heathe and the stinking weed, or the tilled lands with the
bushes, Briars or Brambles is that the cause of these contrarieties, nothing
less: All mankinds, nature with sin is corrupted, and depraved in Adam, all
things there natures change, man's heart of innocence is now made naught, Gods
blessed earth before man's transgression, now after his digression accursed it
is, with barrenness bringing forth unprofitable fruits such as Nettle,
Thorns, and Thistles and Briars, to hinder the plentiful grows of any good,
of which corrupt kind namely of bad: in each nature, climate and quality, the
worser part exceeds the best, more bad ground, then good, more sinners then
Saints, more vicious then virtuous, there is in the whole world a deludge of
Iniquity, more prone, swifter running after all manner of wickedness to
perpetrate them, then willing to perform any of the least Office, or
intertaine such motion inclining unto God, or goodness.

Princes in their Laws and Courses, imitate that lust One in Heaven: Justice
and Mercy kiss and meet each other: Rewards they promise to the virtuous, and
Threatening of Punishments to the wicked: the one, to encourage in their way,
the other, to deter, and retire in their way: experience how they are honored
and promoted, that are sauoured with integrity, and instruments of
punishments, as Sword and Fire, that to good are refractorie: yet will not God
punish, nor adiudge, nor condemn, but he before visites the sins and
offenses of the people. The Kings Majesty imitates his God in this, whom he
unfeignedly fears and serves.

This God on Earth, with the Sun Moon, and States of Nobility, Clergy, and
Gentry, his Court is centured, and gloriously adorned, and are come to visit
and inquire.

To judge the cause, and discern between the people, he appoints the reverend
Judges, and civil Magistrates, to discern and search into the Cause: and to
the Malefactor, they call others to testify, in there Legal Proceedings, that
they will not in any the least manner be taxed with injustice, or wrong. The
Fact, and Prisoner, are produced, and publicly in Court read, Evidence of the
matter of fact upon Oath sworn, and bound at a day of appearance to justify
the truth, and nothing but the whole truth, as they would have God to help
them.

THE MANNER OF THE Courts Proceedings.
Upon the Oaths and deliberated inquiries of 15. reputed honest conscionable
men, now all Causes are begun to be consulted of: and least they should err in
the Termining, and yielding of their Verdict if ought they doubt, they address
themselves unto the reverend Judges, and Honorable Benchors, to be by them of
their doubts resolved, in the matter informed, how to proceed justly, truly,
and conscionable. And that these three things shall concur and agree in their
proceedings, namely, justly, truly and conscionably, to inquire and search out
the truth, they solemnly every man take their Oaths on the holy Evangelist, to
the uttermost of their power so to do: the accuser is sent up with the Bill of
Indictment against the prisoner to them preferred, Oath made of the manner of
the Fact, wherein they cannot err, without wilfully they will. And behold the
vigilant eye of Justice! They have a Keeper sworn, to attend their going in,
and commings forth, that none shall hear their private conferrings. Where they
sit, none approaches that place, after testimony given, that by this means,
savor and hatred may be laid aside: if in one man's breast, yet not in many: for
there are fifteen in number of them: and if that one will disagree, they
exclude him, and choose another: And that there may not be the least invasion,
sinister dealing, for parson, or private causes, or respects, the Keeper that
attends them, is not to approach unto them, unless they call him, nor to
speak with them, except it us to know whether they be agreed of their Verdict,
or no, and then to proclayme to the Court a Verdict, and to usher them into the
face of the Court, there to manifest and declare what they have done in those
weighty matters committed to their trust, judgment, and conscience. Whose
Names I have here set down.

The Names of the Grand Inquest for London.
Thomas Gresham. Richard Brislow. John Allen. Thomas Riley. John May. Gutbert
Haselwood. Thomas Gommersall. Henry Perkins. Clement Pargiter. John Smith.
William Checkley. John Collet. Thomas Gatwood. James Ballard. John Tilney.
The Names of Middlesex Jury for the Quest of Inquiry.
John Waterwoorth. Francis Marsh. William Gualter. Thomas Bates. Thomas
Chatfield. Nicholas Day. Thomas Faulkener. Richard Barnes. Robert Brown. John
Baker. George Smith. Thomas Stanger. Francis Andrews. John Monday. Edward
Saunders. Nathaniel Lomsden. John Smith. William Stanley. Zachary How.
These by the Worshipful Bench, are told what a weighty matter they are
about, the peace and prosperity of a King, and a whole Kingdom, the honor
and glory of God, his Church, and Gospel: they must inquire of the seditious
disturbers, and of the hurting, slaying of the persons, stealing their goods or
chattels, if any such Malefactors be brought before them, they all jointly must
agree, acquit, or condemn.

And behold how God himself approves of what is done, by revealing most
strangely, as consequently I will relate, on a sudden the secret lurking
Malefactor, and the dubious hidden Truth: nay, in the end themselves to say,
both Jury and Judges are clear, and just and upright in what they have done,
in their Proceedings.

Justice imitates God two manner of ways in their Proceedings: not rashly do
they begin; but first, here is their preparation; (Inquiry) whether the Crime
be so, or no; (justly) whether there be cause or matter to punish, or spare;
or the Original whence the accusation or scandal should tise: Reason,
Conscience, and Law, these are the Guides and Lights to inform their
Understanding, to speak, to judge, and deem of the Cause and Prisoner:
(fairly) each party, the accused, and accuser, are face to face; where, what
he can object, must be upon Oath, and the Prisoner, after such testimony
deposed against him, is suffered to speak as much as he can for himself, and
with patience they hear him, and most temperately, modestly, mildly, and
charitably, the Judge of the Court replyeth answer, according to the nature of
their Offense. Mercifully, lento pede, with God, slow to anger, sorry for the
Offenses of the People, with temperate inuections: Witness that often
Miserere, which by heart is learned; for not a Letter of it, one among a
hundredth almost can truly tell: yet this merciful warning they use. And when
Sentence is to proceed; from such a Dove, Gall, from such sweetness,
bitterness: as the Laws rigor, Religious Exhortations, good Persuasions, by
that Tongue uttered, and unfeigned Sorrow and Compassion, by watrie eyes
expressed, and their Charity showed, in preparing for distressed Souls, the
Balm of Gilead: though they wound, yet others to heal: and though they by the
Law have terrified them, by the Sentence of Death, on these mortal Bodies,
they comfort them again by that sweet heavenly Voice of the Gospel sent from
the God above.

The Names of the Jury of London for Life and Death.
Patricke Powell. John Lamb. Thomas Euerit. John Higgins. Ralph Clarke. John
Latheman. Thomas York. Samuel Bridges. Thomas Withers. William Smith. William
Hunter. John Mallard.
The Names of the Jury of Middlesex, for Life and Death.
Robert Estrey. Thomas Barret. Henry Burnet. William Haward. Robert Ewer.
Richard Halsey. John Heerd. Henry Bird. William Lifeild. George Winche. William
Page. Allen Parsons.
The tenor of these Jury men's Oaths, upon the holy Sacrament they do
protest, true, and truly to try, and true deliverance make between out
Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, So help them God,
and the Contents of that Book. And the Fore-mans Oath they jointly accept. And
after such Oath sworn, the Indictment is read to them, the Witness produced,
the Prisoner is brought forth to the Bar, in their public view, that they
may see and behold him, and as God directs, so they conclude. The Honorable
and learned Benchers, whose Names are subscribed, if ought they doubt of, they
are most willing to resolve doubts, and to inform, that they may not ere, and
often times it falls out that the Jury of life and death, acquites them whom
the Grand Inquest sound before guilty.

THE NAMES OF THE HONORAble and Worshipful Benchers, and Justices in this
Sessions for the City of London, and County of Middlesex.
THe Right Honorable Sir William Cokayne Lord Mayor of the Honorable City
of London, with diverse of the Aldermen his Brethren. The Honorable Sir Henry
Mountague, Lord Chief Justice.
Justices for London.
Sir Edward Sackucile. Master Robert Heath Esquier, Recorder. Sir Thomas
Bennet Sir Thomas Low. Sir Thomas Middleton. Sir John Iolles. Sir John Lemon.
Sir George Boules. Sir John Bennet. Master Thomas Jones Esquier, common
Seruient of the City. Master Robert Deane. Master Ieames Cambell. Sheriffs
of the City of London.
Justices for the County of Middlesex.
Sir Thomas Fowler. Sir Baptist Hickes. Sir Allen Apsley, Lieutenant of the
Tower of London. Sir Francis Dercy. Sir Henry Spiller, with diverse Justices of
the same County, learned, and judicious.
A true Relation of the Arraigning, Indicting and conuicting of Andrew Ward,
alias Alliar, and John Percy: who were both hanged at Tiburne on Monday, the
13. of December, 1619.
IT is verified in these persons, of whom I am now to relate somewhat, that
which the Prophet David says, That evil shall hunt the wicked person, to
overthrow him. Which in fine happened, and befell to these; never leaving off
to do wickedly, as to work mischief, till they were paid with that they had
deserved, which was shame and confusion. Shameless were all their Facts and
Proceedings, without any humanity, or fear of God, or Man, or respect to
Manhood: as their usage manifested the same, toward those who fell into their
hands, or stood at their mercy.

These two committed a Robbery upon Hounslaw Heath, upon the person of an
Attorney, coming Westward up to London, to the Term: they took away all he
had, stripped him of all his apparel, and put on him some of their vile
Clothes, and took his Shirt eff his back, and scoffingly said, That that Shirt
was too fine for him, he should have another to keep him warm: and after this
done, they bound him, and left him, and so fled.

Having so well sped, they were fleshed on for more such Booties, to meet
withal, and to get such Prizes, thence they coasted toward Royston: and
within a week after they robbed one a little on this side Royston, whom they
bound, and took all that he had: the Rich and Captain Thief cobbed, as they
say, the poor Thief: but somewhat they had, for which they paid dear. A
riding Cloak one of them had taken from the Gentleman's Man: the which he
espied upon one of their Backs, riding toward Drury Lane: but their Journey
was stayed; They must leave their Turning, and keep on straight their way:
which the Serieants will bring them to; their Inn, and Place most fit for
such, even Tiburne.

A Relation why Thomas Horsey was hanged at Smithfield Bars on Tuesday, the
14. of December, 1619.
THis Thomas Horsey had murdered out Elizabeth Cover, dwelling in Turne-mill
Street, in an Alley called Persons Alley. She was a Woman of a most lewd life,
and they both unlawfully accompanied together: But so it fortuned, that such
love which was between them, could not long continue, nor have a happy Issue;
but Mischief did attend them both likewise, as did the other two, formerly
treated of.

These two lusty, lustful Lovers, fell at variance between themselves, and
suddenly he slew her with a Penknife. After the Fact committed, he fled, and
got passage out of England, with Sir Walter Rauleigh, late deceased, into
(Guiana) where, and in some other places, before he returned, he was absent for
the terms of three years, after this Murder was by him committed. In this
Process of time, he thought none would have known, or sought after him, to
make him answer for the same, but that it had been forgotten. At his return
into England, he boldly repaired to renew his old acquaintance, withsome others
of his deceased friends fashion, and by this means he was taken, and
apprehended.

At his Arraignement he conidently and boldly denied the Fact, and said
another, who was in his company did it, but not himself: But at his death, he
freely confessed it, and said, he meant not to slay her, but to give her a
mark, for remembrance of her abusing of him: and his conclusion concrning her,
was, That he thought in his conscience, through her destruction, that many
hundreds were ^aued from the Gallows.

A true declaration of the manifold Facts done by Richard Earper, who was
executed on Monday last at Tiburne.
AS Almighty God ouertooke others in their mischiefs, so he suddenly
surprised him, as to the hearing of many thousands, he out of his own mouth
confessed, and spoke as follows.

The Fact for which he died, was for Robbing the house of Sir Richard Sutton,
and Sir John Ofley, which house he Robbed once before this time, and confessed
that the Cushions which stood in the Windows of Sir Richard Suttons house he
had, and burnd them, and for the second time he Robbed the house, he got into a
Garden, and climed up to a Window wherein he entered, and took such things, who
pleased, and so came down the Stairs of the same and got forth. But mark
how strangely God reueiled him, by a Dagger which he took of Sir John Oflyes,
he gave it to Sir John's Brother, of whom he ^nquired how he came by that
Dagger, who said that Harper was the man that gave it him, and so there doubts
were resolved, that none but he could Rob that house: this Arraingnement, he
boldly denied that fact, and all others of that nature: but God who brings
all things to light, revealed at the last that he was, a secret notorious
Thief, and Burglaer, as I will hereafter who (...) was by the Jury found
guilty, and adjudged by the Court to death and both Justly, as himself
confessed the day before his Execution, and at the time of his Execution. The
Evening before he su^^^^^^, he disgu^sed him self in Woman's apparel, and got
away by water (...) unto the Banckes-side: but God prevented him, and would not
not let him so escape or fly vengeance, for the Keeper soon ouertooke him.

At the place of Execution he much bewailed his lewd life, and declared that he
had been brought up to the Latin Tongue and Music, but such was his most
wicked continued course of life, and said that he was no sooner entertained
into a Service, but company and women withdrewe him from thence, and counseled
him often to shifte. It was demanded of him to clear his Conscience, and to
tell unfeignedly unto the whole world whether that woman with whom he
accompanied were his wife, or not? and he thus replied answer to them, God
forgive me for it, thou know that she is not. He lastly confessed, that he
had used to rob the Court many times, and that he had stolen twice the Kings
Majesty's cushions from his Chair of State, and that Suite which was of an
Orrange-tawny-colour broad-cloth, he stole out of the Spicery, with a Fetherbed.

For these his most foul and vile offense, he wept most bitterly, and prayed
heartily unto GOD for pardon and remission: unto whose inexpressible mercy, I
must leave him.

At this Sessions was arraigned and executed at Tyburne Thomas Porter a Brewer
by Trade, who in playing at the Cards with one Christopher Body, a Player, fell
out with him, who so provoked him, that he took a Nowle, that lay on the
Boarde, and thrust it into his side, of which mortal wound he dyed.

At this Sessions were convicted and executed upon the statute of Vagrancie,
Samuel Prat, and John Smith, both which the Statute adjudged to be Fellons,
without any benefit of Clergy, having been before whipped, and burnt in the
Shoulder, with a Roman R. and returning back with their Passes, they were
both adjudged to dye: and the one was hanged at White Chapel, and the other
at Grayes Inn Lane end.

Conclusion.
THus Life is destroyed by Life, and Earth turns Earth to Earth. The Life of
the Law, which is just, takes away the Life of the lewd, and unjust. Judges,
Men made of Earth, turns these miserable wretches unto the Grave, Dust, and
Earth. But Christianity requires of me to lodge this hope in my breast, That
he who came down from Heaven to Earth, to bring us unto everlasting Life,
though Death and Grave have now swallowed them up, and gotten the victory of
them; yet by virtue of his most powerful Conquest, and glorious Resurrection,
they shall rise out of the dust of their Graves; for their Corruption, then to
put on Incorruption, for their Mortal and transitory Life, an Immortal and
everlasting Life: Which Lord Jesus grant unto us all, in thy appointed time.

FINIS.

