A True Declaration of the happy Conversion, contrition, and Christian
preparation of FRANCIS ROBINSON, Gentleman.

WHO FOR COVNTERFETting the Great Seal of England, was drawn, Hanged, and
quartered at Charing Cross, on Friday last, being the Thirteenth day of
November, 1618.

Written By HENRY GOODCOLE Preacher of the Word of God, and his daily visiter,
during his imprisonment in the Jail of Newgate.



LONDON

Printed by Edw: All-de dwelling near Christchurch. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Henry Mountague, Lord Chief Justice of England,
grace and Honor be multiplied here, and by the mercies of Jesus Christ,
fruition of his glory, and everlasting Happiness hereafter.
RIght Honorable, I am in a great strait, betwixt hope and despair standing,
your worthiness and wisdom to trouble with such an unworthy labor as this is;
for which my ambitious and bold presumption, I stand at the Bar of your
learned Judgment, and deem to be arraigned, convicted, and adjudged of the
same. But my hearty desire of the welfare of our now flourishing Jerusalem, and
her Inhabitants, which I pray God long it may so continue, and unfeigned zeal,
thereunto is constrained thus to break forth, thus to proclaim unto all her
dwellers therein, your great mercy to distressed souls, desiring to comfort
them, and by all means possible to save them, as well as your Justice and zeal
to punish and cut of offenders: both which to be conjoined together in your
Noble heart, of late are expressed, In sending to a perplexed and distressed
soul, when time of need did greatly require the same (physic) by that
heavenly Physician, and Messenger of God Mr. Robert Pricket, into whose
Industrious labor and harvest, I was bold to intrude my self, and thrust in
my sickle. And now further desirous to explain unto the world, the good
success and blessing that God in his great mercy gave to our willing labors:
Humbly craving your Honors patronage and acceptance, which if your Hon*
vouchsafe to grant, will encourage us to be at your Hon: command in the like
service. And being sheltred under your favorable countenance and acceptance,
will make both the cause and help of our Ministry, respectively regarded and
welcome, to whom we shall be called. And this Labor now published, and
conuayed, my only aim and intent by dispersing of it, is to vestigiate your
Hon: steps, to wish and endeavor the general good of all, and particular hurt
of none: The Lord Almighty of his great goodness long continue your Hon:
amongst his people for their welfare, to be as ever your Religious courses have
explained, to be Noble, charitable, and Religious, a defense to such as else
would be oppressed, and an incourager of the good and virtuous.

Your Honors in all readiness, and humility, to be commanded: HENRY GOODCOLE.

To the Christian Reader.
LAmentable and perilous, are these times and days wherein we now live, to see
the abounding of sin and iniquity, and pure religion, to the corrupt hearts,
and unstable fantasies of men, to be wrested, as they list, to find diversity
of Religions, Sects and Schisms, as the hearts, qualities, and manners of men
differ, thereunto they equiuolate their profession and religion, the which
instability, wherein there should not in the least manner be any inconstancy,
breeds corrupt lives, and unrecoverable downfalls, of many hopeful young
Gentlemen, worshipfully descended, and carefully tutered, the true means of
preventing such horrible wickedness. Of which duly considering, and pondering
in my mind, it did in some measure persuade me to a periode of this by me now
published, before I had put pen to paper, to write, being daily experienced,
that where one suckes honey, another follows, and thence sucketh poison; for
it is a thing most impossible, to please the humors and fantasies of all men.
But when I remembered the cause I had to handle, which was for the public good
of my Country, to admonish them to take heed by other men's hurts and harms,
and for fear it should slip out of their minds, This person Francis Robinson,
his heinous act most remarkable, and deplorable downfall, becomes my subject,
to write; instigating me thereunto, and encouraging me, not to neglect my
intended and good determination to a generality, for fear of the barking and
contradicting spirits of our age, but to perform the cause and quarrel which
I must write of against God and our enemies, how by a ravening Wolf, a Romish
Catholic, as he was blinded, became a blind guide to this poor Gentleman, to
make him fall into the same ditch as he did, whereby like a silly simple
innocent Lamb by his subtle sly seducings, and inticings, his destruction
befell most sudden and fearful. I leave what I shall relate unto thee to
thy construction, desiring (if I may) to have a charitable censure of thee:
Concluding with my hearty affection to thee, and Christian admonition,
howsoever thine is to me-ward. Stand fast in thy faith, profession, and
religion, and I pray God, that other men's harms, may make thee and all others,
fearful, careful, and watchful, that you fall not in such manner as many
before this day have done: the undoubted prevention whereof is, daily to
invoke Gods grace from above, to aid and assist thee, that thou fall not
into the same mischiefs, who are as weak, frail, and subject to be tempted,
as others before thee were. And thus with hearty prayers to God to assist thee
to be a conqueror in the day of battle, and constant in the time and day of
trial: I rest;

Thine in the Lord Jesus, a labourer for thy welfare. HENRY GOODCOLE.

A true Declaration of the happy conuertion, contrition and godly preparition,
of Francis Robinson Gentleman.
DYing men's words are ever remarkable, and their last deeds memorable for
succeeding posterities, by them to be instructed, what virtues or vices they
followed and embraced, and by them to learn to imitate that which was good,
and to eschew evil. But such is the depraved and corrupt nature of all
Mankind, and Satan's subtilty (man's mortal enemy) that daily goes about, and
labors by all means possible he can, to blindfolde us, stopping us out of
the way wherein God has appointed us to walk, and the example of Gods
children that have trod out the way before us. Oh how much do these our days
wherein we now live (show us the too true experience of the same) that
multitudes for company sake, conioyne themselves in all manner of mischief, and
run in heaps with delight, to commit most abominable sins, presuming on
Gods patience, because he does not presently punish, saying in the pride of
their hearts, and glory of their wicked sins, Does the Lord see, mark, or
regard the deeds and actions, of the sons of men? No, they say tush, He
regards them not: And thus the Devil by this means, gets hold of multitudes,
and bringes them in the end, to shame, hell, and destruction; for the reward
and wages of Sin is death.

Let me now my worthy Countrymen, present unto your view, the experienced
reward of sinful delights, which latey befell a Gentleman by name Francis
Robinson, well descended, educated, and fostred tenderly, who happening into
evil company, quickly, by the lewd examples, and dispositions of others, was
brought to be as wicked, and as bad as themselves, for the Devil does make
wicked men to do, what he cannot do himself (that is) to bring men to sin
and shame, by lewd men's inticings, examples and directions, to do as they do,
to walk in their steps and ways of wickedness, merrily to pass away their
times and days whilst here they live, by which tossing, carousing, and
iollitie of life, they become altogether forgetful of God, and the means of
their salvation, which to redeem from the Jaws of Hell, a whole world and to
late repentance then small auailes.

Remember O ye youthful Gallants now your Creator in the days of your youth,
and cast not off the yoke of God from your neck, when you are young, least he
reject you, when your strength and eyesight fail you; that is, in your old
age: learn to tread now the paths of his holy ways, if ye would be assured
to come to the place of his everlasting happiness, for the Lord hates, and
utterly abhors all the works and workers of sin and iniquity: but those
that love and fear him he makes much of them. That you shall see, and say
with the Prophet David, Psalm 58. verse 10. Doubtless there is a God that
Judges the Earth, that he is a just God and loves righteousness, and hates
iniquity, repaying vengeance unto them that delight in the same, my ensuing
sequel shall declare unto you: example does daily testify, and at this
present confirms the same. I pray God the wanton and roaring Gallants of this
our Age, may by them be warned, but much it is to be feared they will not: If
they will not, let them take heed as they go for company, they hang not for
company, whereat, for ought I do perceive they make a scoff and scorn, to
think in that manner of dying they dye valiantly, when that it is indeed most
desperate, deuillish and damnable, and savors no whit of the least spark of
Gods grace, but of contempt of God, and the ripe fruit of Satan's bondslaues,
which is to commit sin, and to boast and brag of the same, to be the full
height of a reprobate soul, from which good Lord deliver us all.

Now to confirm you how this Gentleman, as he himself related to me, fell,
observe what follows.
SO soon as ever he was brought into the Jail of Newgate, he looked round
about him, and earnestly entreated those that stood by him, to take heed of
Papists, and evil company, for they were the cause of his destruction. From
the Lodge he was conuayed by the Keepers into the common Jail, where he
remained some two hours, on Tuesday the tenth day of November, from which side
he was removed to the Master side by Warrant, from the right Honorable Sir
Henry Mountague, Lord Chief Justice of England, who for the same was most
heartily and humbly thankful, and counted it, as well it did deserve, a great
favor from my Lord, there to sequester him, the better to prepare and fit him
for his end. And that no means might be wanting to work that good work in
him of repentance, contrition, and assurance of his salvation, like a good
Samaritane that Honorable and religious Judge, as he had wounded him by
denouncing his just Judgment of deserved death, which is to flesh and blood
most fearful and unwelcome, yet such was his Honorable care toward him,
which is worthy of remembrance, what lay in his power he did to comfort him,
and in nothing more appeared the same, then in the sending of my painful
Brother and fellow labourer in Gods work (Master Pricket) who did most
gravely and wisely apply to his distressed soul (such comfort) as that I do
constantly believe, the lost sheep was brought home again to the fold of
Jesus Christ.

Whereof most constantly Robinson said, he was assured: for the spirit of God
did inwardly confirm the same to him, undoubtedly to believe it, of which most
comfortable words and effectual working, we were most glad, and joyful, that
to our weak means, God rich in mercy, had given and sent such a blessing and
cooperation. Thus seeing our industry and labor begin to prosper to the glory
of God, the saving and winning to God a sinful soul, I was bold to put my
Sickle into another man's Harvest, and bestowed likewise my poor willing pains
and industry: with what they were I have here published, and what effect they
took, I praise God, I labored not in vain, but found a hungry and thirsty
soul, apt and ready, to receive them from my hands, and the fruits thereof,
repentance, contrition, and faith.

A relation how we spent Wednesday Evening, being the eleventh of November.
SO soon as ever I came unto him, he did like a poor, sick, and wounded
Patient, desirous of cure, tell his whole grief, not mincingly or sparingly,
but faithfully and truly, that I might the better apply and endeavor to
comfort him, the beginning of his evils he told me, and how he grew worse and
worse by degrees, the manner he related, and as near as I can from his own
mouth spoken, delivered here the same. Wherein as himself observed we may see
the nature Note this.
of Sin, which if it be not prevented in time, how it gets the masterie of
us, and when we would shake off our old accustomed and habitual sins, we
cannot easily do it, because it cleaves fast unto us, that of our selves, by
no means we are able, but by the help of God, who is willing, and ready at
all times to help and succor us therein, if we call and seek for his saving
health.

Our conference.
HIs lamentable downfall thus begun, the which, O Note this.
would to God the careless and loose livers, within this City of London,
would take notice of (namely) that he forsook God first, before God forsook
him, at which words he much lamented, that the Devil had so blinded and
deluded him, to forsake and deny the profession (and faith of the Church of
England) to embrace and cleave unto the Heretical doctrine of Romish Popery,
which are but lying vanities, and vain shadows, no way substantial for the
maine groundwork of a Christian man's salvation. An in-sight, whereinto after
it pleased God to be so merciful to grant him, he from the bottom of his
heart renounced, (that false and Antechristian Church of Rome) sorrowing
nothing more for any thing, then for that time, that in that Church he had
been a member, and rejoicing and ioying in nothing more, then that God had
opened his eyes to see his former errors, and to give his heart and soul a
light, with earnest desiring and thirsting to be accepted again, into the
company of the true and faithful believers of the Church of England, which his
soul did assure him undoubtedly was the true Church of God.

His Progression.
When there was warrant out for his apprehension, Note this*
he then was in Darby, and hearing that there was wait laid for him, posted
thence some six miles, but had not the power any further to travel, but
returned to Darby, to go and Justify his foul fact, which by the narrow
looking into, and examining of a Lawyer there inhabiting, with whom he was at
variance, his designs were discovered.

When he was thus discovered, and sent up to London to the right Honorable the
Lord Chauncellor of England, by whom he was examined, and urged to confess,
that his foul fact of high Treason: stood stoutly in the denial of the same.
But he that sits in Heaven laughed him to scorn, and most wonderfully
disclosed the secret of his heart, and his foul fact, whereof he thought none
should have known, for being re-examined by the right Hon: Sir Henry Mountague
Knight, Lord chief Justice of England, to him as formerly he did, denied his
foul fact, but behold here how the hand of God laid hold on him, and how
the eye of God was watching over him, and disclosed him, by delivering a Key to
Humphrey Smith, to go to a Truncke, wherein his counterfeit Commission was,
and diverse other writings.

It pleased Almighty God, who teaches all men's hearts wisdom, that the right
Hon: the Lord Chief Justice thus bethought himself, to know the truth, seeing
as yet he could get no knowledge, he set spies to watch those that had access
unto him, to find out by them, this foul fact, which most miraculously by the
careful examination of Humphrey Smith (by that grave Judge Sir Heury
Mountague) came soon to light thereof, who told his Hon: of a Truncke of
writings: which so strangely discovered, Robinson thereat was greatly amazed,
thinking it a thing impossible to be known at all to any; who when that he saw
he was discovered, betook himself (of an obstinate denyer) to become an
humble, contrite, and sorrowful confessor of what he had done, and implored
mercy and favor at honorable persons hands, of whom he little deserved the
same. But he out of his most Noble disposition, denied not any the least of his
requests, and humble suites, but buried all his former vndeseruings, in the
bowels of pity and compassion, grieuing to see what a most wretched course he
had run, that the Justice of the King, and his Laws, did justly challenge
his deserved deoth.

Nay further note and consider I pray you, for these were the words proceeding
out of his own mouth: how God did make his own wisdom to be foolishness,
therewith to laugh himself to scorn, that presuming he had some sound
judgment and true knowledge in the Law, upon which he too much built and
relied, for his knowledge therein, was but the flash of pride and presumption:
for when the right Worshipful, grave, wise and learned in the Law (Sir Henry
Yeluerton his Majesty's Attorney General) heard, said, that his intention,
made the Law to take hold on him, he thereat was silenced, and confessed his
blindness, and ignorance, and that his eyes were shut, and heart infatuated even
unto the day of his trial, in which it pleased God to reveal to him, his
gross mistaking of the Law, and guilt in this his foul fact, which when he
well and plainly perceived; he then remembered that portion of Scripture which
he formerly had read in the 3. Chap. of Jeremy, which stroke remorse of
conscience in him, and that the whole world might take notice that the
Judgments of God had overtaken him, advisedly coated the place recited for
memory, that men should fear to offend in the like case, least they come to
have in the end the like reward for their pains.

Lastly, he confessed the person, and first occasion that drew him to commit
his foul fact, which was (Covetousness) the foundation of all mischief. And
lodging at the Swan at Charing Cross, there he grew acquainted with one (
Morgan a Romish Catholic) whom he told of his thirsting after money, who
then showed the fruits of his Religion, to bring by his wicked device, the
body of this Gentleman to his destruction, and (had not God in his great mercy
prevented the same destroyed) his soul also, for he went the right way
thereunto, by crafty seducing of him to become a Papist. And thus, he leaving
and for saking his God, and Religion, his sudden downfall afterward
happened, the which he heartily prayed to Almighty God might teach, warn, and
terrify others from the like attempt: and thus spoke that morning a little
before he received the most holy and blessed Sacrament, of the Supper of our
Lord Jesus Christ, (said*) that Morgan did seduce him first, from his Religion,
and after that, his heart was inclinable to receive, what Morgans poisoned
tongue of mischief would speak, of which kind of people and their Religion,
he desired all people to beware and to fly their Doctrine, it tending only
to mischief and destruction.

His great desire of giving satisfaction so far as he could, to those whom he
had greatly offended.
HIs God and Creator, he acknowledged most highly by his foul fact to have
offended, and for atonement he fully relied on the meritorious death and
passion of Jesus Christ.

The Kings most excellent Majesty in a most high nature he had offended, for
which he was heartily sorry, and craved pardon, willing to render up his life,
acknowledging his death to be deserved; and further saying, that if he were
never so much to be tortured, he deserved the same, and contentedly embraced
the same, that so his Majesty's just wrath might be appeased.

Of all the people in general, he heartily craved pardon, that he had been a
Runnagate from their blessed Society, heartily desiring their prayers unto
Almighty God for him. And those from whom he had, by his deceitful means, and
guiles, gotten away any money, he to his power (of my knowledge) labored to
give satisfaction, sorrowing that he altogether was disabled, to do what his
hearts desire was.

Thus (dear Countrymen) I finding a wandering sheep, and distressed soul,
wanting cure, and care, seeking, and earnestly destring to be brought home
again, from whence he had strayed, I set unto him my helping hand, and now
publish unto thee, how in the sweet Pastures of Gods word, this wandering
sheep, was directed, fed, and comforted, by praying sometimes, and meditating
at other times, on these sequent portions of Scripture, out of which, I thank
God, he received great comfort, and we Gods Laborers, richly rewarded for the
same: That we confidently believe, our labor was not in vain with him, but
we have brought home again the lost Sheep to Gods Church here on earth, and
to his triumphant Church in Heaven.

The prayers wherein he was exercised day and night.
O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust, let me never be confounded. Amen.

OOmnipotent, and most mercifuil God and Creator, great is thy mercy in man's
creation, for thy mercy exceeds all thy works, in the merciful preserving
of man, who without thy blessed aid, would suddenly come, and quickly slide
to utter confusion, did not thou in thy great mercy and providence daily
prevent the same.

Behold me, I humbly pray thee, the work of thy own hands, and look upon me,
with the eye of thy abundant mercy, that so thereby thy wrath and fury which
justly by my manifold sins and transgressions I have deserved, may be
appeased; the remembrance of the multitudes whereof afflicts me so sorely,
that I can find no peace or rest at, for they are a weight too heavy for me
to bear: I am ready to faint, and fall under them: O send me Lord Jesus power
from above, to help and support me, that I faint not, and finally fall under
them. Come unto me, O my sweet Savior, come quickly, and power in, into this
distressed soul of mine, thy blessed baulme of thy mercy, O stablish my
unconstant heart, and wandering thoughts, with the comforts of thy free spirit:
for in my self, O Lord my God, I find no comfort at all, my conscience does
so accuse me, and thy judgments do so affright me, that without thou in thy
abundant mercy help (O Lord) I utterly perish. Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
have mercy upon me, and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away
mine offenses: wash me, and cleanse me from all my sins, make me a clean
heart I pray thee, and renew a right spirit within me, and now let my poor
distressed soul, with thy heavenly grace be comforted, whose only stay and
refuge O Lord thou art, for whom have I in heaven (O Lord) but only thee, and
nothing here on earth does my soul more desire, or delight in, then in thee,
and in thy saving health. Forsake me not therefore, who thus flies to thee
for succor and comfort, and under the shadow of thy wings to be defended. O
shelter me under the same, for who shall worship thee in the pit or grave, then
let my soul live, and it shall for ever praise thee in the congregation of thy
Saints, in the land of the everliving.

Certain devout inward comforts by him continually uttered and used.
GRant unto me (O God) free pardon of all my sins, and remember not the
sins of my youth: as my Ignorance, pride, wantonness, and lusts of the flesh.

Grant unto me Lord Jesus grace, at no time to despair or distrust of thy
favor and mercy toward me.

Grant unto me O my God, and send into my sad and distressed soul, a taste of
thy sweet mercy.

Grant unto me, O sweet, and gracious Jesus, a willing mind, and heart to
love thee only, and grace to pray to thee faithfully.

Grant unto me Father of mercy, thy gracious assistance, enable me to withstand
all the Devils temptations.

Grant unto me, O thou the wel-spring and fountain of all good desires,
grace, to put out of my mind, all worldly and vain cogitations, which may now
hinder me in thy service, or in the means of my salvation.

Grant unto me, O blessed Bridegroom of my soul, assurance here, that I
shall be with thee this day, in thy Kingdom of glory.

Grant unto me now, O thou the life of my soul, that though now I am to dye
ignomiously, yet that I shall rise again in the day of Resurrection most
gloriously, and behold thee in thy perfect glory.

A Prayer wherein he was exercised.
O Father of mercy* and God of all consolation, whether shall I flia from thee,
oh where shall my poor distressed and sinful soul feeke for peace, and
comfort thus perplexed? to come to thee the fountain of all goodness and
comfort, I dare not, for I have sinned against thee only, and committed many
most grievous offenses in thy presence, which makes me detestable in thy
sight, and to fly the same if that I could for fear of thy heavy displeasure.
To approach thy courts O Lord, to pray to thee for mercy, or to praise thee O
Lord I cannot tell how, for I have been so accustomed to walk in all evil
ways, that now to begin to walk in thy ways, I am not in the least manner
able, for my tongue is still tied, my heart is still obdurate and rebellious,
my thoughts are wandering whilst I am in this Tabernacle of my flesh, after the
vanities of this world. Turn me O Lord my God unto thee, and I shall be
turned, convert me unto thee, and I shall be converted, call me home again
unto thee, and take me to thy mercy: oh teach me thy statutes, and I will keep
them even to the end, vnty my tongue to praise thee, mollify my heart to love
and fear thee, direct and enlighten my will, memory, and understanding to
delight and seek thee, and to love nothing more then thee, and in thy service
to be busied. Thy work O Lord this only is, freely thou give the same to
whom thou please, Oh make me my Lord and God I pray thee in the abundance of
thy mercies, partaker of the same, whose multitude of sins makes me thereof
unworthy.

This Prayer he said at the time of his Death.
His continual prayer and hearty eiaculation.

O Lord have mercy upon me and save me, for in thee do I only put my trust.

O Thou the Savior of all Mankind, and most merciful Samaritane, to thee I
now fly, in the holes of thy wounds to be sheltred and defended, hearken I
most humbly pray thee, and incline thine ears unto me, and forsake me not even
for thy mercyes sake, for my soul wholly trusts in thee and thy saving
health. Thy arrows O Lord do stick fast in me, and of thy terrible
Judgments I am sore afraid. As thou came into the world, in the fulness of
time to be a Jesus to all Mankind, come now and be my JESUS for thy aid I
lack: as thou came into the world to be an advocate for all mankind, become
mine now -- I pray thee. Plead thou my cause O Lord, and let not my enemies
triumph over me, but rid me and deliver me out of the hands of my enemies
even for thy mercy sake. Oh plead for my wickedness thy righteousness; plead for
my disobedience thy obedience; plead for my pardon thy meritorious Death and
Passion; plead for my blessedness, thy accursednes; plead for my life, thy
death; plead for my weakness, thy all sufficiency; plead for my wretchedness
and misery, to have the long white Roabe of thy Innocence to cover me withal,
that I being therewith roabed, may behold the glory of thy Tabernacle and
beauty of thy holy Temple, without which I cannot, nor shall not be able to
stand but appear most vile. Thy former mercyes showed to many of thy servants,
O Lord imboldens me, to approach unto thee and to lie at thy gates of mercy,
expecting thy comfortable answer. O come unto me my Lord Jesus, come quickly
show unto me the light of thy countenance, and then I shall be whole, accept
now of my tears, and unfeigned sorrow and contrition, for that I have offended
so good and gracious a God: abandon and put out of my mind, love of the world
and fear of death, and fix my heart and thoughts only on thee, and thy
saving health: sweeten this bitter cup of death unto me, to make it acceptable
and welcome, not fearing or dispairing thereof to taste, but willingly to
drink it up: O sweeten it with assurance now to my soul, when this momentary
life of mine is fled away, to enjoy thy everlasting glory which thou have
prepared for me in Jesus Christ, thy alone Son and my only Savior. O give
me now and sound into my ears, and assure my heart, of the Thieves paradise,
of Stephens vision, which is to see thy only Son my Savior sitting at thy
right hand in glory. And now to thee O Lord, of all Spirits as is most deue,
and to thee alone belongs, I am prepared joyfully and willingly, to give and
render unto thee this body and soul of mine which are thy due, and which of
thy blessed mercy, I received from thy blessed hands: Lord Jesus receive them,
come Lord Jesus, have thee unto me, come O my God and make no long tarrying,
but meet me: I expect thy coming, Lord Jesus receive me in mercy, Amen. And
these thy mercyes I crave in the mediation of my Savior, now faithfully
praying and repeating his form of prayer.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The portions of Scriptures whereon he continually meditated, after these
Prayers were ended.
The 8. Chap. to the Romans in that he much delighted to read, in the 5. Chap. 2.
Epistle Cor: in the 4. Chap. first general Epistle of John, in the 4. Chap.
Hebrews. 18 Chap. St Luke, the Parable of the poor and humble Publicane.
Plalme 6. 25. 26. 27. 28. 31. 32. 34. 35. 38. 40. 42. 43. 51. 55. 56. 86. Who
so is pleased to peruse these coated Scriptures, I hope, as they did yield
comfort to the dead, they shall no less be thought worthy of the meditation
of the living.

I Must pay two Legacies which I promised unto him I would, one to the right
Honorable Sir Henry Mountague Knight, Lord chief Justice of England, his
humble thanks and hearty prayers to God, to requite and redouble his blessings
here and hereafter, for his Christian and religious care of his distressed
soul, to seek and send means, to comfort and save the same, praising and
attributing to God the glory, who by the weak means of our Ministry, has
called and taken home now again to his most blessed fould, his wandering
sheep, which Honorable care and christian Industry of his, shall remain
memorable in this world, and undoubtedly rewarded by God in his Kingdoms of
glory.

Another Legacy bequeathed, to the right worthy, learned, grave and Worshipful
Sir Henry Yeluerton, his Majesty's Attorney General, to whom Mr. Francis
Robinson acknowledged himself very much bounden, in instructing, and
inlightning his understanding in the letter of the Law, wherein he presumed of
his own wit and understanding to make evasion: but by his grauety and wisdom
he so confuted him, that he to the glory of God being so manifestly convinced,
and showed what a heinous fact he had done, praised God for the same, and
prayed most heartily unto God, to continue and to increase such happy Guardians
to his Majesty's peace, and weal public of this whole Realm.

His own relation of the beginning and proceeding in his foul fact, spoken
the same morning a little before he went to his execution.
NOt long had he been acquainted with the fashions or City of London, for he
had not been in London above four times before that time he did put in
practice his detestable fact: his suites, places, and persons, were not of
mean degree, such was his ambition: But to the Kings most excellent Majesty
and his Royal Court he wholly adressed himself, and by petition* and help of
others his Majesty's attendants, moved his Majesty for a Commission and
protection, under his Majesty's hand, and great Seal of England, concerning
the reforming of the diverse abuses, of Uictualers, Maulsters and Usurers,
having not long before heard, a Petition was preferred for reformation of some
such abuses. He thereupon conceived presently, that this was a fitting subject
for him to work on, to get thereby money to supply his wants* and to satisfy
his greedy mind* though he bought it in the end at a most dear price and rate.

For the better contriuing and effecting of his determina tion and purpose, he
got an accomplice by name Morgan with whom he got first acquainted, at the Swan
at CharingCrosse, and from thence both of them removed to the sign of the
Mayden-head at Saint Giles in the Fields, where he told Morgan his Companion,
his Designs were plotted, and resolved of, what should be by him afterward put
in execution, which truly so it happened. And presuming too much upon that
small understanding and knowledge he had in the Law, of himself drew the form
of a Commission, and thereinto inserted to make it bear the more validity, the
names of diverse worthy Attendants about his Majesty's Court and most Royal
person, to them from his Majesty directed, in his Majesty's name to ask,
cease, levy, and receive in four several Shieres in this Kingdom, certain
several sums of money, according to the tenure of their Commission, to them
from his Majesty directed.

This forged Commission being by him alone invented, and trecherously devised,
brought it to a Scriuener in London, where he had the same engrossed, and
without the knowledge or priuity of any, did put thereunto a counterfeit great
Seal, for the true great Seal of England, and so by virtue thereof, though
none at all there was, did ask, levy, and receive at several sittings in
Commission, though no lawful authority he had thereunto, the sum of twenty
eight pounds and five pence deceitfully, of the Kings liege people. And this he
did for the space of a month continue and proceed, not thinking of the all
seeing eye of Almighty God, that would discover him, and suddenly confound
him, and his most wicked device, whereof when he least imagined, or suspected,
even then bewrayed his treacherous heart and detestable fact.

After the time of his apprehension for this most detestable and foul fact,
behold how steadfastly he stood in the Justification of the same, and used the
name of a worthy Knight, Sir Robert Maxwell, to say he had his priuity and help
therein, (of which) he in the least manner was not acquainted; and for which his
most false and unjust aspersion on him, at the time of his death, on his knees,
and salt tears fast trickling down, most humbly, and heartily craved, his
free pardoning of him for the same: and said, it was the Devils enticing of
him, to do what he did (namely) that foul and filthy treacherous deed of
his, and that which did much afflict and terrify his soul, more then Death it
self, whose grim countenance he did behold so to accuse an innocent
guiltless, worshipful, and worthy Gentleman, that thereby himself who only
was guilty of that foul fact, might be freed; whereof God in his Justice would
not approve, nor be so deluded, but brought him the plotter, contriuer, and
actor of villainy, to receive his just reward for the same, that the mischief
by him pretended, to light on others, did at the last fall on his own pate.
And the net and snare which he had privily laid, and secretly spread abroad
to entrap another, therein himself was ensnared.

And thus he concluded: Let all take heed, and beware of covetousness, content
themselves with that they have, labor honestly with their hands for their own
living: for the honest and industrious Labourer, God will for ever bless, but
they that do trust in lying vanities, to get wealth by deceitful means and
wiles, let them know, said he, that though God for a while forbear them, yet
his Justice requires to render vengeance to them, as justly on me now he has
done.

Like a Lamb going to the slaughter so went he unto his death, prepared before
to suffer the same, willingly, patiently, and joyfully: and our confidence is
such of him, that he is received into the Fold of that most blessed heavenly
Flock, whereof Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of us all is the keeper and
defender, and into which number, the Lord Almighty in his abundant mercy give
grace to all, daily so to prepare themselves, that in the end they may be found
worthy thereof. Amen.

The conclusion.
THus dear Countrymen* have I exercised your patience, and boldly presumed to
incur your censures, for the zeal that I bear to the souls of men,
destring, and daily heartily praying to Almighty God, that his downfall may
make all others wary, and careful to fly sin, the reward whereof, and to
the delighters therein, you have heard. And although God in his mercy deferres
to punish, expecting men's conversion, which if they do not in his expected
time, he pays home in the end, such their neglect of him, with most fearful
and unrecoverable downefalls.

FINIS.

