THE KINGS MEDICINE FOR THIS PREsent year 1604. prescribed by the whole
college of the spiritual physicians, made after the copy of the corporal
kings medicine, which was used in the city the former year. GIVEN, As a
NEWYEERS-GIFT, to the honorable city of LONDON, to be taken in this year for
the soul, as the other was for the body. HEREUNTO are intermixed, First, the
wonders of the former year, his triumphs, two funerals, two coronations, two
preachers. Secondly, LONDONS and ENGLANDS newyeers-gift, to offer up unto the
Lord for his newyeers-gift, containing King DAVID'S Sacrificing after the
ceasing of the pestilence, necessary to teach us the duty of our deliverance.
The whole collected out of the first book of Chr. chapter 21. Made and written by
JAMES GODSKALL, preacher of the word.

John. 5.14. Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, least a worse thing
come unto thee.

At London printed for Edward White, at the little Northdoore of Saint Paul's
Church, at the sign of the gunne.

To the right honorable the Lord Mayor of the most reowmed City of London, and
to the right worshipful the Sheriffs, and Aldermen their Brethren, I. G.
wishes all graces to be multiplied from the Lord, by the holy spirit, both for
the government of his people, and for their everlasting salvation, through
Jesus Christ.
THE almighty God (right honorable and worshipful) has dealte the former
year with your city and suburbs, as Kings and Princes in the besieging and
taking in of towns: first they invade the suburbs, and liberties; where they
destroy, pull down, and set on fire: Secondly they come before the walls and
gates of the city, which (if the inhabitauntes be not able to resist) they
presently take in, sound the allarum, blow the trumpets, strike the drum,
and destroy both young and old: which causes sighs, lamentations, weeping and
howling: So likewise the Monarche of the world, the Lord of hoasts, having put
on his helmet and cloak of revenge Es. 59.17. and taken one of the weapons of
his wrath, (of which in his armory of justice he Psalm, 91.5.
and set the pestilence that walks in the darkness, and destroys at noon
day, thousands and ten thousands have fallen before him, Psalm. 9.6.7. he
has made many to fall, and one fell upon another, as the Prophet speaks Ier.
46.16. So that they have first tasted Psalm. 7.12.
bent his bow, made it ready, and ordained his arrows for the^ that
persecuted him. His angel has kindled the flying fire among your citizens, it
has entered into their housen, and remained in the mids of the^ Za. 5.4. The
allaru^ has bin given, witness the continual allarum of bells, the tru^pets
of Jehovah, which have sou^ded in your ears so that your citizens have also bin
set as a mark for the arrows of his heavenly displeasure to be spent at. O the
widows and desolate orpha^s! O the sighs, tears and lamentatio^s of old and
young, rich and poor, yet continuing for the miseries of the former year? To
what shall we ascribe the cause of our weakness, that the bars of our gates,
and we also, have not be^ able to keep out the destroyer? And to use the
prophets words, why have our valiant men been put back, Ierem. 46.5.
and could not stand? Two things, R. H. make the inhabitants not able to
resist: first, the force of Ostende, admired of all the nations of the world,
does testify: but the second very seldom, of which the Low-cou^tries have had
often woeful experience. Both of these forenamed, have made us unable to keep
out of our city, the Lord of hoastes, his slaying angel, and his flying
arrows, First the default and want of 6. to the Ephesians, our heads being
not covered with the helmet of salvation, our hearts with the breast plate of
righteousness, our loins with the girdie of verity, our feet with the gospel
of peace, our hands having not the sword of the spirit, and the buckler of
faith: the which weapons, our long peace and prosperity, had made us to cast
aside as careless soldiers, and to take the armor of satan, The armor of
Satan.
the helm of mistrust, the brestplate of injury, the girdle of falsehood, the
shoos of discord, the shield of infidelity, the sword of the flesh, the darts
of Atheism, epicurisme, unmercifulness, pride and gluttony. The second cause
of our weakness, has been treason within; the traitors and rebels within
our walls, which have rendered up the city unto the Lord of hoastes. Perhaps
you will object the Apostles saying unto me, 2. Cor 7 4.
that, I use great boldness of speech toward you. Be not offended beloved, I
mean our manifold sins and iniquities, which are, as an ancient father
terms them, traitors within us, which render up the castle and fortress.
This is the nature of sin, it makes us soldiers, rebels, and to use the
words of the holy ghost, fighters against God Act, 5.39; Satan being the
captain, our flesh the lieftenant, our pride the standart and flourishing
ensign, our lying tongues the trumpets, our blasphemies the pikes wherewith we
do as it were pearce him through, our dissensions the drum to give the allarum,
and our damnable oaths and swearings, the horses wherewith we do as it were
tread and trample under feet the sacred name of the immortal god. Four sorts
of traitors have rendered up the city.
But, to particularize, four sorts of traitors and rebels we have had amongst
us, which have betrayed us, and rendered up the city. First, traitors against
the majesty of god the king of heaven, our blasphemies, Atheismes, cursings,
idolatries, damnable swearings, our contemning of his heavenly proclamation,
and of his spiritual heralds. Thus satan, as an old Seba, had blown the
trumpet and many entising blasts, and had carried us away from our true
allegiance to Christ Jesus our king. These 2. Sa. 2.
Seminaries and AVGVSTIN against the Donatistes) conuicti non conficti, by
conviction, not by confiction, locusts, come from the bottomless pit of hell,
spued forth from the sea of Rome and Rhemes in heaps, into the land, who
would rather have a Reboam then a Solomon; and therefore ar vermins, being come
out of the high Oak tree of Rome, seek to destroy the green Olive tree in the
house of the Lord. 1 ^^l. 52.
And have not some home-bredde enemies blown the trumpet of Seba; 2. Sam. 20.
saying, we have no part of David, nor inheritance in the son of Ishai? to
whom may be said that which Wisdom speaks to her son, Pro. 31.1, What my
son, the son of my womb! and yet they have risen against their mother that
did bear them, and gave them suck.

These four kinds of traitors have betrayed us, and made us unable to resist
the King of Heaven; and as they have provoked the Lord against us, so have they
also made the Lords Angels and the elements our enemies. As it has been with
the father, so has it been with the sons; as it has been with the King,
so has it been with the subjects. For, a King being offended, his servants
are ready to be executors of his anger and displeasure. O the admirable force
of sin, that whereas nothing is able to break the hedge of the Lords
vineyard, the Lion, nor the wild Bore, yet our sins are able to make a breach:
and as one speaks; The Lord is a strong Sampson: but yet our sins, are as a
razor, by which we take away, as it were, his strength, and by which we do,
as it were, shave the head of that great Sampson our Judge and defender, that
he cannot, or rather will not help us. I have showed you then (right
Honorable) the causes of our impotencie; give me leave also to signify to
you the means, how to escape, against the future, the brunt of such a
judgment and heavy assault; behold in this new years gift, out of the
armory of King David, I discover the right armor of proof, wherewith we
shall be able to keep out another time the destroyer; namely, King David's
repentance, a tree branching it self, into these fruits, the knowledge of his
sin, desire of remission, accompanied with faith, humble confession, prayer,
sacrificing, prostrating of himself in sackloath with the Elders of the
people. No other target or sword, no other gate to shut out the destroyer then
this. These are man's, or rather the Christians weapons. God has given to every
living creature his weapon to defend himself and to resist; to the Be his
sting, to the Bull his horns, to the Cock his spurs, to the Horse his
heels, to the Bear, his paws, to the Elephant his snoute, to the Lion his
teeth, to the Fish his sins: but to man or a Christian, he has given one
more forcible then all the rest, repentance and prayer, fit weapons to resist
and to keep out the slaying Angel, and the Lords army.

Now, that we might be skillful in the handling of them, this Treatise
sets, before our eyes, DAVID, a skillful captain. Esteem not (Right
Honorable and Worshipful) that it comes too late, and out of time: for as
after the taking in of cities, there is a pourtrature and Map drawn of the
siege and taking in, and of the manner thereof, with a description of the
traitors which have betrayed it, or of the cause of their weakness and
inability to resist, and that for the instruction of others, that therein they
might learn, where to amend the fault, and the means how to keep out
another time the enemy: So likewise, after the besieging and taking in of your
honorable city, by the Lord of Hosts and his Angel, behold, I have made a
pourtrature, and drawn a Map of the manner of the causes of our weakness,
of the traitors which have betrayed it, to show hereby the means to stop
the breach, and the way to resist, if he return again the next summer, or any
other time. For although, now in the winter season, our enemy the pestilence
cease to anoy us, yet he may perhaps the next spring return, if we take not
heed. For, the plague is like unto Kings and Princes in the besieging of
cities: in the winter season, they commonly retire, the coldness of the winter
suffering them not to continue; but when the Summer appears, behold they are
in arms, and come before the city, destroying, burning, and shooting. In the
same manner, the Plague which ceased in the winter, returns often in the
summer. And therefore let us not become careless Soldiers. Great has been
the diligence (by the commandment of our wise and gracious Prince) of the
spiritual Captains in your city, to train up the Lords Soldiers, and to
teach them to handle these weapons; paise-worthy have been the weekly
mustrings in the Lords field, I mean, your weekly fastings in the
congregation through the whole city; we have experience of success, for we
have overcome the invincible Lord, and caused him to retire. But let us not
therefore give our selves to security, and lay aside these weapons: but rather,
as the citizens who are in doubt of the enemies returning, let us continually
watch and pray, Luke 21. that if he return, we be not unprovided: let us
not tarry to take them, until the Lord enter the city, as we have done,
least we smart for it again. Alexander the great, being ready to give an
assault, saw one of his Soldiers then first to take his buckler in hand, and
viewing it to try if it were strong enough: for which negligence he displaced
him, and punished him; let us also take heed, that we suffer not a just
punishment for our procrastination and delay. To avoid the same, (because the
prints or marks of gods correcting hand are yet to be seen, and the noise of
the mournings and gronings of many, do yet sound in our ears) give me
leave (Right Honorable and worshipful) to give unto you, Good counsel for the
city.
and to the whole city, David, exercise your selves in the handling of these
spiritual (Kings Medicine) which, the Treatise following will lay open unto
you. It was a medicine used by King David, and the Elders of the people, and
therefore being a kingly medicine, is not unfit to be dedicated unto your
Honor, a Kings Lieutenant, and also to you (Right Worshipful) the Elders of
the people. The Lord grant, that with the 24. Elders, ye may fall down before
the throne of GOD, and give all praise, glory, wisdom, thanks, honor, power
and might, unto GOD, Revel. 4.10.
for evermore. Amen.

Your Honors and Worships to command, and to use, in the Lord, JAMES GODSKALL
the younger.

THE KINGS MEdicine of the former year, against the Plague of the body. The
first part.
TAke Sage of virtue, The ingredients.
Rue (otherwise called Hearb-grace) Elder-leaues, Red bramble leaves, and
Worme-wood, of each of them a good handful, stamp them all together, and then
strain them through a fine linen cloth: and put to the juice a quart of
perfect good White wine, and a good quantity of white wine Vinegar: mingle
them altogether, and put thereto a quarter of an ounce of White Ginger, beaten
to small powder: use to drink this Medicine every morning fasting (for the
space of nine days together) the quantity of a spooneful at a time, and this
will (by Gods help) preserve you for the space of a whole year.

THE KINGS MEDIcine for this present year, against the Plague of the soul and
the effect thereof.
TAke the herb of virtue, (the doing of good. The ingredients.
Psalm. 34.14, and the herb of patience (otherwise called a waiting upon the
Lord. Psalm. 37.7.) wherewith possess your souls. Luc. 21.19 Insteede of
Hearb-grace, take another, called Christ's grace: and in the place of
Elder-leaues, Elders examples, following and imitating the Elders of Israel. 1.
Chro. 21. prostrating your selves before the Majesty of God. Let not two
things be the ingredients of this Spiritual Kings medicine, which are in the
corporal, the Bramble and the Wormwood. Leave out the proud bramble, and his
leaves, for he would exalt himself above the other trees. Judge. 9.15.
Secondly, leave out also the bitter worme-wood of hate, anger, and envy: and
according to the counsel of God (the best Physician) deu. 29.18: Let there not
be among you any root of bitterness and wormwood. In steed of these two, take
the humble Fig Tree and his leaves, who would not exalt himself above others.
Judge. 9.11. Mingle herein the broad Fig-leaues of lowliness, humbling your
selves under the mighty hand of God. 1. Pet. 5.6. covering your good works
(as the Fig Tree his sweet fruit) with the broad leaves of humility. Take of
each of these a good quantity, and be abundant in good works, and in the
work of the Lord (as the Apostle speaks) being filled with all fullness of
God. Ephe. 3.9. Strain these through the fine Strainer of vprightnes and
integrity, walking uprightly Psalm. 15. Avoiding al hypocrisy, and laying
aside all guile and dissimulation. 1. Pet. 2.1. In steed of white Ginger, put
thereunto, the hot ginger of love toward God and thy neighbor: let it be
white and pure, loving without dissimulation. Romans 12. verse 9. Further, hot
and fervent: Above all things, having fervent love among you 1. Pet. 4. verse.
8. Break with the stamper of obedience and humility, the hardness of thy
heart: Let it smite thee as DAVID'S did, make as it were a small powder of it
through humility: and if to day thou hear the voice of the Lord, harden not
thy heart. Heb. 3. In steed of white Wine, put to the juice of these: The
perfect white and pure wine, that is, the blood of Jesus Christ, and the sower
Vinegar, of his death and passion: For, only by the virtue of this, the
medicine must operate. Use to take in this medicine every day fasting:
sometime outwardly and corporally (when in public calamity it is appointed
by the superior power, to remove a present judgment) but always inwardly
and Spiritually, loosing the bands of wickedness, taking off the heavy
burdens, letting the oppressed go free: covering the naked, dealing thy bread
to the hungry, Esa. 5.8. use this (I say) not for the space of nine days
together, but the whole year, yea, all the days of thy life. So continuing in
the Lord. Phil. 4.1, and being not weary of well doing. 2 Thessalonians. 3, 13. And
this will (by Gods help) preserve you from the Plague of the soul, and the
infection of this world. I say, not a whole year, but all thy life time, till
against the future resurrection, both with body and soul, thou may live
eternally.

THE KINGS BOdily Medicine after infection. The second part.
IF it fortune, that one be stricke^ with the Plague before he have taken the
former medicine: then take the things rehearsed, and put thereto a spoone-ful
of Betony water, and as much Scabious water, and a pretty quantity of fine
Treacle: and temper them well together, and let the patient use to drink it
often, and it will expel the veneme or poison forthwith. But if the Botch do
happen to appear, then take a good quantity of Elder leaves, red Bramble
leaves, and Mustard seed: stamp them well together, and make a plaster
thereof: apply it to the sore, and it will draw forth all the venom and
corruption.

THE SECOND part of the Spiritual medicine.
IF it fortune, that thou art stricken with the Plague, before thou have taken
in the former Kings medicine of repentance, then take the things before
rehearsed: and least in thy affliction thou wax impatient: put thereunto, not
the balm of Gilead. Jer. 46.11. But the Spiritual Triacle and Mithridate of
the consideration of Gods will and providence. Psalm. 39.9. opening not thy
mouth because he does it: and holding that nothing can happen unto thee,
without his appointment. Further, that thou should not distrust or despair
of the remission of thy sins, of the health of thy soul, and of the
goodness and power of God the Physician. In steed of Betony water, put
there-unto, a good quantity of that Aqua benedicta, of that blessed Water of
Gods mercy, praying with DAVID, take away, O Lord the trespass of thy
servant. 2. Sam. 24, 10. and wash me that J may be whiter then snow. Psalm. 51.
This will cool the heat of thy conscience, and comfort thy weary bones. Add
as much of the water of life. John 4.10. which is powered into our hearts by the
holy Ghost, unto everlasting life. Fetch it by prayer, of Christ the Physician
and Doctor of our souls: for he does give it to quench our thirst. Ioh.
4.14. Put hereunto thy Baptism water, representing the blood of Christ Jesus:
It is one of the three witnesses. 1. John. 5. assuring thee of the remission of
thy sins. Leave out Scabious water: I mean, that Scabbie Holie-water, with
the Bulls and Indulgences of the Antichrist: for it will make thee to get
scabbes and sores in thy soul, and be unto thee, not the water of life, but
the water of death. Add also a good quantity of that comfortable Triacle of
hope, with the consideration of the future glory: being sure that thy redeemer
lives, and that thou shall see him with thine eyes. Job. 19.25. Mingle and
temper thus well together, this patience, faith, confidence and hope: and let
the patient that is infected with either of them both, use to drink this Kings
med^cine often: let all his life, in health or in sickness, be a continual
repentance and meditation of these things, and it will expel the venom of his
sin, of impatience, distrustfulnesse, and immoderate fear. But if the filthy
botch of impatience, distrustfulnesse and immoderate fear do happen to
appear: then, insteede of Elder leaves, take a good quantity of elders
examples: the faith of ABRAHAM, patience of JOB, the hope of DAVID, and take my
brethren the Prophets for an example of patience in suffering adversity: Jam.
5.10. Further, take also the Mustard-seede of Gods word. Matthew, 13.31. with the
excellent commandments, admonitions, promises and comforts contained therein:
mingle these together, consider upon them, make a plaster of them, apply it to
thy sore, it will draw forth the venom and corruption of impatience,
distrustfulnesse, and immoderate fear. The Mustard-seede, as PLINIVS does
witness, is both purgativum and curatiuum, it purges the body of evil
humors, and cures the venomous biting of a Serpent: Even so the Spiritual
Mustard-seede of the Word, purges and voydeth the evil humors of the soul,
and heals the venomous biting of that old Serpent the Devil.

THE KINGS MEDIcine for this present year: Collected out of the 2. book of
Sam. Chap 24. and out of the first of the Chron. Chap. 21.
THat which the Apostles in the beginning of their Epistles, have wished unto
the Saints of God; the same in the beginning of the year, I wish unto you
beloved of LONDON, for a New-yeeres-gift. Grace be with you and peace from God
our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Let us, beloved, begin this
present year, with that excellent Prayer of MOSES. Teach us, Psalm. 90.
O Lord to number our days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. That
which is reported of the DOLPHINES (in the enrie of this year) may put us in
mind of the state of the former year: they play most in the Sea, when a
tempest is nearest: And have not we the former year, in the Sea of this world,
been most playing, rejoicing, tryumphing, erecting our Arches, and some of the
works like BABELL, when the tempest of the Pestilence was nearest, and when we
least expected it? the sudden alteration which ensued, preaches it to the
whole Land. And as the Lord has bestowed the former year upon this Kingdom,
the greatest benefit which she ever received: so has he also in the same
year, sent the greatest Pestilence in our memory, which she ever felt: And
note this with me, that as the Prophet DANIEL, in the first year of the reign
of King DARIUS, who was made King over the Realm of the Caldeans, Dan. 9.
understood the desolation of Jerusalem, the royal Mother-citie of Iewrie:
which moved him to turn his face unto the Lord by Prayer and supplications,
with fasting and sackcloth: So likewise, even in the first year of the reign
of King JAMES, who was made King over the Realm of England: We understood, and
also saw the desolations of the English Jerusalem, the Mother-citie, and
imperial Chamber of this kingdom, which moved us with DANIEL, to turn our
faces unto the Lord, with prayer and fasting, which is the best Physic to cure
the Plague of the soul, with the effect thereof, the Plague of the body. The
Physicians against the bodily Plague, have prescribed a certain remedy,
called, THE KINGS MEDICINE, so termed, because a king of England used it in
the time of Plague. This has been the medicine of the old year, great has
been your diligence (beloved of LONDON) to follow this prescription, and being
aided by nature and expeperience, some of you have taken in this Kings
medicine, to prevent the Plague: others, being already prevented by the
sickness, have taken it in, to expel the venom, and to be delivered from
that secret evil and noisome Pestilence: with what success, your selves have
had experience.

The old year being past, give me leave to prescribe another Kings medicine,
fit for the New year: so called, because a king of Israel used it, with the
Elders of the people. It is a medicine against the Plague of the soul, fit for
all times. If PLATO could say, Repentance.
that the life of a Philosopher, ought to be a continual meditation of death:
how much the better may we christians say, that the life of a Christian ought
to be a continual repentance? Although the Plague of the body be ceased, yet
it is to be feared, that the Plague of the soul does yet reign and continue
in many places, both in the City and suburbs, and therefore as you have been
diligent the old year to take in the kings medicine for the body: so be not
negligent this New-yeere, to take in the Kings medicine for the soul. It is a
medicine which will cost nothing, and as fit for the poor, as for the rich.
The Physicians divide their whole practice in two general parts, in (...)
preventing Physic, and (...) recovering Physic, according to this rule: The
bodily kings medicine used the former year, does consist of two parts, as it
may be seen in the medicine it self, which I have annexed to this Treatise.
The first, is for them that are not yet infected, to prevent it. The second is,
for the infected, to remove it. The same medicine for both, but with an
addition. So likewise, the Spiritual kings medicine, which I purpose to
describe, consists of these two parts: It is a preventing and a recovering
Physic, necessary to prevent future calamities, and to recover the health of
the soul. All this hitherto spoken, premitted as a Preface, before we proceed:
let us let some order in this our discourse, and draw the scattered branches
home to their root. I will use the method that Physicians do use in their
practice of Physic, showing unto you the cause of the sickness, the medicine
to heal it, and the operation of the medicine. And this is the method which
the Holy Ghost himself, that wise Physician does follow in these two Chapters
prefixed, which I have taken to be my text, and the subject of this discourse.

The words do empty themselves into these four particulars: A division of the
whole discourse.


The first, contains The Kings sickness, the Plague of the soul, DAVID'S
sin, consisting in the numbering of the people. verse 1.2.3.4 5. which I may
call, the Kings evil.

The second, the effect, operation, and misery of the kings sickness, the
Plague of the body, verse. 14.15.16. with the outward cause of it. The
providence and decree of Jehovah: Secondly the inward cause, the sin of DAVID.

The third, contains the Kings medicine it self, to cure both these
diseases, and this twofolde Plague, DAVID'S repentance. verse 10. and 17. 1.
Chron. 21. verse 8.16.17.

The fourth, the operation of the Kings medicine. verse 25 and the Lord was
appeased toward the Land. And 1. Chron. 21. verse 26.27. with the action and
behavior of DAVID, after his recovery, by the virtue of that medicine, his
sacrificing. 1. Chron. 21. verse 28.

The first part, containing the Kings sickness with a description of the Plague
of the soul.
THe Kings sickness, 1. Part
is the Plague of the soul: In which, the learned Physician, God the Holy
Ghost, describes two things. First, the disease it self: secondly, the
counsel of IOAB (as a Physician) showing unto the King the means to prevent
the increasing of this spiritual infection. 1. Chro. 21. verse. 3. In the Kings
disease, four things are to be observed: First, the person infected (DIVID the
King) Secondly, the air infecting him, or the means by which he got the
infection. 1. Chro. 21. verse 1. (Satan) with the consideration of the time
when he got it: Thirdly, the disease it self, the Plague of the soul, with
the pestilentiall Carbuncles, and Devils tokens, by which this infection did
manifest it self. ver 1. (the numbering of the people) Fourthly the time how
long this infection remained in DAVID'S soul before it was discovered, and felt
by DAVID, (nine months long) Here is a large field to enter in, 2. Sam. 24.8.
but I purpose not to amplify the two first parts, this New year inuiting me
to the description of the Kings medicine: I will only trip over them, and as
the Poet speaks, tantum summa sequar fastigia rerum. I will only point at
the^, leaving the amplifycation of the^ to the meditations of the Reader. 1 The
person infected considered.
The person infected is DAVID, who may be considered two manner of ways.
First, as a public person, a King: secondly, as a private person, DAVID: a
holy, a righteous man, a sweet singer of Israel, 1 As a public person.
a man after Gods one heart. As he is considered as a king, therein we behold,
that credit, countenance, prioritie of place, and the greatness of the person
exe^pteth him not from the infection Doctrine
of sin, but rather makes him subject to this kind of Plague: for as they are
most subject to the plague of the body, which are of a sanguine complexion, and
of a high color, according to the rule of the Physicians: So likewise, they
which descend of Noble blood, and whose arms are countena^ced with high
colors) as the proverb goes) are most subject to the plague of the soul The
high Cedar is more subject to the boistrous winds, then the low and humble
Willow tree: the mountain more than the valley; Worms engender soonest in the
softest wood, and motes in the finest garment. The archer can aim better at
the greater mark, then at the little one: and as Satan lifted up Christ upon
an exceeding high mountain, and then tempted him to ambition, Matthew. 4
which he did not beneath in the valley: So they which are elevated upon the
high mountain of honor and dignity in the Church and common weal, are more
subject to the poison of Satan, than they which are beneath in the valley. As
Princes are not free from the corporal infection, so are they not exempted from
the spiritual plague. It was a foolish humor in CAESAR, who thought, that to
be an Emperor, was safegarde enough against danger: for being in a tempest,
and the master himself doubting the worst: Fear not, says he, Caesarem
vehis, thou cariest CAESAR. MAXIMILIAN had some like conceit, when he told
his soldiers dropping away at his heels with the shot of their enemies: you
must not adventure as far as I do: habent enim principes peculiarem quandam
fortunam suam: For Princes have a luck of their own. And yet CAESAR might
have been deceived, and afterward was in a safer place. To be an Emperor, is
no safegarde, either against the Plague of the body, or of the soul, neither
Princes have a luck of their own to escape the poison of Satan. The use.
Princes and subjects, learn here wisdom: Princes in regard of your selves
and of your subjects: Subjects, in regard of your Princes. 1 In regard of
princes
Princes, seeing ye are subject to get the Plague of the soul, avoid
presumption: for as it is not good to be presumptuous in the time of bodily
infection (for the boldest of them al may ketch it) so adventure not too far,
in regard of sin. Keep the windows of your eyes shut, and let not the
infectious air of concupiscence enter therein. Hang at your hearts the fear
of the Lord, as a preservative against the heart-plague: and as you are
diligent to keep from your Court the infectious person, so be not negligent to
keep out of the same, the flatterer, the Atheist, Epicure, Libertine, and
Machauilion professor: for such infect both the Prince and the Nobles. Ye that
are the heads of the people, imitate the serpentine prudence, Mat, 10, 16
Be wise as Serpents: a precept for the Prince, for the Priest, for the people.
As the Serpents chiefest care, is to preserve his head: so let your principal
study be to preserve your selves from the infection of sin, for this
spiritual infection is not only hurtful to the head, that is, to your
selves, but also to the body, that is, to your subjects, according to the
tenor of the common proverb, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
Credit, countenance, prioritie of place, makes the subjects and inferiors
bolder to sin, because they sin with such authors. Evil behavior in
Princes, infecteth as it were the air round about. A sick head disordereth
all the other parts: a dark eye, makes a dark body. JEROBOAM infected with
the plague of sin, infecteth all Israel: and therefore being mentioned in
the book of GOD, draws a tail after him like a blazing star, Who sinned,
and made Jsrael to sin. You then that by the warrant of your precedence, pull
others to wickedness: you bind two sins together: sinning your selves, and
sinning before others, putting a stumbling block before their feet. Such
bitter roots shall answer for themselves and their corrupted branches, such
leprous and contagious souls, shall answer for the pollution of their own
persons and of others. Such poisoned fountains shall not escape with single
judgment, because they have polluted the whole course of Waters. I leave you
Princes, and come to your subjects; 2 In regard of subjects
let the danger of your Princes, move you subjects to take care, not only
for your selves, but for them also. And as they, who in the time of infection
depart out of infectious places unto the purer-ayre, are not only careful of
themselves, but take with the^, those whom they love, giving them in
preservatives, that they might escape the infection: So this is the duty of the
obedient subjects, Pro. 18.10.
going unto the name of the Lord, that strong tower, to carry with them in
their prayers, their Princes and magistrates, whom they are bound to love as
fathers, that their souls may be preserved from the infection of sin. As
there are no better Halbards, and no trustier guard to preserve a King from
bodily danger (as an ancient father speaks) then the prayers of the
righteous: So I may say, that there is no better preservative for the soul of
the Prince, to keep it from the spiritual infection, then the humble prayers
of the loving subjects. It is the Apostles precept, that prayers, 1. Tim. 2.1.
supplications, and intercessions, should be made for Kings, and for all that
are in authority: As a king for himself, so pray thou for the king: 2. Sa.
24, 10
Take away, O Lord, the trespass of thy servant. I conclude this point, which
concerns kings and subjects, with the prayer of a king, fit for a subject:
Give thy judgments to the King, O God, and thy righteousness to the kings
son. psalm. 72.1.

2 David considered as a private person,
Secondly, DAVID being considered as a private person, a holy and a righteous
soul, a man after Gods own heart, and yet (behold) infected with the plague
of sin, takes me as it were by the hand, and bids me tell you beloved,
that the holiest, the most righteous, the godlyest, may get the spiritual
infectio^, and sometime are taken with spiritual apoplexies. 3. Doctrine,
Where is the Patriarch, the Prophet, the Apostle, which has not had the
falling sickness? Both the bad and the good, get the corporal infection: and
so, not only the vessels of earth, but vessels of the greatest honor, in the
great house of the Lord, are sometimes polluted. For as JEROME speaks,
Nunquam ad perfectionem pertingemus nisi confecto stadio nostro, we shall never
attain unto perfection, until we have finished our race. Magnum electionis
vas, perfectionem abnuit: The great vessel of election, PAVL himself, denies
perfection, says BERNARD. As there is no Pomegranate wherein there is not some
kernel amiss (as the proverb goes:) So where is the Saint in whom there is
no fault? The Arc of covenant it self does Preach it, for consisting, (ex
lignis Sethim auro obducto, Exodus 37, 1.2
) of a certain Wood called, Shitthim-wood, ouer-couered with gold, does
signify, that the Church, as long as she is in the world, shall never be
free from the Plague of sin: and yet that she is purged and covered, by the
innocence, and golden perfection of Christ Jesus. The righteous DAVID, and the
Holiest NOAH, may be compared unto the ORANGE tree, which bears at one time
ripe fruit, green Oranges, and blossoms. So the Christian fig tree, planted in
the Lords Vineyard, has some imperfection. And how can thou deny this, o
impure perfectist? seeing man falls, as LACTANTIVS has noted, three ways:
In deeds, in speeches, in thoughts; who can say, I am clean from sin? Pro.
20.9. Show him me, and I will praise him, tell me where he is, and I will
honor him, let me see him, and I will worship him as a mortal God. Is there a
body without a blemish, or a day without a cloud? The Heathen POET could say,
Horace
Nemo sine crimine viuit. There be two false positions touching the corporal
Plague: which, although many have held to be true, yet I have found false this
year. The first, that an old man can not get the Plague: The second, that he
that fears it not, shall not lightly be infected. As touching the spiritual
Plague, if any should hold these positions, examples would prove the contrary,
in old DAVID and ancient NOAH. Old NOAH could preach that a flood should come,
and yet a second inundation prevailed against him, and he became ouer-flowed
with wine, as the old world with water. PETER would seem the strongest, and to
fear nothing, and yet he showed himself a weakling, and got the Plague of
Apostasy, which remained in his soul, till he was wakened by the allarum of a
seely Cock. But I cease to report their falls. least I seem to take pleasure
with ungracious CAME, to uncover the nakedness of my fathers: The use.
you that stand, learn by their ruins two things, to avoid presumption, 1 To
avoid presumption
and to walk circumspectly: First, by their falls, learn not to fa^, draw
not on thee, sin with the cart-ropes of examples, take no advantage at the
ruins of Gods Saints, countenance not your sins, by the examples of those who
healed them. Alas, precious vessels they are, but made of clay, and shaped of
the selfsame mould, whereof thou, and all mankind is fashioned. Secondly,
learn prudence: 2 To learn prudence.
If the spiritual Physicians get this Plague, how hardly shall the patients
escape? If the Cedars in Libaenon are thrown down, no marvel, if the low
shrubs be shaken and supplanted: If ye are Prophets, trust not the prerogative
of your calling: Prophets have fallen, Patriarchs have fallen, Apostles have
fallen, Stars and Angels have fallen: Are you strong? alas trust not to it,
it is infirmity. Think thou to be pure, o perfectist? alas, trust not your
purest and vprightest spirits, whilst they have their dwelling in houses of
clay: there is a law in the members striving against them, to get the victory:
Say thou, I have stood a time? yet trust not your legs, you may slide
again: reply thou, I have slipped, and recovered? trust not that recovery,
for fear of backe-sliding. It is a co^ceite of men, that if once they have had
the bodily Plague, they think that they cannot get it again. Whether this be
true or no, experience teaches: as for the spiritual plague, be not too bold,
and venture not too far: for DAVID who was once infected with the plague of
murder and of adultery, was afterward infected with ambition: And thus much
for the person infected.

There follows in the description of the spiritual plague, 2 The air which
infected the King
the second thing, which is (the air infecting him) or how DAVID got this
infection. 1. Chron. 21.1. (Satan stood up, and provoked him,) with the
consideration of the time when the king got it, (in the time of peace and
prosperity, his heart now being at ease.) Touching the first, as there have
been diverse opinions concerning the cause of the corporal Plague: some
attributing it to the infection of the air, and inward corruption of the
humors (out of the book of Nature:) others, to the slaying Angel, out of the
book of God. So likewise, diversely some have disputed of the cause of sin,
which is the plague of the soul. Some have ascribed it to God, others, to
Satan; the third, to man. As for them that root wickedness in heaven, they
discern not betwixt the corruption of nature, and the author of nature. True
it is, that GOD is (...), a worker in the works of men, but yet let us not set
up a judgment seat in our erroneous fantasies, thereat arraigning God of
injustice.

Thus much I dare say, that as the house wherein SAMPSON was, fell to ruin
with the very weight of the building, when he withdrew the proppes, and
pillars of the house: and as the remoouing of the sun from these upper parts
of the earth, into the other hemisphere, brings darkness upon us: So when the
Lord withdraws his gracious spirit, and that the aid and assistance of Gods
grace forsakes a man; the righteous Lord, departing from an unrighteous
soul, how can the house but fall? and how can there but darkness succeed?
Great and admirable is thy wisdom o Lord! Sin is a poison, and yet as the
wisdom of the Physicians is, in using the poison of Serpents: for how
harmefull a nature soever the poyso^ has, the Physician tempereth it by
degree, and heals his patie^t thereby, the poison it self, notwithstanding
hurtful, the skill of the Physician commendable, the effect profitable. So the
Lord, an excellent Physician handles sin, the poison of the old Serpent,
and from the corrupted will of man, can produce good effects, as appears here
in the example of DAVID. But I will not enter further into a bottomless sea; let
us remain where the lamb may wade without danger of miscarrying. This
question is covered with a curtain of sacred secrecy, and therefore the book,
that is clasped up, I leave to the lamb and to the blessed Trinity. You
fantastic Libertines, that charge that righteous Lord with the conception and
birth of so vile a monster: why rub ye your filthiness upon his purity?
vessels of clay, dare you thus conceive of your former? Ask but the masters
of humane wisdom, they will inform you better: God is by no means unjust,
says PLATO. Let those dogs be confounded that bark at the justice of God:
Iam. 1.
I conclude with the Apostle, let no man when he is tempted, say that he is
tempted by God, for God is not tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no
man. Others with a right judgment, follow the determination of that wise doctor
the Holy Ghost, who can not err, and make Man and Satan, the cause of this
spiritual infection. But what need we dispute about the matter; the doctor of
truth decideth the question, and himself makes a Commentary upon this
question in few words, Satan stood up and provoked him. For explanation of
which Commentary, the saying of AUGUSTINE is excellent and substantial, Deus
deserit, diabolus suggerit, homo consentit. The devil works by suggestion;
man by consenting, God by forsaking. To follow the method of the Physician, as
he makes a double cause of the corporal Plague, an outward and an inward,
the infection of the air; and the corruption of the humors in the body: The
outward cause of the spiritual contag^on.
So may we make a double cause of the spiritual plague. First, an outward,
(Satan) Secondly, an inward, the flesh, and the corruption within the the soul
of man. Satan is the air which does infect the soul: this air is worser
then the infection of the elementall air. For the Satanicall air is every
where, in all contries, Kingdoms, Job. 1.7. It infecteth all manner of
persons; the Prince and the subject, the Courtier Pet. 5.8. The infection of
the elementall air, hurts nothing tree with a double hedge of a twofold
death, yet it was so forcible, that they became infected with the plague of the
soul, which plague manifested it self with many Devils tokens: disobedience,
apostasy, infidelity, pride, ambition, and other more, this air then has
infected DAVID, and poisoned his heart. Some deny that the air does infect,
and affirm that an Angel does it, I dispute not thereof, but to apply this to
our purpose, I may say that an Angel does infect men with the Plague of the
soul, but it is an Angel of darkness. As an Angel of heaven smote the
ISRALITES with the bodily pestilence, so an Angel of hell smote DAVID their
King with the spiritual pestilence: 2 The inward cause of it. Iam. 1, 14, 15
thus much for the outward cause of this spiritual infection. The inward, is
in man, his pronenes to this corruption; as the corrupted air cannot infect,
except the humors in the body be apt to receive the infection, for the evil
and corrupt humors ingendered in the body, are a cause of the bodily
pestilence: So, although Satan be the outward cause, yet this our spiritual
disease rises from within us. Satan cannot constrain us to receive it, unless
our wills should consent to it, and that by the inward corruption of our
flesh, we were apt to take it. The use


Out of the consideration of the two-folde cause of the spiritual pestilence,
learn to make a two-folde preservative: First, resist the inward cause, 1 To
resist the inward cause
and as against the inward cause of the bodily infection, the engendring of
evil humors, it is good to take heed of disordering himself, either in diet
or other unlawful exercises: So to resist the cause of the spiritual plague,
which is in man: Be sober and watch. 1. Pet. 5.8. Take heed to your selves,
least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life. Luc. 21.36. possess your vessels in holiness and honor,
and not in the lust of concupiscence. 1. These. 4.4. And as NOAH pitched the
Arc without and within, that no water should get in: So let us pitche the
arkes of our souls, that no violent and disordered thoughts rush into them.
The men of the world were wont to say (says BERNARD) that he that keeps
the body, keeps a good Castle: We say not so (says he) but he that
keeps his soul, keeps a good Castle. Let thy principal care be to
preserve this precious soul from this infection. But alas, how many learn
from the school of HYPOCRATES the Physician, and EPICVRVS, the swine, to
preserve, to physic, and diet their bodies? but as for their souls, they are
not once mindful. O ye sons of men, foolish and slow of heart to conceive
the rightest things; how long will ye love such vanities? Secondly, 2 To
resist the outward cause
resist the outward cause of this heart-Plague; and seeing that Satan is an
infectious air, use to take in spiritual antidotes at all times, and in all
places, keep the windows of your eyes shut, and let not the Satanicall air
of concupiscence enter therein: we dwell (beloved) in infectious places, and
shall not we take heed? As to resist the infection of the elementall air, we
shun contagigious places, and fly to the purer air: so let us fly the
Satanicall air by faith and prayer, let us draw near unto God. Jam. 4.8.
Resist the devil, and he will fly from you. Iam. 4.7, and that, steadfast in
the faith. 1. Pet. 5.9. Immitate your own industry, for the preserving, of
your souls, as you have done for your bodies: You that in diverse places the
former year, have watched to keep out the passengers, that came out of
contagious places, and would not suffer them to enter, and to harbor amongst
you, for fear of infection: Watch now this year, to keep out Satan, an
infectious passenger, who runs every where in contagious houses. Shut the
gate of your heart, suffer him not to lodge in your soul, for he will infect
it. It is a precept of a wise Physician: be sober and watch, for your
adversary walks about, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.8. Ask the
Cranes, o sons of men, and they will teach you wisdom, when they flock
together (says PLINY) to feed: one of them uses to feed a far off, and
that Crane so singled from the rest, still as he feeds, looks round about
him, and observes, if any danger be toward them: if he spy any body draw
nigh, then he gives warning to the rest, and so they save themselves. Shall
this policy rest in unreasonable Birds, and shall it not be found in man?
shall not our souls watch, to epsy the fraud of Satan, and so to deceive the
deceiuer? And thus much for the air which infected the king. There follows
the time, The time when the king got the Plague.
when the king got this spiritual infection, which was: now having peace and
prosperity, his heart being at ease, after his victories, being delivered out
of the hands of all his enemies, and out of the hand of SAVL, as appears. 2.
Sam. 22.1. even then Satan stood up, and tempted him, setting before his eyes,
his excellency and glory, his power and victories. Peace, prosperity, and
idleness, are as it were a contagious air, which smites us with the Plague
of the soul. The air which is still and calm, is apt to receive infection,
for the wind is aeris verriculum, a broom to purge the air: so the soul
which is at her ease, soonest gets the spiritual contagion. As evil and
corrupted humors through idleness are engendered in the body: So in peace and
prosperity, bad and pernicious humors are engendered in the soul. As the air
is a good and pure creature of it self, and yet by the influences, putrifyed
vapors, euaporation of dead carcasses, and diverse other things approved by
the book of nature, is altered and becomes pernicious to the body: So peace
and prosperity (which are the gifts of God, by the corruptions of our own
hearts, are abused, and become pernicious to the soul. And as the air has
not always the same force to infect the body: So Satan, the air which
infecteth the soul) has not always the like strength and of efficacy to
fulfill his purpose, and to poison the soul. If thou art desirous to know when
the Satanicall air has most force; It is in the time of peace and
prosperity, when thy heart is at ease, and that thou have given thy self to
security: For he observes three things; the time, the place, the occasion.
Satan deals with us, as the Crabbe with the Oysters, (as AMBROSE observes)
the Crab being an enemy of the Oysters, because he cannot hurt the^ by reason
of the hardness of their shell, he tarryeth till the Sun does shine, for
then they open themselves, and lie still in the Sun, recreating themselves:
and then the Crabbe comes, and casts little stones into their shells, and so
hurts them: So likewise, Satan our adversary, perceiving when we are at our
ease, and that the sunshine of prosperity does shine over us: then he
comes, and casts his poison into our souls. Seeing then that prosperity
ingendreth corruptions in the soul; The use
be not careless of thy health, exercise thy self, to drive away the bad
humors, and to retain thy spirituull health. The sound man, if he does not
exercise himself, is subject to diseases: although thou art sound of spirit,
yet if thou give thy self to security, thou shall fall in the Kings
sickness. Three exercises are necessary for the health of thy soul, against
the gathering of bad humors. The exercise of Prayer; 3 Three exercises,
necessary for the soul.
the exercise of the Word, and the exercise of the Cross. As for the two
first, forget them not, as for the third, the Lord himself will not forget,
sometimes in due season to lay upon thee. And as the Physicians, in their
Treatises of the former year, touching the Plague, bid thee to have a regard
in your exercises, vbi, quomodo quando, where, how, when? So, I bid you this
year observe these rules in your spiritual exercises, the amplifycation of
which, I leave to your meditations. And thus much for the time.

The third member of the first part, contains the Kings sickness it self,
The Kings sickness it self.
consisting in the numbering of the people. This fact of DAVID, is the Kings
sickness, a dangerous disease; I may call it, the heart-plague. As the
infection of the elementall air, in the bodily Plague, does creep unto the
heart, and poison the vital spirits: So the infection and poison of Satan,
has crept into his heart, and infected that place with pride. This Kings
Evil, is more dangerous then that disease, which some have called the kings
evil: For the bodily Kings evil can be cured (si credere f^ est) if it be
true, with corruptible gold: but the spiritual Kings Evil, A spiritual Kings
evil.
cannot be cured with corruptible gold or silver, (as the Apostle speaks) but
only by the precious blood of the Son of God. This is then a dangerous and
greeuou^ wound in a Saint, if I would thrust my fingers into it, and thoroughly
handle it: To extenuate the Kings evil, three things might be alleged, that
it agrees with the commandment o^ God. Exodus 30.12. Secondly with the
practice o^ the Isralits. Numb. 1.2. Thirdly with Politic prudence: To untie
the knot with a word, there is a two-folde numbering. First, a spiritual and
Ecclesiastical. Ex. 30.12. Secondly a political Number. 1.2. Examine this fact
of DAVID at the touchstone of this two-folde numbering, and you shall find it
is neither of them both: To leave amplyfications, it may be further censured
ungodly and unlawful for these three respects. David's fault censured ungodly
for three respects
First, because he did it not to the glory o^ God. Secondly, to the good and
welfare of hi^ kingdom. Thirdly, for the good of his own^ person. This Kings
Evil I have called the plagu^ of the soul, which name, sin justly may bear
for these four respects, for the names attributed to it in the book of God,
corruptions, sores wounds, spots and such like. Secondly, for comparisons,
unto which it is compared unto a leaprosie. Leuit. 13. A Serpent. Ec. 21. unto
Pitch Eccle. 13.1. Thirdly for the medicine appointed to cure it, healing,
cleansing, washing. Jere. 4, 14. we wash things that are polluted. Fourthly
for the similitude which it has with the corporal Plague in diverse things, as
I have already shown and yet will amplyfie in this Kings Evil. As the
corporal Plague does manifest it self with Biles and Carbuncles, yea
sometime with five, six, seven, or more: So likewise in this Plague of the
soul, wherewith DAVID has been infected, diverse pestilentiall ulcers are to
be seen. And as the Carbuncles, Botches, and, sores of the corporal Plague,
are called by the vulgar (Gods-tokens) so give me leave fitly to call the
diverse sins which are to be seen in this Kings Evil, (Devils tokens) To
particularize, this plague in DAVID'S soul, does manifest it self by six
pestilentiall ulcers. The first Devils token, The Devils tokens to be seen in
the Kings evil.
has been Pride; for to the numbering of the people, the king has been moved
by the pride of his heart, and seeks as it were to glory in the arm of the
flesh, and in the multitude of the people: As NEBVCHADNEZER in the greatness and
magnificencie of his

The second has been Ambition, which is, as Secretum venenum, a secret
venom: He did seem hereby, to let others know, to what a glory he had
brought the kingdom, and over how great a multitude he did reign. Ambition
(says one) has ever been the Plague of the earth: It has infected Angels,
Saints, heaven and earth. The third Devils token, his spiritual Idolatry: for
he seems by this, to trust too much upon man, from which the Holy Ghost
disswadeth us. Psalm. 146. The fourth, is the kings curiosity, Sam. 24.2 (that I
may know the number of the people) he renders no just cause. We are all
desirous by nature to attain unto knowledge, says ARISTOTLE, which is not to
be discommended, but our knowledge must be directed to a lawful end and scope,
for if it does consist in the limits of DAVID, that we might only know, it
does degenerate in curiosity, which is, as that hony-father BERNARD speaks,
Primus super biae gradus: the first degree of pride. Her stock of great
antiquity, hell her native soil; the old Serpent, the father of this giddish
wisdom: o would to God, that we the sons of EVE, were not troubled with this
hearts-itch. This infection is very general, spreading it self far and
wide. The fifth Deuils-token is his Disobedience Exo. 30.12. which was to bring
the money to the use of the Tabernacle. The second, for MOSES numbered them to
another end. This fifth token, amongst the other Plants in the garden of Eden,
not far from the goodliest Trees of life and knowledge: grew a bitter root,
which our forefathers no sooner tasted, but it infected their whole blood. The
sixth and last deuils-token, is the Chro. 21.3.4. In which two things are set
down: first, the counsel of IOAB as a physician, showing him the means to
prevent the increasing of this poison. verse. 3. Secondly, the obstinacy of the
sick patient: verse. 4. Touching the first; as the Physician, when he gives
counsel to the patient, either to persuade or dissuade, produces his reasons,
and shows the danger: So IOAB counselling DAVID to fly this Satanical air,
produces two reasons, drawn from the danger: The first respects the Kings
person: Ioabs counsel to divert David of his purpose, with to reasons.
in the first part of the third verse. The second, the kings subjects, in the
latter part of the ver. But David, rejecting the Physicians counsel, would
follow his own mind and appetite, for the kings word prevailed against IOAB,
and so ran wilfully into the plague. Thus I have anatomized the kings evil, and
shown, that although at the first view it seems nothing, yet the wound being
ripped open, there proceeds thereout great quantity of poyso^ and matter.
Satan which stood up against him, has deceived him, he showed him his great
power, his victories, and the multitude of the people: but he covered the
filthiness of the sin, and the indignation of the Lord, with the danger
which should ensue, being like unto the Panther, of whom it is written, that
knowing how beasts fly from him by reason of his ugly head, which fraies
them; thrusts only his head in some secret corner, whilst they, gazing on
his goodly spotted hide, nothing suspecting their approaching end, suddenly he
breaks out, and prays upon them. So this foule-headed Panther Satan,
perceiving well how much delight men take in worldly pleasures, and in the
glory of this world; hides his deformed head, and the filthiness of sin,
sets forth only his fine colored skin, that is, the glory and vanity
of pleasant, but dangerous delights; whilst in the mean time, they neglecting
their enemy, he sudde^ly entrappeth them. I leave Satan, and return to IOAB,
he who before playde the Physician, needs a Physician himself: and obeys
the appetite of the patient, which he knew would be hurtful to the head, and
to the body, to the king and to the subjects: Ye that seek to bind up the
sores and wounds of others, be not careless of your own sores, that to you be
not said, Mat. 23. Physician first heal thy self.

4 The time how long the infectio^ remained, in his soul before he knew of it,
The fourth and last member of the first part, lays down the time how long
this infection remained in the kings soul, before he knew and felt it (nine
Months) for at the end of them, then his heart smote him. As the corporal
Plague is often a good while in the body, and he that has it, knows nor
feels it not: so likewise, the spiritual Plague has often infected many,
and they neither feel nor know it, as here we see in DAVID. The Physicians do
say, that there be seven kind of Agues or Feauers; a continual Fever, a
quotidian, a tertian, a quartan (with which the Lion is sometimes sick) the
Fever Hectic, the wandering fever, that keeps no certain fits; and lastly,
that which lasts but a day. The Plague of the soul (as you see) is not a
Fever of one day, it lasted nine Months in DAVID, and he knew it not. This
kings evil may be compared unto the continual Fever; we have all of us
continually some sparks of pride and ambition in us; the one more, the other
less; and principally, the Lions, Princes and great men are troubled with it.
Seeing then this is the nature of sin, that it sometimes is not known of us, I
will show unto you the signs to know if we be infected with the spiritual
Plague. The Physicians have prescribed the former year in their Treatises,
touching the corporal Plague, the signs whereby a man may judge of himself,
whether he be infected or not, which are many. First, when the outward members
are cold, and the inward parts burning hot, when there is pain and
heaviness of the head; and a great inclination to sleep: a weariness,
heaviness, and difficulty in breathing; a sadness of the mind, a change of
countenance, loss of stomach and appetite, immoderate thirst, and often
vometing, a bitterness and dryness of the mouth: the Pulse frequent, the
urine troublous: lastly, if there do arise Botches, behind the ears or else
where: Give me leave this year, following the same method, to show unto you
beloved, certain signs, whereby we may judge if we be infected with the
Satanicall air.

Signs to know if we are infected with the spiritual contagion or no.
These are also manifold: First, if our outward members are cold, our ears in
the hearing of the word, our mouths to speak and sing the praises of God,
our hands to offer the Sacrifices of mercy unto the poor, our feet to enter
the Temple, and our inward parts burning hot with the heat of concupiscence,
hate, envy, pride and ambition: Further if our heads be heavy with
drunkenness, surfeiting, gluttony, and with the cares of this world, if there
be in us an inclynatio^ to the sleep of sin, and a difficulty to breathe
good words, deeds or thoughts: an immoderate and desperate sadness of the
mind, as there was in SAVL, ACHITOPHEL, and IVDAS: a change of countenance
caused by covetousness, anger and envy: loss of appetite to the milk of the
word the bread of life, and the righteousness of Christ Jesus: a loss of our
zeal, and forsaking of our former love. Reu. 2. Further when there is in us an
immoderate thirst after the riches, honors and pleasures of this world: a
returning to our filthiness and vomit, with the Dog and Swine. 2. Pet. 2.22. A
bitterness and unpleasantness in the vns^^uery words of our mouths. If the
pulse of our hearts smite us with horror of mind, and make us to break
forth in Blasphemies. Lastly if there does arise, a filthy Botch, in our
ears, which stops the^ and makes the^ unwilling to hear the word of God,
a hardness of heart, a swelling of pride and envy, and such other like; they
are all signs, declaring that we are already infected with the poison of
Satan. If this year thou seelest thy self thus infected, immediately seek to
cure thy self by the Kings medicyne. I end this point with the counsel of
SOLOMON. Pro. cap. 4.23. verse. keep thine heart with all diligence, for thence
proceeds the actions of life.

Let me now beloved of LONDON, The application of the first part
hold out the looking-glass, to discrie and see therein whether we have not
been infected with the Kings sickness? The old year is past, and the New is
apappeared: let us now examine our selves, and as DAVID has been busy to
number the people, so let us be busy with a better Arithmaticke, and number
our sins. We may apply to our selves all the four members of the first
part, and to inuert the order, let me begin with the last. 1 The time how
long
As DAVID has had the spiritual infection in his soul, nine months long, and
knew it not; for in the end of them, his heart smote him: So we have been a
long time infected with the same, and sin has reigned in the mortal bodies of
many: not nine months, but nine years, even since the last plague time; and
alas, the most part of us, have as it were not known it; we have took no
regard to it; we have been senseles, and not esteemed it, till that now in the
end of these nine years and odd, our hearts seeing the hand of God, have
begun to smite us, and made us to cry out with DAVID: Lord we have done
foolishly, and sinned exceedingly. And what has been our disease? 2. Our
disease.
alas, the Plague of the soul (for which we have suffered the Plague of the
body) yea the Kings evil has been our evil, which has manifested it self
with the devils tokens, and pestilential ulcers of DAVID, and to speak
plainly, we have sinned in numbering. This Plague has reigned not only in the
head-citie, but in the whole body of the kingdom. Englands arraignement
If England were arraigned and indicted before the Judge of heaven, should it
not be found guilty? I appeal first to the court and to the tribe of Judah: 1
The Court.
has she not these many years had the kings evil, and with DAVID bin lifted
up in the multitude, glorying in the number and multitude of her riches and
treasures, of her stately buildings, and royal Palaces, in the multitude of
her followers, and attendants, of her Nobility and Gentility? 2 London.
Secondly, thou LONDON, tender and delicate, the Mistres of felicity, the
Imperial chamber of this kingdom, to whom I may, as ARISTOTLE speaks of
Babylon; give the title of a country, rather then of a city, the Pillar of
England, as Troy is called of that part of the world: Have thou not also had
the kings evil? it is too manifest, thou have gloried in the number and
multitude of thy people, in the greatness of thy City, mightiness of thy
state, singularity of thy government; in the number of thy mercha^ts, riches,
and stately buildings; in the number of thy Temples and Turrets; and as
Jerusalem, thou did trust in thine own beauty, because of thy renown.
Ez. 16.15. And as Nabucadnezar spoke of his Babel: Is not this great Babel?
etc. So your inhabitants of their city; Is not this great LONDON, our city, the
like not in Europe? Thus have they swelled in the vanity of their conceit, and
said with Laodicea. Re. 3. I am rich and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing. Royal Citizens, Citizens.
not I, but the kings sickness wherewith you have been infected, gives you this
name: has not the carbuncle of curiosity, pride, and ambition been seen in
your buildings, feasts, attendants? May it not be said of you, as it was said
of the marcha^^s of Tyrus. Es. 23. whose merchants are Princes? If our king had
entered the city, in triumph, as Constantius the Emperor in the city of Rome,
and beheld the companies that should have entertained him; might he not have
used that Emperors saying, Tot vidi reges quot ciues? I have seen as many
kings as citizens? Parents, Parents
have you not had the kings evil, have you not gloried in the number and
multitude of your children, and set too much your hearts upon them? And not to
spare our selves: We children of the Prophets, we have been infected with the
kings sickness. I do appeal unto our two Universities, Universities
they have gloried in the number of their Colleges and stately buildings, in
the greatness and multitude of their revenues, of their Doctors, learned
writers, Scholars and Students. And I dare say, our voic^ has been a proud
and ambitious voice, despysing the foreign Schools, as not to be compared
unto us. And it is to be feared, that of them may be said, that which was
spoken of Gilead. Hos. 6.8. which was the place where the Priests dwelt, and
which should best have been instructed. Gilead is a city of them that work
iniquity. As for the whole body of the kingdom, not to flatter our selves, 4
The whole body.
it has had the kings evil; alas, our voice has been insolent and imperious:
we have magnifyed our selves in the mightines of our nation, and have gloryed
our selves in the number of our swift-sayling-Shippes, in the greatness of our
strength and number of our people, that in few hours warning, many thousands
we have been able to make ready; ascribing our victories to the st ength of our
arm, and not to him who teaches DAVID'S fingers to fight. Psalm. 144. Let me
now add this, that a general disease of the whole body has been defect of
charity. The Physicians say, that the body is sick, when that his kindly
heat is to l^ttle or when it is to much: Charity to God and our neighbor, is
as it were the natural heat of the body of a kingdom; lustful love to the
creatures, is an unnatural heat; the first has been too little in the body
of the kingdom; the second too great, and therefore, it has sorely been sick.

Lastly I do appeal to the Clergy. 5. The Clergy.
Many of them have not only had the Kings evil, but also have been infected
with IOABS sickness. Have we not had some (o would to God that there yet were
none) that are spiritual Physicians to others, and in the Lords Temple, produce
their reasons (as IOAB did) to dissuade their auditors from the Plague of
sin, and yet themselves, that seek to bind up the wounds of others, are
careless of their own sores, their notorious sins as ABSOLONS adulteries,
even upon the house tops, open to the world, to the great scandale of the
church, like to MERCVRIES images, that point the way to others, but themselves
stand still and stir not one foot, like to Watermen, that look one way but
row another: O Physicians heal your selves, build not an Arc for others,
and your selves be drowned. Tribe of LEVY, I am ashamed to uncover our own
nakedness, which has also been a cause of that deserved pestilence, whose
printes and marks are yet to be seen amongst us.

To apply the last circumstance, we of England have got the Plague of the
soul, and the Kings evil, 3 How and when we have got the kings evil.
in such a time as the king got it, in our peace and prosperity, our hearts
being at ease, after our victoryes, Satan has set before our eyes our
excellency, glory, power, victories, and our long peace and prosperity, as a
contagious air has infected us. And because we were become gross and fat (as
ISRAEL) we have spurned with the heels Deuteronomy. 32.15. It is an opinion, that
fat men get sooner the corporal Plague, then the lean and macilent: experience
teaches, that the body of this Realm through his long prosperity being waxe^
fat and gross, has got the spiritual plague. There is a disease in the body
called a Lethargy or sleepiness, which disease hants commonly gross and fat
men. There has beloved reigned in our souls a spiritual Lethargy, in us, who
were become fat by reason of our halcyonious days: It has brought us to
wanton Babels estate, and made us tender and delicate. Es. 4.7. or like to the
untamed heyfar, by reason of our long running in plentiful pastures, we have
forgotten to carry the sweet yoke of obedience, and are become so dainty, that
we have esteemed more the dinners of the world then the supper of the Lamb:
the Garlic and Onions of Aegipt, then the milk and honey of the land of
promise. Thus have we lost our spiritual appetites. We may speak of our
selves, as PLINY speaks of a certain Country, that ex siccitate lutum, ex
imbre puluerem etc. drought has caused dirt, and rain has stirrid up dust
among us: for what has the Sunshine of his mercies but caused us to lie in
the mire of our abominations? and what has the moisture of his graces but
even dried up the fountain of grace in us? It is true of us as of Rome, that
religio peperit diuitias, et filia deuorauit matrem, the blessing of the Gospel
has made them wealthy, and the Daugther has devoured the Mother. Our
prosperitye has made us like to the springes in the su^mer, the more heat
abroad, the dryer they are; or like unto the Moon, in our fullness we have
been farthest from the Sun of righteousness. And yet the Lord, has all the
day long stretched out his hands unto us, and made as long a day as ever he did
to IOSVAH, and as long hours of the day, as ever were shadowed upon the Dial
of AHAZ, to provoke our repentance: for the 12. hours of the day, he has
given us almost 4. times twelve years: Esd. 3.1
why have we the^ taken these his benefits with the left hand? why have they
engendered in our souls the kings evil? The old year the^ being past and the
new year come, considering that this is our estate, let this be o England thy
Arithmeticke, to number thy sins: Merchant, be not so busy to nu^mber thy
debts, Lawyer thy clyents, gentleman thy lands, and husbandman thy cattle,
captain thy soldiers, minister thy tithes, as the sins of the old year, that
now this new year we may apply our hearts to wisdom. And thus much for the
first part.

The second part, containing the operation, misery, and effect of the Kings
Evil, which was the Plague of the body.
Second part
AS the sickness of the patient, after that he has followed his own humor
and appetite, despising and rejecting the counsel of the Physician, and
taking in that which is hurtful for him, makes him to smarte for it, and
produces dangerous effects: so has it fallen out with DAVID, who being
stricken with the Plague of the soul, and infected with the Satanicall air;
and IOAB as a good Physician having given him counsel how to prevent the
increasing of this spiritual infection: yet notwithstanding rejected this his
counsel, and followed his own humor, and therefore smarted for it: for this
spiritual Kings evil, has produced the corporal Plague, wherewith the whole
body of Israel has been infected from DAN to Bershebah. In the effect of the
Kings sickness, three things are to be observed. First, it is propounded:
Secondly chosen: The division of the second part.
thirdly sent, propounded by the Prophet. Chose^ by the King, sent by the Lord.
In the proposition note the persons propounding, and the thing propounded. The
persons propou^ding, two in number. First the principal, 1 The proposition.
(the Lord) secondly ^he isntrumental, the Prophet GAD, who accor^ing to the
wise Physician produces not his own ^easons, but the saying of the Lord the
supreme ^hisition. (So says the Lord) The thing propoun^ed, is a trinity of
punishments. Two of them are ^uch fellowe-like companions, that the Graecians
^istinguish them, but by one letter calling the Plague (...), and the famine
(...). The Trini^ie may be reduced unto a double dichotomie: The first Famine
or the sword, and that either the sword of man (which is hostile persecution,
or the sword of an Angel, which is the pestilence. The ^econd is DAVID'S
dichotomie, which he makes ^imselfe, distinguishing them in two sorts: the
first, is a fall into the enemies hands. The other two, (...) fall into God his
hands. Justly thou suffer o ^onne of ADAM this trinity of punishments, for
the ^hree sorts of sins which are to be found in thee! ^he sin of thought,
word, and deed, The Lord ^^ghteth against thee by the hand of man, 2 The Kings
cho^se
because ^hou fightst against him by the hand of sin. ^carcity of bread there
is sometimes in the land, because scarcity of good works in thee is often ^o
be found, the infection of the Plague does ^nnoy thee in thy body, because
the infection ^f sin has reigned in thy soul. In the second ^ember of the
second part, observe, First the Kings choice, secondly the reason of his
choice; ^n the choice, behold the Kings three virtues: his wisdom, charity,
policy; his policy, aiming at the Churches enriching: his charity, aiming at
the easiness of death: thirdly, his wisdom, which appears in three things:
for which hi^ choice was better, than either famine or persecution, if we
respect first the person of God, secondly the kings, thirdly, his subjects: If
the person of God, his glory by this kind of punishment is bette^ advanced,
and that two manner of ways. First, in regard of the faithful, and people of
God: secondly of the infidels and enemies of God. By the faithful, it is
advanced in two things; making them to look above, and beneath: above,
acknowledging the mighty hand of God: beneath, the weakness and impotencie of
man: And takes away a double confidence, first in our selves, secondly, i^
others. In regard of his own person, he chooses one, first, that was just and
reasonable: secondly easiest, thirdly best for his soul: fourthly, one tha^
shows his charity to his people. In regard o^ his subjects, it was the best:
first for their souls secondly, for their bodies: and that either in regard of
the pain, or of their good name: thirdly, for the commonweal: fourthly, for
the Church. The amplifycations of these, I leave to the meditations of the
Readers, and come to the reason o^ the Kings choice; For thy mercy is great. I
will no^ dilate every particular. The reason of his choice
If you desire a large commentary upon the kings reason: Read the King^
Psalms, and in particular, the 103. Psalm. Which use as the best interpretour
upon it. DAVID utters this reason by a double experience, of the mercy of
God, and of the cruelty of man; of the latter, he has also had a double
experience, having felt the cruelty and unkindness of the father, and of the
son: of the Father in SAVL, of the son, either in IBOSHETH or ABSOLON. I
omit to show unto you, beloved, the difference, betwixt the merciful hand of
God, and the unmerciful hand of man: And I appeal to those kingdoms,
Provinces and cities, which have felt this trinity of punishments, propounded
unto DAVID, to ask of them, whither it be better to fall into the hands of
God, or in the hands of man: and because many can answer by experience, I will
only ask it of the Low Countries, in the name of all they may speak; for
they have had the experience of DAVID, and have also felt this trinity of
punishments; famine, pestilence, hostile persecution. And note this with me,
that with DAVID they have felt the cruelty, unkindness, and barbarous
unmercifulness of man. ^n the father and in the son. First, in the father, in
that Spanish SAVL, king PHILIP of late memory; have not the Spanish hands
destroyed their Cities, burnt their Temples, dispersed their inhabitants;
whereof, we strangers in this your kingdom dispersed, living in exile, for the
name of Christ Jesus, are unto you all eyewitness. I will not amplifye the
Spanish cruelty, Horresco referrens; Psalm. 129
only I say that with DAVID, they may speak: From my youth of Israel may say,
they have afflicted me: secondly, in the Son, in that Spanish ISBOSHETH, what
have they not suffered since the death of the father, by the barbarous hands
of his governors? let them now answer, and I doubt not, having DAVID'S
experience, that if DAVID'S choice were propounded unto the^, they would come to
the resolution of DAVID; Let us fall into the hands of God, and not into the
hands of men, for thy mercies are great, O Lord. 3 The execution
The third member of the first part, is the execution, in which I leave to your
meditations, four things: First, the effect of the Kings evil, a Pestilence:
Secondly, the outward cause of that disease, the Lord: thirdly, the inward
cause of it, the sin of DAVID, and of his subjects: Fourthly, the patits
(Israel.) As for the effect, it was a diminutio^ of people, wherein observe;
First, the equity of punishment: Secondly, the truth of that rule observed by
the Wise man. Wisd. cap. 11. 13. Wherewith a man sins, by the same also shall
he be punished. Experience hereof observe in the effect of the kings evil.
DAVID had sinned in the multitude of the people, and therefore DAVID is punished
with adiminutio^ of people. The description of the outward cause, delivers
two things; The agent, the instrument. Jehovah and his angel. In the age^t,
note the outward cause of the pestilence. The Phystions and Naturians, out of
the book of nature, render a double cause of the Plague; an outward and an
inward; 1 The outward cause of the plagu^
the one without man, the other within man; the one prima causa morbi; the
first cause of the disease: the second, proxima, the next: the one, placed
without, in the infectio^ of the air: the other within, in the corrupted
humors of the body. Let us follow the Physicians method, not as naturians and
Galenists, but as Scripturians. If we search the outward cause, out of the
book of God; we shall find, that that wise Physician the holy Ghost, makes
also in outward and an inward cause of the Pestilence; one without man,
another within man. The first is, the decree, will, and providence of the Lord:
the second, the sin of man: the first, is manifested in the plague, three
manner of ways, if we respect the disease it self; the persons infected, the
time when: In all three, the providence of the Lord works, the truth hereof,
five, sufficient testimonies do prove; Five testimonies prooving the outward
cause. Deuteronomy. 28 Ier. 21.5, 6 Esa 38, Job 5.18.
first, the name of it, the sword, rod and outstretched hand of the Lord:
secondly, the Lords threatenings: thirdly, the remoouing of it, which is proper
to him: Fourthly, the instrument which the Lord uses: fifthly, the choice given
to the king. Having found the outward cause, imitate the good Physician; Two
preservatives
learn thereout to make preservatives and antidotes. Out of the consideration
of this will and providence, we may make a double preservative for the time of
infection: Two preservatives,
One for the unvisited, the other, for the visited. For the first, it is
necessary to expel and to resist the poison of immoderate fear. 1 For the
unvisited,
Make it in this manner; take the consideration of the providence of the Lord,
without which, nothing can happen, apply this to thy soul, and it will
operate, and make thee to say; why should I immoderatly apprehende and fear
that, which cannot happen and befall unto me without his will, and which I
cannot escape against his will? If thou take in Triacle, Mithridate, and other
confections of art, to resist the poison of the air, what ought thou to do
to expel the poison of thy soul? I show you the^, beloved here, to make a
spiritual Triacle, and a heavenly Mithridate against this venom. Secondly, out
of this consideration of Gods providence; 2 For the visited
the visited and infected, may learn to make a preservative: which is,
Christian patience, necessary to resist and expel out of his soul the poison
of impatience, grudging and murmuring. Make it in this manner; take the
consideration of Gods will, and thus apply it to thy soul, Psalm, 39
as DAVID did, Lord because thou did it, I will be dumme, and not open my
mouth, and say as IOAB to ABISHAI his brother. 2, Sam. 10.12. (Let the Lord do
that which is good in his eyes) This preservative is first necessary and
forcible: Secondly, profitable: thirdly, comfortable: fourthly, tried and
experimented. And thus much for the outward cause. THe inward, is the sin of
the King, and of his subjects: As the Physicians make the evil and corrupt
humor engendered in the body, 2 The inward cause of the Plague.
the inward cause of the pestilence, out of the book of Nature: So we may
make the inward corruptions in the soul, the inward cause of the bodily
infection, out of the book of God. To the sin of man, I may attribute four
things: First, that it is the inward infection of the air, and of the
corruption of the humors in the body. Out of the consideration of the inward
cause, learn to make physic and preservatives for the time of the plague,
Preservatives to be made out of the consideration of the inward cause
against the plague, and that, both for the visited and unvisited.

Two preservatives may be made out of this consideration: The first, to
remove the Mich. 7.9. J will bear the wrath of the Lord, because J have
sinned against him. This physic is both profitable and comfortable; profitable
to humble thee, and to teach thee the knowledge of thy self, to make thee use
the poor suitors phraise; Lord, I suffer nothing but the which infinitely more
I have deserved: tak away O Lord the trespass of thy servant. Secondly
comfortable, for it sets before our eyes the admirable goodness and mercy
of the Lord and moves us to speak in this manner; I hau^ infinitely more
deserved, o Lord, by my tran^gression (and yet so great is thy mercy, that the
art contented to send me an affliction, which touches only the skin) a
corporal plague, and a temporal chastisement. O inequal proportion! the
creature has offended her creator, a silly earthworme, the majesty of heaven,
and yet for our infinite sins, he sends unto us but temporal chastisements.
Thy mercies, o Lord, overcome thy judgeme^ts, and herein I perceive the truth
of thy promise. Os. 11.9. J will not execute the fiercenes of my wrath. Be not
the^ disamied, o my soul, seeing that the Lord does not punish thee, according
to thy desarte, and the quality of thy sin: this is a testimony unto thee, that
thy sins are remitted, and that this present rod, is but a fatherly
correction. The Lord then visiting thee with the rod of DAVID, does aid thee
with a double aid: The first is, with the aid of correction, and discipline:
The second is, with the aid of comfort: By the first, he does exercise thee
without, by the second, he does assure the within; by the first he bridleth thy
insolency, by the second he encourages thy pusillaminity: by the first he
makes thee more advised for the future, by the second, more devotions. The
second preservative, The second preservative,
is to remove the cause, that the effect may cease, and seeing sin is the
inward cause, fly from it as from a Serpent. Ecc. 21. GALENS counsel is,
that of al remedies the best is to shun the infected air, and to depart in
time to the purer air. But with GALENS leave, seeing sin is the cause of
Physical causes, and that it infecteth the air, the best remedy of all
(according to the counsel of the whole college of the spiritual Physicians)
is to fly from the infectious and contagious air of this world: But I leave
to amplyfie this, because I purpose to speak more of it, in the kings medicine.

4 The patients
The last member of the second part, are the patients who have felt the effect
of the Kings evil. (ISRAEL) that is the subjects of DAVID, Dan to Bershebah;
thirdly of the number, seauentie thousand. The Lord in all ages has sought to
reclaim the sons of men from the kings evil, by sundry corrections, and
amongst the rest, with the Pestilence, which is the Lords beesome, he has
swept away not seauenty, but hundredth thousands, and that in diverse places.
First without the church, secondly within the church: Again, in the Church,
either in the true, or in the false church. Further, some have been universal,
some national and provincial, some have been of a long, some of a short
continuance, so that this rod may be called the flying book. Zach. 5. Here I
might also make a large Chronicle of examples out of the book of God, the
monuments of the church, and the writings of me^: but because others have
amplyfied this at large, I refer you to their Chronicles, being as clouds of
witnesses. Now me thinks I hear an objection against the justice of God, for
the clearing of these patie^ts; These Isralits had not sinned, ergo unjustly
visited. The antecede^t is deyned, the interpretours upon the first verse of 2.
Sam. 24. (And the wrath of the Lord was kindled against ISRAEL) observe diverse
sins for then which the Lords anger was provoked, among the rest: first their
security, and wantonness, after their peace, victories, and prosperity:
secondly the rebellion and disobedience of some against their sacred Prince
DAVID, in the time of ABNER, SEBAH, ABSOLON, and the rest, the which sins he
has deferred to punnish in due season, with the sin of DAVID. And thus much
for the second part, the effect of the Kings evil.

Let us now beloved of LONDON, look home-ward a little, The applycation of the
second part.
and is it were out of the Looking-glass of this example, by way of
reflection. If we hold out the glass, we shall descrie, that justly we have
felt the effect of the kings evil. The old year being past, and the New
appeared, let us apply to our selves the members of the second part, to invert
the order. Let me begin with the last, as the subjects of DAVID, after they
had been infected with the Plague of the soul; and that DAVID now nine Months
and twenty days long had not regarded his sin, have been the Lords patients,
and have felt the effect of the Kings evil, a general pestilence: So likewise
the subjects of our DAVID, after that they have now these nine years and more,
been infected with the Plague of the soul, not regarding their sores, and the
counsel of the spiritual Physicians, have justly also been the Lords
patients, and felt the former year, the effect of their spiritual contagion,
a general pestilence, almost through the whole body of the kingdom. The
inward cause of this effect, has been two-folde: First, we have been
infected with the infection of DAVID, and secondly, of his subjectes. As for
the first, the Lords Prophets, as spiritual physicians, have a long time (as
IOAB did to DAVID) showed unto us the means how to prevent the increasing of
our spiritual contagion: they have produced their reasons, setting before us
the danger which should redounde both to our own persons, and to others. But
alas, great has been our obstinacy, we have as bad patients followed our own
humors, rejected the counsel of the spiritual physicians, and our pride,
ambition, spiritual idolatry, curiosity, and disobedience, have preuiled
against them, and therefore the Lord has sent a pestilence in England, and
there dyed not yet (I am persuaded) seauenty thousand. If in the second place,
I set before our eyes, DAVID'S subjects, as a looking glass, therein (alas) we
may discry the bleamishes of our faces; First, they had a famine. 2. Sa. 21.1.
But the Lord removed that in his mercy, and gave them peace and prosperity,
and yet they waxed wanton and insolent. 1592
Since the last pestilence, there has been a dearth in England, in the days
of ELIZABETH, but the Lord has taken it away in his mercy, and given plenty
and choice, store of earthly treasures: we have since seen and tasted how
friendly the Lord is, Psalm. 34. his mercies have been multiplied upon us, even
like unto the dew of Hermon, that watered the dry earth, that gaped for it.
His blessings both Temporal and spiritual have been as two hands to draw us
home to him, and yet we have been like to DAVID'S subjects. As for their
second sin, shall I be so bold to accuse some thereof? Not I, but the
experience and euente of the former year, does Preach it to the whole
Kingdom. The Land has given us a gracious DAVID, a man after Gods own
heart, and as I may speak, a man after our own heart; and yet, behold, as
some male-contented Israelites, have sought DAVID'S ruin, an envious SEBAH, an
ambitious ABSOLON, A note out of the 2 Samuel 2, agreeing with that which has
happened the forms year
a false-harted ACHITOPHEL a seditious ABNER: so some have been envious with
Satan, of our DAVID'S felicity. And note this with me, which I have observed
out of the second book of Sam. the 2 chap. that as in the first year of king
DAVID'S reign, DAVID being but newly crowned king of Israel, even then behold,
there was found a seditious ABNER, and ASAHEL, and an ISBOSHETH, which rose up
against DAVID: So in the first year of the reign of our DAVID, even then, he
being but newly crowned king of England, as DAVID was king of Israel: behold,
some ABNERS, ASAHELS, and ISBOSHETHS against their sacred and anointed Prince.
But let this be our comfort, in the tenth verse of that Chapter, that the house
of Judah has followed DAVID, the company of the true Professors and
Confessors of God, and that ABNER and his adherents are fallen before the
servants of DAVID. Seeing then we are guilty all of the first sin, and some
of the second: the Lord has dealt justly with us, as with the subjects of
DAVID, sending unto us (as he did to them) after a famine, or a dearth, a
pestilence: So that the wrath of the Lord, having been again kindled against
us, no body needs to make an objection against his justice for our
innocence, as it might have been done for ISRAEL. As there has been a time
for the Reign of the spiritual Plague, so has there been a time for the
Reign of the corporal Plague.

Let us now farther unfold the flying book, that with Jerusalem Eze. 16. we
may bear our own shame. The order calls me now to the applycation of the two
l^st members, which will stores us with some singular meditations: observe with
me beloved of Lo^ndon, in the entry of this New-yeare, Note the things
following, The two preacher^ of the last year
that the Lord has used the former year, two kind of Preachers to move us to
repentance. First a Preacher of anger and justice, summoning us by his
smart-Preacher: Secondly, a Preacher of mercy. So that the old year has
preached both; mercy and justice has kissed each other. The first Preacher is
his justice, which he has shown in two things, crossing us 1 Gods smart
Preacher.
wherewith a man sins, by the same also shall he be punished, and has sent
a diminution of people. England, thou have had the experience of DAVID: thou
have gloryed in the number of the people, and have long been busy with a vain
Arithmeticke, in the numbering of thy riches, prosperity, housen etc, and
therefore the Lord has punished thee, with a diminution of people; and has
teached thee another Arithmeticke: Thou have been busy with addition and
multiplication, and the Lord has been busy with Substraction and division.
He has taken away thousands and ten thousands; and has by the weekly Bills,
taught us to number three things: First our sins, and for them, Secondly the
diminution of the people, and thereby thirdly to number our days: Further
because ordinary magistrates had not done their duty, behold he has sent an
extraordinary Magistrate from heaven to reform us, fear him rich and poor,
honorable and contemptible, this has bin the Lord chief justice. Parents
Parents.
you have also had experience of this, because some of you have gloried in the
number of your children, loving the^ too much and setting your hearts upon the^,
the Lord has taken them away, and made whole families desolate. Parents and
masters, Masters.
you should have bin little magistrates to your families which you should have
purged, but for wan^ of this duty he has sent another Magistrate, Magistrates,
which has purged the^, and because you had deformed and not reformed your
selves, he has se^^ his Reformer. Leu. 26. Merchants Merchants.
because you have been more busy to pay the debts of me^, then to pay a debt
which you owe to God* (which is repentance) which he has long, required by
his servants the Prophets; therefore he has sent his Sergjants and Purseuants
to warn and arrest you. The Lord has among the rest, three Sergjants, age,
sickness, and death^ by the second he has warned some; of you, and by the third
he has arrested some: you that ar^ not yet arrested by death, pay this year
the debts which you owe to God, before you pay the debt which you owe nature,
Husbandmen, Husbandmen
because you have been more careful, to gather your fruits, and to fill your
barnes, and that your fig tree has produced evil fruit, and your sins
filled the measure of iniquity, therefore your teeth have been justly set on
edge, and the Lord has filled full the cup of his wrath and given unto us his
deadly wine to drink. The harvest was come, and because our sins were ripe,
he has sent a sickle from heaven to cut them down; and this has mowens many
thousands. Gentlemen, Gentlemen
some of you have, gloried in the number and multitude of our lands, but what
has this auailed? for the Lord has given to some of you, so much measure of
ground, to the length and breadth of your bodies, as has only served to bury
them in, or so many handfulles of dust, as your bodies go into, after their
consumption. SOCRATES carried ALCIBIADES, bragging of his lands, to a Map of
the world, and bad him demo^strat where his la^d lay; he could not epsy it,
for Athens it self, was but a small thing.

The Lord has told you the former year and yet tells, and shows you this
year, where your Land lies; so much measure of ground, to the length and
breadth of your bodies, as may serve to bury them in. This is my earth, and his
earth, and your earth, and therefore if ye will glory, glory in the Lord: For
why art thou proud o earth and ashes? Ruffianly Swaggerers and Caualiers, you
that have contemned the Lord and spoken with Rabsacs proud and high words:
alas a little Carbuncle, and a little spot in the skin, has cast down, some
of the proudest of you al: and as MOSES smote the hard rock with his rod, so
the Lord has smitten some of your rockie hearts with the rod of his vengeance:
and because your damnable oaths, Blasphemers
have as it were whipped and tormented the patience of God, they have also
received a scourge for which they called for.

Worldlings, Worldlings.
you had not been a long time at rest, the cares of this world had too much
molested you; and as the clock can never stand still from running, so long as
the Peases and Plummets hang thereat; even so, having infinite^ cares hanging
upon your minds as weights upon the Clock, you have had no rest; and therefore
the Lord has sent one to make you rest for a time; and has made you MARY'S
insteede of MARTHA, that ye might not be troubled about many things but
remember that ^^e thing which is necesarie: The Lord grant, that in your
weekly fastings through the whole Land, you have been MARY'S, and sat at the
feet of Jesus with humility, devotion, and reverence. Scholars, children of
the Prophets, Clergy men, and also all ye inhabitants of this kingdom, that
has been the subject, a long time of your discourses, but your profit,
benefices, pleasures, the glory of this world, and in the beginning of the
former year, of the tryumphs of this land, even from Dan to Bershebah, from
Dover to Saint Dauies: From Barwicke to the Mount, court, city: and therefore
the Lord has given us justly another subject to discourse upon, a subject to
speak of our sin, our creator, our permanent city, our misery, and our
mortality. If he had not offered us this subject, we should have forgotten
him. O what a happy time then has it been for the soul! who has not
discoursed of this subject, prepared and ordered his house? The New-yeere being
come, forget not this subject, think not as the Emperor OTHO did, that it is
a part of dastardy to speak of death. Astronomers, Astronomers.
because you have been more busy to behold the Ecclipses of the Sun and of
the Moon, than the Ecclypse in your own souls: the world like unto the
Moon in inconstancy, being betwixt you and the Sun of righteousness Christ
Jesus, therefore j^stly the Lord sent the tempest of the Pestilence, to take
away the love of this world, to remove this moon, that ye might behold
this amiable Sun. Further, we were as it were all asleep, and therefore he
has justly awaked us, and made the whole country to stir: For lo, the
Citizens have fled: the Court has broken up, the Universities have removed.
Poore-men, Poore-men
there has been in some of you, a famine and want of good works, and
therefore there has been for a time, as it were a famine and want of Gods
mercy. Martiall-men, Martial-men
you have been fighters against God. Act, 5. and therefore the Lord of Hoastes,
has sent his soldiers, his Angels, and his arrows against you in the Land.
Noblemen, Noblemen.
because ye have been busier to hunt your Deeres; and also after the honors,
pleasures and riches of this life, than after the living God, therefore justly
the Lord has sent his Hunter in the Land (as it is called. Psalm. 91.3) to hunt
and slay us; who has catched some walking, some feeding, some sporting, some
sleeping, as the experience of the former year does witness. But to leave
generals, I come to thee, o LONDON in particular; An apostrophe to London.
thou have suffered the heauiest brunt. If the Nations that pass by the city,
ask as they did of Jerusalem. Jer. 22. Wherefore has the Lord done this to
this great city* What answer can we give, but that answer Ierem. 22. Because
they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord their God. The mightines of thy
state, multitude of thy people, hau^ not bin able to keep out the Lords
Purseuant nor to drive back the Gunshot of Gods displeasure. Alas, what has
been thy greatness^ compared unto the greatness of Jehovah? the number and
height of thy proud Turrets, could not threaten heaven: for the closer they
have pressed to the seat of God, the nearer they have layen to his lightning.
Thou have tryumphed in thy braueries, and therefore the Lord has the former
year tryumphed over thee in his justice; and of thee, o LONDON, of whom it
might have bin said, as it was of TYRVS, whose river has been as the Harvest
of thy reuennewes, and a Mart of the Nations of thee: we have had occasion to
say. Esa. 23. Esa. 23.
Is this that glorious city of yours, whose Merchants are Princes, and her
chapmen, the Nobles: the Lord of Hoastes has stained the pride of thy glory.

To come unto particulars; London, thou have heard the former year, a
sorrowful music, which has sounded in thy ears day and night; But what
have thou heard, that thou have not deserved? Thou had brought over thy time
in worldly merriments; dedespysing the harp of DAVID, Moreover, thou have had
a continual allarum of Belles, they were the Trumpets of Jehovah: thy sins
caused that allarum, and they have been a witness, that the Lord had taken
in your City, and that you were not able to keep him out.

The Lords spiritual Trumpets, which have sounded in our ears: you have not
heard, Es. 58.2
but contemned, and therefore he has made the very Bells his Preachers, to be
reproaches to us of our obstinacy; and because we have not heard the Bells of
the Pulpit, he has made us to hear the Bells of the steeple. What marvel, if
there have been heard within our walls continual knels and ringing of Bells,
seeing there has been heard the continual Bells of our tongues, which by their
oaths and blasphemies have dishonored the Lord of heaven. I do appeal to the
children in thy streets, o Lord, out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,
from whence thy glory should have proceeded. Psalm. 8.2: from thence has sprung
that which has dishonored thee. If the filthy Plays, with the blast of a
Trumpet, have sooner called thither thousands, then an hours tolling of a
Bell, bring one hundred to the Sermon: what marvel that tolling of Belles
has been heard for another purpose? Citizens, you had not purged your streets
from the plague of sin, and therefore the Lord has sent his heavenly Beesome
to sweep away multitudes; you had not taken away corruption within, and
therefore he placed corruption without. You have bin too busy to adorn your
houses, neglecting the house of the Lord, and therefore, he has made them
desolate, many for-saking them, so that Nettles and Thistles might have grown
in your Palaces. Esd. 30.20. Fraud, oppression, and stealing had walked up
and down, your streets, and therefore justly that flying book Zach. 5. has
entered into your housen, and taken hold of the stone and timber thereof.
LONDON, thou have had occasion to say, Zach. 5. I see a flying book, thou have
seen it, for it has entered your housen, and remained in the midst of them.
Alas, we have all mourned and sighed for the great number, that the pestilence
has increased weekly, above three thousand: but what marvel, seeing there
is none of us, in whom have not reigned above three thousand sins? The
increasing voice then of the Pestilence, has reproached unto us the increase
of our sins. The insatiable mouth of the grave has craved still more and
more, and never thought it had enough, and spared not to swallow up our
sweetest comforts. Had we not deserved that by our covetousness? our hearts
had been as insatiable graves, still crying for more, as SOLOMON speaks.
Remember Londoners, how that some of your inhabitants have ruffled in their
royall-like garments, and that therefore they have been adorned with a
winding-sheete; others gloryed in their bu ldings, and therefore the Lord has
made Coffens and Graves for their habitations: some in the multitude of their
train and attendants, and therefore have had other attendants; the very worms
of the earth to attend upon them, and to eat them up. Learn hereby, beloved
of LONDON, on the one side, that greatness of sins can shake the foundations
of the greatest cities: If their heads stood amongst the stars, iniquity,
would bring the^ down, multitudes of offenses will consume multituds of me^:
Ier. 49.
although the streets were sowe^ with the seed of man, yet, that they shall be
so scarce, that a child may tell them. On the other side, learn your
mortality, and to number your days, that you may apply your hearts to
wisdom. Psalm. 90. The end of those royal citizens, whom CONSTANTIVS entering
Rome, called reges, Kings: was death. The Emperor asking of HORMISDA, master
of his works, what he thought of them? answered that he took not pleasure in
any thing, but in learning one lesson, which was, that men also dyed in Rome.
This is also your end, (royal citizens) and therefore with HORMISDA, take
pleasure this New-yeare, to learn one lesson, that me^ die also in London.

I have further observed four things the former year, Four things to be
observed in the former year
wherewith I will acquaint you, beloved of LONDON; in the entry of the
New-yeere, which are as it were, four Preachers to Preach unto us the doctrine
of Repentance. The old year, has been a year of wonders; as fitly I may
term it: Witness the strange alterations, like unto the variable estate of
the Moon. As King AHASHVEROSH, called to mind out of the book of Records,
and the Chronicles, the things fore-past: Even so call to your minds, out of
the book of your memories, and the Chronicle of the former year, the things
which then have happened. The Lord has visited us the former year at diverse
times, with four visitations; In the beginning, in the midst, in the end.
Two of them are visitations of sorrow, two of joye: Two of them have been
Funeralles, two have bin deliverances and Coronations. Two have concerned a
Prince, two a Princely City: These have been diversely intermingled, sorrow and
joye have followed and kissed each other; Sorrow has begun the year, joye
has ended it; both joye and sorrow have walked in the midst.

To particularize; 1 A visitation of sorrow with the funerals of a Noble
Princess.
The first has been a visitation of sorrow, and the funeralles of a Prince in
the beginning of the year: the Lord first visiting with sickness, and
afterward taking away that Noble Princess of famous memory; that worthy
instrument of Gods glory, by whose sacred Scepter the faithful Protestant
(as well we strangers, as the natural inhabitants) have found a secure and
fertile nurcery. At that time, o the sighs of the righteous! o the complaints
of the godly! o the fear and doubting of many! Spemque metumque inter dubij,
some fearing, some hoping. 2 Chro. 35
Then as JOSIAS was mourned for by all IVDAH and Jerusalem, and JEREMY mourned
for JOSIAS, and al singing men and singing women: Even so all the companies,
and Orders of the Realm, the Princes and the prophets plentifully watered
their cheeks, even from the honorable counsailor to him that grindeth at the
Mill. This began a little to move us, as it were, to taste the medicine of
repentance: for the death of a good Prince is one of the Lords Preachers, and
to make many at that time to pray unto the Lord, that he would be mindful of
Sion, and not permit us to fall again in the superstitions of the Antichrist.
This part of the tragedy ended, behold, there followed the second alteration,
the visitation of joy and mercy: the proclamation of a new Prince, and
afterward his joyful Coronation. At that time, o the admirable joy, even from
Dan to Bershebah, 2 A visitation of joy with the Proclamation and Coronation of
a new Prince.
from the one part of the land to the other; for this heavenly gift, of a noble,
renowned, godly, Religious, virtuous, wise and learned Prince, a man after Gods
own heart, and (unfeignedly I may speak) a man after our own heart, long
desired and wished for in the hearts of the Godly subjects and true
professors. Sorrow in the first visitation, was as it were a heavy stone upon
our hearts, but in the second visitation he has as it were sent an Angel
from heaven, to speak to the whole Kingdom: Fear not. In the first, the
whole land was as it were laid down in the bed of sorrow, but by the second,
there arose a new Sun, whose beams were comfortable to the whole land. This
then has bin another of the Lords Preach^rs. But has this moved us, either
to continue or to go forward in the ways of the Lord? alas, we have not
altered the color or hair of our heads, nor added one inch to our stature
since all these things have bin accomplished among us: our hearts have been as
the adamant, that the impiession of Gods graces have not entered. And therefore
there followed the third visitation, of sorrow and lamentation, the deluge of
the Pestilence, the second Funeral. The funerals of whole families, and the
funeralles of a Princely City, which was as it were going to her grave, if
the Lord in his mercy had not commanded his Angel to put up his sword into the
scabberd: this was an other kind of Preacher. The consideration of the second
visitation, 3 A new visitation of sorrow, with the funerals of a princely
city.
had made us to say in our hearts with DAVID in his prosperity. Psa. 30. I
shall never be moved. The Pestilence of security did begin to reign among
us, I do appeal unto the words and speeches of the inhabitants which then
were used in the Land; and therefore the Lord came, and mingled our joy with
sorrow, and sprinkled a little salt over the joy of the country, and by a
mortality, he did put us in mind of our mortality. As Christ showed unto
PETER, and the rest upon the Mountain, when they were in the midst of their
joye; and that PETER said, Let us make here three tabernacles: as he showed I
say to them, MOSES and ELIAS, which were dead men, Even so in the midst of our
joy and glory, when we were saying, It is good to be here, and to make our
tabernacles here: even then he showed unto us MOSES and ELIAS, and sent us a
mortallity. It was usual amongst the Egiptians, that in the midst of their
feasts, and solemnities, a resemblance of death, all trembling and shaking, was
brought and carried round about, to make them remember it, and to learn
sobriety. Even so, in the midst of our solemnities, for the joye of a new
Prince, death has been carried round about the Land, that we should not wax
to wanton, and forget the Lord. It is storied that when the Emperors were
crowned, the Sepulchers of dead men were showed unto them, to make them
mindful of death: even so, when our King the former year was Crowned, the
Lord has shown unto him, and to us, the Sepulchers of dead men, and by the
continual allarum of Bells, put us in mind of death: which mindfulnesse, as
CASSiANVS an ancient writer speaks, is a general restraint from evil Let
this Preacher, beloved of London teach you, that as JOSEPH of Arimathea, had a
sepulcher in the midst of his beautiful garden; eue^ so you ought in the midst
your prosperity and felicity, to be mindful of your mortal being. The fourth
and last visitatio^ in the end of the year, has been a visitation of joy, a
deliverance from the Pestilence; and as it were a second Coronation, A new
visitation of joy with a second Coronation.
a Coronation of your city; the Lord compassing it round about with joyful
deliverance, Ps. 32. Ps. 103.4
and crowning it with his accustomed kindness, with mercy and compassion. But of
this more at large in King DAVID'S sacrifycing.

To proceed, I told you beloved before, that the Lord by the smart-Preacher of
his justice and anger, has crossed us two manner of ways: First punishing us
as it were by Retaliation, for our glorying in the number and multitude, with a
diminution. Secondly, by contraries: 2 The second thing, where in the Lord
has crossed us, namely, by contraries.
The first hitherto I have amplifyed; Now follows the second; observe them
with me, how wonderfully the Lord the former year by the deluge of the
Pestilence has in diverse things crossed our expectation: First, which we had
spoken: Secondly, expected: Thirdly, begun. First, we had said and expected,
1 Increase of people was expected.
that the number and multitudes of people should have been augmented, both in
the city, and in the Land: and behold, there has been a just contrary, it
has been diminished in both, o how many thousands have been buried! How
have the Church-yeardes been filled up, that scarce there was no place? has
not the Lord shown the truth of that threatening? Ier. 7.32. They shall bury
in Topheth, till there be no place? Secondly, we had 3 Tryumphs
and that therein we should have shown the signs thereof: and behold a
contrary, they have been filled with sorrow, mourning, weeping and howling, for
the funerals which have walked along them. These have been the tryumphs of
LONDON; We expected in our streets the sound of the Trumpets, The tryumphs of
the last year
and the sweet harmony of Music to welcome our Prince; and behold, in
steed of them, we have heard a contrary music; the continual knels of
Belles to welcome death: we expected shows of tryumphs, and behold, other
shows we have seen, the funerals of dead men, who were gone to triumph in
heaven. We had begun to build toward heaven, almost as high as the builders
of Babell: every one for highest and finest, o the great preparations and
diligence in their building and erecting? But behold, a sudden alteration, a
stay of their work; where some had set up, others pluck down: and as the
builders of Babel have been dispersed, even so ours have been scattered: Some
are dead, and some yet left a live: The Lord has sent some of them, from their
downe-beds, to their dust-beds. And as the arrow came suddenly from IEHV his
bow, and stroke IORAM even in his Chariot. 2. Reg. 9.28. even so, the
Pestilence, the Lords flying arrow, Psalm. 91. has struck some, even in the
midst of their triumph: he changed our glory into shame. Hos. 4.7. and
fulfilled that threatening by the Prophet, Ier. 7.34. I will cause to cease from
the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth,
and the voice of gladness. So that with HESECHIAS Esa. 38.17. Thou have, o
London had occasion to say: Behold, for felicity I had bitter grief, but it
was thy pleasure to deliver my soul from the pit of corruption. Fourthly, we
Profit
and that the traficke should have flourished, moreover, that now we should
have adventured, where before many kept themselves close and durst not. How
many had brought up great store of precious wares, thinking that never they had
had such a time: and yet behold a contrary, the traffic, both of the
mother-citie, and of the daughters, of the head and of the members, has been
slack, doings little or none, no aduenturing, little paying; wares esteemed
better the^ debts, and every one keeping close: so that we have had occasion
to use the saying of the Prophet Iere. 8.15. We looked for peace, but no good
came, and for a time of health, and beheld troubles. Further we expected that
our shops should have bin open in that joyful time, which were furnished with
great riches against the future triumph, thinking to reap great profit, and
behold a contrary, many have bin locked up, by reason of a double departure, of
some out of the city, of others out of this world. The Lord has taken away
from us our markets and faires the greatest stays of the common wealth, and
from thee o London that renowned BARTHOLEMEVV fair, and the sportes thereof,
wrestling and Shooting: and instead of them, there have bin wrestling against
death, and the Lords Angels, shooting off the Lords arrows. Psalm. 91. The
reason of this, all has been because the Lord would have us profit not by our
commodities, but by his chastisements. It is reported that the mountains which
are full of golden mines, that they are commonly barren and unfruitful: we by
reason of our riches were unfruitful and barren in good works, and therefore
the Lord by his rod would make us fruitful, and to reap profit for our
souls. Lastly, many had made preparatio^s against the future triumph, to
adorn themselves, and to meet their Prince: and behold a contrary, some of
them have been adorned with a shrouding sheet, and so are gone to meet
another Prince in another kingdom, to triumph eternally.

It has fallen out o London with thee and thy inhabitants, as with the
Emperor SALADINVS, after he had gotten great victories, and had tryumphed;
fell sick and had nothing carried before him to his grave then a shrouding
sheet: and what else have had many of your inhabitants? Thus then beloved,
the Lord has spiced your great joys conceived in the beginning of the year,
with sorrow and bitterness. If you would know the reason; that you should not
forget either the Lord or your selves, for if you had surfeted of pleasure, and
received to much good, it would have bin as an introduction to worse to come.
When tidings was brought to PHILLIP of Macedon. First that PARMENIO got the
victory over his ennemies, Secondly ALEXANDER his son was borne, And thirdly
his Chariots won the prize at Olympus all in one day, he called upon fortune
to do him some little hurt, and to spice his joys with bitterness, that they
should not make him forget himself. Even so o England, seeing that thou have
first obtained a virtuous Prince, a wonder of the world, secondly victories
over thy enemies of Ireland, and thirdly abundance of Corn and fruits of the
earth, and that all in one year; it has been good, that the Lord has done
thee some little hurt, and spyced thy joys with bitterness, that thou
should not forget thy self. That the Lord then, has thus crossed our
expectations by contraries; to what shall we ascribe it, but to this, that we
have crossed his expectation by our sins? I may use the Apostles saying. 1.
Cor. 11. For this many among you are sick, and many are dead. The Lord of
Hoastes has dealt with thee, o England as TAMBERLAINE the Great, in his
besieging of cities. First, he erected white Tents, in token of mercy, if they
would render themselves. Secondly, if they remained obstinate, he erected red
Tents, in sign of blood. Thirdly, when that prevailed no, he erected black
tents, in sign of death. Even so, the Monarcke of the world has first
erected among us, the white Tents of mercy, by the preaching of the Gospel.
Secondly, because we rendered not up our hearts, he has erected up his red
tents, threatening us with an enemy without, and an enemy within. Lastly,
because this has not auailed, he has erected the last year his black rents,
sending among us mortality; the funerals have walked up and down our
streets, with mourning and lamenting; the parents for the children, the
children for the parents: Let then the remaynders repent, least they all
likewise perish. And thus much for the first Preacher of the former year, the
Lords smart-preacher in his anger and in his justice.

There follows now the second Preacher, The Preacher of mercy, which the
Lord, whose mercies are infinite, has manifested in three things: 2 The
second Preacher of the former year, the preacher of mercy manifested in three
things.
in the giving of a Prince, in the fruits of the earth; in the very Plague it
self. First, by the gift of an honorable plant, which his right hand it self
has planted among us: although I have once already mentioned it before, yet I
would not esteem it a tautologie to repeat it twenty and twenty times more;
unto this benefit he has added another: The preserving of him, by his holy
Angels, his majesty's safest guard. First, 1 In the gift of a Prince.
from the snare of the hunter, and the noisome pestilence. Secondly, from
intended treason, against his sacred person. Seeing the Lord has given us a
worthy instrument of his glory, to beat down the walls of that Rom^sh
JERICHO: Satan would feign hinder it; and thereby shows that he has no
greater enemy in the world, then our most Christian Prince. Satan (to use the
words of AUGUSTINE) the former time was as a Lion, for then he raised open
persecution against the Church: And now he plays the subtle serpent, and
privily lies in wait. But although they all should stand up as a huge
mountain against our ZOROBABEL, Zac. 4.7,
yet shall they be made, I hope, a plain as the prophet speaks. The second
token of his mercy, has been the blessing of a fruitful year; the
abundance of corn, 2 In the blessing of a ple^tifull year.
which the distilling dew of heaven has comforted; the sheaues whereof have
filled the mowers hands, and the gleaners lap. The heavens have dropped their
fatness, and the earth has made the hearts of many to leap for joy, and the
barnes as it were to enlarge themselves for the receite of this blessed
plenty. This mercy of the former year, is a Preacher, preaching unto you,
beloved of England, (the 8. verse of the 34. Psalm) Taste and see how gracious
the Lord is. The third token of his mercy, does appear in the very
Pestilence it self; the Lord having shown mercy (as the Prophet speaks) in
the midst of his justice. 3 In the Pestilence it self, as appears in four
things.
If this seems unto you a paradoxe, I will prove and manifest it in four
things: in regard of the time, of the number, of the place, of the kind of
punishment: his mercy toward us, rising up by four degrees, like the
water in EZECHIEL. cap. 4.7. which at the first time came but to the ankles;
the second time, to the knees; the third, to his loins; the fourth time, was a
deep river. First the time preaches his mercy, 1 In regard of the time and
that.
for our continual sins, without continual repentance have deserved a
continual Plague: but the continuance of this rod has notwithstanding not
been among us: The mercy of the Lord toward us, in regard of the time, does
appear in two things, before he comes, and when h^ is come. First, before he
comes, 1 Before he comes
his great patience and long sufferance; he comes leysurely, but every nine
or ten years once, where as he might yearly visit us, if he would deal with
us justly, according to our sins. 2 When he is come.
Secondly, when he is come, the short continuance of the Pestilence, feauen or
eight Months at the most: The Lord turning the storm to calm, so that the
waves thereof are still. Psalm. 107.29, o admirable lenity and fatherly
kindness! thus deals he not with other Nations: Go but unto your
neighbors, and they will preach unto you Gods mercy toward you. Ask the
Pagans, and they will tell it you: witness that Plague begun, Anno 540.
which lasted fifty years tormenting them. Secondly, the number preaches unto
you Gods mercy. Our infinite sins had deserved, that millions and millions,
should have been swept away, and yet there has been but a gleaning of few.
If you reply, and set before me, 2 In regard of the number.
the greatness of the former Plague, which seems to take away this mercy,
which I amplify: Ask but of DAVID, and he himself will open Gods mercy
toward you. What is the number of thirty seven thousand, in the space of a
year, in regard of seauentie thousand in three days? Go further, and ask
the Nations, which knew not God, and they will lay it open to you. What is the
number of 37. thousand, in regard of 2000. which dyed every day in the time of
VESPASIAN, of 5000. every day, and sometime of 10000. in the time of JUSTINIAN;
of a hundredth thousand in the city of Rome: Anno 1521. Thou, o little
kingdom of Bohemia, which have lost, Anno 1577. 300000. may Preach unto
this kingdom, the Lords mercy toward her. O Graecia, thou have in such
manner been consumed, that there were almost none to bury thy dead; Eusebius.
lib. 9. Cap. 7, 8
and yet thou, o England, have had not only some to bury thy dead, but to
accompany them decently and honorably to the grave. It is then the Lords
mercy only, that we have not all been consumed. Lam. 3. O that thou could,
o England, yet perceive thy present happiness, and prevent a future horror!

3 In regard of the place
Thirdly, the diverse places unvisited in this kingdom, do Preach this mercy:
The Plague of the soul which had reigned in every place, had deserved that the
Plague of the body should have reigned also in every corner. The Lord might
have sent his Angel, even from Dan to Bershebah, to strike not only the head
with some of the members, but altogether, and yet he has not: for although
this Pestilence, has been more general then others, yet many have been
exempted. Both DAVID and other nations do Preach unto thee, o England, this
admirable mercy. Remember the 15. Provinces of the Roman Empire, wasted away
in a short time by this smart-whippe. In Egypt ( Exodus 12.30. there was no
house where there was not one dead: And yet behold, there have been many
housen, I say, not in England, but in London it self, which have escaped. To
what shall we ascribe this, but to the great mercy of the Lord?

Fourthly, the kind of punishment, wherewith we have been visited, 4 In regard
of the punishment it self, and that in two respects
preaches also the Lords mercy to England; and that in two things. First,
that he has not sent unto us, the whole Trinity of chastisements, propounded
unto DAVID. Secondly, In that he has not sent the heauiest of them three.
First, our sins did deserve them all three together: 1 Of the trinity, sending
but one.
the famine and scarcity of good works: famine and scarcity of bread; our
fighting against the Lord; the sword of the enemy; the infection of the soul;
the infection of the body. But the Lord who is merciful, has called back his
anger, and not stirred up all his wrath. Psalm. 78.38. The Low Countries may
Preach the Lords mercy toward England. They have sometimes felt at one time
the trinity of punishments; and the former years, both war and Pestilence;
we in the mean time, feeling but the rod of DAVID; We did, I confess,
expect a heavier judgment, we looked for nothing else, but bloodshedding,
and fighting for a crown: and behold, we have nothing but joye, peace,
prosperity, and joyful ringing for a Crown. This our joy in the mean time
being spysed with a little bitterness.

Secondly, he has not only visited us with one of the three; 2 Sending not
the heauiest.
but also with the sweetest and the best; using not the rod of revenge, but
the scourge of correction. And although our sins had deserved the heauiest;
yet he has shown to us that mercy which he showed to DAVID, not suffering us
to fall into the hands of men. If he had sent us famine, it would have made
many to have morgaged their Lands to PHARAOS: Genesis 47.20. to have left the
kingdom Genesis 12. Famine (as the Proverb is) is an evil counselor: when
hunger had gryped us, it would have egged men to thefts, murders, de^eits:
Many would have lived upon the air, and their own moisture, and so consumed
away, and in doing nothing, to use the saying of AUGUSTINE, have come to
nothing. Mothers, you may be Preachers of Gods mercy: if he had sent a
famine, alas, the tongue of the sucking child, had cleaued to the roof of his
mouth for thirst. The young children had asked bread, and no man should have
broken it unto them. And to use further the words of JEREMY (the hands of the
pitiful woman would have sodden their own children,) as they did in the siege
of Jerusalem. Iam. 4.10.
If he had sent us hostile persecution, Alas, the unmerciful soldier would
have laid open your hedges, leauiled your houses with the ground, and emptied
you and yours of all their possessions. Where had bin your cities, your wives,
your daughters? where your temples, your Prophets, yea, where your religion?
they would have displayed the banner, and set up the ensign of the
Romish-beast, and erected the signs of their abhominatio^s. They would have
blaspheamed the God of Israel, and said; are these the Christians, where is
their God? But now, beloved, they all remain in their flower and prime, and
the rod of DAVID has not hindered us to enter the temple, nor the exercises of
religion: we see our signs and our prophets; we enter into the house of the
Lord, with liberty of conscience, there to behold her beauty. Psalm. 27. and
to adore the God of Israel in the spirit and truth. We strangers, An
apostrophe to strangers.
may also be preachers, o Lord, of thy mercy, in the midst of thy justice.
It is true, thou have much diminished the number of thy little flock collected
in this Kingdom; yet better has it been for them (that are exiled here for
the name of thy Son, and for the testimony of thy eternal truth) to have
fallen in thy hands, then in the hands of me^, of whose barbarous cru^lty, both
they and their forefathers have had experience. and although they are buried,
in their exile, yet thou have transported the^ in their heavenly father-land.
Thou which have brought this vain, out of the Romish Egypt, and planted it in
this land, as in another Canaan, make it fruiteful, return we beseech thee,
and now visit it in thy mercy, and we will not go back from thee but call
upon thy name. I return to thee o London, preach thou also the Lords mercy,
he has not undone or dissolved thy composition, nor couerd thee with brambles,
he has not utterly destroyed thee, as Babylon; The great Niniuie, Troy,
Jerusalem, and the rest, of which we may truly say, O iam periere ruina, the
very ruins of them are gone to ruin: thou stand yet, and I hope, shall
flourish as much as thou ever did, if the former judgment move thee to
repentance. I will conclude with a paradoxe. Mercy we had desired the former
year, and mercy he has also shown the former year, A paradoxe, the truth,
whereof the event of the former year has manifested.
yea by the sending of the Plague. The Lord has heard our prayers. If this
seem strange to you beloved, I will expound the paradoxe. In the beginning of
the year, when that Noble Princess Elizabeth of famous memory, fell sick;
during her disease, we mourned, sighed and lamented: We were heavy and much
troubled, many righteous souls prayed unto the Lord, and in their prayers
desired two things merciful to Sion, and not dispearse and scatter them, but
gather and keep together his church: and behold the Lord has heard our
prayers, he has not suffered us to fall into the hands of men, he has sent a
pestilence, by which we are fallen into his hands: for what is the Plague but
a fall into God his hands, according to the definition of DAVID. Further he
has not dispersed, but rather called and gathered many of us unto himself:
for what is death else, but a gathering unto our fathers, and a departure unto
God? The Lord has called many of his children from School, from the School
of this world, where they had learned no good; he has called them to that
heavenly university. Many had desired to see the tryumphes of the city, but
the Lord in his mercy has made them to see a better triumph in that permanent
City and heavenly Jerusalem. Many had desired to see the Coronation of their
new Prince, but the Lord in hss mercy has made the^ to see a better
Coronation, the Coronation of the Prince of glory, and of the true SOLOMON
Christ Jesus; yea he has made many ye royal priesthood. Apo. 1. Thus the^
beloved of LONDON, I have amplyfied unto you the mercy of the Lord, which has
only stayed the Angels sword, or else, it would have gone forward. There is no
comparison betwixt the mercy of God and the mercy of men: It is reported that
MARCELLVS, after that his soldiers had conquered SIRACVSA, not without the
great slaughter of many, was so compassionate over them, that he went up to
the highest Tower in the Castle, and with tears lamented the ruin and
overthrow thereof. Whatsoever may be said of MARCELLVS for his clemency over
those he had slain, yet there is no comparison to be made betwixt him, and the
Emperor of heaven and earth: he has had from the high tower of heaven,
compassion over the City: It has repented him, he has beheld her ruins:
If mercy had not been before him, and grace behind him, (so great is our
sin) the whole City might have been destroyed. And thus much for the second
Preacher of the former year, and also of the second part of this new
yeres-gift.

The third part, containing the Kings Medicine it self, with the ingredients
thereof.
AS an expert Physician, first shows the disease it self, with the cause and
danger thereof; and then prescribes to his patient, Physic, to cure him, and
the order of his diete Even so having shown beloved of London, the disease it
self, the Kings evil with the effect thereof, give me leave now to
prescribe the Physic against the Kings evil. And as the Physician hitting
upon the right humor and cause of the disease, can with happier success apply
his Physic: So we knowing the cause, both of the spiritual and corporal
infection, shall the better be able to find out the right medicine. It is the
desire of al sickemen to know a good medicine, which has bin known most to
prevail, best to remove, and soonest to cure the person diseased. This he
learneth, to know out of the book of nature, the best physicians, the cause of
the disease, and the experience of others: and if there be a medicine which is
much used and commended, every one is desirous to have it, and to know the
ingredients thereof. As this is the desire of the diseased in regard of the
body, so it ought also to be the desire of every Christian in regard of his
soul.

This he shall learn to know out of the book of God, the cause of the
disease, the spiritual Physicians, and the experience of others. If we desire
one for to cure the plague of the soul and the effect thereof, which is
commended and has been used, and tried by experience: behold, I set one before
you, the Kings medicine, DAVID'S repentance, so called, because a King of
Israel took it in, both in the Plague, and after the Plague. As for the
bodyly kings medicine, and other humane confections of art, they are of no
force to cure the spiritual contagion. For the Triacle, and to use the words of
the Lord, Ierm. 8.22, the Balm of Gilead, and their Physicians, cannot help
or recover our health; and therefore the Lord reprocheth the^. Ier. 46.11. Go
up unto Gilead, and take balm, o Virgin, the daughter of Egypt, in vain
shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall have no health.

Seeing that the confections of men, are of so little force, there is no better
then this kings medicine, which is better worth then all the balm of Gilead.
If ye are desirous to know, where the ingredients of this Physic do grow;
ye shall find them growing in the garden of this Scripture now in hand. As
the Lord (says ORIGIN) has prepared Physic for the body, out of the
herbs which grow in the fields and gardens: even so he has ordained Physic
for the soul, whose ingredients he has sown in the garden of the Scripture,
of this Physic Christ Jesus is (...), the supreme Physiti^n.

That we might then orderly proceed in this orderly repentance of king DAVID,
The ingredients of the Kings medicine ar^ set down.
who has been skillful in the art of repentance, I will set f^orth a lively
Anotomie of a repentant sinner, whose foote-steps we ought to follow step by
step.

In this spiritual king; Medicine, I observe five things: First the patients,
or the persons which took it in, verse 28. and 16. The King and the Elders of
Israel.

Secondly, the ingredients of this Physic and the parts whereof it is
compounded, which are three in number. The first ingredient, is the knowledge
and feeling of the Kings disease. verse. 10, And his heart smote him. The second
is, his desire of spiritual life and health, in the same verse: Take away the
trespass of thy servant: The third is, the herb of patience. verse. 14. the
king grudged not, but said, Let us fall into the hands of the Lord.

Thirdly, the patients behavior, and the manner how the king took it in,
which is set down in three things: First, the discovery and laying open of his
sore unto the Physician. 2. Sam. 24.10. I have sinned exceedingly, and I have
done very foolishly. The second is, his bodily prostrating of himself, with
the Elders upon their faces. 1. Chron. 21.16. Thirdly, an humble clothing of
himself, with the Elders in Sackcloth, in the same verse of the Chapter.

Fourthly, the time when he took in this medicine, and the cause moving him
to use this receipt: which was, when he saw that he was infected with the
Plague of the soul: 2. Sam. 24.10. Then, etc. and that he perceived the effect
and danger thereof, the bodily pestilence, 2. Sam. 24.17.

Fifthly, the operation of the Kings medicine, which is, the ceasing of the
Plague. 2. Sam. 24, 25. With the behavior of the patient DAVID now being
healed; his sacrificing unto the Lord. 1. Chron. 21.28. This is the Anotomie of
the Kings medicine: of which in order.

I. The patients or persons, which took in the Kings Medicine.
THe persons which used this Physic, are the King and the Elders; honorable
persons, the chiefest of the kingdom: Patients which were diseased, infected
with the spiritual contagion. Kings and Princes, mortal Gods, Potentates of
the earth, and ye the elders of the people: Here is a Looking-glass for you;
come down from your thrones, and the height of your glory; be not ashamed with
a virtuous, Prince, to take in a royal medicine. Let not the maxims of that
vnpure Atheist MACHIAVEL, that malaperte and pelting Towne-Clearke of Florence,
infecte your souls, who among the rest of his filthiness, blusheth not to
spewe out this poison, that Kings and Princes need not make any accounte of
godliness, and that it is sufficient to make only an outward show of it.

The practice of DAVID, and the Elders, do show the contrary; going before
you, whose foote-steps follow step by step. As the Physicians prescribing a
medicine, show the reasons, which ought to move the patients to take it in:
Even so let me, o Princes and Elders of the people, with the prescription of
this royal medicine; show you also the causes, which ought to persuade you to
the taking in of this Physic.

The reasons are five in number. First, Five reasons to move great men to take
in this Physic.
the consideration of your disease, and the multitude of your sins: Princes,
you are most of al troubled with the kings evil, and the greatest sins
commonly reign among the greatest.

Secondly, the prescription of the whole College of the spiritual Physicians.
God the Father commands it. Ierem. 13.18. Say unto the king and to the
Queen, humble your selves.

Thirdly, the example and practice of great men, with the succes thereof, DAVID
MANASSES, EZECHIAS, and the rest.

Fourthly, the danger in which you cast your selves, if it be neglected. The
justice of the highest God, fearing no power, prevented by no policy, stayed
by no brybes. He spares not the Prince for his Scepter, the high Cedar Tree
for his height, the strong Oak for his strength; The green Laurel for his
greenesse. The flying book. Zach. 5. is a large book, which notes, that none
of what place or calling soever, can be exempted from Gods judgment. Tophet is
prepared of old, it is even prepared for the King; he has made it deep and
large. Es. 30.33. The Lord has a rasour. Es. 7.20 (by which his judgments are
meant) and by this he will shave, not only the hair of the feet, but of the
head, and the beard also. The Lord has also raging floudes, that come up, not
to the loins only, and the middle, but even to the chin and the neck. Es.
8.8. The Frogs could not be kept out of PHARAO his bedchamber, nor from the
Couch where he lay. Exodus 8.3. The Lord is not like the little fishermen, that
spread their Nets for the smaller fish, because they cannot take the grand
Leuiathan of the Sea, and the Whale with an hook; or pearce his jaws with an
angle. Job. 40.21. For he is able to take the Dragon and Crocodile Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur orbis: As the Brook does follow the nature of the
fountain, and the sea the air; even so the people is the shaddowe of the
Prince. You ought then to be as one says, carbo and lampas, a coal burning
unto your selves, and a lamp shining unto others. As the ointment ran down
from the head of AARON, by the beard, to the very boarders of the garment: so
the sweet ointment of good works ought to come and descend from the King, the
head of the people, by the counsel and elders of the people, to the meanest
soul in the Land. True is the saying, that the repentance of a king, is as it
were, the repentance of a whole kingdom: And thus much for the patients which
ought to take it in.

II The ingredients of the Kings medicine, and the parts whereof it is
compounded.
THe first ingredient and part of the Kings medicine, Knowledge of sin,
is the feeling of his disease and knowledge of his sin, for his heart smote
him. This was then an inward sense and feeling in the heart of DAVID. The
Physicians in their practice of Physic, prescribe two maa^er of remedies; some
to be taken inwardly, as Pills and medicines: some to be applied outwardly, as
playsters, and such like: In this spiritual Kings medicine, there are
ingredients which must be taken inwardly: whereof the first is, this inward
knowledge of our sin. Many excellent herbs are the ingredients of the
bodily Kings Midicine: of which the first is Sage of virtue. Surely this
knowledge of our sin, is an herb which has singular virtue, as shall
appear. Follow herein the King in the taking in of this medicine; let there
be in thy soul, an inward knowledge, detestation and sorrow for thy sin. In
this knowledge, observe two things: First the quality of it: Secondly, the
necessity of it. Knowledge must ever go before the face of repentance, and
must be accompanied with three things: First, of the person offended; The
quality of this knowledge in three things.
his name, majesty, greatness: Secondly, of the person offending; his
baseness, mortality, and corruption. Thirdly, of the nature of thy disease;
not of the distinctions of sin, and of her proper names, but of their number
and weight: How many, how grievous, how far they extend to the annoyance of
the earth, provocation of heaven, breach of Christian charity. In this manner
use the kings medicine; convert thy sin before reason, examine it with
judgment and understanding: consider what an infinite majesty it offends;
what infinite plagues it brings; enter into the closet of thy conscience;
turn over the books of thy accounts, cast thy reckonings, set down the
sums; and as DAVID numbered the people to know them: even so number thy sins
(as far as possible is) that thou may attain to this knowledge. Set
down, Jmprimis, for abusing of Gods creatures; for spiritual Idolatry; for
blaspheaming and swearing Item, for profaning of the Sabbath. Item, for
disobedience to parents and magistrates. Item, for hate, envy: Jtem, for
adultery and unclean lusts. Ite^, for stealing and oppression. Item, for
lying and slandering. Item, for the 4. sins of Sodom. Alas, the total sum
is the breach of the whole law; the sum is greater then the number of the
people, which IOAB brought to DAVID.

Now that thou may not forget to take in this ingredient, The reasons for
which we ought not to forget this ingredient.
there are three reasons to persuade thee. First, it is the counsel of the
whole college of the spiritual Physicians; of God the father. Ier. 3.13. know
thine iniquity, for thou have rebelled against the Lord thy God. And Ez. 16.2.
Cause the people to remember their sin. Of God the holy Ghost. Re. 2. Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and repent. It is the counsel of MOSES, Deuteronomy. 9.
that they should remember their sin. Secondly, the practice of others, and the
Psalm. 51.3
DAVID took it in, in this manner: I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever
before me, JONAS forgot it not: Jonas 1.12
I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. The Prodigal son
was mindful of it; for he came to himself, Luc. 25.17.
and said I will go to my father, and say I have sinned. Third-the is a good
sign, to know the disease of our souls: it is the first step to attain
unto spiritual health. The first degree of felicity, is not to offend: The
second is, having offended, to know the offense. And although thy offense be
great, yet God says, NAIANZENE, is more merciful, then man can be sinful, if
man will be sorrowful. The very heathen-man him self, calls them fools
that know not their faults, and reputeth their danger great. SENECA, reporting
of HARPASTES a fool, who knew not that she was blind, and therefore
entreated her guide to go forth of doors, because the house was dark;
compares such as know not their faults unto this HARPASTES, and calls them
fools.

Further, this knowledge, makes us to go unto the Physician, and to seek a
remedy, for the curing of our disease; as the Israelites being stung by the
fiery Serpents, fled to the Brazen Serpent. We are all infected with the
Plague of sin, and yet there is a great difference in the pati nts. Some see
it not at all: Some see it too much: Some feel it and fear it; Some, neither
feel nor fear it. Of these four sorts, the third sort is only careful to
seek a remedy. Happy is the sinner, whose heart does begin to smite with
DAVID. They that are smitten with the corporal Plague, feel pain at the
heart; which often is a sign of death: But, if being smitten with the
spiritual Plague, our hearts do begin once to feel it, and to smite us, it
is a sign of life. The heart is the fountain of life; the first thing that
lives, and the last thing that dies: As it is first in corporal life, so let
it be first in the spiritual life. The heart is like an instrument, if it be
in tune and well strung, it makes a sweet melody. As in the repentance of
Nineueh, when the King began to arise from his throne, the rest followed. So
in the repentance of DAVID, after that his heart (which sits in the body as a
King in his throne, and has all the inferior parts at command) began to
arise, the rest of his members followed him; his mouth confessed, his hands
put off the royal garment, and sacrificed unto the Lord. The heart is like
unto a clock, if the balance thereof stir, all the other instruments and
weights follow in a good course: But if that stand still, every one of the
rest go out of order: Even so, if our hearts move and smite us, if they
stir and step forward, all the rest will follow: but if the heart stay, the
whole body is apter to receive any corruption. The ship is a great vessel, but
if the rudder be well guided, the whole body thereof is directed without
hazard. So, if the heart go aright, it goes not alone. This is then a
profitatable knowledge, it is a key that opens the door to the closet, where
all our books of accounts do lie: which is in the heart. It is a looking
glass, or the eye of the soul, whereby she sees her self, The excellency of
this knowledge.
and looks into her whole estate. It is a spiritual hammer, to break the
stony hardness of our hearts. This knowledge surpasses all humane knowledge.
What is it by Arithmeticall account, to know the division of the least
fractions, and not to know that the multitude of our sins, do make a division
betwixt God and us. What is it by Geometrical practice? to measure the
longitude of the most spacious prospects, and not to measure the height of our
sins, which ascend as high as heaven? What is it to have the knowledge of
Music, and not to know that for want of good government; we lead a life all
out of tune? What is it with the Astronomer, to know the motion of the heavens,
and to be ignorant that our hearts lie buried in the earth? With the
Naturalist, to know the cause and the effects of every thing; and not to know
the effect and cause of our disease? With the Historian, to know what others
have done, and to neglect the true knowledge of our selves? With the Lawer, to
prescribe many Laws, and not to know the Law of God which teaches us the
knowledge of our sins. Let us therefore have this knowledge, this detestation
and sorrow for our sins: this heavenly dew of deu^tion never faleth, but the
sun of righteousness draws it up, and upon whose face soever it drops, it makes
the same most amiable in the sight of God. And thus much for the first part
and ingredient of the Kings medicine.

The second part and ingredient, is his desire of health and spiritual life:
The second ingredient, desire of health.
Take away the trespass of thy servant. Which words deliver two things: First
the desire it self: Secondly, the Physician of whom he does desire it (the
Lord) his desire is, remission of sin, a healing of the Plague of the soul;
and that the Lord as a merciful and skilful Surgion, would take away those
pestilential Carbuncles and deuils-toke^s which were risen in his soul. Among
other ingredients of the bodily kings medicine: the second herb, is
hearb-geace, very excellent against the bodily infectio^. Instead of this,
there is another thing which we may call Gods grace, or Christ's grace, which is
excellent to cure the infection of the soul. This necessary Herb we see is
here in the spiritual Kings medicine; for DAVID sueth for the grace of God,
to cure his evil. He had lost the health of the soul, yea, it was like dead.
For sin is, first the death of our selves; Secondly, the death of Christ.
Thirdly, on the other side, it is the life of death: And fourthly, the life of
the Devil. And therefore DAVID prays his Physician, to restore unto him both
health and life. Further, as the king had this desire, so he had also a
steadfast hope, faith and confidence in the mercy of the Lord; he did not
presume or despair, but bele^ued that his health should be restored, and that
his Physician was able to do it. This his faith he expresses in this his
petition, by two things: First, by the name which he gives to his Physician,
David's faith and hope of mercy.
calling him (Lord) Secondly, by the name which he gives to himself being the
patient, calling himself (his servant) of thy servant. Imitate the king, in
the taking in of this medicine of repentance. Having obtained the knowledge of
thy disease; have a desire of spiritual life and health: And secondly, let thy
desire be mingled with DAVID'S hope and steadfast confidence in the mercies of
God. First, desire this health, and the curing of this sore above all other
things: desire not this life, as much as the spiritual life: for alas, this
life, as AUGUSTINE speaks, is a continual weakness, which follows us to our
death. The heathen man, SOCRATES could say, he lives not; who minds nothing
but this life: for is this a life, where the house is but claye? the breath a
vapor or smoke, the body a body of death, our garment corruption? As the womb
of the earth does breed us, so the womb of the earth must again receive us.
There is a threefolde life: the life of the body, the life of the soul, and
the life of glory. If we will obtain the last, we must seek to get the
second, for as concerning the life of the body, think not says Augustine,
that in this life thou have properly health: immortality shall be our true
and perpect health. If we escape the Plague of the body, and retain the
corporal life, and that our souls in the mean time want this life and health
of the spirit, alas we may esteem our selves but Dead. The Grecian Ladies,
count their age and the beginning of their life, from the time of their
Marryage, not from the day of their Birth: and if they be demanded how old
they be, they begin to reckon from their Marriage, for then only, say they
we begin to live: Even so, we may esteem the beginning of our life (not
from the day of our birth and corporal life) for it is but a shadow which
passes and perishes, but from the day, that we (as spiritual Virgins) have
been Married with Christ Jesus, and by the virtue thereof, have begun to live
this spiritual life. Sin is an unsupportable burden: who would not therefore
with DAVID pray; Lord take it away? Blessed are they whose sins are bound up in
a bundle, and drawn into a narrow room. Secondly, let thy desire be mingled
with faith, and a steadfast persuasion, that thy sore shall be healed. Let the
persuasion of the gratiousnes and kindness of the Lord enter into your heart: for
a man without this hope is without his best advocate, the God of DAVID is yet
the Lord, and thou which art infected with the infection of DAVID, art his
servant. This medicine will heal thy malady: throw not your blood in the
air with IVLIAN: spill it not upon the ground with SAVL: sacrifice it not upon
a Ladder with IVDAS: the Lord does open heaven, and you shut it not, he nailed
the writings upon the Cross, and you renew them not.

He that has not this hope he denies three things says AUGUSTINE, the
truth, the mercy, and the power of the Lord. The knowledge of sin is
needful, but not sufficient, for we need a double eye, one eye in our
selves and in our sin, the other on Christ and his merits. DAVID has had
this double eye, and being conducted by mercy and faith, he leaped out from
the hot-house of desperation. As we need a double eye, so we need a double
virtue; fear and love: love to look upon Gods mercy, fear to look upon his
justice, the first, to stay us from desperation, the second from presumption.
These two support our faith as the two Lions supported SALOMONS Throne. As we
need these two virtues, so let us take heed from these two extremities, our
hope is placed betwixt these two. As in a balance, if there be any ods in the
scales, we take out that which is the heavier, and put in that which is the
lighter, till there be egalitie: Even so we must way ourselves, that we be
not too heavy for our sins, despayring, nor too light for Christ's mercy
presuming: these two are Serpents which infect the souls of many, tread upon
the heads of both. The Surgion does promise help to thy sore, and shalst thou
the patient thrust thy nails into it, and answer him nay, but it shall not
be healed? let us therefore as Christian Soldiers keep this helmet and this
buckler, and then although we should dye, yet shall we live. It is storied of
EPAMINONDAS who being stricken through with a Spear, and his blood saying him,
asked if his Target were safe, and whether the enemy were put to the flight?
and understanding all to be answerable to his hearrs desire; said, my fellows
in arms, it is not an end of my life that is now come, but a better
beginning. Even so although we be stricken with the Plague, and that our life
now fails us, this is no great loss, if the Target of our faith be safe,
for not an end of our life is come, but a better beginning, namelye of the
life of glory. o ye faintyng and declining consciences! set the Pillars of
hope and faith under you, sail not upon the dangerous rock of desperation,
let the breath and wind of faith and hope stop that wretched course, cut the
throat of desperation, which has cut the throat of many. IVDAS (says JEROME)
offended more in dispayring, The reasons why we ought to mingle in this
medicin this confidence.
the^ in betraying. If now you are desirous to know the causes, for which we
ought to mingle in this kings medicine, this confidence and Christ's grace: they
are three in number. The first is, the counsel of the spiritual Physicians:
Christ Jesus prescribes it, Repent and believe. take away the trespass of thy
servant. This desire is health it self; thus is it not in the diseases of the
body: thy desire cannot procure thee thy health. If ^hen we have taken in the
kings medicine of the former year, because we were d^sirous of life: Let us
not from hence-foorth, forget this ingred^ent of this spiritual kings
me^ici^e, for the life and health of the spirit. And so much for the desire it
self.

Th K^^gs Phi^^tion.
Th^re follows the Phisitio^, of whom he desires this health. (Lord) This is
the Kings Physician, who heals all our infirmities, as the king himself
does speak of him. Psalm. 103.3. In this Physician, all needeful qualities are
found, and there is nothing wanting in him which serves for our healing.
First, His qualities
if ye are desirous to have a wise and a skillful Physician, Ps. 103.14. and
the greatness of our disease, and also the way to cure it. Some Physicians are
unskillful in their profession, such as PLINY speaks of: Experimenta per
mortes agunt; they kill men to get experience. Secondly, if ye desire to Es. 43.
his name does prove his power: and although our sins were as crimson, he
is able to make them white as Snow. Es. 1.18. This power is wanting in the
bodily Physician: for it is only this Physician, who must bless the means.
Fourthly, if you lack willingness, as a father has compassion in his children,
so has the Lord compassion on us. Ps. 103. Willingness, is often wanting in
the bodily Ierem. 3.22. Return and I will Psa. 34.18. The consideration of
these six qualities, ought to move us to use no other Physician, then this
Lord: As long as we are in this infectious world, we shall need him; for
we cannot our selves take away our trespasses: As RACHELS cattle could not
drink of the waters of the Brook, Genesis 27. before JACOB had rolled away the
stone that covered it: even so we cannot drink in this Kings medicine, and of
the waters of repentance, unless this Physician, who is the God of JACOB,
does himself remove the stony hardness of our hearts. There has been a
disease in this Land, called the Queens evil, the which she was able to
cure: But as for the Kings evil, nobody can cure it, but the King of heaven,
who is this Physician. Let us make therefore much of this Physician. It is
reported that SOCRATES never needeed a physician in his life time; but as for
us, we shall need this Physician continually, and therefore as we honor the
bodily Physician, so let us give to this Physician the honor which is due to
him. If the weak consciences object their unworthiness, and therefore dare not
presume to go unto this Physician: Let them not fear, this Lord is also the
Lord Jesus, who bids us to come to him Mat. 11. Come unto me, all ye that
are weary and laden, and I will case you: His blood will purge our consciences
from dead works. Heb. 9.14. He is a Physician for every diseased soul; the
plaster and very purgation it self. For Christ's sake, the son of this Lord,
we shall be heard. The story of THEMISTOCLES is not unfitly applied, who having
offended PHILIP king of Macedon, takes up his young son ALEXANDER in his
arms, and so comes to ask mercy; if not for his own sake, yet for his
sons sake whom he did present unto him: Even so, we that have offended the
King of heaven, we crave pardon for our sins; not in the confidence of our
own worthiness, but for the name of Christ Jesus the Kings son: He is that
adoriferous Hysope in the fifty one Psalm. Purge me o Lord with Hysope.
AUGUSTINE says, that Hysope has force to purge the inward parts: Even so,
this spiritual Hysope, the heart and the soul of man; his blood, as SAVARANOIA
speaks is as a precious balsame in our wounds: Unto whom sweet BERNARD
consents: I do acknowledge the greatness of my danger, but the son of God is
slain, that he might cure and heal my wounds, by the gretious balsame of his
blood.

A Physician said to CONSTANTINE the Emperor, that there was no means to
cure his leprosy; but by bathing of himself in the blood of a child: to whom
he answered, I would rather always be sick, then to get my health by such a
remedy. As for us, beloved, we need not use such an answer; a child is
borne unto us, Es. 9. In whose blood we may wash the leprosy and plague of our
sin. For by his stripes (says the Prophet) we are healed, Es. 51.5. In which
few words is described, the sick-mans cure in four things: The Phsition
curing the sick patient; the Physic curing; the operation of the Physic.
Before I end this point, Many not contented with king David's Physician.
let me let before your eyes a company of bewitched Idolaters, who err both
in the medicine, and the Physician. The Iusticiaries run to their works; The
Votaries to their vows: the superstitious, to the Pope, and to Saint
SEBASTION, using not the Prayer of DAVID, Lord take away the trespass of thy
servant, but, Sancte SVDARI, ora pro nobis, and sudarium Christi liberet nos a
peste and morte tristi. O holy NAPKIN, pray for us, and deliver us from the
Pestilence, and evil death. But let the Pope promise health by his pardons,
Bulls and indulgences, they are but even a potion of rank poison, prepared by
the Devil his Apothecary.

This is a counterfaite physic which cannot purge: This Physician has
deceived his Patients, and has wrought no more cure on the souls of men, then
ELISHA his staff did recover the SVNAMITES child when GEHEZI laid it upon
the face thereof. 2. Reg- 4-3- The Popes patients are sick still, for all the
Popes drugges, and still will be, as the SVNAMITES child was dead till ELISHA
came.

I see another sort, who wander up and down, The pilgrim.
and run far and wide to seek Physicians, the one to Spain, the other to
Italy, the third to Jerusalem. Alas, why go ye not to DAVID'S Physician who is
near, and whom ye may have at all times? As the trauailer that has been
round about the world, is not therefore the nearer heaven; even so, when ye
shall have compassed all the world, ye shall not be the nearer to Christ the
true Physician. As the Dove then found no rest, till she returned to the Arc,
even so you shall find no rest for your distressed consciences till you return
to Christ Jesus. As for us, with the lame and the halte in the Gospel, we will
cry to Christ alone, O IESV the son of DAVID have mercy upon us. Luke 17.13.
And thus much for king DAVID'S Physician.

The third ingredient, which is the herb of patience.
the herb of patience. 2. Sam. 24.14 Let us fall into the hands of the Lord.
DAVID hearing the will of the Lord by the Prophet GAD, that the Lord would send
a Pestilence in Israel, he murmureth and grudgeth not, but received patiently
the hand of God. First, he does not allege or produce any thing, in regard
of his sin, to excuse and extenuate the same; Secondly, in regard of the
punishment propounded, to aggrauate it: but possessing his soul in patience,
he breaks forth into these words; Let us fall into the hands of God. Imitate
and follow the king in the taking in of the kings medicine, if the Lord visit
thee with the rod of David, or with any other calamity. The third herb of the
kings medicine for the body, are Bramble leaves. In stead of these, take the
herb of patience, so called in every man's mouth: for as the common proverb
is, Patience is a good herb, but it grows not in every man's garden, As for
the bramble, leave him out, Three reasons to urge the use of it.
for he exalted himself above the other trees. Iud. 9.15. Three things ought
to Luke 21.19. Possess your souls with patience. DAVID the King Psalm 37.7.
Wait patiently upon the Lord. Secondly, The effects of it.
the godly troop of Martyrs Pet. 5.6. Patience, is alumna dei, the daughter
of GOD, says TERTVLLIAN: for want of which, many are like birds in lime or
snares, which the more they strive to escape, the more they are limed and
snared. As the herbs then of the bodily kings medicine, are used both before
infection and after in fection: eue^ so the herb of patience is good both for
the unvisited to prevent, and for the visited Prou. 16.32. Fifthly, it will
heal, and make us perfect in Christ Jesus. Iam. 1.4. It moves the Lord to
pity and Iam. 5.11. Sixthly, it is good cheap, it will not cost gold or
silver, only pray for it, an universal remedy, for all manner of men, for
all diseases, and at all times, not only for the time of Plague, but for the
time of famine, war and poverty. PLINY says, that the earth Para cures al
manner of wounds; this property may better be attributed to Christian patience.
If the patient reply, that the herb of patience is not like unto the herbs
of the bodily kings medicine, for they are to be found in every man's Garden,
and so is not this; I can give him no other answer but this, Let him pray for
it, and he shall obtain it. As for impatience, seeing that it is borne of the
Devil, as TERTVLLIAN speaks, to him let us leave this plant which the hand
of the Lord never planted, and to his male-contented Imps, who never learned
how the linkes of that heavenly chain are fastened one to another, Romans 5
that tribulation brings patience, patience experience, experience hope. They
break the chain at the first link. Let us Christians hang upon the chain,
and clime to heaven by it, through the merits of Christ's death and passion,
whereof the last link consists. Let us not ill entreat the Lords Ambassadors.
DAVID took it not well when the AMONITES ill entreated his Ambassadors:
afflictions are Gods Ambassadors; to repine or grudge against them, is to
entreat them ill. I end with the words of AUGUSTINE; Let us not regard so
much what part we have in the whippe, but what place in the Testament. And
thus much for the three parts and ingredients of the Kings Medicine.

The third part, containing the Patients behavior, and the manner how David
took in this medicine.
KING DAVID'S behavior is set down in three things, whereof of the first is,
that he discovered and laid open his sore unto his Physician, with an humble
confession. 2. Sam. 24.10. I have sinned exceedingly, and I have done very
foolishly. In which discovery, I discover three things; First, the patient of
the person discovering, (DAVID the King) noted in this word (I). Secondly, his
sore or discase, noted in two words ( sinned and foolishly). Thirdly, the
Physician to whom he does discover it (unto the Lord.)

The patient discovering.
As for the patient, it is DAVID, who confesses that he was infected, he
makes an immediate confession, and casts forth the impostumated matter of a
dissembling conscience, which being concealed, had been present death. And
although a king, yet he forgets his glory, sets affection aside,
writes, as it were, his fault in his browe, and points with his finger at
his transgression. Imitate the Kings behavior in thy spiritual disease, o
sinful son of ADAM. Cover it not with some defense as ADAM his nakedness,
strangle it not within thy bones in a sullen and melancholic passion. Two
things hinder sometimes the diseased to discover their disease, fear and
shame. Let not these be impediments. Be not ashamed to confess thy sins.
Eccl. 4.26. Follow not the infected with the corporal plague, who sometimes
plucketh down the bill or defaceth the red cross of his door, either for
shame or temporal profit. Secondly, fear not; it is a sign and argument of
life: and as the first argument of life which the widows son of Naim gave
was this, he began to speak; so in this spiritual resuscitation from the
death of the soul, the first token of our recovery is, that we begin to speak
with DAVID, I have sinned exceedingly. If thou replyest, this is also the voice
of CAIN, of the MOABITE, Egyptian and Elamite: the answer is, Confession is
oris et cordis of the mouth and of the heart: the first was only in the
Edomite, let both be in the Christian.

Six reasons urging confession.
Let me according to the manner of the bodily Physician, show unto you the
reasons which ought to persuade you to this discovery of your Eccl. 4-24. and
of the rest, whose prescriptions read in the book of Psalm. 32.5.
EZRA, Pro. 28.13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that
confesses them shall have mercy. O how available, says AMBROSE, are three
syllables? peccaui is but three syllables, but the flame of an hearty sacrifice
ascends therein into heaven, and fetches afflictions, does, as it were, put
us upon the torture, that we seeing our members either in regard of our own
persons, or of our children and friends, as it were stretched out by the
greatness of the pains, might be enforced to cry peccaui: lord I have done
foolishly. Frustrate not therefore the purpose of the Physician. Sixthly, the
readiness and willingness of God king David's Physician to heal our souls if
we discover them, ought to persuade us. 1. Ioh. 1-9. If we acknowledge our
sins, he is faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Being thus instructed and guided by these six reasons,
follow the prescription of the bodily physicians for the healing of thy
spiritual sore: as they counsel in the time of the infection, to empty in
the morning the body of all superfluities and excrements, and to take heed the
body be not costiue at any time: even so empty thy self daily, by a confession
of thy sins, of thy superfluities and filthy excrements, take heed thy soul
be not costiue at any time by keeping in of thy sins.

There are 3. sorts of bad patients 3. Sorts of bad patients.
which are infected with the plague of the soul, whose behavior follow not.
The first translate their Adam Genesis 2-12. It was indeed a woman of his own
choosing, even the concupiscence of his heart. O how many are strangers unto
themselves, Some translate it on others.
covering their filthiness with the fig leaves of their own devises,
showing thereby from what house they come. This translation of faults was a
lesson learned in Paradyse when the first rudiments and catechism of rebellion
Some hide and deny it.
being infected with the contagion of Cain Genesis 4-9. buinding them with
cursing, and will never yield the victory thereunto, till as the sun from
out the clouds, so truth has made her a way by maine force from out their
dissimulations. Follow them not, knock at the breast of your consciences,
break up those iron and heavy gates which bar up your sins. Saul. 1. Some
excuse and extenuate
Sam. 13. and 1. Sam. 15. some coloring it with pretense, some with good
intention, I meant it well, some with the happy event, it succeeeded well.
These 3. sorts are like to some which are infected with the plague of the
body; some, as it is known by experience, have denied their disease, others to
keep it secret have colored it with some other disease, yea some have plucked
down the bills from their doors and defaced the red cross, that their
houses might not be known for infected: even so, do many which are infected
with the plague of the soul. Happy is therefore that conscience, to conclude
with the saying of BERNARD, Wherein truth and mercy meet together; The truth
of him that confesses, and the mercy of him that pardons. And thus much for
the person discovering.

In the second place, 2. The nature of his disease.
having discovered that he was infected, now he disciphereth his disease, and
describes the nature of it, giving unto it two names, First, the name of
sin, 2. of foolishness. I have sinned and done foolishlie. As for the first,
as the physicians, in one word, do often render a whole definition of a
disease; So the Holy Ghost 1. John. 3.4. in one word expresses the nature of
sin, (...) Sin is the breach of the law.

And so DAVID, as a good physician, gives unto his disease, her proper and
individual name, cloaking it not with the name of virtue. Imitate the King,
and give unto the child, as the proverb is, the right name. Further he
expresses the right nature of the plague of the soul, calling it
foolishness. The nature of some diseases is such, The unmasked plague.
that as the physicians affirm, and experience teaches, they make the
diseased mad and phrenticke: this is the nature of the spiritual contagion,
it is a spiritual frenzy and madness; and the sinners infected therewith,
what are they but fools, phrenticks and mad men? That this is the nature of
sin, the plague of the soul, Three arguments proouing the nature of sin.
of the blessed trinity, who attributes this name to the covetous Luc. 12. to
the Atheist Ps. 14.1. to the careless wise man Ierem 8-8-9-Es. 56-10-to the
stifnecked Deuteronomy. 32. Ps. 38.5. to the ignorant Tit. 3. Wisdom, who is able to
judge of fools, gives this name Pro-1. O ye foolish, how long actions. What
are Cicero a heathen does witness, but the actions of fools and mad men? Of
him that casts himself with a set purpose into the fire or water what do we
judge, but that he is either a fool or a mad man? What does the obstinate
sinner else, but cast himself into the fire? This is then the nature of sin,
the plague of the soul, by the judgment of the best physicians who could not
err.

Touching the nature of this disease, The judgment of bad physicians touching
sin.
there is another judgment and determination, the judgment of bad physicians,
of the devil, the flesh, and the worldling. The devil is crafty in minsing
sin, the flesh and the worldling disguise them under the habit of virtues,
cloaking them with that honorable name. Pride is, by the judgment of this
college, cleanliness and handsomeness. The painting of faces, frizling of
hair, comely ornaments. Malice, envy, and revenge, manhood. Gluttony and
rioting, good fellowshippe. Fornication, a trick of youth. Briberie, the
taking of their fees and their duty, Simonie, gratitude and thankfulness.
Drunkenness, merrinesse. Covetousness, parsimonie and good husbandry.
Prodigality, liberality. Oppression, justice. The dingthrift a great
housekeeper. The worldling, a wise man and a good politician. The good
preacher, a railer, the dumbdogge a good fellow. The swaggering swearer, a fine
gentleman. The zealous man a precisian. Thus we see that sins, having gotten a
liuerie of their master the devil and stolen the cloak of virtue, do iet it,
and brave it up and down, like fiddlers and players, under noble men's coats:
which, when their coats are taken away, are but rogues by statute: and so
sins when their colored cloakes ate taken away, are most foul and ougly
diuelles by the word of God. The three aforesaid physicians, are like unto
some of those which are appointed in the time of the plague to judge whither it
be the sickness or no, after the departure of the infected; some being
corrupted by brybes and money, do often judge, that it is not the plague, and
that there appear no signs, cloaking it with some other disease: even so the
worldlings corrupted and blinded by the Devil and the flesh, do judge of the
plague of the soul. But as there is a punishment ordained by the magistrate
for those corrupted judges, even so there is a punishment appointed by the
magistrate of heaven, Prou. 28.13.
for them that seek patronage and defense for their sins, that they might as
LACTANTIVS says, seem to sin honestly. O ye foolish sons of men, your
eyes are blinded with partiality, yet the eye lids of the Lord shall try you,
his righteous and flaming countenance shall soundly examine your actions,
uncover the faces of your iniquities, and call them by their proper names.
ALCAEVS took a mole in the body, for a grace, yet was it a blemish: even so
although ye esteem your sins ornaments of gentilitie, yet are they but
blemishes both of the body and soul. Think nor that these fig leaves shall
keep gods judgments from you. But as for you o ye righteous souls, despise
the judgment of the scorning Michols of this age, and with DAVID and MARY be
more zealous: for you have chosen the better part, which shall not be taken
away from you, And thus much for the nature of his sore.

There follows the Surgion or physician to whom he discovered his sore 3.
The physician to whom David discovers his sore.
(unto the lord) not unto his friend, or to the priest, but unto the best
physician both in heaven and earth. Imitate the King, and use for this purpose,
no other Surgion then King DAVID'S. The sons of men if they be of any
ability, in their corporal diseases, are desirous to have the kings Surgion
and physician, because they persuade themselves of their wisdom and
experience, and yet they may err; to whom then shall we discover our
spiritual sores but unto the lord the kings physician who can not err, and
whom we may have at all times? The superstitious Papists, bankrupte of all
sense, are not contented with the Kings surgion, they must have unskillful
surgions who have no power to heal their own sores, nor the sores of others.
Behold how the silly people run to lay open their sores unto the priests,
and substitutes appointed by that proud prelate of the seven hilled city
with his purple cardinals and horned bishops. As the Paracelsian physic
sometimes kills the body: even so this Antichristian medicine the soul. But
I purpose not to stir the filthy dunghill of the auricular confession. The
more we stir a dunghill, the more it stinketh, and therefore I will not
infect your senses therewith. But as for you o proud Romanistes, great and
intolerable is your arrogancy to hear the confessions of other men's sins.
Are you Christians? The very Heathens do detest this arrogancy. Lysander
could not abide it, for having asked counsel in Samothracia of the oracle, and
being willed by the Priest and keeper thereof to tell the greatest sin that
ever he committed, asked, whether he should do it at his bidding, or at the
commandment of the gods: when it was told him, it was the will of the gods,
he willed the priest to stand apart and said, he would tell it the gods.
Wherefore let that be abandoned far from the school of Christ, which the
very Heathen by reason did not admit.

2. The second thing wherein the kings behavior is set down.
The second thing, whereby the patients behavior in this his disease is
declared, is his bodily prostrating of himself with the elders of Israel,
upon their faces.

Behold, DAVID forgets not his first foundation, that as he was bred of the
earth, so to earth he must return. They fall not, to lie on a heap of violets
and roses as the Libarites were wont to do, or upon a couch beautified and
decked with the tapistry of Egypt, but upon the earth, and they which before
were kings of the earth, are now as it were worms of the earth, and the
dunghils are their thrones. 1. The use, first in regard of Princes.
Imitate and follow the King and the elders of Israel, both Princes and
subjects. Princes be first and foremost in humility and in the service of
God. It is not the sword, the scepter and the robe, which makes magistrates:
be not lawless Caracalla, to give laws, and to receive none. Be a rule both
to others and to your selves. Let not the golden cup of honor make you drunk
and drive you from all sense of your earthlinesse and mortality, but with
DAVID and the Elders prostrate your selves before the throne of God. Subjects,
think not, that it becomes only the chariots, 2. In regard of subjects.
and chayres of estate to stoop before him, who rides upon the Cherubins, but
that also, it becomes us all, from the highest to the lowest, to fall down
and kneel before the lord our maker. Let us therefore all be low before the
footestoole of his excellency, and with all submission, both of body and
spirit, acknowledge his hand and power over us. Let us abate our proud
spirits, cast down our Lordelie looks, cover our faces for the shame of our
sins, and present our selves unto him in all those humble behauioures, which
the consideration of his majesty and our misery can possibly frame,
degrading and discountenauncing our selves in the eyes of our God. The Kings
medicine for the body, prescribes against the corporal infection,
Elder-leaues: in stead of them, in this spiritual Kings medicine against the
spiritual infection, take the examples of Elders, following the Elders of
Israel. By this prostrating of themselves, they have shown three things;
First, their sorrow for their sins. Secondly, the inward humility of
their hearts. Thirdly, their wisdom. The first does produce the second,
for as a bladder if it bee-prickt, all the wind and emptiness voideth out of
it: 1. Sorrow.
even so our hearts which are puffed up with the wind of pride and ambition,
if they be once pricked with sorrow for their sins, the wind of pride
emptieth it self, and humility of heart succeeds. Which humility of heart
is a necessary ingredient in this Kings medicine. To this spiritual
prostrating of our souls, 2. Humility.
four arguments must persuade us, first the counsel of the spiritual
physicians 1. Pet. 5-5. James. 4.7-10. 2. Chron. 7.14. Secondly, experience of
the success of this physic. Thirdly, the consideration of Gods person and
of our own: we are but creatures taken from the dust, he the creator, whose
majesty the Angels adore, the devils fear, the heavens obey. We but earth,
earth by creation, earth by continuance, earth by resolution, thou come
earth, says one, thou remainest earth, thou returnest earth, shall not we
then prostrate our selves before that Lord: we, for whose sakes the prince of
glory has prostrated himself upon his face to cure the plague of our souls?
Fourthlie, the necessity of it; as long as the poison of pride remains, thy
wound cannot be healed. As certain serpents then, before they drink, spew
out all their poison; even so before we can drink in the spiritual kings
medicine, we must spewe out and cast forth the poison of pride and ambition.
Thirdly, DAVID by this prostrating, has shown his wisdom, 3. Wisdom.
and that in the choice of the medicine, for he chooses a fit plaster and
medicine for his wou^d: his sore was pride, the plaster which he chose, was
humility, which was a contrary, whereby David showed himself a good physician
and practicioner: he had exalted himself, and therefore by a contrary he
seeks to heal his sore, for he abaseth and prostrateth himself. It is a
maxim approved by the bodily physicians. Contraria contrarijs curantur,
Contraries are helped by their contraries, this is a common and true principle,
the physicians do use to take natural remedies from the contrary. If the
sickness is caused by reason of too much cold and moisture, the remedy must
be gathered naturally from the contrary, heat and drouthe: if nature wax
to cold, it must be helped with heat, if it be too hot, it must be cooled,
if it be too moist it must be dried, if too dry, it must be moystened. As
this is a maxim in physic, so it holds in divinity, Gal. de temp.
for the king has used this order. Follow herein the king, and the order of
this medicine, be such a practicioner as David in the curing of thy spiritual
sores. Cure contraries by contraries, If thou art infected with pride, cure it
with humility, if with impatience, heal it by patience, heal
distrustfulnesse with faith, covetousness with liberality, drunkenness with
sobriety, uncleanness with chastity, unmercifulness with mercy. If thy
nature be too cold in love, help it with the heat of love, if too hot in
anger, passions, and concupiscence, cool it with meekness. If too dry in
good works, moysten it with the dew of the spirit. If thy pride, security,
wantonness and other more have caused a corporal plague, heal it by the
contraries. The counsel of Chrysostom is, alluding to the policy of the
wise men in returning into their country another way, Have thou come says
he by the way of adultery? Go back by the way of chastity. Came thou by
the way of covetousness? Go back by the way of mercy. But if thou return
the same way thou came, thou art still under the kingdom of Herod. There
are two motives to move us to follow this wisdom and method 2. motives to
persuade us to follow this method.
of David. First, the Zacheus had been infected with unmercifulness,
couetousenesse and extortion, and therefore he seeks to remove them by a
contrary, namely liberality Luke 19. Secondly the which implies as much as
to become wise, teaches the same order of curing, foolishness by wisdom.

The 3. thing wherein is declared the patientes behauioure.
is the humble clothing of himself in sackcloth 1. Chron. 21-16. with the
Elders of Israel. This clothing implies two things, a putting off, and a
putting on. A putting off of the royal garment, and kingly ornaments, and a
putting on of a vesture, made not for oftentation but for humiliation, the
indument of the penitente and of the sorrowful. A King forgets the wardrobe
of the kingdom, and goes to the beggars press, sackcloath is as it were a
diadem to his head, he to whom the knee was bowed, the head uncovered, the
body prostrated, puts away his crown, his scepter, and his Majesty. The
Elders wind their bodies in sack, and are as corpses made ready for the
burial, and fitter to lie in the ground, then to live and breathe upon the
face of the earth. This is then the habit and liuerie wherein they go unto
the Lord. This humble clothing, with the outward prostrating, are not
godliness and repentance it self, but gestures and behauioures setting it
forth, arguments and outward professions of their inward contrition,
outward signs of an inward cause from whence they proceed, adminicles and
helps to their effectual prayers which they powered forth. Fasting and
sackecloath says JEROME, are the armoure of repentance, she comes not to
God with a full belly, nor in gorgious attire of silver, gold or needle work,
but with the thinnest face, and coursest apparel that she can provide.
Follow the king and the Elders in the taking in of this kings medicine of
repentance, The use
both Princes and Subjects. Princes, in regard of princes.
in a public calamity, esteem the Robes of your Majesty for a time, as
burdens to your backs with DAVID, as unseemly to be worn as ever the
botche or scabbe was to the Egyptians. Let your counterfeyted ornaments be
ashamed at his presence, who is clothed with glory and honor. Psalm. 104.1.
Arise, prostrate your selves, do obeisance to the Lord of Lords, whose throne
is the heavens, and all the thrones of the earth but his footestooles.
Subjects, this belongs Of subjects.
If we will take in this present year, the Kings medicine for the soul, there
are robes and indumentes which we must put off, and others which we must put
on. The Christians putting off, and putting on, fit for this new year.
The robes which we must put off; are diverse: first, the old man, cast off
says the Ap. Ephesians. 4.23 the old man, which is corrupt through the deceivable
lusts. The second indument, is lying. Mercha^ts, put away this robe, and as
the Ap. exhorts, Cast off lying, and speak every man truth unto his Zeph.
4-25. The third sort of indumentes, Garments to put off.
which with the old year we must put off to take in this medicine, are
according to the counsel of the Apostle, Col. 3.8. put ye away, wrath,
anger, cursed speaking, and hate, for as love is the liuerie of a christian as
Tertullian terms it, so hate and envy is the badge and liuerie of Satan,
an ornament of Pet. 2-1. Lay aside all guile and facion not your selves like
unto this world. Romans 12-2. Wives (it is the Apostles precepte 1. Pet. 3.3.)
be subject to your husbands, and let not your apparelling be outward, as
with broyded hair, and gold put about, or in putting on of apparel. Sick
men, which are to take in medicines for their bodily health, and which are cast
down upon their beds, take no care for the adorning and attyring of their
bodies, neither do take pride in their apparel, but cloathe themselves as
patientes and sick men: even so, seeing we are infected and sick of the
plague of sin, and that we are to take in this medicine for to recover our
spiritual health, shall we busy our selves to adorn and trim up these
mortal bodies, and take delight in these outward ornaments? Alas, sin and
shame were the first tailors that shaped ADAMS garments, and the garments on
our backs, they are signs that we are sick with the plague of the soul. For
as the bill and red cross upon the door, is a token, that that house is
infected with the Plague: even so the garments upon our backs, are as a bill
and red cross, showing that the houses of our hearts, with our whole body,
are infected with the plague of sin. Should he not be accounted foolish, who
should glory himself of the red cross upon his door? It is maintained by
the vulgar experience, that the bodily plague does, or can lie and stick in
the apparel; and by this means, that others are infected: whether this be
true or no I can not affirm. But this is certain, that there is a plague
which lies and sticks in the apparel, the plague of strange fashions, of
curiosity, vanity and pride, which plague infecteth others. It is also
maintained, that the plague can be brought out of other contries in the
apparel, wares and merchandises: whether this also be true, I will not
dispute: but this we may affirm, that the plague of pride, curiosity,
vanity, and strange fashions is brought out of other countries into England;
as out of Italy, Spain, and France, and so infecteth us Englishmen. If we
shun the garment which is suspected of bodily infection, shall not we fly
from the induements which are stained with the spiritual contagion? Let us not
then give countenance by them unto our beggary: alas what is their nature, they
are but the painting of a grave, or whiting of a rotten wall, the cover and
case to a lump of mortal flesh, they make us honorable in the sight of men,
but work no reverence or estimation before the Lord of Hosts. And yet, good
God, how are we degenerated from our father ADAM! When God made apparel for
man, he made it but of the skins of beasts, but now this fashion is quite
out of fashion, we rob all the creatures of the world to adorn us, by taking
from some their wool, from some their skins, from others their fur, and from
some their very excrements; and rather then we will be unfurnished of any thing,
we will not stick to diue into the very bottom of the sea for precious
stones. O how many are there of those fools of which Bias speaks, He that
wastes much to follow every fashion, may be called the Mercers friend, the
Tailors fool, and his own foe. Many do err in the taking in of this Kings
medicine, and bring other guises and shows in repentance; but as for us, there
must be in us not DAVID'S Jewish putting on, but his penitent putting off.
Lusty gallants, if ye will take in the kings medicine for this year, you
must put off your Absolons hair; painted Iesabels, you can not take it in,
with your painted faces, open breasts, monstrous verdingales, long staring
ruffes, ruffianly locks. Dainty dames, if you will use this medicine, you
must not gird your selves so straight to be fine and small, but you must girde
and pinch the loins of your minds. Royal citizens, Luke. 12.
if you will take in this royal medicine, you must put off your princely
furniture, your wanton disdainefull and superfluous sails of pride, wherein
ye esteem not warmth, but the color and die, wearing them for their price
more then necessity. They are, as AUGUSTUS the Emperor of Rome terms them,
vexillum superbiae nidusque luxuriae the banner of pride, and neast of
riotousnesse. The cause of Gods anger against us, and which has brought many
to shame and beggary, has it not been their back and their belly? Let us
therefore crush these vipers, and not suffer them any longer to live amongst
us. This excess has been one of the two daughters of the horse-leach, which
has sucked the blood of the whole land, and consumed in vain the substance
of many: and therefore let us cross it in our repentance. And as BENADAD. 1.
Reg. 20. having received an overthrow of an hundred thousand foote-men, upon
that misery wherewith he and his servants were touched, his servants said,
we have heard that the Kings of ISRAEL are merciful kings, let us put on
sackcloath and ropes about our heads, and go to the king of Israel etc: even
so o England, having received the former year an overthrow of many thousands
by the Lords Angel, and knowing that the God of Israel is a merciful God,
leave your prince-like furniture, go unto him, that you may receive mercy. To
conclude this point, whenever we see the Lord is angry, let us imitate
ABIGAIL. 1^ Sam. 25. who perceiving David to be angry, arose and went to meet
him with a present to appease his wrath, and laded her asses with two bottles
of wine, and frailes of raisons: even so let us lade our bodies and sinful
carcasses, which we have used as Asses to bear the huge burden of our sins,
with fasting, sackcloath, and mourning, which are the armor of repentance. Le^
our eyes be as two bottles of wine to carry with us; the tears whereof we
may drink to comfort us in the assurance of Gods mercy: le^ us present our
broken and contrite hearts, the which he will receive kindly at our hands, and
lay his sword down, and bid us to return in peace unto our houses. And thus
much for the Robes of the old year, which we must pu^ off. 2 The garments
for this new year, which we must put on.


There follow the robes and garments of the new year which we must put on,
to take in orderly this Kings medicine. These are also manifold new man* fit
for this new year. Put on the new man, says the Apostle, which is after God
created in righteousness and holiness. Ephesians. 4.24. And be ye changed by the
renewing of your mind. Romans 12.2. The second is charity, mercy, and
kindness. 3.12. Put on the bowels of mercy, kindness, meekness, long
suffering, forbearing and forgiving one another. Here are costly robes (rich
men) to be worn and put on, the old year being past. The third ornament is
Pet. 1.13. This is an ornament for you that look upon the wine how pleasant it
is in the glass. Prou. 23. If you will drink this medicine, you must not give
your selves to the other. The fourth is peace, and have your feet Ephe. 6.
This is your garment, you that are of ^he quarelling humor, and sow strife
among ^our brethren. The fifth ornament to put on, is ^rueth and verity.
Merchants, this is your new ^eares garment, have your loins girded about with
verity. Ephe. 6.14. The sixth garment is ^umilitie; This is your new years
garment, ^roud men, put on humbleness of mind. Col. 3.^2. it is a royal
garment. If then ye will take in ^his royal medicine, forget not David's
garment, (...) simple araiment in the eyes of the world, but ^retious in the
eyes of God. It is an universal ^mament, both for the Prince and the beggar.
It is a boldness and great arrogancy for a subject, how highsoeuer he be, to be
equal to the prince in his garments: princely garments become princes, but as
for this ornament, it is no boldness at al Ephe. 6.14 The eight, is
shamefastness and modesty; women, this is your new years garment. 1. Tim. 2,
9. Array your selves in comely apparel, with shamefastness and modesty.
holiness and righteousness; as this is every man's garment, so more
particularly it ought to be your new years garment, O trybe of Leui, o ye
Prophets of the Lord. Psalm. 132.9. Let thy Priests be clothed with
righteousness. As upon AARONS garment when he entered the Sanctuary, there
was written, Codesh Codesh, holiness, holiness: even so ye that stand in
the Lords Temple, have this holiness Math. 22. which is Faith This is an
ornament for those to put on, who the former year have irreverently approached
Christ Jesus; This is the Christians garment: Put ye^ on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Romans 13.14. This is tha^ white raiment, which covers our nakedness^ Apoc.
3.18. If we desire a precious garment one which is not heavy but light, one
in fashion, one pleasant to God, put on this Lord Jesus. As JACOB having put on
the garment of his eldest brother, received the blessing: even so, if we put
on this garment and approach unto the Lord our Physician with it, we shall
receive the blessing of our father in heaven, and the health of our souls.
These are then the garments to put on. The colors of our garment are two, red
and white; his red color it has from the blood of Christ, Reu. 7.14.
by which it is sanctified: his white color, from the splendor and
brightness of the holy Ghost, in regard of a holy life which shines before
the world Reu. 7.13. Let us then, belooued, be careful to get these
garments, if we will drink this spiritual Kings medicine. The Heathens
being invited, had for their bankets, and went to their feasts, with white
garments, which they called vestes coenatorias, which were also used among the
Jews, as PHILO writes; and they which wore them, were called Candidati: the
Lord does inuit us this year to the Kings feast, which is repentance, and that
by a joyful deliverance, as he invited us the former year by his
smart-Preacher. Ought we not then to have the white garment of integrity to
put on? The former year, men have ayred and perfumed their apparel with
diverse sents and odoriferous confections to resist the poison and infection of
the air, let us this year perfume them with the sweet sent of humility,
modesty, comeliness, to expel and resist the poison and infection of
curiosity, pride and vanity. Let us then, beloved, with these Elders, in this
life be clothed with the penetentiall garment, that in the life to come we may
put on those white robes Reu. 7.13. wherewith the Saints and Elders were
adorned: let us not seek to be as the glowormes, to shine here only beneath,
that hereafter we may shine above as the stars in the firmament. And thus
much for the garments to put on.

Before I proceed, I will show you yet one thing; The Kings medicine aganst
the bodily infection must be taken in, fasting, The spiritual Kings medicine,
is to be taken in, fasting.
as you may see in the medicine it self, prefixed before the treatise, and as
the practice of the former year does also witness: Even so this spiritual
Kings medicine of repentance against the spiritual Plague must be taken in,
fasting. There is a twofolde fast; First, a corporal and an outward; Secondly,
a spiritual and an inward. As for David and the Elders of Israel, whither
they have fasted or no, it is not here expressed; but yet it may be believed
that they have. As for you, beloved of London, first you have taken in the
Kings medicine for the body, fasting. Secondly, you have also begun to take
in this spiritual Kings medicine fasting; witness the weekly fastings of the
former year. Being now come unto the new year, see that you continue in the
inward and spiritual fast: as for the outward it is only necessary in the
time of public calamity, when either any present judgment would be removed,
or any good cause promoted: but without the inward and spiritual, this
spiritual Kings medicine cannot be taken in: use it then not for the space of
9. days together, but for the space of thy whole life. Forget not so much to
forsake ordinary food, as to imprison and shut up your bodies from the
vanities and pleasures of this life; pull down the strength and pride thereof.
The honor of a fast, to use the words of Chrysostom, is not abstinence from
meats, but auoidance of sin. Do thou fast? show me thy fasting by thy
works. If thou ask what kind of works? If thou see a poor man, take
mercy on him, if thine enemy, reconcile thy self. If thy friend deserving
praise, envy him not. If a beautiful woman, make a covenant with thine eyes.
For what avails it, says Augustine, to emty thy belly of food, and to fill
thy soul with sins, to be pale for fasting and to be blewe and pale for
hate and envy; to drink no wine, and to be drunk with the poison of anger;
to abstain from things which are lawful, and to do things which are
unlawful? Follow then, beloved, the counsel of Chrysostom and Bernard, who
both iumpe together: Let not only thy mouth and thy bowels fast, but thine
eyes, thine ears, thy feet, thy hands, and all thy bodily members. Let thy
hands fast from robbery, thy feet from bearing thee to unlawful spectacles,
thine ears from sucking in sla^derous tales, thine eyes from receiving in
wantonness. And to show you out of the mouth of God himself, what manner of
fast you ought to use this new year; Loose the bands of wickedness, Es. 58.
take off the heavy burdens, let the oppressed go free, deal thy bread to
the hungry, and cover the naked. As there has been the former year, a
general fast through the whole land, so there ought this year to be this
inward and spiritual through the whole Kingdom, from the honorable
Counselor, to him that grindeth at the Mill. This is the great general fast,
and a Lent of abstinence which we all must keep. And thus much for the
patients behavior, and also the third part of the Kings Medicine.

The fourth part, containing the time when the King took in this Medicine, and
the cause moving him thereunto.
THE time when he took it in, was; first, when he saw that he had gotten the
spiritual infection by the numbering of the people; and secondly, when he saw
the danger and effect thereof, a pestilence in Israel. The cause moving him to
take it in, was, to heal his disease and to remove the effect thereof. Ver.
8.16- The consideration of both, delivers unto us, a portrature of a wise
Physician and of a wise patient; the wisdom of God, and the wisdom of David.
The wisdom of God the Physician, Use. The wisdom of God the Physician.
does appear in the diversity of means, which he knows to use for to cure
sin and to move the sons of men to take in this spiritual Kings medicine of
repentance. This Physician had before given unto DAVID, peace, prosperity, and
victories over his enemies, and now seeing him anew infected with a dangerous
disease, he sends a general pestilence in Israel. Before, he came with his
benefits, and now with his judgments. As the expert Physician, uses first
soft and lenitiue remedies, and if they avail not, then he comes to his
sharp and biting corrosiues: even so the Lord, uses first the soft and
lenitiue remedies of his commandments, promises and benefits, and then the
biting corrosiues of his judgments. Some he heals by honey, some by gall,
some by salt, some by meal, some by sweet, some by sower. He has a
storehouse full of remedies, and the bread of judgment to breed good blood
in us. The Lord, as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, is like unto an expert
Musician, he has sundry kinds and varieties, and shows the changes of his
notes, he both pittieth and chasteneth, entreats and threateneth, and by
threatening best admonishes, by speaking roughly soonest persuades. When the
railes of the law kept not the Israelits in the pasture of the word, the Lord
appointed the hedge of thorny discipline. And even so at this present, such as
he cannot draw to come in the fold of salvation by the whistle of the word, he
compels them to come in by the dog and hook of discipline and correction.
If the blessings of Mount Garizzim do not move us, Deuteronomy. 27.
then the cursings of Mount Ebal must come upon us. If we take no pleasure in
the beauty of Mount Sion, then the thundrings and lightnings of Sinai must put
us in fear. As this shows the wisdom of God, so it declares the success of
his wisdom, The success of his wisdom.
in DAVID his patient; the Lords corosiues have wrought in his soul: for
seeing the hand of the Lord, he began to take in the medicine of repentance.
The Lords corrosiues have many virtues. The use of afflictions.
First, they make us to esteem, honor and make much of the Lord, King David's
Physician. Secondly, Manasses with chains, pull the King of Babylon from his
throne, and they will know themselves: thirdly, they make us to seek David's
Physitio^ has the former year used his corrosiues. We should have fallen into a
deadly Lethargy of sin, and therefore he has prevented it, that we might, as
the Proverb is, with the burnt child dread the fire. As Jonathan shot arrows
to give DAVID warning, even so the Lord has shot off his arrows Ps. 9. to
give us warning. The Plague, o London, has bin a writing scrole upon your
flesh, engraven in your skin to teach you obedience, as the Leprosy unto
Miryam. It has bin as I. Baptist to send you unto Christ. It has bin as a
medicine sent from heaven; the King of heavens medicine, to heal the sores of
the land and to remove the spiritual plague. Sickness, as Basil says, upon the
25. Psalm, is unto many a salutiferous medicine, and life it self. As we
pluck back or stay our horses, if either they gallop too fast, or go out of the
way: so the Lord, because we were as wild horses, has curbed our bits, and
straightened the raines of our unbridled affections. As the Lords corrasiues have
had good success in DAVID, so they have wrought in us. We had been like unto
Ioab. 2. Sa. 14.29. As Absolon sent for him the first time by his servants, but
would not come; and the second time, and yet would not come to him, and
therefore sent the third time his servants to set Ioabs fields on fire, and
then he arose and came: even so the Lord had sent at diverse times his
servants, the Prophets, to will us to come to him, but because we remained
obstinate, he sent, the former year, other servants, namely, his Angels, to
kindle our housen with the fire of pestilence, and that made us to arise, to
go unto the Lord with fasting; that made us to cry out, Lord have mercy upon
us; Christ have mercy upon us. When the waters of the flood came upon the face
of the earth, down went stately Turrets and Towers; but as the waters rose, so
the Arc rose still higher and higher; In like sort, when the waters of
afflictions arise, as the floode of the pestilence did the former year, down
goes the pride of life, the lust of the eyes, the vanities of the world; as
they did also in some sort, the last year: pray God it may continue. But the
Arc of the soul rises as these waters rise, higher and higher toward
heaven, as also they did the old year. As your afflictions then, beloved, have
been (...), so have they also been (...), both sufferings and instructions.
Interpret them aright, let them put a sensible and lively feeling into your
souls: receive them not as an horse or mule, that takes the branding of an
hot Iron, which they presently forget. Been pungeris si compungeris, says
that honey father BERNARD, It is a happy pricking of the body, that makes a
pricking in the heart. This kind of affliction, as it is reported, moved some
of the Heathens, to become Christians: for in the reign of Edward the third,
there fell a Plague in the East Indies, which lasted seven years, which moved
many of them to become Christians. How much more then, ought it to make us,
deformed Christians, to become reformed and good Christians. If then
tribulation come, receive it with thanks, keep it with patience, digest it in
hope, apply it with wisdom, bury it in meditation, and it shall end in glory and
peace.

Further, The portrature of a wise patient.
observe the wisdom of David the patient, in the taking in of this medicine:
he differreth not to take it in, but as soon as he perceived, that he had
gotten the spiritual contagio^, and that the effect thereof was spread through
the land, behold, his heart smites, he confesses, prostrateth himself. Follow
the wisdom of David, o sons of Adam; let not the opportunity slip, let both the
time and cause persuade you. As medicines for the body must be taken in, Six
motives to persuade us to this vvisdome.
in due season; even so the Kings medicine for the soul. Six motives ought to
persuade us not to differ the ^aking in of it, in due season; First the
counsel of the whole Heb. 3.13. Eccle. 12.1. Es. 55.6. Ec. 5.7.
Joel. 2.12. Eccl. 38.9. Secondly, As many days, as many lives. They who one
day carried the dead bodies to the graves, were themselves on the morrow Three
dangers.
if it be not taken in, in due season; of serpents, first an egg, 2. a
cockatrice, thirdly a serpent. To prevent this increasing take in the Kings
medicine betimes. Ancient wounds says JEROME, are not cured in haste, the
plaster must lie long upon them; even so our old festered sins can not be
done away with a days repentance. The snow ball the more it is rouled, the
greater it waxes; the more sins we commit, the more walls of brass we
build up betwixt God and us: so that at last, our cries can not have passage
unto him, nor his mercyes unto us. The longer the blow be in fetching, the
heavier will the wound be when it comes. And the deeper the arrow be drawn in
the bow the deeper it pearceth when it is let flee. Sin creeps forth like
a canker, if in time it be not medicined. As of the sickness of the body, so
of the soul there are critical days, known to God, whereby he does guess,
whether we be in likelihoode to recover health, and to harken to the wholesome
counsels of his law or not. If then the lord take his time to give us over
to our selves and the malignitie of our diseases, we may say too late as
sometime Christ, of Jerusalem, O that we had known the things that belong to
our peace, but now they are hid from us. As I will not promise, so I dare not
presume says AUSTIN, of evening repenters: to make all out of doubt, the best
course is to repent betimes. The fourth motive, are the impediments which will
hinder us to take in the Kings medicine, if we slip the opportunity, and the
first ha^sel of time. If it be differed to old age, or to sickness, two
impedimentes will be in the way, outward, and inward: First, outward
impediments, thy wife and children enuironing thee, thy friends whispering in
thine ears to make thy Will, and to remember such and such a friend; so that
repentance being differred, will be either nulla, vel ficta, vel difficilis,
either none at all, or counterfeit, or very hard. nulla seria penitentia est
nimis sera, sed raro tam sera est seria. No serious repe^ta^ce is too late: but
yet seldom, a late repentance is a serious repentance. Young men, take in
betimes the Kings medicine, spend not the strength, sap, and greenenesse of
your youth, season your green vessels with the liquor of Gods spirit, and
offer unto him the maidenheade of your youth. Old men, take it also in due
season, differ it not, to the hour of death: for if you do, you tread upon
ye, which if it be molten with a little heat of Gods anger, alas you shall
sink into the gulf of destruction. Young age trust not to old age, thou
leanest upon a brittle staff, which when it breaks, the splinters and shiuers
thereof will wound thee. Both of you, offer not the dregs of your life unto
god, least ye drink the dregs of his anger. The common saying is true,
vita breuis, ars longa, life is short, and the art of salvation requires a
long time of learning. Fiftlie, your own cap. 13.
and they will tell it you: Even the storke in the air knows her appointed
times, the turtle, the crane and the swallows observe the time of their
coming. Ierem. 8.7. If not the wisdom of man, then, let the wisdom of
beasts persuade you. And yet why should not the wisdom of men move men?
Does not the husbandman observe the time of sowing, the mariner watch his
tides, the smith strike his iron while it is hot, the merchant take ship
while the wind serves? and shall not you then that are patients take in
physic before it is too late? I will conclude the fourth part of this
discourse; As JEROME having read the life and death of HILARION who after he
had lived religiously, died mo^^ christianlie, said, well, HILARION shall be
the champion, whom I will follow: even so, having now read and heard the
repentance o^ DAVID, let us say, Well, DAVID shall be ou^ champion whom we
will follow.

The fifth part, containing the operation of the kings medicine, with King
DAVID'S sacrificing.
THe fifth and last part of thi^ discourse, 1. The operation of the kings
medicine.
brauncheth it self in two branches: the first contains the operation o^ the
kings medicine 2. Sam. 24 25. which is, the ceasing o^ the plague. The second,
the behavior of the patient, DAVID, now being healed, and having felt the
operation of this medicine; which is* his sacrificing unto the lord 1. Chron.
21.28, in these words, At that time when DAVID saw that the Lord had heard
him, then he sacrificed.

The operation of the kings medicine, shows that it is a healing medicine, he
takes it in against the plague, and behold the plague cease. This operation
has manifested it self, in two things: First, Manifested in two things.
in the curing of the plague of the soul, for DAVID'S sin has been
pardoned. Secondly, in the remoouing of the effect thereof, for the plague of
the body ceased. The operation then of this physic, commends unto us the
kings medicine. If it be taken in with all her ingredientes, and in that
manner that DAVID took it in, it has the virtue to cure a double plague, of
the soul and of the body. This does king DAVID'S physician witness,
himself, in that excellent testimony worthy to be noted 2. Chron. 7.14; If
my people among whom my name is called upon, do humble themselves, pray, seek
my presence, and ^urne from their wicked ways, then will I be merciful to
their sins, (here is the curing of ^he first plague). And I will heal their
land (here is the healing of the second plague). This medi^ine then is better,
then they which are prescri^ed in the book of nature by Galen, Hypocra^es, and
the rest: it is also better then the balm of Gilead which could not avail.
Ierem. 46.11. To persuade you to the taking in of this King^ medicine, A
commendation of the kings medicine.
not only the operation of it, bu^ diverse other arguments are able to
commend it unto you. The first argument of praise, may b^ taken from the author
1. From the author.
thereof: not mortal man, but the blessed Trinity, has first prescribed and
invented this physic, and the whole college o^ the blessed patriarchs,
prophets, Apostles hau^ taught the manner how to take it in, for us tha^ are
unexperienced. A medicin, having an exper^ and skillful author, has great
force to persuade* The second, from the persons which have used i^ 2. From the
persons which have used it.
and taken it in: not only mean men, but also honorable persons, Kings, princes
and Magistrates, patriarks and prophets, Apostles and martyrs. Medicines used
by honorable persons, are esteemed and much made of, because we persuade our
selue^ that they will spare no cost. 3. Her names.
Thirdly, the honorable names which are given unto it in the book^ of God, do
much commend it, being called glory and a joyful crown. Ec. 1.11.
honourabl^ wisdom, Ec. 1.14. and diverse others which will not specify. The
very name of the kings medicine has persuaded many the former yeer^ to use the
same above others. The ancientnes and antiquity of it, 4. Antiquity.
does minister the 4. argument o^ comme^dation: for it was ordained in paradyse
God the first preacher and physician of ou^ souls preached repentance in
paradyse, he^ showed them their sins and gave them the promise. The 5.
argument of praise, is the universality 5. Universality.
of it, it is good for all manner of persons: which universality is wanting in
the corporal medicines, some being not good for old men, some for young men,
some not good for children, some for women: but this is good for all men, and
therefore it is prescribed universally, to Princes Ierem. 13. to rich men 1.
Tim. 6. to poor men, to old men, to young men Ec. 12.1. to virgins, to married
women Ec. 1.15. to the barren, to them that are with child, to soldiers Luke.
3. for captains Acts 10. for ministers, for scholars, it is a Prophets
medicine. And behold, o physicians, here is a medicine for physicians.
Parents, use it your selves, give it in to your children, and Masters to your
servants, that the infection of this world annoy them not. 6. it is
profitable, 6. Profitable.
it will cost you nothing, yet it has excellent operatio^s: medicines which cost
little or nothing, and yet have singular virtue, are much esteemed. Many have
spent almost their whole substance in physic, for the curing of heir bodies:
this shall not need, if you use this medicine; the Doctors, to teach you the
manner to take it in, shall also cost you nothing. Poor men, here is another
Kings medicine for you, which will not waste your substance. Seventhly, 7.
Delectable.
the pleasantnes of it has no little force to add somewhat to the co^mendatio^
of it. Corporal medicines are often unpleasant, unsavory, bitter, the sick man
sometime will not take them in, for they cannot abide them: but this is
delectable, for it is nothing else but love, it is compounded of love and al
manner of virtues. What is there more delectable then to love God, and to take
our delight in his law Psalm. 1. and therewithal to adorn our selves with all
manner of virtues? Shall not that be pleasant unto us, which voideth the
filthiness of sin that makes us stinking in the sight of God? The patient
does often tremble against the time that he must take in his medicine, but
this rejoices the sinner: for the fear of the Lord Ec. 1.12 makes a merry
heart, 8. Sufficient.
and gives gladness and joy. Eightlie, the sufficiency of it may be an other
argument of praise. I do not dislike the medicines that natural physic does
prescribe, but they are not sufficient for their imperfection sake: but this is
a perfect medicine, for the fear of the lord gives peace and perfect health
Ec. 1.22. Ninthly, it is an experimented 9. Experime^ted.
medicine, the continual practice of others since the beginning of the world
does commend it. The operation of it, experience has proved. Her operations
are admirable, it cures a double plague, it gives long life Ec. 1.12.22. It
makes wise Ec. 1.15. Yea it is a remedy against a secret ill. The plague is
called by some a secret il, wherein learned physicians have professed
ignorance. And yet behold, here is a medicine appointed by God himself, which
is able to remove it. Let these 9. arguments of commendation commend unto you,
this new year, this Kings medicine and the use thereof. And thus much for the
operation of the Kings medicine.

There follows the action and behavior of the patient now being healed, 2.
King DAVID'S sacrificing.
having felt the operation of this medicine: namely his sacrificing unto the
Lord. This his sacrificing emptieth it self into these particulars, First, the
person Chron. 21.28) Sixtlie and lastly, the success v. 26). This action of
DAVID, was religious, reasonable, just, and acceptable to God. Sacrifices are
of two sorts, Jewish and Evangelical. But I purpose not to enter the large
field of sacrifices, and to number their kinds, describe their lineaments,
their antiquity, their soul, their ends. I leave the Jewish to the Jews. The
Evangelical sacrifices, are also of two sorts, the sacrifice of Christ, and
the sacrifice of a Christian. In the sacifice of Christ, observe these
particulars, according to the method of DAVID'S Christ's sacrificing.
the king of the Jews: for that did he once, when he offered up himself
Heb. 7.27. Heb. 9.26. Jerusalem. And as the altar was built in the threshing
floor of a Iebusite, even so Christ our altar has been erected Heb. 9.26.
under Pontius Pilate. David offered for the ceasing of the corporal plague;
even so the true David Christ Jesus offered for the ceasing and remoouing of
the spiritual plague. Heb. 10.12.14. by the virtue of whose sacrifice, it is
only removed. As for the sin of David, whole Israel smarted; so for the Adam
whole mankind. 8 The altar whereupon the true David offered, was David by
fire, so he has answered the sacrifice of the true David by the fire of his
love, and he has consumed our sins by the sacred fire of his mercy, and the
Angels have put up the sword in the scabberd, that is they are become our
friends. 10 As David has been touched with David has been touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, and in all things tempted in like sort, yet without
sin Heb. 4.15. Eleuenthly, as David desired the health of his soul, even so
the true David has wished for the health of our souls, and has said as
David, Lord take away the trespasses of thy servants. 12 As David humbled David
has humbled himself, and is become obedient unto death. Phil. 2.8 he has
prostrated himself upon the earth Mat. 26.13 As David desired to have the
punishment David has indeed borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows,
he has been wounded for our transgressions, broken for our iniquities, and
the chastisemente of our peace was upon him. Es. 53.45. 14 As David has prayed
for the people, even so Christ for us. John 14. 15 Lastly as David Phil. 2.6.
The difference The difference.
betwixt David and Heb. 9.14.

2. The Christians Sacrifices, which are 4. in number, to be offered unto God
this new year.
Now seeing the Lord has heard our prayers, and that we are healed, we ought
this new year to offer up Sacrifices unto the Lord as DAVID did, not the
Jewish, but the Christian Sacrifices, which are 4. in number, Repentance,
thanksgiving, mercy, and our children. These 4. must be the Mercuries or
messengers, to publish abroad through the whole land our repentance, these
must be the proclamations and audible sermons to preach the duty of our
deliverance.

Offer first, the sacrifice of repentance, 1. The Sacrifice of repentance.
called the sacrifices of righteousness Psalm. 51.19. which branch themselves
in many little branches. your selves, both body and soul Romans 12.1. I
beseech you brethren by the mercies of God that ye give up your bodies, a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. your obedience, Ec. 35.1. for
who so keeps the law brings offerings ynow, and he that holds fast the
comma^dements offreth an offering of salvation. This is better then sacrifice,
for he that offreth sacrifice, offreth the flesh of a beast, but he that
obeys offers his own will as a quick and reasonable sacrifice. Make then
the use which DAVID made of gods mercy and deliverance Ps. 105.45. keep his
statutes and observe his laws. Thirdly, your hearts, Prou. Naaman being purged
from his leprosy, returned from the waters, and would offer a present unto
ELISHA, 2. Reg. 5.15. Even so o London being purged from thy contagion, offer
up unto the Lord, both rich and poor the precious gift of your whole heart.
Christ our physician desires no other fee or reward of us then our hearts.
Fourthly, offer up an humble and contrite spirit, for the sacrifice of God, are
a Ps. 51.17. you need not then o son of ADAM says AUSTIN, to seek without
thee a beast to slaughter, you have one within thee: for a sacrifice pleasing
unto God is a contrite spirit. Let therefore the bountifulness of God lead
us to repentance Romans 2.4 and move us to vow unto his majesty the
continual sacrifice of a better life. After the sweet rain and dew of Gods
blessing received, bring forth good fruit, and not briars and brambles Heb.
6.6.7. London thou may say with DAVID Psalm. 116.1. I love the lord because
he has heard my voice and my prayers, when the snares of death compassed me:
and therefore o lord because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes
from tears, I will walk before thee in the land of the living. London, hear
the voice of Christ unto thee Ioh. 5.14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no
more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

And as the Ruler and al his household Ioh. 4.53. believed, after that Christ
had healed his daughter: even so o Rulers of London, political,
ecclesiastical, Oeconomicall, after that Christ has healed you, believe and
show your faith by your works with your whole families. Frame your affections
to love him for his goodness, to honor him for his greatness, to rejoice in
him for his mercies. God, to use the words of Lactantius, desires not the
sacrifice of a dumb beast or of death, but the sacrifice of man and life,
wherein there is no need either of garlands, or of fillets of beasts, but such
things alone as proceed from the inward man: the altar for which offerings is
the heart, whereon offer unto god righteousness, patience, faith, innocency,
chastity and abstinence. We have promised the former year in our affliction
these sacrifices, let us now perform them, and not be like unto Pharaoes
butler, promising Joseph when he was in his affliction that he would remember
him, but being freed forgot him. Gen 40. If you have not, make with the new
year new vows, vow your selves, I say not in the world a virgin, but a virgin
to Christ. Vow your selves I say not in the world a pilgrim, to go with the
papist from place to place, but a pilgrim to Christ. Vow your selves I say not
as the Friar in the world a beggar, but a beggar to Christ. And so much for the
first kind of sacrifice.

The second sort of Sacrifices, to be offered this new year, 2. Sacrifices of
mercy and liberality to the poor.
are the sacrifices of mercy and liberality, which are to be offered unto the
poor. To distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices god is pleased. Heb.
13.16. these are excellent Sacrifices Ec. 35.2. They are an odor that
smells sweet, and a sacrifice acceptable to god, Phil. 4.8. Show thereby your
love and your fidelity, to god, to Christ, to your neighbor. As Zacheus,
after that Christ had looked upon him with the eye of mercy, and that salvation
was come to his house, waxed liberal to the poor; Even so o London, after
that Christ has now looked upon thee with the eye of his mercy, and that
salvation is also come to thy house, be like unto Zacheus, and principally you
rich me^ be ready to distribute and communicate 1. Tim. 6.18. that the poor may
say of you for your well doing, as the Licaonians said of Paul and Barnabas
Act 14.12, for their heavenly speaking, the gods are come down to us in the
shape of me^: for by mercy we com^ near unto god. The necessity does urge this
kind of sacrifice, the pestilence with want of doings, has eaten and consumed
up that, which in a long time they had gathered. The former year the fat kine
have eaten up the lean, but now let the lean feed upon the fat. Genesis 41.4.
The common saying is, that after a pestilence comes a famine: surely I think
this is verified among the poorer sort. You then that are rich take somewhat
from your bellies and backs, and sacrifice it as a new years gift to your poor
brethren, and honor the lord with your riches, and with the first fruits of
your increase Pro. 3.9. The mariners cast out their corn in the tempest to save
their ship: let us to inuert the order, the tempest being past, cast out our
corn to save others. As that wife of the son of the Prophet, after the death
of her husband, entreated assistance of Elisha. 2. King. 4.1. So, many after
the death of their husbands, without doubt, do crave assistance of you. 1.
Sam. 20.7.
As Samuel then said to Saul when thou see these signs com upon thee, do
as occasion shall serve; even so I, to you beloved of London, seeing you see
these signs come upon you, fit your ability to opportunity, and do as
occasion now serves. Ask the Hearts and they will teach you, they help one
another to pass the sea or the river, and help to carry one another burden
as AUGUSTINE reports; the tempest of the plague has made many poor and
weary, let us therefore help one another through the river and sea of this
world, and as the Apostle exhorts, Bear ye one another burden Gal. 6.2. As
those of Athens, had a Temple of mercy in their city, into the which none
might enter, but they which had been merciful; and the greatest ignominy which
could be done to a citizen of Athens, was to reproach him, that yet he had not
entered that Temple, and therefore every one did strive to enter; even so,
beloved of London, erect this year, among you, a Temple of mercy; let the
poor be that Temple, enter therein by the works of mercy, esteem it the
greatest ignominy, that one should reproach to a citizen of London, that he
has not entered the Temple of mercy.

Augustus Caesar thought that day ill spent, in which he had not helped some
poor person: even so, esteem the old year ill spent, you that have not
showen works of mercy; and now begin the new year well. The Papists
sacrifice unto dead and dumb Idols, but you do sacrifice to the lively images
of God, and to those whose wonted nimblenesse of their fingers, and agilitie of
their bodies life-stealing age has taken away. And as DAVID after the death of
Saul's son, asked, if there were any left alive of the house of Saul, that I may
do him good, for Ionathans sake? When he called to mind the benefits which
Jonathan, the Kings son, had bestowed upon him, honoring him with his bow,
his love, and preserving him from the wrath of his father, he was moved to
mercy: even so, beloved of London, and you the Elders of the people, calling
to mind the mercy and love which a Kings son, Christ Jesus, has showed to
you, preserving you from the wrath of his father, and removing the noisome
Pestilence; say as DAVID did, in the beginning of this year, after the death
of so many, Is there any left alive of the poorer sort, that I may do good to
them, for Christ Jesus sake, who has delivered us? You that have already the
old year sacrificed, let not your goodness and mercy go backward, like the
shadow upon Ahaz Dyall. You that have not, let not your hearts be like to the
clay, waxing harder and harder; let them be as wax, and let them melt upon
your brethren. Let the benefit of your deliverance be as a sun to melt them.
Oh how fair a thing is mercy in the time of anguish! It is like a cloud of
rain that comes in the time of a drought Eccle. 35.19. And thus much for the
second sort of Sacrifice.

The third kind of sacrifice, to be offered this new year, is the sacrifice
of thanksgiving, 3 The sacrifice of thanksgiving.
which is to be offered unto the Lord, according to the direction of the holy
Ghost. Psalm. 50.14 Offer unto God praise, and pay thy vows unto the most high:
for he that offers praise, shall glorify me. These are the calves of our
lips. Hos. 14.3. And seeing the Lord has taken away our iniquity, and
received us graciously, Hos. 14.3, Let us therefore offer the sacrifice of
praise to God, the fruit of the lips which confess his name. Hebr. 13.15.
Let us return kindness for kindness. DAVID, Ps. 170. sets down 4. kinds
of men, which are most indebted to GOD, for deliverance from perils. One of
them, are such that are freed from a mortal sickness. London, thou art in the
compass of one of these, and therefore you the remainders, confess before the
Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons of men,
offer the sacrifices of praise, and deliver his works with rejoicing. Psalm.
107.21.22. Exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the
assembly of the Elders, Verse. 32. We have tasted the never stinting stream of
his mercies, what shall we then render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward us? Let us take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord, pay our vows unto him, even now in the presence of all his people Psalm.
116.12. The Leaper, being cleansed by Christ, returned with speed to give GOD
praise: LONDON, thou art now cleansed, and with HEZECHIAH have received health,
and therefore say with the King, Esd. 38 20, The Lord was ready to save me,
therefore we will sing my song, all the days of our life, in the house of the
lord. If the Israelits have bowed themselves and worshipped Exodus 12.27,
because the Angel had spared them, ought not the remainders in all duetifull
manner extol the glorious name of the Lord? Israel being past the red sea,
has song unto the Lord Exodus 15. an^ shall not thou, o London, having now
passed those waters which were entered even to you^ soul Psalm. 96, say with
MOSES, The Lord i^ my praise, and he is become my salvation, I will prepare
him a Tabernacle, and exalt him* O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men
Psalm. 107. Nature it self does teach thee, o London, this kind o^ sacrifice,
it has imprinted a thankful affection in brute beasts, and impressed it in
senseless creatures. One horse claweth another, as it is in the Proverb, in
token of mutual thankfulness. The earth, receiving rain from the clouds
whereby her thirst is quenched, returns vapors unto the clouds again, and
so requires the former benefit. The streaming Fountains and running rivers,
receiving water from the Sea, send their waters again into the Sea, in sign of
gratitude. The boughs and branches of trees, in springtime, sucking their sap
from the root, send it again in the fall of the leaf, into the root to
nourish it in winter season. If nature has ingraffed this affection in
senseless creatures, how much more ought reason, guided by divine knowledge,
lead thee, o London, unto the due consideration of this necessary duty.
A^as, we had not deserved to receive such a benefit and speedy deliverance:
we may then say with DAVID, Not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
name be this honor Psalm. 115. To what shall we ascribe it, but to his great
mercy? The Lord may answer unto us, as Alexander the great, unto a certain
poor man, unto whom he had given two talents, the poor man astonished with
the greatness of the gift, using these words; Most princely Sir, I am not worthy
to receive so much: to whom Alexander replied; I do not respect, good man,
what thou art meet to receive, but what beseemes me, so great a Potentate,
for to give: even so, God has not regarded what we, most unworthy creatures,
were worthy to receive, but what did become his mercy to bestow and give. The
greatness of his mercy then, does require, that we should sing the praises
of God in the highest measure. The cunning Musician, will not only stretch
forth his strings that they may be heard; but sometimes so, that they may be
heard in the highest measure; Such Musicians and singers of Gods mercy we
ought to be; this is the measure we must keep this year upon the Harp of
David. If we consider what cloudie days have gone over our heads, and in how
fair sunshine we are set again, have we not occasion to say with David,
Psalm. 92, It is a good thing to praise the Lord, to sing unto his name, and to
declare his loving kindness? O let us then with the best members and
instruments we have, bodies and spirits, which the fingers of GOD have
harmonically composed, praise the name of the Lord. Let us not take without
giving, as unprofitable ground drinks and deuoureth seed without restoring.
Let us imitate Noah after the Floode, in one thing, and in another leave him.
As Noah. Genesis 8.20. after that the floode was ceased, built an Altar, and
offered unto the Lord: so let us after the deluge of the Pestilence, offer unto
the Lord the sacrifice of thanksgiving, that the Lord may speak unto us, as he
said to Noah; Increase now again upon the earth and replenish it. But yet let
us take heed to surfeit with Noah, and forget the floode; let the former
judgment, which has as a sword been shaken at us for our sin, terrify
the whole Land. Let us not be like to the nine Leapers, who being cleansed,
forgot him that cured them. Little will he yield which will not yield
thanks, which makes us nothing the poorer. We ought then to stir up our
selves, and with David to speak; Awake my tongue, I will praise thee, O Lord,
among the people. Psalm. 57.8. And as Deborah stirred up her self; Up Deborah
up, arise and sing a song. Iud. 5.12: even so, O London, stir up thy self;
up London up, arise, sing a song upon the Harp of DAVID, Psalm. 103 My
soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that which is within me, his holy name;
My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits; let us every
where offer up this sacrifice publicly in the congregation, in our streets,
in our houses, let us fill our meetings and conferences, with this heavenly
harmony, and sweet sounding melody. Provoke one another, citizens, to praise
the Lord for his miraculous deliverance. Up ye families, up ye parents, up
ye children, up every particular soul, whom the lord by the shadowing wings
of his mercy has preserved. Ministers, preach it in your Temples, sing it in
your streets; rich men, write it upon your door posts, paint it upon your
walls, cut with an Adamant upon the tables of your hearts. You need such
remembrances: for memory, as SENECA writes, is most delicate, tender, and
brittle, and soon forgets a benefit. Citizens, neitheir eat or drink
without this condiment to it; The Lord be praised for our deliverance. Dainty
Dames, let the frontlets beteene your eyes, the bracelets upon your arms, and
the gards upon your garments, be thanksgiving. 24. Elders of the city, sing
with the 24. Elders Revel. 4.10. Praise, honor, and glory, be unto him that
sits upon the throne. It is he only, not our prudence, our physicians, the
cold or the frost; but as the Prophet speaks, Salvation is the Lords. Here
is an excellent posie and Epiphoneme. Beloved of London, I have a suite unto
you, if you do erect your tryumphant arches, against the entry of him, of
whom we may say, as the Israelites did of David, Psalm. 118. Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord, forget not among the rest, to adorn the^
with Posies, preaching the Lords mercies in this your deliverance, and to write
this; Salvation is the Lords: write it in the Calender of Gods deliverances,
and leave a Chronicle of it to all posterity. As for the new year, let the
accustomed Lord of misrule, and your unlawful sports be banished, and bring it
over in the praises of him who has delivered you. Show your spiritual
devotions in the openest places, as David built an Altar in the threshing
floor of Araunah. Lastly, offer up this sacrifice not only for your selves,
like unto the Athenians, who would offer sacrifice, only for their own
city, and their neighbors of Chios, but for the whole body; for the father,
for the mother, for the daughters. And thus much for the third kind of
sacrifice.

4 Our children.
The fourth and last kind of sacrifice, are our children, which must be
offered up this new year, unto the Lord. This concerns you, o Christian
parents. Many have offered them a long while, some to Satan, teaching them the
language of Satan; to swear, lie, and blaspheeme; some to the world and the
pride thereof, bringing them up in all voluptuousness and delicious fare;
others to theft, oppression, and deceit: for which, the Lords anger has been
provoked, and has also been a part of our deserved pestilence. Bring them
therefore better up, then you have done; and as the wise man exhorts Ec. 7.23.
If thou have sons, instruct them and hold their neck from their youth. If
thou have daughters, keep their bodies. Worthy is the saying of Ferus, Let us
learn to offer up our children unto the Lord, non occidendo etc. not
murdering and slaying them, as they did the beasts in the law, but bringing
them up in the fear of God, and accustoming them to religious exercises, for
this is a sacrifice acceptable to God. Parents, seek rather to leave your
children honest then wealthy (for which preposterous care, Crates the Theban
would deride many, if he lived) that your children watch not for your death,
as the Eagles for a carcass. Families are the fountains of all common-weals;
purge the fountains that the streams may be clean. And as the Israelites,
after that the slaying Angel was departed, and had spared their children, Exo.
13, offered and sanctified unto the Lord, all the first borne: even so, the
lords slaying Angel being departed, let us offer and sa^ctifie unto the lord
not only our first borne, but all the progeny, by good instructions and
wholesome admonitions, keeping them from the infection of this world. Further, as
you must sa^ctifie them, so forget not the sacrifice of good Job, to sacrifice
and offer your prayers also for the^. Job. 1.5. showing thereby, your religious
care for them. These are then the four kinds of sacrifices; the ^^crifice of
the heart, of the mouth, of the hand, of the womb, which this new year we
must offer up unto the lord in the ceasing of the Pestilence. Differ not to
offer them, but as Abraham rose up early in the morning, in the beginning of
the day to sacrifice his son: even so, beloved of London rise up early to
offer the^ in the very morning and beginning of the year.

A new years gift for England, to bestow upon the Lord.
And thus, I have absolved the Kings Medicine. Now because it is the manner,
that one friend bestows a new years gift upon another; give me leave,
belooued of England, to show unto you, out of the whole frame of the precedent
discourse, a new yeares-gift to bestow upon the best friend we have. If ye
are desirous to know it, it is the repentance of King DAVID: unto the
bestowing of which, three reasons ought to persuade us. First, the relics of
the Kings evil, and of the spiritual Plague, which yet remain in us; that it
may serve as a medicine to heal them. Secondly, the prints, marks, and
relics of the corporal Plague, which in some places yet are to be seen; that
it may serve, as a spiritual weapon to chase and drive them from among us.
Thirdly, the decreasing of the pestilence in the mother city, from whence the
other members receive their maintenance, as the senses and nerves of the body
from the head: that seeing the Lord has answered repentance with repentance,
we may again return repentance for repentance. Holy and commendable has
been your zeal and diligence, Reverend Elders of the English Israel, that
ye have sanctified a fast, blown the trumpet in Sion, called a solemn
assembly, gathered the Elders and all the inhabitants of the Land into the
house of the Lord. Joel. 1.14. Great has also been your obedience, blessed
inhabitants of this Land, that ye have all come together, mourned together,
fasted and cried together, and (the Lord grant) repented together. Behold
therefore the blessed fruits of your zeal, diligence and obedience; the wrath
of the Lord appeased, his hand has not been shortened, that he could not
help, neither his goodness abated, that he would not hear. Wisd 11. And to
use the words of that honey Father BERNAD, you have found honey in the Lion,
mercy in the fearful God of heaven. I find that verified among us, which
Socrates found in the Lacedaemonians; who perceiving that, in certain wars
between the Athenians and them, the Athenians offered much gold unto their
Idols, and yet departed still beaten out of the field, asked the Oracle, what
might be the cause of it. It was answered, that the prayers of the
Lacedaemonians prevailed more then the gold of the Athenians: Even so I may
say, that the prayers of the Church of England have prevailed more, then the
gold of the Papists, and more than if we had presented, with the wisemen,
gold, Incense, and Myrrh, Math. 2, and that for these, the Lords Angel is
departed. This mercy and bountifulness of the Lord, does call us all this
new year unto repentance.

1 The tribe of Judah.
First, it does appeal unto you, o Royal Court, o tribe of Judah, in honor,
degree, and dignity the first; as you offer unto the Prince a new
yeares-gift, so forget not to offer this present to the Prince of Heaven. Do
homage unto the King of Heaven, who rides upon the wings of the Cherubins,
bow the necks of your souls before the throne of his majesty, put on the
royal garment of King DAVID, and take in this year a Kings medicine for the
soul; a royal medicine becomes a royal Court. Honorable Counselors,
meditate the law of the most high, and use King David's counselors, Psalm.
119.24. Great men, let your wills not be inordinate: and having the reigns of
dominion in your hands, proclaim not with Nero; My authority gives me
license to do all things: govern by law and not by lust. Noble peers, take
heed of the sin of Zimri, Numb. 25.14. Possess you vessels in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, 1. Thessa. 4. You that are in
high places, be patient of injuries, forget nothing but injuries as Caesar;
esteem with Theodosius a Christian Emperor, that ye have received a benefit,
as often as ye are entreated to forgive: or say with Marcus Cato, unto him
that smote him, being now desirous to make amends, I remember not that I was
smitten. For as Lactantius speaks, Ira mortalium debet esse mortalis, the
anger of mortal men must be mortal. You that have adorned and imbossed your
speeches with oaths, come out of this humor, esteem them not the humor of
gentilitie, nor an ornament to your discourses; change blasphemies into
prayers, and let your tongues be bells to sound the praises of him who has
delivered us. Let not the voluptuous pamper themselves more in carnal
delights, nor sport themselves with sin, as Sampson with Dalilah; let them
shake it off, and not account this world a silver shrine. Painted Dames, be
contented with the natural color of your Creator. Altogether be not
senseless at the former stroke of Gods hammer, but spend your time in the
royal pastime of King David.

2 The tribe of Levy.
Secondly, the bountifulness of the Lord, does appeal unto you, o tribe of
Leui. Give unto the Lord this new years gift. Prophets, take in this year a
Prophets medicine. Reverend fathers and Elders, prostrate your selves with
DAVID and the Elders of Israel; and, as the holy Ghost exhorts you, Act.
20.28, Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. You the other Prophets, be unreprovable,
watching, sober, modest, harberous, apt to teach, not given to wine or filthy
lucre. 1. Tim. 3.2. Unto you that are in the office of Archippus, Col. 4.17, it
is also said; Take heed to the ministry that thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it. It is a work, not a play, onus non honos, a
burden, not an honor; a service, not a vacancy. You that should guide others
to the Land of promise come not short your selves. We that build Arkes for
others, let us not be drowned our selves. We that are the Lords Seers, let us
not be blind, we that are the Lords Cryers, let us not be dumb and
tongue-tide: and because sin is impudent and cannot blush, let us from
hence-forward arm our selves, not with the spear, but with the zeal of
Phinees: for the gentle spirit of Eli is not sufficient to mende children past
grace; let us not put honey into the sacrifice in stead of salt, but be (...)
the sons of thunder.

You the two Universities, 3 The two Universities.
obtain in this rank the third place, unto you also the Lords bountifulness
does appeal: give unto him this excellent new yeares-gift children of the
Prophets, take one another by the hand ye two sisters, and say with DAVID,
we have also done foolishly, O Lord. Let the Kings medicine come among you,
take it in against the kings evil. Your schools have been broken up the
former year: the new year being come, break the strength of sin, that
the Lords Angel disperse you not again. You that should be fountains and
welsprings of good life to others, be not dried up, that if men seek for the
water of life at your hands, they return not with an empty pitcher: or else,
as Job speaks, 13.4, You are Physicians of no value. Send forth skillful
Bezaleels and Aholiabs, filled with the spirit of Wisdom, and understanding,
to work with all the wise-hearted, all manner of workmanship for the service
of the Lords Sanctuary, for the uniting of the Saints, and for the edification
of the mystical body of Christ Jesus, that from you the two heads (as the
precious ointment from the head of Aaron was derived unto the very skirts of
his garments) many precious ointments may be derived to all the members of the
Kingdom. Lastly, because the harvest is great, suffer your selves to be
thrust into the harvest.

Fourthly, it appealeth to you that obtain the fourth place, 4 Magistrates and
Judges.
and who are the political Elders, the Judges and magistrates. Present unto
the magistrate and Judge of heaven and earth this new years gift, and take
also in the Kings medicine for this present year. You have ordained and
prescribed the former year, good orders for the staying of the bodily
infection; show now your diligence to prescribe good orders for the staying of
the spiritual infection. Be rather desirous of the maintenance of good laws,
and reformation of manners, then of honor; prefer the weale-publike, before
your private good, take heed of the spiritual Plague. First, be not lovers
of gifts, which blind the eyes. Deuteronomy. 18.21. Secondly, differ and delay not
to give judgment in the righteous cause, and if ye can do your neighbor
good to day, say not to him, come to morrow, Proverb. 3.28. View your selves
in Job, that right pattern of a good Judge, Job. 31. Let your sentence be to
the oppressed as the comfortable rain to the thirsty ground Job. 29.23.
Thirdly, have not respect of persons in judgment Deuteronomy. 1.17. hear the small as
well as the great, and fear not the face of man. You are the pillars Ps. 75.3.
If the pillars be weakened, if the nail be broken, or the strong me^ bow
themselves, the house, the burden, and all falls that leans upon them. By
the way it speaks to you also lawyers, Lawiers.
men of counsel, and magistrates atteda^ts offer up also this newyeers gift to
the Lord, that his slaying Angel return not. The wise man Pro. 23.23.
teaches you wise me^ wisdom, and gives counsel to you counselors. Buy the
truth (that is, spare no cost to purchase truth) but sell it not (that is, be
not hired for any money to forgo the truth.) Set not your wisedo^e, eloquence,
conscience and all to sale. Give not sweet taste to the bitter and sower, with
your sugared eloquence. Let not your fined tongues, fair pretenses, cunning
gloses, goodly circumstances of speech, uphold and bolster out the unjust
cause. Be not caught with birdlime (for unto this does AUSTIN compare the
receiving of bribes) by which your wings are pinioned, so that ye can not fly.
Officers, John Baptist Luke 3. gives you a good lesson. Be co^te^t with your
stipe^d, and vseno extortio^

Principally, 5. London.
it does appeal unto thee o London, which have suffered the greatest brunt in
this assault: least the lords Angel return again, offer up unto him which
has shown thee mercy, this new years gift, and as you have bin dilligent the
former year to take in the Kings medicine for the body, so be not now
negligent to take in the Kings medicine for the soul. A certain heathen man,
after that he had seen a sudden shipwreck of all his worldly goods, and had
bin exercised with diverse afflictions, brake forth into these speeches, well
fortune I see thy intent, thou would have me become a philosopher: even so o
London having received the old year a shipwreck of thousands of thy subjects,
and having bin visited with much bitterness, say unto the almighty, well lord, I
see thine intent, thou would have me to become zealous, religious, and to
enter into a meditation of the life to come. Let both Nehemias and Daniel,
magistrate and minister within thy walls, confess their sins. Let every citize^
in particular say as Jonas did, I know that for my sake this great tempest has
bin upon you. It is reported that the Delphia^s had murdered Aesop, and had
co^cealed their sin: but being visited with mortality, they began to confess
it, yea caused it to be proclaimed by noise of criers that they had done it: In
like manner o London, having committed diverse sins, and having bin visited
with mortality, confess the^ now, proclaim the^, and reveal the^ unto the
lord: let the graves that shroude so many corpses, let the tears of the
widows, and desolate orphans yet remaining, move you unto repe^ta^ce. As the
rod of Moses made water to proceed out of the rock; so let the lords rod wring
from our stony hearts some drops of remorse. The voice of the Lord, Londons
Echo.
spoken as it were from heaven, has bin heard within thy walls to move thee
unto repentance: make now answer to this voice with a sweet resounding echo
into heaven, in this manner, Thy voice I will hear, and thy call I will obey.
Greatness will not stoop, but at great judgments; a great one thou have
felt: the Lord has not only bruised the heel of the body, the poorer sort,
but he has reached the head, the rich and mighty among us. First, ye the 24.
elders, Zacheus, and gripple penny fathers in this gold-sick age, and have
ripped up your brethrens entrails for money, as Sa^pson searched the lions
carcass for honey, be no more wealth-deuouring vermins, grind not the faces of
your watrie-faced brethren, break off your cruelty, as the Spinster does her
thread, intending to draw it out no longer. Take heed, Mich. 6. that the
treasures of wickedness be not found in your houses any more, neither a scant
measure which is abominatio^ to the lord who justifies not the wicked bala^ces
and the Tradesme^, labor not any more so much for the meat which perishes,
but for the food which endures for ever Ioh. 6. Citize^ns in general, seeing
the lord has knocked at your proud palaces, shake from you the settled lees of
your long continued iniquities, and because two principal have lodged within
your walls, and walked along your streets pride and gluttony cure them now,
according to the method of the kings medicin, by two co^traries, humility and
te^perancy. Put on the royal indume^t of David which is humility, and let not
your daughters walk more with outstretehed necks as the daughters of Sion Esa.
3. Return not in the city, you that are departed, with your painted faces, open
breasts, monstrous verdingales, long staring ruffes, leave the^ behind, infect
not the city with them any more, that they produce not again the same effect.
Return not with your superfluous feasts, rather from henceforrh inuit Christ
Jesus, and prepare him a feast, by faith and mercy. Many of you have been
deprived a long time of the enjoying of one another fellowship during the time
of the pestilence, A profitable admonition.
but now being returned and coming together again, abuse not your meeting
after this lo^ng separation, by quaffing, da^cing, banqueting, spend it in the
praises of him who has brought you home again. Drunkard, search not out thy
drunken companion, ask not whither he lives, to associate thy self with him.
Whoormonger seek not thy harlot, carnal man for thy co^federates, renew not
that wicked ba^d and league, take the last farewell of them, and communicate no
more with those unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 5.11. We have feared the
former year to draw our breath in the streets, least we should have drawn in
infection, let us this year fear to draw in the infection of sin. The former
year we have used and followed many good orders to stay the bodily infectio^,
purged our house^ cleansed our streets, perfumed our apparel, had upon our
doors bills and red crosses, shu^ned infectious places, let out the corrupted
blood, abstained from evil meats, emptied our housen of dogs, ayred the^ with
fire, carried in our hands diverse co^fections of art and such more: what ought
we not the^ to do this year to stay the plague of sin? Let us purge our house^
from spiritual infectio^, remoouing the false balla^ce, small waights,
Spiritual orders to be followed this year in the city.
cou^terfait lights, sweet words, sour deeds, threasures of wickedness. Let us
wash and cleanse our streets from pride, swearing and blaspheming, perfume our
apparel with modesty and humility, shun places infected with dru^kards,
glutto^s, adulterers. Let us have upon the doors of our hearts other bills, 1 the
mark of the spirit romans 8.2, the blod of the la^b. Of which we need not to be
ashamed. Let us also let out the corrupted blood of hate, envy, concupisce^ce,
abstain from the fleshpots and garlic of Egypt. Let us beware of dogs Phil.
3.2. suffer not the detractio^s and slanders. Further, let us air our house^
and our hearts with the fire of love, having above all things feruente love
among us. 1. Pet. 4.8. Lastly, let us carry with us when we go abroad, that
heavenly poma^der and confection of good works and of the fear of god, and this
will preserve us against the infectio^ of this world. You have used the old
year wormwood against the plague, this year let me tell ye of a wormwood from
which ye must abstain, for it is very naught against the spiritual plague: if
you desire to know it, Moses tells it unto you Deuteronomy. 29.28, Let there not be
a root of bitterness or wormwood amongst you. To leave you o London, for the
continual knils and alarm of bells, the tru^pets of Jehovah which have sounded
within thy walls, let the tongues of thy inhabitants be bells and tru^pets to
publish the praises and mercy of the Lord toward them. O you that are not yet
turned to your earth, how are you bound to think of your creator! redeem
therefore this new year, with newness of lives, the former years misspent.

The other Sister cities, towns, and villages.
you the glorious Sisters and co^federates of the mother city, you the
daughters and other members, of which some of you have also groned under this
burden: offer up unto god with your mother, this new years gift, and take in
also this spiritual kings medicin, draw instructions from your mothers
breasts, change your Moria^s skins, put of your stained coats, wash your feet,
and not only your feet, but your heads also. And because all the joints of the
whole body of the la^d have bin disquieted, and that now the lord has salued
the^ with his saving health, concur together to sing the praises of that god of
Israel. Great has bin your diligence, to avoid the bodily infection: be not
now negligent to expel the spiritual co^tagio^. Were it not madness to have
cried for the wou^d, and not to pull out the arrow, for the coal which has
burnt you, and not to remove it? You have bewailed those sins which ye had
committed, now commit not those sins ye have bewailed. He has not retained his
anger, and shall we retain our sins the cause of his anger? he has returned to
us by his grace, and shall not we return to him by repentance? he has had
co^passio^ on us, and shall not we have co^passio^ on our own souls? He has
taken away that, which took away his favor, and shall not we seek to continue
that which keeps his favor? we have long be^ al like to the Moon in her
decreasing, for the^ she does turn the opening of her bow down toward the
earth, and her back toward heaven: eue^ so, we have decreast, and failed in
virtue, piety, zeal, we have turned the door of our hearts and the opening of
our desires altogether to this world. But now with the new year, let us be
like the Moon in her increasing, for then she turns her open side up toward
heaven, and her back toward the earth, and so grows to a perfect light: In
like manner, let us increase in piety, zeal, charity, let us turn our
backs toward the world, but our hearts and opening of our desires to god and
heaven. And for the decreasing let us encrese, not in iniquity, but in faith
and honesty, let us not forgo for a little money, that, which for no money ca^
be had again. I may speak brethren unto you that of the psalm, The lord has
looked down from the height of his sa^ctuary, that he might hear your
mourning, and deliver the children appointed unto death. You have al called
upon the lord, and behold the success of good seed has bin co^seque^t to your
prayers, and they have been joined together, as if their souls had been knit
together like the souls of David and Ionatha^. Continue therefore in your
repentance and let it not be as a morning cloud, or as the morning dew which
goes away Hos. 6.4. or else never look for saving, sound, and continuing
health, but eue^ with Gehezi to die a leprous man, if not with the plague of
the body, yet with the plague of the soul. Lord most mighty, most gracious,
most merciful, wound us with thy fear, possess our souls with an awful dread
of thy power which thou have shown the former year, rebuild the ruins of the
house of our hearts, make us fit for thy holy service, make us thy spiritual
Jerusalem, and our hearts the temples of the holy ghost, that thy Angel may
spare us, as he did Jerusalem. Psalm. 51.
Create in us o lord with this new year, a clean heart and renew a right spirit
within us. I end with the prayer wherewith I begun, Lord teach us to number our
days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. Psalm. 90.
Amen.

FINIS.

