THE UNCASING OF HERESY, OR, THE ANATOMY OF PROTESTANCIE.

Written and Composed by O. A.

Cum Licentia Superiorum. ANNO DC.XXIII.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THough the devil in no age ever wanted his emissaries, and Antichrist agents,
who busily labors in sowing tares and death-bringing-darnel in the purest
corne-fields of Gods Church, and like cunning Mountebankes, left no wily
invention untried, which they supposed might any way serve to vent their
adulterate theriaca and bastardly balsamum; yet he had never such hopes to
store the vast caves of his infernal mansion with Christian souls, as in this
age of ours, in which whole swarms of Apostates, and deceiving Ministers, are
crept into the Church, introducing (according to the Apostles prophecy,
sundry sects of perdition, by setting abroach, the infectious, pestilent, and
long-since condemned dregs of heresy, brewed by Simon Magus, Cerinthus,
Cerdon, Manichaeus, Aerius, Eustachius, Vigilantius, and other such subjects of
Abaddon, and after barrelled up by Beelzebub, and carefully reserved in his
chief sellar; where though with long standing they were grown mustie and
stinking, yet by pouring in the barme of liberty, they have made them flower
again, and by hanging forth the Iuibush of Novelty (set out and garnished
with Rhetorical flowers) have drawn more customers then hells wiliest
counselor durst ever hope for.

For the better discovery of all which infectious potions, and utter
dismantling of such lewd Mountebankes, which like Egiptian locusts cover the
face of this some-time Angelike I Will, depopulating her once flourishing
vineyeardes, and sweete-senting gardens, I present thee with this ensuing
Treatise, in which thou shall find plainly demonstrated, That Luther, Calvin,
Zwinglius, and other Prime-doctors of Protestancie, were (by their own
confessions) baptized and brought up in the now Roman Catholic Religion, and
only by their apostacy gave life and being to Protestancie, and that the
Protestant Martirologies, Callendars, and genialogical tables, consist either
of confessed Papists, known Schismatikes, detested heretics, wicked Atheists,
accursed Magitians, Sacrilegious thieues, or notorious Traitors.

That all the chief doctrines, and principles of Protestancie, are old
condemned heresies; and that the most damned heresies rhat ever were hatched in
any age, have been fostered, cherished, and defended by the chief: doctors in
the Protestant Church.

3. That no Protestant, especially of the Caluinean sect (which are commonly
known by the names of Protestants here in England, of Puritants in Scotland,
of Caluinists in Sauoy; of Sacramentaries in Heluetia; of Hugonettes in France,
of Picardes in Bohemiah, and of Gomorists, Arminians, Remonstrants,
Contraremonstrants in Holland, and other parts of Germany) can be said (if he
follow the doctrines of his chief doctors) to believe aright any one Article
of the Apostles Creed.

4 That the God of the Protestants (according to their chief doctrines, and
the famous confessions of some of the the same fraternity) is no other but a
devil of hell.

The due consideration of either of which heads or chapters, will abundantly
fuffice to persuade any man that is careful of his salvation, and has not
made a covenant with death and hell, to fly the fellowship of this heretical
fraternity, and haste^ to the rock of that true Roman Catholic Church, from
whole top, Luther, Calvin, and other their Cymists (by the incitements of the
flesh, the world, and the devil) casting them selves headlong, fell into the
sea of heresies in which to be by death drenched, is to eternally lost, and
certainly swallovved up in the Charibdis of hells bottomless abisse.

THE CONTENCE of the first Chapter.
THAT Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius, Bucer, Osiander, and all other prime Doctors
of Protestancie were by their own Confessions, borne, baptized, and bred in
the Roman Catholic Church, and by their false began Protestancie; that the
said Luther, (by his own and most other chief Protestants assertions, was
the first known Protestant, a son, with out a father, and a scholar
without a master.

That neither Illiricus, Fulke, FOX, or White, in their pretended bedrowe of
Protestant vvitnesses, have produced one true Protestant; but have shamefully
stuffed their Catalogues with many knovve^ and confessed Roman Catholics,
infinite store of desperate heretics and a multitude of infamous persons, etc.

The contents of the second Chapter.
THat the chief doctrines and principles of the Protestant Religion viz. That
we may be saved by faith only; that there is no free will to good; that
children may be saved without baptism; that Christians enjoy not the verity
of the old figures; that the Sacraments do not confer grace; that the
commandemenes are impossible to be kept; that Christians are not tied in
conscience to perform the Laws of the church, or com mon weal; that all
things happen by inevitable necessity; that Christ's and S. John's baptism
were all one; that the Church may be for some time invisible; that Altars,
holy oil, and the like are to be contemned; that approved general councels
may err; that the dead are not to be prayed for; that Images are not to be set
up and worshipped; that Matrimony is of equal merit with Virginity; that
Christ is not Realie in the Eucharist; that the Saints can neither hear our
prayers nor help us; that the Sea of Rome is the seat of pestilence; that
Indulgences are of no vvorth, etc. are old condemned heresies.

The contence of the third Chapter.
THat the chief Doctors of Protestancie, teach a plurality of gods; cannot
well brook the word Trinity; deny that Christ is God of God; or that the
Essence of the Father was communicated to him; affirm that Christ was
inferour to his Father, as touching his divinity; maintain that Christ is his
Fathers vicar, or vicegerent as he is God; that he had two persons; that he
was subject to ignorance and vicious affections; that he is not omnipotent,
nor able to do many things; that he cannot be adored with out Idolatry,
because his humanity is joined to his Godhead; that the blessed virgin remained
not a Virgin in, and after her childbirth; that she was subject to the
infirmities of other women in childbearing; that Christ's nativity and
incarnation were no way meritorious; that Christ's divine nature was
crucified, suffered and dead together with his human; that his corporal
death was nothing available, etc. that Christ died not for all men, but for
some fevv; that Christ descended not at all into hell; that his soul lay
together with his body in the grave; that he freed not the Patriarchs and
Prophets in his descent; that he could not raise himself from the death by his
own power; that his Resurrection and Ascension were no way miraculous,
etc. that men need not fear that their works shall come into judgment;
that the holy ghost has a distinct Essence from the Father and the Son; that
he is unequal to the Father and the Son, etc. that the church may err in
fundamental points; that it was invisible for a 1000. years together at lest,
etc. that men's sins are never truly remitted; no not in baptism, etc.

The contence of the fourth Chapter.
THat God (according to the Protestants express doctrines) does not only
permit, but force men to sin; that some men by naked decree of God, without
any desert of their own, are Predestined to eternal damnation; that
howsoever God affirm that he would have all men saved, yet he never meant
so; that the most wicked persons that ever were, were of God appointed to be
wicked even as they were; that the devil is but Gods agent or instru^^^^
(...) does but what God commands him, etc.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Doctors: to the Worshipful Masters: and to the
worthy Students of the University of Oxford.
BEing admonished by a dear friend of mine, that this Treatise was defective,
in that it wanted an Epistle Dedicatorie. I considered with my self, and
resolved to recommend it unto the University of Oxford, in respect that it was
penned by a Scholar, and sometime a student of the said University. And I my
self in my youth sucked the breasts of that Nurse. Often admiring the purple
robes and decorum of the Doctors: accounting of them, as of the Senators and
Sages of England. But yet ever detesting schism and heresy in my heart, being
by Gods providence and goodness even acunabulis from my cradle inclyned to
Catholic faith and Religion. Whereupon I left my native soil, and traveled
into forrayne Countries, where often reflecting with astonishment, that men of
that outward gravity, eloquence and learning should be so ouer-shaddowed with
so dark a cloud of error, schism, and heresy, and of so weak a judgment
as to think all the world to be ecclipsed. and that the light of the Gospel
could shine only from Martin Luther, and Peter Martyr, two Apostata Friars, or
any such rabble. Returning into my Country, especially since his Majesty's
happy reign over Great Britain. I ioyed much to see, as it were at our time,
the prime places of Prelacie occupied by Oxford men: as Canterbury by D. Abbot
York by D. The prime place of supremacy in England.
Tobie Matthew, Winchester by D. Bilson, Durrham by D James* Rochester by D.
Pukerig, London by D. King, an Eloquent Pulpit man, who was vexed long with a
grievous painful sickness of the stone. Oftentimes afflictio dat
intellectum There was a constant report, that he desired a Priest before his
death, and to die a member of the Catholike-Roman Church; If the report were
true, a memorable note of Gods grace and goodness; If not true, the vvorst to
himself: wherefore my innated affection toward your persons, and the place,
urges me to dedicate this Treatise unto you, hoping that it may work some
good effect among you.

2 Now having named the vvorthie men of Oxford for their prime place for
Prelacie. I must not omit the more vvorthie men for good life and learning,
who left all vvorldly preferment, entertained banishment, undertook
voluntary poverty, and forsook all delights and pleasures of this land for
their Religion, and for the profession of the Catholic Roman faith, The
learned Doctors who left Oxford for religion.
and for the salvation of their souls. And first I name William Allen, Doctor
of Divinity, professor and reader of the Divinity lectur in the University
of Doway, the first Founder and President of the English College at Doway,
who went up to Rome and obtained of Pope Gregory the 13. the foundation of
that Seminary, Cardinal ALLEN.
and exhibition for a certain number of Scholars there to be maintained
Afterward in Pope Syxtus quintus time, he was called to Rome again, and
there created Cardinal. the 7. of August, anno Dom. 1587. when he received
his Cardinals Hatte. the Pope pronounced these words. Ego creoto Ducem,
principem, socium regum, Cardinalem Angliae, and fratrem meum. A worthy title
for so vvorthie a man. Secondly, I name D. Audoeu, or Owen Jews an Oxford man,
D. JEWS Archbishop of Cassana.
who was Reader of the Law lecture in the University of Doway for some
years, after sent for by the Metropolitan of Cambray, and by him sent to Rome,
to negotiat important business of his, which happily being performed, he
remained there, and was made Ref^ndarie to the Pope Gregory the 13. and Vicar
general under the Ar h-bishop of Millan, Carollus Boromeus the Saint: after
elected and consecrated Bishop of Cassana, and visitor general in Rome under
Clement the 8. and in election to have been Cardinal. if he had not been
prevented by death. What should I name D. Harding, D. Sanders, D. D. HARDING
and others.
Bristow, D. Stapleton, with other Oxford men all most famous for learning as
their works written against the heresies of this age, now extant do declare.
Gregory Martine, William Reonals, M. Rastall, M. Marshial, Licentiat in
Divinity, and many others for breuities sake I do ommitte worthy members of
the University of Oxford. Among the Fathers of the Society. Edmund Campion,
Robert Parsons, a famous writer, with others. Reverend Priests, I think I may
say descending from the same Nurcerie, above a hundred. D. Barret, D.
Worthington, both Oxford men, and Presidents successively in the College of
Rhemes and Dowaye. And now speaking of the governors of Colleges, I cannot
omit to letaine and number in this rank the now present President, D. The
President of Doway.
Kellison (although not an Oxford man, yet I know a well-willer to that
University) a mylde Moysies for his government, ready to give content to all
men, a lover of learning, a premoter of piety, a great writer. Shall I omit
D. Cicile, who was Almner and Confessor unto the sister of Henry the third K.
of France, D. CICEL
and wife and Queen to Henry the 4, D. Bagshow. D. Bishop. I cannot but
admire and praise the providence and goodness of Almighty God in this time of
persecutions, to consider men who have left their country, accepted of
banishment, content with poverty, abrogated the world, without al hope of
preferment, yet advanced above all expectation. Therefore look at this
present, and cast your eyes upon D. D. GIFFORD Peer of France.
Gifford, in his youth a scholar of Oxford, if I mistake not, went over the
seaes, was a lumnus of the College of Rome, after became Reader of Divinity
in the English College of Rhemes, and now promoted by Jews the 13. King of
France, to be Archbishop of Rhemes, Metropolitan, and Peer of France, for his
learning, for his piety, for his eazle against the Hugonettes of France, an
excellent Pulpit man, who Preached before the King at Paris, a whole Lent. In
Germany we had D. Turner, an Oxford man, in the University of Ingolstad,
heighlie esteemed for his learning, eloquence and Oratorie. D. Spetheri^ was
Theologus to Cardinal Paleat, D. ELIE.
Archbishop of Bolonia. D Elie was reader in the University of Mossapoat in
Lorayne many years for his learning in the Law, cannon and civil, famous, his
elder brother sometime was President of the college of John's in Oxford, he was
a Priest in Queen Mary's time, and dyed in the latter time of Queen
Elizabeth, a prisoner in the City of Hereford. If I should undertake to
capitulate or reakon all our renowned Confessors and Priests, now laboring in
England, or detayned in prison, or dead, I should be ouer-long.

O Oxford, Oxford, thou that have had so many worthy men that have fled
from the seat of Pestilence, and nurse of schism and heresy into foreign
nations and countries, and have for their learning, piety and devotion, been
heighly advanced abroad. Consider also how many Martyrs have dyed, how many
Confessors, how many Priests have been and are imprisoned at home, for
profession of Catholic Faith and Religion. And thou which should be the
lantern of the Land, the Pillar of light, the school of learning, the mother
of peace, the nurse of piety; art now become the dark cloud of heresy, the
foggie mist of Egypt, the mayntaine of schism, the strength of Puritanisme,
and mistrisse of ignorance, etc.

Wherefore this liitle Treatise is addressed unto you, Masters and students of
Oxford, and you who are in purple robes, as Senators and Sages of the land,
that you may uncase your selves, cast off your viseards, expel the ravening
Wolfes. And know your selves, and acknowledge your errors, schism, and
heresy, and return to your mother Church, benigna matter est, she is a loving
mother, to receive you. Hell gates cannot prevail against her, she has the
holy Ghost to assist and direct her in all truth of doctrine and manners, and
good life.

You know the Archbishop of Spalata, a learned Prelate, as you all confess,
Archbishop of Spalato.
he conuersed with your prime Prelate, visited your Universities, informed
himself of your doctrine, wayed your Church, and Congregation, in his
prudentiall ballence, and found you minus habens, to want wayt, to be
schismatic: he retired himself with desire to return home again, not for
that he mislyked his entertaynement; for he was highly esteemed of his
Majesty, much honored of your Prime Prelate, welcomed by the Nobility, he
had large maintenance 800. or a thousand pound reuenew per annum, whereby he
might command all the delicates, delites and pleasures that the land could
yield, yet not satisfied in conscience, nor content in mind, labored to get
license of his Majesty, to return, which he obtained, His departure.
or else was commanded by him to depart the Realm. Why did he thus? but
reflecting upon his estate, being aged, to provide for death, to forsake
schism, to save his soul. I am credible imformed, being urged to declare his
mind, His censure of the Church of England.
and what he thought concerning the Church of England; he clearly answered,
that it was but a schismatical Church, a part divided from the body mystical
of Christ, a congregation that had forsaken the mother Church of the world.
Consider and ruminate well (you worthy students) the sentence and censure of
this learned Prelate Out of all doubt, there is no salvation, but in the true
Church.

There is not the meanest among you, if he do but read the Annals of M. John
Stowe, but he shall clearly understand, how, and when the schism began in K
Henry 8. Schism begone by K. HENRY the 8.
his time, who after he had reigned 20 years in peace with the Church of Rome
seeking a divorce from his lawful wife Q. Katherine, which the mother Church
of the world neither could nor would grant, or permit, the King being much
discontented, and desirous to obtain his purpose, began his schism, made
himself head of the Church of England, and by act of Parliament, united the
title to his Imperial Crown, a thing in auditum, and never by any Christian
Prince practiced before, unless Julian the Apostata attempted it. After he
had thus divided himself from the Church of Rome, and established his
authority of headsh^pp, he presently quarrelled with the Cardinal, Bishops,
and Clergy, and convicted them of a preminire; He convicted the Cardinal, and
Clergy of preminire.
so that they were forced to compounde with him, for a hunder thousand pounds,
which some they paid every penny, and not content with this, but by
Parliament also confiscated all the lands and goods of the religious in his
Kingdom; and so like a wild bore, depopulated and destroyed the Vineyard of
our Lord. and overthrew ten thousand Churches and Chapels, Ouerthrowed all the
Religious houses.
which were erected, builded, and maintained by his Predecessors, and
ancestors, and by the devotion of his Nobility, and piety of the people of
this land. And within some years after, he spoiled the sepulchers and shrines
of the Saints, and what was gold and silver, and precious stone, Spoiled the
sepulchers of Saints.
either by oblations, offerings, or other ways not fearing sacrilege a
whitte, he took without scruple. And from one Chapple of S. Thomas of
Canterbury, were nine or ten waynes laden away with the wealth of that one
place. Put down al Pilgrimages.
He also put down and robbed all the holy places of pilgrimages, frequented
and used by devout people in former ages in this land.

And to omit other of his good works, in the 38 and last year of his
reign (a thing vvorth the noting) having had wars with France, and peace
being concluded, it was proclaimed by Harralds, with sound of trumpet the 13.
of June, being Whit sunday, and the same day a general Procession commanded. in
which were borne all the richest silver Crosses in London, of every Parish
one, and the Priests in their richest Coapes. This Precession came from Paul's
Church through Cheap and Cornehill, up to Leaden Hall, and so went back to
Paul's again. This was the last show of rich Crosses and Coapes in London for
shortly after all those Crosses and Coapes, with other the Church plate were
commanded, called for, Robbed all Churches in London.
and taken by the Kings Officers into the Kings Treasure and Wardrope, and
never seen afterward. And so were cunningly all the Churches of London
robbed on a day. This was one of the last good works this Church-robber
did. For in January after he dyed an excommunicated person, which
excommunication was published by Pope Paul the 3. thus began the schism in
England.

Then succeeded Edward the sixte, a child, a boy of nine years of age, who
continued the schism, he had the title of supreme head immediately in earth
under God, of the Church of England and Ierland. He had two Uncles, the
S^imers by the mothers side, the one L. Protector, the other L. Admiral of
England, K. EDWARD established the schism
both infected in German heresy. Presently the first year they began to
alter the face of Catholic Religion, which K. Henry his Father left,
commanding the Rood, the Crucifixe, and all Images of Saints, in Churches to be
pulled down, forbidding beads, holy water, and other ceremonies, repelling
the statute of the six articles made by Henry the eight, also commanded by
Proclamation, the Communion to be ministered vnde^ both kinds unto the people,
and service to be in the English tongue, Altars of stone to be taken down,
and communion Tables of vvood to be set in their room. The new book of common
prayer was published by D. Ridlie, at Paul's Cross, etc. Pride would not
suffer these two brothers peaceably to reign together. Pride of two Uncles.
Thomas Lord Admiral, was condemned of heigh treason, and beheaded at Tovver
hill. 3. year of Edward the sixth. Shortly after by the cunning of the Lord
Dudlie, Duke of Northumberland, L. Admiral beheaded.
who aimed to settle the Crown in his own blood, by the marriage of his
fourth Son, unto the Lady Jane, daughter of the Duchess of Suffolk, which
indeed was by him attempted, but be failed in his purpose; Edward Duke of
Sommerset, L. Protector, was committed to the Tovver of London the 14. of
October, the forth year of K. Edward the sixth. But delivered out again the
sit of February for that time. But the first of December follovving, was
arraigned at Westminster, of fellonie and treason, and tried by his Peers, L.
Pretector beheaded.
and acquitted of treason, but sound guilty of fellonie, and the 22. of
January, beheaded at Tovver Hill* the fifth year of King Edward. Thus the
schism began to be settled by the two Uncles (but GOD showed his Judgment of
them) and had thought to have been continued by the Duke of Northumberland
(although he died a Catholic) for K. Edward being sick of a Consumption, the
Duke married his fourth son, the Lord Gifford, unto the Lady Jane, eldest
daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, her mother was called Marie, the second
daughter of King Henry the seventh and sister to Henry the eight.

King Edward being dead, the Lady Jane by the Duke was proclaimed Queen. But
God being for the woman, Queen Marie obtained her right, had the Crown, Q.
MARIE renounced the schism.
and reigned after her brother Edward, she restored Catholic religion,
reunited her self to the Sea Apostolic, returned to the Mother Church of
Rome, disanulled the title of the head of the Church, caused this Realm to be
absolved from the censure of schism, and so mayntayned it during her life.

After her decease, Queen Elizabeth succeeded, and she altered all again, and
took to her self, Q. ELIZABETH restored the schism.
being a woman, to be head of the Church of England, restored the scisme
which was set up in K. Edwards time, by his two Uncles, she settled
Protestant religion, deprived the Catholic Bishops, etc.

Whether she did this upon zeal of Protestant Religion, to be the true way
to salvation: It is doubfull, because she professed her self a Catholic all
Queen Mary's time, and was so brought up in her fathers days.

Therefore it is thought she being a woman, did it upon policy fear and
reason of state. The reason to restore schism.
In policy she know her next successor in all right to be a Lady as wise,
and valiant as her self, which was the L. Marie, Queen of Scotland, and
wife to Francis K. of France, with all to be a constant proseffor of the
Catholic Religion. Therefore to make her subjects sure unto her, thought it in
policy fit to win them to a religion contrary to hers. She alvvaies feared
(as she might indeed, knovving her own estate) to subject her self to the
Church of Rome, which would never give consent to grant that the divorce of
Queen Catherine was lawful; but contrary approved her marriage to be good,
neither would allow that her Father King Henry should have two vviues at
once, and so consequently, disapprooued and annulled the Marriage of Queen
Anne her mother, as illigitimate. By what motives, or reason soever she was
moved, I know not, but it is certain she reestablished and continued the
schism from the Mother Church, the Church of Rome.

And King JAMES our Sovereign, who now by all right of succession reigns,
came into this Kingdom, not with sword, nor yet with guard of men; K. JAMES
maintayneth the schism.
but with a ryding rod in his hand, in all peace, vvelcomed of all,
received of al, and being a Protestant, so brought up from his Cradle,
promised to maintain the Religion he here found, which he has and does
perform.

Thirdly, you may understand, the ingresse and progress of the schism of
England, and what will be the egresse we leave to the prescience and
protection of Almighty God, Qui omnia nouit and suauiter disponit.

Thus to return unto you the purple Sages, and Doctors of Oxford, Uncase your
selves, put off your Maskes and Visardes, repent this schism, dissolve the
dark cloud of heresy, Church.
which does dasel your eyes, and be not vvilfully blind, but behold, the
city seated upon an hill, and the candle light set upon a candlestick; Roman
faith renowned.
retire unto your Mother Church, from which by schism you have separated your
selves: Domus Dei est firmiter aedificata supra firmam patram, she is the house
of God strongly built upon the firm rock. You cannot deny but S. Romans 1. v.
8. and 13.
PAVLE praised, recommended, prayed for, and prophesied, that the Roman faith
was, and is to be renowned through the whole world. You cannot deny, but
this Island received her first faith and Christian Religion and Instruction from
Rome. Among the Britains, King Lucius, sent unto Pope Eleutherius, to be
directed in Christian faith: Our first faith from Rome.
and among the Saxons, Gregory the great, and first Pope of that name, called
the Apostle of England by S. Bid, sent S. Augustine, and twelve Monks to
Ethelbert King of Kent, who entered with the Cross, Hist. BED
and displayed banners with the Picture of Christ, and after builded Churches
for M^sse and Martins, and set up in them the Crucifixe the bag of
Christianity, adorned them with Pictures of Saints, erected Altars of stone;
all which you have exiled and abolished, and brought in place of them the
Pictures of Lions and Dragons, and Arms of Kings, with a vvoodden table for
your Communion. Also you cannot deny, but that the Nations and Countries, and
people in this part of the world, All nations in Europe, faith from Rome.
received their Christian faith from Rome, and acknowledge her to be their
Mother Church, as well as we. Why then do you depart from her, why do you
make this division and schism in the world?

It is true say you, that the Roman faith was the true Christian faith, and
first established by S Peter, O^
and after confirmed by S Paul, and therefore worthelie called the
Apostolical Sea, and Mother Church of the world. But now there has many
errors crept unto the Church; and it is an Axiom and maximam ^n Protestant
profession, that the visible Church consisting of men, has erred and may err,
quia humanum est errore, for that man is subject to error.

O dangerous and damnable opposition, which does seek to destroy Catholic
faith, Sor^
no less then the Arrian heresy to destroy Christ and Christian faith. ^or it
is as manifest in Scripture, that the Church cannot err, against the
Protestants, as it is true that Christ is God against the Arria^s. For its
proved out Scripture, that Christ was true God consubstantiall and coequal
with his Father and no way inferior as God, but as man only: so it is as
manifest in scripture, that Christ promised to be with his Church unto the end
of the world, and that he would send the holy Ghost to his Apostles, and
consequently to their successors, and that this Church should instruct and
teach the people all truth, both in doctrine, manners, and in good life: And
that S. Paul does assure us, that the Church is columna and firmamentum
veritatis, the Pillar and foundation of truth, and from her we have received
the scripture, and the true meaning and sense thereof infalliblie without
error. Wherefore as the Arrian heresy sought to destroy Christ, and
Christian religion, in denying the Godhead of Christ; so Protestanisme, in
seeking to overthrow the infaillabilitie of the Church, endeavor to disable
Catholic faith and religion. And as the Arrians labored might and maine to
infect the Roman Church, and to make a Pope of their profession; yet failed in
the purpose. For Pope Foelix whom they promoted and preferred to the Papacy,
condemned them as heretics, and defined against them, and dyed a Martyr. O
providence of God: yea they so afflicted the Church, that the most part of the
world was ouer-clouded and darkened with this filthy cloud of Arria^
heresy: yet praeualebit veritas, truth prevails, insomuch that now in the
hearts of Christian, and Catholic people, nothing is more odious then this
heresy of the Arria^s, and by Protestants condemned to the pit of hell. So the
Protestants have labored omnibus vijs and modis (but not able to make a
Protestant Pope) yet to sovv this seed of Cockel and Darnel, that the Church
of Rome may err, that they have infected and caused a great reuoult in these
parts of Christendom* that almost all Almanie, and a great part of Germany,
is overcome with this seed of infection: all England and Scotland gone: A
great reuoult in Christendom by Protestatisme.
Ireland strongly assalted: all Holland revolted from God, Church and Prince:
Braband and the Lovv Countries made to stagger: but God be thanked, they have
overcome: A great part of France in tumultuous rebellion against their King,
although he would give them liberty of their conscience, yet they will not
yield him dew Temporal government and subjection. The Swissards even to the
confines of Italy stand stubborn in their obedience to the church of Rome,
sed praeualebit veritas, truth vvil prevail, and this heresy of Protestants,
that the Church may err, will be as odious in future ages, as Arianisme is
now.

If we argue with the Protestants, Protestant fly from antiquity,
traditions, and primative church
to free the Church of Rome of imputation of error (as many great Scholars
have written many learned Treatises, concerning this point) and do prove by
antiquity, by practice of the Primative Church, by Traditions from the
Apostles, concerning those differences in Religion, controuerted betvvne the
Protestants and the Catholics, they fly off and say they are not
demonstratiue arguments, to convince in matters of doctrine, but only probable
proofs.

If we urge them with the decrees of Popes, From decrees of Popes.
they care not for them; if with the doctrine of the Fathers, and Saints of
the Primative Church, as for example; if we allege S. Augustine, that he
prayed for the soul of his Mother Monica, departed, that the Sacrifice of the
Altar, Prayers, Alms, From Doctors. S. Ave.
Oblations of the living, may profit the dead, that he writ a whole book,
De cura pro mortuis augenda, of the care to be had of the dead, and that the
whole Church did supplicat and pray for the souls departed; they will
answer he was a particular man, it was his error, and the error of that
time. Aerius was condemned for an Heretic, in apposing against the Church,
Epipha. haer. 65. Aug. hae. 15.
in the 4. age concerning Prayer and Sacrifice to be offered for the souls
departed, Caluins answer is. Lib. 3. inst. c. 5., 10. that the ancient
Fathers, were destitute of warrant from God, to authorize prayer for the dead.
Allege S. S. Hillar.
Hierome against Vigilantius a condemned Heretic, for invocation, and
veneration of Saints, for reuerencing of holy Relickes; for visiting and
celebrating the memories of their sepulchers, and burning of wax tapers, for
observing the fasting days and vigils, determined by the Church, and
Ecclesiastical authority, for profession of Virginity and chastity among
Clergy men: they answer, ^. Ambrose lib. 4. de sacr. c. 4.
it was his error. Bring Saint Ambrose for the Real presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament: saying, that before Consecration it was bread, but after
Consecration his very true body and blood: it was his error, If we allow
the example of S. S. Basil.
Basil and S. Benedictus for monastical life; they will with the Sabellia^
heretics condemn it for a crime, and reprove it for a mere impiety, and
say it was their errors, and so of the rest of the ancient Fathers, they were
men and might err.

General Councels.
Proceed with them to general Counsels, which does represent the body of the
Church, and allege the four first, which all the world receive, and S.
Gregory highly commended, and the mode^^e Protestants do not dare to deny;
yet will the Puritans refuse them, and the Protestants accept of them no
farther then in their imagination they shall agree with them, or serve their
turns. And as for the four last general Counsels (I will name the last
first) the venerable Council of Trent, the Council of Florence, of Constance,
and Lateran, the Protestants absolutely auerce, that they have gone awrye, and
were deceived in the principles of faith and Religion, A new ^urse.
and why? because they have particularly censured and condemned them, and
defined their positions as heretical. So did the Arrians in like manner
instance against the Counsel of Nyce, for the same cause, because it defined
against them.

Wherefore in this Treatise we have excogitated and thought upon another
course, Only Scripture.
to Uncase the Protestants, to lay open their contradictions, to allege
their own authorities and writers; to express the absurdities of their
inferences and consequences, to see vvhither they will run then.

No doubt they will cry out, The Scriptures, the scriptures only shall be
our guide, our Judge, our governor, our vvarrant, in matters of controversy.
Although we know that some contrauersies cannot be decided by express
scripture, according to the written word, but we must have our varrant from
Tradition and the Church (which we call the unwritten words) as for example
the true number of the written scriptures, are these and no more: the Baptism
of Children, etc. Yet we accept of this condition of trial, and acknowledge
the true scripture to be the word of God, verity it self, wherein no
falsehood can be hidden, the true tuchstone of truth, dedicated by the Holy
Ghost, written by the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles of Christ: therefore
with all reverence we read it; and S. Charles Boromeus did so reverently
esteem of the sacred scriptures, that when he did seriously read them, he did
alvvaies read them upon his knees, and bare-headed: a rare example of piety.

Let us willingly enter into the list of this combat with Protestants or
Puritants? We know what will be the end of this, for demanding of them
before hand, whether they will be tried by the bare letter of the word, or
the true sense and meaning of the word? they will answer by both. If we ask
how shall we know that we have the true sense and meaning of the word:
they will answer, that they will make this plain, by conferring of place
with place, and that the spirit within them, does tell them, this is the
Truth, and true sense and meaning. If we reply, we have the spirit as
well as you, vee confer place with place as well as you: where then will
be the end of this controversy? We must believe them upon the verity of their
spirit, and the conference of places made by them, or else no end; so that
their private spirit must end it, or no end at all.

But to make an end at this time, I would advise the young students to take
this notandum and caveat from me; not to be credulous to the allegations of
their doctors and Sages, but to read diligently the authentike Authors, least
that be verified in you. Si coecus coecum ducat in foeueam cadent.

Thus vvishing no worse unto you Right worshipful Doctors, Masters, and
vvorthie students, then to mine own soul, that is united in Religion, peace
in conscience and salvation in JESUS CHSIST, I take my leave, from my chamber
at Doway 17. of January. M.DC.XXIII.

THE UNCASING OF HERESY. OR THE ANATOMY OF PROTESTANCIE.
CHAPTER I. That Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and all other prime-doctors of
Protestanisme, were (by their own confessions baptized and brought up, in the
now Roman Religion; and only by their apostacies, gave life and being to
Protestancie. And that Protestant Martyrologies, Callendars, and genealogicall
tables, consist either of confessed Papists, known schismatikes, detested
heretics, wicked Atheists, accursed Magitians, sacrilegious thieues, or
notorious traitors.
SCIAT lector me fuisse aliquando monachum, and papistam insanissimum, etc.
Luther praefat. tom. 1. and tom. 3. in psalm. 45.
Let the Reader know, that I was sometimes a Monk, and a most mad Papist,
when I began this business, and tom. 5. in 1. Galath. fol. 291.
so drunk and drowned in Popish opinions, that I was most ready to kill and
slay all such as any way with-stood the same, etc. I purely adored the Pope. So
Luther. And again.

Idem in 1. Gal. page 25. tom. 4. Ien. Lat. and p. 26. and tom. 6. in cap. 11.
Gene. fol. 129. and tom. 4. in cap. 43. Isay. fol. 179.
I certainly, if any other before the light of the Gospel, had a good conceit,
and was very zealous for Popish laws, and the Traditions of the Fathers; and
in good earnest I urged and defended them as necessary to salvation: Lastly, I
endeavored with all diligence to perform them, macerating my body with
fasting, watching, prayer, and other exercises. I while I was a Monk daily
crucified Christ, and with my false trust, continually blasphemed him. We have
been holy Apostates, for we have fallen from Antichrist, and the Church of
Satan, etc. There was none of us but were bloody fellows: if not in act, yet
in heart, we have blasphemed God, Christ, the Sacraments, the gospel, faith,
all good men, the true worship of God, and we have taught quite contrary. We
are judged heretics by the Pope, because we have divided our selves from that
Church, in which we were borne and bredde. Hitherto Luther, touching himself,
and the rest of his fellows.

Danaeus in like manner does boast, Danaeus resp. ad Leonic. edita. anno 1518.
Zwingl. tom. 1. Epist. ad fratres. f. 341 Melanct. tom. 1. in cap. 7. Mat. f.
407 and tom. 2. ad Swenkfeld. f. 200 Oecola^p. resp. ad Perkeym. p. 108 and
apud Hospin. part. 2. fol. 35. Brentius in apol. pro conf. Wittenb. c. de eccl.
fol. 873. Calvin in confess. fidei. fol. 111.
that his friend Osiander, was a most wicked Franciscan Monk. Neither do
Zwinglius, Melancton, or Oecolampadius, seem to take small pride in such like
confessions.

Pelican was a Minor, and Bucer a Dominican (says Hospinian) yea, we were all
of us (says Brentius) seduced fools, Idolaters, and servants of Antichrist.

We do not deny (says Calvin) but that we were once of that number Idem l. 4.
confess. c. 15. n. 16.
baptized in the Papal kingdom ibid. c. 6 n. 1. See also the Bishop of Elie
resp. ad Bellar. c. 1. Bulling. tom. 1. decad. 5. ser. 2. fol. 285. Muscul. in
locis communibus, ca. de schismate. Mourney l de ecclesia. cap. 11. Perkins in
cap. 4. ad Galath. v. 26. Hooker lib. 4. of Ecclesiast. pollic. p. 181. Powel
l. 1. de antichr. c. 21. Morton. 2. part of his apol. l. 2. c. 10. Luther tom
7. in ser. quid sit hom. Christ. praestand. fol. 274.
but we have now departed from the Roman Church. So Calvin. And the same is
acknowledged by Bullinger, Musculus, Plessie Mourney, Perkins, Hooker, Powel,
Morto^. and the rest.

I was the first to whom God vouchsafed to reueile those doctrines, which are
now preached, Comment in 1. Cor. 1.15. f. ^34. and col. men's. fol. 488.
this praise they cannot take from us; that we were the first that brought
light to the world. Without our help, no man had ever learned one word of the
Gospel. So the fore mentioned Luther.

Wotton in exam. Iuris cler. Romans page 392.
Luther might well say, that he was the first, who in these times preached
Christ, especially in the principal points of the Gospel, which is
Justification by faith in Christ, and in this respect, it is an honor to
Luther, that he was a son without a father, and a scholar without a master.
So Wotton.

Morgenster. tract. de eccles p. 145.
It is ridiculous (says Morgensterne) to think that any before Luthers time
held the true doctrine, or that Luther received his doctrine from others, and
not others from him, since all Christians know, that all Churches before
Luthers time, were overwhelmed with more then Egyptian darkness, and that
Luther was sent from above to restore the true light.

If Luther had had any predecessors imbued with the true faith and religion,
there had been no need of a Lutheran reformation, Milius in explicat. August.
Confess. art. 7. See the Protestants Apology. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 11.
etc. So Milius. And the like is affirmed by Hospinia^i. Coelius Secundus
Curio, Bucanus, Fulke, Downham, and infinite other Protestants, as shall be
showed in the next chapter.

And although other Protestants blushing at this ingenious confession of their
fellows (which they find apt to convince them of heresy, because tasting so
deeply of novelty) have taken no small pains, to make their pedigree smell
of some more antiquity; and have for this purpose composed very voluminous and
large Catologues, in which they have most shamfully thrust in, not only all
such noble professors of our Religion, who any way reprehended the vices of
those times they lived in, without any dislike of the religion; but also
omitted no sort of schismatikes, lewd heretics, atheists, sorcerers,
witches, thieues, or traitors, who either consent with them, or dissent from us
in any one point, yet such is their hard hap, that among all this GALLAMAFRY,
there is not one true Protestant to be found, as by examining their Catalogues,
and bed-roles of witnesses, I will here demonstrate unto you.

First then, Entitled a looking glass for Protestants.
to begin with the sixth age (leaving * the examination of the first five to
an other Treatise) from the year 600. to 700. S. Gregory the great, dying in
the year 590, is here raised by M. White, after the year 600. to plead for
Protestancie. See White in his way to the Church.. 50. page 387. Humf. in
Iesuitismo part. 2. rat. 5. p. 5. and 627. Bale actis To. Pont. an. 1558. p.
44. 45. 46. etc. Magdeburg. ce^t. 6. cap. 10. col. 743. 382.
they produce S. GREGORY the great: who besides that he was Pope of Rome, was
so far from being a Protestant, that Doctor Humfries, Bale, Osiander, and the
Centuriators confess of him, that he held Purgatory, relikes,
transubstantiation, prayer for the dead, indulgences, worshipping of Images,
Mass, Holy oil, Monkerie, Holy Water, Auricular confession, and al other our
doctrins, yea, quod sibi vendicauerit and exercuerit primatu^super omnes
Ecclesias. Centur. Magdeb. cent. 6. c. 10. col. 425. etc. And the like is
affirmed by Fulke in confut. of Purgato. p. 310. and Martyr. in cap 8. Iud. and
Carrion in Croni. l. 4. p. 368. and Osia^der in epitome. ce^t. 6. p. 242.
That he challe^ged unto himself, and exercised the Supremecie over all
Churches: which is the only point for which M. White makes him one of his
Protestanticall progenitors.

Secondly, they produce the sixth general Council, in which the Fathers were so
far from being Protestantically affected, that they decreed as follows.
Conci. 6. general. can. 4.
That what Clergy person soever did lie with a Nun (whom they style Christ's
spouse) should be deposed. can. 44.
That if any Monk married a wife, he should be punished as a fornicator. can.
48.
That none should be consecrated a Bishop, till his wife (by consent) being
severed from him, were placed in a Monastery, far from his abiding. can. 73.
That the Cross ought to be worshipped. can. 56.
That in Lent (no not on Sundaies) men might not eat Eggs, Cheese, Butter,
nor Flesh. can. 6.
That no Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest, might marry after Orders taken, etc.
Yea, in that very Canon, for which they are made Protestants, it is only said,
that it may be lawful for some selected married persons, to be admitted to the
order of Priesthood; which was sometimes permitted to the Greek Church, and
also in the beginning of the Gospel, when Priests were more scant, among the
Lattins: you shall hear what Epiphanius will say touching this point.

The Holy Preaching of God receives not after Christ, Epiph. haeres. 59.
co^tra Catharos. See S. Hierom co^tra Vigilant. c. 1. and cap. 8. and S.
Augustine de a^dulter. coniug. l. 2. c. 20. and Eusebius. li. 1. Eua^g. demonst.
c. 9. and alij passim.
them that marry again after their wives departure, by reason of their great
dignity and honor of Priesthood, and this the holy Church of God observes
with all sincerity; yea she does not receive the once married person, that yet
uses his wife, etc. especially where the holy Canons be sincerely kept. But
thou will say unto me, that in certain places, Deacons, Subdeacons, and
Priests, do yet beget children; but that is not done according to Order and
Rule, but according to man's mind, which by time slaketh, and for the great
multitude, when there were not found sufficient for the ministry. This and
much more S. Epiphanius.

Thirdly they allege in this age, the third Concilium Bracarence 3. extat
tom. 3. council. see in that council. c. 3. 4. and
Portugal Council, which (besides that it commends unto us hallowed Vessels,
forbids all Clergy men privately to keep company with any woman, save
their mother. And decrees, what ornaments are to be used both in private and
public Masses) has nothing at all against us, no not in the place by them
alleged; for it only says, that in the May. White to make this council
speak against us, uses as black dealing as may be. For where the Council
speaks of the Sacrifice, he applies it to the Sacrament, saying, that the
Council appointed the Cup to be administered to the people in the Sacrament.
And to this he taileth an other egregious Lie, in intimating, that our use
(before we gave the Sacrament in one kind only) was to dippe the bread in wine.
sacrifice of the Mass, wine mingled with water, and bread alone, should be
used, and not wine only, nor bread dipped in water, which doctrine, our Church
well allows of, and constantly teaches and practices.

IN the seventh age, viz. from 700 to 800. they White in his way to the Church.
50. page 388.
name Clement, Scotus, and Adelbertus. Both which (besides that they held more
points with us, then with them, and consequently, could not be true
Protestants) were confessed heretics. See Baronius an. 745 n. 28.
Scotus held that a Christian might lawfully marry, with his brothers wife;
th at when Christ descended into hell, See the same Baron. ancod. n. 21 24. and
Damascene verbo Iconomaclastae.
he delivered thence, not only the faithful, but also the Infidels, and the
worshippers of Idols, and the like. And as for Adelbertus, he gave out that he
had certain relickes, by which he could obtain, what he listed of God; was
well content, that Churches and Chapels, should be dedicated to his proper
worship and honor; gave his own hair, and parings of his nails, to be
worshipped of his followers, as sacred relikes; bragged that he knew the
secrets of men's hearts, and accordingly, White vt supra. see Baron. an. 704. n.
17. and Dama. vt supra. See Conc. Constant. pol. sub Isaurico and Copron. c 15.
17. 18 and Magd. cent. 8. c. 9. and council. tricaenum. 2. act. 6.
gave them absolution without hearing their confessions, etc.

They further produce the two Constantinopolitan councels, under Leo Isauricus
and Copronimus, which councels, (besides, that they were condemned and rejected
by diverse following Councels, as schismatic and heretical) decreed as
follows; that whosoever denied that the B. Virgin, was to be inuocated; or
that the Saints were not to be worshipped; or that eternal life was not given
for the merit of good works, etc. should be ANATHEMA, or accursed of God:
either of which doctrines, will convince, that neither of these councels did
much favor Protestancie.

They further White vt supra.
produce in this age, (as an other Protestant witness) the Council of
Frankford What is to be thought of the Council, see the notes on the third tome
of councels an. 1618. p. p. 126. See also Bellarm. tom. 7. operu^ f. 566. lib.
cu^ titul. confutat. libelli de cultu Im^gin. qui falso, etc.
as also two books one pretended, to be composed by CHARLES the great, and the
other by LODOWICK his son, containing the Acts of that Counsel.

To which we answer, that if the Council of Frankford, had been approved
Council, and those two books (bearing the names of CHARLES and LODOWIKE) there
true borne, and not heretical Imps, (c) injuriously fastened on those two
worthy Catholic Princes; yet seeing together with the reiection of Images,
they teach That the Pope is supreme head, in all controversies belonging to
faith, That the Pope has his supremacy immediately from God, That prayer is to
be made for the dead, That Saints are to be inuocated, That relickes are to be
worshipped, That in the Eucharist, Christ's body is truly present, and there to
be adored, etc. The Emperor Charles the great, did not only command by his
public edicts that the ceremonies, rits, and Masses of the Church of Rome, and
other decrees, pleasurs, and appoyntments of the Roman Bishop, should be
observed through all his Empire; but he himself also did compel the Churches
unto this, by imprisonments, and sundry punishments, says Hospinian in epist.
dedic. hist. vide etiam Osiand. in epit. ce^t 8. p. 101. and Cooper in Cronico.
f. 173. and Crispin^ l. de stat. Ecclesiae page 221. 226.
The Protestants have small reason to claim this Council, as a good witness
of their religion.

Besides the Cent. 8. c. 9. col. 570. ex Paulo Amilio. l. 2. hist. Fran.
Magdeburgians, out of Paulus Aemilius, confess that CHARLES the great, sent
twelve of his most learned Prelates, to the Roman Council, under Pope ADRIAN,
in which the worship of Images was established. He wrote also the Epitaph of
Pope ADRIAN as follows: Hic Pater Ecclesiae, Romae decus, inclytus author
ADRIANVS requiem Papa beatus habet.
Vir cui vita decus; pietas, lex; gloria, Christus;
Pastor Apostolicus, promptus ad omne bonum, etc.
Which evidently show, that CHARLES the great, held not Image-worshippers
Idolaters, but rather the quite contrary, as may appear by what has been
already said, as also by the testimony of Jonas Aureliensis, who as an
eyewitness affirms, that in the reign of CHARLES the great, Claudius
bishop of Towers (the chief oppugner of Images) durst nowhere show his head.
And as for LODOVICK his son, surnamed the godly, Carrion writes as follows.
LODOVICKE the only suruiuing son of CHARLES, was for his religious
superstition, surnamed the godly, for he increased the feasts, and the
Idolatrous worshipping of Saints, and the superstitious observation of
Monastical orders, etc. So far was LODOVICK from being Protestantically
minded.

Lastly, Jonas Aureliens. l. 1. de cultu Imag Carionin cronico l. 4. p. 96.
edit. 2. volumnibus.
they produce venerable Bede, John Damascene, and diverse other known
Catholics. For as touching S. Bid, Osiander acknowledges, that he held in
all points with the Pope, and as for (c) S. John Damascene, he was one of the
principal resisters of Leo Isauricus, in his heresy against the worship of
Images, neither did he differ from us, in any point of doctrine for ought I can
find. Illiricus in catalogo testium veritatis. Osiander in epit. cent. 8. l.
2. c. 3. c. see Baron. an. 727. 7 n. 18. 19.


IN the eight age White vt supra page 388.
they name John Scotus, Bertram, and Claudius bishop of Towers, the last of
which three, holding that baptism was not good, which was not administered with
the sign of the Cross, and professing Nestorianisme: the Protestants must
needs confess him to be an heretic. And as touching Scotus and Besides that,
the Magdeburgenses (cent. 9. c. 4. col 212.) affirm that in Bertrams book,
transubstantiation is taught: it is thought that Bertra^ made not that book,
because Pantalion, who was diligent in reckoning up all Bertrams books, makes
no mention of this book, for which he is only made a Protestant. See Pantalion
in Cronologia. an. 65.
Bertram (if those books in which the Real presence seems to be impugned,
were made by them) being in all other points, besides that of the Real
presence, known Papists; what reason the Protestants have to produce them, as
their progenitors, let the readet judge.

They likewise name in this age Lotharius the Emperor, White vt supra.
who (says White) reduced the Pope to the obedience of the Empire, sending for
that cause, three Archbishops, twenty Bishops, and diverse noble men to Rome,
who disputed against him, and confuted him.

Which to be one of the blackest and most impudent lies, that ever was coined,
the very author by him cited, will abundantly witness; for he plainly says,
that Diuina gratia inspirante, nec sermones ipsius almi Pontificis, nec
prudentiam superare valueru^t. tantaque ei superna aderat virtus, vt nullo
sermon eum includere and constringere potuerunt, etc. See Anastasius (cited by
White) in vitis Pontificum, in Sergio. 2. an. 162.
Gods grace so inspired the Pope, that those (Lotharian) Bishops were not able
to overcome, or circumuent him by their speeches, but being themselves overcome
and confounded, with shame, were forced to leave him, and go their ways.

They further allege in this age The Emperor Michael, chiefly showed
himself to be a Protestant in marying a vowed Nun, in impugning Images, in
condemning the Nicene Council, and in banishing good Catholics.
Michael the Emperor, and Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople, two worthy
Progenitors of Protestanisme. The first of them (according to all See Zonaras
and Cedrinus apud Bellarm. tom 7. de cultu Imagine. ca. 6.
Greek authors) being a most wicked man, far more addicted to Iudaisme, then
Christianity; holding fornication to be lawful, and denying the resurrection,
etc. And the second, maintaining among other heresies, that the Holy Ghost, did
not proceed from the Father, and the Son, but from the Father only; that
neither the good should enjoy happiness, nor the ill receive punishment before
the day of Judgment, that to hurt and circumuent his enemy, See Gualter in
Crono graph. saec. 8. in collat. c. 4.
a man might lie, and for-sweare him self; that it was in each man's power when
he listed to dissolve Matrimony; that Widows might not marry again; that
simple fornication and usury were no sins; that a man was not bound to make
restitution of stolen goods; that men were to abstain from blood, and all
meats prohibited in the Old law; that the Eucharist was to be administered to
children, immediately after baptism, and the like.

Lastly, they Powel in praefat. l. de antichristo.
produce as a Protestant witness of this age, Alphred king of the west Saxons,
and some others whom See Stow in his Cronicle edi. an. 1614. page 80.
all the world knows, to have been in all points true Roman Catholics.

White as above 50. page 389.
IN the ninth age (quoth M. White) Otho the great, deposed JOHN the Pope, and
assumed into his hands the nominating and making of Popes ever after. Which was
a manifest resistance made against the grouth of the supremacy. So White. and
cites for his Author, Sigonius. In which, Sigonius regni Italici. l. 7. an.
963.
after search made, finding the contrary, I could not but stand amazed at the
frontlesse impudence of this Minister, and his Cymists. For both Sigonius and
Luitprandus declare, that Otho went to Rome, with an intent to aid Pope JOHN
against Berengarius and Albertus. And after coming thither, though he was
informed by the Bishops, of this Popes ill demeanor, yet he wrote unto him a
letter, Luitprandus l. 6. c. 6. and 7.
in which he styled him, The chief Bishop, and universal Pope; called the
Cardinals, Bishops, and Priests, his sons, and him self his Protector,
earnestly praying his FATHERHOOD, to make his appearance and answer before the
Council of Bishops (for that purpose assembled) to such crimes, as were
objected against him. And after, when he appeared not, and the Bishops were
instant to have him deposed, he only answered (as Sigonius writes) Quando
ergo haec praestare statuitis, etc. Since then you are determined to depose
him, choose ye another in his room, Illiricus ex Luitprando. cent. 10. c. 9.
col. 433. and sequent.
who may be worthy of this seat, etc. not daring (as Illiricus confesses out
of Luitprandus) to make him self judge of him, that was his Judge. So far
was this good Emperor, from presuming on his own authority, in the
deposition of Popes, or arrogating unto himself the making of Popes, as this
lying heretical Minister affirms.

Arnulphus a learned Catholic Bishop, is also White as above. page 23.
produced for a Protestant witness of this age: but the only reason alleged
(which is, that he held the Pope to be Antichrist) proouing to be a See Baron.
an. 992. per totu^.
slanderous lie; the Protestants cause, is but little aduantaged by this
witness.

Illiricus in catalogo testium. and White as above.
IN the tenth age, they name Glaber, Rodolphus, Leuthericus, Anselmus, Lanfranke
and others, who are all well known Roman Catholics, and notable oppugners of
Protestancie.

They name likewise White as above.
Berengarius, See Gualter in cronographia. saec. 1000. in coll. c. 1.
who yet abiured as heretical, that very point, for which only he is made a
Protestant, and dyed reconciled to the Church of Rome.

They White as above. Stephanus Alberstadiensis in epist. ad Wolfangum. extat
apud Dodechi number in additione ad Marianum Scotum. an. 1090.
name also Henry the fourth, Emperor of Germany, and other of his Bishops and
nobles. The worth of which witness, you shall hear from the Histographers of
that time. Omnis qui dignitates spirituales vendit, haereticus est, etc. Every
one that sells spiritual dignities, is an heretic; but Henry whom they call
king, does sell Bishoprikes, and Abbotships; for he has sold for money, the
Bishoprikes of Constance, Bamburg and Mintz, the Bishoprikes of Reipurth,
Ausburg, and Strasburge for a sword; the Abbotship of Fulden for adultrie; the
bishoprike of Monasterience for Sodomie, etc. So Stephanus Alberstadiensis
while this Henry was yet living.

The Catholic men who lived in that time (says Maerianus) hearing and seeing
these abominations, Marianus Scotus, in Cron. an. 1075.
and unheard of wickedness of Henry, directed Messengers with letters to
ALEXANDER Bishop of the Sea Postolike, in which they declared these, and many
other things which were done and said, by the mad Simoniacal heretics, under
King Henry their Author and patron.

If you desire to know (says Krantzius) the praises of Henry; he was noble,
Krantzius l. 5. Saxon. c. 24.
learned, strong, tall, and of a Kingly Majesty; but on the other side, the
heinous offenses which he committed, are incredible to be spoken, etc.

Auentine also says, Auentine l. 5. anal. Boron. ^. page 563.
that his very friends cannot deny, but that Henry was infamous for
rauishments, adultries, etc. He was held by all Catholics (says Vspergensis)
for an arch-pirate, an apostata, Vspergensis in cronic. an. 1068. Calvin l. 4.
inst. c. 11. n. 3. see Bellarmine l. 1. de translat. Ro^. Imperij. c. 9. tom. 7.
arch-heretike, and a greater persecutor of men's souls, then of their bodies,
etc. So all the writers of that time, to which you may add the testimony of
Calvin, who plainly confesses, that this Henry was a man, light, rash, and of
no judgment, of wounderful dissoluteness of life, Who had in his Hall, all
the bishorikes of Germany, partly to be sold, and partly to be exposed for a
pray.

To this you may Note that this Henry the 3. or as some call him the fourth,
in the time he strove with the Pope for the inuestiing of Bishops by Ring and
Staff, was deposed by his own son, and imprisoned, whence escaping after a
second defeat, was brought to such misery, that he sued to be a Sexton in a
Church, but not admitted to that office, he fell to beg of Lay men, crying in
lamentable manner, Have mercy upon me, at least you my friends, for the hand
of the Lord has touched me, and so full of misery, and repentant sorrow, he
pyned to death, to the great rejoicing of al Christendom. See Sigonius. de
reg. Italico. l. 9. in Hen. 4.
add, that he afterward submitted him self to Rome, and acknowledged the
Popes supremacy, as BELLARMINE proves at large.

IN the eleventh age, they name Henry the fifth, Emperor of that name, who in
the beginning of his reign, insisted in the steps of his father before
mentioned, See Abbas Vspergensis in cron. an. 1110. and
but seeing (as it is well known) he afterward recanted, and was reconciled to
the Sea Apostolic; he ceased to be a Protestant witness.

They produce in like manner, an other of their Gransires in this age; White as
above.
the Emperor Fredertcke, named Ahembardus: but upon what grounds think you?
he denied appeals to Rome, say they, which I find to be true indeed, but yet
this will not make him a Protestant, unless Protestancie, proceed only of
spleen, and the heat of contention. For that he believed that the Pope was
Christ's true Vicegerent upon earth, and the Universal and highest Bishop, as
both his words and deeds declare sufficiently. See Nauclerum vol. 2. generat.
93. p. 844. edit. 1614 and p. 856. See also Radeniu^ de rebus Frederick primi.
c. 16. 17. and 56. and Krantzius l. 6. c. 16.
For to let pass his prostrating him self before Victor the Antipope, which
yet was an evident sign, that he had the Papal dignity, in the heighest
esteem) he styled Pope ALEXANDER the 3. (whom he so much hated) head of the
Catholic Church. And when he was willed to humble him self at this ALEXANDERS
feet, he did so, pronouncing these words, Non tibi, sed Petro, cuius successor
es, Pareo: I do obeisance not to thee, but to S. PETER, whose successor thou
art.

Much more shamfully S. BERNARD is by them produced, as a Protestant witness of
this age, White as before, etc Illiricus.
who yet in all points was a Roman Catholic, as al his books do evidently
declare, and some Protestants protest, saying Centur. cent. 12. col. 1637.
He worshipped the God Maozim, to the last minute of his life; ibid. col 1638.
he was an earnest propugner of the Antichristian seat; White taker ad Rationet
Campaniani. rat. 7. p. 105.
he was the only godly man your Roman Church had for many years.

Again, they allege the White as above, Illiricus in Catalogo testium. and
Beza in vita Caluini, and in Icon. an. 158. v. Wald. Fulke de success. contra.
Stap. page 332. Abbot against Hill page 57. and Camerarius de Ecclesia fratrum
orthodox. p. 7. 9. and 11. See the Protestants Apology, tract. 2. c. 2. sect.
3 cu^ Waldensibus fraterna coniunctio ad extremu^ vsque colenda est. So Calvin
in Epist. 201. ad Polonos.
Waldenses (f) and Albigenses, as Protestant witnesses of this age, who held
indeed many Protestanticall opinions, but with all, * that no obedience was
due to any Prelate; that it was lawful for all men although they were forbidden
by their superiors) to Preach that Lay persons, if they were just, might
Consecrate; that no perfect person might use any manual labor; that men were
to use no other form of prayer, but the Pater noster; that Priests and civil
Magistrates, being once guilty of Mortal sin, did immediately loose their
dignities, and were not after to be reverenced; that Ecclesiastical persons
might possess neither money nor lands; that the Apostles Creed was to be
contemned; that no Judge had power to condemn any man to death; that all
carnal copulation is lawful, if our lust provoke us thereunto; that Churches
environed with walls, are to be esteemed as barnes; that those married folk,
who lie together, without a desire to get children, do sin mortally; that
men might lawfully dissemble their faith; that there were two beginnings, to
wit, God and the devil; that God created men's souls, and the devil their
bodies; that men's souls passed out of one body, into an other; that our
bodies should never rise again; that there was neither Hell nor * See
Gualterus in his Cronographie saec. 12. cap. 25. and 16. and Illiricus in
Catalogo; and Osiander cent. 9. 10. 11. and Fox. acts. and Simon voyen. in
catalogo doctor. Eccles. p. 134.
Purgatory; that the new testament was made by a kind God, and the old by a
spiteful God, and therefore the one to be rejected, and the other admitted;
that the Author of the old Testament, was a liar and a murderer; that all the
Fathers of the old Testament, were damned; that John Baptist, was one of the
greater devils; that Marie Magdalene was Christ's concubine, and the selfsame
woman, which the Gospel affirms to have been taken in adultrie; that there
were two Christ's, one good, who was borne and crucified, and the other bad, who
was visibly borne at Bethelem, and crucified at Jerusalem; that God had two
wives, Collant and Collibant, on whom he begat many children; that good Christ
never eat, nor drunk, nor was ever visible but in Paul's body; That to lie
with ons mother was no greater sin, then with any other woman, etc.

Which horred opinions, howsoever White, Abbots, Illiricus, Beza, Calvin, and
Fox, can digest, and place these miscreant Albigenses, and Waldenses, in the
Catalogue of their most noble Protestant progenitors, Camerarius de fratrum
ortho. Ecclesia page 273.
because in some points they agree with them; yet some other Protestants reject
them as heretics: the Waldenses (says Camerarius) never agreede with our
Churches, Jewel in defense of his Apology. p. 48. Osiander cent. 13. p. 329.
See the Protestants Apology tract. 2. c. 2.
nor we with theirs. The Albigenses are none of ours, says Jewel; they were
Heretics, says Osiander; with whom consent, Cooper (in dict.) the
Magdeburgians ( cent. 3. c. 3. Marbeke ( in locis communibus. 22.) and diverse
others.

They place moreover in this age, in their Catalogue of Protestant progenitors,
Illiricus in catologo test.
Peter de Brucis, Simo^dus in Apoc. page 142.
Abaillardus, Lib. epist. zwing. and Oecola^padij page 710. and 716. and
centur. 12. col. 848.
(d) Arnoldus, and other like, who maintained in deed, as the Protestants now
do; that men had no Free Will; that there is no Real presence; that the Mass
was to be abrogated; that Crosses were to be broken down, and the like, yet
seeing they also held; that no Churches ought to be builded, and that such as
were built, ought to be plucked down; that almes-deedes and prayers, were not
to be regarded; that God was not a simple essence; that God was not the author
of all good; that the Angels created some things; that Christ took not on him
human flesh to free us; that Christ had in him no fear of God; that God
could not have made things otherwise then they are; that all the devils
temptations came by touching certain herbs and stones; that the blessed
should never see God, and the like; the Protestants have no great reason to
glory in them. Illiricus in Catologo test. Powel in praefat. l. de Antichristo
page 14. 15. 16. White as before p. 392. and Powel in the considerat. of Popish
reasons. page 53. Naper in Apocal. cap. 20.


In the twelft age, they name S. Thomas of Aquine, Bonauenture, Durand, Lira,
Duns Scotus, Roger Bacon and others so Catholikely addicted, and so
diametrically opposite to Protestancie, that none but impudence it self, would
produce them for Protestants.

They name also Peter Blois, and Gulielmus de Sancto Amore; the first of which
two (besides these two heretical opinions; that Monks living by alms, could
not be saved, and that actual poverty, was not lawful) was in all points (for
ought I find) a Roman Catholic; and the other, by their own Osiand. in Epit.
cent. 12. page 281.
confessions, only reprehended our manners, and not our doctrine.

They further Whire vt supra.
name in this age, Frederike the second, Emperor of Germany, and Almoricus
with others of like sort; the first of which we easily acknowledge to have
been at emnitie with the Pope a long time. But yet, seeing he after See
Vsperge^sis in Cronico, and Whimxtelingus in epit. rerum Corman cap. 15.
heartily repented the same, and humbly craved absolution at the Popes hands,
and was in Religion a Roman Catholic; the Protestants do him great wrong, in
producing him for one of their progenitors: and as touching Almoricus, since
together with the denial of the Real presence, and invocation of Saints; See
Gualtier in Chronograph. faec. 1200. in collat. c. 1.
he also taught these following ( viz. that if Adam had not offended, there
should not have been any distinction of Sexes, nor any procreation of
Children; that the blessed should never see God, but in his Creatures only;
that there should be no resurrection of bodies; that there was neither heaven
nor hell, and the like) this will prove but an heretical witness. White in
his way as before p. 392 and Powel in prefatione l. de antich. White in his way
as above page, 393. Fox acts and Monuments. Powel in praefat. l. de antichristo.


IN the thirteenth age they name, Alfarus, Pelagius, S. Katherine of Sienna,
William Wickham, William Occham, and some others: the three first of which were
in all points for ought I can find, undoubted Roman Catholics, and howsoever
the other did hold erroniously in some points, yet it is most certain that
they were very far from being in all, Protestantically affected.

They further produce in this age, Lollard walter, and John witclffe, as two
eminent martirs, and most renowned Protestant progenitors; and yet the first of
these was burnt for these and such like opinions. See Gualtier in Cronographia.
saec. 13. c. 7. in collat.
viz. That Lucifer and his assotiates, were unjustly thrust out of heaven; that
Michael and the other blessed Angels, should be damned; that the Virgin MARY
remained not a Virgin; that God will punish no sins that are committed here on
earth, etc.

And as for Wickliffe See Stow and Hollinshead in their Cronicles. an. 1382.
and Bal^in his 4. centurie. Matthew Hoe in tract. 1. de disput. p. 27.
Pantaleo^ in Cronol page 119. Vadianus Zwingl. l. 5. Antichristop. 168.
besides that he dyed of a natural disease quietly in his bed) Matthew Hoe,
Pantaleon, and Vadianus Zwinglianus, all famous Protestants, repute him for an
Heretic, and others for a See Fox acts and monuments, and Stow. See also
Melancton in dispute de iure Magistrate. and Osiander ce^t. 9. 10. 11. 12. art.
15. See also Breitly in his Protestant Apollogie tract. 2.. 4. c. 2.
Traitor. Neither do I see, how any Protestant can judge better of him,
unless he happily allow of these following positions of his viz. That no
Priest ought to possess any thing as proper; that no Magistrate had any
authority, as long as he was in Mortal sin; that no Prelate ought to
excommunicate any, unless he be certain that the party was before
excommunicated by God; that the people may at their pleasure punish their
Lords; that Universities, Colleges, and degrees therein taken, were as
commodious to the common weal, as the devil; that by Gods law, the brother
and sister might marry together; that God must obey the devil; that every
creature may be called God; that all things happened by inevitable necessity;
that to enrich the Clergy, was against the law of Christ; that all oaths are
lawful, which are used to confirm bargains and contracts; that a bishop is
not above a Priest, and the like.

Powel in praefat. lib. de Antichristo. page 28. 29.
Powel adds to the former Protestant Confessors of this age, Nicolas Herford,
Petrus Patishal, and Richard White; but in acknowledging them to have been true
Witcliffes, we may justly conclud them to have been notorious heretics.

IN the fourteenth age; they place Robert Fox in Acts and Monuments, and Powel
vt supra, and Bale, ce^t. 6. c. 78. and Willet in synopsi. Stow in annal. edit.
1614. fol. 344. see also Holinshead an. 1414. See the examination of Foxes
callender in the 3. conversion.
Ashton, for one of their rubicated or prime Martirs; who yet as STOW
witnesses, was condemned for rebellion and treason, and buried under the
Gallows.

John Brown (a) Richard Silbecke, John Beuerly, and William Swindersbie, are
placed as four other Protestant Martirs; and yet the first three (b) were
condemned for treason and rebellion with the foresaid Robert Ashton; and as for
Swindersbie, besides that Fox confesses, that he is uncertain what became of
him (only he is sure that he escaped the hands of those that had him in hold,
and that he had no harm, during the time of RICHARD the second, viz. in the
year 1401. in which year. he is made a martyr) The opinions for which he was
questioned were these: That no man can imprison an other for debt; that every
Priest taking an yearly pension, commits symmonie; that Priests Consecrating
in Mortal sin, commit Idolatry, etc. which evidently show, White as above,
Powel in praefat. lib. de Antichristo. p. 33. 34. Fox acts and mon. Stow and
Hollinsh. an. 5. He^r. 5. Walsing, an. 1417. p. 448.
that Swinderbie was an heretic.

William Thorpe, John Purney, and Sir John Old Castle, are three other
Protestant Martirs of this age; and yet the two first are confessed by Powell,
to have been Weckliffites, and consequently heretics, as before showed; and as
concerning Old-castle, (whom Fox styles Lord Martyr) Stow and Hollanshead
confess, that he was convicted and condemned for treason and open rebellion,
and accordingly executed. an. 134. 17. December 14. an. 3. Henrici. 5. And as
touching his doctrine, Fox and Powel vt supra. This Only or Bullingbrooke, is
named by Fox in his first editio^ knight and in the second Priest.
he was so madly minded (says Walsingham) that he thought he should rise
again the third day.

Roger Only, alias Bullingbrooke, Elenor Cobham, and Rainold Peacocke, are
produced as three other Protestant progenitors in this age; the two last for
confessors, and the first for a rubricated Martyr, who yet was executed for no
other cause, but for that he had sought the kings death, by art Magic; and as
for Elenor Eleonor Colham, is styled by Powel pijssima ducissa. a most pious
Duchess.
Cobham, she was convicted to have been a principal agent in the conspiracy
with Only; and after conviction was committed to the ward of Sir Thomas
Standly, where she remained during her life, in the Castle of Chester, whose
pride, falsehood, covetous, and lechery (says Stow) were cause of her
confusion. Stow an. 20 Henrici 6.


Thirdly concerning Peacoke, the same Stow an 36. Henr. 6.
Stow will tell you, that he was accused, for denying certain Articles of the
Apostles Creed, which he after at Paul's Cross, abiured, revoked, and
renounced; requiring all men, in the name of God, and as they tendered their
saluations, not to give credit to his pernicious doctrines, errors, and
heresies (which by presuming on his own natural wit, and preferring his own
judgment in reading the Scripturs, before the judgment of his Holy Mother the
Church, he had conceived and written) but that all such books and writings,
should be delivered to the Archbishop, or his Commissaries, to be burnt, as
well deserving the same.

They further name in this age, John Hus, Richard Turmin, and Machiauil. The
first of which three, White vt supra. Fox in Acts and Monum. Illiricus l. 19.
test. p. 1916. an. 1608. edit. Matthew Hoe in tract. duobus. tract. 1. de disp.
page 27.
maintained all Wickliffes opinions, and is justly ranked by Matthew Hoe, in the
Catalogue of Heretics, and his opinions, styled MONSTROVS MONSTERS. Secondly
concerning Of this Protestant Martyr, Fox confesses, that he not only escaped
burning, but had never so much as any sentence of death pronounced against him.
Turmin, he was in the conspiracy with Sir John Oldcastle. and as touching
Machiauill al men know that he was a true Atheist.

And thus having exactly viewed the Catalogue of the Protestants pretended
Ancastrie, and found them to be no other, then either confessed Papists, known
Schismatikes, detested Heretics, Athists, Magitians, Thieues and Traitors, I
will conclude this chapter with this dilemma.

Either Luther and his cope-mates, Calvin, Zwinglius and the rest, had known,
visible, and eminent predecessors, who professed the doctrines they now teach
in all former ages, or they had no predecessors. If they had no predecessors
(as Luther himself, and most learned Protestants confessed in the beginning of
this chapter) it must necessarily follow (to say nothing of the calling of
Protestant Ministers, which must needs befro^ the devil, because it was neither
Ordinary that is, from men of lawful authority it could not be, for neither
at that time, nor long before, there had been any known or visible Protestant
Minister or Magistrate, as they themselves confessed in the beginning of this
chapter, and as for Papists, who then were only visible, as most Protestants
acknowledge, they never sent them to Preach those new doctrines, neither will
any Protestant endure to derive any small authority from them. We (says Fulke
in his Retentiue (p. 67.) and in his answer to the false Catholic (page 50.)
detest, abhor, abjure, and spit at your Antichristian and filthy Orders; you
are deceived, if you think that we hold our offices of Deacons, Priests, or
Bishops, for any other then merely laicall; The Papisticall ordinations says
Powell (in his consideration of the Papists reasons page 71. and 70.) are mere
Prophanations, neither is there in the Papacy any Ecclesiastical calling So
he, and the like is affirmed by Beza, apud Sarauium in defens. tract. p. es
Bucanus in locis commun. loco. 42.
ordinary, nor Extraordinary or immediately from God, it was neither by their
own confessions, and this for two reasons: First, because extraordinary
calling has not been in use since the Apostles time, nor must ever be
expected, till the end of the world, as Luther in tom. 5. Wit. in cap. 1. ad
Galath. p. 376. Musculus (in locis commun. p. 304.) Lobecke (in disput.
Theolog. p. 358.) and Sarania (in defens. tract. contra defens. Beza. p. 73.
and 35. 36. 37.) contend. Secondly because extraodinarie vocation was ever
accompanied with miracles, as the said Luther (in locis communib. class 4.
cap. 20. and Epist. ad Senatum Malhus. apud Sleydan. l. 3. an. 25.) Piscator
(in volum. Theolog. These. 1. loco. 23.) Polanus (lib. 1. part Theolog. page
358.) and other affirm; Now that no Protestant ever wrought any miracle, is
manifest in it self, neither will any of them challenge so much; we neither
work miracles, neither do we hold, that the doctrine of truth is to be
confirmed by Miracles. So Sutcliffe in examine. Kelis. p. 8. and the like is
affirmed by Fulke (contra Remist. test. fol. 478.) Erasmus (apud Fitz Siomn in
Britanniar. Ministr) and others.
extraordinary, that is neither immediately from God, nor mediatly by men of
lawful authority: If ((...) say) they had no predecessors, it mus^ needs
follow, that the doctrines, o^ which the Protestant Church is founded, were
heretical and Antichristian, and they them selves Nouellizers, Heretics, and
Sathanicall Ministers, because the true Esaias. cap. 2. verse. 2. and cap. 60. 61.
and 62. per totum. And Psalm. 91. v. 4. Ephesians 4.11.12. Mat. 18. v. 15. and
cap. 24. v. 25.26. And Daniel 2. v. 44. And Osee cap. 2. v. 19 Athanasius in
Orat. de Christi. Chrysostom. sermon. 26. de Pentecost. Augustine epist. 170. and
in Concione. 2. in psalm. 5. See also the Protestants Apology, tract. 2. c. 2.
sect. 8.
Church of Christ, according to express Scriptures, consent of Catholic
writers, and confessions of best learned Protestants, must be always as a
City seated on the top of a hill, known, eminent and gloriously visible,
whose Sun must never set, nor her Moon lie hid, whose gates must ever stand
open and the like, having in her Pastors and Ministers Preaching the word, and
administering the Sacraments, and resisting all novelties and false doctrines.

But if (as Illiricus, Fulke, and D. White con^end) Luther and his cymists, had
any Predecessors, the chief of which were those formerly mentioned, to wit,
Schismatikes, Heretics, Athiests, Magitians, Thieues, and Traitors (for as
touching Papists, they utterly disclayme them, neither will any Protestant
endure to derive his Pedigree or Mission from them of all others) it cannot be
denied, but that Protestants are infamous and detestable heretics, in being
descended, from such accursed, infamous, devilish, and detestable progenitors.

CHAPTER II. That all the chief doctrines and principles of Protestancie, are
old condemned heresies; and that the most damned heresies that ever were
hatched in any age, have been cherished, fostered, and defended by the chief
Doctors in the Protestant Church.
THat all the doctrines which Protestants at this day so eagerly maintain
against Roman Catholics, are old condemned Heresies; and that the chief
Apostles and Doctors of Protestancie, have revived and defended all the most
detestable heresies that ever any former age begotte. Iacobus Gualtier in lib.
cui titulus Tabula Cronographica Ecclesiae catholicae a Christo nato vsque ad
an. 1614. edit. an. 1616. Clement. 3. recog. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 20.
JAMES GVALTIER in his learned and elaborate Cronographicall tables (out of the
several Catalogues of Heresies, composed by S. Eiphanius, Austine,
Philastrius, Alphonsus a Costro Prateolus, and other ancient and modern
writers) has proved at large. Out of whom I will here instance in some few
which seem to be as the Marrow, Essence, and life of Protestanisme. Setting
down the age in which these Heresies were first begot; the Fathers and
Counsels, who opposed and condemned them; and the Protestant Doctors by whom
they are revived and maintained. I will begin with the first age.

In the first age, Simon Magus one of the first detested heretics, was
condemned of heresy by S. CLEMENT and IRENEVS, for teaching; that men are not
saved by good works, but by faith only; and that man had no free will: both
which assertions, are now generally maintained by all sorts of Protestants, as
two principal and essential Articles of their religion.

That Luther in artic. 36.
it is not in man's power to think either good or evil, but that all things
do happen by absolute necessity, is one of our chief Articles, says Martin
Luther; Idem tom. 5. Ger. Ien. in admonit. ad German. fol 288. and tom. 7. Ger.
Wit. fol. 478.
and as for Justification by faith only; (for Idem tom. 1. Ger. Wit in 2. ad
Galat. fol 47. and 91. and tom. 1. Latt. Ien. fol. 488.
faith only Justifies, and not that faith which includes Charity) it is an
Article which we cannot be without, because that failing, our Church falls;
Ide^ to^. 5. in c. 3. ad Gal.
it is our only safeguard, without which, both we and all other sectaries, had
undoubtedly perished; Idem tom. 2. lib. de abhominatione Missae. fol. 390.
it is the sum of our Gospel. So Luther.

In the second age Cerinthus stands convicted of heresy, by Epi^ haeres. 8
S. Epiphanius, for teaching that children might be saved without Baptism;
which is now a plausible doctrine, among all the Caluinian Protestants.

Baptism is but a seal of the promise, and neither hinders nor furthereth
in the way of salvation; neither does the salvation of children depend on
baptism, but on the promise which God made to ABRAHAM Genesis 27.7; therefore all
the children of believing parents, are sanctified in their mothers womb, and
are by faith the heirs of the kingdom of heaven, so Calvin l. 4. Inst. c. 16.
n. 24. and 17. and 26. and cap 15. n. 10. and 20. and in ad. tid council Trident
sess 5. Rogers in his book entitled the Catholic doctrine of the Church of
England. art. 25. Willet in Synops. contr. 11. q. 3. Babington Coment. in
Genes. 17.7. Zanch. in Miscel. l. 3. art. 17.
Calvin; and the like is affirmed by Rogers, Willet, Babington, Zanchie, and
all other pure Caluinian Protestants.

In the same age, Ebion stands condemned of heresy, Epiphan. haeres. 30.
by the foresaid Epiphanius, for denying that Christians enjoyed the verity of
the old Figures; Calvin l. 4. Instit. c. 17. and 19. per totum Et c. 14. n. 20.
and l. 2. c. 10. n 5. and Willet in Synop. controu. 15. q. 3. and controu. 11.
q. 7. and Powel l. 2. de Antichristo cap. 21.
which is also a current doctrine, among the Caluinian Protestants: For they
generally teach; that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is but a figure of
Christ's body; That S. JOHN Baptists baptism, was all one with ours; that our
Baptism exceeds not in prerogative the Jews circumcision; that the
schoolemens distinction (teaching that the Sacraments of the Old law did only
adumbrate or shadow, and the Sacraments of the new conferred grace) was to be
hissed at; and that the Jews in their sacraments had the same substance of
Christ that we have.

Again, the same Ebion was condemned by the foresaid Epipha^. haere. 30.
Father, For imposing a necessity on marriage, which is a doctrine much urged
and defended by Martin Luther, the Protestants Apostle and Evangelist. As it is
not in my power (says he) not to be a man, Luther in Sermon. de Matrimonio
1522. fo. 5. latt. Wit. See also Calvin l. 4. Instit. c. 13. n. 3. and Harmon.
in Mat. 19.12.
so it is not in me to live without a woman, etc. For our Election or Council
is not free, but a thing naturally necessary, that a man be joined to a woman,
and a woman to a man; for this word which God spoke, increase and multiply, is
not a precept, but more then a precept, to wit, Gods work which is not in our
power to hinder or omit, but it is as necessary as to be a man, and more
necessare then to eat, drink, purge, sleep or wake, etc. So Luther. And in
an other place, exempting but three kinds of men from the necessity of
marriage, viz. Gelded men, Eunuchs borne, and such as have made themselves
Eunukes, he adds saying; whosoever does not find himself in the number of
one of these, must in any case think of a wife, and hasten marriage, yea
though he have made ten vows, oaths, promises and adamantine obligations to
the contrary.

Epiphan. haer. 27. and August haer. 7.
Again in this same age, Capronimus stands condemned of heresy, both by S.
Austine, and S. Epiphanius, for contending that the law appertained not unto
Christian men; which is one of Luthers prime doctrines: You shall hear him
speak; Luther tom 4. Ieu. latt. argum in epist. ad Galath.
the Apostle says, ye are not under the Law, but under grace; how not under
the Law? according to the new man, unto whom the Law does nothing appertain,
for it had his limitts unto Christ's time, as PAVLE afterward says etc. Ibid.
o Law touch not my conscience, for I am baptized, and by the Gospel called to
the communion of Justice, and everlasting life, to the Kingdom of Christ,
where there is no Law, but mere remission of sins, peace, quietness, and
mirth, etc. Ibid. in cap. 2. ad Galath. fol. 46.
therefore a Christian is free from all Laws, and subject to none, neither
within nor without Ibid. fol. 42.
The opinion of Hierome and others is to be rejected, who dream that PAVLE
speaks not here of the ten Commandments, but of the Ceremonial Law, etc.
Ibid. fol. 89.
I understand this saying of Christ, do this and live, as a certain Ironie or
scoffing speech, etc. Ibid. fol. 53.
neither does PAVLE speak here of the Ceremonial Law, etc. but of all the Law,
there simply all the Law, whether it be Ceremonial, or of the ten
commandments is abrogated to a Christian, etc. Ibid. in cap. 4. ad Gal. f. 144
THOMAS and other Scholemen speaking about abrogating the Law, say, that the
Judicial and Ceremonial Law were taken away after Christ, but not the Moral;
but ^hese speak they know not what, etc. Ibid. in cap. 2. fol. 62. and 54.
What is it to me, that thou o Law accusest me as guilty, that thou conuictest
me of many sins committed? yea I commit many daily, but this is nothing to
me, now I am deaf, I hear ^hee not, pray thee trouble not my conscience; Ibid
in cap. 2. fol. 55.
true it is, I have sinned, therefore God will punish and condemn me! ^o; yea
but the Law of God says so. I have nothing to do with this Law; why? because
I have an other Law, See also Calvin 4. Inst. c. 10. n. 5. and l. 3. c. 19. n.
2. and 4.
which compels this Law to be mute, to wit, Liberty; what Liberty? of
Christ, for by Christ I am freed from the Law; so a faithful man by only faith
may lift up himself, and conceive sure hope and firm consolation, that he may
not wax pale at the view of sin, but may say, Sir devil, thy threats and
terrors move me nothing, because there is one which is called JESUS CHRIST,
in whom I believe, he has abrogated the Law, and is thy Satan o Satan; o Law
if thou can accuse me, bind me, terrify me, I will place over thee an other
Law, that is to say, an other tyrant and tormentor, who shall in like manner
accuse, bind, and oppress thee, v. Luther vt supra in cap. 3. ad Calat. fol.
115.
thou art in deed my Hangman, but I have an other Hangman Christ, who shall
tortour thee, by him I am free. If the devil beat me, I have a stronger
devil, who shall in like manner whip him; Christ is my devil; Ibid. in cap. 4. ad
Galath. fol. 118.
therefore a conscience believing in Christ, ought to be so sure, that the law
with his terrors and threats is abrogated, that he must altogether be
ignorant, whether MOSES, the Law, or a Jew ever were; (b) the Law certainly is
no other then the sincke of all evils, heresies and blasphemies, because it
only augmenteth sin, accuses, terrifyeth, threatens death, shows God to
be an angry Judge, condemning sinners; wherefore if thou be wise, banning far
off, stuttering and stammering MOSES with his Law; neither let his terrors
and threats any way move thee, but do thou simply suspect him as an heretic,
an excommunicated person, a damned wretch, far worse then the Pope and the
devil himself, and therefore in no case to be heard, etc. Hitherto Luther.

August. haer. 6. see Alphon. a Castro in v. Creatura. and v. malum.
Again in this same age, the Gnostikes stand condemned of heresy by S.
Austine, for teaching, that some creatures were of their own nature ill: which
is Caluins express doctrine. For he plainly says, that the devil was by
nature evil, wicked, malicious; Calvin. l. 3. Inst. c. 23. n. 3 and l 1. c.
14. n. 15. and 17. Epiphan. in anaceph. and August. haer. 18.
and that all men (whom God has Predestined to death, are by a natural
condition, guilty of death.

Again in this same age, the Caini stand condemned of heresy, both by S.
Epiphanius and S. Augustine, for teaching that Judas fact was good in betraying
his master; and that he foresaw the benefits which would accrue unto us by
Christ's Passion: which in like manner is plausible doctrine, among all the
Caluin-Protestants; Crowly in his Apology. page 30. and 46.
I confess (says Crowly) in his Treatise entitled, An Apology or defense of
the English Writers) these are my words, that Gods Predestination was the
only cause of Adams fall, but not consequently of all sin, for such as have
eyes to see, See Melamcton in Romans 8. edit. 1. and Calvin l. 1. Instit. c. 18.
n. 1. and 2. and l. 3. c. 23. n. 8.
do see that Adams fall was good, etc. yea it is a doctrine generally
maintained by Protestants (as shall be showed in the next Chapter) that
Absolons incestious adultery, was Gods work; that Judas treason, was as well
the work of God, as Paul's vocation; that the Jews in abusing our Savior,
and putting him to death, did nothing but what the hand and Counsel of God had
formerly decreed, and the like.

Again in this same age the Plotemaians stand condemned for heretics by S.
Epiphan. haer 33.
Epiphanius, for maintaining, that God had commanded some impossible things.
And in particular touching the inseparable knot of marriage; which doctrine is
generally maintained by all Protestants; as appears not only in that they
(contrary to Gods word) admit of so many divorces as shall be anon showed,
but in that they maintain Calvin l. 2. Instit. c. 7. n. 5. and in Antid.
council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 2
that the Law of God, or the ten Commandments are impossible to be kept, Idem
comme^t. in Act. 14. v. 10.
no not though a man be never so much assisted or helped by Gods grace.

Again in the same age the Priscillians, Marcites or Marcocites stand
condemned for heretics, both by S. Ireneus, S. Augustine and S. Irenaeus l. 1.
c. 9. Epiphan. haer. 49. August. haer. 27.
Epiphanius, for teaching that the order of Preist-hood, appertained as well to
women as to men; which doctrine is also maintaned by Luther and Calvin the two
great Evangelists of Protestanisme.

In the administration of the Luther tom. 7. Wit. Lat in notis Eccles. fol.
150.
Sacraments, it is not material whether the party (administering) be male or
female, young or old, neither need we in the administration of the Word and
Baptism be inquisitiue touching these etc. Idem tom. 2. Ien. Lat. lib. de
abroganda Missa. fol. 442. 443. 444. 447. 448. 449. and tom. 1. Ger. Ien. fol.
336. and 824. apud Vtenbergium. causa 7. See also tom. 2. Lattin. Wit. fol.
90. and lib. de ministris Ecclesiae page 36. where reconing up all the parts of
Priestly function, as to Preach, to Baptize, to Consecrate, to give absolution,
etc. He concludes that they are all common to women.
I say, that among Christian people there is no difference of persons, no Lay
person, no Clarke, no Shaueling, no Anointed person, no Monk etc. Priesthood
in the New Testament is spiritual, and common to all Christians, for we are all
Priests in the same manner that Christ was a Priest; this sentence is
irresistable, that in the New Testament, there are no visible Priests, nor can
be different from lay persons, and such as be, are without the warrant of
Scripture; therefore all Christians, have power and authorite to Preach though
BEHEMOTH, with all his adherents burst himself; when Paul says, it is not
permitted for a woman to speak in the Church, he does not speak simply, as if
it were utterly unlawful for a woman to Preach, but only that it is not fitting
for a woman to Preach, if a man be in presence, that is able to perform that
office, otherwise it is necessary that a woman speak etc. all Christians,
both men and women, See Calvin l. 4. Inst. c. 19. n 28. etc 4. n. 9. Gualtier
in Cronographia. saec. 2. in Collat. c. 16.
young and old, masters and servants, mistaesses and maids, learned and
unlearned are Priests; neither is there any difference, if their faith be
alike; whosoever has crept out of baptism, may glory, that he is both a
Priest, a Bishop, and a Pope. Hitherto Martin Luther. And the like is taught by
other Protestants; yea Gualterus affirms, See Florimundus Ra^mundus l. 7. de
Origin haeres. c. 7. n. 5. where he recites many stories to this purpose.
that in Province, Strasbrug, and infinite other places, women have been
ordinarily seen to Preach; and that not many years since, a woman among the
Abbenacenses, when a certain Minister denied to give her the Communion, went
angerly home to her own house, and there laying a Napkin upon a stool, set
Bread and Wine thereon, and with her own hands, ministered unto her self, the
Lords supper.

Lastly in this same age, Prodicus the father of the Adamites, stands condemned
of heresy by the Sea Baron. anno 120. n. 37 Luther in captiuit. Babylon. tom.
2. Ien. lat. fol. 247. 173. 275. Calvin. l. 4. Inst. c. 10 n. 1. See also l. 3.
Instit. c. 19. n. 2. and 4.
Doctors of that time, for teaching that Christian people were not tied in
conscience, to perform any Law; which doctrine is likewise maintained by
Luther and Calvin, and followed in practice by all sorts of Protestants; It is
certain, that neither Men nor Angels, can impose any Laws upon Christian men,
unless they be willing thereunto. So Luther, and the like is affirmed of
Calvin. Yea he dares to say; that humane Laws, how good or honest soever,
whether they be made by Church or Magistrate, do not bind in conscience Lib.
4. Instit. c. 20. n. 1.
and that the promised liberty in the Gospel, did acknowledge neither King nor
Magistrate among men.

IN the third age, Augustine. contra Faustum Manich. lib. 20. c. 5. 6. 7. and
haer. 40.
the Manichaeans stand condemed by S. Austine, for that they condemned Altars;
which is so current a doctrine among Protestants, that Mr. Smith in his Sermon
upon the Lords Supper, boldly affirms, that the word Alter has been kept in
the Church by the devil, that men should believe the Eucharist to be a
Sacrifice.

Again the same Manichees See Prateolus v. Manichaei
heretically attributed all things to fate or inevitable necessity, and
affirmed that sin could not be avoided; which is a doctrine now generally
maintained by all Protestant doctors, especially those of the Caluinean sect.
Calvin 1. 3. Instit c. 23. n. 9
reprobi euadere nequeunt peccandi necessitate^, etc. The Reprobats cannot
avoid the necessity of sinning; especially, when by ordinance of God, such a
necessity of sinning is imposed upon them. So Calvin. Yea there is nothing
more familiar with him and his followers, then to affirm Idem li. 1. Inst. l
18. n. 4.
that man being justly forced by God, does do what is not lawful for him;
Ibid. n. 1.
that God caused ABSOLON to pollute by incestious Adultery, his fathers bed;
Bucer. in cap. 1. ad. Ro^. p. 72. and in cap. 9. p. 454.
that God does not only permit men to fall into error by forsaking them, but
seduceth, hardneth, delivers into a reprobate sense, and sends a powerful
error, to make men do such a thing Piscator. de Predest. page 105. 166. 167.
cap. 1.
that the most horred offenses that ever were, are done by Gods decree; that
sins through the force of that decree, are altogether inauoidable.

IN the fourth age the Donatists stand convicted of heresy by S. Austine, for
contending, that the Baptism of Christ and S. John Baptist were al one.
August. l. 2. contra lit. Petil. c. 32. and 34.
Which is a doctrine generally defended by all Caluinian Protestants; Calvin.
l. 4. Instit. c. 15. n. 8. and 1. Willet in synop. controu. 14. q. 3. and cont.
12. q, 7. Powel l. 2. de Antichristo. c. 21. Optatus Meliuitan. lib. 2. and 6.
contra Parmen. See Sanders haer. 91.
the ancient Fathers were deceived (says Calvin) when they said, that the
Baptism of JOHN, was but a preparatiue to the Baptism of Christ; we (says D.
Willet) affirm that the Sacrament of JOHN and our Savior were al one; yea
(says Powel) we Protestants hold it a blasphemy in the Papists, for making a
differance between JOHN'S and Christ's Baptism.

Again, the same Donatists stand condemned by S. optatus Miliuitan, for
contemning holy Oil, and casting it on the ground; as also for that they
caused the Sacrament of the Eucharist to be cast to the dogs, pulled down
Altars, (Which he calls the seats of Christ's body) broke and sold Chalices,
rent and tore corporalls, veiles, books, and other instruments appertaining to
Gods service: which was the ordinary deportment of Caluin-Protestants in the
beginning of their deformed reformation, and in which they still persevere, as
opportunity offers it self.

Again the same Donatists stand condemned by S. Austine, for teaching,
Agustine concione 2. in Psalm. 5 and in Psalm. 18. and in epist 16. ad Donatis.
and lib. de vnitate Eccles. c. 11. and 13. Epiphan. haer 68. and 69. Theodoret
lib. 4. haeret. fab. and August. haeret. 46.
that the Catholic Church was perished in all the world, except in those
places which Donatus lived. Which also is a doctrine generally taught by all
sorts of Protestants, as was showed in the former chapter.

Again in the same age, the Arians stand condemned of heresy by S.
Epiphanius, S. Theodoret, and S. Augustine, for maintaining, that the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, were not of one nature, substance, or essence, and
refusing to admit the word (...), or consubstantiall, because it was not in the
scripture: in both which, the chief Protestant Doctors, show themselves to be
their true disciples and faithful followers, as shall be showed in the next
chapter.

Again the same Arians were Athanasius ser. 4. contra Arrianns and Hilarie l.
9. de trinitate.
condemned, for that they taught that the Son of God was ignorant of many
things, and that he learned as he grew in years, which also is current
doctrine with Calvin and his Cymists. Calvin Harmon. in Mat. c. 24 v. 36. and
har. in Luke c. 2. v. 40.
It is evident, that ignorance was common to Christ with the Angels: so Calvin;
yea he further says, that Christ's soul was as subject to ignorance, as the
souls of other men, and that this was the only difference between us and him,
that our necessities are of necessity, his voluntary; and that Christ in
particular knew not the day of Judgment, nor what tree that was which he
cursed. And the like is taught by other Protestant Doctors, as shall be showed
in the next chapter.

Again the same Arrians are See Alphonsus a Castro. v. concili.
condemned of heresy, for maintaining that a Council, how lawful so ever
assembled and approved might err: Which also is a high-prized doctrine in the
Protestant Synagogue; you shall hear the words of their first Author and
Evangelist. Luther in postil. concione 1. post dominic. Trinit. fol. 114. Wit.
Lat and art. 115 and 500. and tom. 7. Wit. Ger. fol. 262.
Among all the Councels, I never saw any in which the Holy Ghost was found;
Councels are uncertain, neither must we trust unto them; for there was never
any so incontaminate, but either added or diminished from Gods word; yea the
council of the Apostles, albeit it was the first and most pure, had some what
mingled with it, etc. Epiphan. haer. 75. and in acephal. August. haer. 53.
Nic^^. l. 9 c. 16.
This abominable opinion (that councels have the Holy Ghost) is to be numbered
among the greatest evils of christianity. So this Apostata.

Again in the same age Eustachius and Aerius stand condemned by S. Epiphanius
and S. Augustine, for maintaining that the prescript Fastes of the Church, were
not to be observed; which is also a known current doctrine among all sorts
of Protestants; yea it is common with the purer sort of them, to make their
greatest feasts upon the greatest and solemnest fasting days, of which none
can be ignorant.

Again the same Aerius, stands condemned by the two fore said Fathers, Epiphan
haer. 75. and August haer. 53.
for teaching that the dead were not to be prayed for, nor Sacrifice to be
offered for them: which also is a Doctrine generally taught by all Protestant
Doctors; yea in defense thereof, they dare pronounce with their master Calvin;
Calvin. l. 3. Instit. c. 5 n. 10.
that all the Fathers, in praying and offering Sacrifice for the dead, were
foolishly deluded by the deceipts of Satan; that it was an argument of
ill-consulted sedulitie, in co^siderate credulity, and perverse emulation;
that the custom of praying for the dead, was a profanation of the invocation
of God, and that it was an error yea and a gross and superstitious error.

Again in the same age, Julian the Apostata stands See Sozomen l. 5. cap. 20.
and Eusebius. l. 7. c. 14.
condemned, for that he brake down the Image of our Savior, and caused his
own to be set up in steed thereof; as also for that he was a great enemy to
the Holy Cross, the Crucifix, and the sign of the Cross: and have not the
Caluinian Ministers abundantly reuied the memory of this accursed Apostata?
have they not thrown down the Images of our Savior? broaken down Crosses
and Crucifixes? do they not hold the sign of the Cross as superstition? and
in steed of the Images of Christ and our Savior do they not place in their
private howses the pictures of their Apostata deformers, or the Lascivious
Images of Venus and Adonis, Jupiter and Ganimede and such like, etc?

Hieronimus contra Heluidiu^.
Again in the same age Heluidius stands condemned by S. Hierome and the other
Catholic Doctors, for equalling the merit of marriage, with the merit of
virginity, Luther Sermon. pe Matrimonio. tom. 5. Lat. Wit. and tom. in Epist.
ad Wolsang fol. 505. See Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 12. n. 28. and Harmon. in
Mat. 19.11.12.
wihch heretical doctrine all the Doctors of Protestancie do also eagerly
maintain; yea their father Luther dares to write; that single life is far
more base and vild then marriage; that matrimony is more then a precept; that
who so determines to live without a woman, must put off the name of man, and
put on the nature of an angel or spirit; that he must needs be a whoremaster
that flies marriage, and that it is more necessary to lie with a woman then
to eat drink or sleep.

Again the same Iouinian stands condemned by S. Augustine, for maintaining,
that these who were by Baptism regenerated, and received into grace, could not
loose that grace, nor sin, at least to death; which very doctrine was
revived by Luther, Luther in captiuit. Babylon. tom. 2. Lat. Wit. fol. 78.
Calvin l. 4. Inst. c. 17. n. 2. Damman l. de Perseuerantia Sanctorum p. 145.
and Piscator in resp. ad duplic. Vostij. p. 389. and alij passim.
and is still eagerly defended by all Caluinian Protestants.

Thou see how rich a Christian or Baptized man is, who though he would,
cannot loose his salvation, what sins soever he commit, unless he will cease
to believe; So Luther. By our sins (says Calvin) we can no more be damned
then Christ himself; we maintain says Damman, that the just man must of
necessity persevere, and that those who are truly faithful, cannot fall from
grace by any sins; they that are once justified, remain always justified. So
the University of Oxford, in their late Vespers. 10. Iulij. nu. 1619. resp.
Baits etc. Isles, and the like is affirmed by Piscator and all others.

IN the fifth age Vigilantius stands condemned of heresy by S. Hieronimus
contra Vigilantius.
Hierome for deriding the Catholic custom in setting up wax lights at the
Tombs of martirs; for impugning the single life of Priests; for teaching that
it was idolatry, to reverence the sepulchers and holy relikes of Saints, and
denying that Saints were to be inuocated or worshipped. Then which Vigilantian
heresies, no doctrines are more plausible in the Protestant religion;
Hieronimus l. 3. contra Pelagianos.
The Pelagian in the same age are comdemned of Heresy by the foresaid father,
for boasting that they were sure of their justice, and might securely promise
to them selves the kingdom of heaven; whch is the very doctrine of the
Protestants at this day; all the faithful ought to be certain of their
salvation, Calvin in Antidot. council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 15. 13 and 10. and l. 3
Instit. c. 2. n. 16. 38. 39. 40 and l. 4. c. 17. n. 2.
says Calvin, yea says he, that man is not truly faithful, who does not
confidently glory that he is the heir of the kingdom of heaven, since our
sins can no more hurt us, then Christ him self, nor we loose heamen, more
then he. Luther tom. 4. Ien. Lat. in cap. 4. ad Galat. fol. 118. and 122. and
in Colloq mensal. Powel. de Antichrist. l. 2. c. 19.
we, thanks be to God, can decree and judge out of the word, how God is
affected toward us; we ought not to doubt that the spirit of God dwells in
us, but certainly to determine that we are the temple of the holy ghost; we
ought firmly to believe that not only our office is pleasing unto God, but
also our person, and whatsoever we say, do, or think. So Luther. To which Mr.
Powel adds, that it is blasphemy to say that every man ought not to assure
himself of his salvation.

The Nestorians in this same age stand Augustine haer. 89. Socrates l. 7. c. 32.
condemned of heresy, for teaching, that Jesus Christ borne of the Virgin
MARIE, was not God, but mere man, Sanders haer. 100.
and after had the divinity joined unto him, for the merit of his holy life,
and that not personally neither, but only by a special prerogative, etc. In
which blasphemous heresy, Luther and Calvin far exceed him, for though they
seem to acknowledge that Christ was perfect God, and that his divinity was
joined to his humanity personally by an hypostaticall union, yet they fasten
ignorance and desperation on him, and make him a sinner, yea the greatest of
sinners: You shall hear them speak; Omnes Prophetae etc. all the Prophets
foresaw this in spirit, that Christ should be the greatest thief, Luther in
cap. 3. ad Galat. tom. 5. Lat. Wit. fol. 348. 349.
the greatest adulterer, the greatest man slayer, the most Sacrilegious and
most blasphemous, etc. because being a sacrifice for the sins of the world,
he is no innocent person, and without sin, he is not the Son of God, borne
of the Virgin, but a sinner, etc. We ought to acknowledge, that as Christ was
inwrapped in our flesh and blood, so likewise in our sins, malediction, death
and evils: but you will happily say, that it is absurd to call God a sinner and
accursed? I answer, Idem hom. baptis. tom. 5 lat. W fol. 3 349.
that if thou will deny that he was a sinner, deny also that he suffered for
thee, etc. (a) all the sins of the world were so laid upon Christ's
shoulders, that he became the most grievous and greatest sinner upon earth,
Calvin in cap. 3. ad Galath and in 1. ad Cor. c. 5.
etc. Since then he was so great a sinner, he needed baptism, and it was very
requisite that he should be baptized, for the remission of his sins. So
Luther. Christ in assuming man's nature, was truly a sinner, and guilty of the
curse of God; Idem. l. 2. Inst. c. 16. n. 10.
it had been to no purpose, if Christ had only died a corporal death Ibid. n.
12. and har. in Mat. 27. v. 46.
he endured in soul the torments of a damned, a desperate man; Ibid.
he was so vexed on all sides, that being ouer-whelmed with desperation, he
ceased to call upon God, which was to renounce his own salvation. So Calvin.
and further adds L. 2. Inst. c. 16. n. 12. in har. in Mar. 14. 36. and Luke
2.4. and in Mat. 26.39. and ad Romans c. 9. v. 3. See after in the next chapter.
that Christ was touched with a vicious affection; that in his prayers, he held
not a well proportioned course; that he in a manner wauered in his vows; that
he forgot that he was sent hither on that condition to be our Redeemer; yea
that he refused and detracted, as much as in him lay, the office of a Redeemer;
that he feared the salvation of his own soul, and the like.

Lastly in this age, Zenaias stands Nicephorus l. 16. c. 27. and Baron. an.
485. n. 16.
condemned of heresy, for the denying the worship of Images; and the foresaid
Socrates l. 7. c. 32. and Sand. haer 100.
Nestorius, for proudly contemning the writings of the Fathers, and preferring
himself and other his adhaerents, before all antiquity. The first of which
heresies is a principle in Protestancie, and as touching the second, I am
verily persuaded that Nestorius came short of the Protestant Doctors.

I am Luther contra regem Angl. to^. 2. Wit. fol. 339. and tom. 6. Ger. Wit
f. 483.
assured that I have my doctrine from heaven, and therefore I will not consent
that either Man or Angel be judge of my doctrine, but by it, I mean to judge
both Men and Angels; tom. 1. Ger. Ien. in praefat. and lib. ad Ducen. Georgiu^.
no doctor since the Apostles time, has so plainly proved and confirmed the
chief articles of faith, out of the word of God, as I have done; L. de seruo
arbitrio contra Eras. edit^ 1. vide etiam tom. 2. Wit. fol. 486. apud
Breiarlio in apol. Protestant. tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10 sub. 9.
we will admit of no other authority, but the Scriptures, and those after our
own interpretation; what we interpret was the mind of the holy Ghost, but
what others interpret, how many or learned soever, proceed from the devil; In
cap. 1. ad Galath. tom. 5. Wit. fol. 290. and tom. 7. Wit. fol. 483.
say that the Church, Austine, or the other Doctors, nay say that Peter or
Apollo, or an Angel of heaven, teach the contrary, yet my doctrine is of that
nature, which will illustrate Gods glory; Tom 4. Ien. Lat. in 2. Galath.
PETER prime of the Apostles, did live and teach beyond the warrant of
Scripture, and therefore he did err In colloq men. fol. 588.
I am Isayas, and and Philip, (Melancton) is Ieremias; Idem in colloq. men's.
fol. 932. and 17. and 478 and tom. 2. latt. Wit. fol. 500. and 505. apud.
Fenardentium in theomach. Caluinistica.
Basil was wholly a Monk, and not worth a rush; Cyprian was a weak divine;
Chrysostom does nothing but prate, his books are a troublesome and inordinate
packet; Athanasius had nothing singular in him; Hierome ought not to be numbered
among the Church doctors, for he was an heretic, a man of no judgment nor
diligence; he wrote many things wickedly, he was a very block head in
understanding the Scriptures, obtruding Jewish blindness for historical
sense, and his own follies for allegories. I know not among the Fathers, to
whom I am such an enemy, for he writes nothing but of fasting, difference of
meats, and virginity; but as for faith and true religion, there is not a word
to be found in his writings; Gregory's sermons are not worth a farthing; in his
dialogues, the devil deceived him, etc. Hitherto Luther touching himself and
the fathers: Calvin in epist. 145. ad Marbachium.
neither do his followers differ from him in judgment.

Luther was an excellent servant of God; and a faithful minister of the
Church; l. 1. co^tra Pighi.
a singular Apostle of Christ, by whose mouth God thundered; Epist. 109. ad
fratres Monstelgar.
from whose Church our Gospel did flow; a man most excellently qualified, etc.
So Calvin. to which other Protestants a^dde Beza in lib. de paena haeret. p.
94. 95. 148. apud Ka^sen in praefat. Catechisminoris* Lutheri.
that he was the renewer of Christian Religion, Gods singular servant, in whom
who so sees not the spirit of God, sees nothing; Melancton apud Kanfen vt sup
that no age would ever produce such a man; Kansen in praefata praefatione
that he was a blessed man, in whom the Holy Ghost shined; the Prophet of
Germany; the light bringer and light-lender to all divines; the wonder of the
world; Amsdorsius in praefatione. 1. Tom. Lutheri.
that there was never any since the Apostles time, who for spirit, wisdom, and
understanding, might be compared with him; Alberas contra Carolasted. l. 7.
that he exceeded all the ancient Fathers, as much as the Sun surpasses the
Moon; and that neither S. Augustine, nor any of the rest, had they lived in
Luthers time, would have been ashamed to have been his scholars, and have
carried a candle before him; Iuel in Apolog. par. 2. c. 4. 2. and Fox Acts and
Monuments.
that he was a man sent from God to illuminate the world, the Chariot, and the
Coachman of Israel; Powel in his Animaduers. of the Papists supplicat. p 70.
a thrice holy man; Spanburgius l. contra Stephan. Agricolum. See the
Protestants Apology. Tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. sub. 15. and 9.
the next in dignity to Christ and Paul; See in Mercurius Gallobel. Arthurus
Goterdi. an. 1617. at what time a Inbile was celebrated, by the consent of all
Protestants, in memory of Luther.
the elect vessel and organ of God; the light of the Gospel, etc. So they
touching their master Luther. But as for the ancient Fathers they will not
tell Calvin communes. in Ioh. c. 10 v. 6. etc. 11. 13. etc. 15. 20.
that S. Austi^ was a prating divine, variable, and inconstant in all learning;
S. Gregory Nazianzene, a teller of feigned fables; S. Basil a^ erroneous
fellow; Melancto^ in 14. ad Romans
S. Irenes, a man tha^ never read the Scriptures, and one tha^ understood not
the Apostles Creed, a pestilent writer; Caluinistae in scuto fidei dialogo 8.
See Feuardentius in theolog. Caluinist.
S. Clement (the fellow labourer with S. Paul (Phil. 4.3. a very knave, and
infected with a diuilish contagion; S. Denis of Areopagite, an insolent and
dangerous fellow; Beza in Iconibus and Luther in postillain die exultat.
that S. Jerome was an Idolater, and a protector of Idolatry; a worse
Christian, then Vigilantius, and as certainly damned (unless he repented him
of his heresies) as the devil; See the Survey page 337. Pomero^ comment in
Ionam. Socinus I de Christi natura contra volanum p. 222. See Protest. Apol 1.
1. sect. 16. fol. 2.
that S. Anacletus and Anicetus, were no better then rogues, and men branded in
the forehead, etc.

I care not for the Fathers, whether holy or not holy, they were blinded with a
Montanicall spirit, in the Traditions and doctrines of devils, speaking lies,
etc. we ought not to credit them, etc. So Pomeran. we do not hold our selves
subject to the judgment of any Fathers, how learned soever, nor to the
judgment of any Councels, though never so lawfully assembled, nor to the
judgment of any church how perfect or universal so ever. So Socinus. And the
like might be proved out of all the other Protestants, Beza in epigram. an.
1597. p. 178. and in Iconibus, and in vita Caluini.
touching the contempt of the Catholic Fathers. But as touching the doctors of
their own society, they speak as you heard of before of Luther; no man wrote
more learnedly then Calvin, no man more godly; we owe the building of our
Church unto Calvin next unto God, he was the destroyer of all heresies, both
new and old; he was the faithful and vn-reproueable servant of God, a true
Prophet, and the mouth of the Lord. So Beza. Again Caluinistae in clypio fidei
diolog 8. and Beza in Iconib. See Gualterus in Cronog. sec. 2. Coll. 20.
we acknowledge Witcliffe for a noble martyr, and the true and immortal glory
of England; Hus for a true heavenly gooses Zwinglius and Oecolampadius, for a
noble pair of heavenly warriors; Tindal for a great Evangelist. And so of the
rest.

IN the sixth age, as Mahomet among other Heresies, Cedrenus in Hierarchio.
blasphemously maintained that God was the author of sin, so do the
Protestants, as shall be showed in the next chapter.

As the Armeni Alpho^s a Castro. v. baptis. Matrim. and Eucharistia.
heretically taught that the Sacraments did not confer grace; that Matrimony
was no Sacrament, and that in the Eucharist water was not to be mingled with
the wine, so do all sorts of Protestants, especially of the Caluinian sect.

Again, as the fore said Mahomet Prateolus verbo Mahometes.
heretically allowed poligamie, or a plurality of wives, so does Luther,
Musculus, Melancton, and other chief Protestant doctors; Luth. in
propositionibus de bigamia. an. 1528. propos. 62. 65. 66 and in exposit in
Genesim. an. 1525. cap. 16.
Poligamie is now no more abrogated then the rest of Moses Law, but left
indifferent, to wit, neither forbidded nor commanded. so Luther. Musc. in
expres. Pauli ad Colos. and Tim. 3. Melancto^ in conciliis Theolog. p. 134. and
128. an 171. Beza in creopagie fol. 80. Zanchie. in Miscel. fol. 27. Calvin in
Epist editis a Beza in 8. an. 76. page 29.
Musculus also is of opinion that Poligamie was permitted in the time of the
Apostles; and Philip Melancton (though he judge the deuorce of king Henry the
8. from his first wife Catherine, as most unlawful) is confident, that king
Henry might with credit and a good conscience (if his end were to have issue)
have taken an other wife etc. because (says he) Poligamie is no unusual
thing, nor against Gods Law; since Abraham, David and many holy men, had many
wives at once. Thus Melancton, Beza, Phinix, Zanchies most holy man, and
Caluins true divine.

There be yet living can well remember that Doctor Lawrence, His first wife is
yet living and dwells at Cowly.
public professor in the Greek tongue, in the University of Oxford, both in
the days of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, had two wives at once,
the one dwelling at Cowley, and the other in Oxford, which two he used
successively, the whole University either willingly conniuing, or else
approving the same.

It is also well known (to omit others) that D. Thorneborow, now bishop of
Worcester, had a long time two wives at once, one of which (viz. the first his
true lawful wife) is lately dead; whence it is evident, that the Doctors of
Protestancie, every way equal Mahomet in the approbation of Poligamie.

Furthermore as the same Mahomet heretically taught; Prateolus verbo Mahometes.
that any man might lawfully sue a deuorce in these three cases; to wit, if his
wife were barren, or peruersly mannered; or if he could not love her, and after
four months marry another; so does Luther, Calvin, Bucer, and all other
chief Protestant Doctors: yea and in many other cases also. You shall hear
them speak.

Sometimes wives prove so froward, Luther sermon. de Matrim. and vita coniugali
tom. 5. lat. fol. 123.
that though their husbands should tentimes fall into lust, yet such would be
their hardness, that they would not regard it; here then it is meet for the
husband to say, If thou will not an other will, if the mistress will not, let
the maid come, dismiss Vasthi, and take Hester, after the example of King
Assuerus. So Luther. Again: Ibid.


It is the duty of Magistrates (if wives prove so obstinate) to force them, yea
and punish them by death; but if the Magistrate will not do it, Ibid. Melanct.
in analijs theologieis part 1. p. 648. and 550. Canones Genuens. an. 1560. and
1562.
then let the husband imagine with himself, that his wife is taken away by
thieues and killed, and so let him choose another wife. Again.

An adulterer may (after divorce) go into a strange country, and there if he
cannot contain, he may take a wife. So Luther, and the like is affirmed by
Melancton and Pomeran.

Bucer in cap. 19. Mat. Bucanus in locis commun. loco 12.
If a husband (say the Geneuean cannons) shall be absent, let his wife cause him
to be called by the public crier, and if he come not within the time
limmitted, the Minister shall license the wife to take an other husband.

Whether a woman be put away justly or unjustly, if she have no hope to return
to her first husband, and yet desires to lead a godly life, and wants the
company of a man, he that marries her, shall not offend. So Bucer. with whom
Bucanus and Calvin give their assent, and farther add; Calvin l. 4. Inst. c
19. n. 37.
that in case two be contracted, without the consent of their parents; Idem in
statutis Geneuens. p. 29. an. 1562.
or in case a man marry a whore, instead of a virgin; Ibid. page 32.
or in case any party get any contagious disease; Ibid. page 40. 41.
or in case either party be absent by the space of a year; (e) or in case the
husband will not keep home after three admonitions, the marriage may lawfully be
dissolved, and other party new mate himself.

Luther also above mentioned, well approves of all the foresaid causes, Luther
commen^ in 1. Cor. c. 7. an. 1523. and in lib. de causis matrim. an. 1530.
and further affirms, that in case the husband persuade the wife, or the wife
the husband to any sin; in case a rich woman marry a poor man, and her
friends dislike the match; and in case the man and the wife brawle and scould,
and cannot live peaceably together, the marriage may be dissolved, and either
party free to marry again.

If after marriage consummate either party, Bucer de regno Christi. etc. l. 2.
c, 42.
by means of some incurable disease cannot perform the marriage duties, the
sound or able party, may be lawfully married to an other. So Bucer above
mentioned. Again.

If the wife be so hurt in bearing children, Ibid.
that afteward she cannot endure the company of her husband, it is a very
plain case, that the man may lawfully take a new wife* and in like manner may
the wife serve the husband, if he chance to hurt his Virgam viril^m Again.

In case either party be a witch, or a murderer, or a Church-robber, Idem vt
supra c. 37. 38. 39 etc.
or a favorer of thieues, or a receiver of stolen goods, or a perjured person,
or in case either party lay violent hands upon the other, Ibid. cap. 26. 27.
28. 29. 30 etc.
or in case the husband do but beat his wife, the marriage may be dissolved,
and either party be at liberty to marry again; yea, whosoever cannot find
in his heart to love his wife, and use her according to the rules of coniugal
charity, See Bucers works entitled De regno Christi; in the beginning of
which you shall find these and infinite other praises.
is strictly commanded and enjoined by God, to put her away and marry an
other.

Hereunto Martin Bucer; whom the English Church acknowledges for one of her
prime Apostles; Crinaeus for an admirable and supreminent divine; Calvin for a
most faithful doctor of Christ's Church; Sir John Cheek, for a most unparalleled
master, both in humanity and divinity, and the University of Cambridge for a
most divine man.

See Baron. an. 745. n. 27
Again in the same age, as Adelbertu^ derided those that went on Pilgrimage to
Rome, to visit the holy sepulchers of the Apostles, and other glorious
marters, so do all Protestants; And as the Albanenses, heretically contend
that usury was lawful, so do Calvin in epist. 345. cuius initium diligentior
fuissem. edit. Geneuae. an. 1575. Bucer in cap. 5. Mat. Hutter in 2. part.
resp. etc. in praef. ad confratres.
Calvin, Bucer, and other chief Protestants; yea this doctrine passed for such
current divinity in Geneua, that two Ministers were banished thence, for
maintaining the contrary, as Hutter a Protestant writer witnesses.

Lastly, not to insist any longer exactly on particulars as Godiscaldus,
Beringarius, the Waldenses, Albanenses, John Witcliffe, and other in following
ages, See conciliu^ valent. c. 3. Council Roman sub Gregor. 7. an. 1079. Council.
11. generale. an. 1170. Council. Constantiense. an. 1415. Council Florentinum.
an. 1431. Conciliu^ Trident. an. 1546.
heretically taught (as may appear in the * councels and doctors of that time)
that Christ was not really present in the Sacrament; that the Mass was a
Sacrifice of devils; that the Saints could not hear our prayers; that the
festiuals of Saints, were not to be observed; that the Aue Maria was not to be
said; that Auricular Confession was not to be used; that Indulgences were of no
power; that there was no Purgatory; that there was no merit in fasting; that
the Church wrought no true miracles; that all the Ecclesiastical benedictions
of Water, Bread, Wine, were to be rejected; that Confirmation was no Sacrament;
that the Bishop of Rome was not the head of the Church; that the Church of
Rome, was the Synagogue of Satan, etc. So do all sorts of Caluinian
Protestants.

Whence, if a little* leaven be sufficient to mar the whole paste; or as S.
Ambrose expounds these words of the Apostle, if one error may corrupt the
whole mass of Faith, what an OLLIPOTREDO or Gallimafrie, may we judge
Protestancie to be, which is composed of all the fore mentioned hereheresies,
most of which were raked out of hels botomlesse abisse, after they had been
condemned thither, for more then a thousand years before, and the rest,
devised in latter ages, by persons which the Protestants cannot deny to have
been desperate heretics. If I say one error be sufficient to corrupt the
whole mass of Faith, as the Apostle affirms; if he that offends in one, is
made guilty of all, James 1. v. 10.
as S. JAMES contendeth; if one singular doctrinall error obstinatly defended,
make an heretic, Luther tom. 2. de votis fol. 272. and tom. ^. Wit. Lat. in
c. 17. Mat. fol. 74. Schlusselberg. in Theolog. Calvin. art. 1.
and every heretic be certainly damned, as both Luther and Sclusselberg
avouch; what a monstrous corrupt mass is Protestancie, and what guilty and
heretical wretches are all Protestants, who defend not one, ten, or twenty,
but many scores, I may say, many hundreds of accursed heresies?

If any man does not ANATHEMATIZE Arrius, Eunomius, Marcedonius, Apollinaris,
Nestorius, etc. with their wicked writings, and all other heretics which are
condemned by the Church, and those who teach as they did, and remain in their
impieties, let him be accursed of God, says the sixth general Council. Accurse
therefore (Christian reader, accurse (I say) these heretical Protestants;
these new sowers of old condemned heresies; these late revived Simonians,
Corinthians, Nouatise, Arrians, Aerians, Eustachians, Vigilantius, Nestorians
etc. less in not accursing them, thou they self stand accursed of God.

The Apostle bids us in any case to avoid an heretical man, after two or
three admonitions, and not to say unto him so much as Aue, or God save you; now
that the Protestants are manifoldly heretical, has been abundantly proved,
avoid them therefore as much as may be, have no commerse with them, at least in
spiritual affairs, less by partaking with them, in this life thou be forced
to accompany them in the next also, in the lake that burns with unquenchable
fires.

CHAPTER III. That the Protestants (especially those of the Caluinean sect)
believe aright, no one Article of the Apostles Creed: Evidently proved out of
their best Doctors, and their own mutual confessions.
ARTICLE I. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.
FIrst to believe a right in God (according to express One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of al, etc. Ephesians. 4. ver. 4.5.
Scripture, and the NICENE The Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy
Ghost is God, and yet there are not three Gods, but one God, etc. For as we are
compelled by the Christian verity, to confess each person to be God and Lord,
so are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to say three Gods and three
Lords.
CREED) is to teach and profess that there is but one God only, and not a
plurality of Gods; but many Zanchie wrote a book which he entitled, de
tribus Elohim that is, of the three Gods, concerning which, see
Caluino-Turcismum, Gulielmi Rainoldi l. 3. c. 5 fol 449. edit. 1603. Calvin
affirms that God the Father is God (...) and (...) by an excellency and
excess, and that Christ is his Fathers Vicar or Vicegerent, and has a power
secondarie or next unto the Father. Coment. in cap. 22. Mat. v. 44. and in cap.
^6. and in cap. 16. Marci 2. 19. and in 1. Cor 15. and contra Gentile^.
Prothesi. 10. and in confess. ca. 2. and lib 1. Inst. cap. 13. u. 23. See
Feuardentius in Theomach. Calvin. l 3. c. 15. The generality also of
Protestant Doctors, both Lutherans and Caluenists (as shall be showed in the
second Article) maintaining that Christ's divine nature or Godhead is subject
and inferior to the Father, whence it necessarily follows, that either Christ
is not absolutely God, or that he is a distinct and inferior God to God the
Father, and consequently that there are more Gods then one.
Protestant Doctors plainly teach, that there is a plurality of Gods; and the
best esteemed and most Apostolical amongst them, maintain The word of God does
plainly teach us, that this divine Essence, is truly, really, indeed, and from
Eternity distinct in the three persons. Beza in Confess Gallie a puncto 1 art.
2. Luther also (the Protestants Apostle and Evangelist) and Melancton (Caluins
never enough commended divine) affirm that there be three diuinities, as there
be three persons. Luther apud Zwingliu^. tom. 2 resp. ad Lutheri l de
sacramento. fol. 474. and Melancton in locis communibus edi. Basil. c. de
Christo, In like manner the confession of the English Church says as follows,
The divine nature, which we call God, is divided into three coequal persons. In
Harmo. Confess. And Calvin is confident, that if God the Father did communicate
his Essence to his Son, that either he has no Essence him self, or but
half an Essence, and condemns it as an absurd opinion in his adversary, in
that he said, The Father gave to his Son that very substance which he had,
the same and no other. Calvin contra Valintin Gentilum. p. 916. and 917. and
912 and in Actis Serueti. p. 249. 250. 871. 872. and the like is affirmed by
Skeggius in Genebra. p. 98 and 108. See Caluino-Turcis l. 3 c 5.
that in the three persons of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, there be three
Diuinities, three esse^tial differences, three distinct (...) or essences;
which is all one (as they themselves George Paul, Cassenouius, and other
bewitched of Valentine Gentile, do write that the three persons or (...) have
three (...) or Essences, whence they necessarily teach, that there be three
Gods. So Beza, lib. de vnitate essent. in confess. fidei cap. 1. sect. 2. And
Zwinglius in his answer to Luther, affirming that the Divinity is threefold,
or of three kinds, says, Hence it necessarily follows, that there are three
natures (in the divinity) and three Gods. Zwinglius vt supra. And the like is
affirmed by Stankarus lib de trinitate apud Guliel. Rainol. in Caluino-Turcis.
l. 3. c. 5.
confess) as to teach that there be three Gods.

Secondly to believe in God aright (according to the foresaid NICENE CREED The
Catholic faith is this, that we worship one God in Trinity, and the Trinity
in unity. etc.
is to adore one God in Trinity, and the Trinity in unity: but the chief
Protestant In a Synod of Caluinsts at Vilna an. 1589. May 11. It was by public
decree prohibited, for Ministers to use any more the word Trinity in their
Sermons, because it was not found in the sacred Scriptures. See Schlusselberg
in Theologia Caluinistica. lib 4. p. 326. Danaus terms this prayer (holy
Trinity, one God have mercy on us) a foolish mad, and unjointed prayer,
euilly invented by the Fathers, and most dangerous. Danaeus apud Feuardentium
in theomachia. Calvin. l. 1. errore 4. fol. 13. Ochinus calls these divine
names (God infinite, God in the trinity of persons) monstrous, Sathanicall,
and unknown to the Prophets and Apostles; Calvin wishes that the word
(Trinity) were buried; Musculus plainly says, that he would not confess the
three divine persons before the heathen, less he might be thought to say, that
there were three Gods. And Luther blotted out of the Roman Liturgy, the
foresaid prayer ( the holy Trinity one God, etc. See Feuard. as above, fol. 9.
and 10. 13. In a Synod at Petriconio in Poland an. 1565. The Caluinian
Ministers there assembled, rejected the decree of the Nicene council, and
affirmed that they would rather subscribe to the Arrian Synod. See
Caluino-Turicis. l. 3. c 4. And Danaeus in his censuram magistrum sentent.
did. 12. resp. ad Genebrard. cap. 2. and 6. Calvin was much offended with the
word Trinity (says Petrus Carolus, one of his own brethren in actis colloq.
Lausanens.) and the rest of the Protestants confidently teaching* that nothing
is necessarily to be believed, that cannot expressly be found in Scripture,
cannot but join with these formerly recited. See Caluino-Turcis l. 1. c. 10.
and 5. p. 116. 117. and 43.
Doctors, both Lutherans and Caluinists, cannot away with the word TRINITY, and
jointly condemn this form of prayer (Holy Trinity one God have mercy upon
us) as foolish, mad, unjointed, barbarous, most dangerous, and euilly
invented by the Fathers.

Thirdly to believe a right in God, is to teach and maintain, according to
Gods express word in holy Scripture; Psalm. 5 v. 5.
that God wills no wickedness; Eccles. 15. v. 21.
that God commands no man to do wickedly; James 1 v. 13.
that God tempts no man; Psalm. 24. v. 10. and psalm. 83. v. 11
that all the ways of God are mercy and truth; Osee 1. v. 9.
that our destruction comes from our selves; 2. Pet 3. v. 9. and 1. Tim. 2.
v. 4.
that God would have no man perish, and the like.

But the Caluin-protestants do generally, and with great confidence, teach;
Calvin. lib. 1. Instit. c. 18. n. 4.
that God forces men to do what is not lawful for them; Ibid. n. 1.
that God caused ABSOLON to pollute by incest his fathers bed; Ibid. 7 cap. 14.
n, 2. and Whitaker apud Duraeum ration. 8. p. 214. 217. and Bucer in Romans c. 9.
that God put into the heart of DAVID, to number the people; that God does not
only permit men to fall into error by forsaking them, Ibid.
but seduceth, hardens, delivers into a reprobate sense, and sends a
powerful error to make men do such a thing; Crowly in his Apology for the
English Ministers, set forth with privilege. p. 46.
that the most wicked persons that ever were, were of God appointed to be
wicked, even as they were; Piscator de Predest. c. 1. p. 105. 166. 167.
that sins through Gods decree, are unavoidable; Zanchie lib. de natura Dei
p. 688 and Renneceherus in catena aure^ p. 36.
that though God according to his revealed will in the Law, would have all men
saved, yet according to Gods hidden and secreet power he would not have all men
saved; Piscator de pradest. c. 1. p. 133. 134. 138.
that though he commanded all men to repent, yet he would not have them so to
do; Ibid. c. 2. p. 261.
that God in promise offers his grace to many, which yet he never means to
perform; Ibid. cap. 4 p. 304. See also Calvin l. 3. Instit. c. 24. n. 13.
that God seriously calls the reprobate to repentance, and yet precisely he
would not have them repent; that Christ called the Jews to repentance, as he
was man, but not as he was God, and the like: By which they make God the author
of all sins, an hypocrite, a deceiuer, and a most wicked tyrant, and
consequently are so far from believing a right in God, as that by their
doctrines they transform him into a devil, and so invoke and worship him, as
Schlusselberg a famous Lutheran Doctor affirms in these words.

The Sacramentaries make God the author and producer of all sins,
Schlusselberg in Theologia Caluinistica. art. 6. p. 113.
but we know not this God, but do constantly affirm, that the devil is the
author, moouer, forcer, and producer of al sins and injustice, therefore the
god, whom the Caluinists adore and invoke is the devil. So their brother
Schlusselberg. And the like is affirmed by Philippus Nicolaus, Castalio, and
other, as shall be showed in the last chapter of this Treatise.

ARTICLE II. And in JESUS CHRIST his only Son our LORD.
THe Protestants believe not aright in JESUS CHRIST the Son of the Eternal
Father, is also abundantly manifest.

For first, whereas according to the NICENE Therefore the right faith is, that
we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, is God
and Man; God of the substance of his Father, begotten before the world, and Man
of the substance of his Mother, borne in the world, perfect God, and perfect
man, etc. In symbolo Athanasij.
CREED, to believe aright

For first, where as according to the NICENE CREED, to believe a right in Jesus
Christ the Son, is to believe that he was begotten of the substance of his
Father, and that he is Deus de Deo, God of God. The chief doctors of
Protestancie teach; Anima mea odit (...), etc. my soul hates the word
Consubstantial, and the Arrians did very well in exacting, that it might not
be lawful, to place that profane and new voice among the rules of faith. So
Luther. tom. 2. Wit. Latt. an. 1551. fol. 252. Filius non est genitus de
substantia patris, The Son is not begotten of the substance of his Father,
says Beza contra Heshusiu^; howsoever the Fathers in the Nicene Council
affirmed, that Christ is God of God, yet Calvin inuincibly proves that Christ
is God of himself; the Fathers in the Nicene Council teaching that Christ was
consubstantiall to his Father, spoiled Christ of his divinity. So Whitaker
contra Campianum. page 153. the Papists blaspheme in saying, that Christ is not
(...), God of himsefe. So Powel lib. 2. de Antichristo. cap. 8. and the like is
affirmed by Willet in Synops. page 610. and Danaeus contra Bellarm. part 1. ad
controuers. 2. c. 19. out of Calvin l. 1. Instit. c. 13. n. 23. and Beza contra
Heshusium, and other prime Protestants. See Caluino-Turcis. l. 3. c. 7. and
Fenardentius in Theomach. Call. lib. 3. f. 73. 74. and Jacob Gualtier in
Conograph. tabula saec. 4. cap. 3. and 12. in collat.
that the Essence of the Father cannot be communicated to the Son, and that
Christ was God of himself.

Again, the said The divinity of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost is equal,
their Majesty coeternall, etc.
Fathers affirm, that to believe a right in Christ, is to profess that he was
equal to his Father according to his Divinity; but the Protestants
Arrianizing teach, It is a most wicked, and diuilish thing to say, that Chirst
is not our Mediator, as he is God. So Calvin. in tract. theolog. p. 941. 945.
And further expounding that of the first to the Corinthians cap. 15. v. 28.
(then the Son shall also be subject unto him) He understands it of Christ's
divine nature, Calvin. l. 2. Inst. c. 14. n. 3. and in his Epistle to the
Polonians (page 941.) he affirms that it is not absurd to grant, that the
Son is inferior to the Father, and that according to his divinity he makes
intercession. Whence Stankarus a brother of his, infers saying. Calvin with
Arrius, and Arrius with Calvin do very well agree, in that they both make the
Son of God in his divine nature, to do the office of a Minister, a Bishop,
and Mediator. Stankarus lib. de Trinitate v. 2. See Caluino-Turcis. lib. 3. c.
8. Again. It is Concluded o Calvin, that thy doctrine touching the Son of God,
is plainly Arian, from which I pray you to depart as soon as may be. Stankarius
contra ministros Genuens. and Tigur, fol. 123. Christ according to his divine
nature, was a Priest and offered Sacrifice. So Fulke in his Retentiue. page 89.
and against the Rhemese testament. Heb. 5.6. sect. 4. Christ is our Mediator,
Redeemer, King, etc. not according to one nature, either human or divine; but
according to both natures. So the Lutherans in their book of concord. p. 736.
art. de persona Christ's. Melancton also teaches, that Christ's divine nature
was obedient to his Father. in locis commun. an. 1558. loco de filio; The
University of Oxford in their late Vespers, publicly maintained, That Christ
was our Mediator according to both natures. See their act questions. 10. Iulij
an. 1619. Resp. Th. Winnefe. And the like is affirmed and taught in all
Protestant Churches, if Beza may be credited, saying* Haec (sc. Christu^ esse
mediatorem secundum diuinam naturam distinct consideratam) est nostrarum
Ecclesiarum fides, etc That Christ is our Mediator, according to his divine
nature distinctly considered, is the belief of all our Churches touching
Christ our Mediator, which we do not doubt to be conformablie to the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles. Beza Epist. 28.
that Christ was in feriour to his Father, according to his divine nature.

We farther find in the same Nicene In like manner the Father is omnipotent,
the Son is omnipotent, and the holy Ghost is omnipotent, etc. Equal to his
Father, according to his divinity, etc.
Creed, that to believe a right in Jesus Christ the Son, is to acknowledge
that the Son is omnipotent, as well as the Father; that he is both God and
Man; that he is but one person and the like: but the Caluino-protestants teach,
Calvin l. 1. Instit. c. 13. n. 23. 24. plainly seuering the person of the
Mediator from Christ's divine person, does together with Beza (contra Pappum
page 7.) and othar Caluinists maintain two persons in Christ, the one human,
and the other divine, which is Nestorianisme; and the Lutherans in
communicating the proprieties of the divine nature to his human, confound the
two natures in Christ, which is Eutichisme. Whence Beza (in praefat. contra
Brentium) infers that the Lutherans are Eutichians, and Philippus Nicolaus
(lib. cui titulus fundamentum Caluinianae sectae cum veteribus Nestorianis and
Arrianis, detectio) contendeth that the Caluinists are Nestorians, and so both
heretics by their own judgment. See Feuardentium in Theomach. Calvin. l. 3.
fol 81. 82. contra haeres. 10. 11. and Gualter in tabula cronograph. saec. 5
cap. 16. in collat.
that he had two persons, the one human, and the other divine; It is evident
that ignorance was common to Christ with the Angels, so Calvin. har. in Mat. c.
24. v. 36. Yea further, that Christ's soul was as subject to ignorance, as
other men's, and that this was the only difference, that our infirmities are of
necessity his voluntary. har. in Luke 2. v 40. that in particular he knew not
the day of judgment, not what that tree was which he cursed Harmon. in Mat.
24.36 etc. 21. v. 18. Marlorat also expounding the foresaid places of Scripture
consents with Calvin, and affirms that all Protestant Doctors be of the
same opinion. Marlorat. in Mat 9. and Luke 2. Gallasius (Bezas colleague in the
Geneua Church) affirms, that Christ was so ignorant, that he needed
instruction as well as other men. annot in Irenaeum l. 2. c. 49. The foresaid
Calvin farther affirms, that Christ was touched with a vicious affection;
that in his prayers he held not a well proportioned couse; that his prayer in
the Garden was not Meditated; that in a manner he wauered in his vows; that he
forgot that he was sent hither on that condition, to be our Redeemer, yea, that
he refused and detrected as much as in him lay, the office of a Redeemer.
Calvin. Harmon. in Mark 14.36. and in Luke ^. d. 4. and ad Roman. c. 9. v. 3.
and in Mat. c. 26. v. 34. See Caluino-Turcis l. 3. c. 13.
that he was subject to ignorance and vicious affections; Petrus Richeus, whom
Beza (in (h) Iconibus styles a man of rare piety and learning, and Danaeus an
other famous Protestant Doctor, publicly taught, that Christ was not to be
adored, because his godhead was joined with his manhood, which [in the
Caluinists opinion) cannot be adored without Idolatry. Yea Richeus affirmed,
that whosoever said that Christ was necessarily to be adored, was an heretic.
He blotted out also in the Primers or common prayer books* this appendix
usually added to every Psalm, Glory be to the Father, the Son, and holy
Ghost) And Danaeus pronounced him accursed of God, that adored the flesh of
Christ; though hypostatically joined to the Son of God. See Feuardentius in
theomach. Calvin. lib. 3. fol. 82. 83. contra haeres. 22. and 13. cap. 9. and
Schlusselberg. in Theolog. Caluinist. art. 29. p. 150. and Caluino-Turcis l. 3.
c. 9.
that he is not in any case to to be adored See Feuardentius in Theomach.
Caluinistica lib. 1. fol. 35. and 36. and Schlusselberg in Theolog. Call. art.
3. page 12; that this doctrine against Christ's omnipotency, might be the more
universally believed, the Caluinian Ministers in their Catechism printed at
Geneua an. 1563. per Francisum Duron, and diuulged through out all France,
suppressed the word Omnipotent, and left it out of the Apostles Creed, as the
foresaid Feuardentius affirms. l. 1. p. 36. vt supra.
and as touching his omnipotency, they are so far from believing it, that
they plainly affirm it as blasphemous doctrine in the Papists, to give God
absolute power; that the Angel Gabriels speech (no word is impossible to God)
is not universally to be received, nor to be believed; that God cannot make a
body exist without his dimensions; that God cannot make a a Camel or Cable
rope pass through the eye of a needle; that those things are impossible to
God which were never seen, nor never about to be; that God can effect nothing
above or contrary to the order in nature by him prescribed; and that neither
God the Father, nor the Son, with all their power, can bring to pass, that
Christ's body may substantially be present in many places at once, or in any
other place but in heaven.

ARTICLE III. Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost; borne of the Virgin MARIE.
IN the third Article, which treats of Christ's Conception and Nativity,
neither Lutheran nor Caluinian Protestant can be said to believe aright.

For first the Lutherano-protestants with one consent, teach and maintain
Lutherani in concordia referente Iurgieuicio in bello quinto Euangelij anno
1602. quar. A. 7.
that the human nature, is every where, whence it must needs follow (says
Iurgiewicius) that it could not be conceived and borne of the Virgin Marie
alone; for if presently after the Incarnation, it was every where, surely it
was in the wombes of al both men and women; neither could Christ in that sense
be ever said to be borne of the Virgin MARIE. For to be borne of a woman, is no
other then to go out of her womb, but he that is every where, cannot be said
to go from place to place, or ever so to go out of the womb as that at the
same instant he remain not there.

Secondly the Caluino Rejecting the Popish fictio^, that Christ miraculously
passed through the Virgins womb, we say and believe, that he went out and was
borne naturally, the obstacles being broken, and the places opened, and that
the Virgin being supernaturally gotten with child, was delivered naturally. So
Molinaeus in vniou^ 4. Euang. part. 3. And the like is affirmed by Martin Bucer
in dialogo de corpore Christi. fol. 94. Calvin also enquiring what time passed
between Christ's nativity and flight into Egypt, answers that it seemed to
him very probable, that it was not presently, but long after, and that God
spared Marie, till she had well recovered her weakness in childbearing, that
so she might the better take her journey. Calvin. Harmon. in cap. 2. Mat. v. 13.
Protestants generally teach, that the B. Virgin MARIE was not only subject to
the infirmities of other women great with child, but also that she was not a
Virgin at that instant when our Savior was borne, which is contrary to the
doctrine of the Catholic If by Christ's nativity, the integrity or soundnes
of Marie his Mother, should have bin corrupted, he could not now be said to
have bin borne of a Virgin. and so the whole Church should make a false
confession. Augustine in Euchirid cap. 34.
Church, and the plain denial of this third Article.

They also The Monks and Massing Priests, and Popish Doctors, do err in
urging the merit of Christ's incarnation, nativity, temptations, and
afflictions; for these had profited nothing, but only the death of Christ, that
only was acceptable for the expiation of sins. So Molinaeus in har. Euang.
teach that Christ's nativity and incarnation were not meritorious; yea some
Caluinists (as Sarcerius in concione de festo natiuitatis.
Sarcerius writes) do utterly deny that Christ took flesh of the Virgin MARY,
but that he made him self a certain body of the four elements, and passed
through her womb, as water through a channel, Andreas Fricius lib. de
mediatore in initio.
And Andreas Frizius a famous Protestant, doubts not to profess, that for
his own part he cannot see (if the essence of the three persons be all one)
how the Father should not be incarnate as well as the Son.

ARTICLE IIII. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried.
COncerning Christ's death and Passion, Luther in Confess. Maiori de coena
domini, and de council part. 2. fol. 276. and fo. 554 tom. 3. Ger Ien. apud
Zwingl. tom. 2. in resp. ad Luther. fol. 458.
which is taught in the fourth Article, the Apostle of Protestancie says as
follows; if in Christ the human nature had only suffered for me, that
Christ had been a base and low-prized Savior, yea he had needed an other
Savior to save him self. So Luther; Lutherani in lib. concordiae. art. de
Christi persona. an 1580. Calvin lib. 2. Inst c. 16 n. 10 and 11.
the Lutheria^s also in their book of Concord, teach the same doctrine,
saying; Christ's whole person suffered for us, was crucified, died, and
descended into hell, is our Mediator, Redeemer, King, etc. not according to one
nature, either human or divine, but according to both natures; Calvin in like
manner plainly affirms, that it had been to no purpose, if Christ had only
dyed a corporal death; that he endured in soul the torments of a damned and
desperate man; Idem harmon in Mat. c. 27. v. 49. and 46. and cap. 26. v. 39.
and Harmon. in Mark c. 14. v. 36.
that he was so vexed on all sides, and so ouer-whelmed with desperation, that
he ceased to call upon God; that in his Passion, he spoke inconsideratly and
without Meditation; that he refused as much as in him lay, the office of a
Redeemer; Lib. 2. Inst. ca. 17. number. 1.
and that if Christ had been simply and by himself opposed to Gods justice,
there had been no place of meriting, because there could not be found in the
man (Christ) any such dignity as might merit Gods favor. So Calvin.

Gerlachius co^tra Buaeum. p. 24. 126. Simidelius thesi. 136. Seluecerus in
co^futatione accusationum. fol. 192.
Gerlachius avouches, that these are true propositions, The divinity is
borne, crucified and dead.

Smidelinus also affirms, that both to suffer and to die, do appertain to
divinity.

Albeit (says Selueccerus) that never to be endured phrase (That Christ as he
was God was not subject to passion or suffering) do often occur in
Theodoret, yet none of us (Protestants) either may or ought to say that God did
not suffer or die. So he. And Test Czecanio lib. de corruptis moribus
pontificiorum and euangelicoru^ art. 3.
Musculus an other great Protestant publicly maintained against Stankarus at
Frankford, that Christ's divine nature or Godhead, both suffered and dyed
together, with his body on the Cross, and caused Stankarus by a public decree
to be banished for holding the contrary.

Now to say that Christ's divine nature suffered and died together with his
human, Zwinglius tom 2. in resp. ad Lutheri co^fess. fol. 498.
or which is all one, to hold that God can suffer or die, what is it but to
deny God? what more blasphemous thing can be spoken (says Zwinglius) then to
say that God can suffer; why the very Philosophers themselves held, that God
was (...) immortal, how then can Christ's divine nature is passible (much more
that it can die) is Arrianisme, Stankarus l. de Trinitate etc. quart d. 5. and
B. 1.
blasphemy, atheism, and the direct way to throw down Christ, and the Holy
Trinity, from the throne of Majesty.

Again to maintain with Calvin that Christ died more then a corporal death
and the like before mentioned, what See Caluino-Turcis. l. 3. c. 13. p. 580.
581.
is it but to place him among accursed sinners, and desperate wretches?

Lastly, it is a received doctrine among all the Caluine-protestants, That
Christ died not for all men, and that by his death and Passion, he satisfied
not for the sins of the whole world, which the Schlusselberg. in Theolog,
Caluinist. l. 1. art. 6.
Lutheran Protestants truly auow to be a most blasphemous doctrine, and farther
add, that the maintainers there of, are worthy to be adjudged to eternal
flames.

Whence it abundantly follows, that the Protestant Doctors, even by their
own confessions teach most wickedly concerning Christ's death and Passion, and
therefore are very far from believing a right, the fourth Article of the
Apostles Creed.

ARTICLE V. He descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.
COncerning the fifth Article, which treats of Christ's descent into hell, and
rising again from the dead whereas it is expressly said in the Article, that he
descended into hell after he was dea^ and buried: the Caluino-protestants
generally Zwinglius l. epist. 3. Oecola^padius lib. 1. Epist. p 4. Bucerus in
c. 27. Mat. Bullinger coment. super Epist. Petri. Hidelbergens. Theologi in
catechismo an. 36. 69 Calvin. l. 2. instit. c. 16. n. 8. 10. 11.
teach, that by his descent into hell, is meant that he suffered extreme
torments on the Cross, and so either utterly deny this Article, or confound
it with the former.

Again, whereas the Scripture plainly says, Thou shall not leave my soul in
hell; and, Thou have brought my soul out of hell, etc. whence it may be
evidently collected (as Rogers in his Analacis of the English Articles agreed
upon an. 1562. and 1609. art. 3. Bezas testament printed an. 1556. 1558. and
1598.
some chief Protestants acknowledge) that his soul went down into Hell; Beza
in the translation of the text reads, Thou shall not leave my carcass in the
grave; and after See t. 1. operum Bez. an. 1582. page 461.
gives the reason of this wicked translation to have been, because the Papists
wrest this place to establish their Limbus.

Moreover whereas all the Irenaeus l. 4. c. 39. and Eusaebius in demonstrat.
euang. l. 10. c 8. and Gregor, Nazianzene in oratione 2 in pascha. and
Epiphanius haer. 46. and Ambrose de Myster. Paschae c. 4. Chrysostom hom. 5.
in demonstrat. quod sit Deus. Hierom in 9. Zachariae and epist. 3. epitap. Nep
and August. l. 20. de Ciuitate Dei c. 15. and epist. 99. Cyrill in John l. 12.
c. 36. Gregory the great l. 6. epist. 179. and Paulinus in Panegerico Colsi.
etc.
Fathers with one consent out of the Scriptures, and this Article (as Call. l.
2. Inst. c. 16. n. 9.
Calvin him self confesses) taught that Christ descended into hell or Limbus,
and freed thence the Patriarchs and Prophets, and other true believers, and
after in his ascension, carried them with him triu^phantly into heaven; the
Protestants will believe no such matter; yea they hold it a Rogers vt supra. art.
3. page 17.
Popish error to affirm, that the Fathers which died under the Old Law, were
shut up in any such place, as Limbo, and That there is a hell before the last
day, I am not yet well assured, and that there is a particular place, where now
the souls of the damned are, as Painters set out, and bellie-slaues teach, is
naught in my opinion. Luther tom. 3. Ien. Ger. fol. 212. Christophorus Ireneus
also in his book entitled Speculum inferni, cap. 9. affirms that the hell
of the damned is not yet, but that God will make such a place, at or after the
day of judgment; and the Catechism of the divines of Hidelberg. an. 63. and
69. makes a doubt whether there be any hell or not, or any place appointed for
the wicked to be punished in, after this life. See Schlusselberg in theologia
Calvin. art. 27.
many of them, and those also of the chiefest note, make question whether there
be any such local place, as hell is affirmed to be by the Catholic Doctors,
or whether there shall be any hell at all, till after doomes-day at the soonest.

Again, whereas this article expressly says, that Christ rose from death, and
the I have power to yield my life, and I have power to take it again. Ioh
10.18. The Son quickens whom he will. John. 5.21. dissolve this temple, and
in three days I will raise it. John. 2.19. Calvin in cap. 2. John. and in 8.
ad Romans
Scriptures add, that he rose by his own power, as it must needs be, he
being himself God and equal to his Father, according to his divine nature;
Calvin says, that it is absurd to hold, that Christ did challenge to him self
the glory of his own resurrection, since the scripture says, that it was the
work of God the Father; and In concione habita Daeipa in portis neustriae. an.
1564. test Feuardentio in theomachia Calvin. l. 3. haer. 17.
Franciscus a Sancto Paulo, a Minister at Deip, expounding that place of S.
Paul ( the God of peace which raised from death our great Pastor. Heb. 13.20.)
affirmed that Christ could not raise him self; and therefore it was necessary
that his Father should extend the arm of his virtue to that work.

Further, the right belief of this Article, according to express Mat. 28. v.
2.
Scripture, and the joint Hier. in 28. Mat. and Hilar. l. 6.3. de Trinitate
Cyrillus l. 12. in Joan. ca. 59. and 53. Chrysostom. hom. 85. in Johan. and hom.
16. de resurrectione. and Augustine sermon. 160. de clausis Ianuis. and alibi
passim.
consent of all ancient Catholic Doctors, is, that Christ in his resurrection
penetrated the stone, and arrose, the sepulcher, being shut close, as after
he entered into the chamber the doors being shut: but the Caluino-Protesta^ts,
least hence they might be forced to confess, that Christ's body may as well be
in many places at once, as that two bodies may be in one place, utterly deny
See Schlusselberg, artic. 31. p. 163. in Theolog, Calvin. l. 1.
this verity, and say that either he tumbled away the stone when he rose, or
that some other rolled it away: yea Zwinglius (the Protestants sainted
confessor and Martyr) dares to say that Zwinglius apud Guliel. Rainold. in
Caluino-Turcis. l. 3. c. 15. page 614. Beza Apolog. 2. ad Claud. de Xantes. p.
385 Confess. Gallica. an. 1560. and Conf. Belgica co^tinent 37. artic. quibus
synodus Dordraci an. 1578 praecipit omnes Hollandiae Ministros subcribere. See
Feuard. in Theolog. Call. l. 6. cap. 1. Carleil against D. Smith. fol. 28. 77.
and 140.
the grossest Sargeant with his red breeches, might have gone out of the
Monument in that manner as Christ did.

Lastly, Beza is of opinion, that this Article (he descended into hell, and
rose again the third day) crept by negligence into the Creed; yea the French
and Holland Ministers, in the years 1569. and 1578. in the Confession of their
faith omitted this article, and Carliel in a book printed at London an. 1582.
calls this Article, a a Tale, an Error, and a pernicious heresy.

From all which premises, it will abundantly follow, that the Protestants,
especially those of the Caluinian sect, cannot in any point be said to believe
a right this fifth Article of the Apostles Creed.

ARTICLE VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty.
THe sixth Article is, that Christ ascended up into heaven, and there sits at
the right hand of God; the true meaning of which Article, according to the
express word of God in Holy See Hebrews 11. v. 13. 39. etc. 9. v. 15. Ephesians.
4.8. and Psalm. 67. and Zachary 9.11. and psalm 107. v. 16. See S. Thomas
Aquinas 3. part, q. 49. art. 5. and q. 52 art. 5.
Scripture, and the uniform consent of all the ancient The blood of Christ is
the Keye of Paradise, etc. this is the land of the living which before the
coming of our Savior in flesh, neither Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Jacob, nor the
Prophets, could obtain, [according to that of S. Paul Heb. 9.15.] therefore
he is the Mediator of the New Testament, etc. So S. Hierome Epist. ad Dardanum.
See also in Epist. ad Heliodorum, where he says that before Christ Abraham was
in hell, etc. Reading the Prophets, reading the Law, reading the Psalms, I
never found the kingdom of heaven, but in the New Testament, because, before
Christ opened the gate of that kingdom, all the just were detained in hell. So
S. Chrysostom hom. 4. in Marcum. And the like is affirmed by the rest of the
Fathers. See Ambrose in c. 9. ad Hebr. and Augustine ser. 137. de Tempore. See
in the former Article in d.
doctors, is, that Christ ascending like a Conqueror, led with him the
Saints of the Old Testament, who till then were detayned in prison, and first
opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers, and now sits at the right
hand of God the Father, that is to say, has So S. Athanasius de confess.
essent. and orat. 2. contra Arian. and Damascene l. 4. de Orthodox fide c. 2.
and Cyrillus Hiaros. catech. 14.
equal power and authority with the Father, and that his humanity in respect
of his hypostatical See Schlussel. in theolog. Call. art. 29. fol. 150. l. 4.
co^iunctio^ with the Godhead, is to be adored; and that though he be still
locally in heaven, yet by his Omnipotency, is also at the same instant locally
on See Feuarde^tius l. 6. Theomach. Call. c. 10.
earth, where the Sacrament of his last Supper is celebrated, though it be in
10000. places at once: but the Protestants besides that they generally deny,
that he freed in his descent the Fathers souls out of LIMBO, as was before
noted, do also constantly teach, that the Fathers were in heaven long before
Christ's Ascension; and do so incarcerate See the same Feuard. l. 6 c. 6. and
Schlusselberg vt supra art. 2.
Christ's glorified body (now triumphantly reigning in heaven) in a certain
place, as that by any means, he cannot be else where present, neither in
heaven nor earth, contrary to which the Lutherans as erroniously maintain his
Vbiquitarie presence.

Again the Caluino-protestants (for the better maintenance of their figurative
presence in the Eucharist) teach that in Christ's Ascension up into heaven, he
did not penetrate but See Feuardst. as before cap 7.
break the heavens, or else entered in by some great chinke or crennie; which
is contrary to See Feuard. as before
Scripture, and does infinitely derogate from the power and virtue of Christ God
and Man; and most blasphemously take from his glorified body, all privileges,
gifts, and perfections, and make it in all things, like one of ours.

Calvin haer in Mat. cap. 22. v. 44. and in cap. 26. v. 64. and in cap. 16. v.
19.
Lastly they utterly deny, as was before showed, that any adoration is to be
given to Christ's humanity; and by the right hand of God, they commonly
understand, that Christ has a place in heaven in dignity, next his father.
Sessio ad dextram, etc. the sitting at the right hand (says Calvin) is taken
for the second or next degree, That all the Protestants make Christ inferior to
his Father as touching his Godhead was formerly proved in the second Article.
which the VICAIR of God does occupy.

Christ is said to sit at the right hand of the Father, because being made the
Heighest King, he does obtain as it were the second seat of honor and rule
next unto him, because he is his VICAIR; again to sit at the right hand, is
all one as to say the VICAIR of God. So Calvin Arianizing. And thus you see how
far the Protestants are from believing a right the sixth Article of the
Apostles Creed.

ARTICLE VII. From thence he shall come to Judge both the quick and the dead.
THe seventh Article is, touching Christ's coming to Judgment, which the
doctors of protestancie many ways deprave. For were as the sacred Scriptures
every where affirm that all men shall be judged according to their works, and
in particular treating of Christ's coming to judgment, expressly say Mat. 25
v. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. etc.
that Christ shall pronounce sentence of condemnation against the wicked,
because they neglected to do the works of charity, such as be to feed the
hungry, cloth the naked, harbor the harbourles and stranger, visit the
sick, to go to men in prison and the like; and contrariwise, shall all the
good to everlasting joys, for performing the said merciful works; the
Protestants generally teach; Calvin in c. 27. Mat. v. 26. and Beza in confess.
puncto 4. art. 12.
that it is impossible, at least Christian men need not fear, that their
works shall come into Judgment; Luther l. de captiuit. Babylon. tom. 2. Wit.
lat. fol. 78. and Tindal in reuelat. antichrist apud Fox in Acts p. 1337. and
Whitak. de ecclesia contra Bellarm. controu. 2. 9. 4. and Smoutius in explicat.
sup. dominican oratione^. p. 53. 54.
that no sin can condemn a Christian or baptized man, but only infidelity;
Luther in cap. 3. ad Galath. tom. 1. Lat. Wit. fol. 348.
that all the sins we commit are as properly Christ's, as if he himself had
committed them; Calvin. lib. 4. inst. cap. 17. n. 2.
that believing men's sins can no more hurt them then Christ himself; Luther
tom 1. in dis p. f. 400. and tom. 2. de abhominatione missae fol. 390. and tom.
1. in fine 50. conclus. fol. 54.
that Faith only does save us, Luther tom. 1. Lat. Ien fol. 484. and tom. 1.
Ger. Wit in 2. Gal fol 47. and 92. See before Chap. 2. page
and that this Faith must be without the least works.

Again we find in Luke 24.39.40 and John. 20.27.28
Scripture, that Christ rose from death with the five wounds, which he
received on the Cross; and the same Acts 1.11.
Scripture else where affirms, that he shall so come to judgment, as he
ascended up into heaven. The Catholic So S. Chrysostom Theoptilact. Cyrill.
of Alex. comment. in Acts. 1. v. 11. So S. Athanasius in Epist. ad Epitetetum,
Ignatius in epist. ad Smitnenses; Augustine tract. 121. in John; Ambrose l 10.
in Lucam. Hilarie l. 3. de Trinitate; Leo Magnus ser. 1. de ascens. and
Augustine ser. 6. and 7. de ascensione and ser. 49. and 146. de tempore, and
li. 2. de symbolo. c. 7. and epist. 146. See Feuardentius in theomach. Call. l.
6. c. 11. errore 17. Calvin in c. 24. Lucae.
Church also ever taught and believed, that Christ shall have the scarres of
his wounds appearing in his body, when he comes to judgment; but Calvin
says that it is a foolish and old wives dotage, to believe that Christ shall
have the marks of his wounds when he comes to judgment.

Lastly, for a Judge to force a man to do evil, and after to punish him for
it, all men must needs acknowlegd to be horrible injustice and tyranny. Now
the Sea the first Article.
Caluino-Protestants, generally teaching (as was before showed in the first
Article) that God does not only permit, See also in the last chapter.
but predestinate all our acts whatsoever; that the most wickedst persons that
ever were, were of God appointed to be wicked; and that the sins which men
commit through the force of Gods decree, are altogether unavoidable; it must
needs follow according to their doctrine; that Christ (whom they should
acknowledge to be God, and consequently goodness and Justice it self) either
will not come to Judge both the quick and the dead, or that in adiudging any
to hell, he is a most tyrannical and unjust Judge.

ARTICLE VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost:
TO believe a right in the holy ghost, John 15.26. and 1. Ioh 5. n. 7
according to express Scripture, and the Nicene Creed, is to maintain and
teach, that he proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is of the same
essence with the Father and the Son, of equal Majesty, and coeternal; but
the chief Doctors of Protestancie (as was formerly showed in the second
article) teach that the essence of the Father is incommunicable, and that both
the Son and the Holy Ghost have distinct essences from the Father, by which
they make them distinct Gods, as was there proved. Yea the Protestants are so
far from believing aright this Article, that Feuardentius a Catholic Author
in his Treatise, entitled THEOMACHIA CALVINISTICA, conuinceth them as guilty
of heresy against the Holy Ghost, in at least seven and fifty points, as you
may see in the seventh chapter of the said THEOMACHIA, in the first nine
Chapters of which he shows, Feuardentius theomachia Calvin. l. 7. per totu^.
how they deny the Holy Ghosts proceeding from the Father and the Son; give
him a distinct essence from the Father; make him unequal to the Father and the
Son; deny that he is to be adored together with the Father and the Son,
etc. and in the rest of the Chapters that follow, they make him the Author of
all sins and wickedness, and blasphemously detract from his goodness,
sanctity, prescience, and infinite power; take al Godhead from him, and
transform him into a mere devil.

ARTICLE IX. I believe the Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
THe ninth Article is, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints. Which Article all sorts of Protestants, are farther from believing a
right, then any of the former.

For first as touching the word Catholic, Luther quite blotted it out of the
Creed, See Iurgeinicius in bello quinti euangelij quart. C. 7.
and placed instead thereof, the word Christian; fearing least the word
Catholic duly considered, might discover his Protestanticall Church (whose
foundation he had then newly laid) to be but a new and Antichristian Synagogue.

Secondly concerning the Church it self, whereas Christ calls it the Pillar
and firmament of truth, and further promises, that the Holy Ghost should guide
it to all truth, to the end of the world, and that the gates of hell should not
prevail against it: the Protestants imitating their heretical Gransires the
Donatists, 1. Tim. 3.15. and Mat 16.18. and cap. 5. v. 20. and Ioh 14. v. 16.
etc. 16 v. 13. and Mat 28. v. 20. John Rainold in his thesies 9. and in
praefat. 9. and D. White in his way to the Church 26. and Whitaker lib. 2.
contra bellarm. de eccles. q. 4. p. 322
generally teach that the Church both may and has erred even in fundamental
points.

Again God speaking of the Catholic Church, says Isay. c. 2. v. 2. etc. 60.
61. 62. per totum. and psalm. 19. v. 4. and Ephesians 4.11.
that he would make her an everlasting glory, and a joy from generation to
generation; that her gates should be continually open; that her watchmen should
never cease day nor night; that her Sun should never go down, nor her Moon
be hid; that it should never be said of her, forsaken or desolate; that she
should be placed on the hill, and that all nations should flow unto her; and
that there should be Pastors in her to the end of the world: but the Sea in the
former Chapter.
Protestants, because they cannot show their own Church from the Apostles
time, till Luthers apostacy, contend that the Catholic Church may be
invisible; and that it was de facto. INVISIBLE for above a thousand years, no
true Pastor (at least of the Protestant Religion) being any where to be found.

Lastly (to omit other notes and properties of the true Catholic Church, which
the Protestants utterly deny, that thereby they may the better be able to
support their Antichristian Synagogue) whereas the Concilium Tol. 8. cap. 9.
and Council Gangre^se cap. 19. and in praefat. and Concili. generale 6. can. 56.
and canones apostolor. can. 68.
Church (under pain of ANATHEMA) commands all men, whom sickness and
impossibility of age do not exempt, to fast the Lent, the four Embers, all
Fridaies and Saterdaies, and the Eaues of our B. Lady and the Apostles, from
flesh; the doctors of Protestancie generally affirm, that fasting is a work
indifferent, and do ordinarily eat flesh in Lent and other fasting days,
yea they commonly make their greatest feasts on the sollemnest fasts, and hold
him a superstitious fellow that makes a difference of meats on such days;
which they could not do if they believed the Catholic Church, or credited our
Savior, where he affirms, that whosoever refuses to hear the Church,
should be as a heathen and a publican. Luther tom. 4. de Ecclesia c. 9. and
Call. l. 3. Inst. c. 20. n. 24. and Musculus in locis communibus ca. de
decalogo. praecept. 5.
and thus you see how far the Protestants are from believing aright the
Catholic Church, which is taught in the first part of this ninth article. And
as touching the Communion of Saints, which is the second part of this Article,
in teaching that the Saints cannot hear our Prayers, yea that such as be dead,
do so sleep, that they understand nothing, and that the living have no
fellowship with the dead; they sufficiently intimate that they cannot
communicate with us in those prayers we make to Almighty God.

ARTICLE X. I believe the remission of sins.
AL Catholic Doctors from time to time, according to express John. 1. v. 23.
and Acts 3.19. Heb. 9. v. 28. Mich. 7.19. Psalm. 50. v. 9. Ezech. 36 24. and 1.
Cor. 6. v. 11. and Acts 22.16. 1. John. 1. v. 7. Apocal. 1.6. Heb. 9.13. Tim.
26. See Iurgenicius in bello quinti Euangelij cap. 7.
Scripture and this article, have taught; that God, through the Passion and
death of Christ, does truly remitte their sins, who by Baptism, or any other
Sacrament, lay hold on Christ's Passion, and are truly penitent: but the
Caluino-protestants following their master Calvin, do generally teach; Sin
truly remains in us, neither is it taken away by Baptism but because the
guilt is blotted out by imputation it is nothing. So Calvin. in Antid. Council.
Trid. sess. 5. Again, now it is manifest, how false it is which some long
since have taught, that by Baptism we are loosed and freed from Original
sin. lib. 4. inst. cap. 15. n. 10. Again, let no man flatter him self, when
he hears that sin always remains in us. ibid. n. 11. See also l. 3.
instit. c. 11. n. 2. and 22. and lib. 2. inst. c. 1. n. 8. and 9. and l. 3. c.
12. n. 4; neither are we ashamed to say that Justice is the hiding of the
offense. So Whitaker ad 8. rat. Camp. Remit our offenses, that is, do not
impute them; so the Palantine Cathechisme quaest. 126, and 36 Sins in us are
not taken away, but in the Judgment of God; that is, they are not smputed. So
Paraeus in Thesibns de peccato. See Iurgiewicius in bello 5. Euang. in hoc
Articulo.
that sin truly remains in us even after Baptism; and that it is never
truly remitted, though to the elect it be not imputed.

And therefore I cannot see, how Protestants can say this tenth Article of
their Creed, at least I cannot but marvel that they do not alter it, and say,
I believe then my sins shall not be imputed to me.

ARTICLE XI. I believe the Resurrection of the body.
TOuching the Resurrection of the dead, which is the Eleventh Article of the
Apostles Creed, though I can not generally accuse the Protestants, as not
believing the same, yet Brentius one of their chief Doctors will confess that
the mayor part amongst them, do not believe the same; his words be these. Etsi
nulla sit inter nos, etc. Brentius in Luca^ c. 2. hom. 35. See Caluin-Turcis.
lib. 4. c. 5.
although amongst us, there be no public profession, that the soul dies
together with the body, and that there is not a resurrection of the dead; yet
that most impure and profane life which the greatest part follow, does plainly
show, that they are persuaded that after this life, there is no life, at least
they are not certain of it, yea some when they are most sober, as well as when
they are drunk; in there familiar talk, cast forth such speeches, by which
they plainly signify, that they do not believe the resurrection of the dead.
So Brentius, Schlusselberg, also a Lutheran Protestant will tell you, that if
it be true which the Caluino-Protestants affirm, that Christ in his
Resu^^^^^on, resumed not that blood, which (...) shed on the Cross, two
absurdities will necessarily follow; first, Schlusselberg in theolog. Calvin.
lib. 1. art. 20. See Iurgiewicius in bello 5. Euangelij quart. D.
that mankind was redeemed with corruptible and putrefying blood contrary to
that of Peter 1 cap. 1. and secondly that Christ contrary to the prophesies of
the Holy Ghost, saw corruption: whence it appears (quoth he) that the
Caluinists albeit they affirm in word and writing, yet in their heart they do
not believe the Resurrection of the dead. So Schlusselberg.

As touching Calvin the father of al English, Scottish, French, and Belgian
Protestants, it plainly appears by an epistle which his Cymist and beloved
brother * Farellus wrote unto him, Quod res tibi incredibilis videtur carnis
resurrectio, nihil miru^ quod aute^ hac ratione permotus, sufficere flatuis, si
credas nouis corporibus aliquando nos induendos, hoc a scriptura doctrina
alienu^ est, etc. So Farellus, and after a long confutation of this error,
concludes thus. Atque tibi satisfactura spero, nisi mentem tuam nimis
occupatam reperiant, quod a pictate and a modestia tua procul abest. Sed tamen
leuiter pro nostra amicitia, monendum te censui, quia nuper cum te audirem,
subuerebar, ne altiores apud te radices egisset haec opinio, quam vt facile eam
abijceres. Hitherto Farellus. in epist. ad Caluinum. an. 1549 cuius initium
est. Litteras tuas, etc. and est epist. 78. inter epist. Caluini. edit per
Petum Sanctean dicum. Geneuae.
that he was far from believing this Resurrection of the dead; and the like we
may judge of his followers, for they all deny that Christ can make his own
body to be Really present in many places at once, as Schlusselberg proves at
large, and they further deny (as was before showed, that Christ could, or at
least did not, (through the Scriptures and all Antiquity, stand against them)
go out of his Mothers womb without violating her virginity, or out of the
Sepulcher without remoouing the stone; or into the chamber where the Apostles
were a^^^bled, the doors being shut, either (...) which is a less miracle,
and the belief of it will sooner sink into men's minds, considering that
Christ was God and Man; then that men's bodies after so many alterations,
mutations, and corruptions should rise again (even in the twinkling of an eye)
the very same that they were in this mortal life.

ARTICLE XII. And the life everlasting.
COncerning the life everlasting, which the Saints enjoy in heaven, and is here
treated of in this 12. and last Article, the Doctors of Protestancie, are as
far from believing a right, as any of the former. Mat. 10. v. 18. and Man. 7.
v. 21.


For first, whereas the Scripture says, if you will enter into life
everlasting, ^e must keep the Commandments, and, not that belief only but
deeds must bring us to heaven; they generally teach, that faith only does
Justify, and that the Commandments are impossible to be kept, and therefore
far from being necessary to the attainement of heaven.

Secondly, whereas the sacred John. 3.5 and 37. and Titus 3 5. and Rom 5.12.
and Ephesians. 2. v. 3. and 1. Cor. 15. v. 22.
Scripture, and out of it all Catholic Doctors Augustine l. 3. de anima and
eius origin cap. 9. and alij passim.
teach, that Baptism is the only key that opens unto us the Gate of this
life everlasting: The Protestants Calmin. l. 4. inst. c. 16. n. 24. etc. 15. n.
10. and 20. and cap. 16. n. 17. and 26. and in antidot. Council. Trident. sess.
5. See the former.
place those children there who die with out it; and further add, that
Baptism neither hinders nor furthereth in the way of salvation.

Thirdly whereas all Catholic Augustine l. 4. contra Donatist c. 8. and de
fide and symbolo. and lib. de patientia cap. 26. and lib. de fide ad Petrum. c.
38.
doctors, according to the express word of God, ever taught and believed, that
neither Pagan, Heretic, nor Schismatike, could enter into life everlasting;
the Protestants affirm, that not only Heretics and Schismatikes, but Heathen
also and Infidels (such is their wicked) as they term it) Charity) may be
saved; In vita aeterna, etc. In the kingdom of heaven (says Zwinglius) Vide
praefationem operu^ Zwinglij tom. 1. lib de prouide^tia cap. 6. and Luther in
Genes. cap. 47 and Schlusselberg. lib. 3. Theolog. Call. ant. 7. See Caluino
Turcis. lib. 4. cap. 9.
We shall see Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Aristides, Antigonus, etc. yea
(says he) if I might have my choice, I would rather choose the lotte of
Socrates or Seneca, then of any Roman Emperor, King, or Prince addicted to
Popery. So Zwinglius, and the like is affirmed by Lautherus, Hardenbergius,
Tossanus, Rhodolphus, and Bullinger.

Fourthly, whereas the Apocal 21. v. 27.
Scripture plainly says, that no spotted or defiled thing shall enter into the
Holy City; the Protestants make no question, but that all of their
fraternity, shall go thither, who yet (as they themselves confess) have
always their souls spotted from top to toe, and that also with mortal sin;
sin Calvin in antid. council. Trid. sess. 5. and lib. 4 inst. c. 15. n. 10. 11.
and lib 2. c. 1. n. 8.
remains in us; neither is taken away by baptism. So Calvin; and again,
Ibid. n. 9.
all the parts of our souls are possessed with sin; Lib. 3. Inst. c. 12. n.
4.
neither is there any thing in us free from a deadly contagion.

To all which, if you add that prophaine Doctrine of the Apostle of
Protestancie Luther in collog mensa^. c. 49. tit. de vita aeterna.
affirming that in the kingdom of heaven shall be dogs, sheep, oxen, and
other like Creatures, for the inhabitants to sport with all, it will abundantly
appear, that the Doctors of Protestancie, are very far from believing a
right this twelft and last Article of the Apostles.

CHAPTER IV. That the god of the Protestants, especially those of the
Caluino-Puritan sect, according to their chief doctrines, and the famous
confessions of some of the same fraternity, is no other but a devil of Hell.
THat the Author of evil, is no other then a devil, no good Christian ever
questioned, neither does Calvin deny, but that if God may be said to be the
Calvin contra Libertinos c. 14. Si qui dij turpia faciunt non sunt dij
Euripides. impia and scelerata opera dij beati non faciunt. Homer. Odyss.
Pugnandu^ est omnibus modis ne quis in ciuitate quam volumus recte gubernari
Deum authorem sed causam esse malorum dicere vel audire, quia nec pium est ita
dicere, nec ipsum dictum secum consistit Plato lib. 2. de Repub.
author of evil, it may justly be inferred that God is a devil: now that the
Protestants in general, especial those of the Caluinian separation, make God
the Author of all sins and offenses whatsoever, their own writings will give
sufficient testimony.

Mala opera in impijs operatur, quit audet negare, se etiam in malis operibus
saepe coactum aliud facere quam cogitauit. God does work evil works in evil
men, who dares deny, but that he has often ben compelled in evil works to
do otherwise then he thought. So Luther the Luther in affert. art. impresse.
Wit. an. 1520. art. 36. See the Protestants apology tract 2. c. 2. sect. 10
sub 14. Fox in his acts and monumen^s Willet in his Synopsi passim Zwinglius
sermon. de prouidentia. c. 6. tom. 1. and cap. 5. an 1530. See Schl^sselberg in
theologia Calvin. art. 8. p. 77. Melanct. coment. in Rom 8 edit. ^. Caluini l
^3. ^nn. 23 n. 7.
Protetants Prophet and evangelist. When we committ murder or adultrie, it is
the work of God, who is the moouer, author, and inforcer of it. so Zwinglius,
Fox and Willets true Protestant confessor and martyr: again; although a bull
do bull a whole heard of kine, yet it is no sin in him but a greater
commendation, because no Law forbids him; yet if the master of the bull
should lie with more wives then his own, he should offend, since the Law
commands saying, Thou shall not committ adultry, even so God having no Law
prohibiting him he does not sin, though he work those things which is sin
in men. etc. We say that God does not only permit or suffer his creatures to
work or do any thing, but does properly do all things him self, whether those
works be indifferent, as to eat and drink etc. or whether they be evil, as
the adultrie of David. There is no reason why we should allow of this cold
gloss, That God does only permit, and not also cause evils, so in effect
Melancton: Again; the abulterie of David, and the treason of Judas, are as
properly the works of God, as the vocation and the conversion of Paul.

It is a horrible decree I confess (says Calvin) and yet no man can deny but
that God forsaw, what end man should have, and he therefore knew it, because by
his decree he had so ordained it, etc. Idem. lib. 3. jnst cap. 21. n. 5.
we call Predestination, the eternal decree of God, by which he has ordained
with him self, what he will have done with every man, for all are not created
with like condition, but to some eternal life, to others eternal death is
preordained, etc. Ibid. n. 7.
wheresoever this pleasure of God reigns, no works come into consideration;
Lib. 2. Inst. cap. 23. n. 2. See also lib. 3. inst cap. 24 n. 14. and 14.
men by the naked decree of God, without any desert of their own, are
Predestined to eternal death; Lib. 1. inst. cap. 18. n. 1.
therefore whatsoever men do, or the devil himself, God holds the stern,
and conuerteth their indemeanours, to the execution of his judgments; God
would have the perfidious king Achab to be deceived; the devil does offer his
help, to effect that business; he is sent with a certain commandment, to be a
lying Spirit in the mouths of all the Prophets; Ibid.
the devil is said to blind the hearts of the incredilous, but the efficacy of
this error, comes from God himself; Ibid.
man being justly forced by God, does do what is not lawful for him; Lib. 1
Inst. cap. 17. n. 5.
I farther grant, that thieues and murderers, and other malefactors, are the
instruments of Gods divine justice; Ibid. c. 18. n. 1^
Absolon polluting his fathers bed, by incestuous adultrie, does commit a
detestable wickedness, yet God pronounces this work to be his own; Ibid.
cap. 14. n. 2. see also lib. 2. inst cap. 4. n. 5 l. lib. 3. inst. cap. 24. n.
13. Non ita intelligen dum est^ quod dictur quem vult indurat, quasi Deus in
homine ipsa^, quae non esset, du^itiem cordis operetur indurare enim dicitur
quem mol liri noliri noluerit. Sic etiam execare quem i luminare noluerit.
August. li. de praed and gratia cap. 4. Calvin. l. 1 instit. c 18. n. 1. and 2.
there can be nothing more plain, then where he so often pronounces, that he
blinds the minds of men, and strikes them with giddines; that he
inebriateth them with the spirit of drowsines, that he hardneth their hearts,
etc. (l) behold he directs his voice unto them, but to make them the more
deaf, he sends them light, but to make them the more blind, he gives them
a remedy, but means not to cure them, etc. the impure spirit is therefore
called Gods spirit, because he does answer to his beck and power, and is
rather an instrument in doing, then an author of him self. Thus and much more
Calvin, in which as you see like a true child of darkness, he pleads
fairly for his Lord and master the devil, clearing him as much as in him
lies, from being any principal author of evil (as all good Christians hold
him to be) and lays it wholly on Gods shoulders, he makes God (I say) the
only, absolute, and principal author of all wickedness, neither will he endure
the word (Permission) ridiculum esset, etc. It were ridiculous (says he) that
a Judge should only permit, and not also decree what he would have done; Ibid.
c. 14 n. 2.
where it is said, that God does blind men, and harden their hearts, may put
it off, by flying unto Gods Permission, as if God by leaving the Reprobate, did
suffer him to be blinded by the devil; but since the spirit pronounces, that
man's blindness and madness, Calvin. lib. 1 inst cap 18 n. 3. See also lib. 3.
inst c. 23. n 6.
is inflicted by Gods just judgment, that solution is ouer-friuolous; again,
now I have plainly showed that God is the author of all those things which
those Censurers (meaning Catholics) would have to happen by his idle
permission only. Bucer in enarrat in epist. ad Romans p. 394. and 239 an. 1536.
So Calvin ^ Pharao (says Bucer) did what God would have him, neither could he
do otherwise; when God put into the heart of David to number the people,
doubtless God was willing to have him to do it, and wrought it in him; Idem
in cap. 1. ad Rom p. 7 2. and in cap 9. page 459. Beza in appotis. 8
since God seduceth, hardens, delivers into a reprobate sense, sends a
powerful error to make men do such a thing, it approoueth that he does not
only permit them to fall into error by forsaking them, but also by inclining
their hearts.

God (says Beza) does work al things without exception, whether they be good
or badde, virtuous or vicious, otherwise he should live in idleness; Idem
contra Castalion apud Feuardentium in theomac. Call.
if God did only permit sins to be done, he were not Omnipotent, but an
Epicurean God, idle, slouthful, and improuident; Idem contra Sycoph. apud
Duraeum lib. contra Whitaker. rat. 8. p. 218.
human reason tells us, that he is no less in fault, who is able to save
one from destruction, and yet saves him not, then if he himself had destroyed
him; Idem in volum theol. 1. page 417
we acknowledge that God has not only Predestined men to damnation, but also
to the causes of damnation. Now the causes of damnation being sins, it must
needs follow, that God Predestinateth men unto sin, and consequently is the
Author of sin.

God does not only permit men to fall into sin (says Marlorat) but he will
have it so, and does so ordain, Marlorat in cap. 1. ad Romans v. 24. and cap. 9
v. 18.
and by his commandment, Satan the hangman of hell, does rise up against us,
powerfully working what him lists, in the hearts of the wicked.

Many men hold a stale opinion (says Whitaker) that what sins soever are
committed by any one, Whitaker apud Duraeum rat. 8. p. 217. See also page 214.
Se in Calvin. aut Marlorat, etc.
are done only by Gods permission, and not his will, and this permission, they
wholly sever from Gods will, whereas God does not only permit, but by his
powerful will, would have all things done which the wicked do.

God (says Willet) an other English Doctor) has destined some to be the
vessels of his wrath, Willet in synopsi. page 554.
without any respect to their works, whether good or bad.

Crowly in his Apollogie, for the Englesh writers.
I confess (says Crowly) these are my words, that Gods Predestinaito^ was the
only cause of Adams fall, but not consequently of al sin; for such as have
eyes to see do see; that Adams fall was good etc. the only cause why Adam was
assaulted and overthrown by Satan was the Predestination of God; I confess I
have said that Gods Predestination was the only cause of Adams fall, and of the
murder of Cain against his brother Abell, yea that the most wiked persons that
ever were, of God appointed to be wicked eue^ as they were, so Crowly in a
book entitled, The apology or defense of English writers and Preachers etc.
subscribed, scene and allowed, according to the order appointed.

The Caluinists make god the author, mouer, and for^er of all sin; and they
say that though the elect run into Adultery, muttherer, lust, and the like
sines, yet they are never the more the sons of the diuel^, no not for a
moments space. See Schlusselberg in theolog. Calvin. art. 7. page 70.
It being evident then that the Protestants in general especially the
Caluinian, Zwinglian, and English faction, make God the principal cause of all
sins and wickednesses, and repute the diuill but as his Agent or instrument,
and it being also confessed by Calvin, Whitaker, and others, that the author of
sin, is no other but the Diuill. I will close up this chapter with the words
of Philippus Nicolaus a Lutheran Protestant, only applying that in general to
Protestants, which he affirms of the Caluinists in particular, saying.

Deum quem colunt, inuocant, adorant, etc. We say that the God whom the
Caluinists (and all other Protestants) worship, invoke, and adore, is a
desperate Arch-knaue, Arch-thiefe, Arch-traytour, Arch-lyer, Arch-hangman, etc.
since there is no murder, no theift, no heinous offense, no deceit, no
treason, no wickedness, no lewdness, in in the whole world to be thought or
devised so great, so horred, so gross, so abominable, which the God of the
Caluinists (and other Protestantt) by his essential malice, does not a hundred
millions of times exceed and surpass; vnder-firmiter, irrefragablliter, (...)
sequitur, etc. whence it follows firmly, irresistably, and without
contradiction, that the Caluinists (and other Protestants) in attributing such
properties and power to their God, are blind, mad, and possessed by the
devil, worshipping and inuocating a most horrible devil, instead of the
All-potent, Eternal, and Everliving God; Again, Deus Caluinistarum est
leuis, etc. The like affirm Hessusius and Schluslelberg, two other Lutherean
ministers and also Castalio (Caluins good brother) in their notable Treatises,
against this blasphemous doctrine of absolute Predestination, from which most
of the chief doctrines of Protestant Religion, take their beginnings.
The God o^ the Caluinists (and other Protestants) is light, lascivious,
impure, variable, crafty, deceiptfull, bloody, the Molo^^ described in holy
writ, the roaring Lion, the old enemy, the accursed Leuiathan, etc. From
which accursed and ever execrable god, or rather devil, the good God of heaven
deliver us.

FINIS.

