A CHILD OF LIGHT WALKING IN DARKNESS: OR A TREATISE Showing The Causes, by
which The Cases, wherein The Ends, for which
God leaves his children to distress of conscience. TOGETHER WITH DIRECTIONS
HOW TO COME FORTH OF SVCH A CONDITION: With other OBSERVATIONS upon Esaias 50.
10, and 11. verses.

BY THO: GOODWIN B. D.

JOB 34. 29. When he hides his face, who can behold him?

Printed at London by M. F. for R. Dawlman and L. F. at the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO, ROBERTO, DOMINO BROOK, BARONI BROOK, HEROI OPELLAM
HANC, CONSOLATORIAM, TESTIMONIVM.

DO: DICO: CONSECRO.

THOMAS GOODWIN.

To the Reader.
THat which drew these Sermons from me, next to thy good, was to right my
self. They were first preached eight years since; and some notes thereof
were, (to say no more,) dispersed into the hands of many, to my prejudice. They
are here presented as they were preached, with little alteration or addition,
in method, style, or matter: Only to make up the Treatise more complete, I
entirely added, against the publishing thereof, that whole discourse about
Satan's part, and hand in these desertions, beginning at Chap. 6. In handling
which, I trust I have not at all incurred that severe increpation of the
Apostle, against curious speculations about angels, Col. 2. 18.
of intruding into those things which I have not seen ground, and warrant for
in the word. Sure I am I have endeavored to follow the School, in their
Labyrinths herein, no further then I found a Clue of Scripture, and right
reason, clearly guiding and warranting my way: Without which, I account the
ways of this old and winding Serpent, in his communications to us, to be as
Solomon speaks, Prove. 30. 18, 19.
Like the way of a Serpent upon a stone, hidden, and past tracing, or finding
out. And lest any of the weaker readers, especially those in distress; to whom
more speculative, and doctrinall discourses, though about things practical,
prove usually tedious and unpleasing, should in reading that piece, be
discouraged at the first: My advertisement is, that (if they find that part of
the way craggy, or tyresome, which I hope they will not) they would divert out
of it, and come in again at Chap. 11. from whence to the end, they shall find
what is more accommodate to their understandings, and conditions, and more
practically speaking to your distress. The blessing of heaven go with it.

THO: GOODWIN.

THE TABLE.
Part. 1.
A Paraphrase upon the words. page 1. Chap. 1. The first and maine observation,
That a child of God may walk in darkness. p. 5. 1. What it is to walk in
darkness. ibid. That thereby here is not meant. ibid. 1. Insin. ibid. 2. In
ignorance. p. 6 But in sorrow and discomfort.ibid. 1. And that not of outward
afflictions only. ibid. 2. But chiefly inward from the want of the sense of
Gods favor. p. 7 Proved by 3. Reasons. ibid. Chap. 2. The particulars of that
distress as contained in those two phrases, Walking in darkness: Having no
light. p. 9 1. What the condition of such an one is, ibid.. 1. As expressed, 1.
By having no light.p. 9. Light distinct from faith.ibid. A threefold light
added to faith to cause assurance. p. 10 1. The immediate light of Gods
countenance. ibid. Which a belever may want. ibid. Proved. p. 11 And how the
want of it may stand with Gods love still continued, and with the real
influence of his grace. p. 12 2. The light of present graces.ibid. Which he
also may want. p. 13 Or 3. Light may be taken for the remembrance of former
graces, and evidences. ibid. Which he may want. p. 14 The reason of both. ibid.
How grace may be exercised, and not discerned. p. 15 The reason. ibid.. 2. What
his condition is, as expressed by walking in darkness. 1. To be in doubt what
will become of him. p. 16 2. Stumbling at all comforts. p. 17 3. Filled with
terrors. ibid. Chap. 3. The efficient causes of this distress: First, the
Spirit: Whether he has any hand therein, and how far. ibid. The efficient
causes of this distress, three.. 1. The Spirit: not the cause of doubting and
despairing thoughts. p. 18 2. Yet the Spirit has some hand in the distress.
p. 20 1. Privative, by withdrawing his testimony. ibid. 2. Positive, in 2.
things. p. 21 1. By representing God angry through immediate impression of
wrath on the conscience. ibid. 2. By shaking over us the threatenings of
eternal wrath. p. 22 Chap. 4. How Satan and our hearts increase this darkness
and distress, by false conclusions from the Spirits work: illustrated by the
like in the illumination of temporaries: The Spirits work in both compared. p.
24 Chap. 5. The second efficient cause of this darkness Our own Hearts: The
principles therein which are the causes thereof. p. 29. 1. By reason of our
weakness, as we are creatures ibid.. 2. Of an innate darkness, as we are
sinful creatures. p. 30. 3. Of carnal reason. p. 31 Which as in men
unregenerate does reason for their bad estate; So in the regenerate, against
the goodness of their estates. p. 32 How potent and prevalent carnal reason
is with us? p. 34 And how desperate an enemy unto faith, and the reason of it.
p. 35 The great advantage carnal reason has in time of desertion. p. 37. 4.
Of corrupt affections which join with carnal reason in this: as jealousy,
suspicion, etc. ibid. The rise of them, and of their working in the heart. p.
39. 5. The guilt in our own consciences remaining in part defiled. p. 41 Chap.
6. The third efficient cause, Satan: His special malice in this temptation,
commission, access to, and advantage over us in this temptation, by reason of
the darkness in us. p. 44 Four things in general premised to explain Satan's
working herein. p. 45. 1. Satan has a special inclination to this kind of
temptation. ibid. The reasons. p. 47. 2. God may and does give up his child
into Satan's hands, and permit him thus to tempt him. p. 48 Which permission is
granted him, either 1. At Satan's own motion and request. p. 49 2. Upon the
ordinance of excommunication. ibid. Or 3. When that ordinance is neglected in
case of some gross sin. p. 51 Yet this permission is with difference, from
that giving up of wicked men to Satan. p. 51. 3. How able Satan is to tempt. p.
52. 4. That the exercise of this his power is much from the darkness in us. p.
53 A double advantage that Satan has over us in the exercise of his power in
tempting us. p. 54 1. Of more near and intimate access to suggest inwardly to
our spirits. ibid. 2. Of fit matter and fuel in our spirits to work upon. p.
55 Chap. 7. More particularly, how Satan works upon those three principles in
us: first on carnal reason. p. 56. 1. Satan's abilities to invent falfe
reasonings. p. 57 Increased by so long a time of experience. ibid. And his
continual exercise in this great controversy in all ages. p. 58 Which of all
controversies is the most subtle and intricate. ibid.. 2. Satan knows how to
suit his falfe reasoning to all sorts of believers. p. 57 The conditions of men
are exceeding various, and so are capable of several sorts of temptations. p.
60 Satan fitly knows how to apply his temptations unto those various
conditions. p. 62. 3. Satan is able indiscernably to communicate the most
spiritual false reasonings, and in such a manner as to make them take with us.
62 1. To suggest even the most subtle and abstracted reasonings about things
spiritual. ibid. 2. To suggest them in such a manner as to deceive us. p. 65.
4. Satan is able to continue the dispute, and often to make replies to answers
made to his false reasonings. p. 67 Chap. 8. That Satan is able to work upon
that other corrupt principle in us. [Guilt of conscience] both how far he is
able to know matter by us, in objecting against us; as also to set on, and work
upon the guilt and erroneousnesse of the conscience. p. 70 A difference
between Satan's sifting us in temptation, and the holy Ghosts searching us. p.
73. 1. How Satan is an accuser by charging the guilt of sin upon the
conscience. p. 74 And works upon the injudiciousnesse of the conscience. p.
77. 2. This quaere discussed, how Satan may know matter against us to accuse us
of. p. 78 A caution premised that it is Gods sole prerogative to know the
heart. p. 79 1. In general, Satan might lay to our charge, though in
particular he know little by us. p. 86 1. In that he knows what corruptions
are in all men's hearts, he might by guess object them to everyone. 2. By
casting in a jealous thought from some one particular he knows, he might set
the heart aworke to examine all the rest. 2. More particularly. 1. He may know
all that another man can know of us. p. 87 As all corporeal acts done by
bodily substances. p. 88 2. He sets himself to know what he can by us, by
study and diligence. ibid. 3. He is or can be privy to all our vocal
confession of our sins to God. p. 89 4. He is or can be present at all times
and places, and so can accuse us, 1. Of all gross sins outwardly committed.
ibid. 2. Of neglect and deadness in duties. p. 90 3. Of a man's bosom sin.
ibid. 5. From what he sees outwardly, he can guess at inward corruptions.
ibid. 3. Ways. p. 91 6. He may further view the images in the fancy, and the
passions; and perturbatious of our affections in the body. p. 92 How
notwithstanding his knowledge, falls short of knowing the heart. p. 93 Chap. 9.
How able Satan is to work upon that third principle; The passions, and corrupt
affections: and bring home his false conclusions with terrors. p. 97. 1. That
Satan can raise terrors. ibid. A caution. p. 99. 2. That though he cannot
immediately wound the conscience: yet, 1. He can rake in those wounds the
Spirit has made. p. 105 2. From the renewing the remembrance of those terrors
impressed by the Spirit, he can amaze the soul afresh with fear of worse.
ibid. 3. He can bring home all the threatenings made against hy p^^rites, etc.
ibid. And 4. when he goes about to do this, he can excite the passions of
fear and trembling of Spirit.p. 109 Which when stirred, all suggestions strike
deeper into us. p. 110 Chap. 10. The conclusion: Seven advantages in common,
which Satan has over us, in all these his dealings. p. 111 1. That he can
suggest frequently, and familiarly. ibid. 2. That he can present his
suggestions, and false reasonings together at once. p. 112 3. That he holds and
keeps the thoughts and intentions of the mind fixed to them. p. 113 4. That he
sets on all with an imperious affirmation. p. 113 5. That he backs them also
with terrors, which is an argument to sense. p. 115 6. That he suggests
undiscerned. ibid. 7. That we cannot avoid his suggesting to us. p. 116 Chap.
11. The second general head: The Cases wherein God leaves his unto darkness.
First, Three cases extraordinary. p. 118 The cases of two sorts, ordinary,
extraordinary. ibid.. 1. 1. Case extraordinary, out of Gods sole prerogative.
ibid. 2. Case, when God intends to make a man wise, and able to comfort others.
p. 121 3. In case of abundance of revelations and comfort: Either, p. 123 1.
After a man has partooke of them. ibid. 2. Before God does dispense them. p.
124 Chap. 12. The cases ordinary, wherein God does leave his in darkness. p.
125 A general rule premised. That God is exceeding various in these
dispensations. ibid. The cases. 1. In case of carnal confidence, which is
either. p. 128 1. In trusting to false signs, together with true. p. 129 2.
Putting too much confidence upon signs, with neglect of Christ. ibid. 3.
Neglect of going to Christ, for upholding of graces. p. 130 2. Case, For
neglecting opportunities of spiritual comforts. ibid. 3. Case, for not
exercising our graces. p. 131 4. In case of some gross sin. Either, 1.
Against light. p. 132 2. Not thoroughly humbled for. p. 134 3. Though long since
committed. p. 138 The reason of all. p. 139 5. In case of a stubborn spirit
under outward afflictions. p. 140 6. Case, for deserting the truth when called
to profess it. p. 141 7. In case of unthankfulnes for former spiritual
comforts enjoyed. p. 143 Chap. 13. The third general Head: The ENDS for which
God leaves to darkness. First, such as are drawn from God, and his
faithfulness, etc. p. 144 1. To show Gods power and faithfulness in
upholding, and raising up a man's spirit again. ibid.. 2. The secondend, to
know the fellowship of Christ's sufferings. p. 140. 3. To show the different
estate of Gods children here, and hereafter. p. 141. 4. To show the spring of
all spiritual comforts, and our dependence for them. p. 143 Chap. 14. A second
sort of Ends for the trial and discovery of graces, especially of Faith. p.
144 Especially for the trial of faith. p. 146 1. Of all graces God tryes faith
the most. p. 153 2. Of all trials this of darkness is the greatest, for 3.
reasons. ibid. Chap. 15. Six Ends more for the increasing of several graces,
and destroying of corruptions. p. 156 1. To destroy corruption. ibid. 2. To
humble. ibid. 3. To increase assurance in the event. p. 157 4. The fear and
obedience of God. ibid. 5. To pray more and more earnestly. ibid. 6. To prize
the light of Gods countenance.
Part. 2.
Use 1. TO those that fear not God, nor obey him, what darkness reserved for
such? page 1. Use 2. To those that are translated from darkness into light,
and yet never thus walked in darkness. p. 4 To take notice of such a condition
there is: which is useful. p. 5 1. To prepare them against it, if it should
afterward befall them. ibid. 2. To be kept more in dependence upon God. p. 6.
3. To learn not to censure others. p. 7 4. To fear God the more. ibid. 5. To
be thankful that God has spared them. ibid. Use 3. To those that have been
in darkness, and are now recovered out of it. p. 8 1. To bethankfull to God
and Christ. ibid. 2. To pity others in that condition? p. 9 3. To declare what
God has done for them. ib. And to give warning unto others. ibid. 4. To take
heed of such sins as may bring them into such a condition again. p. 10 Use 4.
To such as fear God, and walk in darkness. ibid. Two sorts of such: some more
lightly troubled, some more deeply. p. 13 Ten directions for those who are more
deeply troubled, and means to be used, how to recover light and comfort. p.
15 1. Direction. To take heed of rash, impatient, and unbeleeving speeches and
wishes. ibid. 2. Direct. To make a diligent search, and examination. p. 19 Two
things to be searched into. ibid. 1. What is the true cause which provokes God
to leave them to this distress. ibid. 2. What is the maine reasoning in the
heart, that causes this questioning of the estate. p. 21 3. Direct. To
consider as indifferently, what may make for them, as against them. p. 25 4.
Direct. To call to remembrance former evidences, and passages betwixt God and
us. p. 28 5. Direct. To renew a man's faith and repentance. p. 33 6. Direct. To
be resolute and peremptory in believing, and turning to God, what ever may be
the issue. p. 36 7. Direct. Let him trust in the name of the Lord p. 39 That
the name of the Lord in all sufficient prop, and stay for a man's faith to rest
upon, when he sees nothing in himself. ibid. By the name of the Lord 2. things
are meant 1. Those attributes of grace and mercy. 2. Christ's righteousness. p.
40 Instances of those that have trusted in his Name (...). p. 41 Reasons 3. p.
44 How the Name of the Lord answers all objections. ibid. 8. Direct. To wait
upon God in the use of all means p. 52 9. Direct. To seek to God by prayer
most earnestly; together with Pleas and arguments to be used to God in prayer,
for recovery out of this condition. p. 55 10. Direct. Not to rest in ease, but
alone in healing. p. 68 Other observations out of the 10. verse. Doct. 2. That
though it may befall one that fears God to walk in darkness, yet but to a
few. p. 75 Reasons three. p. 76, 77 Uses three. p. 78 Doct. 3. That those few
that walk in darkness, Christ has an especial eye unto, and care of. p. 79
Uses two. p. 81 A child of darkness walking in light. p. 86 Doct. 4. That
when the children of God are under terrors, the most eminent grace that does
appear in them, is fearfulness to offend God and willingness to obey him.
p. 81 Explication of it. ibid. Reason. p. 82 Uses two. ibid. By fire and the
light of it, two things meant. p. 84 1. Their own righteousness. ibid. By
sparks what is meant. p. 87 What by walking in the light of their fire. ibid.
Use. 1. Examine what fire we offer to God. ibid. Use 2. Take heed of walking in
the light of such fire. p. 90 2. Outward comforts. p. 91 Why fire is put for
comfort. p. 92 Why outward comfort compared to fire of their own kindling, to
earthly fire. ibid. The comparison holds in 6. things. p. 93
FINIS.
A CHILD OF LIGHT WALKING in DARKNESS.
ISAI: 50. 10, 11. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. 11. Behold all ye that
kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light
of your fire, and in the sparks which ye have kindled; this ye shall have of
my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.
The words paraphrased,
WE have in these words, The Sum^^.
A true believer, in his worst; and natural men, in their best condition, set
forth together unto our view. And withal, the power of true faith, as it alone
upholdeth him in the saddest hour of darkness that can befall him: opposed
unto, and compared with, the falsenesse of their presumptuous confidence, in
their greatest security: Together with the differing supports of either; The
one in the tenth verse: the other in the eleventh.

First, Of the tenth verse.
take a true believer, who has had the least beam, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
of the light of the glory of God, which shines in the face of Christ, let in
upon his soul, and his heart, so taken with that sight, as it became eternally
divorced from all things here below, and resolved to adventure all his future
hopes of comfort, and happiness in the enjoyment of that Light of Gods
countenance alone: Which, that he may enjoy, he fears to offend the Lord,
more then Hell; and endeavors as truly, to obey the voice of his Servants,
as ever he desires to attain unto that happiness. Think with your selves,
what is the worst thing, next, to the eternal loss of God, really, and indeed
that can be supposed to befall this man? What worse, then to have that cranny,
through which he first espied that beam, to be as it were, clean shut up,
the Light of Gods countenance withdrawn, yea all Light, and appearance to him,
of his own graces, withheld, and overclouded; The face of heaven so overcast
with Darkness, that neither Sun-light nor Starlight appears to him: so as
he has no light: yea further, finds his soul beset, and besieged round with
all the powers of Hell, and darkness, and the terrors of the Almighty shot
into his soul: And, he thus quite left, walking in this darkness, is filled
with strong fears and jealousies, that God is not His God; nay questioning
whether he ever will be? Psalm. 77. 7.
yea, apprehending by the wrath he feels, God, to be became his enemy. All
this is set forth to us here, as the very estate of one who fears the Lord
and obeyes him: and is comprehended in these words; That walks in Darkness
and has no Light. You see him at his worst.

In which forlorn condition, what is there to be found to releeve, and
support this man? But only one thing; which is here held forth to him; The
name of the Lord, for him to trust, and stay himself upon; Both that Name of
God, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord God, gracious and merciful, etc. and that Name of
Christ, which is called, Ierem. 23. 6. Jehovah our righteousness. Both, or
either of which, He, by the naked hand of faith, laying hold upon, may now
make use of, as of a staff, (as David compares it Psalm. 23. 4.) whilst, he
thus Walks in darkness, and through the valley of the shadow of death, safely
to trust, and stay himself upon, Psalm. 36 9.
so as in the end, to come forth, to see Light in Gods Light for evermore. You
see likewise the prop of his soul in this condition.

On the contrary, Of the 11. verse.
let us behold, (as all are here called to do) the best and most secure, of
unregenerate men encompassed about with all means, and supports of confidence,
and comfort; whether of Legal righteousness of their own, (which these Jews
made boast of,) together with the addition of all worldly and outward comforts:
both which the Prophet here compares to Fire and sparks, as preserving Light
and comfort in them. As, 1 let their lives, and natural dispositions, abound
with never so many sparks of legal righteousness, which themselves have
kindled: for so he compares all those several acts and performances of
natural and acquired righteousness, struck out, and educed from the powers of
natural principles, improved; which make a great blaze in a man's own opinion,
and esteem; which yet, not proceeding from the holy Ghost baptising them as
with fire, and renewing them; nor from internal principles of regeneration,
which Christ compares to fire, Mar. 9 ult are all in Gods account, but as a
sacrifice offered up with strange fire; which was forbidden, and are here said
to be of their own kindling: And such were the sparks, in the light of which,
these Jews walked, who went about to establish their own righteousness, Romans
10. 3.
and with confidence trusted therein, and not on the name of the Lord. And
further, 2 Let these men be surrounded, and encompassed about with the greatest
splendour of worldly glory, and abound in all those good things this world can
afford them; (the comforts whereof Solomon in like manner compares to a fire of
Thorns, and the pleasures of it, to the crackling of thrones, Eccles. 7. 6.
as here to sparks:) and let them keep never so good fires to warm and cheer
themselves withal, lay on as much every day as shall even encompasse them
about with sparks; and in the light, and confidence of both these, let them
walk for many years; despising that other poor believer, that fears to be
found in his own righteousness, and refuses to be comforted by any of these:
yet, let them know, (says Christ, who is brought in as the speaker here,) that
when they have thus walk^ presumptuously, and securely, and even walk
themselves weary; (as it is Isai. 40. 13.) weary of all their own ways, and
pleasures; (as they will be one day,) and then at their death beds, think to
lie down and rest them: They shall lie down indeed, (says Christ) and their
bed shall be of my making, and providing: this you shall have of my hand, ye
shall lie down; but, in a bed of sorrow, and despair: In which, they shall lie
down, never to rise again.

CHAP. I.
The maine proposition, and subject of this discourse, thence deduced; That a
child of God may walk in darkness. That thereby distress of conscience, and
desertion in the want of assurance of justification, is meant, proved.

THis to be the meaning of the words, will more fully appear in opening the
several propositions to be delivered out of them; The first and maine
observation: That a child of God may walk in darkness.
whereof the first and principally intended is this: That one who truly fears
God, and is obedient to him, may be in a condition of darkness, and have no
light, and he may walk many days and years in that condition.

And herein,. 1.
further to explain the Text, and bottom this great point well upon it; 1.
What it is To walk in darkness.
and more particularly to discover, what the condition of a child of God, thus
in darkness is, we will first inquire what is meant by walking in darkness
here in this place.

First, What is not meant here;
walking in darkness is taken in the 1 John 1. 6. for living in sin and
ungodliness: 1. Not in sin.
in the commission of known sins, or omission of known duties, going on in
the works of darkness. But so it is not, to be taken here. For Christ would
not have encouraged such, to trust in God, who is light, and there can be no
fellowship between him and such darkness; as the Apostle tells us: Nay, the
Holy Ghost reproves such, as do lean on the Lord, and yet transgress; Micah
3. 11.
and besides, the Text speaks of such, who for their present condition, fear
God, and are obedient to him, which if they thus walked in darkness, they could
not be said to do.

Neither secondly, is it to be meant of walking in ignorance, 2. Not in
ignorance.
as John 12. 36. it is taken. For, one that has no light in that sense, can
never truly fear God, Prove. 19. 2.
nor obey him; the heart that wants knowledge is not good, says Solomon; and
so to walk in darkness, is accompanied with walking in vanity of mind Ephesians.
4. 18.

But thirdly, he means it of discomfiture and sorrow. 3. But in sorrow and
discomfort.
As often, we find in Scripture, darkness to be taken: as Eccles. 5. 17. As
on the contrary, Light, Eccles. 11. 7.
because it is so pleasant a thing to behold, is put for comfort. And, that so
it is taken here, is evident, by that which is opposed in the next verse, walk
ye in your light, yet, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

But fourthly, sorrow, and for what? Whether from outward afflictions, or inward
distress of mind and conscience; or (to use Salomons distinction) whether by
reason of man's ordinary infirmities, or of a wounded spirit? that is yet in
question.

And that not of outward afflictions only.
which are called man's infirmities, as being common to man; which arise from
the things of this world, or from the men of the world; though to walk in
darkness is so taken, Esai. 59. 9. and I will not exclude it here. For, in
them also, a man's best support, is to trust in God; and it is the safest way to
interpret Scriptures in the largest sense which the words and coherence will
bear. But yet that cannot be the only, or principal meaning of it: for
besides what is further to be said to the contrary, he adds withal, and has
no light, that is, no comfort: Now as Philosophers say, non dantur purae
tenebrae, there is no pure darkness without some mixture of light: so we may
say, there is not mere or utter darkness caused by outward afflictions, no
outward affliction can so universally environ the mind, as to shut up all the
crannies of it, so that a man should have no light. And besides, Gods people
when they walk in the greatest outward darkness, may have, yea, often use to
have most light in their spirits. But here is such an estate spoken of, such a
darkness as has no light in it.

Therefore secondly, it is principally to be understood, want of inward comfort
in their spirits; But chiefly inward from the want of the sense of Gods favor.
from something that is between God and them; and so meant of that darkness
and terrors, which accompany the want, and the sense of Gods favor. And so
darkness is elsewhere taken, for inward affliction of spirit, and mind, and
want of sight, in point of assurance, that God is a man's God, and of the pardon
of a man's sins; so Psalm. 88. 6. Heman uses this word to express his
distress; and the reasons why it is thus to be understood, here, are;

First, Proved by 3. reasons. The first.
because the remedy here prescribed is faith; to stay himself upon God, and
that as upon His God; he puts in His God, emphatically; because that is the
point he is troubled about, and concerning which he is in darkness; and that
is it, which faith, which is propounded here as the remedy, does in the first
place and principally look unto, as its primary aim, and object.

Secondly, The second.
in the foregoing verses he had spoken of Justification, whereby God pardons
our sins, and accepts our persons: The Prophet, or Christ in the person of
his elect, (as some) having expressed his assurance of this: God is near that
justifies me, who shall condemn? (Which words the Apostle Romans 8. 32, 33. does
allege in the point of justification, and to express the triumphing
assurance of it; and applies them in the name and persons of true believers)
now because there might be some poor souls, who though truly fearing God,
yet might want this assurance; and upon the hearing of this might be the more
troubled, because not able to express that confidence which he did: therefore
he adds, who is among you that fears the Lord, etc. as if he should have
said, though you want the comfortable sense and assurance of this, be not
discouraged, but do you exercise faith, go out of your selves, rely upon
Christ and that mercy which is to be found in God: you may fear God and want
it; and you are to trust in God in the want of it.

Thirdly, The third.
these words have a relation also to the fourth verse, where he says, (as that
God had given him this assurance of his own justification, for his own
particular comfort in the foregoing verses so) that God had also given him the
tongue of the learned to minister a word of comfort in season, to him that is
weary and heavy laden: and thereupon in this verse, he accordingly shows the
blessed condition of such persons as are most weary through long walking in
darkness; and withal he discovers to them, the way of getting out of this
darkness, and recovering comfort again: And in all the word of God, there is
not a more comfortable and seasonable word to one in such a condition to be
found. All which argues, it is spoken of inward darkness, and trouble of
spirit, and that in point of applying justification, and God to be a man's God.

CHAP. II.
The particulars of the distress, contained in these two phrases: Walking in
Darkness; Having no Light.

THe second thing to be enquired into is, What is His condition whilst he
walks in darkness, etc.
What is the condition of such an one who is thus in darkness, and who has no
light? Which I will so far discover, as the phrases used here will give light
into, by the help of other Scriptures.

First,. 1. as expressed, 1. by having no light.
he is said to have no light: Light says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 13. is that
whereby things are made manifest; that is, to the sense of sight, to which,
light properly belongs: and as light, and faith, are here severed as you see;
so sight also is in 2 Cor. 5. 7. distinguished from faith, Heb. 11. 1.
which is the evidence of things absent and not seen: Light distinct from
faith.
when therefore, here he says, he has no light, the meaning is, he wants all
present sensible testimonies of Gods favor to him; he sees nothing that may
give sensible present witness of it to him: Gods favor, and his own graces,
and all the sensible tokens and evidences thereof, which are apprehended by
spiritual sight, are become all as absent things, as if they were not, or
never had been; that light which ordinarily discovers these as present, he is
clean deprived of.

To understand this, A threefold light added to faith to cause assurance.
we must know, that God to help our faith (which, as I said before, is
distinguished from sight, as we now speak of it) vouchsafes a threefold light
to his people, to add assurance and joy to their faith; which is to faith, as
a back of steel to a bow to strengthen it, and made to be taken off, or put
on to it at Gods good pleasure.

First, 1. The immediate light of Gods countenance:
the immediate light of his countenance, which is a clear evident beam and
revelation of Gods favor, immediately testifying that we are his, which is
called the sealing of the Spirit, received after believing. Ephesians. 1. 13. which
David desired, and rejoiced in more then in all worldly things. Lord lift up
the light of thy countenance: Psalm. 4. 6.
in which, more or less, in some glimpses of it some of Gods people have the
privilege to walk with joy, from day to day: Psalm. 89. 15. They shall walk
in the light of thy countenance, in thy name shall they rejoice all day. which
he may want,
And this is here utterly withdrawn: and it may thus come to pass; that the
soul in regard of any sense or sight of this, may be left in that case that
Saul really was left in: 1 Samuel 28. 15. God is departed from me, and answers me
not, neither by Prophets, nor by dreams: though with this difference, that God
was really departed from Saul, but to these, but in their own apprehensions:
yet so, as for ought they can see of him, God is departed clean from them;
answers them neither by prayer, nor by word, proved.
nor by conference; they cannot get one good look from him: Jonah 2. 4.
Such was Ionahs case, I am cast out of thy sight, that is, he could not get a
sight of him; not one smile, not one glaunce or cast of his countenance, not a
beam of comfort, and so thought himself cast out. And so he dealt with David
often, and sometimes a long time together, Psalm. 13. 1. How long will thou hide
thy face from me: and Psalm. 89. 46. How long, etc. even so long as David puts
God in remembrance, and pleades how short a time in all he had to live, and
complains, how in much of that time his face had been hid from him, ver. 47.
And the like was Hemans case, and this also long, even from his youth up. Psalm.
88. 14, 15. So from Job, Job 13. 24.
yea, and from Christ himself; My God my God why have thou forsaken me?

But concerning this, this dealing of his stand with his everlasting love, And
how the want of it may stand with
continued notwithstanding to the soul, that he should deal so with one he
loves, but especially, how it may stand with the real influence of his grace,
powerfully enabling the soul all that while to go on to fear and obey him?

For the first, with his everlasting love, Gods love still continued,
and God may be his God still, as the Text tells us: so, Esa. 54. 8. For a
moment, I have hid my face, but with everlasting kindness, will I have mercy
on thee. It is but hiding his face, and concealing his love as David concealed
his love from Absalom, when his bowels yearned toward him: and God takes the
liberty that other fathers have, to shut His children out of his presence, when
he is angry: and it is but for a moment; that is, in comparison of eternity;
though happily it should be thus with him during a man's whole life; and he
therefore takes liberty to do it, because he has such an eternity of time, to
reveal his kindness in; time enough for kisses and embraces, and to pour
forth his love in.

real gracious influences, and effects of his favor may be continued, and
with the real influence of grace.
upholding, strengthening, and carrying on the soul, still to obey and fear
him, whilst he yet conceales his favor. For, when Christ complained, My God
my God why have thou forsaken me? Deus se communicate, vel qua beatus; vel qua
sanctus; qua beatus gaudium and gloriam; qua sanctus gratiam: Virumque
voluntary, ideoque non utrumque simul necessario.
(when, as great an eclipse in regard of the light of Gods countenance, was
upon his spirit, as was upon the earth) yet he never more obeyed God; was
never stronglier supported then at that time, for then he was obeying to the
death. Like as we see, that when the Sun is eclipsed, though the earth wants
the light of it, yet not the influence thereof; for the metals which are
engendered in the bottom of the earth are concocted by the Sun; so as though
the light of the Sun comes not to them, yet the influence and virtue of it
does, and alters and changes them: So does Gods favor visit men's hearts in
the power, heat, and vigorous influence of his grace; when the light and
comfort of it does not; but is intercluded.

light which God vouchsafes his people ordinarily to help and ^eeke out their
faith, Light is of present graces;
is the sight and comfort of their own graces, unto which so many promises
belong; as, of their love to his people, fear of his name, desire to obey him.
So that often when the Sun is set, yet Starlight appears; that is, though
that other the immediate presence and evidence of his favor shines not on the
soul, yet his graces therein appear, as tokens of that his love: so as the
soul knows that there is a Sun still, that gives light to these Stars,
though it sees it not; as in the night, we know that there is a Sun in
another Horizon, because the Stars, we see, have their light from it; and we
are sure that it will arise again to us.

Now a soul that has true grace in it, which he also may want.
and goes on to obey God, may also want light to see these his graces, and
look upon his own heart as empty of all. And as they in the storm, Acts 27.
20. so he, in temptation may come to have neither Sun-light, nor Starlight; no
light, as in the Text. Thus Esaias 63. 17. the Church there complains, that God
had hardened them from his fear: they were afraid, feeling their hearts so
hard, that the fear of God was wanting: which yet was there, for they
complain of the want of it.

But yet thirdly, though he want the present Light may be taken for the
remembrance of former graces and evidences;
and the sight of present graces; yet he may have a comfortable remembrance of
what once before he had, still left; and so long is not utterly left in
darkness. Therefore further know, that the state of one that fears God and
obeyes him, may be such, as he may have no comfortable light or remembrance of
what grace, etc. formerly he had. 2 Pet. 1. 9. One that has true grace in him,
only lackes the exercise of them, (for I take it, that place is to be
understood of a regenerate man, because he was purged from sin: and is now
said to lack grace, because he does not use it; for, idem est non habere, and
non uti; a man is said not to have that which he does not use when he ought to
use it, especially in things whose worth lies wholly in use and employment, for
it is as good as if he had it not) now, which he may want.
such a man may fall into such a blindness, that he cannot see afar off, and
so forgets his former assurance, that he was purged from his old sins. Yea, it
may be, calls all into question. Thus David in the 30. Psalm. 6, 7. though his
heart was but even now, a little before full of joy, and assurance of Gods
favor: yet God did but hide his face, and all was gone, I was troubled (says
he) he was thus blind, and could not see what was but a little past him, as
it is with men in a mist.

And the reason of these two last assertions is as evident as the experience
thereof. The reason of both.
For graces in us shine, but with a borrowed light, as the Stars do, with a
light borrowed from the Sun. So that, unless God will shine secretly, and
give light to thy graces, and irradiate them, thy graces will not appear to
comfort thee, nor be at all a witness of Gods favor to assure thee. For our
spirit, that is, our graces, never witness alone; but if Gods Spirit joyneth
not in testimony therewith, it is silent: The Spirit of God witnesses with our
spirits, Romans 8. 16. Now therefore, when God has withdrawn his testimony,
then the testimony of our hearts, and of our own graces has no force in it.

But you will say,

Yes: How grace may be exercised, when not discerned.
and as much as ever, and yet this fear have no light in it to discover it
self to him: it may be in the heart, in esse and operari, when not in
cognosci: it may have a being and a working there, when not in thy apprehension.

The reason is, The reason
because as the influence of Gods favor may be really in the heart, when the
sense, sight, and light of it is withdrawn; (as was said before,) so the power
of grace may in like manner be in the heart, when the light and comfort thereof
is wanting. And although it is true, that every man having the power of
reflecting upon his own actions, can discern what thoughts are in him, and
what affections; and can tell for the matter of them, what he thinks on, and
that he is grieved, etc. But yet so, as he may still question whether those
thoughts be acts of true and unfeigned faith; and whether those affections of
sorrow for sin, etc. be sanctified affections, holy, and genuine, and spiritual
affections. And the reason of the difference is, because though the natural
spirit, which is in a man knows the things of a man, as the Apostle has it, 1
Cor. 2. 11. that is, his own thoughts, etc. understanding them physically, as
they are acts of a man: yet, what is the true goodness of them morally; Ierem.
17.
in discerning This, the spirit of a man is deceitful, and cannot know it,
without the supernatural light of the Spirit of God: who as he is the giver
and actor of that grace in us; so is given of God that we might know the things
which are given us of God: 1 Cor. 2. 8. 12. Light is sown for the righteous,
and joy for the upright says the Psalmist. Grace and the exercise of it is the
seed, which they continually scatter; but light and joy is the crop that is to
be reaped. This seed often lies hid long, though it will come up in the end.
Thus light or joy may be severed from grace; and the comfort of it, from the
power of it.

Secondly,. 2.
let us further consider the other What his condition is, as expressed by walking
in darkness.
when (as it is said) he walks in darkness.

First, to walk in darkness, implies to be in doubt whither to go: so John
12. 35. He that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes. And thus the
soul of one that fears God, To be in doubt what will become of him.
may be filled with doubts, whether God will ever be merciful to him yea or
no, and not know what God means to do with him, whether he shall go to
heaven or hell. Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9. Will the Lord be merciful? which speeches
are spoken doubtingly: for ver. 10. he says, this was his infirmity, to call
this into question. So Heman Psalm. 88. 5, 6, 11, 12. He thought himself as
one that was in hell; Free among the dead, that is, as one admitted into the
company of them there: ver. 5. free of that company, as you use to say, and of
the number of those whom God no more remembered: in such darkness was he, ver.
6. And to raise him out of that condition, was a thing he doubted whether God
would ever do. ver. 10, 11, 12. Will thou show wonders to the dead? shall thy
wonders be declared in the grave? that is, did God ever show mercy to one that
was in the same state that they in hell are in, which is my state now: yea, so
as to be out of hope: So Lamen. 3. 18. My hope is perished from the Lord.

Secondly, those in darkness are apt to stumble at every thing: Stumbling at
all comfor^s.
So Esaias 59. 10. One effect of darkness, mentioned there, is to stumble at
noone day. So take a soul that is left in darkness, and it will stumble at
all it hears out of the word, either in conference, or at Sermons; all it
reads, all promises it meets with, it is more discouraged by them: Oh think
they, that there should be such glorious promises, and not belong to us! Such
an one misapplies and misinterprets all Gods dealings, and the Scriptures
against himself; and refuses comfort: as Psalm. 77. 2. Yea, and as at the
third verse, when he remembers God, he is troubled.

Thirdly, darkness is exceeding terrible and full Filled with terrors.
When children are in the dark, they think they see fearful sights; it is
therefore called the Horror of darkness. Genesis 15. 12. So his soul here may be
filled with fears, and terrors from Gods wrath, and of Gods being an enemy
to him. Heman was almost distracted, Psalm. 88. 15.
and out of his wits with terrors. So the Church thought Lament. 3. Yea, and
concluded it for certain, that God was her enemy: Surely he is turned against
me: ver. 3.

CHAP. III.
The efficient causes of this distress: First, the Spirit; whether he has any
hand therein, and how far.

HAving thus explicated and proved this, that this does, and may befall one who
truly fears the Lord: for the more full clearing of it, I will further show.

efficient causes.

cases, wherein.

ends, for which God leaves his children in such distresses.

First, The efficient causes of this distress 3.
for the efficient causes of this so woeful, desperate, dark condition of Gods
child: they are three which have a hand in it.







First,. 1.
for Gods Spirit: Although he has a hand in some part of this disquietnesse;
1. The Spirit,
yet we must take heed how we put upon him any of those doubts, and desperate
fears and conclusions, whereby the child of God calls his state into
question. For the Spirit is not the direct efficient, or positive cause of them.

And to this end we may consider that known place: not the cause of doubtful
and despairing thoughts;
Romans 8. 16. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but
the spirit of adoption; the right understanding of which, will also prevent an
objection: For some have alleged this place, as if the child of God after he
had once the Spirit, sealing adoption to him, could never after fall into
apprehension of bondage, that is, into fears of eternal damnation any more, or
of being bound ^ver for hell; and that this can befall him but once, and that
at his first conversion.

But if we mark the words well. The Apostle affirms not, that fears of
bondage can never befall Gods child again: but his scope is to show, that the
Spirit which we have received, having been once become the Spirit of adoption,
that spirit is never after again the spirit of bondage to us, nor the cause of
such fears; indeed at first conversion, and before he did witness adoption,
he then revealed our estates to us, to be an estate of bondage; which he then
does in love, to drive us out of it; and then indeed he was a spirit of
bondage; to which he has reference, when he says to fear again, because he
was once such to them, and such the Holy Ghost then might be, and then
witness to them that their estates were damnable: for then it was a truth, in
tha they had lived in an estate of bondage, whereunto damnation was immediately
due; and had they dyed in it, had certainly fallen upon them: But when once he
by making a man a Son, has become the spirit of adoption to him, then if ever
he should put him into such apprehensions, and fears again, he should
witness an untruth. Therefore, for the comfort of them and all believers, he
tells them that he never crosses nor reverseth his testimony of adoption, but
his office is to be ready as a witness to seal to it. but our own hearts and
Satan.
But yet, though the Judge does not condemn any more, yet the Iaylor may
trouble and affright us, 1 John 3. 12.
and our own hearts may condemn us; God may give Satan leave to cast us into
prison, to clap bolts upon us again, and to become a lying Spirit of bondage to
us, as he became a lying spirit in the mouths of Ahabs Prophets: and he may
give up our hearts to be fettered with the cords of our own sins, Prove. 5. 22
and to be ensnared with its own inventions, and fears, and jealousies.

For a more distinct understanding of this,. 2.
to manifest how it comes to pass, that all this befalls Gods child; Yet the
Spirit has some hand in the distress;
I will show how far the holy Ghost proceeds in it, and puts forth his hand
toward it, and what Satan's work is, where he strikes in, and our own hearts
to work further, and deeper distress then the holy Ghost by himself alone
intended. For unto these three several hands is the whole to be ascribed: and
the works of Gods Spirit, and his concurrence therein, carefully to be severed
from Satan's: as light from darkness at the first.

Thus far then the Spirit of God may concur in this darkness that befalls
his child.

1. Privatively: 1. Privatively, to withdraw his testimony.
He may suspend his testimony, and the execution of his office of witnessing
adoption; he may withdraw his comfortable presence, and hide himself for a
moment, and conceal his love, as other Fathers will sometimes do; As David
did, when yet his heart was toward Absalom: He may not admit him to see his
face, he may shut a Son out of doors, when yet he does not cast him off:
John 20. 23.
He may retain their sins (as Christ's expression is) that is, call in the
patent of his pardon which he had passed under his hand and seal, in earth,
Mat. 18. 18.
that is, in their own consciences; take it out of their hands and custody,
and call for it home again into the pardon office in Heaven, and there keep
it. And also when Satan comes and gives in a false witness, and evidence, and
our own hearts thereupon likewise condemn us, the Holy Ghost may stand by (as
it were) silent, and say nothing to the contrary, but forbear to contradict
Satan by any loud testimony, or secret rebuking him, as he does at other times:
as Zach. 3. 1, 2.

2. Positively: 2. Positive, in 2. things.
He may further proceed:

1. To reveal and represent God as angry with his child, 1. To represe^t God
angry by immediate expression of wrath on the conscience.
for such and such sins formerly committed, and make him sensible thereof;
not barely by concealing his love, but by making impressions of his wrath upon
his conscience immediately, and not by outward crosses only. Thus Esaias 57. 17,
18. God not only hid himself and was wroth, that is, expressed his wrath by
hiding himself; but I smote him and was wroth: and v. 16. he contended and was
wroth, that is, fought against him as an enemy, as Esaias 63. 10. and this with
his wrath upon his spirit; for it follows, that the spirit was ready to fail,
and the soul which he had made; so as it was the spirit which was the white
God shot at and wounded, and that so deep, that it was ready to fail and come
to nothing; which Solomon calls by way of distinction, a wounded spirit, which
who can bear? and differenceth it from all other afflictions upon the outward
man, which strike the spirit but through the clothes of the body mediately;
for says he, The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; that is, all
such outward afflictions wherein it suffers, but by way of sympathy, and
compassion; but when the spirit it self is laid bare and naked, and wounded
immediately by Gods wrath, (which only can reach it and wound it,) Who can
bear this? Thus toward Heman, God did not only hide his face from him, Psalm.
88. ver. 14. but His fierce wrath went over him, and thy terrors (says he) cut
me off: ver. 16. not wounded him only, but even cut him off: and and such
impressions of immediate wrath, as expressions and effects of Gods anger, the
Holy Ghost may make upon the spirit of his child: for it is a truth that God
is angry and wroth with them when they sin; which anger he may make known,
not only by dumb signs in outward crosses and effects; but by an immediate
witnessing, and plain and express speaking so much to their consciences, and
making them to feel so much, by scalding drops of his hot displeasure let fall
thereon: And as other Fathers show their anger by whipping the bodies of their
children (upon this ground as says the Apostle) because they are the Fathers
of our flesh: Heb. 12. 9. So, for the like reason may God show his anger, and
chastise his children by lashing their spirits: For he is the father of our
spirits as he speaks in the same place. And likewise our spirits, and the very
bones and marrow of them do lie open and naked to him, with whom we have to
do, and his word and spirit being quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two edged sword, Heb. 4. 12, 13.
are able to divide, and cut even to the bones and marrow; as the same Author
speaks. Yet withal, so as when he expresses his wrath thus upon their
consciences; he does not witness, that this is an eternal wrath which he
has conceived against them: for it is but a temporary displeasure, It is but
for a moment, as Esaias speaks; the indignation of a Father; nor is it a wrath
which revenging justice has stirred in him, Heb. 12. 6.
but Fatherly affection. And though the Spirit tells them that God is
displeased, yet never that they are accursed; that is a false collection made
out of it. 2. By shaking over him the threatenings of eternal wrath.


Yet 2. The holy Ghost may proceed yet further herein; so far as to bring
forth, and show him, and shake over him the rod of his eternal wrath,
especially when he has provoked Christ by presumptuous sins already; and to
prevent his going on frowardly in the way of his heart. And this, both 1 by
presenting to them, and setting on all those threatenings which do
hypothetically and conditionally threaten, even to believers, eternal
damnation: such as that which we find Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the
flesh, ye (even you believers) shall die: for there is a truth in all such
threatenings, so conditionally propounded, which reaches Gods dearest children,
under a condition, and with relation to going on in sin: to stop him and
prevent him in which, when he is a going on frowardly in the way of his heart,
the holy Spirit may bring home such threatenings to him, with respect to such a
course as he is entering into, and accordingly stir up the fear of that
damnation thus threatened, if he should go on in those sins he has begun to
commit: But to apply threatenings of eternal damnation simply to his person, as
that thou shall dye eternally; This the holy Ghost does not speak to the heart
of a believer, when he is a believer. And again also 2 the holy Ghost may
represent to him, and mind him of all those examples of men in whom for their
going on in sin, Heb. 10. ult.
his soul has had no pleasure; and of Gods dealings with them: As how he
swear against many of the Israelites, for their provocations of him, that they
should never enter into his rest; and how he rejected Esau for the despisall of
his birthright; and all this with this end, to startle and awaken him; and with
this intimation, that for such and such sins, God might in like manner deal
with him. For these and the like examples, does the Spirit of God set before
the believing Hebrews: Heb. chap. 3. and chap. 12. and the believing
Corinthians: 1 Cor. 10. from the 5. ver. to the 13. to keep them in
fearfulness to offend: But to apply any such examples absolutely unto them:
so as to say, thus God intends to do with thee, for such and such sins past,
and that God will never be merciful; This the holy Ghost does not speak to a
believers heart.

CHAP. IV.
How Satan and our hearts increase this darkness by false conclusions from the
Spirits work, illustrated by the like in the illumination of Temporaries. The
Spirits work in both compared.

ANd now the Spirit of God having proceeded thus far himself in causing such
darkness, From which work of the Spirit, Satan and our hearts make false
conclusions.
and terrors of conscience in them that fear him: Satan and their own hearts
(unto which he may and does often further also leave them) may take occasion
from these dispensations of the holy Ghost, (which are all holy righteous and
true) to draw forth false and fearful conclusions against themselves, and
their estates; and start amazing doubts, and fears of their utter want of
Grace and lying under the curse, and threatenings of eternal wrath at the
present; yea and further, of eternal rejection for the future, and that God
will never be merciful; and so lay them lower, and cast them into a further
darkness and bondage then the holy Ghost was cause of or intended:
Misinterpreting and perverting all these his righteous proceedings; as
interpreting, that withdrawing his light and presence, and hiding himself, to
be a casting them off: Thus Heman, Psalm. 88. 14. So likewise misconstruing that
temporary wrath, chastising and wounding their spirits for the present, to be
no other, then the impressions and earnest of Gods eternal vengeance: and
arguing from their being under wrath, themselves to be children of wrath; and
misapplying the application of all those threatenings of eternal damnation made
by the Spirit but in relation, and under a condition of such and such courses
for the future, to be absolute against their persons, and to speak their
present estate; and because such examples of men cast off are presented to
them, to show them what advantage God might take against them; they mistaking,
think they read their own destiny laid before them in them; and conclude
that God will deal so with them: And thus as the Apostle says of sin, Romans
7. 11. That sin taking occasion by the Commandment, (he misunderstanding the
scope of it, when a Pharisee) it deceived him, and thereby slew him: and yet
the Commandment is holy, just, and good, ver. 12. So Satan and our hearts, by
occasion of these dealings of the Spirit (which are righteous and true, as
himself is, who is the Spirit of truth and leads into truth,) do deceive
believers, and lay them in their apprehensions among the stain whom God
remembers no more, as Heman speaks, Psalm. 88. 5.

And as in these, The like instanced in Temporaries.
so in other works and dispensations of Gods Spirit, it is ordinary for Satan
and our hearts to practice the like delusions, and false conclusions upon them.
To instance in those more common and inferior works of the Spirit on the
hearts of men, not as yet savingly regenerated: The Spirit enlightening them,
together with impressions of joy, and a taste of sweetness in the promises of
the Gospel, and of salvation revealed therein, which under a condition of true
repentance and conversion, the Spirit of God does make the offer and tender of
Known unto their hearts. Thus he wrought upon the stony ground, and in the
Jews by John's ministry: John 5. 35. which light, and taste, and revelation of
this conditional proffer, tending in a way unto salvation, by alluring their
hearts to seek it, they often through Satan's abuse of this good work, and the
selfe-slattery of their own hearts, do too hastily take to be that grace
which accompanies salvation, (...).
on which has salvation annexed to it: from which, the Apostle by that very
expression, Heb. 6. 9. does difference those enlightnings, ver. 4. They thus
mistaking these works precursory to grace, even as the Jews mistook John,
that was but sent before to prepare the way for Christ, to be that very true
Christ that was to come into the world: and misunderstanding the entendment of
Gods most blessed Spirit in such his dealings, they make up too hasty a
conclusion not meant by the Spirit in those promises.

And I instance in these the rather, A comparison between the work of
illumination in them, and of darkness in these.
because these his dispensations of desertion (which we have in hand) toward
men already regenerated, and those formentioned visitations toward such as
often attain not to regeneration, are in an opposite way of comparison
exceeding parallel, and much alike in the dispensations themselves; as well as
in the differing false conclusions which are drawn from either, and do
therefore exceedingly illustrate the one the other. God withdrawing himself as
much in their sense, from those who are in covenant with him: as he draws
near unto, and visits their hearts from on high, who are as yet strangers to
him: The needle of Gods favor and love varying as much (that I may so allude)
toward Hell in their Compass who shall be saved: as it does heavenward in the
other, many of whom arrive not thither: Mar. 12. 34.
and as they are brought nigh to the kingdom of heaven, (as Christ told him:)
so of true believers, it may be said, that their souls do often draw near to
hell, in their own sense and apprehension; and the pains of hell do take
hold upon them. And as the other are enlightened, as Balaam was; so they are
left to walk in darkness and see (...) light; and do taste of that wrath
which the Law threatens; as those other taste the goodness of that salvation
the Gospel offers; God out of a temporary anger chastising them for a
moment: as with a temporary favor he shines upon the other: That as they for
a season rejoice in that light, John 5. 35. So Gods dearest children may be
for a season in much heaviness, (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1. 6. and
walk in darkness. And as the similitude of the dealings themselves run
along so far in a parallel line of comparision: So it holds in the false
apprehensions which Satan and our hearts do make out of both: and the cause of
the mistake in each, is also alike. For Gods dealings with those Temporary
believers, being so like to those dealings toward such as receive a state of
adoption from him: They thence too hastily conclude their acceptance unto life.
And on the contrary, Gods dealings with these Temporary despairers, (as I may
so call them) being so like in their sense, to his proceedings with those he
cuts off for ever, they in like manner as hastily conclude ( I said in my haste
says David) their eternal rejection. Only in the issue they prove unlike;
tending but to their present discomfort, through their frailty: but in the
other through their own willing neglect, their enlightnings turn to their
destruction.

So as to conclude, we must warily sever the work of Gods Spirit herein, from
that of Satan, and our own hearts; not attributing such desperate conclusions
to the Spirit. Thus that depth of sorrow wherewith that humbled Corinthian was
well nigh swallowed up, 2 Cor. 2. 7. is ascribed unto Satan, when ver. 11. it
is made and termed one of his devices, which word does in part refer to the
Corinthians sorrow. Thus David also imputes that his questioning, Psalm. 77.
Whether God would be merciful to him, ver. 7. unto his own heart: this is My
infirmity says he, ver. 10. So as the blame herein is to be divided between
Satan and our hearts.

CHAP. V.
How our own hearts are the causes of this darkness: The principles therein,
which are the causes of it.

TO speak more particularly of either:

First, that our own hearts should be the causes and producers of such
distress and darkness, when the holy Ghost thus deals with us, is at all no
wonder: because

1. As we are creatures,. 1.
there is such a weakness and infirmity in us as David speaks; 1. By reason
of our weakness as we are creatures
by reason of which, if God does but hide himself and withdraw his presence,
(which supporteth us in comfort, as in being) we are ready presently to fall
into these fears of our selves. The Psalmist says of all the creatures, Psalm.
104. 29.
Thou hidest thy face and they are troubled: and this by reason of their
weakness, and dependence upon God: And no less, but far greater is the
dependence of the new creature upon Gods face and presence, that it cannot be
alone and bear up it self, but it fails if God hide himself, as Esaias
speaks, Chap. 57. Especially now in this life during the infancy thereof,
whilst it is a child, as God speaks of Ephraim, Hos. 11. 1. then it cannot
stand, or go alone, unless God bear it up in his arms, and teach it to go,
as he speaks there, ver. 1, 3. And then also as children left alone in the
dark, are afraid of bugbeares, and they know not what, and are apt to stumble
and fall, which is by reason of their weakness: So is it with the new creature
in its childhood here in this life, It was my infir^^^ says David; and again,
Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. Psalm. 30. 6.


There is not only such a weakness in us as we are creatures: But,

2. Also an innate darkness in our spirits as we are sinful creatures:. 2.
since the fall, 2. Of an innate darkness as we are sinful creatures.
our hearts of themselves are nothing but darkness, and therefore no wonder,
if when God draws but the curtains, and shuts up the light from us, that our
hearts should engender, and conceive such horrid fears and doubts: Thus in the
2. Cor. 4. 6. The Apostle compares this native darkness of our hearts unto
that Chaos, and lump of darkness which at the first creation covered the face
of the deep: when he says, that God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, (he refers to the first creation, Genesis 1. 1, 2.) has shined into
our hearts [even of us Apostles] to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. So that no longer then God continues
to shine, either the light of comfort, or of grace, no longer do our hearts
[even of us beleevers] retain light in them. And if at any time he withhold
that light of comfort in his face, when yet he continues an influence of
grace: Then so far do our hearts presently return to their former
darkness: And then does that vast womb of darkness conceive, and form all
those fears and doubts within it self. Considering withal, that our hearts
are a great deep also; so deep in darkness and deceitfulness, as no plummet
can fathom them; Deceitful above all things, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9.
Darkness covers not the face of this deep only, but it is darkness to the
bottom, throughout darkness. No wonder then, if when the Spirit cease to
move upon this deep with beams of light, it cast us into such deepes and
darkness as Heman (complaining) speaks of, Psalm. 88. 6. and frames in it
self such hideous apprehensions and desperate conclusions of a man's own
estate.

Especially seeing 3.. 3.
There is so much strength of carnal and corrupt reason in men, 3. Principles
of carnal reason.
ready to forge and invent strong reasons and arguments to confirm those sad
fears and darkened apprehensions; and those drawn from those dealings of Gods
Spirit mentioned. For as it is said of the Gentiles, that when their foolish
heart was darkened, (that is, when left and given over to their own natural
darkness) they became vain in their imaginations, (...).
or (as the original has it) in their reasonings: Romans 1. 21. and this even
in those things which God had clearly revealed in his works, to the light of
nature: (of which that place speaks,) So may it be said even of those who have
been most enlightened, that their hearts are apt to become much more vain in
their reasonings about, and in the judging of their own estates before God,
^ut of his word and dealings with them, if God once leaves them unto darkness.
And this that great caveat given to professors, James 1. 22. gives as to
understand, when they are exhorted to take ^eed that in hearing the word they
be not found deceiving themselves by false reasonings: James 1. 22. ^o the
original, (...), renders it; which is, as if we should say, false reasoning
themselves; as we use to say in a like phrase of speech, befooling themselves.
And this is spoken of judging of their own estates; concerning which, men are
more apt through the distempers and prejudices of self-love, to make (to
speak in that phrase of the Apostle) false Syllogismes, and to misconclude,
then about any other spiritual truth whatever. And in men that want true
faith, Which as in men unregenerate, reasons for their bad estates; So in the
regenerate against the goodness of their estates.
the unsound hearers of the word (of whom the Apostle there speaks,) are thus
apt, through carnal reason misapplying the word they hear, to frame and draw
from the^^ (as he insinuates) multitudes of false reasons to uphold and
maintain to themselves a good opinion of their estates: So on the contrary, in
those who have true faith, all that carnal reason, (which remains in a great
measure unsubdued in them) is (...) apt to raise and forge as strong objections
against the work of faith begun, and as peremptorily to conclude against their
present estates by the like misapplication of the word; but especially by
misinterpreting Gods dealings toward them. And they being sometimes led by
sense and reason, whilst they walk in darkness, they are apt to interpret
Gods mind toward them, rather by his works and dispensations, which they see
and feel, then by his word, which they are to believe. This we may see in
Gideon, Judges 6. Who because God wrought not miracles as he had formerly for
his people; but had delivered them into their enemies hands, from thence
reasons against the message of the angel, (Christ himself) who had told
him, the Lord is with thee ver. 12. But he objects, oh my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befollen us? Where be all the miracles which our
fathers told us of? But now the Lord has forsaken us, etc. This we may also
see in Asaph, or what other holy penman of the 73. Psalm; his heels were
well nigh tript up in the dark: My feet were almost gone (says he) ver. 2.
that is, from keeping his standing by faith, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.
and this by an argument framed by carnal reason, from Gods dispensation of
outward prosperity to wicked men; but on the contrary, chastening of him every
morning, with outward afflictions, as the opposition does there import. And how
peremptory is he, in his conclusion thence deduced? Verily, I have cleansed my
heart in vain: ver. 13. and what reason has he? For all the day long I have
been plagued, etc. ver. 14. He thought his reason strong, and irrefragable,
else he would not have been so concludent [Verily, etc.] But what would this
man have said and thought if he had been in Hemans condition? or in Jobs, or
David's? if in those shallowes of outward troubles, which are common to man, his
faith could not find footing; but he was well-nigh carried away with the common
stream and error of wicked men; to have condemned himself, and the
generation of the righteous, ver. 15. How would his faith have been over-borne,
If all Gods waves and billows had gone over him? as David complains; Psalm.
42. 7. How would he have sunk in Hemans deepes, Ps. 88. or in David's, Ps. 69.
2. I sink in the deep mire where there is no standing: I am come into deep
waters, where the floods overflow me. Speaking of such waters as came in unto
his soul; ver. 1. Even the floods of Gods immediate wrath breaking in upon his
conscience, over flowing the inward man, and not the outward only. How much
more peremptorily would he have concluded against himself, if this had been
his condition? as indeed they, and many others of the generation of Gods
children have done, when they have lain under, and walked in such distrenesses.

And the reason of all this is as evident as the experience of it.

1. In general: How potent and prevalent carnal reason is with us,
Reason is of it self a busy principle, that will be prying into, and making
false glosses upon all Gods matters as well as our own; and trying its skill,
in arguing upon all his dealings with us. Thus Jeremy would needs be reasoning
with God about his dispensations toward wicked men, Chap. 12. 1, 2. and Ioh,
of his dealings with himself: Chap. 13. 3. And Reason being likewise the
supreme principle in us by nature, and our highest difference as we are men;
therefore no wonder if when we are left to our selves to walk in darkness, we
walk as men, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 3. and to use Solomon's words,
do leave to our own wisdom, Prove. 3. 5.
even because it is our own and was brought up with us; it is our great
Ahitophel, (and as David says of him) Our guide with whom we have taken so
much sweet counsel in all our worldly and politic affairs: In which only,
we should make use of its advise: But we too often take it into the Sanctuary
with us, and walk in company with it into the house of God, (to allude to what
David says there, Psalm. 55. 13, 14.) that is, we suffer it to meddle in
matters that pertain to the Sanctuary, and to debate and conclude of our
spiritual and eternal estates, as well as of our temporal; and which is
worse, we are opinionative of its judgment therein; I thought (says Asaph in
that forementioned Psalm) to know this, ver. 16. that is, he thought to have
comprehended and reached Gods mind in those his dispensations, by the
discussions of reason, and so to have concluded rightly from them: Whereas
after he had gone into the Sanctuary, ver. 17. with faith alone, and thereby
consulted with the word; he confesses his own wisdom and best reason to have
been as ignorant of Gods meaning, and of those rules he proceeds by, in those
his dispensations toward his children, Even as a beast ver. 22. is of those
principles which men walk by, or the intentions they have in their ways. If
Reason then, when it is so utterly unskilful and mistaken in the premises,
will yet be exercising and trying its faculty in reasoning from them, no wonder
if the conclusions thence deduced be so wide and wild; and yet with Asaph, We
think we know this.

But more particularly: and how desperate an enemy unto faith, and the reason
of it.
Carnal reason is the most desperate enemy to faith of all other principles in
man. For until faith be wrought, it is the most supreme principle; but then
faith deposes and subjecteth it, and afterward does often co^tradict it, yea
excludes it, as unskilful in its matters, from being of its counsel. And so
deep and desperate is this enmity against faith, that look what is the most
especial work and business of faith (which is to alter our estates before
God, and put us into a state of justification and to assure us of it) therein,
it shows a more peculiar enmity against faith, by opposing it in that work of
it more then in any other. This enmity shows it self both before and after
faith is wrought, and the one illustrates the other. For as before faith was
wrought carnal reason shows its opposition, by using the utmost of its
strength to persuade a man of the goodness of his estate though without faith;
thereby to prevent the entrance of faith and our seeking after it at all as not
needful to change our estates or to justify us, and thus would keep it
wholly out. And therefore in the first working of faith, the holy Ghost brings
faith in by force of open arms, as a Conqueror casting down all those strong
holds and reasonings, (...).
(as the word is, 2 Cor. 10. 4.) which carnal reason had been long a building
and afortifying, and so erecteth faith a throne upon the mines of them all.
Thus in like manner after faith is thus wrought, all that carnal reason which
is left unsubdued, does out of a further revenge of such an overthrow, and with
a greater degree of enmity oppose faith still, only it diverts the war, now
mustering up new forces, and turns all the great Ordnance a clean contrary
way, namely to persuade a man by all the objections it can raise, of the
badnesse of his estate now, as before of the goodness of it: Hereby to
blaspheme the great work of faith in justifying of us: And also, because that
next to justifying us, the office and errand of faith is to settle in our
hearts peace with God, and a persuasion of our being in his favor, as Romans 5.
1. Therefore does carnal reason bend the utmost of its power and Acumen to
persuade upon all occasions, by all the most specious and seeming arguments it
can start and suggest, that God is not at peace with us, nor as yet reconciled
to us; merely to contradict faith in what is the principle point it would
persuade us of.

So that as in men whilst unregenerate, carnal reason endeavors by false
reasonings to preserve a good opinion of their estates in them: In like manner
the very same principle of carnal reason continuing its opposition to faith,
does as much persuade to a bad opinion of their estates when they are once
regenerated.

And to conclude this, The great advantage carnal reason has in time of
desertion.
if in any condition that befalls Gods child, carnal reason has the
advantage and upper ground of faith. It is now when it is in the valley of the
shadow of death, as David speaks, when it walks in darkness and has no
light: A condition that does afford a most complete Topic for carnal reason
to frame objections out of; When in respect of Gods dealings with him there is
a seeming conjunction of all bad aspects threatening perdition and destruction:
When faith is under so great an eclipse, and is left to fight it our alone in
darkness, and has no second: When on the contrary carnal reason, and our
dark hearts (which are led by sense) are possessed with the sense (the deepest
and most exquisite sense) and impressions of (that which the heart is most
jealous of) Gods sorest wrath and displeasure, and that felt and argued (not
mediately and afar off, by consequence from outward afflictions, but)
immediately from Gods own hand. Thou always have suspected (says carnal
reason) that thou were a child of wrath, and that thou and God were enemies;
But now thou find it put out of question, and that from Gods own mouth, who
speaks grievous things against thee; Ier. 31. 20.
thou have it also under his own hand, for lo he writes bitter things against
thee, Job. 13. 26.
that is, in thy conscience as Job speaks, and holds thee for an enemy, ver.
24. and whips thee with the same rod of his immediate wrath and displeasure,
where with he lasheth those that are cut from his hand, and whom he
remembers no more, but are now in hell, as Heman speaks. A time also this is
when this present sense of wrath so distempers and (to use Hemans words)
distracts the mind, that it cannot listen to faith, which speaks of nothing
too, but of what it fees not; even as the people of Israel could not attend to
Moses his message of deliverance through the anguish of their present bondage
Exodus 6. 9. So as no wonder if then carnal reason be most busy, and takes
this advantage to frame and suggest the strongest objections to the soul
whilst it is in this distemper.

Add unto all this 4. that as there is such strength of corrupt reason which
is thus opposite to faith,. 4.
so that there are many other principles of corrupt affections in the heart, 4.
Principle, corrupt affections of jealousy, suspicion, and incredulity, join
with carnal reason in this.
which join and take part with carnal reason in all this its opposition
against faith, and which set it a work and do back it as much in persuading
Gods children that their estates are naught, as in securing men unregenerate
that their estates are good; and the hand of self-love (which bribeth and
byasseth carnal reason, especially in judging of our estates) is found as
deep in the one as in the other; and this does yet give further light to this
point in hand. For look as before faith is wrought, selfe-flattery (which is
one branch of self-love) bribeth and sets carnal reason aworke to plead
the goodness of their estates to men unregenerate, and causes all such false
reasons to take with them which tend to persuade them to think well of
themselves. So when once faith is wrought, jealousy, and suspiciousnesse, and
incredulity, (which are other, as great sprigs of pride and self-love in us,
as the former, which do begin to sprout and show themselves, when that other is
lopt off, and which do grow up together with the work of faith) these do
edge and sharpen the wit of carnal reason, to argue and wrangle against the
work of faith and grace begun; and all such objections as carnal reason does
find out against it, are pleasing and plausible to these corrupt principles,
for they are thereby nourished and strengthened.

And the reason why such jealousies, The use of them and their working in the
heart.
and suspicions, etc. (which are such contrary dispositions unto selfe-flattery
which swayed our opinions of our estates before) should thus arise and be
started up in the heart upon the work of faith, and be apt rather to prevail
now after faith, is; 1 Because that in the work of humiliation, (which
prepares for faith) all those strong holds of carnal reason being demolisht,
which upheld selfe-flattery, and that false good opinion of a man's estate, and
those mountainous thoughts of presumption as then laid low, a man is for ever
put out of conceit with himself, as of himself. At which time also, 2 he was so
thoroughly and feelingly convinced of the heinousness of sin, (which before
he slighted) and of the greatness and multitudes of his sins, that he is
apt now (instead of presuming as before) to be jealous of God, lest he might
have been so provoked as never to pardon him, and is accordingly apt to draw a
misinterpretation of all Gods dealings with him to strengthen that conceit. And
3 having through the same conviction the infinite error and deceitfulness of
his heart before, in flattering him and judging his estate good, when it was
most accursed, so clearly discovered and discerned; he thereby becomes
exceeding jealous, and afraid of erring on that hand still, and so is apt to
lend an ear to any doubt or scruple that is suggested. Especially 4 he being
withal made apprehensive both of that infinite danger to his eternal
salvation there may be in nourishing a false opinion of the goodness of his
estate if it should prove otherwise; because such a false conceit keeps a man
from saving faith; whereas to cherish the contrary error in judging his estate
bad, when it is in truth good, tends but to his present discomfort; so as he
thinks it safer to err on that hand then the other. And 5 being also sensible
of what transcendent concernment his eternal salvation is of, (which he before
slighted) this rowseth suspicion, (which in all matters of great consequence
and moment, is always doubting and inquisitive,) and also keeps it waking,
which before lay asleep. And all these being now startled and stirred up, do
not only provoke carnal reason unsatisfiedly to pry into all things that may
seem to argue Gods disfavour, or the unsoundnesse of our hearts, but also do
give entertainment too, and applaud all such objections as are found out, and
makes up too hastily false conclusions from them.

Last of all,. 5.
as there are these corrupt principles of carnal reason, 3. Principle. The
guilt in our own consciences, remaining in part defiled, a cause of this
darkness.
and suspitiousnesse in us, to raise and foment these doubts, and fears from
Gods dealings toward us: So there is an abundance of guilt within us, of our
false dealings toward him. And we have consciences, which remain in part
defiled, which may further join with all these, and increase our fears and
doubtings; and as we are dark and weak creatures, so guilty creatures also.
And this guilt, like the waves of the Sea, or the swellings of Jordan, do
begin upon these terrible storms from God to rise, and swell, and overflow in
our consciences. As in David Psalm. 38. when Gods wrath was sore upon him, ver.
1. 2. then also he complains, Mine iniquities are gone over my head, ver. 4.
There is much guile and falsenesse of heart, which in those distempers (when
our consciences do boil within us, and are stirred and heated to the bottom)
does like the scumme, come up and flote aloft. Thus in David when he was under
the rod for his sin of murder, as the guilt of his sin so the guile of his
Spirit came up, and he calls for Truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. For as
his sin, ver. 2. so his falsenesse of heart was ever before him, and with an
eye to this he spoke that speech, Psalm. 32. Oh blessed is that man in whose
spirit is no guile, and to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Thus he spoke when
God had charged upon him the guilt of his sin, and discovered to him the guile
of his spirit, ver. 4. 5. And this guile does oftentimes so appear, that our
consciences can hardly discern any thing else to be in us, it lies uppermost,
and covers our graces from our view; and like as the chafe when the wheat is
tossed in the fan, comes up to the top: So in these commotions and winnowings
of spirit, do our corruptions float in our consciences, whilst the graces
that are in us lyecovered under them out of sight; and the dark side of our
hearts (as of the cloud) is turned toward us, and the light side from us. And
indeed there are in the best of us humors enough, which if they be stirred
and congregated in our consciences, may alone cast us into these burning fits
of trouble and distress; so as whilst Gods Spirit shall withhold from us the
light of our own graces, and our own consciences represent to us the guilt and
corruptions that are in our best performances, our hearts may conclude our
selves hypocrites, as M. Bradfar in some of his letters cloth of himself; and
others of the Saints have done. Yea, so as even our own consciences, (which are
the only principle now left in us, which should take part with and encourage
faith, and witness to us (as the office of it is) the goodness of our
estates) in this may join with the former corruptions against us, and bring in
a false evidence, and pronounce a false judgment. Even Conscience it self,
which is ordained as the urine of the body to show the estate of the whole;
(and therefore is accordingly called Good or Evil as the man's state is) This
is apt in such distempers to change and turn color; and look to a man's own
view as (...) as the state of a very Hypocrite.

And the reason of this is also as evident, The reason.
as is the experience of it. Even because conscience remains in part defiled
in a man that is regenerate: and though we are sprinkled from an evil
conscience in part, yet not wholly: so as though our persons are fully
discharged from the guilt of our sins, through the sprinkling of Christ's blood,
before God; yet the sprinkling of that blood upon our consciences whereby we
apprehend this, is imperfect, and the reason is, because this very sprinkling
of conscience, whereby it restifies the sprinkling of Christ's blood, and our
justification thereby, is but part of the sanctification of Conscience, as it
is a faculty, whose office and duty is to testify and with (...) our estates;
and therefore as the sanctification of all other faculties is imperfect, so of
conscience also herein. And hence it is that when Gods Spirit forbeareth to
witness with conscience, the goodness of our estates, and cease to embolden
and encourage conscience by his presence, and the sprinkling of Christ's blood
upon it against the remaining defilement; that then our consciences are as apt
to fall into fears, and doubts, and self-condemnings; even as much as when he
withdrawes the assistance of his grace, those other faculties are to fall into
any other sin: And therefore as the Law of sin in the other members may be
up in arms and prevail so far as to lead us captive unto sin: So may the
guilt of sin in our consciences remaining in part defiled, by the same reason
prevail against us, and get the upper hand, and lead us captive to fears and
doubtings, and cast us into bondage.

CHAP. VI.
The third efficient cause, Satan. His special malice in this temptation,
commission: access to, and advantage over us in this temptation, by reason of
the darkness in us.

THus far our own hearts upon the holy Ghosts deserting, become authors unto
us of this darkness.

But herein believers wrestle not alone with flesh and blood, and the darkness
thereof; but do further conflict also with those spiritual wickednesses, the
Princes of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. about their interest in those heavenly
privileges, (as the phrase there used (...) may be well interpreted) even
with Satan and his Angels. Whom this Apostle compares to a roaring (...) that
seeks whom he may devo^re, 1 Pet. 5. 8. And like as when God makes this
natural darkness and it is night, then the young Lions creep forth, and
rear after their pre^, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 104. 20, 21. So do these
roaring Lions, now when A God has withdrawn the light of his countenance, and
night comes on, and those dampes and fogges of jealousies and guilt begin to
arise out of a man's own heart, then come these forth, and say, as David's
enemies said in his distress; Come, let us now take him, for God has forsaken
him; Let us now devour him and swallow him up with sorrow and despair. And as
God says of those enemies of his Church, Zach. 1. 15. I was but a little
displeased, and they helped forward the affliction; So when God is angry with
his child, and but a little, and does hide his face but for a moment; yet
Satan watches that hour of darkness, (as Christ calls it Luke 22. 53.) and
joins his power of darkness to this our natural darkness, to cause (if
possible) blackness of darkness, even utter despair in us.

Now concerning Satan's working herein, 4. things in general premised to
explain Satan's working herein.
we will (as in the former) more distinctly treat thereof by way of
explication of it: 1. More generally. 2. More particularly.

1. In general.
First,. 1.
Satan, he has a special inclination, and a more peculiar malicious desire,
Satan has a special inclination to this kind of temptation.
to vex and molest the Saints with this sort of temptations, of doubts and
disquietnesse that God is not their God: so as all other his temptations unto
sin, are but as the laying in and barrelling up the gunpowder, and making of
the train for this great plot of blowing up all. He tempts Peter to deny his
Master, Satan desires to winnow you; but he has a further reach, a design
upon his faith; which Christ foresaw, and therefore did mainely bend his prayer
against it, But I have prayed that thy faith fail not: Satan hoped by that
gross sin to have drawn him into despair. We may likewise observe how he
did place this temptation in the forefront of those three assaults which he
made upon Christ; who as in his obedience, so in his temptations is made a
complete example unto us; for he was tempted in all things, that is, with all
sorts of temptations, and also like us for the manner, only without sin, Heb.
4. 15. Now he tempted him not only to vain hopes, when he showed him the
glory of the whole would, and to presumption to throw himself down headlong
from an now (...) ground; But first, and primarily to jealousies and distrusts
between him and his Father, and between his humane nature and the divine; For
when Christ had newly received that testimony from all the three persons; the
Father proclaiming him to be his Son from heaven; the Spirit descending on
him at his baptism, (it being the special grace and institution of that
ordinance to seal up adoption and regeneration) then comes Satan and tempts
him to question that voice, [that it might be but a delusion:] and Christ's
humane nature never having done any outward miracle as yet, as appears Ioh. 2.
11. he would now have had him taken this occasion in the extremity of his
hunger, by commanding stones to become bread, to make trial whether he was the
Son of God or no, and hypostatically united to the second person: which if
God should not do for him, then to question his Sonship; and think all this
to be but a delusion. This was the meaning of it, If thou be the Son of God
command these stones to be made bread, etc. withal insinuating that God
leaving him even destitute of daily bread (which parents that are evil give
unto their children, and not a stone instead of bread) might seem to occasion
an [if] whether he was the Son of God or no.

The reasons of this are: The reasons.
1. Above all graces in us, he is the greatest enemy to faith; Therefore
These. 3. 5. the Apostle was jealous of Satan, in nothing more then in this,
lest he had been dealing and tampering with, and perverting their faith, I sent
to know of your faith, lest by some means the tempter has tempted you: For
faith in God is the greatest enemy unto Satan, it quenches all his darts:
Ephesians. 6. 16. By standing steadfast in which, we resist him, so that he flies
from us, 1 Pet. 5. 9. As therefore faith is that (...), John 6.
that work of God and the master-grace; So despair and doubting is the
masterpiece of Satan. Romans 15. 13.
And in faith he is envious especially at the joy of our faith. And as comfort
is the most proper work of the Spirit, and most pleasing work to him: So is
discomfort and distress the proper work of this evil Spirit.

And again 2. as he is most opposite to the holy

3. He is called (...) that envious one, and the That God should be our God,
who has cast off him; and therefore when he sees he cannot separate between
God and us really, he will endeavor to cast and raise up jealousies that he is
not our God in our apprehensions; he endeavored to raise jealousies between
God and our first parents: God knows you shall be as gods, etc. As if God had
forbidden them that fruit out of an envy toward them of a better condition:
and the like he endeavored between Christ's humane nature and the divine,
though hypostatically united.

And likewise 4. [That God has given us eternal life, and that life is in his
Sonne] this being (...) great truth of the Gospel, so as a Christian (...)
believes it not, makes God a liar; 1 John 5. 10, 11. Therefore Satan being that
great liar, John 8. 44.
opposes this great truth, and our faith therein above all others; His (...)
at the advancement of our nature in Christ according to that truth, is thought
by some to have bin his fall and ruin, so understanding that in Ioh. 8. He
abode not in the truth. However, he does now delight to make God a liar to us
in our apprehensions by questioning his promises, and especially to enforce the
persuasion thereof out of Gods own dealing with us, perverting his righteous
ways.

And secondly,. 2.
as Satan has such a desire, is God may give his child up into Satan's hand
for a while thus to afflict and terrify his Spirit: God may and does give up
his child into Satan's hands, and permit him thus to tempt him.
His last commission over Job seems to extend thus far; for his life only was
excepted: Job 2. 6. He is in thy hand, only save his life; and therefore after
that leave given, we hear Job (although never brought to question his estate,
yet) crying out of terrors, and of the sins of his youth; for Satan then as he
smote his body with boiles, so buffetted his spirit. And though Satan has will
of himself, and a desire to it, and power physical enough, and abilities to
inflict this at all times; yet he must further have power moral, or leave and
commission from God; And God sometimes gives to Satan power over the sons and
daughters of Abraham, Luke 13. even as well as others; and as their bodies to be
vexed by him, so their spirits: and as to provoke them unto sin, so much more
to terrify for sin: there being more of punishment then of sin in that.
Thus he left David to Satan, to provoke him unto sin, as well as Judas:
Therefore that provocation to number the people as it is imputed to Satan and
his malice, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. so also to God and his anger, in giving leave first
to Satan, 2 Samuel 24. 1. And as an evil spirit from the Lord troubled Saul's
mind, 1 Samuel 16. 14. So a messenger of satan was sent to buffet Paul's spirit,
2 Cor. 12. wherein yet God does no way help Satan with any further power, then
what as an Angel he furnished him with at his creation; nor with any
assistance or information of our secret sins against us, to enable him the more
to assault us, (this I find not in Scripture) but permissive power only. Which
is either 1. obtained Satan has requested and petitioned to winnow you; (...).
as that also Job 2. 3. Thou movedst me against him; does imply: and as it may
seem, by singling out and calling forth some one for this combat; as he did
him more especially; to whom therefore Christ addresseth that premonition; and
the word (...) implies as much. So also Job was singled out for this duel; both
by God and Satan. Or else 2. this is done through clave non errante, for gross
and scandalous sins: The proper inward effect that accompanies that
ordinance, (which casts men out of the Church) being inward affliction, and
distress of conscience by Satan (which of all afflictions is the greatest
punishment as the Apostle calls it, (...).
2 Cor. 2. 6.) thereby to bring a man to repentance: Even as on the contrary,
the special work of baptism (which admits into the Church) to such as were
fideles adulti, and believers already, was by joy in the holy Ghost to seal up
their adoption and regeneration unto them: as to the Eunuch, Acts 8. 39. This
we may see in the excommunication of the incestuous Corinthian; whose
excommunication is therefore expressed, to be a delivering him up unto Satan in
the name of the Lord Jesus: 1 Cor. 5. 9. (that is) he was to be cast out by a
commission from Christ, which going forth in his name; when they published it
on earth, he signed it in heaven. Upon which rightly administered does ensue,
first, that as the Church does cut them off from communion with them; so God
cuts them off from communion with himself, and hides, and withdrawes the light
of his countenance, the witness of his Spirit, and his comfortable presence;
and not only so, but delivers them up to satan; that being the consequent of
it: which therefore, because it implies the former, is put to express the
whole proceeding; which delivery of him unto Satan, was not a giving him a
commission to carry him on to more sin: for the end propounded by the Apostle
was to destroy the flesh, that is, corruption and the body of sin, and that
the spirit might be saved, ver. 5. that is, that contrary principle of grace
which yet remained, but was ready to die, (as it is Rev. 3. 2.) might be saved
and kept from death and destruction; (though that often be indeed the effect of
it in hypocrites, as in Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 19.) but it was to terrify and
afflict his conscience, and to stir up in him the guilt of his sin with terrors
for it; which God sanctifies to humble and to mortify the flesh. And thus,
when that Corinthian was excommunicated, did Satan accordingly deal with him;
for in the next Epistle, 2 Cor. 2. 7. we find him well nigh swallowed up of
sorrow; which was Satan's doing, for ver. 11. We are not ignorant (says the
Apostle in reference partly to this) of his devices. And thus Satan continued
still to handle him, even now when he began to be truly humbled, and was a fit
subject to receive forgiveness and comfort, ver. 7. when though he feared God
and obeyed him, yet he walked in darkness, till the Church received him. Or
else 3. when this ordinance is not in the Ruler, and their head; they are
therefore called the rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12. Who
therefore work effectually in the children of disobedience: Ephesians. 2. 2. Or
else as captives to a Prince, he taking them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
so as they are captived and led away, 1 Cor. 12. 2. But his own, God gives up
to him, but as prisoners to a Iaylor, as a Magistrate may do his child, to
commit him; who has not a power over his prisoner to do any thing with him;
but only by appointment, for a time, with a limited commission, and therefore
cannot put him on the rack, or into the dungeon, but when and how far God
pleases: even as when Satan is said to have cast them into prison, Rev. 2. 10.
his commission was but for ten days, and then God rebukes him.

Satan having thus obtained leave;. 3.
now 3. to show how able and powerful he is to work darkness in us, How
able Satan is to tempt us.
I need not much insist on. His physical and natural power to work upon our
spirits, by his creation as he is angel, is exceeding great. We are a middle
sort of creatures between them and beasts; beasts being merely corporeal,
they merely spiritual, man between both; He made us a little inferior to
the Angels, Heb. 2. though but a little, yet inferior: and in respect of that
inferiority we are exposed to their working and crafty wyles. The great
advantage they have hereby over us, the Apostle insinuates when he says, We
have not to do with flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6. 12.
but spiritual wickednesses; that is, with spirits, in abilities transcending
the power of flesh and blood: for flesh is used to express weakness when it
is thus compared (as here) with Spirit, so Esaias 31. 3. Therefore they are there
also called, as Principalities for their authority; so Powers for their
natural abilities; and that to work upon us: For it is spoken in that
relation. All which power, how great soever in him at his first creation, is
now become the power of darkness; and so called, because most powerful that
way, namely, to cause and work darkness in us: and though he can for a need
transform himself into an angel of light, by deluding his deceived enthusiasts
with false joys; yet therein he does but act a part, it is but forced; but to
show himself an angel of darkness, by terrifying and affrighting weak
consciences, this is natural now to him; His power lies most in this.
Therefore his title further, is the ruler of darkness: and also he is called
that strong man; strong as to keep peace, Luke 11. 21. in those he deceives
with a false peace; so to make war and commotions in us when he is cast out.
We are bidden therefore to stand upon our guard, and to look that we have on
the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against his wiles.
Ephesians. 6. 11.

Only in the fourth place,. 4.
though Satan has never so much power, That the exercise of this his power is
much from the darkness in us.
yet the advantage and exercise of this his power to work those disquietments
in us, is by reason of that sinful darkness which is in us. We may say, that
as, unless he had power from above, that is, from God; so nor unless he had
furtherance from beneath, even from those principles of guilt and darkness in
us aforementioned, he could not disquiet us. Satan comes (says Christ) but
has nothing in me; a commission he had, and therefore came; but he had
nothing of his Image, or of the guilt of any of his works, to work upon in
Christ; and therefore could effect nothing at all upon his spirit. That
therefore which gives him privilege, scope, and matter to work thus upon us,
is something within us; there being even in the best something which does belong
to his jurisdiction, which makes their spirits fit subjects for his
temptations to take upon. In the 6. chap. to the Ephesians. v. 12. They are called
the rulers of the darkness of this world: and Coloss. 1. 12, 13. Their power is
called the power of darkness; so as darkness is his territories, dominion,
and jurisdiction: for it is his work, and his image, without which he could
have no power at all with us. But by reason of this remaining darkness he has
a double advantage over us.

1.. 5.
An advantage of more near intimate and immediate access to our spirits to
close with them, A double advantage that Satan has over us in the exercise of
his power in tempting us:
to suggest unto them, and work upon them; and to tempt not only, as one man
tempts another, by the outward senses, but by the inward also, which is an
exceeding great advantage. And though it is Of near and intimate access to
suggest inwardly to our spirits.
that as he is an Angel he has naturally by creation ability thus to do;
yet as he is now a devil, and an unclean spirit, were we but perfectly holy,
as in innocence, he should be debarred all such near communication to us. To
this purpose it may be observed, that in that his temptation of Adam in
innocence, he was not permitted in his first assault, till he had sinned, to
come within him to work upon his fancy and affections indiscernably: but only
mediately and externally; by an audible voice in the body of a Serpent.
Caeterum Malus ille extrinsecus, ac non per cogitationes, Christum adortus est,
quemadmodum and Adamum. Nam ne illum quidem per immissas cogitationes, sed per
Serpentem impetivit Damasce. Ortho. fidei, lib. 3. cap. 20.
And likewise as touching the second Adam, we read not, that he had access
to his inward senses and spirit; but only by an external suggestion by voice,
and by visible representations; as when he showed him the glory of the world in
visible Land-skips of his own making: which were represented to the eye; what
else was the reason why he took the advantage of a mountain? if it had been
by working on his inward senses, any place would have served for that; But the
devil then appeared in a visible shape and so tempted him, for he would have
had him fallen down to worship him. Another time we find him crept into one
of his Apostles, to assault our Savior by him, Master spare thy self, says
he, when therefore Christ says to him, Mat. 16. 23.
Get thee behind me Satan: Thou art an offense to me. So as still Satan was
kept at a distance and could come no nearer. And that he should yet come thus
near to him, made Christ also in that great temptation in the wilderness with
so much vehemence and indignation, at last say to him, Avoid Satan, Mat. 4.
10. as loathing the neerenesse of so foul a spirit: For what fellowship (that
is, such, thus near) should Light have with this angel of darkness? Nor
should he have such more near and inward access to our spirits, but for that
darkness in us; by reason of which he thus comes within us; and as darkness
mingleth with darkness, so he with our spirits: So that as the light of grace
in us begun, does fit us for Gods drawing nigh to us; so this darkness
remaining in part unexpelled, exposes us to Satan his drawing nigh, so near,
as to mingle with our spirits and as it were to become one spirit with us.

2. As hereby he has this advantage of access Of fit matter to work upon.
so this darkness in us is also as fit fuel, and as tinder to his fiery
temptations, that presently enkindleth and enflameth: so as all those effects
of the principles of darkness mentioned, he can both increase and augment; and
so adds blackness to that darkness in us, and darkness being his dominion,
therefore so much darkness as is in us, so great a party he has in us to work
upon. Hence therefore all the effects that he works in unregenerate men, who
are nothing but darkness; he may work in regenerate men, according to the
proportion of the remainder of darkness in them, to a certain degree, and for
a limited season; as to delude their reason, falsely accuse, and terrify their
consciences, etc. Only small despair and revenge against God, which is that
sin unto death, this the Apostle excepteth; for having occasionally mentioned
that sin, 1 John 5. 16. he adds ver. 17. That he that is borne of God
sins no^, that is, not that sin; and he subjoyneth, But keep^ himself
that that evil one touch him not: that is, with the least infusion of the
venom of that sin, which is properly his sin, John. 8. 44. and which he
touches their spirits with, who become the Serpents seed. And therefore all
such instances as we find, that show how he has wrought on the spirits of
carnal men by reason of their total darkness, may be alleged, to show in a
proportion, what he may also work on regenerate men for a season, by reason of
their darkness in part remaining. All things happening alike to all. Thus in
general

CHAP. VII.
More particularly, how Satan works upon those three principles in us: First,
on Carnal reason.

SEeing therefore the exercise of his power lies in that darkness which is in
us; let us more particularly see how able and powerful he is, to work upon
those several principles of Carnal reason, guilt of conscience, jealousies,
and fears.

First on carnal reason, on which he chiefly works in this sort of
temptations, the strength whereof lies in false reasonings; wherein, if in any
thing, he has the advantage.

First,. 1.
his abilities to forge and invent false reasonings and arguments to overthrow
our faith, Satan's abilities to invent false reasonings,
are (as they must needs be conceived to be) exceeding great: who for his
knowledge is called (...), as well as Satan, for his malice; and for his
subtility in out-reaching us, a Serpent: who when young, outwitted our first
parents, he beguiled Eve through his subtlety, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11. 3.
then, when their reason was not depraved; but now he is grown that Old
Serpent, increased by so long a time of experience,
Rev. 17. 9. and we are become children, apt to be tossed to and fro, Ephesians. 4.
14. He has had time enough to improve his knowledge in; a student he is of
5000. years standing; that has lost no time, but as he is said to accuse day
and night, Rev. 12. 10. so is able to study both day and night; and he has
made it his chief, if not whole study, to enable himself to tempt, and plead
against us; It is his trade, therefore as men are called Lawyers, or Divines
from their calling; so he the tempter and the accuser from his employment; and
by this his long experience and abservation he has his (...) 2 Cor. 2. 11. his
set and composed machinations; his (...) Ephesians. 6. 11. his methods of
temptations, which are studied and artificially molded, and ordered; even such
systemes and methods of them, as tutors and professors of arts and sciences
have, and do read over again and again to their Auditors: The Apostle calls
them darts, verse 16. and he has an whole shop, and armory of them ready made
and forged; which for the acuteness, and subtle sophistry that is in them,
are called depths of Satan, Revel. 2. 24. Which depths, and his continual
exercise in this great controversy in all ages:
if in any point, are most to be found in this; for he is more especially
versed in this great question and dispute whether a man be the child of God
or no, more then in any other: all other controversies he has had to deal in
but in particular ages, as occasionally they were started; but this has been
the standing controversy of all ages, since God has had any children on
earth; With every one of whom more or less, he has at one time or another had
solemn disputes about it: so as he knows all the advantages, windings, and
turnings in this debate; all the objections, and answers, and discussions in
it. And as other controversies; the longer they are on foot, and the further
they have bin carried along, the more they are enlarged, improved and grow more
subtle: So must this needs also, especially in this latter knowing age of the
world; and by reason also of that seeming near similitude which hypocrisy
holds unto the truth and power of grace, (which has fazled and entangled this
controversy) The objections and difficulties which a believer meets with in
beating out a right judgment of his estate, which of all controversies is the
most subtle and intricate.
are greater then in any controversy the world ever knew; and afford stranger
knots, and require as acute distinctions to dissolve them as the School knows
any. And indeed such, as, did not the holy Ghost sometimes cut, sometimes untie
them for believers, by witnessing with our spirits that we are the sons of
God, bare reason alone could never determine in it. Now Satan through long
experience, and observation has all these at his fingers ends; and has
reduced them all to common places long since; He has still observed, and laid
up what answers have relieved the spirits of believers in such and such a doubt
cast in by him; and then studies a further reply against the next time, or for
the next believer he shall have to do with.

Secondly,. 2.
as he has thus thoroughly studied this controversy, Satan knows how best to
suit his false reasonings to all sorts of believers.
and knows all the windings and false reasonings in it: So withal, by his
daily studiing and considering Men, he knows how best to suit, and make use of
those reasonings, both to persons and seasons. It is the sole business of
those evil spirits to study men; for this end they go up and down the earth;
and he has common places of men, and their several frames and temper of
spirit, as well as of temptations; he knows all the several ranks and
classes of men in the state of grace; and according to their ranks, with what
sort of temptations to encounter them. For men's temptations are various and
manifold, 1 Pet. 2. 6. even as the gifts and operations of the Spirit are, 1
Cor. 12. 4, 5. Now he having beaten out this controversy with all sorts,
knows how to lay the dispute, how to order, and marshall, and apply
objections, and weild his blows with most success and advantage. That as
Physicians, having observed the several workings of medicines of all sorts,
upon several ages, and constitutions; and what several issues and effects
they have had, do therefore accordingly prescribe and apply several
medicines, according to the several and differing conditions of their
patients, though sick of the same disease: Thus Satan, he by observation
finding the hearts of some men answering to some others, even as face to face
in water, as Solomon says, and more alike, and withal remembering what
reasonings have always taken most with such a sort or strain of Christians,
whose corruptions and whose graces were much alike unto those in this or that
man he has now to deal with; accordingly he makes use and application of
these reasonings again. The conditions of men are exceeding various, and so
are capable of several sorts of temptations.
1 The temper of men's spirits we know is diverse, and so is capable of diversity
of suggestions. Men of melancholy and jealous spirits, he plyes with
reasonings and suggestions that will most take with their spirits. And again 2
the operations of graces, as of sin, are various in those several tempers.
And 3 Gods dealings with, and workings upon his children are as various as
either: some he humbles much, some are led on with comfort; some he works on
with a sudden and mavelous light, as if the Sun should rise on the sudden, at
midnight; and on others, insensibly and by degrees, as when the dawning steals
upon the day; some have had a false and a counterfeit work before; some were
never enlightened until savingly; and this variety affords rise, and occasion
for several temptations. So as what kind of work any other Christian has
had, is apt to be made an exception to another that wants it. I was never thus
humbled says one, nor I thus comforted says another; I had a sudden violent
work indeed, which came in like a spring tide, but now the tide is fallen, and
my first love abated, says a third; I had some workings and enlightnings
heretofore says another, and I was deceived then, and I may be so now also;
and so he has that vast tuske set him, to compare a counterfeit work with a
true. Thus every several way of working lies open to several exceptions; and
as we say, that every calling earthly has its several and proper temptations:
to the several ways and manner of effecting this calling heavenly, have their
several veins and currents of temptations. All which Satan knows, and has
often traced; and accordingly knows how to sit them to men, and to prosecute
them the most advantageous way. So in like manner he takes the compass of
every man's knowledge, notions, and apprehensions; according unto which, as our
knowledge is more or less, we are also capable of several temptations. Many
reasonings and objections, which like small haile-shot could not reach, or make
any dint at all upon men of parts and knowledge, that soar high out of the
gunshot of them; and who have on the whole armor of God, as the Apostle
speaks Ephesians. 6. are in complete armor, abounding in all faith and knowledge;
yet are fittest to level with, at such as are more ignorant, and fly low, and
have but some few broken pieces of that armor to defend some parts with: but
on the contrary those other of his great shot, which he discharges on men of
knowledge, they would be shot, and clean fly over the others heads, and not
come near such smaller vessels. All in Thyatira knew not Satan's depths, nor
were capable of them, Rev. 2. 24. Thus ignorance, and want of knowledge of the
meaning of the Scriptures, and of the ways of grace chalked forth therein, how
does Satan abuse, to the disquietment of many poor and good souls that want
much knowledge, by putting false glosses on them? how many weak souls do
stick in shallowes, and are sometimes a long while (...) with gross mistakes?
and like small birds, are held long under with limed strawes of frivolous
objections, which great ones fly away with. S. Paul being a man of knowledge
was not easily taken with such chafe, Satan fitly knows how to apply his
temptations
We are not ignorant of his devices, (says he 2 Cor. 2. 11.) and therefore
Satan takes another course with him, and comes with downeright blows, and
falls a buffet in him, 2. Cor. 12. Thus does Satan take measure of the bore (as
I may so speak) of every man's understanding and fits them with objections
proportionable, of several sises. And as the Apostles in his Sermons prepared
milk for babes, but strong meat for strong meant so does satan in his
temptations, apply and suite them to men's notions and apprehensions, still
framing objections according to their reading.

Thirdly,. 3.
he is able indiscernably to communicate all his false reasonings, Satan is
able indiscernably to communicate the most spiritual false reasonings; and in
such a manner as to make them take.
(though never so spiritual,) which he does forge and invent, and that in
such a manner as to deceive us by them, and to make them take with us.

First, he is able not only to put into the heart suggestions and
solicitations unto sensual and worldly objects; such as that into Judas heart,
to betray John 13. 2. and to tempt married couples severed, To suggest even the
most subtle and abstracted reasonings about things spiritual.
to incontinuancy, 1 Cor. 7. 5. But also the most subtle and abstracted
reasonings concerning things spiritual, which are utterly remote from sense,
he can insinuate and impart according to the measure and capacity of men's
apprehensions. Therefore we are said to wrestle with them about things
heavenly, and out interest therein is often made the matter of the contention,
and the subject of the question: so that phrase Ephesians. 6. 12. (...); when it is
said, We wrestle with spiritual wickednesses in heavenly, is rather to be
understood of [heavenly things] then of heavenly places;] the word signifying
rather supercaelestiall, in the highest heavens; whither (if rendered of places)
the devils never came since their fall; and it being used elsewhere for
[heavenly things] as Heb. 8. 5. and the preposition [(...)] or [In] being
likewise sometimes put to express the object matter about which a thing is
conversant, as Matthew. 11. 6. Blessed is he that is not offended in me, that
is, with or about me, and for my sake; it may congruously be so here meant as
noting to us, that the price about which we wrestle with Satan, the stake, are
not things worldly, as honors, riches, and the like, but things heavenly,
which concern our souls and estates hereafter. Now the contention being about
heavenly things, and spiritual blessings, it cannot be transacted but by
reasonings suitable; that is, spiritual false reasonings abstracted from sense
and fancy: and in this respect they are termed spiritual wickednesses; because
in such wickednesses they deal and trade in especially, or as much as in those
that are sensual; as tempting to unbelief, despair, blasphemy against God,
of which sort are all those temptations we have now in hand. And that he is
able to convey and suggest such spiritual thoughts and reasonings of what sort
soever, appears many ways: as by injecting blasphemous thoughts against God
such as do sometimes transcend the wit and capacity of the receiver of them;
and is manifest likewise by Saul's prophesying even from the immediate dictating
and suggestion of an evil spirit as is expressly said, 1 Samuel 18. 10. in the
like manner to which, happily the Sibylls also propheyed: but more evid^^ it is in
all those damnable heresies which have been broached in all ages; as in the
primitive times among the Romans, the broachers whereof are made the
Emissaries of Satan, therefore Romans 16. (...) Paul having branded them unto the
Romans, that taught false doctrines among them, and having instructed them
against them, he gives this encouragement about them, ver. 20. That God should
treat dawne satan under their feet shortly, having respect to Satan's work in
those errors mentioned, v. 16. Satan being the main author of them. Thus in the
Church of Thyatira, those cursed heretics who appla^ded themselves, and were
admired by their followers for the depths and profoundnesse of the learning
shown in those heresies they broached: Depths as they speak, Rev. 2. 24. But
if they call them depths says the Apostle, I will call them Depths of satan
[Depths of satan as they speak,] for the devil was the master and the author
and suggester of them: so in aftertimes Apostasy is ascribed to spirits of
error, that is, Devils, which he foretells men should give heed unto, 1 Timothy
4. 1. and in the working of satan, 2 Th. ^. 9. it was He that sharpened their
wits, and pens. Now then by the same reason there is no reasoning about our
estates, though never so spiritual, but he can suggest it as well as he did
those depths of heresies to the broachers of (...). So as Satan cannot only
make those false reasonings which our own hearts forge more specious, and
probable, and suggest further confirmations of them, which are enough to add
unto this darkness; but he is also able to put in new, which himself invents, of
what kind soever they be.

Secondly, To suggest them in such a manner, as to take and deceive us.
he is not simply able to suggest them, men should give heed unto them: 1 Timothy
4. 1. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. (where the working of those very same spirits is set
forth, ver. 9.) it is not only said, that they were sent as from God to
delude, but with strong delusions; such, as should have a strength put into
them, to prevail, so as that men should believe them. So also, that lying
spirit which God sent, and who persuaded Ahab by a lie in the mouths of his
false Prophets: commission is not simply given to him to suggest a lie, but so
as it should prevail with Ahab; so 2 Chronicles. 18. 21. And the Lord said, thou
shall entise him, and thou shall also prevail. And as he is thus able (when
God gives leave) to delude wicked men's understandings with false reasonings in
matters of heresy and false doctrine, by reason of that total darkness that
is in them: So he is able (if God give leave (as sometimes he does) to bring
strong delusions upon the minds of Gods children also, through false
reasonings about their own estates, by reason of that darkness which in part
remains in them: by means of which he may work the same effects for a time,
and in a certain degree in a godly man, which in another, as was before
observed. Thus the believing Galatians, especially some of them, were so far
bewitched (as his word is) as for a time to assent to that great error in
point of justification: And this by reason of that folly and darkness which
remained in them, as he intimates, when he says; Oh ye [foolish] Galatians,
who has [bewitched] you, that ye should not obey the truth: Gal. 3. 1. And if
in the very doctrine of Justification it self, believers were thus for a time
deluded, (which is rare) then much more may they, and ordinarily are they
misled in the application of faith, in the believing their own personal
justification, which is the point in hand. A caution.
Only this is to be added here for caution sake: That it is true, that Satan
cannot enforce an act of assent to any falsehood upon the understanding of any
man. For how then should they have all been dawned for believing that lied 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. which should not have been unless it were their own sin;
which is as true of all other temptations as that. Though Satan pat the thought
into Judas heart, John 13. 2. yet his own conscience ownes it wholly as his
own act, Mat. 27. 4. I have sinned, etc. Neither yet does he is immediately
concur to produce such an act of assent in us; Tentationis potest esse causa
efficacax, at non peccati: potest necessitarehomines ad sentiendam tentationem
non ad consentiendam.
as God does, when he works says in us: for then Gods power and assistance
in working good, should be no more then Satan's in working evil. And yet the
Scripture phrases go far in ascribing unto Satan herein, when it says of
those that believed not the Gospel; that the god of this world has blinded
their minds that believe not: 2 Cor. 4. which notes out a superadded working
of blindness unto their own natural blindness. As also when he says, that the
Prince of the air is (...), that works effectually, etc. Ephesians. 2. 2. And
also that of the Corinthians whilst unregenerate, who as then are said to be
carried and led away after dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12. 2. All which phrases would
seem to argue, not only a further power of working on men's judgments, then
when one man does endeavor to corrupt and persuade another man in a moral
way: (because he suggesteth indiscernably, and with more frequency and
importunity, and holds the mind more to the object, and presents an army
of confirmations at once, and is able so to marshall them, as the mind can
scarce resist; and puts all these upon the Spirit with a violent and imperious
affirmation:) But further also it would seem to imply some kind of physical
working; though not immediately on the spring of the clock, yet upon the
wheels and weights of it, I mean the passions in the body, and the images in
the fancy; though not upon the understanding immediately: all which, what
influence they have to sway the judgment and pervert it, experience shows.

Fourthly,. 4.
he is further able to follow and continue his reasonings as occasion is, Satan
is able to continue the dispute, and often, to make replies to the answers of
his false reasonings.
and to keep up the dispute, and hold out arguments with us, and out-reason
us; by putting in new replies to our answers, and so to maintain and manage
and carry along the dispute, and to come up with fresh supplies: which in this
respect is called wrestling; Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not with flesh and blood,
but principalities and powers, it being (as the bodily wrestling) transacted by
reiterated assaults, and attempts to overcome and get the victory; he as it
were going about to strike up our heels, as wrestlers do: that is, to take
away from under us those reasonings which supported us, by cavillling
objections; which kind of spiritual wrestlings how often have we experience
of in spiritual agonies? In the hour of temptation believers find conflicts
and bandyings of disputes, rationally carried along, and pertinent objections
brought in against those answers, which they secretly meditate of: In which
case therefore Divines bid men not to dispute with that cunning sophister. Thus
many when death has approached have found that they have had their reasonings
for their estates, and those evidences they have had recourse unto, taken away
and confuted as fast as they have thought of them. And that Satan has this
dexterity and skill thus to manage such kind of disputes with us, is further
evident, in the framing of heresies, wherein he assists the contrivers of them
with pertinent considerations to back and confirm their notions, in their
private meditations, studies, and contrivements. And indeed if Satan were not
able and skillful thus to oppose and reply, these kind of temptations which
consist in disputes could not be managed: for otherwise, Satan in the^ did
dispute with us, but as if one of us should reason with a dumb man that can
hear, but his answers cannot be known, and so we know no way what reply to
make. Therefore surely Satan has some way, more or less a guess and inkling,
often what may be the answers of the heart again: which were it otherwise, the
glory also which God has by the victory gotten over Satan in these
temptations, were much obscured, and Satan's confusion less; for the victory of
our faith in these disputes, and the resistance it makes, lies chiefly in those
replies which are made, whereby it quenches all his darts: whereof the devil,
when he is once sensible, and perceives it, he is confounded; for then, when he
is once sensible and apprehensive that he is resisted, does he fly from us, as
the Apostle speaks, James 4. 7. and that of his own accord, as the expression
there imports; even as a foiled and disgraced soldier. And this we may see in
his carriage in those his temptations of Christ; which were managed by mutual
disputes; and the foiling of satan, was by the answers out of Scripture which
Christ gave, Mat. 4. 11.
by which being confounded, he left him (as the text says) as out of pride,
ashamed that he was foiled. So that Satan some way or other is able to guess
at, and discernes the replies in our hearts to his objections; as well as to
make and cast in objections.

CHAP. VIII.
That Satan is able to work upon that other corrupt principle in us; [Guilt of
Conscience.] Both how far he is able to know matter by us to object against
us; as also to set it on, and work upon the guilt and erroneousnesse of the
conscience.

THus we see how able Satan is to join with and assist carnal reason in us
against our selves; we will now further consider what power and working he may
exercise upon that other principle in us, our consciences; in joining with the
filth and defilement thereof, in accusing us and laying particulars to our
change; in which consists the greatest of his strength, even in an army of
accusations of us to our selves; which in this warfare he musters up against
us. This sort of temptations (we have in hand) consists either of false majors,
or false minors; which are like the two wings of an army. His false majors,
they are such, as misapprehensions of the ways and of the work of grace, or
misunderstanding of sayings of Scripture, etc. which by reason of that darkness
of ignorance, that is in us, he puts upon us wrested and perverted. As [That to
relapse into the same sin again and again is not compatible with grace] and
many the like. For the opinions whereby some do measure what strictness is
essential to the being in the state of grace, are often too severe and rigid;
as in others too loose: The measure of some is too scant, not giving allowance
to failings; as of others too large, taking in such gross corruptions, and the
constant practice of them as cannot stand with grace. And Satan deceives with
both: As the one sort of profane men to flatter themselves to be in a good
condition when they are not, so the other of weak and tender consciences, that
they are not in a good estate when they are. And in like manner places of
Scripture misunderstood, do often prove matter of great temptation to many, as
that Hebrews 6. unto One, who having fallen from his first love, concluded he
could never be saved, because it is there said, that they which are once
enlightened, if they fall away, it is impossible they should be renewed to
repentance: whereas it is only to be understood of a revengefull total
Apostasy. Acts 13. 10.
Thus as Elymas perverted the right ways of the Lord: So does Satan also,
Elymas being therefore there called child of the devil, because he did the
work of his father therein. Now all such false reasonings as are founded upon
such mistakes of the things, and of the rule it self whereby we should judge
of our estates, false majors, do properly belong to the former head of Carnal
reason. But he has another wing of forces to join to these, and they are false
accusations of a man to himself, from the guilt of his own heart and ways,
misconceits of a man's self, and misapplications to a man's self, another sort
of arguments wherein the minors are false. So as although a man be full of
knowledge, and through the light thereof has a right judgment both of the
Scriptures, and of the ways and work of grace by which men's estates are to be
judged; and so therein Satan cannot be too hard for him with all his sophistry:
yet by misrepresenting a man to himself, and by perverting his own ways to
him, making that which is straight, seem crooked, and all in him to be
hypocrisy, a man is brought to pass a false sentence upon himself. So as if
this subtle pleader cannot deceive the judge (as I may so speak) with false
rules and mistakes in the Law it self; then he endeavors it by
misrepresenting the case of the party, and puts in a false bill of accusation,
so ordered and colored as to procure a judgment against him; laying before the
eyes of men's consciences their by-ends, deadness and hardness of heart, and
falsenesse in such and such turning of their lives; excepting against what is
good in them; aggravating what is evil, and all to enforce from thence a false
conclusion. To instance in some one false reasoning: Satan often argues and
charge the conscience of one distressed in this or the like manner; Those in
whom any sin reigns, or in whose hearts hypocrisy and self-love is the
predominant principle, are not in the state of grace: But such an one art thou,
etc. for the proof of which minor, he musters up and sets in order in the view
of conscience, a multitude of instances, of sins committed, thus hainously,
thus often; of duties omitted, and if performed, yet with such and such pride of
heart, self-aimes, etc. In which sort of reasoning, the major and first
proposition is often true: but the minor, the assumption [such an one art thou]
is most false. And although there be a truth in the instances alleged to prove
it: That such sins have been committed, and that in performance of duties such
particular by-ends, etc. do arise, and are found in the heart, yet not in that
manner, as he would lay the charge, not as reigning, not as the swaying and
prevailing principle in a man's whole course; That hypocrisy is there, cannot
be denied: but that hypocrisy rules there, and is predominant, and that
nothing but hypocrisy, this is it, is false, which yet satan amazeth the
conscience with, to bring forth this conclusion out of all, Therefore thou art
an hypocrite: which conclusion likewise, how able he is to set on with terrors
and affrightments, we shall show anon; That which we have now in hand, is to
show how able he is, for those kind of false reasonings: the deceit of which
lies chiefly in the assumption, and minor proposition, that, is in
misapplications to a man's self; in which he has principally to deal with
conscience: for the guilt of a man's particular ways, actions, and corruptions,
is made the matter of the evidence, and the proofs of those minors: and the
defilement and erroneousnesse of the conscience is that principle in us, which
he works upon, when he enforces such a misapprehension from those evidences.

Wherein we may take notice of a difference between the holy Ghosts dealing
with a believer, A difference between satan's sifting us, and the holy Ghosts
searching.
when at any time he comes with the word, and searches and tries the heart,
and discovers corruptions to us, to wit, such as David prayed for, Examine me
oh Lord, and try my heart, etc. Psalm. 26. 2. Psalm. 139. 23. convincing and
reproving us, and that sometimes with some sharpness for our by-ends,
hypocrisies, etc. when also he bores the care, and shows wherein we have
exceeded, as Elihu speaks, Job 36. 9, 10. and between these other siftings and
winnowings of satan, (as Christ's phrase is, Luke 22. 31. (of which
afterward.) The difference is, That the holy Ghost deals sweetly herein, but
as a father that rebukes and convinces his child of his misdemeanors; but
without putting in any such sting in the conclusion, that therefore we are
hypocrites; nor to any such meaning, or purpose thence inferred, that therefore
sin reigns in us, etc. but in these of satan, that is the issue he mainely
drives all to, and it is made the foot, the burden of all those his
accusations, and is as the scope and argument that runs through the whole of
that his charge, against us.

And in respect to this his misse-representing our estates and false
aggravations of our sins unto us, he is called as the Tempter, which is in a
general relation to all sorts of tentations: so the accuser, (...).
Rev. 12. 20. or empleader against us; and as the accuser of us to God,. 1.
in Gods Court, How satan is an accuser, by charging the guilt (...) on the
conscience.
and before his tribunal, (for to accuse in a Court the word may seem to
import) so in the Court of our own consciences. And as he tempts us unto
sin, so also for sin and by sin; that is, the guilt of it, to draw us to
despair. He that accused Job unto God, would surely accuse Job unto himself
much more. A Caution.


And though it may be truly (...) that neither Satan nor our own consciences,
A Caution.
can ever aggravate unto us too much, the intrinsecall sinfulness, the
hainousnes and vileness of our sins in their due and proper colors, and true
aggravations of them, which we can never come to see enough, as not to hate nor
loath, and mourn for as we ought; yet Satan and our own consciences may in
the representation of our sins, put such false apprehensions and such
aggravations upon them, as may make us apprehend too much about them; as when
it is suggested, that they are such as are not compatible with the state of
grace; or that they are utterly unpardonable: he may likewise use them as
inductions to prove a false conclusion. And also although our sins if truly
can never be enough represented, if it be in order to drive a man more to Gods
free grace, and unto Christ; yet to present them singlely, and alone, and to
hold the mind and intention of it so to the^, as to cause us to forget our
own mercies, and in such a manner, as thereby Gods mercies and all comforts
are hidden and concealed from us; this is that is satan's practice, and is the
cause of this deep bondage we thus here speak of. And in this respect that
name (...), the accuser, is given this evil spirit in a direct and full
opposition to that special name and office of the holy Ghost (...), the
comforter or pleader for us: because as the holy Ghost makes intercession in
our own hearts unto God for us, and upon true repentance helps us to make
apologies for our selves, (as the word is) 2 Cor. 7. 11. and comfort us by
discovering our graces given us of God, as 1 Cor. 2. 12. and by pleading our
evidences, and witnessing with our spirits that we are the sons of God: so
on the contrary, satan is (...), an accuser, by laying to our charge the guilt
of our sins, by empleading our evidences, misrepresenting our estates,
thereby to deject us, and swallow us up with sorrow, as 2 Cor. 2. 7. And
further, because in these accusations his scope is to misrepresent our estates
to us, and falsely to disquiet us, therefore he is yet more especially called
(...), a slanderer, as one that falsely and lyingly calumniateth and slandereth
all our graces, all Gods dealings toward us, all our dealings toward him:
slandering our persons, our estates to us, charging us to be hypocrites;
unsound, and carnal, and counterfeit Christians, still misconstruing all unto
the worst. Which false calumnies and charges of his, I take most properly to be
those darts mentioned Ephesians. 6. ver. 11. which are there said more especially
to oppose our faith: and therefore faith is there said to quench them, from
which trade of his forging darts of calumnies, he has his name (...) a
slanderer from (...) a metaphor, it is from casting darts, (for the slanderous
calumnies of the tongue, are as a manle, Prove. 25. 18.
and a sword, Psalm. 57. 4.
and a sharp arrow, as Solomon speaks: their teeth spears and arrows) and
such are these kind of satan's tentations and accusations against us, Even as
darts and arrows that wound and pierce, and run through the affections, that
strike the soul through and through with fears: his name (...), the tempter,
is from (...), to pierce: because such are his darts, so sharpened, and slung
with that force, as they are fitted to pierce, and enabled to run through.
And besides the sharpness of the darts themselves, they are said to be fiery,
as making double way for themselves: for a piece of iron, though blunt, yet if
fired red hot, it runs through without resistance. Satan, he is that great
general of the whole powers of darkness in us; and therefore even the forces
of the guilt of sin (the proper seat of which is the conscience) he has
some command over, as well as of the power of sin in other members; as he can
muster up and set on fleshly lusts which fight against the soul, and provoke
and back them in their assaults upon us, so he can clap on the chains of guilt
and bondage.

And as he can stir that guilt that is in us, And also by working upon the
injudiciousnesse of the conscience.
so also work upon that injudiciousnesse and erroneous defilement that is in
the conscience, to judge of a man's own estate; this satan works upon and
abuses: For as he has a power to work upon the corruption in the rest of the
faculties, so also over the defilement and pollution of the conscience,
misleading it in the verdict, as cunning pleaders do a silly Jury; the wards
of conscience are of themselves loose, and naturally misplaced, but he with
his false keys wrings and perverts them much more: it naturally gives an
uncertain sound, but he by his false alarums and pannicke fears cast in, does
much more confound the testimony of it. And how easy is it to trouble a soul
disquieted already, and to work upon jealousies which are raised? we see how
far a cunning man can insinuate with jealous natures, to increase suspicions
and surmises. When an humor is stirred, how easily is it wrought on: and when
the Spirit has already read us a sharp Lecture, and examind our consciences,
then he strikes in, and descants upon all.

But the more full and distinct explication of Satan's work herein, 2.
requires a further search and inquiry, A quaere discusted, how, and how far
satan may know matter against us, to accuse us of.
and larger demonstration, how Satan comes, and how far to know matter by us
thus to accuse us of: for if he does accuse, he must, as he said Acts 28.
Have ought against us whereof to accuse, else it were in vain, and there is
this difference between these kind of tentations wherein we are exercised
about the guilt of sin, and those other into sin. That the object matter of
other tentations is what is without our selves: but in these, that which is in
us and from us, and has been committed by us, is made matter of objection
against, and disquietment unto us. That which is from within the man, disquiets
the man.

But ere I enter upon this enquiry I must premise a general Caution, to set
limits to our discourse therein.

And the Caution is this, A Caution premised.
that we are to reserve and maintain this, both as an undoubted truths and as
Gods sole and royal prerogative, That it is in Gods sole prerogative to know
the heart
that he can alone both search and know the heart and conscience; As in like
manner, that He can only by his wrath immediately make those deep and killing
wounds and gashes with which men's souls are often here and hereafter eternally
wounded: (of which by way of caution also in the next chapter) which two
glorious and incommunicable attributes of his, that Elogium of the word of God,
Heb. 4. 12, 13. seems fully to hold forth unto us: where, as at the Gate of
Paradise was set a Cherubin with a flaming sword to keep our fallen parents
from ever entering in again, so there Christ is represented, as that supreme
Judge, with whom, as at the 13. verse, we are eternally, to have to do, (or as
the original (...), to whom we are to give an account: for so (...) is Romans
14. 12. and elsewhere taken) and this with that dreadful sword of his word
drawn, and brandished, (by which he will judge men at the later day, John 12.
48. and which therefore is called (...), verse 12. a judger of the thoughts,
etc.) that by the awful terror thereof, he might compel and drive those that
hear the Gospel, to enter into that rest, (to which he had exhorted, ver.
11.) which is set open by him for men now fallen to come into. Which sword, as
it has a double edge, (as there) so in his hand (who alone can wield it) it
serves to a double use: That whereas in a Judge two things are requisite to the
complete performance of his office: 1. Skill and knowledge to find out and
examine the fact: 2. Power to execute and torture the Malefactor when found
guilty. He shows how both these do transcendently and solely-meet in him, by
what power is found to be in his word, which is the ensign of his justice, and
instrument of his power in judging, which is said to be a discerner of the
thoughts, and a sword that pierces and wounds the soul and spirit with
unutterable anguish. Which wounding power is distinctly set forth (as some)
from the beginning of the 12. ver. to those last words, [and is a discerner of
the thoughts,] from whence to the end of the 13. ver. that other, the searching
and all-judging property of God, and his word is laid forth to us; but rather
as I conceive, the Apostle in one continued metaphor carries along the
expression of both through the whole, though more principally, the one in that
former part of the words, and the other in the later: yet so as both are alike
made The royalty of God, which is the thing we have in hand. Neither needs it
stumble any that this is attributed to the word of God, of which he seems to
speak, for that is all one, and to ascribe it unto God: for as where the word
of a King is, there is power, says Solomon, Eccles 8. 4. so, where the word of
God is, there is the power of God, and so is it here to be understood: and
therefore as in other Scriptures his word is said to create, and by it the
heavens to be established, etc. and also, Gal. 3. 8. in the like phrase of
speech, the Scripture is said to foresee, that is, God foresaw, who writ the
Scripture: so also here, to know, and wound the heart. Which to be the Apostles
express intention here, appears by the connection of the 12. and 13. verses.
For whereas ver. 12. he begins with attributing this power unto the word, yet
in the end he closes his speech with transferring all that was said thereof
upon God himself. ver. 13. with whom we have to do.

To open the words a little more largely, so as to clear this assertion out of
them, which it is necessary to premise. The words are, For the word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart, neither is there any
creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and opened
to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

And first, of that sole searching power of the soul in this Chapter, and of
that other, the sole wounding power of the conscience, in the next Chap. we
shall have the like occasion to premise.

For the present, that searching, examining, and judging power of the word now
in hand, he expresses by an allusion to the anatomy of bodies: (which then,
though not so frequently as now, was yet in use) or else to the cutting up of
the sacrifices, whether those of the Jews, or as it was used among the heathen;
especially by the Soothsayers, who curiously searched into every inward part,
as we find in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 21. 21. and his similitude stands then, that
look what the entrails are to a sharp sword, or Sacrificers knife, or the
like instruments of Anatomy in a strong and skillful hand, such are all the
most inward, and secret parts of the heart, even those which are most difficult
to be divided, unto this sword in Gods hand, when he is pleased to use it to
search the heart and reins, and to discover and bring forth to judgment the
secrets thereof. He can use this sword, not only to unrip, and strip off the
outward clothes of outward and formal actions, and so present the soul
naked, (as his expression is, ver. 13.) nor only to flea off all the skin, to
excoriate, and so to see what lies under it, (as the next word there (...),
which is translated opened, does sometimes signify) but further to cleave and
cut up to the back bone (for even so deep does the signification of that word
reach) that so all the inwards may appear; and this so curiously divided and
laid asunder, as to see and view apart what is in each. It pierces to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit. By which, grace and corruption are not so
properly here to be understood: for then he would have rather said, flesh and
spirit: and besides the persons he speaks this of, are principally those who
shall be found secret unbeleevers, who have not spirit in that sense at all in
them: but they are here used to express those two maine powers of the heart.
The soul, that is the inferior part, that more sensual part, wherein the
affections are, (as 1 These. 5. 20. it is also used) which it divides by
discovering how close and inordinatly all those affections cleave to sin: and
then 2. of the spirit, that is the superior part of the understanding
conscience, etc. which it rips up by discovering how these plot, and contrive
the accomplishment of sin. Dividing, that is, discovering apart, with
difference, how things are carried severally in each: and withal, what
correspondency and intercourse there is between these; how sin and all our
actions pass through them from the one to the other, even as blood and spirits
do through the veins and arteries, in all the parts from each to other. And
as in the body, there are several regions (as Anatomists call them) divided by
partitions: the vital parts in the upper loft next the neck, in which are
lodged the heart, and lungs: The natural parts in that lower, and these
divided by the midriffe, as by a floor between them: so in the soul, (to
which happily Solomon alludes, when Prove. 19. 27. he calls the several powers
of it, The Chambers of the belly, as some read it.) there is the sensual part
of the affections, The soul, etc. which is as it were in a distinct room from
that more sublime and spiritual part, the spirit. And as the spirit of man,
that is, the conscience and understanding of a man, searches all those
cha^bers, (as it is there,) that is, Knows what is in man; as the Apostle speaks,
1 Cor. 2. 11. (which yet when it does so, it is not by an innate light, but
with Gods candle, as Solomon's expression there is: that is, by the word and the
light thereof set up by him in it.) So here, the word, under another
similitude, namely, of a sword, is said to cut up, and to discover all within
those several regions. And in the Spirit, it is said to discover what can be
imagined, most retired and withdrawn, and so locked up, as no eye could find
it out, which he expresses by mentioning such parts, as are most inwardly
seated of all other: the marrow, which we know is enclosed within the bones:
and the joints, or ligaments, by which the joints are knit, and move; these it
unbares, and discovers also. Both which he interprets in the next words, [and
is a discoverer of the thoughts, and intentions of the heart,] which are a more
plain interpretation of what he had expressed by those two metaphors. The
utmost intention and end, in all our actions, that is as the marrow, because as
the marrow gives moisture to the bones, so by these our ends all our purposes
and resolutions (by which we are supported in all our actions) are strengthened
and confirmed: and then our devising thoughts or plottings, our contrivements
and machinations, those by which we artificially do connect, and hang
together many joints of means, to accomplish and bring to pass our
intentions: (which thoughts of all other we strive to hide and conceal) these
are as the joints, or (as the word (...) rather implies) as the ligaments, and
the sinews, and the tendons, by which the joints do move, so these are they
upon which our designs do move and turn. Even all those cogitationes
compaginatae, plotting thoughts, the word, it discovers and cuts up, and also
judges, and examineth, and passes sentence upon them: yea and that so
exactly, as not the smallest fault can pass uncensured by it: it is as a
curious Critique in this review: (...), it judges exactly, as Critiques use to
do. So as by this anatomy, which the word makes, all things in man, every
creature, even the least Fibra, the smallest string in the heart which would
escape the sight of the most exact Anatomist, are all naked, and opened, and
cut up before the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

The reasons why God has reserved this to himself, The reasons.
are, 1. It was for the glory of God, that he should have one private cabinet
among the creatures, which he alone should know, and keep the key of, which
might argue his omniscience: as also one place to be sanctified in, whither no
creatures eye could pierce: That so the greatness of his glory might appear,
namely, in this, that he is not worshipped outwardly only, as great ones are,
but inwardly in spirit and truth: and that his glory is such, as commands the
inward parts, which no eye sees but his own: so as a man will respect God so
much as to sanctify him in secret when no creature looks upon him.

2. That God alone might be the Judge and rewarder of men's ways: and so looked
at by them, to whom alone men must give an account: which would draw the
creatures eye alone upon him, when the strength and first borne of all our
actions, are his subjects alone, and do come under his eye and view. Therefore
it is said, that he rewards men according to their works, 1 Kings 8 39.
whose heart he knows. It was fit, that he only should take upon him to
reward, who only could know the principles of all actions, in which the chief
of the good or evil in the action lies. This is the great glory of God and
Christ at the day of judgment, that they will discover the secrets of all
hearts, 1 Cor. 4. 5. It is not said so much of men's actions, that they shall be
then discovered, as that the secrets of their hearts: For therein lies Gods
glory, which he will not give to any other.

This premised as a most necessary Caution, 2.
I come to the disquisition of that Quaere mentioned; How satan has matter to
accuse and object against us.
How, and how far Satan may come to know so much matter against us whereof to
accuse us.

1. In general it may be considered: Two general considerations:


1. That he knows what ends, 1. That he knows what corruptions are in all
men's natures, and may object them to every one.
and intentions, and thoughts, and lusts, such corrupt hearts as ours usually
produce, and bring forth in all men; and therefore can imagine what by-ends,
etc. may be stirring in such and such actions, and solay them to our charge:
and so often hit right therein, and speak a man's heart thus at random. For
our natures are apt to bring forth all concupiscence, as the Apostle says Romans
7. Therefore if there were no more; then that he knows all temptations common
to man's nature, he might go far in accusing every man; he having keys of all
sorts, sorted to all men's spirits, tryes with every one which will enter. And
as David's elder brother charged David, when he came into the wars, This is
the pride and the naughtiness of thy heart, guessing at his by-ends in it: so
does satan; he often in like manner charges us by guess. Thus he did Job,
Does Job serve God for naught? he knew such by-ends were in some men's hearts,
and so ventures to lay them to Jobs charge also.

2. Though he should know very little of us, 2. By casting in a jealous thought
from some one particular he knows by us he might set the heart awake to examine
all the rest.
yet he may from some one particular which he does know or suspect, cast in a
suspicious thought about a man's estate: and so set the jealous heart aworke it
self to search out more matter against it self. As in case of treason, the
least hint given by some one, sets the State aworke to examine the bottom of
the business, and so to get all out. So as satan often gives, and casts in but
a scruple, which proves as a theme for the heart it self to dilate upon, and
the conscience upon inquiry finds matter against it self to prove and increase
that surmise. Thus in general.

But 2. he may more particularly know much against us to accuse us of, 2. More
particularly.
and so frame bills against us out of what he knows, He may know,
and this first supposing he had no access to our inward parts, and that he
had no further way of knowing of us, then men have one of another, it being
made the limits of man's knowledge by God to Samuel, to judge by outward
appearance: yet all those advantages which men have to know one another by, he
has over us, more then any man can have and all more eminently.

For 1. 1. All corporeal acts committed
Those spirits can discern all corporeal actions, though not of all men, at
once, (for then why should satan travail up and down the earth to review all
in it^) yet in that distance is proportioned unto them: they understand not
only by innate inbred species, but some things per species acceptas a rebus.
They learn daily. This by the Church the good Angels are said to learn what
they never knew before of the mysteries of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 10. and though
these species in them, and their manner of knowing corporeal things differs
from ours, yet they are analogicall with ours, and we no more know the manner
how they should receive, species a rebus corporeis, the images of all things
done by bodily substances, then a blind man can imagine, how men that see
should receive in colors: yet this we may be sure of, that all that the
senses or mind of man can know, that they can also: for natural things are
all Debita objecta, due objects made for them: for they were therefore made to
be discerned by intelligent creatures; and if by any, then by the most supreme
and intellectual natures.

2. They make it their business to study men, 2. Which knowledge he improves
by study
it is their trade to go up and down and consider men, Have thou not
considered (says God to satan) my servant Job? Satan uses to consider and
study men, and as the Apostle exhorts to consider (...) another to provoke to
love, so satan considers men to provoke to sin, and to tempt for sin unto
despair.

3. He may be privy to our vocal confessions of sins to God, 3. He may be
privy to our vocal confession unto God.
or men; unto our laying open our own hearts to God in private prayers, or to
others in trouble of conscience: therefore so much of the heart as is this way
discovered, he can and does know. And why may not God permit him, and give him
the liberty and advantage to accuse us, even of that which he comes to know by
this means? it being for the trial of his servants: especially in case they
have returned again to those sins which they confessed, and yet have not
forsaken: it is just, that then, as the guilt of former sins return upon us
in such a case, so that satan should be permitted afresh to charge us with
them. And that in this case a man should lose the privilege of sigillum
confessionis, of the secrecy and seal of confession (as I may so speak.) And
if God may permit a man to whom we have confessed, according to Gods own
ordinance, yet to tell things confessed, and to cast them in our teeth, as
sometimes it has fallen out, why may not satan the accuser of the brethren
sometimes be permitted to lay that to our charge, which he only knew this
way?

4. He is and can be present at all our more retired actions, 4 He is and can
be present at al times and places: and so can accuse us,
and is privy to them, being with us at bed, board, in all companies. By means
of this he can accuse us: First,

1. Of all gross actions done, 1. Of all gross sins outwardly committed.
that are obvious to sense: which indeed are usually the greatest matter of
accusation, and do lie upon us most heavily in such temptations, as David's
murder and adultery did on him: My sin, says he, is ever before me. And
these having pulled a man down, and put him into prison, and clapped him up, our
own consciences then may come in, with all our more privy corruptions, as
lesser creditors use to do: and when once the soul has by means of the
accusing of one foul act, given way to doubting, then all other privy
corruptions join and offer themselves to accuse us also: For they lie at the
door (as God told Cain) ready for such an occasion.

2. Also he may by this be able to accuse us of all deadness, 2. Of deadness
and drowsiness of spirit, and neglect in duties.
and drowsinesse, and neglect in the performance of holy duties, as want of
attention, and quicknes in them (for these are easily discerned by any one that
is observant) and of the want of stirring affections, and also of neglect of
holy conference in all companies, and the like. If a godly man were to follow a
man up and down in all companies, how much might he know of a man, and be able
to accuse him of?

3. By such observations he may know a man's bosom sins. And 3. a man's bosom
sin.
So he knew and observed Judas bosom sin, to be covetousness, and accordingly
sorted his temptation to it.

5. By what he sees outwardly of our actions, 5. From what he sees outwardly,
he may guess at inward corruptions.
he can many ways guess at inward corruption, which are the principles of
them. He has all the ways which a wise discerning man has, (who should
always watch a man, and set himself to study a man, and that has opportunity
to suggest when he pleases, on purpose for trial and discovery) all the ways
such a man has to know the heart, satan has. And that which Solomon says of
a wise man, that though the heart of man be deep, Prove. 20. 5.
yet a man of understanding will fetch it out, 3. Ways.
holds true of satan much more. As 1. by comparing one action with another,
Ioab discerned David's pride in his command for numbering the people, so as it
was loathsome in his eyes. And if Ioab discerned this by the outward carriage
of the matter, how much more might satan that put in the motives to persuade
him to it? The Jesuits bid those of their followers who are to deal with men,
when they talk with any, whose minds they would discern, still to observe
their eye, to see what alterations are in their countenances, as through which
the mind is transparent; now satan, he is a good Phisiognomist, and he eyes a
man. 3. Further that way, and fetched him off. The Jews might see what moved
Pilate to crucify Christ, because at that saying, as the Text notes, that else
he was an enemy to Caesar, he gave sentence: so satan, when he stirred up
David by proud arguments to number the people, he must needs know what pride
was in his heart.

Now 6. besides all this, 6. That he may further view the images in the fancy,
and also the passions in the body.
how far he may have an insight into the Fancy, and the images therein,
which follow and imitate the inward thoughts of the mind, as the shadow does
the body: and also into the passions, which are but the flowing, and reflowing
of corporeal spirits, and in which the affections of the will discover
themselves, this I leave to others to determine. For the present, this is
certain, that although all the powers of the reasonable soul be fast locked
up from him (as we shall show) and the immediate acts which are imminent in the
soul it self, utterly hidden from him, and that, take the soul as it is the
immediate subject, and root of the^, so, intuitive, no devil can discern
them, no more then one Angel can discern the thoughts of another; yet
arguitive, and as they do transire and appear, and are put forth in the body
and corporeal organs outwardly in actions, or inwardly in passions, and so
quasi in alio, and mediately they may be very far discerned, and looked into by
Angels. Which yet will nothing at all pre-judge that prerogative which is given
to God, when he is said alone to know and search the heart, but give its full
allowance; nor that privilege which is given to the soul it self to enjoy,
namely, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
that none should know the things of a man, but the spirit that is in man: as
we shall have occasion to show in the Appendix to this discourse.

Besides, therefore, these advantages and ways of knowledge, somewhat common
to us men, each of other, they have a further, and and more near way of
knowing the acts of the reasonable powers, the understanding, and will, then we
men can have, even as they have also a way of communicating their thoughts to
us in a more intimate, close, secret manner: yet still such, as falls short of
an intuitive knowledge of them: they can go into a room further then we: and
into a room which is next the privy chamber, which yet remains fast locked up
unto them. As their power in all other things reaches a degree higher then
ours, so in this also. To open this a little.

Those reasonable powers and faculties in us, the understanding, and the will,
the immediate immanent acts of which are thus in themselves fast locked up,
being yet in this life drencht in the body, and bodily organs, upon which their
working does depend: As 1. The understanding is joined to the fancy, which
makes parelii, and resemblances and shadows of those thoughts the mind
secretly conceives and forms; so as scarce any thoughts do stir, but the
fancy imitates them, and acts them as far as it is able. And 2. The will also
is conjoined with the affections which are drencht, and show themselves in
bodily organs and spirits, so as not any motion of the will puts it self forth,
but more or less some affections of the body do stir with it; and
therefore affections are as well defined by their motion in the body, as by
their seat in the will it self. As when anger is defined, ira est ebullitio
sanguinis circa cor, a boiling of blood about the heart; and affections are but
the flowings and reflowings of spirits to and from the heart.

Now both these, both phantasmes and passions, all divines do grant that the
devils may know; and that to know them they have a nearer access to us, then
men can have each to other: yea, and that they may discern them, intuirive, as
we do things which are present before us, how else should they work upon
fancy? and otherwise, there were no diabolical dreams, nor angelical
neither, caused by good angels. But we find that a good angel dictated to
Joseph a great article of faith, [Christs divinity, and nativity] it was done
in a dream; and therefore to his fancy. So they inspired the Sibylls, and
dictated prophecies as was said. And so the evil angels prompted Saul's fancy.
And this they do, not by creating new species and images, but evocando,
calling forth the images there already. For the images of things in the fancy
being corporeal species, they can no more beget a new corporeal image, then
they can make a body anew. And therefore all the power of the angels cannot
cause a blind man to dream of colors. And therefore their way in
communicating their suggestions to us herein, must be by discerning the
species, to wit, of all words heard or read, that lie in the fancy already; and
so by ordering and composing them, even as a Compositor in printing does his
letters that lie confused before him, into words and sentences, to represent to
the readers eye what he would have read by him: So he to the understanding,
which naturally prints off from the fancy what ever is in it, as fast as he
does set them. And by the like reason, that he can call them forth, and so view
the species and images laid up there already, to set them thus as he pleases,
by the same reason it must be supposed that he is as able to discern any of
them in the fancy at any time, then when reason it self calls up any of them,
and makes use of them, as it does when ever it sets it self to think or
muse; and these and all operations of the sensitive powers they may view and
see as truly (for ought I know) and as intuitively, even as we see colors and
species of things in the eye of a man. So as these evil angels, may when God
permits, get into the head, and see all the images and species in the fancy,
and those that are in direct conjunction with the understanding, which it is
then thinking and musing of: even as a man does what images are in the apple of
the eye of another man: and so by discerning those phantasmes, which the
understanding actually then vieweth and makes use of, he may then judge what
the mind is musing of.

And again, as we discern men's passions when they dye and affect the outward
parts, as if shame dies the face red, and fear paints it white; so may the
angels more secretly discern the motion of them within, which is the cause of
this alteration without; they can go further, and see the inward commotion of
the spirits in our inward parts, even in their channels and springs, in that
bodily heart we carry within us, and in the veins and arteries, and so know
what affections are stirring. And this is evident by this, in that they are
also able to work upon these passions. Now their power of working on the
affections, arises from their knowing them, and skill to move and stir those
spirits and humors electively, wherein these passions are seated. And herein
their power of discerning us, exceeds that in us men, in discerning other men;
as that of communicating their minds to us also does. For as they can
communicate secretly by fancy it self; we but by outward words, and signs to
the outward senses of others; so they can discern more secretly what is in the
fancy, and not only what appears in the outward parts; which is yet but a
room further, that they get into, which we men cannot come to; so as they can
discern the least rising of the tide, the least turn of the stream of
affections in our veins, and in the corporeal heart, Satan can discern those
lesser aguish fits of passion that accompanies any act of the will, which men
discern not. But of this great and necessary quaere; as also how by means of
this he communicates all his temptations to us, more largely, in an Appendix to
be annexed to this Treatise.

CHAP. IX.
How able Satan is to work upon that third principle; The passions, and
corrupt affections: and bring home his false conclusions with terrors.

THus we have seen how able Satan is to work upon those two forementioned
principles of carnal reason, and abuse it with false Majors; and also upon
conscience, in laying our sins to our charge, with mis-representations of our
estates. It remains now only, that we show, how he can stir, and work
upon the passions, and corrupt affections in us, and make use of them: and so
set on all those false conclusions [That we are hypocrites] thence deduced,
with hideous, and horrid fears, and terrors.

And hence, 1.
as he is called a Serpent, as was said, That Satan can raise up terrors.
for slights, and cunning reasonings, and wiles: So likewise a Lion, of all
beasts the strongest. Esaias 38. 13. A roaring Lion, of all the terriblest, and
most terrible in his roaring: whose roaring is therefore often in Scripture put
to express dreadfulnesse, and horror; The Lion roares, who will not tremble.
Amos 3. 8. And (as some have observed, and the Psalmist intimates it) by his
roaring, he strikes such horror and amazement into all other beasts, as they
stand still as exanimated, and so he seizes and preyes upon them as he
pleases; and in this respect those darts aforeme^tioned, are principally
called fiery; namely, for that dolor, and anguish, and inflammation, and
combustion they cause through distempering the affections. Those fears which
our own hearts engendered within us, were but as smoke; these darts of his put
a fire into the^, and do cause them to flame and blaze. The allusion is to the
poisoned darts, which the Scythians of old, and other nations now use in war,
dipped in the blood and gall of Asps, and Vipers; the venomous heat of which,
like a fire in their flesh, killed the wounded by them, with torments the
likest hell of any other. Which Job also alludes to, Job 6. 4. The arrows of
the Almighty are within me. The poison, or (as others read it) the heat and
fervor (we may use both and read) The hot poison thereof drinks up my spirit,
even as fire preying upon moisture. And what were those arrows, but terrors?
So it follows, the terrors of God, etc. Thus that Corinthian was in danger to
have been drunk up (as the word signifies) with overmuch sorrow, (...).
when Satan had to do with him. 2 Cor. 2. 7. and the same word is again used of
the devil, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Seeking whom to drink up. So that as Satan inflames
other members, and the inordinate lusts in them, with a superadded natural
vehemence and violence; as the tongue which (though of it self full of poison)
is said to be set on fire from hell: James 3. 16.
that is, from Satan (who is called hell, as in that speech; the gates of
hell,) even as the Angels the noblest creatures, are called heavens: Heb. 7.
26.) who inflames men's tongues with an overplus of venom and malice, to wound
men's names with; even as on the contrary, the Holy Ghost did set on fire the
Apostles tongues with zeal. In like manner he can, and does put fire into those
darts he wounds the conscience with, and thereby augments our fears and
griefs, and so causes such disquietments and pangs, as that hell fire as it
were begins to flame in a man's conscience. As Christ is that Brazen Serpent, so
Satan is that fiery Serpent, that can sting us by the guilt of sin.

And here I must bring in the like caution as I used in the former Chapter; A
Caution.
namely, that he works not these terrors by immediate impressions upon the
conscience, which in that respect is subject to Gods stroke alone, as to his
knowledge alone. Which as I intimated, I take to be that other principal part
of the drift of those words; Heb. 4. 11, 12. The word of God is quick and
powerful, etc. For there he sets forth Christ to us (as was showed) as a judge
completely enabled for vengeance against us, not only in respect of an
omnisciency to find us out in all our shiftings, but also (because a judge
would not be much feared, if he had only skill and knowledge though never so
much, to search, and find out the guile and guilt of malefactors, if he were
not armed with power to avenge, and torture them) therefore withal, the
Apostles scope is to strike terror into their hearts, in respect of that
vengeance he can execute, and therefore his aim is to exhort them, not to
dally with God, or with his word, in which he had (...) of those that believed
not, they should not enter into his rest, in the former verses. So as the
purport of the words must necessarily also be supposed to be, to show the
dreadful power of God, and of his word, in avenging it self upon the
contemners of him and it, and not merely to describe his omniscience, and
knowing of the heart, but as joined also with power to pierce as deep in
wounding of the soul, as in knowing of it. Yea, and that so large an
illustration of his knowledge is brought in but as a clearer demonstration of
His power to punish, Who can diverso deep into our hearts. As, from whence we
might argue, and fear the stroke of that (...) in this hand, whose eyes are so
piercing. And accordingly to set forth the dreadfulnesse of this his power, all
those his expressions do as fully tend, as to express the other; and he uses
such a comparison, as both in the nature of the things, and according, to the
more usual phrase of Scripture, does more properly and abundanily intimate
this slaying and wounding of men's souls that should be disobedient, by (...),
then that other of searching the soul and spirit. This word, says he, is
quick and lively, not in respect, of duration only, as abiding ever; but in
respect to working and e^^cution* Things that are exceeding operative, though
inanimate, we call quick: So quicksilver, which runs through a man's bowels
like hail shot; and so oppositely, drugs and drinks that have lost their
virtue, and are ineffectuall, we call dead; and in respect to this energy, and
power to work upon men's hearts, is that in John 6. 63. The words I speak
(says Christ) are spirit and life: that is, are full of an operative
principle; for an active working principle, we use to call Spirit, as the
spirit of wine, etc. So as in that he says the word is quick, he nores out
that that word is inspired with a principle, most quick, spiritfull, and
active, and fit to work as occasion is, the holy Spirit, as the internal form
of it: and therefore 2. having thus intimated this internal form of working;
he adds by way of explication, (...) powerful and mighty in operation, as
noting out that power which flows from thence; that ability to produce strange
effects upon the soul; (these expressions carry report of more then of a skill,
and dexterity to search and know the heart only.) And then 3. he further
instanceth in such operations of it, as the effects of that power, which are
most dreadful, as the comparisons he uses do import. More piercing then any
two edged sword. Now as elsewhere the word is compared to an armory of all
sorts of weapons, and engines for war and vengeance; The weapons of our warfare
are mighty, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 4. and this, as, To the pulling down of strong
holds, and subduing unto Christ, those that turn effectually unto him; So also,
that they have in a readiness to avenge all disobedience. v. 6. in the^ that
submit not to him: In like manner here, he resembles it to a sword, the most
usual, and most terrible of all the instruments of death, which were then in
use. The brandishing of which, strikes palenesse and horror into a man, ere
the stroke comes at him; which is usually put in Scripture to express
vengeance, and more especially in the prophecy of Ezekiel. So also, Psalm. 7.
13. If he turn not, God has whet his sword, and prepared his instruments of
death, that is, to inflict torments, and eternal torments also, as Deuteronomy. 32.
^2. And indeed, whatsoever does torment, or cause dolor, and anguish, is in
Scripture called a sword; and the piercing with a sword, is used to express
the most exquisite dolours, as Luke 2. 35. Yea, a sword shall pierce through
thy soul also: Speaking to the blessed mother of Christ, and of that her
anguish and grief, wherewith she should be cut even to the heart, when she
should behold her Son upon the Cross. Of whose dolours upon the Cross
likewise, the same expression is used, Psalm. 22. 21. when he prays; Deliver my
soul from the sword. And in this respect the word in Christ's hand, still when
he is spoken of as a Judge, Psalm. 45. 3.
is compared to a sword: and so here. Rev. 19. 16.
Therefore to strike the more terror into their hearts in respect of the
wounds, Isay 49. 2.
and torments it inflicts; he goes further on to exaggerate the dread thereof,
he says not only that it is as sharp, but more sharp, not then a sword of
one edge, but then a two-edged sword, nor then some, but then any two-edged
sword; and further, to show that he speaks it in relation unto wounding, and
anguish, and torment it causes in the soul; he mentions the division of
such parts as are not only most hid, and inward, in relation to discovery (for
such the marrow is being covered with the bones, and the ligaments covered with
flesh) but which are also of most exquisite sense, and the wounding of which
causes the greatest dolor. He says, it pierces even through the bones,
which it must needs be supposed to do, when it is said to reach unto the
marrow. Now the breaking of the bones is still put to express those exquisite
and unsupportable terrors and dolours of conscience, and woundings of the
Spirit which a man cannot bear, or sustain. For when the bones are broken, a
man cannot stand nor support himself. And the like is also the cutting of the
ligaments, the nerves, sinews, and arteries, those (...) that knit the joints,
which are the organs of sense and motion. Again he says, it divides not
only the Soul, that is, the sensual part, the passions of the mind, as
wounding them; which creatures, as men and angels, can torment, and excruciate,
but (...), that is, the Spirit also, which is with an emphasis expressed: and
his meaning is not so much that it divides the soul from the spirit, (as some
have understood it) but the soul and spirit also. It is a two-edged sword, and
can at one blow strike through both, this axe strikes at the root; at the
spirit, which, when wounded, it (...) can bear? says Solomon. And so he
concludes ver. 13. That as before him all things are (...) so that if he but
strike them with his word, they lie (...), even with their throats cut, dead
and speechless at his feet, as Theoderet expounds that word. Now thus far,
that is, to this spirit in man, no created sword can reach; they turn edge at
it: but even this, the word reaches, and that alone. So as the summary drift
of all herein, is the same which Christ expressed elsewhere in other words, to
exhort them to fear that God, whose sword, and powerful word is able thus to
wound, and who is alone able thus to do; and not to fear those who can only
wound and kill the body, and but reach to the sensual soul that is drencht in
it, but cannot wound or kill the Spirit. Which God alone can do, and no mere
creature whatsoever. And therefore in all our thoughts and fears of Satan's
power of knowing our sins, or troubling, or disquieting our spirits (as also
through this discourse) we are to set such bounds, as that this incommunicable
royalty of God, and of his word, may be reserved unentrencht upon; namely, that
he alone knows, and can immediately wound the spirit and conscience, 2.
both which, at once this place held out unto us, Though he cannot immediately
wound the conscience; yet,
which made me the largelier to insist upon the opening of it.

But yet although Satan cannot immediately wound the conscience, and make
impression; of Gods wrath upon it: (for as no creature can shed abroad Gods
love, and cause the creature to taste the sweetness of it, so nor the
bitterness of his wrath, but God is his own reporter of both.)

Yet, 1. 1. When the Spirit has wounded it, he can rake in those soars.
When the holy Ghost has lasht and whipped the conscience, and made it tender
once, and fetched off the skin; Satan then, may fret it more, and more, and be
still rubbing upon the soar, by horrid suggestions.

And 2. From the experience of former terrors, he can amaze the soul afresh.
He can by renewing the experimental remembrance of those lashes, which the
soul has had, amaze the soul with fears of an infinitely soarer vengeance
yet to come, and so paint out, and flash representations of hell fire in their
consciences, from those real glimpses they have already had, as to wilder the
soul into vast and unthought of horrors.

And then 3. 3. He can bring home all the threatenings.
He can bring home all the threatenings that are thundered forth in the word
against hypocrites, and men unregenerate, and discharge them all with much
violence, and noise upon a poor doubting soul; he can and does present, and
show his prisoners those terrible threatenings, chains, and racks, and other
instruments of death, Psalm. 7. 13.
as the Psalmist calls them, which God has prepared against sinners, and has
stored up in that great armory of his word; Which has in a readiness to
revenge all disobedience. 2 Cor. 10. 6. With the rattling of which chains,
Satan can make a noise in the conscience of a poor sinner, to affright him.
Which he is the more enabled to do, out of experience of such terrors in
himself: Being bound up in chains everlasting, under darkness, to the judgment
of the great day. Jude 6. And as a son of consolation, and child of light is
enabled to comfort others the more, by the comfort wherewith he has been
comforted of God. So this Prince of darkness is the more powerful to terrify
weak consciences that are ensnared with the cords of their own sins, by
reason of the terrors which he has received from the Lord. And therefore in
Scripture, as a power in sin is attributed to him, so the power of death. Heb.
2. 14. Where, by death is meant not so much that bodily, as that eternal
death, to which, as the proper punishment of sin, the guilt of it does bind us
over. Which power of his is not that of the Judge in sentencing to death, or
casting men to hell, which is a special flower of Christ's Crown; who Rev. 1.
18. has the keys of hell and death at his girdle; and of Gods, who is
therefore only to be feared, because, he only can cast body and soul into
hell. Nor is it as if he were the main tormenter, and executioner of men's
souls, after that great day, seeing that they are to be tormented by that fire
which in common, was prepared for the devils themselves. And who is it that
does torment them? but it is therefore principally meant 1. of that power and
advantage he obtained over sinners, when he had seduced them; so, as to come
boldly as a pleader against them, enabled with authority to urge Gods righteous
law and word, and to call upon, and to provoke his justice to condemn poor
sinners: till Christ that righteous advocate dispoyled him of his pleas and
power, by that satisfaction of his; which before, the law had put into his
hands; and so He destroyed him that had the power of death; and enervated all
his pleas and terrors. And 2. the meaning is, that as he has this power in
Gods court, so also in our consciences, to urge the law upon us, and to plead
all that the Law says to the^ under the Law; and to increase in us the fears
of that death, by presenting to us the terrors of the Law, to which in respect
of natural conscience, men of themselves are subject all their life long. And
unto this later power, has that power of death there, especial reference, for
those words follow there, v. 15. And because the children of God, whilst in
this life, as they know but in part, so they love but in part; and so far as
love remains imperfect, so far fear which has torment, keeps possession.
1 John 4. 18. For it is perfect love (only) that casts out (all) fear. And
hence, so far as slavish fear remains, so far they may be subject to be
terrified by him that has power of death; over those that are in any degree
subject to the fear of it.

And 4. 4. He can excite the passions of fear, and trembling of spirit.
He can immediately, by his own power, stir the passions of fear and
grief, etc. Excite them beyond nature, as the winds can raise the billows in
the sea, and make the floods to make a noise; so can he a tumult in the
affections, and put all the soul into an hurry and violent perturbation. He is
the Prince of the aerie part of the little world in man, as well as of that
elementary region in the great world; and so can raise unnatural storms, and
vapors that shall darken reason; and cause such thunders and lightnings, as
shall hurl all into a black confusion; such, as if hell and the soul would
presently come together. And though it is true, that he cannot turn the
stream and current of our affections back (God only can turn this Jordan
back) yet he can drive them faster, and cause them to swell above their
natural channels; that as a man possessed has the strength of ten men in him;
as that man, Luke 8. 19. So shall the affections have, that are blown up by
him. As we may see in David, what a strong mind do we find in him, so
needlessly to number the people. 2 Samuel 24? against all reason, as well as
religion, and the persuasion, yea opposition, not of Ioab only, but others
also of his Counselors, the Captains of the host; a man would wonder, that a
man so holy and wise should be so transported to do an act so foolish, (as
himself saw afterward, I have done very foolishly, says he, ver. 10.) yea,
and so grossly sinful, as that it was abominable in the eyes of Ioab, 1 Chronicles. 21. 6. (one that seems by his other cariages to have had but nature in
him.) But the devil was in it. So verse the 1. Satan provoked David to number
the people, by raising up such an affection and inclination in him. The like
appears in the affection of love, which how strongly has Satan drawn forth
in some, even to madness, toward such, as before, and also after his
fascination was overpast, they have loathed and hated above all others, is
evident in stories by many instances. And as he can raise up other passions in
us, so also fears and terrors, jealousies, and distrusts. To fear where no
fear is. And thus he handled Saul (when God left him to him) An evil spirit
from the Lord troubled him; or (as most read it, and our margent varies it)
terrified him. 1 Samuel 16. 15. And in the raising up of these affections of
fear, and the like; he works more then simply morally, that is, then by bare
propounding such objects as shall move them; (which men only can do) but
further also, Physically, by stirring such humors in the body, which such
passions do act and stir in. And so those humors in the body, which shall put
a man into a timorous, and trembling disposition, he can electively work upon,
as he pleases. And then also he can disturb the phantasmes in the head, the
organs of the understanding; as in him, Luke 8. 35. Who through Satan's working
is intimated, not to have been in his right mind. And when he has thus
distempered, and disordered all in a man, and put a man into such dispositions
to fears, etc. then he comes with his suggestions, and speaks nothing but of
wrath, and terrors, and of the threatenings, and of the heinousness of a man's
sins, the fearfulness of Gods wrath, etc. to the conscience that is
troubled; and then (look as when a man's choler is up, every small thing
provokes him; so now when fear and melancholy are encited, every suggestion,
every surmise does strikes: soul through and through, with horrid fears and
jealousies. And thus, though not immediately, yet through the means of these
mists and vapors, and fogges raised, which environ and darken this sun, he
works upon the conscience; and therefore we see by experience, that he
prevails most in this sort of temptations, with melancholy te^pers; who
dwelling in dark shops, he much deceives with false colors and glosses. And
when affections are up, and do cloud the mind, then multitudes of troublesome
thoughts arise, and every suggestion suitable to that passion takes, and
prevails with a man's spirit; as appears by that speech of Christ Luke 24. 38.
Why are you troubled (or afraid) and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
Passions like to heavy weights hung upon a clock, do not only make the
wheels, the thoughts move faster; but also perverts them, and wrests them the
wrong way; so as to a heart thus distempered, all things come to be presented
amiss; even as to a bloodshot eye all things seem red. In a word, as he
deludes his Enthusiasts by setting on, and backing their false opinions, and
illusions, with joys and ravishments of spirit (which differ as much from the
joys of the holy Ghost which are unspeakable and glorious, as heaven from
earth.) So he can, and does back his false reasonings, and accusations to holy
men about their estates, with abundance of terror and disturbance; which also
differs as much from the impressions of Gods wrath made immediately by the
spirit upon the conscience, as those joys are found to do.

CHAP. X.
The conclusion: 7. Advantages in common Satan has over us, in all those
forementioned dealings.

ANd for a general conclusion to this, and all the rest of this discourse
about Satan's working on us, I will but only mention some of those great and
many advantages he has in all these his false reasonings, and accusations
over us, to set them on, to fasten his slanders and false conclusions thence
deduced, and to persuade the mind of them. Which I therefore bring in here, as
being common to all those particulars which have been related.

First, 1.
it is no small advantage, that he can familiarly, 1. Advantage, that he can
and does suggest frequently and familiarly.
and frequently suggest them again and again unto us. The frequency of any
thought that comes in again and again, that lies by us, and haunts us, has
secretly the force of an argument to persuade us to think it is so. We use to
say [I have thought so again and againe] A cunning flatterer, that is
continually suggesting, and taking all hints and occasions so to do, may at
last put hard to work out a near and a dear friend, and to make one jealous
of him. As the Judge yielded to her importunity, Luke 18. 5. So is the mind
apt to yield a suggestion that haunts it, and importunately presents it self,
yea though it be to pass a false sentence against a man's self.

And 2. he can also (and does) represent a multitude of reasonings, 2.
and considerations together at once, 2. That he presents a multitude of false
reasonings, etc. At once.
all tending to confirm the same persuasion. He will sometimes bring in a
cloud of witnesses, and instances to prove us hypocrites; and environ the mind
round about with them, that look which way it will, it sees nothing else. As
he represented to Christ, (...) glory of the world in the twinkling of an eye*
So he can do a man's sins, etc. That a man shall have a general prospect of
them, and see nothing else, look which way he will. And what force this must
needs have to prevail with the mind and judgment to assent, experience
shows. As when a man doubting of a truth in a thing controverted, reads an
opposite party, presenting all that can be said for the other side alone, it
often staggers him, and for the present wins and gains his opinion to that
side, till he reads and considers what is said to the contrary: yea, though a
man is confirme^, and settled in the truth, yet sometimes a man shall have an
army of arguments on the other side, come in upon him, so ranked and ordered,
as for the present shall shake and stagger him: and so it must needs be in the
agitation of this great controversy about a man's estate, when Satan shall
muster and marshall up an army of objections once together, and not
scatteredly; as he is able to do.

And 3.. 3.
He is able to hold the intention of the mind so unto them, 3. That he can
hold the mind and the intention of it to them alone.
as to keep off all that which should any way comfort; he can turn down that
column in the leaves of our hearts, wherein grace, or any thing that may
comfort is written, and turn over only, and hold our eyes fixed to read
nothing but that wherein our Errataes and sins are written; so as to cause a
man's soul to forget all good, as Lament. 3. 17. the Church in desertion is
said to do; and to forget his own mercies, as Jonah speaks, he can multiply
suggestions so fast; and come in with such a tempest, that as Job complains.
Job 9. 17. he will not suffer them to take breath: and therefore the Apostle
calls them the buffetings of Satan. 2 Cor. 12. because like unto buffetings,
they come in, thick and threefold, upon a man's spirit; so as a man's spirit
cannot take breath; he raines down temptations sometimes, not by drops (as in
ordinary raines) but by spouts (as mariners calls them, when a cloud melts)
(as in hot countries) suddenly, and falls by whole sale, and often sinkes a
ship) He breaks me with a tempest says Job, in the place forementioned,
Chap. 9. 17.. 4.
He speaks it of God, but such like tempests Satan also raises.

4. He adds weight to his lying accusations, 4. That he backs all with an
imperious affirmation.
and false reasonings by an imperious and obstreperous affirmation [that so it
is,] he suggests not reasons only, that should persuade, but sets them on
with words of affirmation, and persuasion therewithal suggested: and so, like
as in reasoning, often a weak spirit is borne down by a stronger, not by
force of argument so much, as by strength and violence of spirit; for many when
the iron is blunt, and their arguments want edge, put to the more strength, as
Solomon speaks. Eccles. 10. 10. and so prevail: and so does Satan; being a
spirit of greater strength then ours by creation; and guilt also, further
weakening us in arguing with him. Cunning pleaders may so argue the case, with
such violence and confidence, that as Socrates said when his accusers had done,
that if he had not been very innocent, he should have suspected himself
guilty: how much more, when this shall fall upon persons that are so guilty, as
we all are; and the thing also impleaded be that which we are already
suspicious of? What a man fears already, he easily believes, as what a man
hopes, quod metuunt facile credunt. There falls out often in opinions a
preconceit which also exceedingly swayes the mind, a giving of mind that such
a thing is so or so; and in such a case Satan can strike in exceedingly to
strengthen such a conceit: this I take to be employed in that phrase. 2. These.
2. 1. I Where the Apostle gives warning they should not be troubled neither [by
spirit] nor by word, to think the day of Judgment was at hand: By spirit he
means a pretense of a revelation, joined with a man's own private conceit and
imagination; thus 1 John 4. 1. Spirit is also taken. And oftentimes when Satan
perceives the mind inclined to think or conceit thus or thus, he adds weight
unto the balance, and so a man is given up to the efficacy of delusion: as we
see in false Prophets which the Apostle there speaks of, when he says,
Believe not every spirit, because many false Prophets are gone out into the
world. Thus those false Prophets became confident in their prophecies: they
walk in the spirit says the Prophet, Micah 2. 11. But do lie. They took up
such conceits, and the devil he joined with them, and confirmed them in them.
And as Satan by such false revelations confirms Enthusiasts in their opinions
and conceits: so he joins with the jealousies of believers, and puts weight
into the balance, strongly swaying them to judge amiss of their estates.

And 5. in that he,. 5.
as was said, backeth his false conclusions thence deduced, 5. That his
reasonings are backed with sense of terrors.
with terrors, etc. this becomes an argument to sense; and such do
exceedingly carry on the judgment in our opinion of things. A conceit that
comes in with joy, we are apt to conclude is true; and so in like manner what
comes in with terror: such impressions are as it were a seal to what is
suggested, to confirm it. And as the holy Ghost seals his instructions, Job
33. 16. with impressio^s of joy, etc. so does Satan his temptations with
impressions of fear and disquietment. If a man has a dream with any strong
impression, a man is apt to give heed to it, to think there is something in
it: that which made Nebuchadnezzar think there must needs be something in
his, Daniel Chap. 2. and Chap. 4. When yet he had forgot what it was, was,
that it made him afraid, and his thoughts troubled him. ver. 5.

A 6.. 6.
Advantage is, that he suggests and works all these impressions undiscerned
at all to be from him, 6. That he suggests all undiscerned by us.
so as we know not but they are our own thoughts, yea sometimes think that
they be from the holy Ghost, working as the Spirit of bondage in us. This is
also an exceeding great advantage, as it would be to an enemy to have gotten
the opposites own watchword, their own colors: this causes us readily to
yield and open the gates to him: and though when the temptation is over we
perceive his delusion in it, yet still because we cannot discern his
suggestions from our own thoughts when upon us, when we are in the mist and
eclipse, therefore he can come again and again with the same temptation, to
day, and to morrow, and the next day, and we perceive it not; which if we did,
we should not listen to it, no more then we would to one who had formerly
deceived us. Thus Ahabs Prophets knew not that Satan was a lying spirit in
them, for says one of them unto Micaiah, When went the Spirit of God from me
to you? Those strong delusions, 2. These. 2. 10. could not have prevailed upon
their minds to have believed a lie, had it been discerned by them that Satan
had suggested them. Peter knew no that Satan did by him tempt his master to
spare himself; which yet Christ perceived, and therefore called him Satan.

Last of all,. 7.
a man can no way avoid his suggestions, 7. That his suggestions cannot be
avoided.
nor subduce himself from them; neither can any take Satan off from a man but
God; he must rebuke him, none else can. A poor soul fights with Satan in this
darkness, like unto a man that is assaulted by one that carries a dark
lantern, who can see the assaulted, and how to buffet him, and follows him
where ever he goes, whereas the poor man cannot fee him, nor who it is that
strikes him, nor be aware how to award the blow. Therefore the Apostle when
buffeted by Satan, 2 Cor. 12.
knew not what to do, but only to have recourse to God by prayer: for he
could no more avoid or run away from those suggestions, then from himself.
Nor could all the Saints on earth any other way have freed him; none, till God
should cause him to depart.

CHAP. XI.
The second general head: The cases wherein God leaves his unto this
darkness. First, three cases extraordinary.

HAving dispatched the efficient causes of this darkness; The causes Physical.
I now proceed to the cases wherein, and ends for which God leaves his children
to such a condition; The causes Moral. The cases of two sorts. 1.
Extraordinary.
The cases, they were the second general head I propounded to be handled and
they are either Extraordinary, or ordinary.

First, Extraordinary; as,

First, out of his prerogative.

Secondly, in case he means to make a man eminently wise, and able to comfort
others.

Thirdly, in case of extraordinary comforts; and revelations.

First,. 1.
What if God will use his absoluteness, and prerogative, 1. Out of Gods sole
prerogative.
in this his dealing with his child? and proceed therein according to no
ruled case or president? This he may do, and (as it is thought) in Jobs case
he did; who is thought by some, to be set up as a type among the Gentiles, of
Christ at his crucifying, who was to be left by his Apostles, and all, forsaken
of God, etc. and though Jobs desertion began but with his estate, children, and
body, yet it pierced further in the end, and seized upon his spirit, (though
not so far as to question Gods love to him, this we read no where of him,
yet was) seen in Gods withdrawing himself in the comfort of his presence, and
Satan's making him a Butt to spend his arrows upon. And yet though the Lord had
cause enough against him, yet no cause (as I remember) is pleaded, but it is
resolved into an extraordinary dealing; wherein God took a liberty to glorify
himself, by singling out one of his stoutest, valiantest champions; and
setting him hand to hand to wrestle with the powers of darkness; and because
Satan was (as it were) not hard enough for him, he turned enemy himself, Job
13. 24. None more just then he before: The Lord you know glories in him: None
ever led a stricter life, read the 31. Chapter; no man kept more in awe, and
that by fearing such a desertion aforehand; which was the only way to prevent
it; for what a man fears, he prays much against: which he expresses, when
complaining, he says, Chap. 4. 25. That though he feared it, yet it came:
Impliing that it was not ordinary, nor indeed is it so: and though Job
justifies himself too far, yet this was it which made him so stoutly to
plead his own cause, that he could find no president, no ruled case of the
like proceeding. And therefore Elihu, who took both Gods part and Jobs, and
stepped up as a moderator, and as one in Gods stead to decide the matter,
resolves it most of all into Gods prerogative, though not without Jobs desert;
(yet not such as according to which God ordinarily proceeds, not so severly
with others;) as appears by the 34. Chapter: and to that end he set forth Gods
greatness, in the 36. and 37. Chap. And thus God himself when he came to
plead with Job about it, and to show him a reason of it, he only tells him how
great a God he was, and therefore might do as he pleased; and uses no other
arguments in the 38, 39, 40, 41. Chap. God indeed never wants a cause, nor does
deal thus where sin is not; yet as it is said of the young man, that he was
blind, not for his sin, nor his parents (yet not without it) but for the
glory of God; it was an act of Gods prerogative: so here. God had higher ends
of glorifying himself in the patience, and conquest of such a champion as Job
was, and of confuting the devil, who accused him of serving God for naught;
the falsenesse of which to demonstrate, God tryes conclusions with him; as also
to confute the opinions which in those days were generally received, (as may
seem by his friends arguings, and also the 37. Psalm. That godly men did
prosper, and flourish outwardly, according to their godliness: for these and
the like reasons God did it. However, (...) gives Job this good and seasonable
counsel, to make this use of it, to search into his sins, Chap. 34. ver. 31.
32. And God might well take liberty to deal thus with Job, because he could
make him amends, as afterward he did, in restoring double to him; and indeed
it was but the concealing awhile of his love, as many parents love to do by
their children, and yet to show it the more in real effects, as God even then
did, in making him more then a conqueror.

A second case extraordinary is, when he intends When God intends to make a
man wise, and able to comfort others
able, skillful, and a strong Christian; Wise, namely in this, which is the
greatest learning, and wisdom in the world, experimentally to comfort others.

This may seem to be the reason of this his dealing with Heman; Heman was
brought up in this school of temptation, and kept in this form of desertion,
from a youth, Psalm. 88. 15. He was put soon to it, and so deep lessons had he
set him, as he had like to have lost his wits as he says there; yet in the
end, when God raised him up again, this Heman (who lived about David and
Solomon's time) is reckoned among the wisest of his time, and one of the four
that were next to Solomon: 1 Kings 4. 31. So that great Apostle was a man
exposed to the same combats that others were; he was buffeted by Satan, 2 Cor.
12. filled with inward terrors, as well as those without: what was this for?
Not so much for any personal cause of his own, as to make him able to comfort
others: 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. For that comfort which answers a temptation in one man's
heart, will answer the same in another: the same key will unlock twenty locks
that have the same wards. So when temptations have the same wards, that key
which unlockt one man's bolts, will serve and answer to another. It is not
every word that will comfort a weary soul, but only a word in season, ver. 4.
of this 50. of Esaias; that is, which is fitted to the parties case; now, who are
they who have such apt and fit, and seasonable considerations to comfort such,
but those who have had the same temptations, and the like distresses? This art
of speaking peace, and comfort, and words in season is the greatest wisdom in
the world, and not learnt but in Hemans school. Temptation was one of Luthers
masters. And therefore of abilities of the ministry, Christ in this Chapter
instanceth in this ver. 4. and calls the tongue of him that is able to speak
seasonably to weary souls, the tongue of the learned: and therefore Job 33.
23. to raise up one whose soul draw^s nigh to the grave, is said to be the
work of (...) of a thousand; which is easily granted, if you consider the
danger of such a distress: In Scripture it is called the breaking the bones,
Psalm. 51. because the strength of a man's spirit that should uphold it as the
bones the body, sinkes with in him; now to be a bone-fetter, is not every man's
skill; he must have special art and cunning, and a Ladies hand (as we say) that
is, meekness and pity; which also are never kindly, but when we have tasted
the like, or may fear the like. Gal. 6. 1. The Apostle commands them to set
such as one in Joint again, as the word signifies, (...).
Lest, thou also be tempted, and it is the work of one that is spiritual, You
that are spiritual restore such an one. It requires skill to get out every
shiver, to meet with every scruple, and set all straight again. It is also
called the wounding of the spirit; Solomon, A wounded spirit who can bear?
Prove. 18. 14. As the power of sin wounds, so the guilt also; and the one as
incurable as the other; and it being the spirit of a man which is wounded, that
which must heal it, must be something dropped into the heart that may come at the
spirit; and there are to be peculiar elective plasters to heal these wounds,
because these wounds are usual of a differing nature; for some objections
there are, that often the learned men never met with in books, and Satan
has devised methods, Ephesians. 6. of tempting souls deserted, which he uses
again and again: and know those depths, and fathom them a man shall not,
unless he has been in the depths himself, as Heman speaks; and then he
shall see such wonders of God in those depths, which none else ever saw; and
thereby gain such wisdom, as to be able to encourage others by his example,
to trust in God and call upon him, so David, Psalm. 32. ver. 5, 6.

The third case extraordinary. 3. In case of abundance of revelations and
comforts.
God does desert in case a man has had, or is to have from God abundance of
revelations and comforts.

First, in case he has already had abundance of revelations from God. As after
that glorious testimony given to Christ at his baptism, This is my beloved
son, etc. Mat. 3. ult. Then was Jesus led aside to be tempted. Mat. 4. 1. He
points out the time to this very purpose: In like manner does God often deal
with, the members of Christ for the season and time of their (...) and
temptations. This was also that (...) Apostles case, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I
should be exalted above measure, through abundance of venue lations, a
messenger of Satan was sent to buffet (...) That which he calls there the
thorn in the flesh; that pricked him, is meant rather I think of a desertion,
and leaving him to distress of spirit, then of a lust, for his scope is, to
glory in his afflictions. ver. 9. 10. Now if it had been a lust, it had been
a thing not to be gloried in. Again, it was a messenger of Satan, therefore
something external; and it buffeted him; he was as a mere patient in it, as a
man buffered is: in the exercise of lusts, our spirits are active; and besides,
he prayed, it might depart, which phrase would seem to note out something
external. God had took him aside into heaven, and spoke wonderful things to
him, and when he comes down again, Satan must take him to task, and batter
him; the flesh would have grown proud, if it had not been thus beaten black
and blew. He had been in heaven, and heard the language of Angels and Saints,
things not to be uttered; and he must hear by devils the language of hell.
This buffeting I take it, was by Satanicall injections.

strengthen them against the approaching conflict: (thus God to hearten his
Son against that great agony in the garden, and combat on the Cross,
transfigureth him on the Mount first.) So on the contrary, sometimes before
great revelations, and comforts, to make them sweet, and the more welcome, God
uses to withdraw himself then most; thereby preparing the heart for them: as
Physicians do the body for cordials. The greatest springtide of comfort,
comes in upon the lowest ebb of distress. Distress enlarges the heart, and
makes it gasp and thirst after comfort the more, and so is made more capable
of consolation, for that rule is true, 2 Cor. 1. 5. That as sufferings abound,
so comforts shall abound also.

CHAP. XII.
The cases ordinary, wherein God does leave His in darkness.

NOw secondly, we come to the more ordinary cases, wherein God usually
dispenses light and darkness. A general rule premised. That God is various
in these dispensations.
Ere I name particulars, I will premise concerning them this general rule. We
shall find, that God goes not constantly by the same rule in the dispensation
of them: so as no man can say, that in such and such cases, God will and does
certainly desert men, or that he always does so: but is various in his
dealings herein. For some men he leaves for a while in darkness, in, and
upon, and immediately after their conversion; their sun rises in an eclipse,
and continues so till none; yea till their night: on the contrary, toward
others sometimes he never shines in more comforts on them then at their first
conversion: again, some he deserts upon a gross sin committed; to others
he never reveals himself more at any time, then after a gross sin humbled
for, and repented of; thereby to show the freeness of his grace. So likewise,
some that have less grace, and have lived more loosely, he fits their sails
at death, and they have abundant entrance, with full sail into the Kingdom of
Christ; others that have walked more strictly with God, and whose ends you would
expect should be most glorious, he leaves to fears, and doubts; and their
Sun does set in a cloud.

And the reasons why God is thus vaious in these his dealings, is both because
spiritual comforts tend not simply ad esse, but been esse; not to the absolute
being of a Christian, but his comfortable well-being: and also because in
respect of their dispensation, they are to be reckoned in the rank of
temporal rewards; and though light and assurance is not an earthly, but an
heavenly blessing, yet it is but a temporary blessing; and therefore as the
promises of temporal good things are not absolute, no more are the promises to
give assurance to a believer absolute, as to give him heaven and salvation are.
So likewise on the contrary, darkness and distress of conscience, is but a
temporal chastisement, as outward crosses are; differing from them only in
the matter of them; the one being conversant about things of the outward man;
this of the inward, namely, a man's spiritual estate. Hence therefore in the
dispensation of both, though God always goes by some rule, as in all other
dealings of his; yet so as he varies and deals differently with his children
therein: as he does in dispensing outward prosperity and adversity, Setting the
one against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him, as
Solomon says, Eccles. 7. 14. that is, gives such cross and contrary opposite
instances in both kinds, that men might not find him out in these ways, or
trace him as the phrase is, Romans 9. ult. not so, as to say certainly, and
infallibly, what he means to do in such and such cases. Indeed in the world
to come he makes even with all the world, how differing soever his
dispensations of rewards or punishments have been here; and what is behind
hand to any one, he then pays with respect to what they have received. Thus in
matter of spituall joy and assurance God may vouchsafe it to one that has not
feared and obeyed him so much, as one that walks in darkness, but then if any
one has received more earnest pennies aforehand, and has not walked
answerably, God considers it as an aggravation of his sin, as he did in
Solomon, whose sin is aggravated by this, 1 Kings 11. 9, 10. that he sinned
against God, who had appeared to him twice. Otherwise, if these comforts make a
man in any proportion to such cost, more fruitful then others are, I see not
but that God who crowns his own graces will reward them the more; this being
one means sanctified to some, to work more grace, as afflictions are to
others. Thus it is in like manner in desertings, and distress of mind, they
being a temporal punishment, God is as various in them. So as one of more
grace, or whom God entends more grace unto, shall be afflicted and forsaken,
when one of less shall reign as a King, as it is said of the Corinthians, in
case of worldly prosperity. So he shall have peace and liberty of mind,
triumph over Satan and hell, 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10.
and discomfort; when Apostles in comparison, that is, men eminent in grace,
are in respect of spiritual conflicts made spectacles to angels and men.

This rule premised, the ordinary cases follow.

First, 1. Case.
in case of carnal confidence; In case of carnal confidence
thus Psalm. 30. David had been in great distress of mind for a while, as
appears by what is said ver. 3, and 5. that though heaviness be overnight,
yet joy comes in the morning, and in this sunshine David looks about him,
and sees never a cloud appear in view, that might again eclipse his comfort,
then he grew confident upon no other ground but present se^fe, thinking it
would always be so with him; and so trusted in that comfort he had at present,
as if now he could never have been troubled so again (as in such cases good
souls are apt to think) Now I shall never be removed says David; this was
carnal confidence, and God to confound it hides himself again, ver. 7.

Now carnal confidence is either; Carnal confidence in three things.


First, when we trust to false signs shuffled in among true; 1. In trusting to
false signs together with true.
which is incident even to believers that are in the state of grace, and have
good evide^ces to show for it; who yet together with those sound evidences often
rake many other signs that are but probable, yea, and which are deceitful,
and but common to hypocrites; this we are apt to do, to take many things as
infallible signs which are not: As many are said in Daniel, to cleave to the
better side by flattery, so in a man's heart, many false signs will come in,
and give their testimony, and flatter a man, and speak the same thing true
evidences do. Now God to discover which are false, and which are not, leaves a
man: and then he will find all his false signs fail him, and to leave him as
flatterer^ use to do, and to be but as broken teeth among those which are
sound and whole to fail and disquiet him; like reeds that break when any
stresse is put to them, and so run into his hand.

Or, 2. Putting too much confidence on signs.
secondly, when we put too much of our confidence upon signs, though true, and
trust too much to comforts and former revelations, and witnesses of Gods
Spirit, and to our graces which are but creatures, acts of God upon us, and in
us, when therefore we let all the weight of our support to hang on these; God
in this case often leaves us, That no flesh should rejoice in his presence.

Or thirdly, 3. When we neglect going to Christ (...) upholding our graces.
when we think graces and comforts are so rooted in our selves, that we
neglect God and Christ, for the upholding, increase, and exercise of them; then
God with draws the light of these, that we may have recour^^ to the spring,
and wellhead. As too much confidence in the power of inherent grace, caused
Christ to leave Peter to the power of sin, so confidence also in the power of
grace, causes God to leave us to the guilt of, and terrors that come by sin.

The second case, 2. Case. For neglecting opportunities of spiritual comforts.
for neglecting such precious opportunities of comforts and refreshings as God
has vouchsafed: As the neglect of holy duties, wherein God did offer to draw
nigh to us, as the Sacraments, etc. So Cant. 5. 4, 5, 6, 7. Christ stood at the
door and knocked, that is, moved the heart of the Church there to pray, or
perform the like duty in which he uses to come in to the heart and visit it;
he offered to assist her and began to enlarge and prepare her heart, (...) made
excuses? upon this Christ went presently away; only he left behind him an
impression, a sent of himself in her heart; ver. 4. 5, 6. enough to stir her
up to seek him, in the sense of the want of him, as in desertion God uses to
do.

Thirdly, 3. Case.
in case of not exercising the graces which a man has; For not exercising
graces.
not stirring them up, etc. when Christians are as it were between sleeping and
waking, which was the Churches condition in that Cant. 5. 2. then also Christ
deserts. To perform duties with the inward manhalf awake, as it were and half
asleep; to pray as if we prayed not; as on the contrary, we are to use the
world, as if we used it not: Thus, to do the work of the Lord negligently,
this provokes God to absent himself; as he did there Cant. 5. 2. and so 2
Pet. 1. 9. He that lacks these things; that is, uses them not, neglecting
to add grace to grace, (as the former words expounds that phrase; and it
agrees with the like elsewhere used: as Mat. 25. 29. He that uses not his
talent, is said not to have it. To him that has shall be given, etc.) A
blindness soon falls on such a man, and he forgets all that ever he had
(as was opened before.) And indeed there is no reason that a man should have
present comfort of future grace, when he neglects the use of present grace.
Esa. 64. 7. God complains that there was none that stirred up himself; and
for this, God was wroth. Whereas otherwise, ver. 5. God meets with him that
works righteousness, and rejoices in him that rejoices to work
righteousness, God meers such, and rejoices with, and draws nigh unto them:
but others, that stir not up themselves, God rouseth and stirs them up by
terrors. He that walks according to this rule, peace be on him, Gal. 6. 16.
not else. Though comfort is not always the present necessary fruit of
righteousness, yet is never without it.

In case of some gross sin.
in case of some gross sin committed against light, unhumbled for, or
proving scandalous; or of old sins long forgotten: I will give instances of
each particular.

against light. Against light.
An instance for this is David. With though he was a man after Gods heart, yet
we meet with him often complaining, as one that was frequently in these
desertions; amongst othertimes, once in the 119. Psalm. 25, 28. ver. where his
soul cleaves unto the dust, and is even at deaths door, for he says,
quicken me, he means it in regard of the sense of Gods favor, which is
better than life; which also is the meaning of that phrase, that his soul did
(...) the dust; that is, was brought to the apprehension of death, therefore
Psalm. 22. 15. Christ upon the Cross (of whom the Psalm is made) cries out,
that God had forsaken him, and brought his soul to the dust of death: and
David says here also, that his soul (...), and was (...) even all the powers
of it were loosned, and ^^led within him, at the sense of Gods wrath, even as
wax melts before the fire: ordinarily we find in Scripture no such eminent
desertion, but we find the cause of (...) off, if we read on; so here, in the
29. verse, Remove from ^ee (says David) the way of lying. He points to the
scare of his heart, wherein his grief lay. David among other corruptions, had
a lying spirit, (...) is very roundly, two or three lies together, when he fled
from Saul, and came to Ahimelech; who fearing to harbor him because of Saul,
asked him why he was alone; it being a suspicious thing, that he so great a man
should have no greater train to attend him: and did argue that he fled as a
proscribed person, and then it would be dangerous to foster him. To this he
answers roundly; That the King had commanded him a business. There is one lie;
and that the King had commanded him secrecy in it, there is another: and
because my servants should not know it, I have sent them away to several
places, there is a third: and again, at the 8. verse, I have not brought my
sword, because the Kings business required have, there is a fourth lie. David
went on here in a way of lying; they were all made, and deliberate lies. Other
such like speeches of his, as that 1 Samuel 2. 8. 10. where he told Achish, That
he went against the South of Judah, and against the South of the Kenites, v.
10. when as he went against the Geshurites and the Amalekites, ver. 8. some
excuse, because those nations bordered over against the South of Judah, and the
house of the Kenites; and so make a truth in his speech: but the last verse,
that says that Achish believed David, implies that he understood it, as David
indeed meant it, as if he went up against his own countrymen, and then it can
no way be excused. These therefore being gross sins, sins against light,
(as of all sins lying must needs be supposed to be, because it is against
that truth which rises up in the mind) and is a sin wherein a man's mind
shows are, cunning, and wit; and a sin, which when the truth is discovered
proves exceeding shameful, and scandalous; therefore this sin (especially
when it had been some while gone on in by him, he calls it a way of lying) lay
heavy on him long after. Therefore he entreates God to take the load of it off,
Remove from me the way of lying; it was the load hereof which did lie so heavy
on him, as it pressed his soul to the dust of death, as he had before
complained.

So for the second particular, 2. In case of some sin not thoroughly humbled for.
in case a sin be not thoroughly humbled for, and confessed; or if when we
committed it, we had shifts to keep us from thinking it to be sin, or not so
heinous; or were doubtful whether it were a sin or no, and so were loath to
acknowledge it to be a sin; and to burden our selves with it in our
confessions, but our hearts stood out rather to clear our selves in it: as it
is likely David did in the case of his murder of Vriah; he had done it so
cunningly, as he thought he could clear himself and wash his hands of it, for
it was but the chance of war, (says he,) that did cut him off; The sword
devoureth one as well as another; And so he excuses it, 2 Samuel 11. 25. God in
this case brings him to the rack, Psalm. 32. (It is thought that Psalm was
made, as well as the 51. Psalm upon that occasion of his murder; and indeed
it may seem so, they are tuned so near together, as might be shown in many
particulars,) These sins being known and become scandalous, David was to
confess publicly; as in the end he did, when in making the 51. Psalm. he
stood to do penance in a white sheet, that I may so speak. Now David was
loath to come to this, that murder being done so cunningly, he could hardly be
brought to confess it, so much as in secret, much less publicly, God in
this case lays his hand so soarely on him, that his natural moisture was
dried up, as that Psalm tells us, (for in men troubled in conscience, their
trouble of mind casts their bodies often into as great heats, as men that are
in burning fevers, so Psalm. 102. 3. in the like fit, he says his bones were
burnt like an hearth;) and this was without intermission day and night; and
thus he lay roaring, so he expresses his carriage in his torture, like a
malefactor on the rack, though happily he cried out for mercy to God, yet
because not with a broken heart, God therefore accounted it but as roaring,
that is, the voice of a beast as it were, rather then the voice of a man
humbled for his sin. And why was David put to the rack thus? he would not
confess, and humble himself for his sin; I was silent, and yet roared, ver.
3. a still broken hearted confession might have saved all this torment. But
when in the end I said I would confess my sin, ver. 5. and in his heart he
resolved once to lay open all that sin of murder, and adultery in the
circumstances of them, then God pardoned him (as you know he did) for Nathan
coming to him, told him, as soon as but a word of confession began to fall
from him, that his sins were pardoned. And yet after that, as appears in the
51. Psalm. God did not yet restore comfort, and the joy of his salvation to him,
(for there he prays for it in the sense of the want of it) not until he had
publicly confessed it also, and thoroughly humbled himself, it having caused
the enemies of God to blaspheme; God would have a public satisfaction given.

So when the incestuous person had committed that sin, 1 Cor. 5. 1, 9. for
which, as then he was not humbled (for afterward in the 2 Cor. 2. 7. when he
was humbled indeed, he bids them comfort him) yet till that his humiliation
was apparent, he bids them to deliver such an one to Satan, to the jaylour, to
the tormentor with him, to the prince of darkness to terrify him, and afflict
his spirit. Now the meaning of that delivering him up to Satan, was that he
should be solemnly excommunicated, which when it is performed as it ought to
be, In the name of the Lord Jesus, and with the power of the Lord Jesus; then
as the Church cuts them off from communion with them, so God from communion
with himself, and withdrawes all fellowship with their spirits, (as was before
declared) And so leaves them alone in darkness, and to desertions; and not
only so, but delivers them up to Satan, not with a commission to carry them
on to more sin (for the end propounded by the Apostle, was thereby to destroy
the flesh, ver. 5. not to nourish it by provoking him to more sin) but to
terrify and afflict his conscience, and to stir up therein the guilt of
sin, and terrors for it. Which God sanctifies to humble a man, and to
mortify the flesh, and thus when that Corinthian was excommunicated, and given
up to him, did Satan deal with him; for 2 Cor. 2. 7. he was nigh being
swallowed up of too much sorrow; and this occasioned by Satan, whose devices we
are not ignorant of says the Apostle, ver. 11. Now as every ordinance has a
proper peculiar work it is appointed for; an inward effect to accompany it in
a man's spirit: So this, and that proper effect, and inward working and event of
this great ordinance of excommunication, is terror, and sorrow, and desertion
of spirit, thereby to humble a man; even as it is the proper effect of the
Sacraments to convay comforts and assurance, and to convay the seal of the
Spirit. And when this ordinance is neglected or omitted, when yet gross and
scandalous sins require it; then a man belonging to God, God himself often
works thus, and inflicts this on him without that ordinance. Thus he dealt with
David, and others after gross sins. God inwadly excommunicates, and casts men
out of his presence, and from all comforts in his ordinances, although they are
not refused by men to come to them: dealing herein, as a father that is a
public magistrate, with an unruly child, after some great misdemeanour,
though he cast him not off, yet he may send him to the Jail, to be for
example sake, imprisoned: for the Jailer to take him, and to clap irons on him,
to have him down into the dungeon, where he sees no light, and into the little
ease, where he is in so straight a condition, as he can neither sit nor stand,
nor lie, as Elihu expresses it, Job 36. 16. he calls it bringing into a
straight place, and binding them in fetters, and cords of affliction, and then
he shows them their transgression, and wherein they have exceeded. ver. 8, 9.

Yea, And this 3. for sins long since committed.
and thirdly, this God does not only presently after the sins were
committed, but sometimes a long while after, and that when they have been
often confessed. Yea, and after that God has pardoned them also in our
consciences, as well as in heaven; yet the guilt may return again and leave
us in darkness. Thus Job 13. 26. For the sins of his youth, (which
questionless he had humbled himself for, and had assurance of the pardon of,
yet) God did write bitter things against him for them many years after, and
made him possess them, as himself speaks. God gave him over to the Jailer,
and put him into the little ease in prison, thou put my feet into the
stocks, says he ver. 27. For as the power of sin, and the law of sin is
but in part done away in our members, so in our consciences the guilt of sin is
likewise, but in part done away, in regard of our apprehensio^s of the pardon
of the^; and therefore as those lusts we had thought dead, and that they would
never have risen again, do sometimes revive and trouble us afresh, coming
with new assaults; so in like manner may the guilt of those sins revive which
we thought long before had been pardoned, and after the commission of some new
act, or forgetfulness of the old, and security about them, God may let them
loose upon us afresh, that we shall look upon them, as if they never had been
pardoned.

Now the reason of all these particulars, The reason fo all.
both why gross sins, especially if against light, when not confessed
thoroughly, should yet after many years cast us into such fits of desertion, is

Because therein we rebel against Gods Spirit; and that spirit, It a nos
tractat, ut a nobis tractatur, does deal with us as we with him. If you
grieve him, he grieves you; if you rebel against him, he fights against you as
an enemy: so Esa. 63. 10. They rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore
he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them; now to sin
against light is called rebellion, so Job 24. 11. When men go about to
extinguish and darken the light of direction, which God has set up in their
hearts to guide their paths by; God puts out the light of comfort, and so
leaves them to darkness. But especially then, when our hearts are so full of
guile; as we plead that they are no sins; or extenuate them, as David in all
likelihood did. Psalm. 32. in reference to which he says, in 2. ver. of that
Psalm, That that man is a blessed man in whom is no guile. and in the 51.
Psalm. 6. Thou desire truth in the inward parts, David had dealt guilefully
and deceitfully in that sin; if man keeps a sin under his tongue, and will
not be convinced of it, nor bring it forth by confession; God in that case
brings him to the rack; as they do Traitors to confess: and if it be that any
of our old sins revive, and cause these terrors, it is because we began to
look on them as past and gone, and thought we needed not go on to humble our
selves any more for them; making account they are so buried, as that they will
never rise again; when as the remembrance of them should keep us low, and
humble us all our days. It is laid to the charge of them in the 26. of Ezekiel.
22. That they remembered not that they lay in their blood. We are apt to think
that time wears out the guilt of sins: but to God they are as fresh as if
they had been committed yesterday; and therefore nothing wears them out but
repentance. Great sins forgiven must not be forgotten.

Fifthly;. 5.
in case of a stubborn stiff spirit, under outward afflictions; 5. Case. Of a
stubborn spirit under outward afflictions.
when we will not mend nor stoop to God. This may be part of the case
mentioned, Esa. 57. 16. Where God alleging the reason why he contended with a
poor soul of his, he gives an account of it, ver. 17. you shall see where the
quarrel began, For the iniquity of his covetousness I was wroth; that is, for
some inordinate affection, which we call concupiscence; he mentions not a
gross act of sin committed, so much as some lust harbored; for which God
began to be angry, and to show the effects of that his anger in smiting him,
happily with some outward cross first; I was wroth and smote him; and when that
did no good, God began to be more angry, and to hide himself: I hid my face,
and this he speaks of inward affliction, which he also calls, ver. 16.
Contending with the soul, and so far leaving it, as that the spirit was ready
to fail; it came to inward affliction in the end, and he further intimates the
cause of all this, He went on frowardly in the way of his heart. When lighter,
and outward strokes will not take us of, God leaves and deserts our spirits,
and wounds them. And the reason is, for in this case what course else should
God take? for either he must give him up to hardness of heart, and leave him to
his stubbornness, and so he should have lost his child; but that God is
resolved he will not do; I will heal him, says he, ver. 18. When therefore
the heart remains stubborn under other strokes, he has no way left in his
ordinary course and progress, in the way of means, but to lay strokes upon
his spirit, and wound that. And this yoke is like to break and tame him, if
any; For this he cannot bear: other outward afflictions man's natural spirit,
stoutnesse, and stubbornness may bear; and has borne even in heathen men;
they have endured any thing rather then be put out of their way; The spirit of
man will sustain its infirmities, but in this, the spirit fails in them, ver.
16. other afflictions are but particular; but as taking some stars of comfort
out of the firmament, when others are still left to shine to them: but when
Gods countenance is hid, the Sun it self, the fountain of light is darkened,
and so a general darkness befalls them: and therefore then the heart is
driven to God, and broke off from all things else; and then God delights to
restore and to comfort a man again. I will restore comfort to him, ver. 18.

Sixthly,. 6.
in case of deserting his truth, and not professing it, 6. Case.
and appearing for it when he calls us to do it. For deserting his truth when
called to profess it.
In this case he left many of the Martys; many of whom, especially until
those in Queen Mary's days (when with the Gospells increase, and the light of
it, God gave more strength also) and some then also did desert the truth for a
while, and then God in respect of comfort deserted the^; and then they
recovering Gods favor again, upon repentance and a new resolution taken, to
stick to the profession of the truth, what ever came of it, that their
desertion made them the more bold and resolute, And this was in part Ionahs
case, who having a commission sealed him to go to Niniveh, with a message from
God; he withdrew himself, and went another way; and God in the midst of his
security casts him into a whales belly, and when he was there God withdrawes
himself from him, as if he meant never to own him more; insomuch that Jonah
says, Chap. 2. 4. Then I said I am cast out of thy presence. And there is this
equity in this dealing of Gods thus with us: That as when we are ashamed of
Christ, the punishment fitted to it is, That Christ will be ashamed of us: so
when we will not witness for God, there is no reason His Spirit should
witness to us. And so, when we seem to evade persecution for the Cross of
Christ, then it is meet, God should meet with us, and take us in hand himself;
which is far worse.

Seaventhly,. 7.
in case of unthankfulness, and too common an esteem had of the assurance, 7.
Case.
and light of Gods countenance, Of unthankfulness for former comforts.
and of freedom from those terrors and doubtings which others are in; which
is a sin Christians are apt to run into: For as the light of the Sun,
because it is ordinary, is not regarded, none mind it or look at the Sun,
but (as he said) when it is in the eclipse; So, a continual sunshine of Gods
favor enjoyed, occasioneth but a common esteem of it. And in this case God
withdrawes those co^forts, and assurance; because they are the greatest and
sweetest comforts of all other; and which to abuse, or not to value, of all
other provokes most, therefore in this case God takes them away. For as Hos. 2.
9. in case of being unthankful in outward mercies, God took them away, and
restored them not again, till they esteemed them better, and acknowledged
whence they had them: So also in spiritual assurance, light, and comfort, does
God in like manner deal.

CHAP. XIII.
The third general head; The Ends for which God leaves his children unto this
darkness. First, such as are drawn from God, and his faithfulness; etc.

NOw let us come to those ends which God may have in this his dealing with one
that fears and obeyes him, which are many and holy ones.

First, to show his power and faithfulness, in upholding, raising up, and
healing such a spirit again as has been long and deadly wounded with inward
terrors; which is as great an evidence of his power as any other; and
therefore says Heman, Psalm. 88. 10. Will thou show wonders to the dead? shall
thy faithfulness be declared in destruction. ver. 11. That is, in raising my
soul up again to joy, and comfort, which is as much as to raise up a dead man;
nay more, as much as to raise up a soul already in hell; for the same
terrors, says he, that destroy them, do in like manner seize on me; in the
1. Ephesians. 19. it is said, That the exceeding greatness of Gods power was seen
in raising Christ from death to life: and wherein lay principally the
demo^stration of that power? not simply in raising his body up again; that was
no more then he did to others, but in Acts 2. 24. the power is said to be
shown in this, that he having losed the pains of death wherewith it was
impossible he should be held, he was raised up again, his soul was heavy unto
death, with terrors: and those pains in themselves were deadly, though not to
him, in that he being God as well as man, it was impossible for him to sink
under them: now therefore to raise up and glorify that his soul that was so
bruised, wounded, and pierced through and through, herein lay the wonder: and
such a wonder God showed in recovering Heman. And to show the greatness of
this work let us consider a little the depth and deadliness of this kind of
distress, it is compared to the bruising of a reed, which when it is bruised,
who can make it stand upright again? It is called The wounding of the spirit.
Proverbs 28. which no creature knows how to come at to heal, none but God who
is the father of spirits; who made them, and knows how to mend them. It is not
only called, the sickness of the spirit, as Esa. 33. 24. (where the want of
the assurance of the forgiveness of sins, makes poor souls to say, I am
sick; which to heal, is made the prerogative of the Sun of righteousness,
arising with healing in his wings. Mal. 4. 2.) but also it is called death and
destruction: for so in that 88. Psalm, Heman calls that distress that he was
in. And the reason is, Gods favor is our life, by which we live and are
upheld; which therefore being withdrawn, the soul is ready to fail and
faint, and to come to nothing, and sink into destruction. Esa. 57. 16. And
again, the pains of those terrors are more violent, and more powerful to
hold us under, then are the pangs of death. The wounds of the guilt of sin
being as deadly, and as strong as the lusts of the power of it, and it requires
as great a power to dissolve and scatter them. For all the strength that the
law and Gods justice has, sin also has to back it, For the strength of
sin is the Law. 1 Cor. 15. 56.

Secondly, 2.
as to know the power of Christ his resurrection, 2. End, to know the
fellowship of Christ's sufferings.
so the fellowship of his sufferings: that thereby the soul may be made more
conformable to him, as it is Phil. 3. 10. As there are the suffering for
Christ, so the sufferings of Christ: and God, makes his partakers of both;
persecutions without, and terrors within. With which Christ's soul was filled,
then, when as the text says, He was heard in what he feared: and his soul
was heavy to death: and My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? and so Esa.
53. It pleased God to bruise and wound him. Now then, to conform us to his
image, we that are his brethren, and are the persons guilty, must suffer
somewhat in spirit as well as he, and have a portion therein also. And
therefore as Christ did suffer both inwardly and outwardly, so do many of his
members. If you have suffered with him, ye shall also be glorified with him.
The sons of Zebedeus would have been glorified in Christ's kingdom, more than
the rest of the Apostles: But says Christ, Mat. 20. 22, 23. Are ye able to
drink of the cup whereof I shall drink? He means that cup delivered to him
at his crucifying, Let this cup pass, the bitter cup of Gods anger, and are ye
able to be baptized with the baptism I am baptized with; namely, outward
afflictions, and persecutions for the name of God; which are called baptism,
because they set Gods mark on us, that we are Gods, as baptism does seal to
us that we are his; and because then the Church ownes us, and takes notice of
us as sincere, when we have believed and suffered, as at baptism the Church
receives us: and of this baptism Christ speaks in the present tense, because
that he was already baptized with outward persecutions: but the cup, which was
inward affliction of his spirit; this he was to drink off at his agony, which
I shall drink off in the future; which cup cast him into that sweat, ere he
came to the bottom. This though no creature was able to drink off to the
bottom; yet taste they might, and he tells them they should, v. 23. Ye shall
drink of it, etc. that is, taste of inward affliction and desertion, as well as
of outward persecution; terrors within and without; and all to make us
conformable to him, and so come to know in part what he endured for us.

Thirdly,. 3.
to put the greater difference between the estate of Gods children here, 3. To
show the different estate of Gods children here, and hereafter.
and that hereafter in heaven: To which very purpose is that speech of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 7. That here we walk by faith not by sight; he had said
before that the estate of believers in this life, is an estate of absence from
the Lord, wherein we want his presence, and so enjoy not the sight of him; and
therefore are to exercise faith the more; which is peculiar to this estate,
and a grace given of purpose for us to walk by, while it we live here. And
though sometimes here we have some light, and glimpses of him and his
presence, yet we walk not by sight always, for we walk by faith not by
sight. We shall have enough of the sight of God hereafter, when we shall see
him as we are seen face to face; and be ever more with the Lord; when in his
light we shall see light; and be satisfied with his image. We may therefore be
content to want it here sometimes; you may well endure over-cloudings here, and
sometimes that all sight should be taken away; for in the world to come there
will nor be one cloud to all eternity, Your inheritance is light (...) 13.
Light is your portion, but now is the seed (...) and light is s^^en, Psalm. 7.
11. For the righteous^^. you must be content to let it lie under (...) the
longer (...) does so, the greater crop and (...) vest will come up in the end.
You must (...) the vicissitude of day and night here, (...) night, and joy in
the morning; for her easier you shall have continual day, and no ^ight. This
differnce there is put between earth, and heaven, to make heaven (...), and to
exercise faith: the estate in heaven is as a state of per^^t and continual
^ealth, which that we may (...), we are ever and anon sick here, and qualmes
come over our consciences, fears our sins are not forgiven; but when we come
thither, The inhabitants there shall be no more sick, but their sins shall be
forgiven them. Esa. 33. 24.

The fourth end is, 4.
to let us see whence spiritual comforts and refreshings come: 4. End, to show
the spring of all spiritual comforts, and our dependence for them.
That God alone keeps the keys of that cupbord, and alone dispenses them how
and when he pleases. That we may know (as it is Esa. 45. 6, 7.) that it is the
Lord that forms the light, and creates darkness, evil and peace; and that
as affliction rises not out of the dust, as Job speaks, so nor comfort out of
our hearts. Whereas if continually we enjoyed comfort, we should be apt so to
think. God will let us see that our hearts are nothing but darkness; and that
to cause any spiritual comfort, is as much as to create light at first;
therefore he says, I create the fruit of the lips peace, Esa. 57. and that he
it is that does command light to shine into our hearts, who commanded light at
first to shine out of darkness: 2 Cor. 4. 4. Which can no way more fully be
manifested, then by with drawing that light sometimes, and leaving us to
darkness. As why does he sometimes assist us in prayer, and fill the sails;
and again at sometimes leaves our hearts empty? Is it not that we may learn
that lesson Romans 8. 26. That it is the Spirit that helps ou^ infirmities: and
that we of our selves know not what, nor how to ask. Which lesson, although he
sometimes streightens us, yet we are difficult in learning, nor are easily
brought to acknowledge our dependence on him for his assistance: in like manner,
for the same end does he sometimes hide, and then again sometimes reveal
himself; to show that he is the immediate fountain of comfort, The God of all
comforts, 2 Cor. 1. 4. that so we might know whom to thank, whom to depend on,
whom to go to for comfort: it being as difficult a thing for us to go out of
our selves, and from the creatures, for comfort, to God alone, as to go out of
our selves to Christ alone for righteousness. Hereby also we see, that though
we have never so many outward comforts, that yet the comforts of our spirits
do depend on God alone: For if He in the midst of them withdraw himself, they
all prove but miserable comforters.

CHAP. XIV.
A second sort of Ends, for the trial and discovery of graces: especially of
Faith.

OTher ends God has to make trial of our graces, and a discovery of them. The
same end that God had in leading his people through the great wilderness where
no water was, where Sco^pions stung them, Deu. 8. 16. which was to prove the,
etc. The same ends has God in suffering his people to go through this desert,
barrenness, and darkness, where no light is, and where terrors of the Law
do sting them, (for all those his dealings then, were types of Gods dealing
with his people now) even to prove them, and to make trial of their hearts.
For the same ends as he left Hezekiah to the power of sin, in the point of
sanctification, namely, To know what was in his heart, does he also leave
others of his children to the guilt of sin, in the point of justification, to
discover also what is in their hearts. This is conceived to have been his end
in deserting Job; to show what strong patience, unconquered faith was in him.
There be many gracious dispositions, which actually have not opportunity to
discover themselves, bu^ in case of this kind of desertion: some of those
which are the highest acts of Grace, and purest fruits of it, and which are the
surest evidences of the truth of grace, would never appear but in case of such
desertion. For instance, then it is known, whether a man love God for
himself, and for those excellencies of wisdom, holiness, and goodness that
are in him, when yet he knows not, whether he himself shall be ever the
better for them yea or no: Then also it is manifested to be pure, sincere, and
unfeigned obedience. Then it is seen his repentance is true, when he repents
not of it, then, when he is out of hopes of any reward for it. Then it is seen
his sorrow is godly sorrow, when, though the sentence of condemnation is read to
him in his own apprehension and conscience, and he verily thinks he is taking
his leave of God for ever, and going to execution, yet he can down upon his
knees, and ask him forgiveness, and mourns that ever he wronged him; is
angry and displeased with himself, that a God so good, so just, should have so
just cause to be angry, and displeased with him; and he finds he could have
some rest and contentment that God is glorified upon one, who has so much
dishonored him. Such dispositions as these would never see the light, if it
were not for this darkness. But as Natura vexata prodit soipsam; Nature when
conclusions are tried upon it, and it is put out of its course, then it
discovers it self, even as anger discovers it self when a man is (...) as if
you would know the properties that are in herbs, you must try conclusions with
them. So also here does God with a man's graces; and then they discover their
most occult and hidden properties.

It were endless to go over all particular graces: Especially for the trial
of Faith.
I will but more distinctly instance in that glorious grace of Faith. Which in
this trial deserves more then all graces else; and though in all the varieties
of conditions we pass through, it stands us in stead, yet in desertions it
alone does wonders: Standing like Sampson, encountering, and conquering alone,
when there is none to help. Because likewise, it is that grace which is called
for in the Text, Let him trust in the name of the Lord: as being that grace
which God principally tryes; to discover the truth, and magnify the power
there of in such desertions.

First, this is certain, there is no grace God tryes more then this grace of
faith. 1. Of all graces God tries faith the most.
Therefore 1 Pet. 1. 7. Ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations,
that the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold which
perishes, being tried in the fire, might be found to glory, praise, and
honor: That is, both to the honor of God who is believed in, and also of
faith it self, which is the most glorious grace a Christian has; which God
loves to try, to that end the glory of it may appear. In the fifth verse he
having said, that we are kept by the power of God to salvation, If any now
should ask, wherein is that power of keeping us most shown? He answers, in
and through faith; Ye are kept by the power of God through faith: and if you
ask when and wherein is the power of God through faith seen most? He
instanceth in manifold temptations, that the try all of your faith, etc.

Now then, as of all graces God would have faith tried.

So 2. 2. Of all trials this of darkness is the greatest, ^* for 3. reasons.
of all temptations, none try it more then desertion of Gods countenance, this
of darkness and of terrors: other temptations strike but obliquely at faith,
but these lay direct battery to our faith; for they strike at that which is the
immediate aim and object of it; namely, [that God God.] These speak the direct
contrary to what faith endeavors to apprehend, and that directly, and not by
consequence only. Again, them off, as He the viper off his hand: but when that
shall begin to be questioned (as in this case it is) who is able to stand? and
what is able to strengthen a man then, but the power of faith? as Solomon says
of the spirit of a man, that it will bear all kind of infirmities, if it
self be whole; but if it be wounded, who can bear it? So I say of assurance,
if it be weakened, and battered, the very foundations thereby are shaken; a
man's freehold touched; the root struck; now in such a case it is faiths
peculiar office to stand a man in stead, when nothing else can: therefore he
says, Let him trust, etc. because it helps thus at this dead lift.

God himself, apprehended as an enemy. God called out Job to try him by
fighting a single combat with Satan, and he became (as I may so say) too hard
for Satan alone; and God joins against him also: now then, to bear the brunt
and shock of his wrath, and yet to stand upon a man's feet; this, to the utmost
argues the strength of faith. Hosea 12. 3. It is said of Jacob, That by
strength he had power with God, it argued strength indeed: and this is done by
faith, by the power whereof (Gods power rather supporting it) a man relies on
God, when all his dealings would argue he had forsaken a man; that though God
put on never so angry a countenance, looks never so sternely, yet faith is not
dashed out of countenance but can read love in his angry looks, and trust God
beyond what he sees, it being the evidence of things not seen. Then, faith
goes wholly out of it self, and seeing nothing in it self but barely a
capacity of mercy, and plenteous redemption which it knows to be in God. This
faith is a miracle of miracles, for it is founded as the earth, upon mere
nothing in it self, and yet bears the weight and stresse of sins, devil,
yea of God himself. And this is the faith ye are converted by, in believing
then on him that justifies the ungodly. Romans 4. 5. and that which we must live
by, when all comforts fail: and this is that faith which must stand you in
stead at death, when the King of fears comes and besieges you: and this is
the faith that is to honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XV.
Six Ends more: For the increasing of several graces, and destroying
corruptions.

Sixthly, as it makes for the trial and discovery of graces, so it is a means
sanctified to increase them, and to eat out corruptions.

First, 1. To destroy corruption.
it is a means to destroy the flesh. The incestuous Corinthian was to be
delivered to Satan, that is, to be terrified; to destroy the flesh. As
corrasives eat out dead flesh, so these terrors the dead corruptions: and the
reviving of the guilt of old sins, does kill the seeds of those that remain
in the heart. For if an outward affliction, which crosses but the satisfaction
of a lust, is a means sactified by God, to kill a lust; then much more the
inward terror, which the conscience feels, and which arises immediately from
the guilt of a sin, must needs be a means much more.

Secondly, 2. To humble.
it is a means to humble. So Deuteronomy. 8. 16. the end of the biting of the
Israelites by Scorpions, (which were the types of these stings and terrors)
were, as to prove, so to humble them, and for this end was that buffeting by
Satan (we have so often mentioned 2 Cor. 12. 7.) to keep down being exalted
above measure: So also, 1 Pet. 5. 6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God: and if in any other
affliction, his mighty hand lays hardest on surely in these.

Thirdly, 3. To increase assurance in the event.
it is a means to bring you in more assurance, and establishment. 1 Pet. 5.
10. The God of all grace after you have suffered a while, stablish and
strengthen you. He knew they could not be settled, till they had suffered in
this, or some other kind. The tree roots it self the more it is shaken.
Comforts abound the more that sufferings do abound. That light is clearest and
strongest, that arises out of darkness, because God creates it. Those things
which men doubt of most, God gives the greatest evidence of in the end.

Fourthly, 4. The fear^ and obedience of God.
it trains you up to fear God more, and to obey him. Therefore in the Text,
these are added as the concomitant dispositions of the soul in such a case.
For of all other, these of fearing God, and obeying him, do most eminently,
and sensibly appear in that estate. Heb. 5. 8. Christ himself learnt
obedience by what he suffered. The yoke tames the wanton wildness in beasts,
and makes them serviceable, breaks them: and so do these the stubbornness of
a man's spirit.

Fifthly, 5. To pray more and more earnestly.
to set believers hearts awork to pray more, and more earnestly: So the
Apostles buffetings, 2 Cor. 12. made him pray thrice; that is, often: So
Christ, Luke 22. 44. being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly; and being in
fears, he did lift up strong cries, Heb. 5. 7. So Heman by reason of his
terrors, was a man much in prayers. Psalm. 88. 1. I have cried day and night
before thee. Christians that enjoy not communion with God, yet if they think
they have not lost him, they are secure, and lazy in prayers* but if they
apprehend once, that their (...) gone; or that they are in danger to lose him,
then they will seek him all the world over but they will find him; Cant. 5.
6, 7, 8. and make (...) and cry after him, as the Church did there.

Sixthly, 6. To prize the light of Gods countenance.
it causes them to prize the light of Gods countenance the more, when they
again obtain it: and to set a higher price upon it, and to endavour by close
walking with God, as children of light, to keep it. To prize it more then
corn, and oil. Cant. 3. at the 2. verse She loses him; but at the 4. verse,
She finds him again, and then She holds him, and would not let him go.

A CHILD OF LIGHT WALKING in DARKNESS.
ISAI. 50. 10. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? --
USE 1.
IF those that fear God and obey him are exposed to such a condition as has
been described: To those that fear not God, nor obey him. What darkness
reserved for such!
Then, Who is among you that fears [not] the Lord, nor obeyes the voice of
his servante? You that live in known sins, and in omissio^ of known duties,
which Gods servants your Ministers tell you, you ought to perform; that pray
not withyour families, who make not conscience of your speeches, nor (...) be
thus scarcely saved; if they, whom God has loved with a love as great and
unchange able as himself, yet suffer his terrors here; what shall you d^e whom
he has set himself to hate, and to show the power of his wrath upon without
repentance? If these things be done to the green tree, Luke 23 31.
what shall be done to the dry? which is fitted for wrath, and the fire, Nahum
1. 10.
even as stubble fully dry, as the Prophet speaks: If such an estate of
darkness and horror befall them that are children of light, whose inheritance
is light; Col. 1. 12.
then what is reserved for you that are darkness, and love darkness more then
light? And if this befalls them for not stirring up the grace, which they
already have; what to you that are utterly devoid of it? and not only so, but
despise and scoff it. If this befalls them for not humbling themselves for old
sins, though long since committed; what will be fall you for going on to add
new to the old with greediness? If to them for neglecting the opportunities
of drawing nigher to God; what to you for neglecting the offer of grace, and
trampling under foot the blood of Christ? All you that think there is no hell;
or if there be, that it is not so dark as it is usually painted, look upon
Heman ready to run distracted through terrors, and to give up the ghost
every moment, Psalm. 88. when yet his body was strong, and outward estate whole:
look upon David lying upon the wheels, and the spirit of God breaking his
bones, Psalm. 51.
when as otherwise, he being a King, had all outward things at will. Look upon
holy Jo^, Chap. 6. Oh that my grief were weighted, it is heavier then the
sand; and my words are swallowed up, (that is) I am not able to express and
utter my grief: The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison thereof
drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in battle array
against me. ver. 4. Insomuch, that at the 8. verse, he wishes God would cut
him off, and, Is my strength the strength of stones (says he) or, my flesh
brass as he complains, that he should be able to hold out against such fierce
encounters. (My brethren) Gods people find pains beyond those of the Stone,
or gout, and toothake; the falling of Gods wrath on the conscience is more then
the dropping a little scalding rheum on a tooth; and yet these, which Job and
David felt, are but a taste of that cup, which you that obey not must drink off
to the bottom; and it is eternity to the bottom, Psalm. 75. 8. There is a cup
in the hand of the Lord, and it is full of mixture: that is, all the bitter
ingredients in the world are in it, the quintessence of evils are strained into
it; and here indeed God poures out of the same, as it follows there; that is,
in this life some few sprinklings of it fall from the top of the cup; which his
own do taste and drink of: but, the bottom, the dregs thereof, all the
wicked of the earth shall drink, and wring them out; that is, leave none
behind; but the Vialls of it, which will never be emptied shall be poured
forth, even to the utmost drop. And if Gods people do begin to taste of it, as
Christ himself did, it could not pass him, and Zebedees sons were to pledge
him, as was observed, then as God says by Jeremiah, chap. 25. 27, 28, 29. If
my people have drunk of it, and begun to you, and I have brought evil upon
the City that is called by my name; then certainly you shall drink of it and
be drunk, and spue, and fall, and never rise again. If Gods people be thus
shut up in darkness, what darkness is reserved for you? even as Jude says,
ver. 13. Blackness of darkness. Darkness where is weeping, and wa^^ing, and
gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22. 13. Blackness of darkness, because there is not a
cranny of light, nor one beam of comfort that shines in to all eternity. And
this is not for a moment, or a few years, but for ever. You that (...) days
in pleasure here, and rejoice in them all; Remembers the days of darkness,
for they are many says Solomon, Eccles. 11. 8. many indeed; dayes^ (...)
eternal night that shall know no end, which no day shall follow.

USE. 2.
WHo is among you that fears the Lord, To those that are translated from
darkness into light, and yet never thu^s walked in darkness.
and is translated out of the state of darkness, and yet never was in this
darkness of desertion, which I have described unto you? You that have been
free from those terrors of conscience, which are beyond all the miseries the
world has, (for as the jay of the Holy Ghost is unspeakable and glorious, so
these terrors are unutterable, and unsupportably grievous) which yet souls
that fear God, and have obeyed him more then you, have been made the anvills
of: You that have been dandled, and cockered, and fed with sweet meats, had
into the wine seller, John 14. 23.
and have had all the Trinity to (...) with (...) others have eaten gall and
wormwood, Rev. 3. 20.
as it is Lament. 3. 19. And likewise you, who though you enjoy not much
ravishing joy, Romans 5. 1.
and peace which passes understanding, yet being justified by faith, you have
(a solid) peace with God; and so walk in freedom of spirit, in the use of
Gods ordinances, and the performance of holy duties: Let me out of this
doctrine give all such this great instruction. To take notice that such kind
of troubles there are that do befall Gods people, To take notice such a
condition there is,
beyond what they have experience of; many there are that think not so; which
is useful
Jobs friends did not, and therefore censured him. And this is a necessary
instruction.

1. 1. To prepare them against it if it should afterward befall them.
For this very knowledge of it does prepare men for such a condition, if it
should befall them; and therefore aforehand to prepare them he wrote too, for
afflictions, the Apostle bids them not think it strange concerning the fiery
trial, 1 Pet. 4. 12. For if they be strange to any, then if they befall them
at any time, they are the more grievous. As if some strange disease befall a
man, which he had never heard of before, no Physician has skill in, it a
mazeth a man, and makes him desperate: but if he has heard that such and such
have had it, as well as himself, and have been recovered; this some thing
helps to assuage the bitterness of it to him. Jobs trial was a strange trial
to his friends, and therefore you see how unskilfully they go about to heal
it, and so left the soar worse then they found it. So that to prepare you for
it, it is good to take notice that such a condition there is. In like manner
also in 1 Cor. 13. 10. for the same end the Apostle says of other kind of
trials, that nothing had be fallen them but what is common to man, there is a
great relief in that, that it is common, and others have been in the like.

Secondly also, 2. To be kept more in dependence upon God.
take notice of it, that you may be kept more in dependence upon God, and that
you may fear him more, whilst you live in this world, men that know not any
afflictions in this life beyond what they see with their eyes, and feel in the
outward man; nothing beyond loss of friends and credit, these do often fear
God less, (though truly) and when they come to part with any of these for God,
are less willing; as when they must endure a cross rather then sin, are
apter to choose affliction rather then sin, as Job says: but when they shall
hear and know that Gods wrath is beyond Pharaohs wrath as Moses knew it; who
yet in the vast apprehension of the greatness of it, cries out, Psalm. 90. Who
has known the power of thy wrath? then they will obey God and fear him more
then they would all the Kings of the earth, as Moses did, not fearing the wrath
of Pharaoh. Heb. 11. 27. When men enjoy a confluence of all carnal worldly
comforts, and think their mountain strong, well built with wife, children
about them, and riches, health, and honors, they think they are then more out
of Gods danger then other men, and are apt to say Soul, thou have goods for
many years: but know that God without taking either thy goods away, or thy
soul away, can in this life put thy spirit into such a condition of darkness,
as thou would give all the world to have a moments ease; when all other
comforts shall be to thee, but as the white of an egg as Job says. As he has
joys the world gives not, so he has afflictions the world inflicts not.
Therefore fear him more then the loss of all; obey him rather then to keep
all: for God can meet with thee in the midst of all: so he met with David
though a King, and then all his wives and kingdom could not comfort him, till
God would heal the bones that he had broken.

Thirdly, 3. To learn not to censure others.
take notice there are such troubles, and learn not to censure others when
they are in this condition; thou walk in the light, and thou see another
in the dungeon, he may be dearer to God then thou. It was Jobs friends fault,
who having not had experience of such a condition in themselves, concluded he
was an hypocrite; if you thus judge then (as Asaph says) You condemn the
generation of the Just. Psalm. 73. 13, 14.
And herein Satan also is gratified, the strict ways of grace scandalized: If
God use his children thus, Curse God and die, says Jobs wife, and so the
foolish men and women of the world.

Fourthly, 4. To fear God the more.
pass your soiourning here in fear, and serve him with fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
For even our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. Keep thy heart in awe with
the knowledge of such an estate; this kept Job in awe, and made him so strict a
man al his days: read the thirty first Chapter throughout, and you shall see
what a righteous man he was, and then see the reason of all, ver. 23.
Destruction from the Lord was a terror to me; and to the same purpose also
Chapter 4. ver. ult. he says, that he had always feared that which now had
befallen him, whereof the distress of his Spirit was the greatest evil, this
he feared might befall him when he had most assurance.

Lastly, 5. Be thankful God has spared thee.
be thankful that God spares thee, happily thy body is weak, and he knows thou
art but flesh; and so stirs not up all his wrath; if he should fall on thee
as on others, it would destroy thee. But consider that thou had a stone in
thy heart as well as any other: has God cured it by gentle (...), and so
dissolved it, and carried it away, when as he has cut others, and bound them,
and put them to much pain in taking of it out? Oh be thankful. You that are
healthful and have strong bodies, are you not thankful when you see others
sick, and (...) bedrid, roaring of the Stone, Toothach, Gout, whereof you are
free? and ought you not to be much more for the healthfulnesse of your spirits
(cheerfulness being the marrow of them) when as others are sick, (as the
expression is Esaias 33. ult.) for want of assurance that their sins are
forgiven, others (...) all day as on a rack, and are distracted, almost out of
their wits, and even themselves are a burden to themselves. Oh be thankful
that it is not so with you!

USE. 3.
WHo is among you that fearth the Lord, To those that have been in darkness,
and are now recovered out of it.
and has been in darkness, but now is out of that eclipse and walks in the
light again, you who have been in the dungeon, and have been set free
again; who have had the wounds of your spirit healed, your souls raised from
the nether most hell, when they drew nigh to the grave, and have found a
ransom, Job 33.
learn you duty also.

thankful to God and Jesus Christ, and to love the more; To be thankful to
God and Christ.
for you know and have tasted what he did for you; you know how bitter a few
sippes of the cup was, which he drank off and took down, and therefore must
needs love him more. You also have more experience of Gods power and
faithfulness, and what a miracle God has wrought in raising you up again, He
has shown you wonders among the dead, as Heman speaks: Be thankful. Thus
David in Psalm. 116. ver. 3, 4. compared with the first verse, I love the Lord,
and why? The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of hell got hold upon
me. I found trouble and sorrow, I was brought low and he helped me.

Secondly, 2. To pity others in that condition.
learn to pity others in that condition. Who can do it better then you, that
have experience of the like? If you hear of any soul in distress, it is
expected of you to pray for him more then of another. Heb. 2. ult.
Christ learnt to pity us in all our infirmities the more, by bearing out
infirmities himself: to that end God raised you up, that you might be able to
comfort others with the comforts you have received; 2 Cor. 1. 4.
and might pray for them. Therefore Isay 57. 17. when any poor soul is
smitten, God, as is there said, is moved to restore him again, for his
mourners sakes as well as his own.

Thirdly, 3. Declare what God has done for you.
declare what God has done for you, you have been in hell: give warning to
others from coming there; 1 Cor. 5. 11.
We knowing the terror of the Lord, persuade men. If the rich man had come
from hell, what stories would he have told to have scared all his brethren?
tell you the like: You have seen the wonders of God in the Deeps, And give
warning unto others.
now you are a shore, tell men of the rocks, and shelves, and storms they are
like to meet with in such and such courses: of uncleanness, worldliness, etc.
David says, when he should have once his bones that were broken healed again;
Psalm 51.
that then he would teach sinners Gods ways.

Fourthly, 4. Take heed of such sins as may bring you into such a condition
again.
take heed of what may prove the (...) of such a condition. The devil may come
and cast you into your old fits if he find the same materials to work upon,
such as gross sins, acts of uncleanness, lying; unjust dealing, etc. You
know what brought David to his broken bones, and likewise take heed of
performing duties formally, coldly, and in hypocrisy, and of resting in them,
which are but as a hollow tooth, ^s Solomon speaken, that is, broken, Prove. 25.
19.
better out of the head then in, these any cause the tooth ach again. Take
heed of sinning against light; if the devil found no such things in you, he
should not trouble you. So also, get (...) straggling doubts answered, (...)
them not lie neglected, they may come in together one day and make an army;
though several, and apart, as they now rise in your consciences scattered, you
can despise and neglect them.

USE. 4.
The fourth and maine use, to such as fear God and walk in Darkness.
THen 4. (...) fortlesse, their spirits dead and hard; do call Gods love and
their own estates into question: Especially if they were in the Sunshine
before, but now sit in the valley of the shadow of death: If dandled in Gods lap
before and kissed, now to be lasht with terrors, and his sharpest rods, and on
the tendrest place, the conscience; to have their songs in the night, turned
into writing bitter things against them; how bitter is it to them! Once they
say they could never come to the throne of grace but their hearts were
welcomed, their heads stroakt, and they went seldom away without a white
stone, an earnest penny put into their hands: But now God is a terror to them,
and when they arise from prayer or the like duty, their hearts condemn them
more then when they began. Once they never looked to heaven but they had a
smile; now they may cry day and night and not get a good look from him: once
(say they) they never hoist up sail to any duty, but they had a fair and good
wind; God went along with them: but now they have both wind and tide, God and
the deadness of their own hearts against them. In a word, God is gone, light
is gone: God answers them neither by vision nor by Prophets; neither in praying
nor in hearing; and therefore has forsaken them, cast them off, Yea, will
never be merciful; Oh woe to us (say they) we are undone.

You err (poor souls) not knowing the Scriptures, and the manner of your God,
and of his dealings with his people: to think that his mind is changed, when
his countenance is; and so to run away from him; as Jacob did from Laban: to
think he has cast you off, when he is but returned to his place, that you
may seek him more earnestly. Hosea 5.
Like children, when their mother is gone aside a little, you fall a crying, as
if you were undone. So it (...) that you are always in the extremes; if he
(...) on you, then your mountain shall never be removed, if he hides his face,
then he will never be merciful. (...) as it is a fond and a childish fault, so
it is beastly and brutish also, thus to judge. I term it so, because ye are
led therein by sense* and like beasts, believe nothing but what you feel and
see; and measure Gods love by his looks and outward carriage which when Asaph
did in other afflictions, as you in this; he cries out he was ignorant, and as
a beast, Psalm. 73. 22. What will you trust God no further then you see him? It
will shame you one day, to think what a great deal of trouble your
childishness put the Spirit of God unto. As what a trouble is it to a wise
man, to have a fond and foolish wife, who if he be but abroad, and about
necessary business, happily for her maintenance; yet then she complains he
regards her not, but leaves her; if he chides her for any fault, then she says
he hates her; and is so much distempered by it, as a whole days kindness
cannot quiet her again: Thus deal you with God, and though he has given you
never so many fair, and clear evidences of his love, and these never so often
reiterated and renewed; yet still you are jealous, never quiet, always
doubting, questioning all upon the least frown: that either God must undo
you, by letting you go on in your sinful dispositions, without ever rebuking
of you; or else lose the acknowledgement of all his love formerly shown, and
have it called in question by your peevish, jealous misconstructions, upon
every small expression of his anger toward you. Two sorts of such; some more
lightly troubled, some more deeply.
Some of you that are less troubled, and thus wanton against Christ, I would
chide out of it.

But you that are more deeply and lastingly distressed, I pity you, I blame
you not for being troubled; for when he hides his face, the creatures all are
troubled, Psalm. 104. 29. God would have you lay it to heart when he is angry,
Isa. 57. 17. God there took it ill, that when he smote him, he went on
stubbornly: if you should not thus lay it to heart, it were a sign you had no
grace, that you made not him your portion, if you could bear his absence and
not mourn. Carnal men having other comforts, can bear the want and absence
of him well enough, but not you, that have made him your portion, and your
exceeding great reward. But yet though you are to lay it to heart, so as to
mourn under it; yet not to be discouraged, to call all into question. Mal. 3. 6.
For though you change, yet not God: James 1. 7.
nor his love; for his love is himself, 1 John 4. 8, 9, 10. We may change in
our apprehensions, and opinions; and Gods outward cariages and dispensations
may be changed toward us, but not his rooted love: We are not the same to
day, Heb. 13.
that yesterday we were: but Christ is the same to day, yesterday, and for
ever. To say that he has cast you off because he has hid his face, is a
fallacy fetched out of the devils Topics, and injurious to him: For Isay 54. 8.
In a little wrath have I hid my face, for a moment; but with everlasting
kindness will I remember thee. First, I have but hid my face, not cast thee
out of mind; and 2 though in anger, yet but a little anger: and (...) a
moment: And all that while 4 I am nor (...) full of thee, I remember thee, etc.
5 And this with kindness from everlasting to everlasting. When the Sun is
eclipsed, (which eclipse is rather of the earth then of the Sun, which shines
as (...)) foolish people think it will never recover light, but wise men know
it will.

But you will say,

How many years? Everlasting kindnesses. Remember the Text says, One than
fears God may [walke] in darkness* (...) a step or two, but many wearisome
turns in it Heman was afflicted from his youth, David so long that Psalm. 77.
he thought God had forgotten (...) And does his promise fail for ever?
Remember wh^^ is said in another case, Luke 18. 8. that though He bears long,
yet he comes speedily; (that is) though long in our eyes, yet speedily in his
own; (...) has all time before him, and knows how much time is behind to be
spent in embraces with you*

Yea but you will say, hiding his face; but I suffer terrors; he is wroth;
he is turned enemy; he fights against me; and therefore (...) vessel of wrath
sitted to destruction.

So it was with Job, Chap. 13. 24. Wherefore (...) thou thy face, and hold
me for thine enemy) So Esaias 63. 10. Psalm. 88. 16. All those are but the effects
of a temporal wrath. There is a wide difference between a child under wrath,
and a child of wrath. Thou may be a child under wrath, when not a child of
wrath: God as he may afflict you in your estates and bodies, so your spirits,
as a Father, for Heb. 12. 9. He is the Father of spirits.

Ten Directions for those who are more deeply troubled and means to be used how
to recover light and comfort.

FOr their sakes who are thus more deeply troubled, I will prescribe some
directions how they are to behave themselves in such a condition, so as to come
more comfortably and the more speedily out of it. For it is in these long and
great sicknesses of the soul, as in those of the body; men are kept the longer
in them, and under them, for want of right directions and prescriptions, as we
see in long agues and fevers, and the like diseases.

Direction 1.
FIrst, To take heed of rash, impatient, and unbeleeving speeches and wishes.
take heed of rash, desperate, impatient, and unbeleeving speeches and wishes:
such you will be forced to recall again with sorrow. As David, when he was in
fears, uttered a desperate speech, namely, that Samuels prophecy concerning
him, and message to him from God, that he should be King, would prove false;
and he says not only, that one day he should perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. (The ground of which speech was, that he (...) himself every day
in some danger or other of his life; and so, though God had preserved him
again and again, yet he thought that some of those many arrows which were
shot against him so continually, and which still so narrowly mist him, might at
one time or other hit and speed him, it were a wonder else:) but he says
further I said in my have, Psalm. 116. 11. that all men are liars, the Prophet
Samuel and all; that it was but a promise of a vain man; but he soon recalls
himself and adds, I said this in my have. So likewise Ps. 31. 22. I said in
my have, I am cut off; they were rash speeches (as he confesses) spoken in
have. Even so does many a poor (...) break forth and say, after they have had
strong hopes at first conversion, that a Kingdom is theirs, that heaven is
theirs, and that it is reserved for them, and they kept for it also through the
power of God: Yet the devil being let loose to (...) them as Saul did him, and
God hiding his face, and the arrows of the Almighty flying thick about their
ears, the sorrows of hell encompassing them, and well nigh every moment
cutting them off; they (although upheld again and again, yet) are apt to say,
that one day or other, they shall in all likelihood be cut off by Gods hand,
swallowed up of Satan and everlastingly destroyed. And when they are told of
the hopes they had at their first conversion, and the promises that are made to
them, they are apt to say, that their grace by which they should now claim
those promises are all a lie, false and counterfeit, and but in hypocrisy;
this they say in their have, too often. So at another time; (...) David was in
doubt about that other pro^^sse of an eternal Kingdom, made to him (...) he
says God will never be merciful; (...) rate weak speech was this? that what
a man sees not at present, he should conclude would never be: but he
acknowledges his error in it, It was my infirmity, ver. 10. thus to speak.
So the Church, Lament. 3. 17, 18, 19. I said, my hope is perished from the
Lord: What a desperate speech was this? but she eats her words again with
grief, ver. 21. This I recall to mind, therefore have I hope. Job, though for
a while, at the beginning of the storm he was somewhat calm and quiet in his
spirit, and it was his commendation; and therefore in the first Chap. ver. 22.
it is said, that in all this, that is, so long and thitherto, he had not
charged God foolishly; but this held but to the first and second Chapter, for
when he begun to be wet to the skin once, and the drops of Gods wrath began
to soake into his soul, then he falls a roaring, Chap. 3. and Curses the day
of his birth; and Chap. 6. ver. 8, 9. wishes God would cut him off; and Chap.
7. 15. says his soul did choose strangling, rather then life. For which
speeches God in the end steps out (as it were) from behind the hangings,
over-hearing him, taking him up for them: Chap. 38. 2. Who is this says he
that talks thus; How now?

But (good souls) you that are in trouble; oh take heed of such impatient
wishes or speeches; as these or the like, that all which you have had is but in
hypocrisy; and oh that God would cut me off! that I were in hell and knew the
worst! take heed I say: When a man is sick, and raves, whereas otherwise the
Physician and those that stand about him would in pity use him gently, they
are forced to hold and bind him; Impatiens agrotus crudelem medicum facit, an
impatient patient makes a Physician more cruel, then otherwise he would be:
So God would deal more gently with thee, but for such impatiencies. And know
that this is taking Gods name in vain in a high degree. You must know that the
graces of God written in your hearts are a part of Gods name, as whereby his
love is manifested to you; now for you to call the truth of these in question,
and say they are counterfeit; is as if you should say of the Kings hand and
seal, when it comes down to you, that it were counterfeit, and deny it; which
is crimen lasae Majestatis. So if a special friend, or your father had given
you some old precious pieces of gold or jewels, etc. as tokens of their love
and remembrances of them, for you to say in a distempered fit of jealousy, all
these are but counters and but Alchymie, you should exceedingly wrong and abuse
their love. Thus is it if you deny Gods handwriting in your own hearts, when
he has written therein by his Spirit, joy, fear, love, zeal, etc. and should
say, It is not like his hand: So if you deny the seal of the Spirit, after he
has sealed you up unto the day of redemption; and say that all the
earnest-penies of heaven, are but counters, and alchymie, and nothing worth; in
so doing, you take his name, his love, his mercy, and all in vain; yea you lie
against the holy Ghost, as the Apostle said in another case. Thus though God
give you full leave to try and examine all his graces in you, and dealings with
you; yet not desperately at the first blush and view, upon the least mistake or
flaw, to say they are no graces; and that he will never be merciful. You
abuse him when you do so: Take heed of it.

Direction 2.
SEcondly let the troubled soul make diligent search. To make a diligent
search, and examination.
Let an inquisition be set up in thy heart. So, Ps. 77. ver. 6. David in case
of desertion is said to do: I communed with mine own heart, and made diligent
search.

Now in this search make inquiry into two things.

First, 2. Things to be searched into.
what might be the true cause which provokes God thus to leave thee, and hide
himself from thee.

Secondly, what, in thine own heart is the main doubt, and objection,
reasoning and apprehension, which causes thee to fear and thus to call all
into question?

These are two distinct things. For though God has just cause and reason to
leave us to this trouble; yet often the thing that troubles and disquiets us,
is a mere mistake, a misapprehension: even as a father sees good reason often
to scare the child; but yet the thing he suffers him to be affrighted with, is
but a mere bugbeare. It is necessary to enquire into both.

First, 1. What is the true cause which provokes God to leave thee to this
distress.
examine what might be the true cause that provokes God thus to leave thee. So
Lament. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, it was spoken by the Church in
desertion, as appears by the former part of the Chapter. And to help your
selves in this, go over all the Cases which have been propounded: have thou
not been carnally confident in false signs? or rested too much on true, to the
neglect of Christ, and Gods free grace? Did thou not before neglect to stir up
thy own graces? etc. go over all those cases mentioned: something or other will
be found to be the cause. This is necessary, for all the cause be known, the
heart submits not; neither will it sanctify Gods name; nor will the trouble
cease, till that which provokes God to lay it on be confessed and forsaken.
And if it be a particular sin that God aims at, then usually, God uses the
horror for, and the guilt of that very sin to afflict thee with; and then
that sin it self is made the cause of thy trouble in thy own apprehension. So
as then it is easily found out; thou will find thy sin to be the thorn in
thy foot, the stone in thy shoo, that did grate, gal, and vex thee. David
(...) knew in Psalm. 51. what it was for which God broke his bones: for his very
sin was it was the iron Mace, the isntrumental cause it self of Gods
executing it upon him; the horror of that murder God used as the hammer to
break him withal, and as the rod to whip him with, ver. 3. My sin (says
he) is ever before me; it was ever in his eye. Indeed; in outward afflictions
it is more difficult to find out the cause why God afflicts a man; (unless
sometimes you may through Gods wise-disposing hand find and read the sin in
the punishment, they so resemble one another, so as a man may say, this cross
lay in the womb of such a sin, they are so like: in quo peccamus, in eodem
plectimur,) but in those inward distresses of conscience, that sin which is the
true cause, and that moves God to afflict, God often uses even the guilt of
that very sin to terrify thee; to cast a man into the distress and to keep
him in it, it is both the procatarticall cause, and executioner also.

But in case thou can not find out the cause, as Job (it seems) did not;
and Elihu did suppose he might not; therefore gives him this counsel (which
do thou also follow, till God show thee the cause) Job 34. 31, 32. to say unto
God (as he advises there) That which I see not, teach thou me, and I will not
offend any more; and if thou find it, say also, as ver. 31. I have borne
chastisement for such a sin, I will never offend any more: Till then God will
not let thee down.

The second thing to be searched into is; 2. What is the maine reasoning in thy
heart, that causes this question of thy estate
What is the chief and maine reasoning in thy heart, which makes thee call all
into question, whether God be thy God. What is the reason why thou think
so, what makes thee conclude so?

For this you must consider, that although God for some sin committed does
hide himself from thee, terrifies, and lasheth thy conscience, yet that which
causes in thee, and works in thee this apprehension [that God has cast thee
off,] is usually some false reasoning or misapprehension, some mere mistake,
some devise and sophistry of Satan. When the Corinthian was excommunicated for
his sin, Satan had leave to terrify his conscience for it, but Satan went
further, he would have swallowed him up of sorrow, by persuading him that such a
sin was unpardonable, and that God would never own him again: now the
reasoning Satan used to bring this upon him was a false one, some trick and
devise, 2 Cor. 2. 7. compared with the eleventh verse, whereof if a man be
ignorant, he may go mourning a long while, as a castaway. Therefore take thy
soul aside, and seriously ask it, and examine it Why it is thus troubled?
What reason, what ground thou have to think that God is not thy God? and then
examine it whether it be a true ground yea, or no? As the Apostle bid^ us, 1
Pet. 3. 15.
Give a reason of our faith: so ask thou of thy soul, the reason of its
doubting.

Thus David, Psalm. 42. ver. 5. Why art thou cast down oh my soul? and because
doubts arise again and again, therefore he asks the reason again, ver. 11.
Why art thou cast down? David knew, the way to dissolve them, was to search
into and examine the reason of them: for still when he had thoroughly examined
the^, he found them needless, and causeless, to put him into such desperate
fears. The child of God is often cast into prison, (...) fears and bondage,
and after he has layen long in them, and begins to read over the (...), and
Mittimus, he finds it to be false imprisonment, a mere trick of Satan his
Jaylour. For as carnal men, when they think their estate good, and that they
are in the favor of God, it is some delusion, some false reasoning that is
still the ground of such their opinion; as because they prosper in the world
therefore God loves them, because they perform some duties, have some good
motions, which grounds they cannot endure to have examined: (...) contrarily,
one that fears God, the ground of his apprehension that he is out of the
favor of God, is likewise some false reasoning, which when examined appears
to be such, and when it appear^^ the soul is freed out of its fears and
doubts. Heman thought, Psalm. 88. 14.
and said that God had cast him off; and what was the reason persuaded him to
think so, ver 14. Because God had hidden his face: It does not follow Heman; a
Father may hide his face from his son, and yet not cast him off. So David
also reasons, Psalm. 77. ver. 2, 3. I have sought God, prayed, and used the
means, and yet I am troubled; and yet God reveals not himself: and what does
he conclude from this? ver. 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever? He thought, [if
God had loved me, he would presently have heard me;] he thought his soul would
not have been worse after praying: This was a false reasoning, for Psalm. 70.
4. sometimes God shuts out his peoples prayers. A father may sometimes seem so
angry, that he may throw away his childs petition, and yet resolve to be his
father still. It were infinite to reckon up all the false reasonings, that
souls in distress have: sometimes from a place of Scripture misunderstood,
and misapplyed; some who being annoyed with blasphemous thoughts against God
and Christ, and his Spirit, though they be their greatest affliction, yet have
thought they have sinned against the Holy Ghost, upon the misapplying that
place Mat. 12. 31. That blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall never be
forgiven; whereas that place is meant only but of some one kind of blasphemy,
which indeed is wilful blaspheming of God and the work of his Spirit, out of
revenge, Heb. 10. 29. So some because they have sinned after enlightening and
tasting, and fallen into some gross sin, think they shall never be renewed;
by reason of that place, Heb. 6. 4. whereas he speaks of a wilful and
revengeful falling away, with such a reve^ge as they would, if they could,
crucify Christ again, ver. 6. For otherwise David had not been renewed, for
he sinned presumptuously, 1 Samuel 12. 9.
and despised the commandment. So some if they hear but of some fearful
example, and of Gods severe dealing with others, how he cast them off upon
such a sin, as he did Saul, they think and conclude that upon the commission
of the like, that God has cast them off also: But there is no certain ground
for such a thought, for secret things belong to God. So because some hear that
there is a time, after which, God sometimes offers grace no more, but swears
against some men; therefore, that their time is also past; which they can have
no ground for: for though it be true, God does so with many that hear the
Gospel, yet the word gives us no certain rules to judge he has done so by
any of us. It is good to fear least thou should provoke him to it, but thou
have no sign to fear he has done so with thee. And indeed herein lies the
maine and first business to be done in raising up a troubled soul, even to
find out the ground of their doubting, and to examine the truth of it and
confute it. If a man be falsely imprisoned or cast in a suit at Law, what does
he to remedy it? he seeks to find out the error in the writ: so do thou
search out the ground of thy trouble: go to some spiritual Lawyer skilled in
Soule-worke; keep not the devils council: he opposes nothing more then
making your doubts known.

Direction 3.
THe third direction I give to such is, 3. To consider as indifferently what
may make for them, as against them
that they keep and lend one ear as well to hear and consider what makes for
their comfort, as unto what may make against them.

This direction meets with a great infirmity of such as are in distress, who
through Satan's temptations have their hearts so deeply possessed with
prejudicial conceits of the misery of their estates, that as the people of God
in Exodus 6. 9. through the anguish of their hearts were so far distempered,
that they listened not to the good message which Moses brought them, nor
believed that so good news could be true of them: So are the souls of many
that are in distress, so filled with anguish and sense of misery, and so
strongly prepossessed with desperate opinions, and so far put out of hopes,
that they reject all that is spoken for their comfort; so as they will not so
much as be brought to cast an eye or a thought upon any thing that may be an
occasion of comfort to them: Like some prisoners at the bar, through
extremity of fear they cannot read that in their hearts and in the word which
might save them. Tell them of what God has wrought for them and in them, as
evidences of his love, and as they cannot, so often they will not read them
over; or if they do they read them over but as a man does a book he means to
confute, they pick quarrels, and make objections at every thing that is said:
as if they were hired as Lawyers to plead against themselves, and to find
flawes in their evidences. I have observed some who have set all their wits
awork to strengthen all arguments and objections against themselves, and who
have bin glad if they could object any thing which might puzzle those who have
come to comfort them; if they could hold argument against themselves: as if
they were disputing for the victory only. And thus through much poring upon,
and considering only what might make against them, they have had the bolts of
their hearts so far shot into despair, and fixed in desperate sorrow, and the
true wards of sound evidences so far wrung and wrested by false keys, that
when the skilfullest and strongest comforters have come with true keys, to
shoot back the bolt, they would not turn about, nay could scarce get entrance.

This was David's infirmity, as at the 10. verse of the 77. Psalm compared with
the second verse, My soul refuses to be comforted, he spilt all the cordialls
and physic that were brought him: he was not only void of comfort but
refused it. What? bring me promises to comfort me, (will such an one say) you
may as well carry them to one in hell; or give physic to a man past recovery;
and so will take down nothing that is given them. So also the Church, in the
third of the Lamentations ver. 17, 18. her heart was deeply possessed with a
desperate apprehension, My hope (says she) is perished from the Lord. And
what was it that shot her soul into so fixed despair? ver. 17. She forgot
all good: she forgot, that is, she would not so much as take into consideration
and remembrance, any thing that had been comfortable to her. All good (so the
original) that is, all Gods former good and gracious dealings with her, all
the good things wrought in her, and for her, whence she might have comfort:
and instead thereof, what did her thoughts feed and chew upon? only wormwood
and gall, her bitterness and distress, poring only on what might make
against her, I said my hope was perished from the Lord, calling to mind my
affliction, and my misery, my wormwood and gall. These she could revolve and
roll up and down in her mind though they were bitter, and would entertain
thoughts of nothing else. But when on the contrary, she began to take into
consideration, Gods gracious and faithful supporting her in that very
desertion, in faithfulness renewing his mercies every morning, ver. 22, 23.
and that still he maintained in her heart a longing and lingering after him, and
a secret cleaving to him, and that God did enable her to choose him as her
portion, ver. 24. [This] I recall to mind, (says she) ver. 21. (which speech
has reference to those words fore recited, which follow there;) therefore have
I hope; she spits out her wormwood, and ears her own words. And now that her
heart began to listen to what might comfort her, presently she began to have
hope. This sullen peevish desperate obstinacy is a thing you ought to take heed
of; for hereby you take Satan's part, and that against those you ought to love
so dearly, even your own souls: But as they said, Let Baal plead for
himself, So let Satan plead his own cause, do not you. Hereby also you
forsake your own mercies, (as it is said) Jonah 2. 8. you give up your own
right, and are so far befooled as to plead against your own title, your own
interest in the best things you can have interest in, Gods mercies, made yours
by an everlasting covenant; you give up your portion bequeathed you in your
fathers will, which you ought to maintain, and you trust to lying vanities,
the sooth-sayings, and fortune-tellings (as I may call them) of Satan and of
your own hearts. Hereby also ye become judges of evil thoughts: James 2.
For he is an ill hearer of a cause, who will hear but one party speak.

Direction 4.
THe fourth direction is, to make diligent search into, and to call to
remembrance what formerly has been between God and you: The remembrance of
former things does often uphold, when present sense fails. This David
practiced, in the like case Psalm. 77. ver. 5, 6. when his soul had refused
comfort, (as I told you) v. 2. yet in the end he began not only to be willing
to listen to what might make for him, but set himself aworke to recall to
mind, to consider the days of old, to make diligent search, namely into the
records and register of Gods dealings, ver. 11. to see if there were never a
record extant which might help him, now the devil pleaded against his title:
even as if your houses and lands were called into question, you would search
over old writings and deeds; so do you in this: I considered (says he) the
songs in the night, (that is) that joyful communion he had enjoyed with God
when God and he sang songs together, and I communed with mine own heart, and
made diligent search I tossed and tumbled over my heart, to see if no grace
formerly had been there, and if no grace at present were there; he searched
into what might comfort him, as well as into the causes might provoke God thus
to deal with him, for I take it both may be meant.

And so Job did, when he was thus stricken, and forsaken of God, he viewes over
every part of his life; he seeks what dry land he could find to get footing
upon in the midst of seas of temptations, recounts what an holy life he had
lived, with what fear and strictness he had served God. Chap. 29. and Chap.
30. and Chap. 31. throughout, and tells them plainly, Chap. 27. ver. 5, 6.
That let them plead and argue what they could against him, and go about to
prove him an hypocrite, till I die (says he) I will not remove mine integrity
from me, nor let go my righteousness: I will never give up mine interest in
Gods mercies, nor the evidences I have to show for them, and says he Chap. 19.
27, 28. Though my reins be at present consumed, yet the root of the matter is
in me; (that is) though God deals thus hardly with me, as you see, yea though
the exercise of grace is much obscured, the Sunshine of Gods favor
withdrawn, his face hidden from me, and the joyful fruits of righteousness,
and comfortable fresh green speeches, and leaves you have known to grow upon
this now withered stock fallen off; yet there is the root of the matter still
(...); a root of faith that decays not, a constant frame of grace, that still
remains, which hareth sin, loves God, and you shall all never bear me from
it. And can thou call nothing to remembrance betwixt God and thee, which
argues infallibly his love? what nothing? Look again, Did God never speak
peace to thy heart, and shed his love abroad in it? Have thou at no time found
in thine heart pure strains of true love and good will to him? some pure drops
of godly sorrow for offending him, and found some dispositions of pure
self-denial, wherein thou did simply aim at his glory more then thine own
good? Have thou never an old tried evidence which has been acknowledged and
confirmed again and again in open court? what not one? And if thou (...) now
call to mind but one, if in truth, it may support thee. For if one promise
does belong to thee, then all do: for every one conveyes whole Christ, in whom
all the promises are made, and who is the matter of them: as in the Sacraments,
the bread conveyes whole Christ, and the wine also whole Christ: so in the
word, every promise conveyes whole Christ. And if thou can say as the Church
of Ephesus, Rev. ^. 6. This thing I have, that I hate sin, and every sin as
God hates it, and because he hates it: as Christ owned them for this one grace,
and though they had many sins and many failings, yet (says he) this thou
have, etc. If Christ will acknowledge thee to be his for one eare-mark; or if
he sees but one spot of his child upon thee, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
thou may well plead it, even any one to him; Yea though it be but in a
lesser degree, if in truth and sincerity. For God brings not a pair of scales
to weigh your graces, and if they be too light refuses them; but he brings a
touchstone to try them; and if they be true gold, though never so little of it,
it will pass current with him; though it be but smoke not flame, Mat. 12. 20.
though it be but as a week in the socket, as it is there in the original,
likelier to dye and go out then to continue, which we use to throw away; yet he
will not quench it, but accept it. Yea and though at present thou find in
thy sense no grace stirring in thee, nothing but hardness, deadness, etc. yet
if thou can remember, [yea but this once I had;] as a woman with child,
though after her first quickening, she does not always find the child to
stir, yet because she did feel it stir, she still conceives hopes and thinks
she is with child; So think thou of the new creature formed within thee.

These things you are to recall and consider in time of distress: to remember
former graces, and spiritual dispositions in you, and Gods gracious dealings
with you; God remembers them to have mercy on you; and why should not you
remember them to comfort you? Therefore Heb. 6. 9, 10. We hope (says he)
better things of you, for God is not unrighteous to forget your labor of love,
namely, to reward you; and therefore he calls upon them in like manner, Heb.
10. ver. 31. To call to remembrance the former days to comfort them; how they
held out when their hearts were tried to the bottom; when shipwreck was made
of their goods, good names, and all for Christ; yet they made not shipwreck of
a good conscience. And if thou do thus call to remembrance things of old, and
yet can find no comfort at first from them, (as often ye may not, as was
David's case Psalm. 77. for after his remembrance of his songs in the night,
still his soul was left in doubt, and he goes on to say, Will God ever be
merciful?) yet have recourse to (...) again, and then again; for though they
(...) not at one time, they may at another: that it may be seen that God
comforts by them, and not they alone of themselves. Have thou found a (...)
(which is a breast of consolation) milklesse* Isay 66. 11.
yet again suck comfort may come in the end. (...) thou have empanelled a Jury
and grand Inquest to search, and their first verdict condemns thee, of they
bring in an (...); yet do as wise Judges often do, send them about it again,
they may find it the next time. Jonah looked once it (...), and found no
comfort, Jonah 2. 4. For he said, I will look again toward thine holy
Temple. A (...) heart is like those two faced pictures, if you look one way
toward one side of them, you shall see nothing but some horrid shape of a
devil, or the like; but go to the other side, and look again, and you shall
see the picture of an Angel, or of some beautiful woman, etc. So some have
looked over their hearts by signs at one time, and have to their thinking found
nothing but hypocrisy, unbelief, hardness, selfe-seeking; but not long after
examining their hearts again by the same signs, they have espied the image of
God drawn fairly upon the table of their hearts.

Direction 5.
BUt now if former signs remembered, 5. To renew a man's faith and repentance.
bring thee no comfort in, but the waves that come over thy soul prove so
deep, that thou can find no bottom to cast anchor on, the storm and
stresse so great that no cable will hold, but they snap all asunder, as is
often the case of many a poor soul:

Then 5. take and put in practice this fifth direction, renew thy faith and
repentance, set thy heart aworke, to believe and repent afresh as if thou had
never yet begun. Leave off and cease awhile to reason about the goodness of
thy former faith and repentance, and set upon the work of believing and
repenting anew; spend not all the time in casting out of anchors, but fall
apumping. Say, well, suppose I have not hitherto been in the state of grace,
yet I am not incapable of it for time to come, I may obtain grace yet. Suppose
my faith and repentance has not been true hitherto, I will therefore now
begin to endeavor after such as is true; and to that end make this use of
whatsoever flawes the devil finds in either, to direct thee what to mend and
rectify for time to come; begin to make up the breaches and unsoundnesse which
is discovered, endeavor after a supply of all those wants he objects to be
in either, to mend all the holes he pickes. Say, Lord I cast my self upon thy
mercies afresh, I desire now to make my heart perfect with thee for time to
come, to part with every sin, to submit to every duty, to curse every by-end
to hell, and to set up God and Christ as my mark, pole star, and aim in all;
and when thou have done this, let the devil say his worst. This of all the
former directions I commend to you, as a special means to dissolve and put
these temptations about assurance to an end. I set a probatum est upon it, take
it, practice it, it is a tried one; and it is that which at the last the Church
in desertion comes to: Lam. 3. 40. Come let (...) try our ways, and turn to
the Lord, that is the last way and course she takes. Now when the water is at
the lowest, and the tide of assurance ebbed, (...) up your banks as you use to
do at low waters. Now when nothing but hypocrisy, and unbelief, and
faisenesse of heart appear to thee, to be in thy heart, do thou groan, sigh,
endeavor after the contrary sincerity, and let Satan say his worst: and this
direction I now in the next place prescribe you, because in time of temptation
about assurance, it is the usual course of some troubled souls to spend (...)
their thoughts upon what formerly they have had, as if they must have comfort
only from the former work or no way: laying out all their time and cost in
new suites and new trials about their former title, and when they have been
cast again and again, yet still to do nothing but read over old evidences
again and again, and bring in and study new proofs.

But know, that though this is to be done, and not to be neglected, and is
found often comfortable, therefore in the former direction I exhorted to it:
yet you are not only to take that course, nor to look back, so much to your
former faith and repentance, as to forget to practice new. But begin to
practice new acts of faith and repentance, this is the rightest way, the
shortest cut, and requires as little pains: thou may with as little charge
get a new Lease renewed, as prove good the old one; it will require many terms
to examine over all thy evidences again and again, which also happily are
blotted and blurred; thou may cut the knot and dissolve the temptations
sooner by new faith, then untie it by reasonings and disputings: And the truth
is, in the end thou must come to this, for Gods great end in deserting, is to
put you upon renewing your faith and repentance: Except ye he co^verted, (as
Christ says to his Apostles) Converted as it were anew. He will not deliver
thee out of the dungeon, till thou entrest into new bonds and bail for thy
good behavior. Therefore begin to do it soon. And whereas thou think that by
this thou may prejudice thy former title, that is not my meaning, as if thou
should utterly give up thy old faith and repentance as counterfeit; I will
keep my integrity (says Job:) only my advice is to forbear, and to cease
pleading of it for a time, and to begin to renew it rather, that is it I exhort
unto: And then the comfort of thy old repentance will come in: As the Apostle
says of the Law, so I of thy former title, it is not destroyed, but
established rather by this. And as Christ says John 7. 17. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the doctrine that it is of God: So as often the best
way to know the truth is not to spend all the time in disputing about it, but
to practice it, which puts an end to controversies in men's hearts: so say I, to
know the truth of, and so to come to have the comfort of former grace, is to
add to these reasonings about it, the practice of believing and repenting
anew: This baffles the devil exceedingly, and gets the advantage of him: for
by this the suite is removed, all his old pleas dashed, this puts him upon a new
reply, diverts the war, and indeed non-plusseth him, for what can he say to it?
he must now prove thou art incapable of grace, that thou shall never repent,
which all the world and devils in hell cannot prove. And yet if in this case
he tells thee (as usually he does) that all will be in vain for time to come,
as well as it has been for time past:

Direction 6.
THen sixthly, stand not now disputing it, but be peremptory and resolute in
thy faith and turning to God, 6. To be resolute and peremptory in believing and
turning to God whatever may be the issue.
let the issue be what it will be. Faith is never nonplust, it is a most
desperate thing; Job vows he will trust him though he kills him, Job 13. 15.
So do thou, whether he will damn or save thee, do what he will with thee,
leave not to cast thy self upon him for mercy, nor to serve and love him. Go
thou on to use the means diligently and constantly; and be so much the more
diligent, fear and hate sin still, pray day and night as Heman did when he
thought himself cut off, Psalm. 88. ver. 1. I have cried day and night, though
I be as one thou remembrest no more, ver. 4, 5. and so at the ninth verse I
have called daily, though ver. 10, 11, 12. he thought himself in hell, and
thought it a miracle ever to be raised up again, yet says he ver. 13. But I
have cried to thee, that [But] seems to come in as an expression of his
resolution, that though these were his apprehensions of his condition, yet
howsoever, he had, and would go on to seek the Lord. Suppose thou find no
relish in the ordinances, yet use them; though thou art desperately sick, yet
eat still, take all is brought thee, some strength comes of it: Say, be I
damned or saved, hypocrite or not hypocrite, I resolve to go on. And there is
good reason for it: for if thou should leave off to serve the Lord, and
resolve never to look after him more, then thou art sure to be damned; if
there be an evil heart in thee to depart from the living God, thou art
undone, but this other way of seeking him thou may in the end prevail, Who
knows but God may be merciful? in the third of the Lament. 29. this counsel
is given to a soul being yoked and deserted, to put his mouth in the dust; and
it waits, says he, suffers, and does any thing, not only if he has hope,
but if there may be hope, if there be but such a thought it may prove so, he
will make a venture, and so do thou. See what Ester did in the like desperate
case; thought she, if I hold my tongue (and so Mordecay told her) God will
destroy me: and better it was to make a venture upon the King to speak, and so
to carry her life in her hand; and therefore she says, if I perish I perish.
And so the Lepers, see how they reasoned in a desperate case, 2 Kings 7. 3, 4.
If we go into the City we are sure to die, for the famine is there; if we sit
still, we die also: Come let us fall into the hands of the Assyrians, if they
save us alive, so; if they kill us, we shall (however) but dye; and there were
many strong arguments to move them to think they would kill them, for they
were Jews, and so of the enemies side, and might be suspected for spies; if
not, they were Lepers that might infect the camp, who were fit for no service,
for nothing but to be knock^ ith head: yet in this desperate case they took
the surer and more probable part, ventured to fall to the Assyrians side, and
the success is known to you all. So reason thou; if I give over my believing,
humbling my self, praying, attending on the means, I shall certainly perish,
there is no help for it; I will therefore rather go on to do all these as
sincerely as I can to the utmost and if God saves me a sinner, a leper, an
enemy, so; if not, I can be but damned.

But let me tell thee such a resolution can never go to hell with thee; yea,
if any have a room in heaven, such a soul shall: for this puts not the devil
only to it, (for in this case, what can the devil himself say to thee? for
if thou will venture thy soul, service, and all upon God, let the issue be what
it will, in this resolute, yet safe way: if thou will in a pure trust refer
it unto God with contentedness and submission, what is that to him?) but it
puts God to it also, who cannot find in his heart to damn such an one who
shall go on to do thus: when thou thus freely servest him, choosest him,
venturest and leavest thy self and all the issue of thy ways to him; thou by
this one act in such a case shall win more upon him and his love, then happily
by all thy obedience all thy life before. Thy salvation, and the assurance of
it, that is Gods work, leave it to him, try his faithfulness, it is self
love makes us so much troubled about it. Go thou on to believe, repent, mourn
for sin, hate, forsake it, to use the means, etc. that is thy work; and so
doing, thou can not be damned.

Direction 7.
-- Let him trust in the Name of the Lord --
IF you ask what ground a soul in this case may have to venture thus upon --

I answer His Name; which will make up a seventh direction.

Being thus resolved to turn to God, and to go on to fear and obey him, thou
may safely and confidently trust in and stay upon the Name of God when thou
have nothing else to rest upon. This you see is the direction which the text
gives, and I had thought therefore to have made a distinct point of it, but I
will somewhat more largely open and explain it, only as it is a direction,
and means of support and comfort in this distress; and so take it as it
rises out of the text. Thus,

That to one who resolves to fear God and obey him, the Name of God is an al
sufficient prop and stay for his faith to rest on when he sees nothing in
himself, or in any promise in the word belonging unto him.

The Name of God alone is here opposed to all other means and props which
faith has to rest on. It is opposed to all comfortable sense of Gods love, to
all sight of any grace in a man's self to which any promise is made: So that
when the soul shall look into its self with one eye, and glaunce over all
the word of God with another; and yet shall see not any one grace in the one,
nor promise in the other made to any grace in it self which it may rest upon;
yet the soul then looking upon God, and considering what a God he is, and what
he says of himself, of his mercy and kindness, and free grace toward
sinful men. The consideration of what merely it knows to be in God as he is
revealed in the covenant of grace, may support him. This it is to stay upon his
name.

Now to explain this further to you: By the name of God two things are meant.

First, those glorious attributes, especially of grace and mercy, whereby God
has expressed himself, and made himself known to us.

Secondly, Jesus Christ, as he is made and set forth to be righteousness to
the sons of men.

For the first, in the 24. of Exodus ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. The Lord proclaimed his
name; The Lord God, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and
sin, and will by no means clear the impenitent.

For the second, I refer to that place, Ier. 23. 6. speaking of Christ; This
is the name wherewith he shall be called, or made known to us; THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS, (that is,) that Jesus Christ who is God, has righteousness in
him for us, which may be made ours.

So that when a poor soul in distress is not able to say, I see such or such
signs, or any evidence in my self, whereby I can say God is my God, or that
Christ is mine; yet because I see free grace enough in God, and righteousness
in Christ, which I being a sinful man, and not a devil, may therefore be
capable of, and may come to have an interest in them, though I know nothing in
my self whereby I can challenge any present interest: and because grace and
mercy is his Name, and Our Righteousness his Sons Name; therefore I do cast
my self upon both, for pardon and favor, and thereupon my soul leanes,
stays, and abides, and from these it will not be driven. So that these two
apprehensions meeting in the heart in truth, help to make up this resting upon
his Name here spoken of; namely, First, [that there is such free grace, good
will, and mercy, etc. in God, and that Jesus Christ is appointed and made to be
our Righteousness.] And secondly, [that I am capable of, and may come to have an
interest in both these,] and that though there be nothing in me which may
challenge an interest in them, yet there is nothing that excludes me;
whereupon I cast my self upon God for both, and there rest: yea though I
cannot yet say that ever I shall obtain them. And this where it is in truth,
and accompanied with that firm resolution of turning to God in all things
aforementioned, is as good faith as any of you have in your hearts.

And so I come to the proof of this: namely, That when the name of God and
Christ are thus simply and alone apprehended, they may be sufficient ground
for faith to rest upon; then which nothing can be more comfortable to a poor
distressed believer. Number. 14. When Gods wrath waxed hot against his people, (as
sometimes in like manner it does against a poor soul) that God began to say,
how long shall they provoke me? ver. 11. and speaks of destroying them, and of
making Moses a great Nation: what has Moses his faith recourse unto, but to
that proclamation of his Name you heard of before? and urges that, ver. 17,
18. Let the power of my Lord be great according as thou have spoken: The Lord
is long suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and
sin, and he desires him to show his power in pardoning, because as much power
is seen in overcomming his wrath, as in making a world. Let thy power be great;
it was his name you see that was alleged by Moses and prevailed with God for
mercy. So also for his Sons sake, The Lord our Righteousness, Elihu says
Job 33. when a man's soul is in deepest distress, as in the 19, 20, 21, 22.
ver. he describes it, yet says he ver. 23. If there be a messenger to show a
man his uprightness, that is, that righteousness, that is laid up for men in
the Lord Jesus: then God is gracious to him, and says, deliver him, and he
resting thereupon, his flesh returns to him again; it is a means to stay him
and restore him. I mention these places of the old Testament rather then of
the new; out of which you see Gods name and his Sons name are all-sufficient
to uphold and support a soul. So the penman of that Psalm, whether David or
whoever, Psalm. 130. when he was in his depths, as ver. 1, 2. plunged over head
and ears in sorrow and discomfiture, what has his faith recourse unto (...).
4. to Gods name, to nothing that was in himself, but simply to what his faith
apprehended to be in God. Mercy it with thee; he says no more; in him, and
with him, it is to be had: and he confirms his faith in that, by this
argument, because else none would fear him: and If thou were extreme to mark
what were amiss, no man could stand, or would be saved: therefore surely
(says he) mercy is with thee, and therefore let Israel hope in the Lord, ver.
7. And why? what, because Israel sees he has grace in himself? no, but because
mercy is with him and plenteous redemption: v. ult. which word redemption has
relation to his Sons name. There is enough in him, else he will have none, and
Israel is mentioned in his will, as capable of it: and therefore says he, I
will wait and hope in the Lord. ver. 5. and though he could not say that God
had forgiven him, yet forgiveness was with him: and there he pitcheth and
rests his soul; as a beggar at a great man's door, when there is none else
in the country able or willing to relieve him, there he lies; though he knows
not whether he shall have any thing or no. In my fathers house there is bread
enough, (says the Prodigal) there it is to be had; and no where else, and
there is enough; and crummes will serve me, says the woman of Canaan; thou art
the Mediator thought she, and it is thy business to save, and though I am a
dog, yet I am capable of having crummes; Woman says Christ, great is thy
faith; not such faith among all my disciples. These trusted in his name, and
nothing in themselves. So Psalm. 62. David says at the 5. ver. He trusted in
God for salvation and mercy, and exhorts throughout the whole: Trust in God
fully and at all times, and in no creature. ver. 8. 9. And what was it he
rested upon? simply two attributes of his, viz. Mercy and Power. God has
spoken once, (that is, irrevocably: as Psalm. 89. 35. Once have I sworn, etc.)
and twice I have heard this, that is, often met with it in the word, and
thought of it, (says he) that with God is power, v. 11. so as he is able to
save in the greatest distress; and I have heard that to him belongs mercy
also, v. 12. and therefore he may be willing to help, and because these are in
him, though I have nothing in my self, yet these I rest upon, and these alone.
Many such instances more might be brought.

The reasons why the name of God,

Exodus 34. 5, 6. consider every letter in that his Name, and every letter
answers to some temptation may be made by us.

First, art thou in misery and great distress, he is merciful, The Lord
merciful, the Lord therefore able to help thee, and merciful, therefore
wiling.

Yea but secondly, thou will say I am unworthy, I have nothing in me to move
him to it, well therefore, he is gracious, now grace is to show mercy freely.
Yea, but I have sinned against him long, for many years, if I had come in when
I was young, mercy might have been shown me: To this he says, I am long
suffering. Yea, but my sins every way abound in number, and it is impossible
to reckon them up, and they abound in heinousness, I have committed the same
sins again and again; I have bin false to him, broke promise with him again
and again: his Name also answers this objection, he is abundant in
goodness; he abounds more in grace, then thou in sinning; and though thou
have been false again and again to him, and broke all covenants, yet he is
abundant in truth, also better then his word, for he cannot to our capacities
express all that mercy that is in him for us. Yea, but I have committed great
sins, aggravated with many and great circumstances, against knowledge,
wilfully, etc. he forgives iniquity, transgression, and sin; sins of all
sorts. Yea, but there is mercy thus in him but for a few, and I may be none of
the number: yes, there is mercy for thousands, and he keeps it, treasures of
it lies by him, and are kept, if men would come in and take them.

Object what thou can, his Name will answer thee: Need thou comfort as
well as pardon? he is both Father of mercies, and God of all comforts, that is
his Name, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Need thou peace of conscience being filled with
terrors? he is the God of peace, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Yea, but I have an heart
empty of grace and holiness, and full of corruptions; He is the God of all
grace to heal thee, as well as of peace to pardon thee? Need thou wisdom and
direction? he is the Father of lights, as the Apostle says. Is thy heart
inconstant, and full of double mindedness? he is unchangeable also, as he
speaks there: James 1. Thus all objections that can be made, may be answered
out of his Name: Therefore it is all-sufficient for faith to rest upon.

The like may be as fully showed in his Sons name; in whom God has made
himself strong to show mercy and bestow all good things. Whose Name is
adequate to Gods Name, that is, is of as large extent in worth and merit, as
Gods heart is in his purposes of showing and bestowing mercies, to purchase all
that God meant to bestow. Whose Name has likewise an al-sufficiency in it to
supply all our wants, and desires, and satisfy all scruples. For example, that
his Name mentioned by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 9. 6. (which he here directs to:)
compared with 1 Cor. 1. ult. For, would we have peace of conscience, and the
guilt of sins removed? He is the Prince of peace, and is made Righteousness
to us. Are we in depths of distress, terrors within, terrors without, out of
which we see no redemption? he is the Mighty God, able to save to the utmost,
being made redemption to us. Want we grace, and his image to be renewed and
increased in us? He is the Everlasting father, a Father to beget his likeness
in us, and everlasting, to maintain it ever, when it is begun once, he is made
sanctification to us. Want we wisdom to guide us? He is the counselor, and is
made wisdom to us. All we want he has; even as all he has we want: and
further, although we not only want all these, but never so much of all these,
his Name is also Wonderful. For such he is in all these; able to do beyond
all our expectations, to wonderment.

Or if the soul desires more distinct and particular satisfaction in point of
justification, which consists in the pardon of sins, and acceptance to the
favor of God, it being the point which in this state of desertion is
questioned, and wherein the soul desires satisfaction; That other name of his
The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. will answer all objections and doubts
that our hearts can make, if we had but skill to spell all the letters in it.
For if that righteousness of his satisfied God, who in condemning us, 1 John
3. 20.
is greater then our hearts; then it may satisfy our hearts much more. The
righteousness of his life and death, is not only (...) an adequate sufficient
ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6. But there is plenteous redemption in it, Psalm. 130. Yea
to superfluity as the Apostles phrase implies; (...) 1 Timothy 1. 14. that is,
overfull, more then would serve the turn; and that to pardon his sins, who v.
15. was the chief of sinners. He elsewhere challenges all the wit and powers
of sin and hell and darkness to appear in this dispute, and undertakes to
answer them all out of this one position, which he lays as a bottom truth.
[Christ has dyed,] Romans 8. 34. which is in effect the same with this, The Lord
our righteousness: Who therefore (says he) shall condemn? What can be
alleged either in the heinousness of sin in the general, or in any of thy
sins in particular, unto which an answer may not hence be fetched? from the
righteousness of his death and life. Is it that sin is an offense against the
great God: Against thee, against thee, etc. as David speaks: and is not this
his righteousness, the righteousness of Jehovah, Jehovah our righteousness, who is
the mighty God? Is the glory of this great God, and all his excellencies
debased by us in sinning* and will not the emptying of his glory, Phil. 2. 7.
whose name is the brightness of his fathers glory, Heb. 1. 2.
in performing this righteousness for us, satisfy and make amends? Are our
sins the transgression of the holy and righteous Law in every part of it? and
did not Jehovah who gave and made that Law, to make himself our
righteousness, make himself under the law? Gal. 4. 4. and to make up a full
righteousness, fulfill every part of it? Romans 8. 3, 4. Is it thy continuance
in sin, and the number, and iteration of them that amazeth thee? All fullness
dwells in him who is our righteousness, Col. 1. 19. and has dwelt in him
longer then sin in thee; and the righteousness of our Messiah is everlasting
righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. The merit of which, an eternity of sinning could
not expend, or make void. And is all this righteousness laid up for himself
only, or for any other, so as thou might never come to have interest in it?
No: the top of our comfort is, that [Our] righteousness is one letter of his
Name; and that our names are put into his. For us it is, and Ours it is
ordained to be: as much ours to save us trusting upon it, as his own to
glorify him. Ours; not for himself: he had no need of it, being God blessed
for ever. Ours, not the Angels: neither the good, for they are justified by
their own: nor the bad, they are put out of Gods will for ever. But ours, who
are the sons of men; and among them, theirs especially, who are broken, lost,
whose souls draw near to the grave, and their lives to the destroyers; and
that come and pray unto God, and stay themselves upon it; unto them God cannot
deny it, for it is theirs* For he will render to man [His] righteousness. Job
33. 22, 26. So as his Sons Name also is all-sufficient to answer all
objections for faith to rest upon: So as they that know his name will trust in
him, Psalm. 9. 10.

A second reason why his name is sufficient, Yea and Amen only in this his
Name, and his Sons Name. That is the original of them all; the root, the
seed of them all; his Name is the materia prima the first matter of all those
secondary promises, ex quo fiunt, and in quod resolvuntur, his Name gives being
to them all; if it were not for the mercy, grace, truth, kindness in him, and
the righteousness which is in his Son all the promises which are made, what
were they worth? As the worth of bonds depends upon the sufficiency of the man
who makes them, so all these promises upon his Name.

Therefore now, when you rely upon his Name having as yet no promise made to
any thing in you to rely upon, you then rely upon that which is the
foundation of all those promises, you then have recourse to the original,
which is more authentical then extract copies; you rely on that which all
those other are resolved into, and therefore is sufficient, though all the rest
fail you in your apprehension.

Thirdly, Names sake, and his Sons Names sake, he does all he does; and for
nothing in us, but merely for what is in himself, so Esaias 48. 9, 10. For my
Names sake, etc. So also Ezekiel. 36. 22, 32. For my Names sake, and not your
sake: and Esaias 43. 25. I am he that blotteth out thy transgression for my own
sake, and will not remember thy sins. For it he blotteth out transgression,
and pardons. And if it be for his Names sake he does all he does, and
fulfilleth all promises made to us, and to what is in us: Then when thou see
nothing in thy self to which any promise is made, nothing which may appear to
be any argument or motive that he will pardon thee, then trust thou in that his
Name; that because he is God, and has mercy in him, that therefore he will do
it. For that thing which is the only or maine motive to God himself to do
any thing for us, must needs be (when apprehended and believed) the strongest
and surest ground for our faith also, to persuade the heart that he will do
it. As it is in knowledge, the knowledge of the causes of things causes the
surest knowledge: So in faith, the knowledge of the maine motive to God the
cause of all, causes the greatest certainty of persuasion.

This then may direct poor souls in distress, what to venture all upon, upon
what ground to hazard souls, labors, endeavors, faith, repentance, obedience
and all, upon his Name, when they see nothing in themselves to which any
promise belongs: as David says, Psalm. 73. 26. My heart may fail, and my flesh
may fail, but God will never fail: So I may say, your comforts in prayers, in
hearing, your joys, your earnest-penies you have laid up, may be all spent in
a dearth, your own graces and all promises made to them: your own hearts may
fail, and being creatures they use to fail again and again, but Gods Name
and his Sons Name rested on, will never fail you: Lean on these, not by
halves [in distress,] 1 Pet. 1. 13.
but trust perfectly (as the Apostle says) on that mercy you hear is in God,
upon that grace revealed: That is, throw, and cast your whole souls, your
whole weight upon it. he only has perfect peace, Isa. 26. 3.
whose mind is staid on thee; Psalm. 61. 2.
have not half thy soul upon that rock which is higher then thee, but creep
up, and get all upon it, and when all fail, renew thy faith on his Name.
Thereon rest, there die. To this purpose may that of Solomon serve, Prove. 18.
10. His Name (says he) is a strong Tower, and the righteous fly to it and are
safe. Now what end is there, and use of a Tower in a City? but that when all
outworkes are taken, the walls scaled, all fortifications forsaken, houses
left, then a Tower holds out last, and is a refuge to fly to. So also when the
devil and Gods wrath beleaguers thee round, and encompasseth thy soul, and the
comfort of every grace in thee is taken from thee, and thou art driven from,
and art forced to forsake all other thy holds and grounds of comfort, then fly
to the Name of the Lord, as thy City of refuge: as Heb. 6. 18. it is compared;
Say, there is mercy in thee, Lord, and that is thy Name: and there is
righteousness in thy Son, and that is his Name: and I am directed to trust in
thy Name in time of need: and here rest and catch hold as on the horns of the
Altar, and if thou dyest, dye there.

Direction 8.
THe eighth direction is, To wait in the use of all means.
to Wait upon God, thus trusting in his Name, in the constant use of all
ordinances and means of comfort: Waiting is indeed but an act of faith further
stretched out. As an Allegory is but a continued Metaphor, so waiting is but a
continuing to believe on God, and to look for help from him, with submission,
though he stays long ere he comes. Waiting is an act of faith resting on God;
and an act of hope expecting help from him; an act of patience, the mind
quietly contenting it self till God does come, and of submission if he should
not come. Therefore says the Church being in this very case: It is good (says
she) to hope, Lament. 3. 26.
and quietly to wait for the salvation of the Lord. It is good indeed to do
so; for God will afflict the less, case you the sooner, comfort you the more
when he does come; and in the mean while it makes you to possess your souls,
and to be your selves, and upholds them: and to do otherwise, to be
impatient, and to give over looking for the Lord, as Abaz did, is the greatest
folly that can be; for as Job says Chap. 12. ver. 14. If he shut up, there is
no opening; all the world cannot let you out, he keeps the keys of the
dungeon, and you must stay his leisure, and he stays but for a fit time to let
you out, Esaias 30. 18. He will wait to be grati^^^ to you, for he is a God of
judgment, a wise and judicious God, and knows the fittest times and seasons;
and that he stays so long, is not out of want of mercy, for he waits, and
longs to be gracious; but he does it out of Judgment, and his wisdom sees not
a fit time; he is grieved as well as you, that you are not yet fit for mercy,
that his mercy would not yet be exalted if he should show it, till you further
see your misery; and therefore says he, Blessed are all they that wait for
him. And as he now waits but to be the more gracious to thee, so he did
heretofore, a long while wait for thee, that thou should begin to turn to
him, and said, When will it once be; Ier. 13. ult. Thou made him stay thy
leisure in turning from thy sin, why may he not make thee stay his for the
pardon of it? And indeed the escaping hell in the end is so great a mercy, that
it is worth the waiting for all thy days, though thou endure an hell here, and
gettest not a good look till the very last gasp and moment of living;
therefore put thy mouth in the dust, Lament. 3 29.
and wait quietly, if there may be hope at last.

And waiting thus, go on to use all the means of grace more diligently, more
constantly, though thou find a long while no good by them: omit no ordinance
God has appointed for thy comfort and recovery: As in a long sickness, you
still use means though many have failed, as the woman who had the bloody
issue, spent all upon Physicians, in the use of means for her recovery. That
trouble of mind does only hurt you, that drives you from the means: that
trouble of mind that drives you to the means can never hurt you. Therefore
the devil endeavors nothing more then to keep such souls from the word, from
good company, from the Sacraments, from prayer, by objecting their
unprofitablenes unto them, and that all is in vain, and that you do but
increase your condemnation.

But first, if thou learnest no other lesson in the use of the means, but that
thou art of thy self most unprofitable; and that unless God teaches thee to
profit, no good is done, and so learnest to depend upon God in the ordinance;
This is a great degree of profiting.

But secondly, as when men are sick and eat, and cast up again, you use to
say, yet take something down, for some strength is gotten, something remains
in the stomach which keeps life and soul together: So I say here, though thou
should forget in a manner all thou hear, seem to reap no benefit by
it: yet hear, for some secret strength is gotten by it. And for increasing thy
condemnation know, that utterly to neglect and despise the means is greater
condemnation: and know that if thou should use them in a way of dependence,
and obedience to God, it would lessen thy condemnation. Therefore read, pray,
meditate, hear, confer, receive the Sacraments, forbear not these your
appointed meals. Indeed when the body is sick ye use to forbear your
appointed food, but when the soul is sick there is more need of them then
ever. All these are both meat and medicine, food, physic, cordials, and all.
Use reading the word; The Scriptures were written for our consolation,
therefore read them much: attend on preaching, for God creates the fruits of
the lips peace, Isa. 57. So receive the Sacrament often, those days are
sealing days; go thou and confess thy sins, write over thy pardon, put in
all thou know by thy self, bring it to Christ to set his seal to it.

Only take this caution, that thou trust not to the use of the means, but
unto God in the means: To think, oh I shall have comfort by such a man, or at
such a time, in such an ordinance; this often dasheth all. So believe in God as
if you used no means, and yet as diligently use the means, even as if your
confidence were to be in them.

Direction 9.
To Pray; Pleas to be used to God in Prayer for recovery out of this condition.
ANd ninthly, above all things Pray, and get others also to pray for thee, for
God often restores comfort unto such, at the request of Mourners for them, Isa.
57. 18. But yet especially be earnest and fervent in pouring forth thy
complaint thy self; for though the speaking of friends may somewhat further
thy suite, yet (as between two wooers, so) it must be wrought out between God
and thee alone in private; and his good will must be obtained by wooing him in
secret. This counsel the Apostle gives you, James 5. 13. Is any man afflicted?
let him pray. And because of all afflictions else, this of darkness in a man's
spirit needs prayer the most: therefore David pens a Psalm on purpose, not
for his own private use only, but for the benefit and use of all other in the
like distress; as by the title of it does appear. Psalm. 102. A prayer for the
afflicted, when he it (...) and (...) out his complaint before the Lord. And
this (says David) is my constant practice when my soul (...), I pour out my
prayer unto thee: Psalm. 61. 3. And it was Christ's also, for in his agony he
prayed yet more earnestly, Luke 22. 44.

When at any time therefore, thy sins and Gods wrath meeting in thy
conscience, make thee deadly sick, as Isay speaks, then pour forth thy soul,
lay open and confess thy sin; and as it will ease thee, (as vomiting uses to
do) so also it will move God to pity, and to give thee cordials, and comforts
to restore thee again. Thus David, Psalm. 38. ver. 18. being in great
distress, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. I will declare mine iniquity, and be sorry for my
sin: and he makes it an argument to God to pardon him, When his bones were
broken, Psalm. 51. Cleanse me from my sin, ver. 2. for I acknowledge my
transgressions, ver. 3. and when he had confessed, ver. 4, 5, 6. then he
cries, Make me to hear of joy and gladness, ver. 8. and restore unto me the
joy of thy salvation, ver. 12. and what was the chief ingredient, the maine
and principal motive, which wrought most kindly with him to confess, and
mourn, and brought up all? Against thee: thee only, he puts in twice, as much
of the consideration thereof, as of any other ingredient, to make his heart
mourn: that chiefly if not only, melted, dissolved him. And in these thy
confessions, let the same also mainely work with thee. Against thee, thee,
have I sinned, thus often, thus grievously, thus presumptuously, Against thee, a
God so great, and yet withal so good, so kind, so willing to receive and
pardon, if my heart (say) were but as willing to turn unto thee; and when thy
case is as Jobs was, Job 10. 15, 16, 17. That thou art full of confusion (as he
speaks there;) so full as thou think thy heart could hold no more; and yet
it increases (as it is there,) and he fills thee fuller yet; then do thou
pour out thy complaints to him, as he poures in confusion into thee; and when
he hunts thee, as Job there complains, like a fierce Lion, fall thou down and
humble thy self like a poor and silly Lamb; if thou dyest, dye at his feet,
mourning, bleeding out thy soul in tears: and when he hunts thee up and
down, and pursues thee with blow after blow, follow thou hard after him where
ever he goes, Psalm. 63. 8.
with complaint after complaint: And when yet he leaves thee not, but again and
again returns, (as some read it) after some intermission, and shows himself
terrible to thee day after day, night after night, yet do thou look in like
manner again and again toward his holy Temple, Jonah 2. 4.
as Jonah did: And when he begins to bring in new sins, new inditements against
thee, (as it is in the 16. verse:) Thou renewest thy witnesses: and when thou
thoughtest he had done with thee, he fetches new rods forth, and enters into
new quarrels, and reckonings long since past and forgotten, (as it is in the
same verse) Changes and war are against me, vicissitudes and armies of
disquietments; and when one army is overcome, new appear in the field. Then
fall thou down upon thy knees, and say as Job at last does; Job 7. 20.
I have sinned, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee? what shall I do unto
thee? oh thou preserver (and not the destroyer) of men: these and these
abominations I have done, and I cannot now undo them; and what shall I do to
obtain thy favor? Alas, nothing that can satisfy him: only confess thy
sin, Lev. 26. 41.
accept thy punishment. Go and strip thy self therefore, and with all
submission present a naked back to him, and though every stroke fetches not
blood only, but well nigh thy soul away, yet complain thou not one whit of
him; put thy mouth in the dust, Lam. 3. 29, 30. Be still, not a word; but only
such as whereby thou utterest thy complaints, and do acknowledge thine own
deservednesse of ten thousands times more. And say as Micah 7. 9. I will bear
thine indignation patiently, for I have sinned against thee: bear witness
still to every stroke, that it is not only just, but also less then thou have
deserved, Neh. 9. 13.
and that it is his mercy thou art not consumed, Lament. 3.
and cut off by every blow: and the heavier he lays on, struggle thou not, he
will let thee down the sooner: the higher he life's up his hand to strike, the
lower let thy soul fall down; 1 Pet. 5. 6.
Humble your selves under his mighty hand: And still kiss the rod when he
has done. Hosea 14. 2.
And then take up words of pleading for thy self; It is for thy life, desiring
him to remember what he has been ever thinking of even from everlasting,
thoughts of peace, and mercy to usward, and the number of them cannot be told
(as David says Psalm. 40. 5.) which he has been ever thinking of, and with the
greatest of delights, (as one that was in his besome and was his councellor,
his Son tells us, Prove. 8. 31.) and plead thou as David and other Saints of God
have done: What are now become of all these thy thoughts of mercy? Isay 63. 15.
are they restrained? what, Psalm. 77. 9.
are all now on the sudden forgotten? laid aside? which thou have been thinking
on so long? have thou forgotten thine old and ancient delights? ask him if he
has forgotten his own Name; to be gracious and abundant in kindness, it is
his Name. (Say,) did the very intent of showing mercy so infinitely beforehand
possess thee with delights, and now when thou should come to put it in
execution, and have so fair an opportunity of doing it, to a soul as full of
misery (the object of mercy) as ever, have thou now no heart, no mind to it?
And withal, (Say) that thou have notice given thee of an infinite and
alsufficient righteousness in his Son, laid up in him, and that by his own
procurement, whereof his Son never had, nor can have any need himself, (being
God blessed for ever) and for whom was it then appointed? but for the sons of
men; those who are weary, wounded, sick, broken, Heb. 9. 16.
lost; these his Son has put into his Will, who still lives to be his own
Executor. And say further also to him, that it is come to thine cares, that his
Spirit is the Comforter; a God of comforts, and that his Son has bought them
all, his whole shop and all his cordialls, Isay 61. 1, 2, 3.
and all his skill, and is anointed with this Spirit on purpose to pour him
forth into the hearts of those that are wounded, and sick, and broken: and the
whole they have no need of them. If it be said unto thee; yea, but thou art
most unworthy: Answer, Hosea 14. 4.
but he professes to love freely. If the greatness of thy sins be objected
against thee, plead thou again, Psalm. 130. 7.
that Plenteous redemption is with him; and if thou have not enough to pardon
me, (say,) I am content to go without. If that thou art ungodly, (Say) That
thou beleevest on him that justifies the ungodly. Romans 4. 15.
If he puts thee off (as Christ a while did the woman of Canaan) and says he
has no need of thee* (say,) that thou have need of him, and can no longer
live without him; for, In his favor is thy life, and that without it thou art
undone. If he seems to rebuke thee, that how dare thou press thus to him
who is the high and lofty One; a sinful man to him, whose Name is holy? (Say,)
thou have heard himself say; Thus faith that high and lofty One, whose Name is
holy; that he dwells with him that is of a contrite spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble: Isa. 57. 15. And be further bold to tell him that there
are but a few in the world that do seek him, and if he should turn any away
that do, he would have fewer, for who would fear him, Psalm. 130. 4.
if there were not mercy in him, and plentenus redemption?

If still he does pursue thee, and his wrath lies heavy on thee, ask him what
it is he aims at? Is it to have the victory, and overcome when he judges; (as
Romans 3. 4. which David also knew when he humbled himself, Ps. 51. 4.) Freely
tell him that thou art willing to give it him, to yield to him, to stand out
with him in nothing; but art content to submit to his commanding will in all
things, and to his condemning will also, if so he pleases; and that it shall
be just (as David there acknowledges) if he does condemn thee: and justify
thou him, whilst he is condemning thee; and say that at the latter day, he
shall need no other judge against thee then thy self. Only beseech him to
consider what honor it will be to him to pursue dry stubble, Job 13. 25.
and to break a poor dried leaf, that crumbleth under his fingers if he does
but touch it; (as Job pleads) to break a reed that is broken already. Mat. ^2.
20.


(Say,) thou art not a fit match for him, and he has said, He will not contend
for ever, Isa. 57. 19. especially when he sees any to lay down the weapons, as
thou art content to do.

Or is it, (ask him,) that he aims to have glory out of thy eternal
condemnation in hell? tell him it is true, he may; and that this is some
comfort to thee that he may have glory out of thy death and destruction, who
never yet had it out of thy life: but yet desire him to consider this before he
thrusts his sword into thee, Zach. 13. 7.
that he did first sheath it in his Sons bowels; and that he may show as
much power in overcomming his wrath, as in venting of it; yea and have also
greater glory thereby: for (plead that) thou art never able to satisfy him,
though he should throw thee down to hell: he may cast thee into prison, but
thou can never pay the debt: and what profit therefore will be in my blood:
Psalm. 30. 9.
and therefore if satisfaction to his justice be his end, he might better
accept that which his Son made him, and so he shall be sure to be no loser by
thee: and thereby not only receive the glory of his justice, but show the
riches of his grace and mercy also, and so double the revenew of his glory in
thee.

Or is it (Lord) that thou aimest to have more obedience from me then
heretofore thou have had? plead, that this is the way at present to disable
thee for service, for that while thou suffer his terrors, thou art as one
among the dead, listlesse not to his business only, but to all things else;
Distracted with terrors, (as Heman pleads, Psalm. 88. 15.) so as the powers and
forces of thy soul are scattered, and dissolved, and cannot intend and attend
upon their duty; and besides this distraction in thy spirit, plead, that it
consumes thy strength also, (...) (as David also often complains, and makes
an argument of it, as Psalm. 39. 10, 11, 12, 13.) Remove thy stroke away from
me, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand: When thou rebukest man for sin,
thou make his beauty to consume away as a ^oth: Oh therefore spare me, that I
may (...) strength, before I go hence and be no more seen. And withal, put
him in mind, that if he should go on thus to deal with thee, as thou
should not be able to do him much service, so nor to do it long. For it
will cut short my days (Say) this David pleads, Psalm. 89. 46, 47. compared
with the 39. Psalm ver. 12.) How long Lord will thou hide thy self? for ever?
Shall thy wrath burn like fire? remember how short my time is. As if he should
have said, I have but a little time here allotted me in the world, though none
of it be shortened,) And further tell him, that for that little time thou have
to live, the more joy thou have, the more service thou shall be able for to do
him; and to go about his work more lively, and more strongly: ( For the joy
of the Lord is our strength: Nehem. 8. 10.) and more acceptably also, 2 Cor. 9.
7.
for thou love a cheerful giver. And therefore entreat him to restore thee
to the joy of his salvation, so shall thou be able to do him more service in a
week, then in a year now, (long trouble of mind being as long sicknesses which
make all thy performances weak) and it is for his disadvantage to have his
servants lie long sick upon his hands.

And if it be objected against thee, that if thou should be trusted with
much assurance, thou would abuse it, and turn it into wantonness; Reply,
that if he pleases, he can prevent it, by preparing thy heart aforehand for
these cordials, so as they shall work most kindly on thee; by writing a law of
love toward him in thy heart, which when his love shed abroad shall join
with, will work most strongly; and one grain of it have more force to purge
out sin, to constrain, and strengthen to obedience, then a pound of terrors.
And (say,) that though thou have indeed a stubborn and selfe-loving heart, yet
he can make his loving kindness overcome it, Cant. 8. 6.
for it is stronger then death: (say) thou have love in thee (which runs out
enough to other things) if he would be pleased to win it to himself: Suggest
how that that soul mentioned, Isa. 57. had as stout and stubborn an heart as
thou, and went on frowardly, notwithstanding all thy terrors: and yet (oh
Lord) thou tookest mother course with him, and did heal him again, and that
by comforts (I will heal him (says God there,) and restore comforts to him,
ver. 17, 18.) and that so if he please, he may deal with thee.

And if light and mercy yet comes not, but still God seems as it were to cast
thee off; then call to mind if ever thou have had any true communion with him,
and thereupon begin to challenge him: (so does the Church Isa. 63. 16. when in
thy case, when his mercies were restrained to her, she says yet, Doubtless
thou art my father; she saw God was angry, her heart hard, ver. 17. yet she
thought she should know him: Doubtless he is my Father, and where is thy
zeal, the sounding of thy bowels? so) challenge him thou, upon that old
acquaintance thou have had and held with him in former times: (Say,) Doubtless
thou art my farther and my husband, how strange soever thou cariest thy self
now toward me: for do thou not remember what has been between me and thee
in prayer, in such a chamber, at such a time? Have thou never a piece of a
broken ring between him and thee, no love passage, no love-token, that could
not pass between him and any, whom he had not betrothed himself unto in
kindness? Hosea 2. 19.
produce it at such a time as this. And if thou should discern no grace in
thee thy self, yet desire him to look into thy heart; and be bold to enquire of
him, if he can see nothing there which himself wrote, never to be blotted out,
if there be not some spark of love to him, and his fear, which himself put
there; and ask him if he knows his own hand. And for thy comfort know, that
when thou can not read it, (thy graces being much blurred) yet he can read
his own hand at any time, and will not deny it.

Thou may be yet bolder. Yea desire him to look into his own heart, and
therein to view the Idea he had of thee, and those secret ancient thoughts he
bore toward thee, from all eternity. And if at first he seems yet silent at
it; then desire him to look upon thee again, and ask him if he does not know
thee, and if he has not known and taken thee for his from everlasting, and
engraven thee in the palms of his hands, and table of his heart, with such
deep and lasting letters of loving kindness, as are not as yet, yea which will
not for ever be blotted out. (Tell him) thou dare refer thy self wholly
to what past between him and his Son concerning thee, and let his own heart
cast it. Appeal to Christ as thy surety and a witness thereof for thee, who
was privy to all his counsel, whether thou art not one of those he gave unto
him with a charge to redeem and save. And desire him to look into Christ's heart
also, if thy name be not written there with his own hand; and if that Christ
did not bear thy name written up in his heart (as the high Priest did the
names of all the Tribes,) when he hung upon the Cross, and when he ascended
into the Holy of holies. Thus Habakkuk putting up a prayer in the name of the
Church, has taught us to plead, Hab. 1. 12. Oh Lord, Art not thou from
everlasting my God, and mine holy One? It was a bold question, yet God dislikes
it not, but approves it, and presently assents to it in a gracious answer to
their hearts ere they went any further: for their next words, and those
abruptly spoken, by reason of a sudden answer, are an assurance of this, We
shall not die. God being put thus to it, and his own thoughts being spoken,
could not deny it; he acknowledges it was true. And thus whilst thou may
be a speaking blindfold as it were, casting anchor in the dark, yet speaking
his very heart, he happily may own thee, and fall upon thy neck and kiss thee.

And if yet after continual praying thus, thou find still no comfort, no
answer from him, but he seems rather even to shut thy very prayers out, (as
Psalm. 22. 2, 3.) then expostulate (as David does Psalm. 70. 4.) Why shuttest
thou out our prayers, and wilt not hear us pray? for alas (thought he) we have
nothing else to help us in the time of need but prayer. And if prayer will do
no good, I am undone, say.

And if through all these discouragements, thy condition prove worse and worse,
so as thou can not pray; but art struck dumb when thou come into his
presence; (as David Psalm. 77. 4. I am so troubled I cannot speak:) then fall a
making signs, when thou can not speak; groan, sigh, sob, Chatter as
Hezekiah did, bemoane thy self for thine own unworthiness; and desire Christ
to speak thy requests for thee, and God to hear him for thee. 1 John 2. 3.
Christ he is an advocate with the Father, and pleads no bad case, nor was ever
cast in any suit he pleaded.

And if still (happily) after many years he ownes thee not, but is grows darker
and darker, suppose even till thy death approaches, or to such extremities
that he seems to thee, to cast thee off for ever, so as thy distress boils up
to such thoughts as these, That there is no other remedy, but thou and he must
part: then in the midst and depths of such sad fears and apprehensions,
down upon thy knees once more: and notwithstanding fall thou a blessing him
for all those glorious excellencies of holiness, kindness, grace, wisdom,
etc. which are in him, the beauty of which first took thy heart and made thee
enamoured with him; though thou should be never like to be the better for
them. Bless him for all the mercy he shows to others, by which they have
occasion to magnify him, though thou should be found unworthy: Bless him,
and those who shall for ever live with him, who do stand about him, and see
his face, and enjoy him ever. What sins thou think thou shall be condemned
for by him, condemn thy self for first, and still ask forgiveness of them:
what service thou have any way done him, which he had any glory by, get thy
heart to say thou repentest not of it, but art glad of all done for him, and
wishest it had been better. What mercies thou have tasted of, from him,
confess thy self unworthy of, and thank him though thou should never
partake of any more; (such dispositions as these in such extremities do often
appear in the hearts of Gods children) and desire him that he would but
preserve good thoughts of him in thee, that thou may not blaspheme him. And
when thou art agoing, asinking into hell in thy own apprehensions, see if he
calls thee not back again.

See what himself says, Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. Ephraim is my son, his dear
son, my pleasant son (as he says there) and yet he began to speak
against him, as bitter sharp words as ever he has done against thee, and
took him up severely, and looked sternly on him, as if he had meant never to
have had mercy on him: upon which Ephraim falls a crying being thus snibd, and
a bemoaning himself, as I have taught thee to do, and being yoked as thou
art, to tame him; he acknowledges it was justly done, having been a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke; and Ephraim began to be ashamed, confounded, not able
to look up, for sinning against him, and seeks after repentance, and that
from him, without whose help he was not able to turn to him, Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned: and to challenge him and his eternal love, Thou art the
Lord my God. Well says God, though it be long since I spoke against him, and
I have suffered him long to lie thus plunged in misery, yet I remember him
still; his tears, his sighs will never out of my mind; and though he thinks
that I had forgotten him, yet I remember him, and my bowels are troubled for
him, as much and more then he is for himself; and I can forbear no longer, I
will surely have mercy on him. And should he have damned him, his bowels would
have been troubled for him indeed, all his days.

Direction 10.
THe tenth and last direction is, Rest not in ease, but healing.
that having done all this, you would not rest in ease, but healing: not in
ease of conscience, but in healing of conscience. This I ground upon, Isa. 57.
17, 18. What was the true issue of that his trouble there, whom God contended
with? It was healing and guiding. I will guide him, and I will heal him.

You that are troubled in mind, think not your estates to be good, simply
because you begin to cease to be troubled, but only then when the issue of
your trouble is healing your spirits, by some sound ground of comfort; and when
guidance in Gods ways, and more close walking with God is the issue of it. For
God may slack the cords and take you off the rack, when yet he has not
pardoned you. A traitor who was cast into the dungeon, and had many irons on
him, may be let out of the dungeon, and have his irons taken off, and have the
liberty of the Tower, and walk abroad again, with his keeper with him, and
yet not have his pardon: nay usually before execution they use to take their
irons off, and let them have more freedom. Thus it is with many. I thank God
(says one) I have had much trouble of mind, distress of conscience, such and
such sins terrified me, and I could not sleep for them: but now I am well
again, and now they do not trouble me. Yea, but is this all? Thou have cause to
fear that thy irons are but taken off against execution. It is with men in
point of trouble of mind in the guilt of sin, as in the power of it; in
justification, as in sanctification: A man who has had a strong lust stirring
in him, if he has gone a year or two, and finds it not to stir, he
therefore thinks he is utterly freed from it, which yet may be but a
restraint of it, not killing of it; a cessation, not mortification: So it is
often in this trouble of mind, which arises from the guilt of sin, because
a man finds not those doubts, and fears, and terrors in his heart which he
had wont, therefore presently he thinks all is well: when as it may be but
merely a truce, not a peace; a laying down of arms only for a while, to make
greater preparation against the soul afterward; a reprivall and a little
enlargement in prison, not a pardon, if this be all the issue of it.

That you may further conceive the meaning of this, in one that is Gods child,
and in a wicked man (though both may be, and are troubled in mind and
conscience, yet) there is a maine difference, both in the maine cause of their
trouble, and also in the issue and removal of their trouble. A wicked man's
trouble is for the anguish and present smart he feels in sin, and in Gods
wrath lashing his conscience, and out of fears that his sin will not be
pardoned, but that he shall endure these tortures for ever in hell: So it was in
Judas, Cain, and many others: but a godly man's trouble (though it has often
all this in it, yet the chiefest of his trouble is a further thing) it is not
only the smart, the sting of sin; but also the filth, the fowlnesse, the
offense of it done to God, that wounds him: for he has an heart after Gods
heart, and therefore looks on sin with the same kind of eye that God does;
and as God accounts the offense done to him the greatest evil in sin, so
does a godly heart also. It is not the sting of this serpent only, but the
poison of it that disquiets him; neither is it only the want of pardon of
sin, and the fear of Gods everlasting wrath which mainly troubles him, but
the want of Gods favor, the parting with him, whom he sees so excellent and
glorious; the want of seeing his face, his desire is to live in his sight, and
to have God to be his God. Now such as the wou^d is, such also is the remedy.
Therefore the one being but troubled with the sting, the smart of sin; pull but
that sting out, take that load off, and he is well enough, as jocund, as
pleasant as ever: it being present ease that he seeks, and to that end
confesses his sin, and does any thing for the present to come out of it; As
Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 17. Take away this death only: or at the utmost, his aim
is but pardon of sin, and peace with God, that he may be freed from the
fears of undergoing that for ever, the earnest whereof he feels in his
conscience now. And hence therefore the remedies they often have recourse unto
are suitable; they are but like rattles to still children with: they run to
merry company, and to music, etc. as Cain fell a building Cities; and so they
put off the terrors of their consciences. It is ease they seek and no more:
or they run to a formal performance of duties: even as poor souls under
Popery, when they were stung by the Friars Sermons, they set them penances and
good deeds to be done, which stilled them awhile, and for them they thought
they should have pardon: So men run now to holy duties, but with the same
opinion that they did then, as bribes for a pardon, what shall I give (says he
in Micah) for the sin of my soul? Micah 6. 7.


But now the wound of Gods child being deeper, not the sting of sin only,
but the poison of it; not the smart, but the offense done to God; nor the fear
of his wrath, but want of his favor: therefore accordingly ease from those
terrors pacify not him; no not simply peace with God will content him, or a
pardon. He says not only, Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this death only; but, who shall deliver me from this body of death. If
news were brought him that God would pardon him, and not call him to reckoning
for any sin, and no more were spoken to his conscience, he would still be
troubled, till he had assurance of his good will also: if it were said, God
will indeed pardon thee, but he will never love thee as he did, he will not
look on thee, thou must not come into his sight: This would grieve the soul
more then the other would content it, and he would be everlastingly troubled. I
may allude to that which Absalom said in co^plement of his Father, when he was
banished from him, to express the true desire and greatest trouble of a soul
in this case, as you have it 2 Samuel 14. 32. Absalom was pardoned the fault, but
it contented him not: Let me see his face, or let him kill me: So it is with a
poor soul; ease, pardon, knocking off his bolts content him not, till he
enjoyes communion with God, till he sees his face in his ordinances: Psalm. 24.
6. This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face. (that is)
this is the mark, the genius, the disposition of that generation. This you may
see in David, when his conscience was wounded for that great sin; what was it
troubled him? Not the want of pardon of sin, for the Prophet told him God had
pardoned him; not the mere stings of conscience, and ach of his broken bones,
but that against thee, thee, have I sinned, so as ease could not satisfy him;
but further ver. 10. Create in me a clean spirit, which he speaks because he
having chewed the cud of that unclean act, it had left a soil in his fancy:
and renew a right spirit within me; oh give me grace and truth of heart to
thee, and oh let me live in thy presence, and see thee, and have acquaintance
with thee, ver. 11. the want of this was it that troubled him, which till he
had obtained, he could never be at quiet: for he sought not ease, or pardon
only, but healing of his conscience by the favor of God, and his love shed
abroad. So as take heed of resting in ease, (as if your hearts be right you
will not, you will wait till the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in
his wings,) Mal. 4. 2.
Are you now in darkness, full of terrors and Gods wrath? you will not rest
till that darkness be dispelled by the arising of the light of the Sun of
righteousness on you, and revealing Gods face in the face of Jesus Christ,
till his righteousness be conveyed to your hearts by some of his wings, by
some promise, by some ordinance of his; for the wound being the unrighteousnes
of sin, nothing but Christ's righteousness will heal it: the wound being the want
of Gods favor, and of the evidence of his being your God, the want of his face
and good will, nothing but the revealing and arising of this in your hearts
will heal you: for look what the wound is, such is the plaster: and indeed
this only heales; for though by other means the sore may be skinned over, and
ease gotten; yet it will break (...) again. So Isa. 57. 17, 18. I will heal
him, and how? by restoring comforts to him. Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation, says David, that the bones that thou have broken may rejoice: and
how heals he him? I create of the fruit of the lips, peace. He does it by some
promise or other: if the want of the sense of communion with God, and absence
from him disquiets a man, then the heart rests not till it has found its
Welbeloved, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If doubts that no grace is in the heart,
then the heart rests not till some grace in truth be evidenced, and some such
promise made to some grace brought home: still look what the trouble is, such
also must the plaster be, and then it is healing. Were ever in the Dungeon?
what was it freed thee? was it Christ's righteousness laid hold on, Gods face
revealed, thine own grace with some promise brought home to thy heart, that
came with a commission to deliver thee? then it is right; otherwise thy bolts
may be knocked off, and this but against thy execution.

ISAI. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice
of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in
the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. --
SOme gleanings there yet remain of this Text, which I thought good to bind
up into one sheafe, and thresh out at this time.

The second Doctrine is, it may befall one that fears God to walk in
darkness, yet but to a few, he says, Who is among you? he singleth such out
of a crowd: if simply he had spoken of those that fear God and obey him,
without this limitation added, and walk in darkness, he might well have spoken
thus sparingly, who is among you: For to the wicked he says, All you that
kindle a fire, etc. for there are but few that fear God, in comparison of
them. If he had spoken of those that fear God, and have been in darkness for
some little while, happily some few days among many, there are yet fewer, for
there are that walk in the light of Gods countenance to their death, and never
knew what terror of conscience means, but when he shall speak of those that
fear God, and walk in darkness, and suffer terrors from their youth, as
Heman did, such an one is one of a thousand, of such an one (he says) who is
among you? few have experience of such a condition. Job had friends, who
certainly were godly, for Job was to pray for them, and God said he would hear
Job for them; and they, as is likely knew many godly men besides Job; yet when
this condition of darkness befell Job, it was so strange a trial to them,
that they thought him therefore an hypocrite, as never having themselves felt,
or heard of the like in others. When Christ was to go into his agony, he
would not have many of his Apostles, so much as by him, to be witnesses of it,
much less to feel the like, he takes but two or three. The reasons are,

First, fighting men, and men of valor, yet he has but a few champions, as
David though he had many soldiers, yet but few Worthies; and therefore calls
but a few out to fight single combats with satan and his wrath; though he
exercises them all in lighter skirmishes, yet not to fight such bloody
battles. See thou not my servant Job, there is none like him? him God will
venture into the field, but others his friends he will not.

Secondly, fit for such an encounter, so he has variety of other temptations
to exercise his withal; he has poverty, and ill report, imprisonment, and
cruel mockings, loss of goods, crosses in friends, and some have enough to
struggle under one of these; and there is no temptation but must befall some,
and seldom all befall one: some spirits are so weak, as they would faint, and
not be able to sustain themselves: and God never suffers any to be tempted
above what they are able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Some men's bodies are weak, and if God
should rebuke them long for sin, they would be brought to nothing; and he
remembers they are flesh, and stirs not up all his wrath, as David says, Oh
suffer me to recover strength. Some men God has present use of in their
callings and employments, which if they were distracted (as Heman was) with
terrors continually, they were unfit for.

Thirdly, God afflicts in this kind but in case of extremity usually, when he
meets with a very froward heart, and stout proud spirit, a knotty piece. Isa.
57. 17. If lesser crosses would do it, he would not fetch out the great rod.
If a rod will thresh out the cummin, he uses not to turn the wheel over it,
nor take a ^^aile to do it. Isa. 28. 27. Now lesser afflictions work with the
most of his, through his blessing; mercies work, disgrace works, poverty works,
and he does not willingly afflict, Lamen. 3. 33. And therefore not
unnecessarily, he puts not men into the dungeon for every fault; and therefore
there are few long exercised this way.

Think not therefore thou have not true grace, joy unspeakeable and glorious;
So some have sound humiliation, who never knew terrors of conscience. If thou
see sin the greatest misery, Christ the greatest good, thou art humbled.

You see we may often preach such things which do yet concern but a few in a
congregation, Christ does preach: Yea, and for such does God give gifts, the
tongue of the learned. God often gives a Pastor after his own heart for a few.
Ier. 3. 15. Take one or two of a City, etc. and I will give the^ Pastors after
my heart: much more are many Sermons often preached but to a few. So even by
Christ himself, as he says, Luke 4. 26. There were many widows, etc. but
unto none was Elias sent, but unto her at Sarepta: and many Lepers, but unto
none was Elias sent, but unto Naaman. So says Christ, I am sent but to a few;
and therefore as we must not defraud one poor soul of its portion, because
none else partake of it: so the rest are not to think much: but as in a Dole,
stay till their portion come; and if any one poor soul has had his estate
discovered, all the rest are to be thankful.

See some reason why some in distress of mind complain, like condition; thus
they are apt to do. So the Church, Lamen. 1. 12. The reason is, because few
are so troubled, and happily they never knew any: but yet some are, and have been
in the like. For 1 Cor. 10. 13. No temptation befalls, but is common to man.

That those few in congregations, God and Christ has an especial eye unto,
and care of: you see he singles them out as it were from all the rest, Who is
among you? Esaias 66. 2. All these things have my hand made, but to this man will
I look that is poor and broken, and trembles at my word: (that is,) though
all things and persons else in the world be my creatures, and so I have a care
of them all; yet he seems to over-looke all else, and to him will I look, etc.
as if there were none else in the Church.

The first reason is, Christ so to do. The Spirit is upon him on purpose, Esaias
61. 1, 2, 3. to open the prison to them that are bound, shut up in this
dungeon: to appoint to them that mourn, beauty for ashes: the oil of joy for
mourning: garments of praise, for the spirit of heaviness. He is the
Physician, and has undertaken the cure, Mat. 9. 12. and whom should the
Physician have an eye to, but the sick? and the most sick, as those are that
cannot find their sins forgiven. Isay 33. 14. He is the Shepherd, Esa. 40.
11. and will take care of all his sheep, knows them by name. But of whom
especially? the lambs that are weak, young Christians. He will gather them
with his arms, and gently lead the ewes with young; that are traveling and
bringing forth, as those under terrors are: he will not over-drive them: for
God has given him charge he should lose none of them.

Secondly, merciful and a pitiful high priest, Heb. 4. 15. and was in all
points tempted as we are, and especially, in agony of spirit, therein he drank
deepest of any, and therefore is fitted to pity us therein most: and the
greatlier any is troubled, the more he is touched. Isa 63. 9. In all your
afflictions he is afflicted. And Ier. 31. 20. Since I spoke against him I
remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him. When a child is
sick, the mother is more troubled, and careful about it, and her eye and mind
more upon it, then on all the house besides.

The Use is, God regards not them. Sion said, God has forgotten me, Esa. 49.
15. So David, God has forgotten to be merciful. Because they find their
hearts hard to God, they think that his is so to them: because they can find
no love in their hearts to God, they think he bears none to them: but you see
Christ especially enquires for such, and over-looks all others else. God has
graven thee on the palms of his hands: every sigh of thine goes to his bowels.
Esa. 59. 15. I dwell with him that is broken, to revive his spirit. God is nigh
him.

Second Use is, We cannot tell what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. Let
our eyes be toward him for help, as of those that looked on the brazen serpent:
let our eyes be toward him for service, as the eyes of hand-maidens are on
their mistress: to look not to men, not to credit, but to have our eyes on
God in all we do, as if if there were none else in the world, to approve our
selves unto.

In that when he speaks of those his children that are in darkness, fear
and obedience, then by any other grace: observe that when the children of God
are under terrors, the most eminent grace that does appear in them, is
fearfulness to offend God, and willingness to obey him: other graces may be
stirred, but these are most eminent, and therefore he mentions these for
their comfort.

First, Explication.
for Explication. Know that several occasions draw out several graces. When
the Sunshine of Gods favor melts the heart, then love and obedience thence
proceeding, are most eminent, and also godly sorrow. So Mary wept much, loved
much, for much was forgiven her: her heart was full of assurance. On the
contrary, when the sense of Gods love is withdrawn, and fears and terrors
shed abroad in the heart, then fear and obedience show and discover
themselves. Therefore Esaias 66. 2. He that is poor and contrite, and trembles
at the word, are joined: trembles at every command and threatening, is fearful
to transgress: and so those in that estate do find. The reason is,

Because graces and affections in which graces are seated, seeing our God is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. let us serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear: therefore when we feel him so, we are to suspect our hearts
most, if we be not more fearful of offending him, and obey him.

The first Use is of trial, Christ learned obedience by what he suffered, so
wilt also thou if thou have his spirit.

The second use is, art afflicted pray: when joyful, sing Psalms, Iam. 1. 13.
when filled with assurance, then mourn and be confounded, Ezekiel. 16. last.

A CHILD OF DARKNESS VVALKING IN LIGHT.
ISA: 50. 11. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves
about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks which ye
have kindled; this ye shall have of my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.
LEt us now come to the opposite state of wicked men, who are said here to
walk in the light of their own fire, etc.

All the difficulty lies in opening what is meant by their own fire, and what
is meant by walking in the light of it, which is opposed here to walking in
darkness, and to trusting on the Name of the Lord, namely Christ's
righteousness, as I said before: to this purpose you must remember, that his
scope is to show the differing props and stays for Justification and comfort,
which a godly man has, and a natural man.

The stay and comfort of a godly man's soul lies in the light of Gods
countenance, which when he wants, he is in darkness, though he has never
so many outward comforts. The stay, comfort, and prop of his faith for
justification in that estate, when he sees no righteousness in himself, is
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ our righteousness.

Oppositely therefore, By fire and the light of it, two things meant.
by the fire, and the light of their fire which wicked men are said to walk in,
two things must be meant.

First, their own natural righteousness which they have by nature, and in
the state of nature, and the sparks and acts thereof, this they trust to, and
neglect the Name of the Lord, and the righteousness of justification, and of
the new creature.

Secondly, the light of outward comforts from the creatures, which in this
world they enjoy, and the sparkling pleasures thereof which they walk in and
content themselves with, neglecting communion with God, being estranged from
the life of God, and living without him in the world. So as the opposition
strongly caries it, that both these should be meant by their fire here, and all
interpreters give the first interpretation of it, and I have added this second
to make the sense complete.

First, 1. Their own righteousness.
how that by fire of their own kindling, their own righteousness without
Christ, such as the Pharisees had, and Paul had before conversion should be
meant, we must consider that he speaking here to the Jews, alludeth to the
types of the old Law, which they were acquainted with. Wherein

First, fire, you know, was it they offered their sacrifices with, typissing
out as Mar. 9. last. our inward habitual grace and righteousness, whereby we
offer up our selves and our service as a living sacrifice to God, Romans 12. 1.

Secondly, when they offered Incense or Sacrifice acceptable to God, they were
not to offer it with common fire, which is ordinary in the world in their
chimneys and kitchings, which was kindled by themselves by sparks out of
stones, or from things here below; but it was to be fire from heaven, and taken
from the Altar. So Lev. 9. 24. which was kept continually burning, and
therefore when a new Altar was made, fire came from heaven, 2 Kings. 7. 3. and
the high priest was to take fire off the Altar, when ever he offered Incense,
Lev. 16. 12. And therefore when Nadab and Abibu offered common fire of their
own kindling, Lev. 10. 1. they were consumed, for thinking to please God with
it: Now all these things fell out in types to them. For answerably by fire of
their own kindling, is meant the common righteousness of Civility, and
natural devotion, which was by nature in some of the heathen, Romans 2. 14.
found even in their chimneys: which also the Jews performed, both by the
common help of nature, custom, and education, by the strength of natural
principles, of conscience enlightened by the law, and self-love emproved; all
which thus coming, but from nature not renewed by grace, is said to be of
their own kindling: whereby yet they thought to please God, and rested in it,
as a sacrifice well pleasing to him; as Nadab and Abihu did. Whereas the
righteousness they should have offered up to God, should have been that from
heaven, the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith, and a new work of
Grace, is fire from off that Altar Christ, changing their hearts, and making
them new creatures, renewing them into the same Image of holiness which was in
him; which as it adds to what is in nature, and grows not there, so differs
as much from that goodness of nature you bring into the world, or which has
been wrought in you by education, as the fire and light of the Sun in heaven,
does from common fire; or the light of a glowworm from that of the Sun.

Now because the Jews rested in such an outward conformity to the law, of
their own working, therefore they are said, Romans 10. 3. to establish their
own righteousness, being ignorant of both these righteousness, Christ
righteousness which is the fire from heaven, and the righteousness of
regeneration, to change their natures which is the fire off the Altar.
Nichode^us was ignorant of both, and so had lain down in sorrow as his
Forefathers did, if Christ had not changed him, and begotten him again.

To this end you may further consider, that in men's hearts, there are (to use
the language of the metaphor here) though they be stony unto God, yet some
sparks of fire which may be struck out of the^, by the word, By sparks, what.
by education, by enlightening of the conscience, and by working upon self-love
in men: And the sparks of this fire are those outward acts of righteousness,
which arise and spring from self-love, and natural conscience; which die as
sparks and remain not; which the true righteousness of regeneration is said
to do, 2 Cor. 9. and 1 Ioh. 2. 16. And the light of this fire, which carnal
men not born again content themselves with, is that excusing, which natural
conscience upon the performing any outward act of just dealing, has in such
men's hearts, mentioned. Romans 2. 15.

And the walking in the light of this fire, What by walking in the light of the
fire
is resting therein all their days, not endeavoring to have their hearts
changed, and to get a new principle of grace, and of love to God fetched from
Christ, as the spring of all.

Use.
THe first Use is, Examine what fire we offer up to God.
it is good you examine whether that righteousness you think to please God
with, be any more then fire of your own kindling.

First, 1. The original of it.
That righteousness which is kindled in thy heart, and blazeth in thy life,
whence was it first enkindled? examine the original of it. Was it kindled in
thee by fire from heaven? that is by the Holy Ghost coming down in Gods
ordinances on thee as fire, burning up thy lusts, (...) thy heart, dissolving
the works of the devil, enkindling sparks of true love to God, zeal for his
glory, which are above the reach of man's natural ability? or is it no more,
then that whereas every man has some sparks of ingenuity and honesty toward
others, and of sobriety, and of devotion to a Deity, raked up in the ashes of
corrupt nature, (for even the heathen had the Law written in their hearts, Romans
2. 14.) which sparks, thou living in the Cuurch, where civility and religion
is professed, civil education, natural wisdom, and the accusings of
natural conscience enlightened, have blown up to some blaze, to some just
dealing, common care of serving God; yet know that if there be no other
principle, nor no more, it is but fire of your own kindling, and you will lie
down in sorrow.

Secondly, 2. The fuel.
examine, what duties are especially the fuel of that fire in thee: in what
duties is that righteousness, thou think thou please God with, chiefly
spent and exercised? are they principally the duties of the second Table, of
just dealing with men, and sobriety, and it may be thou bring withal a
stick or two of the first Table to this fire, that is, some duties thereof,
such as for thy credit thou must not omit, as coming to Gods ordinances of
public worship. This fuel, if there be no more, argues (...) but common
fire: for look into the chimneys of the heathen, thou shall find the most of
all this practiced; and in that thou do put the chiefest of thy religion in
them, it is argued to be but a fire kindled of those sparks, which are raked up
in nature: for those common sparks which are in all men's hearts, are especially
those of the second Table. But now if it were a fire from heaven, the^ though
those would not be left undone, yet the chiefest heat of thy heart would be to
the duties of heaven, of the worship of God, public and private: when men
practice but so much righteousness, as is necessary for them to do, if they
will live in the world in any comfort or credit, as to be just and sober is
necessary, as also to frequent Gods ordinances, for the state we live in,
enjoins them: But when men's zeal and fervor contends also, and lives upon
such duties which the world regards not, as mourning for sin, taking pains
with the heart in private, between God and a man's own soul; and feeds upon
heavenly things, and thoughts, and is such fire as the world quenches, it is a
sign it is more then common fire.

Thirdly, 3. By warming only the outward man.
in these duties, common fire warmes but the outward man, as that fire does
which you feel daily; it heats you not within: so common righteousness
contents it self with bodily exercise, a formal performance of duties
public and private: but fire from heaven heats first within, heats the heart
within, as at the hearing the Word, did not our hearts burn within us? (say
they) so it heats the heart in prayer, makes a man fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord.

Fourthly, 4. What incentives inflame it.
examine what bellows cherish and keep alive that fire of righteousness that
is in thee, and makes it flame, (that is) what motives set thee awork, to do
what thou do: if worldly ends make thee abstain from sin, and to be just
in thy dealings, as credit with the world, and fear of disgrace, or the
accusings of conscience only, or fear of hell, or hope of heaven; this is but
common fire: but if love to God, the consideration of his mercies, his eternal
love, and the love of Christ, zeal for his glory, if these be the bellows,
the fire is heavenly. But if when thou art to be moved with such as these, they
stir not thy heart, It is but common fire.

The second Use is, Jews here did, for you will lie down in sorrow if you do.

But you will say, we do not trust in this our own righteousness, for we
profess Christ, and believe in him, which added to this, is enough.

I answer. That though you profess Christ, yet1. unless you have had a light
that has discovered to you, that all the righteousness you have by nature,
and emproved in nature is a false righteousness, you do then as yet rest in
your own righteousness, and rely not wholly on Christ. So Phil. 3. Paul first
sum all to be dross and dung, counted it loss, that he might which r^st: it
implies, he could not have him else. Men though they seem to take Christ's Title,
as many will procure the Kings Title for a living to make all sure, yet they
keep, and stick to, and plead their own; but you must give up that first, and
rely wholly on Christ, or he will not save you.

2. He that does not daily above all things, directly, and immediately aim
at, and seek out for Christ's righteousness, and makes it not the chiefest of
his thoughts, prayers, and business, and is restless without it, rests in his
own: for so when he had given up his title in his own, he mainely
endeavored after this, to be found in Christ. Phil. 3.

Thirdly, you will seek from Christ a new righteousness of sanctification
also: for you will see that the common righteousness of nature and education
will not please him, and Christ must be made sanctification to you, 1 Cor. 1.
30. as well as righteousness. Thus Nicodemus, though a civil man before, yet
when he came to Christ, his old civility would not serve, without being borne
again, and becoming a new creature: so as you must not think to make a supply
or addition unto Christ with fire of your own kindling; you must have all off
the Altar: your morrall virtues must be turned into graces, by having a new end
put into them, carrying your hearts in them unto God.

The other interpretation which I add, 2. By fire is meant outward comforts.
is, That the fire of outward comforts is also meant: which, whilst men enjoy,
they go on merrily, neglecting God, and Christ, and communion with him: But
the soul of a believer wanting this communion with God, is in darkness, and
till he enjoys God again, can take comfort in nothing. Thus Eccl. 7. 6. The
laughter of the wicked is compared to the crackling of thorns.

Fire is a comfortable creature, Why fire is put for comfort.
having both heat and light in it, which serve and help against both cold and
darkness, which are two of the greatest evils to the senses.

Heat is comfortable. Therefore Isa. 44. 16. He warmeth himself ( says the
Prophet) and cries Aha.

Light also is comfortable. For says Solomon, It is a pleasant thing to behold
the Sun. Hence therefore fire here is put for outward comforts.

But yet what fire are they? Why outward comfort compared to fire of their own
kindling, to earthly fire.
but kitching fire, Ignis f^calis, as the Philosopher calls it: for It is fire
of their own kindling, says the Text: not that purest element of fire above:
God he is said to be light and fire, whom the Saints enjoy, and are refreshed
with his light, and in it see light.

And the resemblance this way also will strongly hold.

For a kindled fire has two things common, which go to the making of it; both
which together, are called fire.

First, fuel: as wood, or coals, etc.

Secondly. That element that preys upon these.

Answerably unto those carn^ll pleasures and delights, which wicked (...)
enjoy, and rest in, (...) things are also (...).

First, The object, which is as the fuel. Things earthly, and of this world.

Secondly, The comparison holds in 6. things.
Their fiery hot and burning lusts, which prey upon, and live upon this fuel;
both which make this fire here spoken of: in both which, this resemblance will
hold in many regards.

First, because the fuel of these fires of their base; things only here
below. What is the fuel of your kitching fires? things dug out of the
earth, dung, wood, coal; so things on earth are fuel to their desires. Their
lusts are therefore called members upon earth. Col. 3. 5. for all their comfors
consist in, and their desires are after earthly things, as their fair wives,
children, houses, meat, drink, their God is their belly, and they mind
earthly things, Phil. 3. 19.

Secondly, because when this fuel is taken away, Nabal thought David might yet
come, and take his goods, his heart died within him. For men live in the
creatures, and out of them they die.

Thirdly, as fire is a consuming thing, Heb. 12. last. it leaves nothing but
ashes: so are men's lusts, Iam. 4. 4. They ask to consume all upon their lusts.
All the pleasures they have, nothing comes of them; nothing of the strength
they get by them: they do all for themselves, and with themselves all dies.

Fourthly, fire is a devouring thing; a whole world would not satisfy it, if
it were let alone to burn on: And one day, this whole world you see shall be
burnt up by fire, as a witch for entising men. Even such are men's desires after
pleasures, unsatisfied they are; and the more fuel is laid on, the more ye may
lay on; they enlarge their desire as the fire of hell, Hab. 2. 5.

Fistly, the pleasures which arise from the meeting and conjunction of this
fuel, and their lusts are but as sparks. Job calls sparks the sons of
fire, being engendered by it upon fuel: as pleasures are the sons of your
lusts, when the object and they lie and couple together: and they are not long
lived, they are but as sparks, they die as soon as begotten, Col. 2. 22.
perish in the using; and are but as the crackling of thorns, they soon go
out.

Sixthly, smoke accompany such fires, the fuel being muddy things: so does much
sorrow their comforts, Pro. 14. 13. and they go out and end in smoke, as in
the Text, lie down in sorrow.

So that put these together, both that strange fire of their own
righteousness, which is from, and in nature, unchanged; and the kitching fire
of outward comforts: these are the two maine hindrances that keep all wicked
men from Christ, and justification through him:

That whereas the convenant of grace has these two maine promises in it:

First, that God himself (who is the God of comfort) will be an abundant
reward, Genesis 17. 1, 2. and so by faith we take him to be, and are divorced from
all comforts else in comparison of him. And

Secondly, that Jesus Christ his Son is made the Lord our righteousness,
Ier. 23. 6. and therefore ere we take him to be so to us, we must be emptied of
all our own righteousness by nature, that so God and Christ might be all in
all to us. And therefore as the first and main work of grace consists both in
emptying the heart, and bringing it to nothing in its own righteousness: As
also in regard of all outward comforts, that so no flesh might rejoice in his
sight. Answerably unto these two there are found two maine impediments in men
by nature.

First, because in nature, they find some sparks of civil goodness, they rest
in them, and take them for grace, and neglect Christ. And

Secondly, finding also in this world themselves to be warmed with many outward
comforts, being encompassed about with sparks, they content themselves with
these. Thus so long as that young man had righteousness of his own, and
possessions of his own, he cared not for Christ, nor communion with him, nor
righteousness from him. Well, but (says Christ here) flatter your selves with
your own righteousness, and cheer your selves with your own sparks, and walk
on. But know you will lie down in sorrow when the godly shall rest in their
beds. Isa. 57. 2. You will lie bedridden in hell; or as a woman in travail never
to rise again.

FINIS.

