BABELS BALM: OR THE HONEY-COMBE OF ROMES RELIGION. WITH A neat draining and
straining-out of the rammish HONEY thereof.

Sung in ten most elegant ELEGIES in Latin, by that most worthy Christian
SATYRIST, Master GEORGE GOOD-VVINNE. AND Translated into ten English SATYRS,
by the Muses most unworthy Echo, JOHN VICARS.

AUGUSTINE, Pride has an appetite of Unity and Omnipotency. Imprinted at
London by George Purslowe for Nathanaell Brown, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the upper end of the long Walk near Little S. Bartholomews. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM LORD HERBERT, of Cardiffe, Marmion St.
Quintin, and Parr of Kendall; EARL of Pembrooke, Chamberlain of his MAJESTY'S
Household, Chauncelour of OXEFORD, Knight of the Noble Order of the GARTER; and
one of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVIE-COVNCELL.
WIse Counselors (great Lord) as Sages say,
Have three fair Marks to make their best blessed aim;
First, Gods due glory; next, their Princes Fame;
Lastly, to be their Countries Staff and Stay.
God His exacts; by whom, they are first elected:
Kings, Theirs expect; under whom they have Grace:
States, Hence their Fates extract; for whom that Place
They exercise, to see them safe protected.
How well your Lordship hits this triple- White,
How well your Worth's approved to God and Man,
Your God, your King, your Country witness can,
Whose Goodness, Grauenesse, Greatness, All delight.
Your Goodness to your God, your Faith makes known,
Your Grauenesse to your King, your Wisdom shows;
Your Greatness to the State, in Virtue flows;
Faith, Wisdom, Worth, combined, conioynd in One.
A fair Paire-Royall in a Loyal Peer,
Whom Heaven has happifi'd for's Piety,
Whom his great King loves for his Loyalty*
Whom all his Country, justly, holds most dear.
O, may this threefold Twist be never vntwin'd;
May Piety your Pilot ever be:
O, may your Prince your Prudence ever see;
Long may your Country your good Counsel find.
That as you GOD, GOD may you ever houour;
That as you grace your King, your King may grace you;
That as you fight under Faiths blessed Banner;
Your God, your King, your Country may embrace you:
His humble Heart and Voice, this says, thus prays;
Who in his Prayers, his Best, does rest always.
Your Honors most humble Votarie to be commanded, JOHN VICARS.

TO THE JUDICIOUS AND COURTEOUS READER.
THou have here (courteous Reader) my Authors Epistle Dedicatorie: which both
for the Elegancy thereof, and propriety to this present Discourse, I have
translated into English, the rather for that the Author has learnedly
laid-downe his Motives both to the Matter and Metricall Method thereof. Which
as they most justly may and do protect him from the Prauitie of detracting
Malignitie: So I hope they will with no less indifferency (my Cause and Case
being the same in the Matter, though far inferior in the Manner) Patronize
me, and Apologize for me against the Malice of muttering Momus. Thus hoping the
best in the generous and judicious, disdayning the worst in the degenerous and
inscitious. I rest

Thine Io. VICARS.

The Authors Epistle Dedicatorie to the right Honorable Sir ROBERT NANTON,
Knight, Principal Secretary to the State, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council.
MAny things there be (right Honorable) which vilify and diminish the faith
of Romes Religion, which fortify and garnish ours. And yet indeed it is a very
miserable and deplorable thing, that in matter of Religion, men's minds and
judgments should still hang wavering and anxiously tottering as a Wedge of
Steel between two attractiue Loadestones; and not to be maturely and firmly
confirmed in the indubitable orthodox Faith and Religion. When therefore I had
adapted and addicted my mind to the study of Divinity, and afterward settled
my serious inquisition upon Controversies of Faith: Popery most perspicuously
seemed to me, to be nothing else, but a certain pompous and Maiesticke
Monarchy, begotten by Ambition, bred and fed up by Superstition, blocked-vp
and fortified by Tyranny, enlarged and propagated both by the Mammon of the
World, and fraudulent Fabrication of the Pseudo-Clergie.

Many most learned Authors have by their worthy Writings notably shaken this
(I say not Religion, but) Relegation or Banishment of true Religion: and may It
now (with your Honors good liking) put on a versified Vesture, and by this my
Edition and Dedication to your Honor, come forth, yet more grossly guilty
from me.

Theodorite writes of one Ephres of Syrus an Island in Asia, who long since
composed in diverse kinds of Verses, whatsoever appertained to Piety and
Religion: That so they might the more fervently be affected and earnestly
desired. The same does Socrates and Sozomen affirm of Apollinarius; And
Gregory Nyssen of Basil and of Nazianzen. Of more proximious and modern times
also Eobanus of Hesse, Beza, Bucanan, and very many more did accomodate
themselves (as it were, with a certain kind of delightful Sauce and
Seasoning of the Truth) to the illustration and setting forth of the Book of
Psalms in Verse.

(...) (as Pindarus) Let not then the stormy Stones of dire Detraction be
thrown at me, if I in imitation of those worthy imitable Authors have in
verse composed Hoc (...) Religionis argumentum, This often controuerted Subject
of Religion.

The most exquisitely learned Interpreters do call the Book of Psalms, the
most sacred sugared Poem of Gods blessed Spirit; And they give the reason why
Almighty God would have so excellent a Treasure of his Church to be contrived
and contained in verse, viz. (...), that it might be as a Bait to allure and
entice men to facile obedience thereunto. The same also is most manifest that
Satan (as he is Operum Dei (...) the Ape of Gods Actions) was wont to enfold,
wreathe and winde-vp in Verse, all his Oracles which in former ages he used to
deliver by his Pythons or Sybils, that by this means they might be the more
pleasant and acceptable to those which enquired after them. I omit, that Saint
Paul out of certain Poets, as Aratus, Menander and Epimenedes, quoted diverse
Testimonies or amplifications, and not out of any other Heathenish Authors, as
near as I can observe in his Epistles.

Once also heretofore I my self composed a Module in Latine-Verse, under the
Title of A Combat between the Flesh and the Spirit; or, The Warfare of a
Christian Soldier. Of our holy Martyrs; And of The miseries of this miserable
Life; Since which time, I with Nazianzen (...): have cast and prostrated this
my Muse at my Saviors feet, submitting and addicting it wholly to his service,
and to the setting forth of his pure Doctrine. And whilst I read the elaborate
Labors and Diatribae of Divines, and at intermissiue hours ruminated what I
had read; with most fervent desire and full delight, I forthwith put my self
upon a versifying Vein, thereby (as well as I might) to strengthen and assist
my weak and untrusty memory.

The Fruit of this my Labor I humbly Deuote, Dedicate and Consecrate to you
(Right Honorable) whom I ever knew (since I ever knew any thing) most
exquisitely endued, and adorned, furnished and accomplished with all generous and
ingenious Virtues and Discipline. Whence, the reason why his Majesty made you
his worthy Principal Secretary, cannot be Secretly hidden, but most
conspicuously evident, to me, to all others: But by this Poem, the Proeme of
my principal intention is, sincerely to lay down a perpetual Pledge, and
merited Memory of my obsequious observance of that great Favor and Courtesy,
wherewith your Honor has ever graced and embraced me: And of that firm
Faith, which I here endeavor to defend, and wherein I am most certainly
assured, you are most confidently and immoueably settled.

But I trust your Honorable Courtesy will conniue at and excuse me, if (as I
am Acrior paulo (...), a somewhat sharp and tart Opposite to the
Antichristian-Crew) the syllables and sentences in diverse places being
transposed and alternated, I seem to say and reiterate one and the same thing:
Since that even from my first undertaking of this Work thus once undertaken, I
undertook to display and disperse the fragrant and odoriferous Flowers of
various Authors, and not only to write diverse things, but to write them diverse
ways, and truly to depaint the power of Popery to be no less sumptuously
spacious, than auariciously Capacious.

But above all, my heart has eagerly exasperated my Hand and ready Pen (to the
utmost of my power) to pull down the intolerable and abominable Pride of Rome:
whereby her Babylonicall Bishops have with the Horns of their Insolency,
butted at the Princes of the Earth, showing themselves to be nothing else,
indeed, than the sirely Sons of Saturn, and an aspiring Offspring of
robustious combustious Phaetontine haughty Spirits.

Neither shall the Reader find here any flourishing veins or strains of
painted Poetry and fabulous Fictions: My prime purpose, in the fashioning and
framing of this Honey-Combe, being, to furnish it with a more beautiful
Cluster of Theology, than a bountiful Crop of Poesy.

Nor have I been ambitiously busy, to cite my Authors Names on the Margines:
For, what I write, I write to those, who (as Saint Augustine says, are willing
to read, and wise to understand; and who together with me, do either already
know, or easily may know, whatsoever I have writ.

Finally, Here, you have neither a few, nor all matters touching the Romish
Religion; Let whosoever will, give my Book a Bill of Divorce: But from your right
Honorable Humanity, and Customary Courtesy, I undoubtedly expect, and hope to
find, Favor for what I have done, and Pardon for what I have pretermitted and
left undone.

Your Honors most duly devoted, GEORGE GOODVVINNE.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO HIS TRVELY INGENVOVS and most ingenious Author.
Mr.
Gall'd-backed Babel, do thou kick and winch,
Enraged with smart of Goodwinnes tart Balme-Plaster?
O may it sting thee still, and prick and pinch
Romes corrupt crew, and her most leprous Master!
God (yet) give grace, that Some may some Good-win,
Enlightened by Gods guide, to see Romes sin.
Goodwinne did This, One special end propound
Of his sweet Satyrs: And even so do I,
Of my mere Oaten-Pipes plain rusticke sound,
Derived (rare Goodwinne) from thy Melody:
Wherein poor Pan has curious Orpheus found,
Inimitable in his Harmony.
Needs then (I say) must Mine be all the blame,
Not Thine, if Romes Wilde-beasts be not made tame:
Excuse, therefore (kind Sir) what is mis-committed;
Pardon, I pray (if ought be ill-omitted)
Your most truly loving friend, I. V.

To the most Dis-courteous Momish Catholic, whose greatest Grace is a graceles
gracious Kiss at his Vn-holy Fathers Great-Toe, Greeting.
ROmish Catholic, to Thee
This I send, if Be thou be,
Or if Waspe or sting-lesse Drone,
Or if humming Hornet known;
Herein, Thou shall Flowers find,
Various for thy curious mind:
Whereon thou may suck thy fill,
And with Romish Momish skill,
(By thy Honey-thighs, to thrive)
Garnish, furnish Romes Bee-Hiue.
Here, the Pope, thy Master-Bee,
Christ's Vicegerent, thou may see,
Peter's Heyre-apparent true,
Claiming as his proper due,
Heaven, Earth, Hell and Purgatory,
Far transcending Them in glory:
To whose Keys and Crosier-Staues
Kings and Keisars must be Slaves:
And, all this, for right and good
Is, seen here, as clear as mud.
Here is shown, how Thy great Father
Planted has for Thee to gather,
Plants which do Christ's Plants excel,
Flowers which have more fragrant smell
Than the Scriptures Killing-Letter,
Therefore making Honey better*
Whereby Romes most sacred Hiue,
And sweet Swarms full fatly thrive:
Here, Thou Henbane-Merit have,
Broad-way Flowers, here, are placed:
Asse-Cucombers, Cats-tayle tall,
Wolues-claw, Goose-grasse, great and small.
Goat-Beard, Bucke-Beanes, Dragons-Blood,
Mad-hearbe, Cog-wort, and Popes-wood.
Penny-male, and Female fair,
Virgin-marke, and Maidens-haire.
As for Scriptures Herb of Grace.
Patience, Hearts-ease, These, as base,
He has for thy sake displac't,
Lest they should offend thy taste:
Or, if tasted, Him displease,
And his total Swarm disease.
Therefore, those that most delight Thee,
Stand here ready to inuit Thee.
Then, seek, suck, what Thou think best,
And, to Honey-Combes digest,
What thou have so well collected,
And Fellifluously confected:
That, so, Thou, and all the Swarm
In your Hiue may chaunt and charm.
As for Me, the only gains
I could wish for all my pains,
Is, that my best Help, pressed Power,
Able were to tear the Tower
Of proud Babels Master-Bee,
Master of much Villainy;
Whose decay and downfall di^e,
Truly, duly, He Will desire,
Who is a hearty Ill-willer to the im-pure hollownesse of his im-pious
Holiness, JOHN VICARS.

IVDGEMENT UPON HIS WIT.
IF e're Translatour did deserve a Bays,
It is thy full desert, nor full thy Praise.
They changed sad-Inuention; you, brisk Wit
Forms and Transformes, unto all forms of it;
Rendering in most, the strain, in all, the sense:
The Wits will fear thy sting, and get them hence.
If any stay and pish; the cause is seen,
The matter* not thy manner, moves their spleen.
Bloud-rudilie Rome, thou have drawn much Saints blood:
This has drawn Thine; pray God it does thee good.
If this fail with the rest, thou art d^sp'rate, sure,
No Balm, for Babel, naught that Wh^re can cure.
You have my Censure, had you Romes Cens^res too,
They could be but as I am,
All for you. THOMAS SALISBVRY Bach. in Divinity.

The Argument of the Poem.
ONce, Satan hatched an Egg, full of foul Hope,
Whose Birth, by Fraud and Pride became a Pope:
How fondly men break Serpents Eggs? Romes pride
Dos't to their hand, and gives a Pope beside.
Another.
The Popes great Pride and Pomp Imperial,
Did make him Head, will make him headlong fal^.
Against Papal Supremacy.
Romes High Priest, late, like Sol, aloft did shine,
Like falling-S^arre* now, droops, drops, fears his fall;
His patent Rule, by potent Wrath divine,
Now, turns to Ashes; late a Cedar fall.
Another.
As encreast, decreast is the Popes great power:
And Rome, which flourisht, fades, now, like a flower.
A Brief of the Romish Religion.
Of all Sums, here is the Summary, chief Sum;
That underneath the Popes Rule, Faiths Rule come.
The Satyrs of this Book.
1 OF the Popes Supremacy. 2 Of the Authority of the Pope of Rome. 3 Of the
Interpretation of the Scriptures. 4 Of the false Doctrine of the Church of
Rome. 5 Of the blasphemous fiction of Merits, and Works of Supererogation,
etc. 6 Of the fond fiction of Transubstantiation. 7 Of the corrupt conditions
and wicked living in the City of Rome. 8 Of the covetous buying and selling of
all things under the Popes power and jurisdiction. 9 Of the most formidable and
abominable Powder Plot by Papists; with their horrible-authorized liberty to
perpetrate any villainy. 10 Of the holy Reliqu^s, Traditions, and other
admirable Inventions of the Church of Rome.
OF THE POPES SVPREMACY.
THE FIRST SATYR.
THE ARGUMENT.
Rome strives, contriues, how Popes may uncontrolled,
Solely and wholly, Keys, Crowns, Scepters hold.
ROME, the Worlds wonder, Stage of Mitred Bands,
Has Papal Power of Empire in her Hands:
For, here, the Pope succeeds in Peter's Right*
Which is as clear at Noone, as it is at Night.
The Highpriests Chair, here, Peter placed has;
But, this, (me thinks) smells more of Fame than Faith.
Here, on a seuen-fold Beast, the treble Beast,
With triple-Crowne does ride, each solemn Feast.
Yea, here, the Babylonish Bawd most fine,
A Scarlet Godhead, with rich Iemmes does shine.
Fie, fie, poor Peter, and penurious Paul,
Do ye not blush presumptuously to call
Your selves the Popes great Grand-sires? you are to blame,
That you thus think his Holiness to shame.
Alas, you are Both deceived, his Papal Throne
Buds, blows, and blossoms, big and broad is grown;
Your Slave of Slaves, is now a Lord of Lords,
The best of Men no equal Him affords.
Logic lacks Phrases to define your Pope,
He must have more then Categories scope;
He Is yet not found, can find* or firmly say,
What, How, How great's the Pope and Papal sway.
Romes power's distinct, from other powers all,
Of all Powers else, Romes has no General.
The Pope is peerless, Rome knows none more Royal;
This, Realms, He Men, surmounts past all denial.
See here Gods Steward, Heavens Controuler great,
Blown big with Badges, swelled with supreme Seat.
Stately he stalks and walks; his Blasphemies
Fill Heaven and Earth, and his mad Pride implies.
This monstrous Monarch, Tetrach terrible,
Is his Flocks Wonder, Thund^r horrible.
Religion brought forth Riches, this rich Daughter,
Repaies her Dam, with Death, not long time after.
All Sacred things their Sacred Pope's above;
To Him nought's Sacred, but Golds Sacred love.
Peter, to exceed, more than succeed, he joys:
Tenths of his Honor, none (almost) enioyes.
His Sea's a Sea of Wealth: But let me choose
A Man to grace his place; This, Popes refuse.
And why alone to Peter's this Charge given?
Why are the Rest from State and Office driven?
In Paul, not any, many spots in Peter
We find; why then, for Paul was it not much meeter?
At least, Saint John, whom Christ esteemed Best,
Ought to be prized, preferred before the Rest.
Yet Peter never was decked with Iems and Gold;
Was no Key-keeper, no Sword Bearer bold,
Rode not with Strappes and Trappes, in Scarlet Gowns;
Not daubed with Pearls, or Princely golden Crowns.
Peter, Colleague-ship with the Priests desires;
The Pope, ^o be the Prince of Priests aspires.
Peter was never attired Centurion-like;
Peter's Successor, often times, Caesar-like.
Meekness gave to Saint Peter Primacy;
An humble mind was his Priority.
Peter a Fisher, Peter's Impe a Fighter;
A Stone was Peter's Throne, the Heavens his Mitre.
And what was Paul, even equal to the best;
Greater than he, not any of the rest.
Yet he for Christ's sake, joys in bonds and blows:
Ergo, the Pope is greater than Both Those.
Christ of a Heavenly, not an earthly Throne,
Had the Fee-simple; Peter, other, None.
If Christ had here no Kingdom, how should He
Place Peter, where Himself would never be?
And is it not strange, Heavens Kingdoms Key should open
The doors of Earthly Kingdoms to the Pope?
He which so grossly guls, beguiles each Nation,
Besots himself with Reasons deprivation.
Alas, fond Flash, o earthly glory shallow!
What wry-waies, by-waies take thou, Christ to follow?
Alas, they void not Christ's, but Worlds offense;
Which use to choose such carnal sottish Sense.
What Christ prescribes, That Antichrist proscribes;
Is It like, that Christ this Function him ascribes?
What Right of Title, Titles-Right is there,
Where naught, but Show of Title does appear?
As Spend-thrifts boast of Title, All being gone;
So, insubstantiate Shades Popes build upon.
He faineth Christ, but follows Satan still;
Serves God in Words, denies him in his Will.
The Apostate Priest sits often in Peter's Chair;
Whom to call Pope, not Pius, we may dare.
As Polypus sticks to each Rock of's shape;
And by that craft, few fish his Jaws do escape:
So, forging, faining, Peter, Christ, Faiths Rock,
His Pseudo-founded Faith th'vnwise does mock.
The Ground-worke's hid, the top is seen to all;
To what end tend these wiles Pontifical?
The reason's plain, and Pluto's paths lie open;
What of this false Profession is the Scope?
Now then behold the Popes Monarchike might;
Which, He, by Christ's allowance claims as Right.
This Heavenly Viceroy, Peter's proper Heir:
Christ's office holds, sits, shines in Peter's Chair.
The supreme Bishop awelesse, lawless quite,
An Earthly god, a two-leg'd monstrous Wight;
Beyond all Beings, great beyond Relation;
The Court, the Church, he rules by usurpation.
Wheth'r Antichrist, Lesse-Christ, or Other-Christ;
With Christ, his Rule, by right, must needs be highest.
In, under, For Christ, all Power here, in Heaven;
To this Key-keeper, Rockey Father's given.
Thus writ that Faith-lesse frantike S^apleto^
Favorite,
Unfit (great Jewel) for thy opposite.
And why may not the Pope, as worthy, claim
The honor due to great Iehouah's Name?
Why may not call him Jupiter, Earth's Thunder,
Yea Elohim? the Worlds great God of Wonder?
Unto the The ^ope.
Mount (that Mounte-banke says plain)
I lift mine Eyes which does my state sustain.
That all the World must bow to the Pope of Rome,
Who e're believes not, he to hell does doom.
As at a beck, the Lord of heaven rules All:
So, here, his Sheep, the Pope has at a call.
This Priestly Pilot, (for, the Church, it is known,
Is like a Ship) Christ's Ship can rule alone.
He which the Popes pipe knows not perfectly,
Is none of this great Shepherds Sheep surely.
Others Rule's finite; his is infinite:
Theirs, but a Beam of his All-supreme Light.
His patent Province both for Grace and Place,
Specious and spacious, bows before his face.
As with huge Waves, the Sea, small dewes does sup:
So his great Power, less Powers deuoures, drinks up.
Therefore He in submission, to him holds,
Captains, Commanders, Shepherds, Sheep, Sheepe-folds.
He Is poor, can count his flocks: this Shepherd great, Pauperis es^ numerar^
pecuspunc;

Has far more Sheep, than food for them to eat.
Councels and sacred Synods he excels;
An hyperbolicke-Priest in Gods house dwells.
This Romish Briareus; Hydra fell,
For Hands and Head, to rule, does all excel.
To the Council, this Cosmopolite once came,
A Judge, a Party, Guilty, One, the Same.
But what need Councels, when their Pope Divine
Can all Divine Decrees, finely define^
O yes; by Councels, is the right way known,
To Him which has sound judgments praise alone.
Even He alone, which without Councels aid,
Remoues Faiths Rubs, and Wrackes, by doubts displaid.
To Peter's chair Error can never come near;
Which, that ^he Pope enioyes, does plain appear.
He may doe-ill, not Err, in any case:
If once He sit in that All-prying Place.
If Baalam, Caiaphas, Right did Prophetize:
Why may not wicked Popes do so likewise?
Yea though they Pilate, Judas base, transcend:
Yet may a traitorous Pope, be Faiths good Friend.
He swears to Lies, by Lying often deceiues:
Yet, his loose tongue to Faith stickes-fast and cleaues.
Let Alexander, Julius, witness bear:
Whose fained Faith, firm'd and infringed were;
Who got the Popedom Foxe-like, craftily;
Reigned like a Lion, like a Dog did die.
He that Christ's Court and Sheepe-cote thus does gain,
Is not a Friend, but Fiend; no Balm, but Bane.
That Swines-snout, Sergius, Sergeant of the devil;
Was to his Chair a Scoff, a Scurffe most evil.
Pius the fifth, Im-pius, within, without,
How against Eliza, shot he darts, about?
Vrbane the third, a Bane, A-bad-one, right;
Strange Popish chaos caused by furious fight.
That Brand of Hell, foul Heldebrand also:
With what mad mischiefs did he ouerflow?
Christ chained up Satan, but thy Potentate,
O Rome, does let him loose to deuorate.
That Christ Church then, may flourish, firmly stand,
It Is time the Pope were pulled down out of hand.
O how this Prelate differs from that Prince,
Which was both poor and pure in Innocence?
Surely this Worlds Arch-Metropolitan,
Seeks somewhat more then Christ, not known to man.
For, Christ to be Faiths head, when was it read?
Yet this Arch-father must be faiths Arch-head.
And Tortu^ with his Torture has so framed;
That Christ is great, the Pope is greatest, named.
His Masticke and Stigmaticke-Slaues do dare,
To give the Pope, what ere be never so rare.
Most-holy, Great'st, Supreme, Superlatiues,
Are the Popes due, and not plain Positiues.
Great Alexander, Pompey, Charles the Great:
But he is most-Mightie, h'as the Greatest seat.
Christ prays to God, and says, O holy-Father:
To the Pope, his Shauelings say, Most-Holy, rather.
We must not mint these terms, or use less phrases:
Diminitiues deduct from his high praises.
Of Peter's Titles is not lost a tittle,
Nor from the Popes praise wants the least little.
Romes Monkish-mad-men crouch upon their knee,
To kiss his Seat, his Feet, for so 't must be.
Thus not the Prime, but Supreme Power is sought,
And unto God he is almost equal thought.
For he tha^ Popes rare Titles rightly prizeth.
Holds him Almighty, when to the chair he rises.
This lofty Leuite holds, injuriously,
The pillar, prop, of Prin^ely Sovereignty.
Judge of all Judges, is this Drudge of Drudges:
Which, who denies, to fire, away he trudges.
So vile, so servile is the yoke, alas,
Which this Iol^-hea^ makes ore Kings heads to pass.
And why? the Pope is Pastor, Kings are Sheep;
Is It not He then, must them in order keep?
But when Christ left his Sheep to Peter, pray,
Tell me, Feed thine, or my sheep, did he say?
But, Kings are said to feed; which, being so,
How then the Pope is not a No, for he is a Wolf in ^ Sheep c^at.
Sheep, I Would know?
And did Christ's coming Kings right ^erminate?
Used he his power Kings power to lacerate?
Alas, if Romes High Priest so potent were:
On a small thread Kings Hopes would hang, I fear.
If Crowns to Crosier-Staues should subject be,
By fatal date their falls we soon might see.
What have Kings done, what angry God displeased,
To be of Power, by Papal power eased?
But what is the Pope to the Prince? Crosse-Caps to Crowns?
Are Swords for Peter? Scepters fit for Clownes?
Have Popes a Ladder, than Kings Thrones more high?
Or rather, reaching Hells profundity?
Not poore-mens gain, but Princely Reign he scrapes:
And, Aquila non capit Muscas.
Eagle-like, at Flies he never gapes.
Kings from their Crowns, for Heresy he drives:
Pesants may escape in body, goods, and lives.
This Mitred Molech, Priestly Dagon stout,
Satan for's Basshaw, Champion, has picked out.
Wearing by's side a gallant Bilbo-blade;
And not with Words, but Swords, does soon persuade.
Is this to preach, and people poor to teach*
O, no, in's head He has a further reach;
Namely, to cut down Leban C^dars tall:
To fell high Oaks, and cause bright Stars to fall.
Not Iupiter-Capitoline, alone,
But Mars Capitolin^ He must be known.
When this great Paedagogue of Princes, shakes
His scourging Rod, Kingdoms to quake he makes.
Who, if he forge, Paul, Peter, Tyrants vilde:
His Brow is Brass, he has his Faith defilde.
Thy Substitute (O Christ) which Thine exceeds,
Them often with much dread, no doctrine feeds.
His Power's a Pasture to men's souls most bitter:
His flocks to kill, then well to fill, much fitter.
Christ had his Unction: he combustion fire:
Christ mild^ly heales: he heales men's wounds most dire.
O Spouse of God, thy Corn, is Cockle grown:
When thy Housekeeper will be Keisar known.
He sits not idle which in the chair does sit:
Yet has for's flock no food, affection fit.
The scope of's hope is still to keep down Kings:
Save this, impertinent he holds all things.
Thus all his vassals from aloft he spies:
His Myrmidons, his Waspes, his Butter-flies.
He ore-lookes all wheres'ere, from top to toe:
Pulls down the tallest Mounts, and lays them low.
And that all this is good, the reason's plain:
Drawn from example, with all might and maine.
Bees, Masters have: Cranes Guides: Bell-weathers, Sheep:
These prove that Popes may all men vnder-keepe.
And by this Art, this Worlds Arch-Primate may
Typhaeus-like, over Kings and Clergy sway.
But feign I would the Popes great Myrer doffe:
And with his own Sword Goliahs head smite-off.
Why should not one King over all Kings reign*
A Head of heads, a Guide of guides most plain.
Why is thy head (Christ) spectable to all?
When as thy Kingdom is Spiritual.
Alas, the Clergies swelling Tympany
Of Pride, gave God this monstrous Emperie,
That two crosse-heads of one set kingdom be,
This set in Heaven, that (Earth) set over thee.
A Gulfe's between these Heads, agree never shall:
God's sp'rituall head, the Popes material.
Christ's Kingdom is in the world invisible:
Admits no head, official, sensible:
Ne'r^ did Christ's Spouse, two heads, two husbands know:
Christ only her dear pheere, the Church does owe.
If Antichrist (pray tell me) should be mad,
Could Christ be joined to such a head, so bad?
Again, Christ left his Church much Goods, most good:
(The are so indeed, since purchased with his blood)
If Christ, his Church so rich a dowry gave;
From thee (proud Pope) what newfound wealth may't have?
Art thou the Churches Head? Heart, Corpse, and all,
(Which were blasphemous) then we might thee call.
And if the Pope were Head, the Church would be
Headless, like Dagon, in Popes Vacancie.
Now, as the Body, with the Head does die:
The Pope once dead, the Flock must liuelesse lie.
Which is not so in Christ, who though once dead;
Yet then did live, as our spiritual head.
See then ambitious vilely vicious Pope:
The ruin of thy iarres, thy wars, thy hope.
And yet this great Anteus of proud Rome,
Does stoutly from his false newforce resume.
With Wit argute, will quick dispute, and spit,
At Right, and Reason, and all Rules of it.
Thus Rome; Are Priests held Heads? the Pope Priests Head?
May not then Popes the Heads of Heads be sed?
This shallow Reason reasonlesse and wrong,
Proves not chief Power to Popes, for to belong.
Can any Pastor be all Pastors chief?
(But Christ alone) to give his Church relief?
On whom so great does Romes great Head subsist?
What one head can so many heads assist?
O fond befooling of men's fantasy:
To shape, to set up such a prodigy.
For, it is above, beyond, against, deep conceit,
Of all men's heads to make one head so great.
And it may be (nor is this may be vain)
This grosse-head does much swelling sores contain.
That part's enorme does not conform to the rest:
And can the sound the sick part well digest?
So when weak frames by rotten props are staid,
These being cracked, the work is wrackt, decaid.
O work unworthy, worthy hatred still!
Than which there is naught more cross to Gods blessed will.
O Peter's lawless heir, Christ's counterfeit!
Full of Satanicke iugling, sly deceit.
O hideous, heinous Monster, blind, misshapen;
In Gods Church, as God, for God, often mistaken.
What help can this base helpless Man of Sin,
Thy deadly foe (O Christ) to thee bring in?
What is a Wave to the Sea; to the Wood, one Tree?
A Torch, to the Sun, Man's help, O God to thee?
He which would thus Christ's love and labor minish:
Does but a Work of scoff and laughter finish.
This botching Bishop, Romish prodigal;
Makes either Toys, or naught, or naught at all.
And I much marvel, all the World throughout,
Bring not their aid, to bring this work about.
A vselesse Key, on's Head a treble Twist;
A formal Crook, fatal, officious Fist:
These are Romes high Priests most peculiar Signs;
To these rare Works himself he most enclines.
Alas, his Brow is Brass, Marble his Mind;
Which, to Christ's Body, thinks this head's not joined.
For to this high-topt Tower of Babels throne,
The Churches Guide, Gods Guard, are linkt in one.
Apocal. 5.6.
Great Lamb of God, enlightening seven Lamps bright:
What need have thou of any newfound light?
O Christ, thy Kingdom of this world is not;
Satan, this Worlds great Sovereignty has got:
Which, being so, this Romish Ghostly Father,
May be the diu'ls, than Christ's head, much the rather.
Is Pluto prince, does he a Vicar need?
Thou then, proud Pope, may fitly him succeed.
How often (O Rome) have thou thy Head expeld?
How many Heads, at once, has thy chair held?
How often with broiles has thy false Church been rent?
By double, treble Heads most turbulent.
Often had thy Church, in Womb, seditious Seed:
Which Anti-Popes and Pseudo-Popes did breed.
Often has Ambitions Horse his Rider cast:
And broke his neck, riding to the chair too fast.
And their Succession, whereof they so glory,
Quite worn, quite torn, witness authentic Story.
So many mighty Battles have been bred,
'Bout Supreme Seat and Titles of chiefe-Head.
Mad-brain'd Ambition, Titius envious heart:
Being cause of much deceit and deadly smart.
The Prelates pomp, by too great growth decaid:
And Pride and Plenty their own graves have made.
Christ then, our great chief Pastor, holds both these:
Contention theirs, ^eares not Christ's Coat of Peace.
Here Concord has her Temples fixed station;
One Heart, one Faith, one Path, and one Salvation.
O! What a Head did then Christ's Temple guide?
When a fair Popesse did in the Chair reside?
When falsely termed John, indeed, Pope Ioane,
By her foul Birth, true Whore of Rome was known?
She was indeed Romes Bishoppesse, not Head:
And, of her Plocke, the Tail, the shame, and dread.
Thus Romes ^are Prelates were not Fathers, all:
This one, w^ may their Ghostly M^ther call.
O ominous portent, o horrid Sign!
Surely, that day vncloudy did not shine.
What? could a Woman, Where, the Chair inherit?
Androgini, populi, vtrisque Naturae.
Androginus might it more justly merit.
But (first it may be) She a Man was known
But changed her Sex, and was a Woman grown:
For, thus writ Dialogo 10. page 47.
Cope, scarce copious in capacity,
Whose wit herein, sauour'd of much Fooleacity.
This, this was that Ecliptic Line, once gliding,
Between Romes Sky, and Popish Zodiac biding.
But yet a Whore (the Salick Law well held)
Should from the Chair, at least, have bin expelled.
I know, Rome holds this fact, a feigned Lie:
Though faithful Authors do it justify.
But, now, that never Foemale Popes may reign,
Their Manhood, first, by fruitful Signs is plain.
But tell me this, Ghostly Gargantua;
Is Christ thy Head? He is (no doubt) thou wilt say:
Suffices th^^e, this Head? Yes: Well, why then,
As well as thee, not Me, and other Men?
If any rouing Reason favors Thee,
Or fits thy Foe; why may't not stand for me?
Silenus and his drunken Droues here stagger:
This cunning Crafts-man must with Reason swagger.
Wherefore, henceforth this triple-crowned Deity,
Shall ere, be held a Pseudo-Popish Monarchy.
The Capital great Logger-head of all;
Trascendent Head, huge, right Pontifical;
Or else a Heap of Heads, a Chaos rude:
Such Head, such heap, nor wit, nor writ, ere showed.
The Rule that May-tide Lords of Mis-rule find,
Such Lord, such Laws let be to Rome assigned.
If of Christ's Body Popes be Head; by right,
They may, as well, be Health, Heart, Life, Light, Sight.
But if no other Basis can be laid:
No other Head may here on Earth be made.
Well, pur-blind Bayard, one day thou shall reign:
And headless, Dagon-like, thy Blind maintain.
When all Sun-shunning Owls, one huge Head have;
Thou shall be then, the Worlds Block-head most brave.
But, in all ancient Fathers, never was read,
That of Christ's Body any Priest was Head:
Christ left his Church, true Treasure to enjoy:
What wealth did Christ to the Popes use employ?
Three Creedes the pristine Fathers left behind:
In none of them, Popes supreme power we find.
Nor ere did they which did our Creedes indite,
Of Apostolic Proto-Popes ought write.
Surely, the Popes Prerogatives most high,
They never saw, or seen, shamed to descry.
He, then; which has bin Head, of's Iay-like pride,
Shall be made bare, the world shall him deride.
Prize not, fond Fool, thy Torch above Sols light:
There Is no such need of Popes Vicegerent might.
What ere is Chief, is Head, Heads Riuals hate:
One Head, cannot Another tolerate.
This Fable then of Peter's Power, thus fails;
Which, with Saint Peter's Chair, are old-Wines, tales.
OF THE AVTHORITY OF THE POPE OF ROME.
THE SECOND SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
Heaven is hemmed in; Seaes Waves have Walls, a Bound;
But, the Popes Power has no Enclosure found.
OF all the World Romes Pope is President:
He rules the Reins of rouing Regiment.
All Power to Popes (witness a Pope) is given;
Of right, of wrong, on Earth, in Hell, in Heaven.
He gives, he takes, makes rich, makes poor, high, low:
Makes vows, breaks vows, makes bloody battles grow.
He Is Frantic, frets, Mars-like molesteth all:
With two two-edged Swords, does fight and brawle.
Yet, this prodigious Priest does all by Law:
All well, for why? he Error never saw.
He Will turn, turn back, turn topsie-turuie quite;
And yet can never do ought but just and right.
And this High Priest may, with due Worthiness,
Call the whole world his proper Diocese.
Faso^rum lib. 2.
Ovid has this Dogmatically shown;
The World, and Romes large Reach are both but one.
He Is out of Natures Fold, He Is Hee-Alone:
Colleague or Legall-Rites, the Pope knows none.
He, He Is the Worlds Prince, Prelate, high above all:
Rapt up in the Clouds, of Stars the principal.
This Priestly Turret, Apostolic Head,
Can (under Christ) by none be equalled.
Thus Romes proud Chair or takes, or makes Elated:
With such strange pride Romes Titan is sufflated.
Pleasing things, pious; impious must be,
What ere displease; this is the Popes Decree.
His Thunder, Earth; His Furies fright even Hell:
Except what-ere he does, you deem done well.
His Lawless Kings under his Laws to thrall,
Is his Great, greater, greatest work of all.
This large Law- Giver, Guider, Rights Vmpire;
But what is just, can naught affect, desire.
If Land to Sea he join, and Sea to Land:
What Ca^aphas calls Right, for right must stand.
He builds, vnbuilds, plays fast and loose with Law:
And who complains, he soon restraines with Awe.
Lo, to the World the Pope ( Worlds Sol, most bright)
Is come; yet nien love Darkness more than Light.
Surely, not he, to Peter's pomp which hies,
Creates a Pope; but which Popes Deifies.
He Is the only Man, which nobly, notably,
Himself before All Men can magnify.
He may be said, and with the finger shown,
Conspicuous Christ, Visible God alone.
He has, and must have, wealth, far more than Kings:
For why? Romes Chair must want no needful things.
He must have Kings their Scepters to lay down;
And from his Feet to fetch their regal Crown.
And reason good, to Miters, Crowns should creep:
The Miter, not the Crown, makes Priests for Sheep.
He has those firm Foundations of Romes See:
Which Peter held, and by God settled be.
He of all Kingdoms has the supreme Grace:
And he (O Christ) holds, here, thy stead and Place.
He must not only be, of Councels, Head;
But he alone would be in Councels stead.
He can of Scriptures rain down showers thick:
That at his words Heretics perish quick.
It Is no great fault if he false Latin speak.
And with For Fiat. Julius the 2.
Fiatur, Priscians head do break.
He which dares say, this Lawier's not best able
To clear all doubts; must be held execrable.
Though he (most blockish) fail in the Premises,
Yet justly he concludes all businesses.
If he the right hand call the left; Night, Day;
Thou must not dare his Holiness gainsay:
This is that great Ringleader to the Rest;
Whose Steps to tread, his Bishops must be pressed.
Thy guilt, is grievous, gross, abominable,
If what he does, thou deem not warrantable.
He can, as easily, from his thundering Throne,
Spoil Heretics, as Nut-shells with a Stone:
Hark, Heretic, which scorn'st Romes Sacrifices:
Burn, Heretic, which stop'st Popes Enterprises.
He scorns a Judge to plead in his Defense:
He Is Holier, Higher, than the highst offense.
All must to him be bare, and bend the knee;
But he to none, of never so high degreee.
Since he has power All to proscribe, indite:
Spare the Popes Crimes; you which of Times do write.
To the Buyer nought's more dear, more dear Relief:
Than His in Wax, in Lead, in the Bull and Brief.
Fit Fellows for him, are the Archangels bright:
Namely, good Michael, sovereign Gabriels might.
His only Lust is Law most just and pure;
All right made against him, he will by right abjure.
Without, above, clean contrary to Right:
His Canons hold, all things are in his might.
Others may plead, He Laws prescribes, alone;
Even he which has the prime Pontifick Throne.
Within a Shell thou may the Sea contain:
As soon as Popes rights within Bounds restrain.
If (as a wild-Beast) He the Hunter fear:
He can most nimbly skip and escape his Spear.
Power, makes his passage, Laws brass bars he breaks.
And who is he that against Popes pleasure speaks?
Hear'st thou, Superbor^ Principum Typus.
Salmonean Tarpey's thunder crack?
Be still, quick do Romes Will, or fear thy wrack.
Does weak wrath slow from Encelade alone?
Are Leaden Bulls as flying Gulls now known?
Devils Dish, Wraths Child, Hells fuel, thou art straight,
If thou once dare the Pope to irritate.
This halfe-God-Priest, Corporeal Deity:
Steward, Sub-Iustice of Jehovah high:
Earth's Mitred Atlas, passing man's condition;
Indocible in Limits of his Dition.
Symbolick-Christ, Bar-Iona's Son notorious;
Christ's God head has; with Peter's pomp is glorious.
Nay more; this Lesse-Christ, more than Christ will have;
Than Peter, Petty-Peter's far more brave.
Christ hid himself, when Men, Him King would make:
The Pope by fraud and force does Kingdoms take.
Christ, on a Colt, rode; but Vice-Christ must be
On great-Mens shoulders borne, that All may see.
The Satan.
Prince oth' World, Worlds pomp, showed thee (O Christ)
Which thou did shun; So does not Antichrist.
O Christ, thy Kingdom of this World is not:
But thy House-holder holds this World, his Lot.
Christ gives Gifts, gratis; gratis, so, gives He:
But it is to Grateful, greater gifts to see.
Christ, Harlots gifts in the Temple would not have:
The Pope with such, fills up his Bags most brave.
Christ purged his Temple of all things, there sold:
The Pope, in the Temple, buys and sells for Gold.
And who now doubts, (but the whole world per^hance)
That Christ did this great Chapman thus advance?
This Slave of Slaves, glistring in Gold most bright;
With His thick, quick Lightnings, does Gods Flock affright;
This Priests Goliath; Nubuchadnezzers
Fulmineous Flame, his shiu'ring Sheep much fears.
Christ, sure, hi^ Sheep with such Horns did not arm;
But made them ^ilde, ^o bear; not Strong, to harm.
Say; Is the Pope a Prince of Peace? nay rather,
He is Warres-Worker, mouer, only Father.
Worlds Floods He Muds, in Muddy Waters, best,
Romes wily Weeles catch Fish; too manifest.
Thus, this Great Bishop Kingdoms does annoy:
Thus supreme Rule he holds fast, does enjoy.
Holds, and ^nioyes (I say) but All thus got;
This Priestly Meteor holds by theeuish Lot.
Kings he depose^h, Kingdoms does dispose;
And on all Monarchs does his Yoke impose.
Satan being Guide in Martial pride, These same,
With Victors voice, his Vassals, he does name.
For, the Popes parlour keeps a Key in store;
Which, unto Kings Thrones locks, vnlockes the door.
To the Laity, Laws against their King he gives;
And from their King, his Clergy lawless lives:
For, they are Subjects, not by Law, but Lust;
And only as their Reason holds it just.
If he over Kings Dictator cannot be;
The Plebeans Tribune, soon you shall him see.
For he does Monarchs, Commons-creatures, call;
That so at's Will their Thrones may stand and fall.
If Peter's Key, to Peter cannot frame
Kings Scepters; then, Paul's Sword shall do the same.
Fevers to Plagues. Scabs turn to Leprosy,
If Romes Physicion bring not Remedy.
This ramping Lion fills all parts with horror;
His Flocks in Field he frights with fear and terror.
Peers wait at's Board, Monarchs his Bridle hold
His very Feet are kissed by Champions bold.
'Twas the Popes voice; an Emp'rours neck, alone,
Was the Aspe and Basilishe he would trample on.
To hold his Stirr^p Kings must crouch and bend;
Whiles this great Priest on horseback does ascend.
An Emperor kneeles, whilst he with high renown,
With hand and f^^t, puts on, puts off his Crown.
This Popish Latro-Monarch the Eagles plumes
Plucks off; yea Emp'rours Crowns and Iems assumes.
See; do not Popes succeed in Peter's place?
Does not Christ, Them, his Substitutes embrace?
A Scarlet Stole, gold Stool, with Garl^nd crowned,
With worldly wealth, pomp, glory, thus renowned;
With Starre-like Iems, and sparkling Stones most precious,
Voluptuous Life, much Ease, Riot, pernicious;
Persian apparel, stiff Neck, glistering Head;
A shining Crest, gay Shape, Front garnished:
Wagging his Diamond-sparkling fingers fine,
Proffering to kiss his Hand and Feet divine;
Gazing on's Troop and Train, while each one sings,
Hail the Worlds Father, our great King of Kings,
Borne on Mens-backes, while mighty Monarchs must
Prop-vp his Pride; and from their Thrones be thrust.
Bearing in's hand the sacred Keys of Rome,
Earths high Tribunal, under Christ t'assume;
Forcing hells Fiends (his Friends) to do his will;
And heavens Angelike Host his Hest fulfill:
Taken for God, and taking clean away
Sins Guilt: yea opening all Heaven- Gates, for pay;
Drowned in delights of all sorts; with mad pride,
He celebrates each Gourmandizing-Tyde.
These, truly, these are holy Popes best Signs:
These, Peter had, these God to them assigns.
Who Will then deny (but he that is well in's wits)
But Popes to be Gods Stewards, well befits?
He can give Heaven to the Heinous, and bestow
Faiths Crown on those, in treason that oreflow.
Falsehood is Faith; true Worship, Coniuration:
(So please the Pope) and Truth, Equivocation.
If by one-Plot the Publike-weale had perished:
So please the Pope; that-Plot must needs be cherisht.
If Parricides in Parents sides, their sword
Should sheath; the Pope quick pardon could afford.
Yea, all, Law-breakers shall be faultlesse held:
So please the Pope; who Laws does rule and weild.
Rule's, out of Rule; Law, Lawless, guidelesse, all:
When pleases this High Priest Pontifical.
And though against Christ, blaspemous words be spoke;
(If from his holy-Mouth) they turn to smoke:
That poorely-pure Leo the tenth durst say:
What talk we of that Tale of Christ, I pray?
O holy Speech; and for Faiths Fostrer fit:
For him which in the Highpriests Chair does sit.
It shows indeed (Monarchicke-Pope) most plain;
Of Christ, thou, naught but Title do retain.
Thus have thou (Thou all-daring impious wight)
Thy ghastly Gorgons, sottish Sects, to fright;
Thou Kingdoms, Kings, do thus, tame, terrify:
Thus make thou foes yield most submissiuely.
Thus unto thee (witness thy self) was given
Power of the double-slicing Sword, from heaven.
If, in one-hand, that twofold brandisht Blade
Thou shake, day, night, light, darkness; straight is made.
All Is become comely, which uncomely seemed,
If Crowns be thine, if the Ephod such be deemed.
But here, the Moralists, facetious Fable
Seems, thee, to paint, a Iugler admirable:
While the fond Camel wished for Horns, denied;
His fore-giuen Ears he lost, for's foolish pride:
So whilst the Pope both Swords to gripe does gape;
Shortly he shall lose both, desert of Rape.
Thus, thus it is plain (or I my self deceive)
All Is his that Christ did to prime Peter leave.
The Pope is Peter's Heir of All; likewise,
As Prince of Priests he thus does Peterize.
Nor God nor Man, nor both; but twixt both dubious:
A two-legg'd Thing, monstrous, amphibious.
A Semi-god, two natures, Ianus-Elfe:
To Pet'r as like as Peter's to himself.
Him God ordained to sit in Judgment seat:
And under God, Priests Ashuer^sh great.
When of Christ's Church to Heirs their parts were made
All fell to the Pope (as pilfering Popes have said.)
He Is heavens Key-Keeper and Housekeeper great:
To Saints in heaven, he gives, gai^e-sayes a Seat.
To hells deep dungeon he throws desperately,
Infinite Souls; yet none dare ask him why.
White into black, old, new; squares into rounds
He turns; but mutter, and he thee confounds.
Thou but whetst wrath, digg'st flames, the Lion sharest:
With taunting terms, if chide the Pope thou dare.
If, once, this Lion, big Behemoth roar,
His breath will blast and beat thee over and over.
Then, O dire Fate, too late, thou shall be taught;
What it is this Halfe-man-God, to set at naught,
Maturely, then (lest his fierce fury boil)
Slack, and draw- back the fuel of thy spoil.
And if thou love thy self vnboyled, yet,
Quickly, submissely, run to Rome, it is fit.
For (I think sure) thou scarce secure can be:
When night and day such dangers threaten thee.
O supreme Prelate, Earths God, sacred Sire:
Did thou for this Christ's Sheepefold thus acquire?
To Peter's chair, was such fierce fury given?
Are these men's duties services, of Heaven?
Art Thou Christ's Tipe? do Thou in's room reside?
Thou Art rather Type of Tarquin's, Plutoes pride.
OF THE INTERPRETATION OF THE SCRIPTVRES.
THE THIRD SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
Since, it is most plain, Popes can explain Gods Writ;
To seek to Them, in All. Doubts, is most sit.
THe Trident Council has confirmed the scope
Of Scriptures to the pleasure of the Pope:
Whose sacred Sense on Romes Hi^^ Priest depends:
And therefore to Romes love submissely bends.
If not, her Readers shall be sure to find
Nothing but Wry-wayes, By-ways, dark and blind.
For it is Gods Word; which none, well, understand:
Unless the Pope pu^ to his helping hand.
Consult with Popish Rubricks lest thou wander;
This Ariadne guides in Texts Meander.
For of Gods Word he is the only Hermes best:
The Holy Ghost being seated in his breast.
And the Popes Word, is Gods Word certainly:
In whom is not least spot of Heresy.
This Wizards quick Wit picks-out, passing well;
Marrow from bones, Nut-kernels from the shell.
The holy words true sense he sure finds out,
Who else interprets, leaves the text in doubt.
He only being Scriptures South-Sayer, sure,
Resolves the doubts of rigid Texts obscure.
Sols day star, which, to Christ's Church gives pure light:
And does dark clouds of Error banish quite.
He Is virtues Watch-Towre, rule of Piety:
Laws light, and Courts bright-beame of Equity.
The Sages Star, Christ's birth, showed not so right:
As Popes to Christians do Gods Word enlight.
Like as the Sun fills All with shine most pure:
So his clear Light makes bright the Bible sure.
And since his Paraphrase from Errour's free:
Ergo, the Texts pure Sense from him must be.
If at his Candle thou wilt not kindle thine:
Thou Art blind, and Gods Word cannot in thee shine.
The Axetree of Romes Faith rowles hereupon:
That Peter's Heir must be thy Master known.
And though a Gloss most Gross the Text does wrest:
Since, Ipse dixit, that must be the best.
This Library of God, Atlas of Faith,
Commends, condemns, at pleasure, says, vnsaith.
But (sure as Sol does shine) he is the bold Boaster
Of Piety; false-Prophet, Worlds Imposter.
He, boldly, his opinions does apply
To Scriptures; but ner're bettered is thereby.
For if thou knewst how he Christ's writ does wrest:
Thou Would think he brow, nor brain, nor heart, possessed.
He is (Romes Delius says) the Delphicke Sword:
Life's perfect leaden Rule, Gods holy Word.
Pliant t'each Sense, Devotions doubtful line;
To false opinions facile to incline.
It Is Gods own Word, that Pens of Exposition
Should run with Romes Rites, Practices, Condition.
The Church, Truths witness (a dumb witness, sure)
Must learn from Romes High Priest to speak most pure.
Thus this worlds Dunghill, Patriarch subtle, sly;
Expounds Gods Word most artificially.
But, whatsoere's unpleasant to his taste,
His Paraphrase must mend it in all haste.
O Pope, Arts Prop, great Master of the Muses:
Whose holy mouth, faith into all infuses:
Must I (O Clarke of Clerks most learned, rare,)
Be a Disciple of thy Sacred Chair?
I Am sure of Paul's and Peter's anger, when
Thine Oracle (great Scholiast) I contemn.
Long have I listened, let me quickly know
The sacred Oracles which from thee flow.
Though Rude, I Am Ready; thou shall find me free:
If taught, new- wrought from Rudeness I may be.
Thus, then: Christ, thrice bad Peter his flock feed:
Ergo, the Pope must supreme Head succeed.
Christ left his sheep to Peter to be fed:
Ergo, the Pope is of all Councels Head.
Again, to feed his Lambs Christ Peter bad:
Ergo, from his mouth Scriptures Sense is had.
Feed, that is to say; the worlds Vicegerent be:
And let all Regal Scepters bow to thee.
Feed, that is as much, as Curb, proscribe, and kill:
In this sense Peter did his charge fulfill.
Sing, holy Sir, Saint Peter makes thee sit
His firm Successor, witness holy Writ.
On, with this newfound Logic; Beautify
Thy thus got charge; thy prize (fair Palms) is nigh.
Hark now: Christ said to Peter, follow me:
Ergo, he followd Christ, in Emperie.
Peter's firm faith was never with blasts oreblowne.
Ergo, Popes faith eclipse has never known.
To thee (O Peter) heavens blessed Keys were given:
Ergo, the Pope them keeps as Port'r of heaven.
Christ praid for Peter: Ergo, it is most plain;
The Petrean-Parents faith must firm remain.
Kill and eat: Ergo, Peter must be Head:
For that which ears, that same is sure the head.
Upon a Rock Christ's Church was built: Therefore,
Peter's a Rock, the Pope his Paramour.
O Prince of Priests, Bishop of fragrant fame;
Who (tamelesse) tam'st All; heaven has willed the same.
Prop and protect Romes Axetree with more might.
Lest thy Pontifike heaven be cast down quite.
Open (O rare Interpreter) for me,
Mo Scripture Nuts that I their Kernes may see.
Others (alas) give but a glimpse of light:
But thy blessed Lawpe gives a great Sun-beame bright.
To thee the Scripture freely opes her heart:
And to thy Cisterne does full streams impart.
Apollo prompting thee, thou can conclude,
Ought out of ought* Logic thou have subdude.
Expounding's fit for Boys: sense swims to thee:
Spare oil and match, thou without Light can see.
If I an hundred wise Apollos had,
To find thy force and fraud, they would all run mad.
On, farther, Father, sit down in thy Chair:
Thy word to weigh my prone ears I prepare.
To cast to Dogs things holy it is not fit:
Ergo* Rude people must not know Gods writ.
Other things when I come I will dispose:
Ergo, The Apostle did the Mass compose.
For thirty Pence our Savior was betraide:
Ergo, the Host like Pence must needs be made.
Christ was a Rock: Ergo, to say Mass on,
All Altars must be made of Rockey Stone.
Promise of Life, to Bread, not Wine, was made:
Ergo, the Wine to Laics is gaine-said.
Who eats this Bread, shall live eternally:
Ergo, for Hea'un, Bread serves sufficiently.
Priests are in the Church, like Soldiers Sp'rituall:
Ergo, against Hell with Songs they rore and yaull.
The fruitless Fig Tree, Christ with curse did smite:
Ergo, the Pope may curse and ban by right.
All men shall at his Footstool Him adore:
Ergo, the Pope must on men's backs be bore.
People, of Priests, touching the Law must ask:
Ergo, t'expound is the Popes only Task.
An Ethnic let him be, which hears not Thee:
Ergo, All must receive the Popes Decree.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and me:
^rgo, the Pope Truths Horologe must be.
Moses, the Jews Iarres, to an end did draw:
Ergo, the Popes Law's lively; dead's Gods Law.
Christ, Tribute paid for Peter: Ergo, than,
The Pope paies none, but catches all he can.
O Rabbi rare, Angelical Expounder!
Whose sense of Sacred-Writ, than all is sounder:
When I a Beef kill, thou the horns shall have,
For these thy Scripture-Expositions brave.
The pith of Texts is known so well to thee;
That for thy use, they Parrets seem to (...).
What Is next? O show it, shoot more lightning out:
To scatter trembling Heretics about.
Those that live in the Flesh, please not the Lord:
Ergo, the Pope will Priests no wives afford.
Melchisedech the Priest no Parents had:
Ergo, Priests to be Parents is most bad.
God has put all things underneath his Feet:
Ergo, the World should be Popes slave, it is meet.
The Lord two great Lights made: Ergo, Popes Might,
Must be the greatest, lesser Emp'rours Light.
First Heaven, then Earth was made: Ergo, I hope,
Caesar in pomp, must come behind the Pope.
The Spirit the unbridled Flesh must tame, abase:
Ergo, the Pope of Emperors must take place.
The Father is the Sucklings due Superior:
Ergo, a King is to the Pope Inferior.
Sin-Sory Mary kissed our Saviors Feet:
Ergo, that All, the Popes feet kiss, it is meet.
Earths Springs, sprung up, moisten the Earth again:
Ergo, the Pope (Worlds chief) ore all must reign.
O precious Priest, Worlds Master most admired!
Arts pillar, pride, glory, so much desired.
Praiseworthy Provost, of Wits crafty School:
O the rare Fame of thy Cathedral Stool!
Saint Peter's Power, amazed, I adore:
Than thy great Name, I make of nothing more.
My thoughts are sharp, my wits are ready pressed,
My Muse is rowz'd, thy Fame to manifest.
Whole Academies, Bay-trees bend to Thee:
Pallas, Apollo, thine Inferiors be.
To thee it is given to know Heavens Mysteries:
Thou, for pure sense, art the only Wizard-wise.
Another Priest, in the Priesthood, placed with Thee:
He Is but a Calfe; Thou a huge Ox shall be.
Since, I, at Delphos, Oracles may not here:
Thou, thou alone, shall be my Delius dear.
A fig for all the Fathers; of their light
I scorn to borrow; theirs by thine shines bright.
Thou none do cheat, nor, none cheats, only Thee:
Thy sacred word, Gods Canon Writ must be.
Heaven is thy Studies Stool, thy sense, the Stars:
And no Eclipse thy shining Iubar bars.
All the trim treasures of Celestial skill,
The sacred Cabinet of thy breast fill.
The gates of hell against thee have no might:
Faith does for Thee, at sword and buckler fight.
Yea thou Christ's very thoughts do thoroughly know;
And in thy mouth Gods Spirit springs to and fro.
Why should not then the Worlds loud exclamation,
Sound out to thee Hosanna their Salvation?
The art righteousness, and Peace's Prince of fame:
Melchisedech, King Salem, changed in name.
Since graceless Rome, with her ungrounded faith,
Other blessed names of Christ to thee given has:
Christ is the first, thou the Worlds second light:
So, golden- Glosses, t'vs grosse-Asses write.
In Christ, her Pheere, the Church, his Dear, is blessed:
And thou (Vice-Christ) her Brooker keepst her best.
Christ is that Royall-Head which quickens all:
And thou must be that Head, Subalternall.
The world which Christ protects, is thine own charge:
Let others take his part, thine's the world large.
Christ and Thou but one Consistory have:
Thus under him thy rule may realms be-slaue.
Thou, Cherubins and Seraphins make tremble:
Yea Devils to do thy will thou wilt soon assemble.
Mountains, to Mole-hils melt; vailes cleave in sunder:
Seas, are drawn dry, if with thy Voice Thou thunder.
The firey Charret of Elias, straight;
Shall whurrey thee through Clouds, to Heaven Gate.
In spite of Swords and Shields (great King of Kings)
Earth's Thrones to thy Throne, couple with strong strings.
Thy Royalties with Christ's so close agree:
That (as thou iugglest) we no difference see:
Yet (to be plain) great difference is in the one:
But being alike, your Powers the like are known.
Thou, mai'st infringe; Christ must the Law fulfill:
Laws Debt^r He, Thou Dispensator still.
What need we Words, when Deeds more plainly speak?
That at thy pleasure, thou Gods Laws can break.
By Power of Pope-ship, and the Holy Chair,
Thou All can mar; All things, as just, do dare.
If ought remain, to heat it I am pressed:
That so thy Clients tired ears may rest.
Henceforth I Will thee a Fisher of Men make:
Ergo, the Pope in's net may Kingdoms take.
All things are judged by the Spiritual man:
Ergo, the Pope does all well judge and scan.
All things are judged by the Spiritual man:
Ergo, judge Popes, pneumaticke-Lords, none can.
Here are two Swords: Ergo, they both are Thine:
And every Kingdom shall to thee incline.
Perish shall every Land not serving Thee:
Ergo, all must Popes Tributares be.
Perish shall every Land not serving thee:
Ergo, to the Pope, all Lands must vassals be.
Under his feet are all things put: Ergo,
All power, this Hyperbolike Pope's below.
No man can serve two Masters: Ergo, All
Must serve the Pope, and from their Princes ^^ll.
No Servant is above his Master known:
Ergo, to blame the Pope, it is fit for none.
Slaves than their Lords, Cynthia than Sol is less:
Ergo, ought Kings to Popes their necks depresse.
Many such Lies (Arch-Sophister) thy Wit
Relates; and wrests Gods holy Word to it.
And were not Thine concordant to the same,
'Twere none of Thine, none of it from thee came.
Thy Witness called, Thou Wilt tortures add thereto:
Their right to wrong, their contrary to do.
Thus Thou a Doctors Charge, Christ's Office, thus,
Thou vnder-go'st, and smack'st Gods deep sense, thus.
Distastefull is thy Taste, the art Wooden Wise:
Whilst thou do broach thy brains fond fantasies.
Thou (Chimicall Expounder) Protean Senses
Give to Gods Word; with an old Fox pretenses.
Yet, no Sense Wrested, Thou the Text do follow:
For thou art Scriptures Phoebu^, wise Apollo.
Art thou the Bibles Hermes Touchstone pure?
He that denies it, does most wisely, sure.
OF THE DAMNABLE DOCTRINE IN THE DECEIVEABLE SYNAGOGVE OF SATAN, AT ROME.
THE FOVRTH SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
Coined, re-coyned Faith, at Rome, often hatches
A great Increase, botcht up with many patches.
WIth what thick mists (oh Antichrist profane)
What, Stygian Chaos, seekst thou Truth to stain?
Of Living Streams, poys'ning the sound, sweet drafts,
Digging up Muddy-Pooles of Lies and Crafts.
On pain of Heavens fierce fury charging All,
Wrong-wrested Texts to hold Authentical:
Thou scorn'st the Hebrew Conduit-Heads, As though,
From thy Sluice, Slow, far fairer Floods did flow.
With Orthodox, Apocryphal false Writs;
With Doubtless Truth, Friars Forgeries Rome fits.
Grammaticke, Mystic, Moral, Sphynx-like senses,
Gods Book must have, to save the Popes pretenses.
But, since such various Sense, Gods Book contains:
I wonder how least Sense in It remains.
Thus Antichrist, Christ's Word, most heavenly Treasure
Does explicate, and applicate at's pleasure.
O proud prompt Tyrant of Nonsense or Sense:
Bold Bibliocide, Autographs often offense:
Great Talmudists, Rare Popish Alchymist:
Whose beck, whose bleat, thy Sheep lead as thou list.
O how Romes learned Land-markes on her Glosses,
The Popes great pleasure or confirms or crosses.
Christ's Scriptures, you, with Dross for Doctrine varnish:
That they, thus wronged, your Latian-God may garnish.
For, this Metropolite of Sophisters,
Has of Religion Asse-like Enginers.
And Readers Iester justly (sure) is He,
Whiles thus for profit he will Gods Prophet be.
Faiths Farmer, Framer, forms opinions new:
And would, with His Faiths-Bond, bind Christians true.
Foul faced: the Worlds Apostate-Generall,
T'himselfe assumes Faiths holy Tenants all.
When once his Annual pompous Fasts begin,
Who-'ere eats Flesh, commits a deadly sin.
Fish they may eat, but to eat Flesh it is hated:
Because the Earth, not Sea, was execrated. Why then eat they bread.

Great ghostly Grand-Sire, Coryphe of Doctors,
Peoples Omega, Alpha of Hels Proctors:
Since thou do thus such Devilish doctrines broach,
Is It like, Christ's Flock (Thou Guide) can Heaven approach?
Since thou wilt officiate Satan's part so well:
Thou Art Commissarie, not of Heaven, but Hell.
Scriptures, Thou cal'st the Book of Heretics:
And these ( Man's joy) thou burn'st like Brands or Sticks.
And though in other Books be thousand Lies:
Only the Bible as Delinquent Fries.
In vttrance strange Thy holy things are shown:
Which Ignorants conceive like stupid Stone.
He which to men reads Scriptures fruitfully,
Casts Bread to Dogs, to Hogs does pearls apply.
Raw stomachs may their holiest things digest;
Their Picture-Pastures famisht Souls fill best.
A Players posture shows Faiths Mystery:
And Folks in Flocks, carved Saints do rectify.
Thus Bethel's made Bethauen: the Arc exilde,
Thus Molechs reign Gods Temple has defilde.
What talk I of their Glosses of dull Wit?
While their dull Bishop jests with sacred Writ.
Of Gods blessed Word, the abused Majesty,
Shows in Romes rout that there is no piety.
The order of pristine Priests was once of Gold:
Now't's Wooden, Why? Wooden Popes Popedomes hold,
Keepers had need be kept; Teachers be taught:
Curates of Cures, be cured, lest all be naught.
Illit'rate Lubbe^s base are dignifi'de:
To the sacred Chair comes naught but climbing pride.
Priests cloddy, cloudy ignorance, poor skill,
With most Cymmerian darkness Temples fill.
With Babish toys of Christ they Pulpits stain:
With impious Errors they chaste Faith prophaine.
Most drossy Darnell, poisonous Pills they give,
And Salues apply, which Health from Sickness drive.
If Strumpet Rome had not a brazen Brow*
She could not but my Words for truth auow.
If she deny (as that she has and will)
It shall her brand with prostituted Ill.
But now lets see what rotten Rags remain,
What vpstart Tricks, Romish Faith to sustain.
Do know great Purgatories wondrous fire?
This flame, cleares souls, Bags emptieth for hire.
This purges Purses pregnant with pure gold:
Romes strong gold-glister torrid zoane behold.
This purges metals (though most pure before)
And leaves to fools, of wit and wealth small store.
A Bug-Beare is this great Catharticke flame,
Popes painted hell, Worlds Scarre-Crow fools to tame.
How this fond Popes fond fire, fond fools does fright?
How foolish lightnings from's false heavens shine bright?
Nothing but Sinons voice Fraud, Chimicke tricks,
Is in this strange Purse-purifying Styx.
He which can quickly kindle this quick flame,
Can if he list (rare Craftesmen) quench the same,
Thou have (O Sacred Sir) firm faculty,
To damn, redeem all souls that there do fry:
If thou can save, but wilt not the art too just;
But if thou would, and can not, who will thee trust?
Choose wheth'r of these, since either of these overthrow thee:
A Lying-Priest, or Tyrant-fierce, they show thee.
Romes Pontificke, Pompificke Prelate, rather,
Such fond Daedalean fantasies does father.
And Berengarius quaintly quips them well,
For pot and pottage they the World excel.
But I (if lawful it is) may term them, true,
Mercuries, Ioiners, Coiners, of faith new.
Great reason is it that Purgatories fire
Should burn most bright, and warm the Popes desire.
For if this Money-fertile fire go out,
Popes chimneys would (alas) lie cold, I doubt.
O Supreme Priest, Apostle general:
Great master of the Chair dogmaticall:
O let illiterate Me, be farther taught,
The Babylonish Rites thy brains have brought.
Thy great Decr^e from heaven all those keeps out,
Which from Thy sheep-cote straggle, stray about.
Thy slightest censure makes damned Atheists fly:
Thee to displease brings death undoubtedly.
No scourge of Heretics ere raged like Thee:
Yet thou, worst Heretic, they guilty be.
Since Personal Succession helps thee not:
Thy Faiths Succession, who regards a jot?
Yet, this I grant, as Darkness follows Light:
Thou and thy sheepe-hooke, follow Peter right.
Thou Caiaphas, (...) Cephas, do succeed:
Simon (not Peter) Magus did thee breed.
Annas and Caiphas held succession fair.
But Christ and'^ followers did not for it care.
Issue of Men Faiths issue cannot imply:
Nor empty scabbards win a victory.
By hearing, not succeeding, Faith's begot:
A Holy life mak^s good-men, Orders, not.
Ancletus, Cletus, Clemens, Linus, Pope,
Which, who succeeds, to show is past all hope.
And to this day the tyranne Turk does hold
Four Patriarch Seats, by four Popes lost or sold.
Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, Constantinople.
Thus he Vice-Christ does Christ suc^eed, it is right:
For, Vice-Christs Presence breeds Christ's Absence quite.
That ravening Wolves should follow Pastors pure:
Saint Paul foretold, and Gods Amen, proves sure.
O disguisde Sire, Christ's Vicar vizard faced:
Which here on earth, hells forces, courses, haste:
Show me more Wardroabes of thy Alcaron;
And novel Tricks thy Treuet stands upon.
It Is thy divine decree, that Man, sins slave,
Can work Gods Will, yea more then God does crave:
The Just, thou say, do it, but perfect men
Do more than Gods Law does demand of them.
But is it in me the Law of God to do?
Why then by Bond; did God me bind thereto?
The Law me kills, the Law me tramples-on:
Can then Life's acts by Dead be undergone?
By power of man's Free Will and inbred-good:
Thou do despise, disgrace Christ's blessed Blood.
And lasting life t'election to make sure,
Thou Wilt use thy Mud, and not Christ's Mould most pure.
Christ's blood shut-vp; vain Veniall-Sinnes thou wilt find;
Which to Deaths Doom, the soul of no man bind.
But even these sins which from Christ's blood thou would free,
Will cause thy soul Christ's Kingdom never to see.
Whilst by the Law thou look for Salvation;
Thou do the Law by mere imagination.
For how thou ^anst Gods firm Law undergo,
Thine own fast-law-bound Conscience best can show.
Christ's Blood (thou say) for Sin, not Pain, did pay:
Yet (thy Indulgence can take Both away.)
Sometime thou wilt Penanco have, yet Sin protected:
Can Sin be salu'd, yet Penance be expected?
O the Indulgent love os Romes kind Father!
To bind, loose, show to Guilt, and Guilty favor.
At once, he blows, and sups, makes hot, and cold:
Binds, and vnbindes, unbound things fast does hold.
What e're he pardons, he can punish to;
Make Guilty, Guiltless, this and more he will do.
His Ramish-Romish Faith much Mirth may make:
But whose weak Faith, true growth from it can take?
He which is dawbd with extreme V^ction, has
Full strength to struggle with spiritual scath.
This blessed Balm Christ's blessed servants makes:
He Is none of Christ's, that Babels Balm forsakes.
But Caluinists (though Papists rage and rave)
To greaze their Boots, this oil do often save.
Calixtus, wisely, did four Fasts ordain:
For, bodies, years; four quarters do^ contain.
Like the four Humors and four Elements:
And as four farthings for four Eggs, contents.
As, Peter was a Fisher, fish to use,
Peter's religious Popes do chiefly choose.
Repentance was no Sacrament of old:
Penance is now a new-one uncontrolled.
Baptisme's a pledge of Faith to Christ conioyn'd:
And by this Badge Romes Vice-Christ, his will find.
Heavens life Eternal, by external lauing
We get: and thence comes all men's hope of saving.
This Salt, this Oil, these magic Arts, rank Spittle,
Abuse thy people (O Christ) not a little.
O damned deeds of Romes botching-Bishop base,
Gods Law and pure Handwriting to disgrace.
Heretics this Arch-Hereticke makes those,
Which will not seven sound Sacraments suppose.
For, the seven Card'nall Vices, Virtues, show:
From the new cou'nant, just seven Signs to grow.
In The Eucharist, their Wine is poysnous, sure:
For laymen may not that dire draught endure.
These thirsty Guests sup, sip no moisture; they
(Against their wills) That cup, to pass them, pray.
If Sacrilegiously they will half withold:
With neither part to part, they may be bold.
Mass Priests took Bread and Wine; Laics, but Bread:
If Bread serve these, with both, why are Priests fed?
The answer's easy, Who eats Bread, has Wine:
For needs must Flesh, within it Blood conioyne.
Well, if meere-Bread both Bread and Wine does coope:
Why (besides Bread) take Priests so sound a S^ope?
And if one-Element sufficient be:
Change turns: Give Laics Wine, take Bread to thee.
Since Christ (Cup, Bearer-like) gave us his Blood:
How is it by audacious Popes withstood?
Confession is (thou say) Sins Remedy:
But thy flock finds it Curing-Crueltie.
Their soul being fed with Vinegar and Gall:
When pard'ned, to sins Penance it is in thrall.
Soule-Tyrannizing Pope, dire dregs, hard heart:
O how vnkindely-kinde (alas) thou art?
No Laud, much Fraud in thy Confessions be.
Which thy Newes-quaff^ing-Eares (sly Clarke) drink free.
Surely the fond Confessors self, often times,
Both hears and cleares (thee telling) thy foul crimes.
And can thou then other folks faults forgive?
Thou can thine own, then, howsoere they live.
Thou can indeed absolve Absoluers: Why?
Heavens kingdoms Key between thy lips does lie:
For something, all things, thou wilt forgive to All:
Which for Romes joyful Iubiles do call.
Thou Wilt loose Omissiue and Commissiue sin;
And could Christ's Passion greater glory win?
Canonized Saints are surely saved, thou't say.
Thy self unsure, would certainly display.
Do thou know others, yet thy self much doubt?
Are thy eyes bright abroad? At home put out?
Would be believed, but not Thy-selfe believe?
Though wise to others, thou wilt thy self deceive.
See here, the triple Crowns decree divine:
See Popes Petrean-faith, Saint Peter's Shrine.
Art thou not right Bezalels typed Temple?
Babel, God's Ark may hear, with like example.
Of this Browne-Bran (for here is not least fine Flower)
Dogmaticke dunghils, Popes to make have power.
What need I name, each worship-new, vain Rite?
Whereby true worship is even buried quite.
Romes Mother Church is big with foolerie:
With faithless Faith and impious Piety;
For the most part, Papisme is Paganism:
Fertile, yea rank, in rotten newfound Schism.
O impious Idolizing Papists grave!
Is God your God? who many Gods may have?
Whiles you lie snorting, the Envious Man keeps watch:
And Satan (so) you often with scoffs does catch.
Vain, silly Superstition songs does mutter:
And daily Prayers by numbered Beads, does utter.
But I shall show in more convenient place:
The noise and toys of Romish Quires most base.
Mean while, What does our Clergie-Master, see,
How plays he Peter's part? How flocks Feeds he:
Surely, this Care, who will, may take in hand:
Himself in the Church, treble-Head-Stone does stand.
And in this Sense, I say, and ever shall:
The Pope's a Rock, lively Grammatical.
And I will wager now, with any one,
That, than the Pope, Nothing's more like a Stone.
He Is hush in Words, but Swords he will brandish brave;
In Love, Stone-heart: in Hate, Wraths part he will have:
He sends forth Threats, suspends milk- Teats; and thus,
Favors Gods flock: thus is Religious.
Paul (sure) that Pattern of a Pastor good,
Nor Peter (thus) their duties understood.
Doubtless, whilst he Kingdoms loose shackles shakes:
His Kings, most blind, to Wars and Iarres, he makes.
While these his restless Cares, all rest deny, Non v^cat ex^gu^.

Justly this love slight sacred Cares may fly.
If thou reuise each annual act and deed:
None of them show one Pope his flocks to feed.
And this Vice-Christ, herein Christ imitates:
With a few Loaves, thousands he satiates.
Good Shepherds, more than Life, their Flocks do prize:
The Pope his Flocks, under all, vilifies.
Ah ignorant, base, dull, blind, vulgar Rout!
To whom the Lamp of Light and Truth's put out.
O how your day is darkness, Guides, misguide:
Hearts, rough; Mind, tough; Hope, vain; Faith foolified.
Thousand Goth-like, Vandall-like villainies:
Among thousands of Popes people Tyrannize.
At Rome, huge bands of Vagrants vain there be:
Which break Christ's Sabbaths in loose company.
Shepherds may keep the Erymanthean Bear:
As well as Popes Christ's Flocks, deuoyd of care.
He which in the Church will have nor, Blind, nor Lame:
In holy'st duties, he is in Both the same.
Implicit faith to hold, they hold most holy:
And Ignorance, chief Piety, not Folly.
This is no holy Fatling, but lean, lanke:
This is not Peoples power, but Poison rank.
Thus in Soule-captiu'd flocks is Popes delight:
Like the Cyclopean Troops bereft of sight.
Whilst he by Images would people teach:
Himselfe's an Image, he will not to them preach:
While his external Temple's glorious gay:
He suffers Gods true Temple to decay.
And while he may wallow in worldly pelf:
Proximus ipse sibi.
Farewell poor Christ, He Is nearest to himself.
Yea fare thou well, that thy Priest well may be:
For if thou first do well, then (sure) will he.
Bread to be made of Stones (with Stygian skill)
And men t'eate Stones in Statues, is his will.
Cease Questionist t'enquire of faith sincere:
Rome holds it fittest, faith confounded were.
This high Priest of Romes sacred Rites, indeed,
His feeble flocks with frothy milk does feed.
Impostour, Pastor, Doctor, Deceiuer great:
Is there in thy Sheepfold such holy meat?
Whiles thou do thus souls feed, or rather starve:
Give Satan Them, the Rest to thee reserve.
Since in Gods Church thou art rough Marpesias rock:
Why then should stupid I, trust such a stock?
Should men thee trust, as thou thy self do trust:
Trust me, who trusts thee, is a mad man just.
People trust Priests, Priests Bishops trust, I hope;
Prelates trust Councels, Councels trust the Pope.
Let all opinions to ones opinion trust:
Then, but one flock, one faith needs be there must.
Is This faiths golden Syntaxe firmly true?
Commend it first t'a Turk or faithless Jew.
Now (great Priests-Prelate) by thy mitred pleasure:
Declare mo Things following from things already demonstrated.
Confectaries of thy Treasure.
If thou, faiths Cacodocuments wilt show me:
A triple-fitted Crest I Will wish unto thee.
Rome being drunk with sacred Saints dear blooe:
Worshippeth Saints, with Rites, never understood.
Truly thou say, and we the Truth must trust:
Thou then, when I speak true, believe me must.
The Popes (by rules of Romes Religion old)
Far less, love Saints, than Strumpets, base and bold.
Under Christ's name, many foul contraries
To Christ, this cunning craftsman does devise.
On Satan's Boxes, he subscribes Christ's name:
With paliated Fraud; Gods Flock to shame.
The people eat poison, with paint surrounded.
And venom drink, with Antidotes compounded.
Vice-Christ adores Christ's name, not Deity:
Keeps less of Christ's, than Peter's, memory.
To Peter, Temples, Feasts, Fasts, makes, erects;
Peter to be Faiths Rock, he most affects.
Peter, alive, would not be worshipped: Now,
To's Image (as to God) being dead, they bow,
The Saints alive, were clad in mean array:
Their pictures, Puppet-like, are wondrous gay.
A Maid, is made, Man's Sauiouresse divine:
And She by right her Son can ought enjoin.
Nor is Romes sect (the Mother's so adored)
With Christ's, as Mary's worshippers, so stored.
Heavens kingdom, Christ did with his Mother share:
Kept half himself, and half to her did spare.
Gods Daughter by pure fruit of most pure birth,
Excels the lovely Lillies of the Earth.
Fairer then Phiebus, than full Phoebe whiter:
Cleerer than Stars, than brave Aurora brighter.
Seas Star, Suns Patroness, Heavens golden-gate:
Transparent Spring, Rose most intemerate;
Poor wretches Joy, Anchor, Haven, blessed Blast, Hope;
And What Not? Is She to the plumbeous Pope.
She, which to the World brought forth the promised Seed;
Took from the World, almost what Eve did breed.
The Pope, fallen back, to Heretics old Toys:
Heresies fragments to re-boile, much joys.
In golden Cups He deadly poison quaffes:
And in brave Bowls, to slay poor Souls, He laughes,
Is Christ Med'atour? Why then seek'st thou More?
Yes, Popelings thousands have, thousands adore.
O fond, besotted Papists, deaf, dull, blind:
Can one such madness, amongst the Heathen find?
This Hellish Hangman Mart'ricide most fierce:
Worshippeth many a Martyrs painted Hearse.
This Faiths Confounder, killing thy Lambs good:
To Thee (O Christ) does sacrifice thy Blood.
A painted Lamb's adored, devoured alive:
Thus, thus, does Romes Religion rarely thrive.
Him I will not Religious, Holy, style,
But Common Whore, or Couchant Wolf most vile.
Gods Church, with floods of blood, orewhelmed all:
We may the Pope, Saints bloody Butcher call.
This Field of blood, Acheldamae thus shown:
Makes thee (proud Priest) a Dog-Wolfe, Bitch-Wolfe known*
How many Tesles do detest with Scath;
Romes sacrilegious ebbing, flowing Faith?
Which He Will, now firm, anon infringe, and be
A Synon sly, not Simon-Peter free.
For to a Counsel, One, once called, secured;
The Guest was slain, the Host, his Faith abiur'd,
And whereas Priests Gods Flocks bright Star should be,
The raging Dog-starre this Vice-Christ, we see.
Christ's feeble Flock, the Popes Salve hurts, not heales:
He with tart Tortures, not mild Medicines deals.
I surely think, that Turks of All Popes times,
Never wrought against Christ, so many bloody Crimes.
O what a Man of Blood art Thou to the Bride?
By whom Her offspring Dye, in Fire are fryde.
Popes furious frowns, make many undergo
Deaths Dart, Wars Smart, Waves final, fatal Woe.
The Pope and Pluto (witness every Lowne)
Thus differ, he has Horns, Popes triple Crown;
All else concur. So well performed thou see;
All Satan's Works, by this Plutonick Priest.
A time will come, when He, Christ's sacred Train,
And living Members dearly would re-gaine.
And yet Saints slaughter will not Him suffice;
But ore Dead Corpse dig'd up, He Will tyrannize.
Nor rests his Fury with Dead bodies fed:
But this fierce Fiend their Ghosts has tortured.
Rachel, Thy Church (sweet Savior, craves thy aid:
Lamenting sore, that She Is so childlesse made.
Her Saints wide Wounds from Rome received, she shows;
And how with Flames she shines, with Blo^d ore-flowes.
She now does Roses with much ruth bring out:
Who, in sweet peace, once, made white Lillies sprout.
In midst of Flames, than Flames themselves more bright;
Thy Martyrs were, all clad with fiery Light.
Nor did her soil want rain, to spring and bud;
Too fertile 'twas, ore flowne with showers of Blood.
Popes Founders and Repayrers Devils were;
With props of Blood, His Throne to build and rear.
O Christ, whilst Thy Saints, after Death feared Death:
They feared not in Life to lose their breath.
In England, here, a Queen being Papists pride:
By fire how many holy Martyrs dyd'e?
Nor did Queen Marie, of mere Vulgars build
Those Godless Flames; but burned five Bishops mild.
Nay more; a Child, from Mothers Womb which brast;
Was into the Fire by Romish Fiends re-cast.
Lo; thus, with slaughtered Saints, Romes shambles shines;
No better brau'rie Romes renown refines.
Servant of Seruant^, Fellow servants slayes:
And so himself a Servant base betrays.
This Latian Dragon with Gods Saints makes war:
In Blood, his foul Face laues, than Wars worse far.
In one of these fierce Monsters shortest reign;
Records report, an hundred thousand slain.
Nocent the third, (I take in from the Nocent)
So many thousands in one Slaughter spent.
O thou (in truth) Saints ruth, All red (often read)
With Blood of many Martyrs Martyred.
Slain corpse do con-corrupt my life (alas)
That He Saints Homicide so long does pass.
And when (O Christ) thy Servants slain I see,
Ore-flowing Floods mine eyes I wish to be.
In that Parisian Shambles, known too well;
How many guiltless Lambs in one week fell?
Whilst Paris, then more blood did drink, than Wine:
That Town, that time, a Tempest was Sanguine.
Forewarned, learn wisdom, do not Christ despise:
Whom, soon, Romes Shambles brings to Butcheries.
Alas, He Is not Sheeps Peeder, but Confounder:
Black-cankered Conscience, Ouicide, Sheepe-wounder.
He which grows great by sacred Saints perdition:
Hastens to Hell with guilty Expedition.
Thine, plagues (O Christ) by Sufferance, subiugate:
For, what they cannot shun, they tolerate.
To these, Life's want is Life; their Death, no Death:
Conquest, their Cross; to live, to lose their breath.
Goodness, their Gold; the World, their Pot, Grief, Flame:
Their Flesh, the Reed; their Hammer, God; to frame.
Blood founded first Christ's Church; by blood, it grew:
Blood showers, It cheeres; by Blood it is of red hiew.
With Blood, Vice-Christ, Christ's Foldes does filthifie:
See, Men of God; See, Popish Piety.
Of Romes false doctrines, many Scraps remain:
Which my close Hedge is too close to contain.
Index Expurgatorius, Books great Bane:
A Work, well known, dishonest, crafty, vain:
Robs, or rubs out much antique learned Treasure;
Pills or pals out much, at the Popes dis-Pleasure.
His Censure suffocates Men's Births, (their Books)
Takes out plain Truths, puts in vile spurious Crookes.
O horrid, hateful, Slaught'r-House, foul, nefarious:
To Godly Books, a plague, a torture various.
The Fathers Strayes, not Sons (then) Papists Name;
Though Fathers theirs, All theirs, still theirs they claim.
Their Postils, Packets are of Trumperies;
He which in them can find no Wit, is wise.
It Is plain, All Papists are Traditionists:
Who term and trouble us for Scripturists.
Which be, or what, or how many Traditions;
Or where they are, scapes (yet) Romes Inquisitions:
Yet These must be observed religiously,
And be embraced with Scriptures dignity.
What-e're has part of neither Word nor Writ:
With Word, and Writ, in equal State must sit.
Thus Clementines, and Asinines poor packs;
(Wherewith the Pope his Library well thwacks)
And God knows what trim toys, and Decretals,
Must be Gods sacred Scriptures Corriuals.
Thus that blessed Book must have no blessed use:
More Wealth, more work from others, Popes produce.
Relics, more than Religion, they respect:
And more than Churches, Chimnies they affect.
His Agnus Dei's made of Wax mo^^ pure,
He makes the Worlds great Wens and Sores to cure.
And he which will not blessed Salvation miss:
Must straitway strive the Popes blessed Foot to kiss.
Water with Wine (after Romes custom) mixed;
Assures poor Souls to be with Christ fast fixed.
The Thorney Crown (O Christ) which wrought thy woe:
A Golden Crown, on a bald-pate, does show.
A Cock, on Pinnacles of Temples placed,
Warnes All with Peter to Repentance haste.
Waxe-Tapers, burnt, to grace the Noone-daies light:
The Gentiles promis'd-Light, declare, most right.
But (sure) those Lights, do plainly intimate;
The Popes Soules-darknesse, and his friends retraite.
It also shows, that Papists hate Daylight,
And, most like Owls, see best in darkest Night.
Much Faith boiles in his brain; his Heart holds none:
And whilst he brags of Good, his Work's not shown.
A Pater Noster said, puts sins away:
If thou it say, resay thrice, often a day.
These taste to me, as Gall to Christ did taste:
What-ere I read, taste, trust, prove; All proves waste.
What virtue by Christ crucified grows,
The Mimick-Masse, Popes Cleopatra shows:
Fair Phillis, Philomel, Calliope:
Venus, Melissa, and Melpomene:
This Romes Religion her Palladium has,
This the Idea of the Romish Faith.
Here Babels Bawd ruffles in silk and gold:
In shining Syndon sheltring thefts most bold.
And with clean clothes her damned Dens does hide,
That She of none a ravening Wolf be spide.
Her Face to grace, the Popes Spouse spares no charge:
For Satan's Mask, She needs not pay so large.
Unto All sick, All sound, at all times (sure)
The Mass a Medcine comes, them all to cure.
If thou thy Swine sick of the Measels see,
A sovereign Salve the Mass will make to thee.
A Venial or a Mortal Sin to clear,
The Mass, Gods Might, a present Help draws near.
Who hears a Mass, shall not by day wax old:
If the Masse-monger be well paid with Gold.
For, the Heavens Poles (the Mass near tired) stand still:
And lazy Lachesis, leaves Wheel and Quill.
For quick and dead, there, prayr's and offerings be:
The Mass, (Messiah) is an Ape of Thee.
Nay more, the Priest (strange wonder) daubed with Oil:
By's Host, can Christ to's Father reconcile.
In The Eucharist (O Christ) God gives us Thee:
Can thou again by Priests to God given be?
Thou art (O Christ) our Priest and Sacrifice:
What power, so like, in unlike Mass Priests lies?
O Pandects of impure Impiety!
Which the impious Mass does seldom let pass by
If once a man to Mass admitted be:
Goodness and Faith omitted he shall see.
A Puppet-playing Priest, makes (O foul crime!)
Christ's Passe-ouer, Sport, to passe-ouer time.
They, sure, which did Masse-matters institute;
Than Christ, Paul, Peter, were far more acute.
The Priest says Mass, the idiot people mutter:
While old-wiues, petty, pretty prayers do utter.
A strange Tongue talks, but sense none thence can pick:
Thus Fickle Fools, Brittle-glasse* Bottles lick.
Let him on the idle Stage see plays and Sights;
Which would go see, hear, love, and know Mass Rites.
He which conceiues not, hears not: Even so He,
Hears, sees in vain, which void of sense, does see.
Not Sentences, but Sense enlights the mind:
Consent is gone, if Sense we do not find.
O how the Munc-key in his Surplis white;
The merry-Masse, and Massing-Priest, plays right.
With hearty laughes, my heart in me would chatter;
When I but read the Masses merry-matter.
Music so much, sweet Songs, shrill singing out;
Romes sacred Sirens do so chaunt about.
These cunning tricks, Kings facinate; and All
Quaffe her adulterous Nectar sp'rituall.
Christ's Ransom, thus, and our Redemptions pay,
She sells, and sits, for gain in Harlots way.
If then by Christ's blood thou thy soul would save;
The Pope, (Souls Hope) Mass, as Messiah, crave.
If thou the Worlds Sin-purger feign would buy;
In The Mass for Money he is sold easily.
For a small price, the Mass makes Thine (cock-sure)
Christ's Merits, which He dearly did procure.
Caiaphas doted, when he paid so dear,
To Have Christ betrayed, He Is bought far cheaper here.
O formidable God, Heavens high Commander:
See thou, yet suffrest this nefarious slander:
The sacred Cou'nant, Justice, Rites, blessed Hope:
So often abusde, misusde, by Romes proud Pope.
O can thy boundless Longanimitie,
To judge this monstrous Mass, yet still passe-by?
O can thy endless Mercy tolerate,
The Mass, Messiah Rights, to arrogate?
Though God be slow, he is sure, to punish Pride:
And who his sharp severe wrath can abide?
To strike more sure; his Sword he lifts up long:
His Leaden-Heeles, bring Hands of steel most strong.
O Devils device, accursed feasting place:
Damned mass of the Mass, sins bundle base!
O Pope profane: which with such monsters vilde:
So idle Idols, have Gods House defilde.
Art thou Gods Parson proud, Faiths Lamp most light?
Curate of all Gods Cures, his Arch-Leuit^e?
Thee, Faiths desiler, Christ's, his Churches Foe,
My obligated Verse, to the world shall show.
Whilst life does last, the Whet-stone of my Rhimes:
My Verses Venom, shall be Romes foul Crimes.
And while my Pen may play the Satyrs part,
Rome shall be stripped and whipped, and soundly smart,
OF THAT BLASPHEMOVS FALSE-FICTION OF MERIT, AND OF WORKS OF SVPEREROGATION, to
the Derogation of Christ's honor.
THE FIFTH SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
On Romes Bawds brow is branded Blasphemy;
Whose Mark, mark here, in this gross Heresy.
WHo ( Pseudo. Prophet, of false Prophets) can
Thy thundering Blasphemies discuss or scan?
Christ merited (Thou Wilt say) that thou might merit:
And Merits dipped in his Blood do inherit.
With Merits mingling Christ, do Monsters make:
Which from Workes-wages, and Faith, fashion take.
Strange iugling Tricks of Merits, thou do plot:
And make Christs-selfe to merit God knows what*
By Merits, thou (for so the Bargaine's made,
Twixt God and Thee) have for Gods Kingdom paid.
Saluations Stern, and Foredecke, Merits are:
Thy Faith's in Christ, for Faiths Deseruing-share.
Sole Faith is no Faith; is a Carcass dead,
Nothing almost, rude lump, a fant'sie fled.
With Merits, Grace-Mediatrixe saues (thou say)
But vain is Hope on God alone that is placed.
Faith fixed on God, confusde, retires, retorts;
But fixed on Thee, Thy goodness, It supports.
Faith Physic is; trust in Physicion's frail:
And, without thine own work, Both these will fail.
Thy prayer, is, Lord, for Merits, Mercy show:
And thy desires desired as debts that grow.
Boldly thou would breake-ope heaven Gates by Merit:
And make thy self and thine, Gods Throne inherit.
As Ixion did his Cloud, thou wilt this embrace:
As thy chief Light, Delight, and heavenly Grace.
Merits superfluous scums and scraps thou wilt sell:
( Apothecarie kind) to All not well.
Who ere wants Merits, thou can fill him full:
And out of Trunks and Treasuries, them pull.
The Just do supererogate, thou wilt say:
And for himself and his, On, merit may.
Such Just are superarrogating Elues:
And merit not for Others nor themselves.
Stealing Saints Merits, thereby to get gold:
Thou Art Merits-Thiefe, Merits unfruitful mold.
I wonder where this Chest of Merits stood:
In The days of our Isachian Patriarchs good.
Did Rome keep this trim Treasure of such worth*
That afterward Romes Lord might bring it forth?
For, if Romes Jove a golden gobbet have:
He Will straight raine-downe a shower of Merits brave.
Gods gifts are free, the Elect get grace unbought:
The Popes gifts are at most dear prices sought.
In The Scriptures, none, can Tubs of Merits find:
But, there (we read) Grace gratis gives (most kind)
Upon Christ's blood, God, our souls health did place:
Can thou then sell this Ransom (Peddler base)
It Is a deep Whirlepoole of most impious bane:
Which muds the stinking Laerna of thy brain.
Christ never (thou say) t'vs Righteousness imputes:
Yet Rome, Saints-Righteousnesse, t'vs attributes.
Did free Saint Francis gran^ what Christ did not?
Thy pate and party Physic might have got.
For (sure) all Saints (that none might Merits lack)
Their Merits hid, in the corners of thy Sack.
At Rome also Merits Exchange does stand:
Whose golden Keys, are at thy chief command.
Porter whereof thou art, but in good time:
Thou may be Butler, and so higher climb.
And as Seas waves all on a heap do flow;
Nereus being never the less, when back they go:
So thou alone do all Saints Merits take:
And, sell thou never so many, they never slake.
It Is in thy power to poure-out Merits treasure:
For, all Store's trusted to the Stewards pleasure.
Romes gracious streams from her full veins do thrill*
That grateful ones may gratis drink their fill.
Alas Christ's troubled, Truth disgraced grace:
What Goods, what gifts, gives Man, God to abase?
Hebrews and Greeks, no word for Merit have:
Both Covenants God in Greek and Hebrew gave.
The Faithful live not by their Righteousness:
Life and souls health the Just by Faith possess.
Saints have received, but Crowns did never bestow:
And none to lend their Righteousness, I know.
Who in himself perfection seeks; In The Gra^e,
Seeks Life; which, he may seek, but never shall have.
He makes up Merit, that he so may see,
Christ's Passion spoild, and God no God to be.
Say Peter, when as Christ beheld thee weeping:
What Merits helped thee? who had them in keeping?
Gods grace, is no grace, if not gratis given:
Do thou deserve it? Grace is from thee driven.
By sin, first Adam, Hell to us did Merit:
By second Adam, we may Heaven inherit.
But whose foul Seed can give a fair conception?
If no man's can, can I wretch, all infection?
My faith's most firm, that me poor wretch to save:
Himself God valent, and Christ volent gave.
Each, operist-Papist, scraps of works does add:
And of's own pureness is halfe-Botcher badd.
In's life time often times he works aid does trust:
But, dying, he all is Works away will thrust. Note this mystery of iniqui^i^.

O helpelesse Hope, on Merits to rely!
Who, trust such faithless faith, soon fall thereby.
Such hapless Hope, by hoping spoils poor wretches:
Whose care to keep, by too much care bewitches.
Sole Faith is Sole Cause, of Souls health assured:
Christ says to the sick, believe, and thou art cured.
When Christ our Lord with souls betrothings has;
His Nuptials busy Bride-Maide is sole faith.
The debtour, than the Creditour's more base:
If works make God our debtour, where is his grace?
Can Works worke-out my punishments remission?
To work my Bliss, add Merits least addition?
Can I by Merits my souls sore-eyes cure?
Are These the Sop^, sweet Wash-Bals, blots to pure?
Must heavens blessed Harvest, works base husks require?
Must one-howers work; enjoy Joy infinite?
Must I with Merit-Oyle, enlight my feet?
Lest I with lightlesse lamp, the Bridegroom meet?
Whom, Christ's Words, Wounds, laue, save, and sanctify:
Can worthless Works, those better beautify?
Can Merits driue-backe Deaths darts deadly rage?
Is merit my souls wholesome sovereign Sage?
Can Trash pay Treasure, Drugs and Dross, pay gold?
Can mites, with mounts, minutes with myriads hold?
Can my deserts, Christ's death, deserts, deserve?
Such proud opinions from true wisdom swerue.
Since by Christ's Blood, it is plain, I gain salvation:
Heavens wrath, base merit, brings to consternation.
I live no^ of my self; if so, I die:
God is my life, the life of God wish I.
Whats'ere is try de in the Furnace of Gods frown:
Is quickly, quite with furious flames, burnt down.
What if man's Works to the world seem never so fair:
If God be Judge, all men most guilty are.
Who, Guilty, does Gods will? unless he do it,
By God, first Facient; He, poor patient, to it.
All Is else a Shadow, Christ the Substance pure:
Christ is (alone) my Life, Salvation sure.
Christ's Price and Ransom, my Redemption paid:
What then can man (all paid) to pay, be made?
Moses, all livers lives ith Blood, did place:
So in Christ's Blood shed, is my life, my grace.
Virtue, is Vice; if Grace, by Christ be none:
And if we ought do well, it is Gods alone.
Nor (sure) did God confect, but Gall infect,
Those Eyes; which on Christ's Price have ill aspect.
O let Christ's precious Blood my blessed Bath be:
And not one drop of least desert in me.
O, be it my care, my self, a Wretch to view:
And no desert (but death) to be my due.
O me, me most unworthy, heaven to see:
So conscious am I of desert in me.
My eyes confirm, my inward-parts confess:
Of Merit, my sad souls great emptiness.
I feel defects, my life ore-laide with woe:
And I poor wretch ( these gone) do naught else know.
Gold, Jasper Stones, are foul, with Christ's blood placed:
Must not deserts dregs, (then) be more abac't.
When I am wrencht and drencht in Christ's dear blood:
O let my Merits, be hells burning Wood.
Say, I had lived well, yet my hope might fail me:
But having lived ill, death will (sure) assail me.
Oh, from deaths danger who shall me wretch raise*
Herein (sweet Savior) Thine be all the praise.
The handwriting of Sin Christ quite defaced,
Which taken from Satan, on his Cross he placed.
If Christ Gods only Son, Life's orient Sun;
For Me, a Servant, dire death would not shun:
Can I, a Slave, Christ's death, as my due claim?
And challenge Life, because Christ death did tame?
Blood should flow from my deep torn worn heart:
And all my Marrow, should sad tears impart.
I merit naught; my self, by no means save;
Christ, my Redeemers death, this, to me gave:
O may I die e're Christ's Grace through me die:
For, in me, of me, for me, naught have I.
O wash me, well in the Well of thy good will:
Lest, guilty me, my guilty deeds do kill.
O may my fil^hs of flesh, my life lewd, base.
Dear Christ, be folded in thy kind embrace.
Satan's dire Darts assault me (Victor great)
Give me sharp shafts, that I may Satan beat.
I am, in the world, soyld, spoyld, (O Jesus good)
Laue, save my soul, in the Brook of thy blessed blood.
I burn with self-love, (O great Lord of Love)
To burn with thy Love, grant grace from above.
As Lord, the Spirit; as Tyrant, flesh I serve;
Oh tame the Tyrant flesh, my soul preserve.
Lest Earth me take, lest Hell me terrify:
O hold me, heat me, with heavens Feruencie.
Let Earths frail Joys to Heau'^s firm Joys give place:
And sacred love of good, Earths Mud quite chase.
I hate all mine, and that I be not mine:
I seek thee, Christ; and sue to be all thi^e.
O let thy large, thy Seamlesse coat (most fair)
Paliate my native filth, and leave none bare.
O Lamb of God, slain from the worlds creation:
Thy proper-Worke, be my Propitiation.
With thy dear Saints (O Savior Christ I crave)
Me, thy most Suppliant, submisse servant, save.
The evil of guilt, and punishment I know:
This, this indeed's the Merit I can show.
But the evil of guilt and pain and hells fierce flame,
Yea hells great Lord; I know heavens Lord did tame.
This is my constant faiths confession; hence,
I Will not be forced by fraud or violence.
He which (O Christ) trusts not thy sole sweet Merit.
Shows he is not thine, and shall not thine inherit.
Since all thy gracious gifts, me far surpass:
Can my naught, nothing, merit ought (alas.
Whos' ere (O Christ) an hundredth Pence Thee owes:
Unto ten thousand Talents, My debt grows.
Within Me, Sin: a Massy Mountain has:
Sins Mountain to remove, Lord, strength my Faith.
Least I (O God by Deaths sting wounded be:
Behold my Saviors Wounds wide-ope, for me.
O Thou which Bottlest up Thy Saints Tears, All:
Let not, these of thy Servant, fruitless fall.
The Bane of Sin, my Blood of Tears descries:
And me, my sweet Redeemers thirst, even fries,
Free me, from Death, and from life's guilt me clear:
And for my Spots, O let Christ's Stripes appear.
If Christ for's Servant, undue debts did pay:
Let not the Servant pay, what is paid, I pray.
O Jesus, which of heart, reins, Searcher art:
To thee, I (here) sacrifice reins, and heart.
I thee beseech, even by thy bloody Sweat:
Thy Teare^, Fears, Flouts; whom Jews unjustly beat?
Let all my hope, to thy sure Seal be fixed;
With none of my selfe-Meri^ to be mixed.
This is my serious, pious protestation:
Confirmed, from false dogmaticke alteration.
Christ has ingul^t me in his Sea of Love.
Bare, poor, impure, I Am (here) a milke-white Dove.
Here is my Hope, firm Faith, Pledge of salvation:
This, this fair foun^, flows to my restoration.
If the Ocean of Christ's Blood; me, all keep in:
'Twill purely purge my Blots and Spots of sin.
Let this, the, this, blessed Lamb with his holy hide:
Cloth me, and let me, thine (O Christ) abide.
Sweet Savior of the world, Jesus most kind:
Let me thy Mercies, in thy Merits find.
Gold, Incense, Myrrh, of Praise, I humbly bring;
As Lord, take Incense; Man, Myrrh; Gold, as King.
What-ere is Thine, and thou to the World made free:
All those, Thy Love, makes proper unto me.
With godless Goats, adiudge me not to stand:
But, with thy Sheep, set me at Thy Right Hand.
Whom Thou held'st dear, and dear for me did pay?
Now, count not Vile, as willing my decay.
For, without Thee (O Christ) I say, and shall:
I, either Death deserve, or Naught at all.
But, since, for vanquished Me, you are Victor-wise:
My pain is Thine; Thy Palm, is made my prize.
My due- Deaths-draft (O Christ) Thou first drank'st up:
When, Thou for me, did say, Let pass this Cup.
O let my Death, by thee, be Deaths decay:
And in thy Love, to leave Life, no delay.
Let Grace, be my life's lovely Morning-light:
Then Glory, will beeth' Euening-Starre most bright.
By thy dear Death, and Life, let me, Deaths due:
Obtain sure hold on Life's Hire, most undue.
And let thy glorious Beams of Goodness shine
Upon this sparkling Faith, faint heart of mine.
Yea, where all plenteous pleasures, from thy Torrent,
And Loue-Flo^ds flow, from thy still-streaming Current:
Let me drink deep, from that deep Spring most clear,
And with Thy Blood My thirsty Heart re-cheere.
Let Thy Death be my Host; Thy Pains, my Pay;
Thy Cross, my Crown, Thy Sores, my Salues always.
Whilst Life does last (O Christ) I Will deadly hate,
Thy Romish Rival, I Will repudiate.
Thus, then, Man's Lies, Blasphemies arrogate,
Merit by's Works; from Christ's Deeds derogate.
Thus, to Man's Merits, Christ must now give place:
And to Romes Ruler render Throne and Grace.
And, thus, Christ's godly goodly Vicar, has
Gods Power disdained, profaned the Name of Faith.
His Merits Meritoriously do Merit,
That he should Hell, but never Heaven inherit.
For Merits, Heaven He Will sell, the Church defile:
And Christ to Belial He dates reconcile.
O Rome, is this thy Zeal? thy Church so fair?
Did Christ charge Peter thus for's Flock to care?
With such Tartarean terms ( Church-Scourger brave)
Dare Thou Gods Justice, free- grace, whip, deprave?
If any sense in thy blunt Breast does stay:
Antichrists noted Notes, these be, thou wilt say.
But, I am hopeless, by my Verse, to frame
On the Anuill of thy Heart, Sense of thy Shame.
See, then, Romes Faith, Romes holy Church, now see:
How like to Peter's, He and his Faith be.
OF THAT LOVDE LIE, AND FOND FICTION OF TRANSVBSTANTIATION.
THE SIXTH SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
When I receive (O Christ) Thy Body blessed;
The Signs, in Substance, still the same do rest.
ROmes Ten b^rn'd Beast strange Errors belcheth up,
And Heretics, Schismatikes feeds, breeds up.
More Heresies from Peter's proud Chair spring,
Than all Church, Chapel Pewes could ever bring.
Much I passe-o're, since (else) my Muse would be
Too too prolixe (kind Reader) unto Thee.
But yet, there is One, sprung from the seuen-fold Whore,
Prodigious, horrid, fond, never found before,
Amphibious Gorgon; whereby Substance slips:
This, this, my Tisiphonike Satyr whips.
Here, has my Pen large Lists, abundant stuff:
Here, to triumph my Rhyme has room enough.
Here, Waves waves ouerflow; Depths invoke
Depths; Here Is a Mean to be immoderate.
This nointed, big- Brood, Accher^ntine Crew;
In's Mass creates a creator new.
Surely, it is more Christ, than a World, to make:
Nor, ere, did God, to make God, undertake.
But Popish Chymicks make a thousand Gods:
Priests (then) are greater gods than God, by odds.
In The Mass Priests mouth, what so great virtues are,
That He, with his Mouth, his God can make, and mar?
Surely, he has some rare resistlesse power:
Whereby he makes and vnmakes God, each hour.
Christ's Flesh (in the Mass) This Flesh-feeder eats up:
And this blood-bibbing Bishop, Blood does sup.
With Murder, stained is this Christ-killing Host:
Whilst he Gods Flesh with his Fangs to tear does boaste.
Indeed, besides this Popish Caniball,
Of Men, not God-deuourers, read we shall.
Grant, This gross Error, and grant thousands mo^:
Which from this horrid Hydra, thick, would grow.
Me thinks, I see Serpents on Gorgons pate,
When this Gorgonish Act I meditate.
This Christ-eater, with his Cyclaps throat wide open:
With griping Claws, with grinding James (the Pope)
^ Lycaons filthy Feasts does celebrate:
And A King of Arcadia, who to (...) Jupiters godhead, served in the flesh of
certain young gentlemen of the Molossian^ at a Feast which be made to Jupiter,
who in detestatio^ of that foul fact, s^ved ^^is Palar^, and turned Lycaon
into a Wolf.
Laestrigons cursed Cates does deuourate.
For, He to's holy Cheer inuites (most kind)
Sharp Teeth, good Stomack^, but no godly Mind*
Proud Iayes are they, not Eagles, which, thus, dare
Forecast to come, to eat Christ's dainty fare.
Not Abra'am, Patriarchs, not blessed Prophets all;
Who, yet enjoyed this Man^^ Mystical: Another kind of Canibals in Campania*

Could thus eat Christ, could thus have saving grace,
For, God Mans-Flesh was, then found in no place.
And, since by Christ, Grace, Life's alike to me:
Christ to receive, to me like rule, let be.
With mouth and teeth, I take not (sure) Souls meat:
This, with my mind, heart, Faith, I take and eat.
My Hearing eats, my Knowledge, Christ does chew:
And lively Faith digests Him in me to.
I taste Christ with Hearts Palate, there, confinde,
That Feast's a Fact, not of the Mouth, but Mind.
Christ's Presence, is Faiths Charge, Christ's real being
Is sure in the Supper, to each firm Faiths Seeing.
Yea, Christ to those that thus believe, is slain:
Whose bles^ Oblation, still does Faith sustain.
Again, each unbaptized infant small,
Once borne, and washed in the Fount Mystical:
He should with Christ have no Community:
If Corpse must Corpse, Flesh, Flesh, touch needfully.
Herod did (once) but some young Infants smite:
The Popes opinion damnes All Infants quite.
Besides, He which belieues not, Christ may eat:
And thus, to Dogs, Hogs, Mice, Christ may be Meat.
Yea, Judas, thus, with Peter has full share:
Christ's Body is to Both, like dainty fare.
Can he which is not Christ's, upon Christ feed?
Are God and Satan Partners well agreed*
Or can Christ's Members in Christ's Body rot,
Which, bold-fac't Rome, to broach abroad, shames not?
O Mad Religion, strange Divinity:
Clergies fair Helon, Popes fond Fantasy!
Bread makes a God, as Mice may Ca^^ls make.
Not so: The Popes opinion we mistake.
But Sure, (although the Trid^^^-Councell wise,
The same, to Christ's Guests more than once denies)
The same means which in Baptism Christ contains:
The same in the Supper also Christ retains.
This feeds, That breeds, by Christ's Concorporation:
I Am Bred, and Fed, by the same Obligation.
Symbolik^ Signs we all in Baptism see:
Therefore the Signs in the Supper unchanged be.
In Christ I live, as I of Christ am made:
What Grace conuerts, concerns me, as is said.
Union gives Life, Communion It sustaines:
That was the Spirits, This still the Spirits remains.
But, truly, truly, (for this truth's most true,
And Faith, to be Truths Daughter, ought most due)
What Is made of Bread oth' Virgin is not made:
Nor was Christ's Being, from a Bread-corne blade.
Nor was the Promised Seed of Grains weak power,
Nor Mary blessed, a Mother of five Flower.
Nor did the Root of les^, bear ^ares of Corn:
Nor was I^d's Li^^ of Land-Acres borne.
Nor Floods, on C^r^s Bi^th, the Dragon shed:
Nor could a Wheat-Eare break the Serpe^t^ Headpunc;
Besides, I feel this bruised, assumed, consumed:
Where was Christ^ Body then may't be presumed:
Absurdly, ^bsurd Fools* absurd things reach:
And to the Absurd, absurd opinions preach.
Out Field is filled with troops of Reasons good:
Which Popish Parad^xe^ make to skud.
When Christ, Himself, the Bread of Life did name:
Before, and after that, Christ was tho Some.
Christ is a Vine, the Ways the Life, who ever
In Him gr^^bes, g^es, li^^s, f^des, wanders, die^ never:
Thus Christ says of himself; yet I suppose,
Of Way, ^me, Life, no Transi^^^^tio^ ro^e.
Why then in the Supper should a change be made?
'Cause Christ of Bread, This is my Body, said.
What if huge Heaps of Loaves were consecrated?
Must all to Flesh be forthwith Transmutated?
What if a Grooms Horse-Bread b^ conse^red?
Will it straight into Flesh be altered?
What if the holy-Hoste be eat in Lent?
Will it be turned to Flesh incontinent?
At that time (I think, rather) it is Fish made:
For, Flesh to eat, in Lens, Popes have gain said.
How well Romes Pythagorean Fool does act:
Does things forbidden, forbids his own Fact.
It Is Witty Folly, Fathers foolish Wit:
To Stab his ^tatutes, his Births heart to split.
This Popish Metamorphosis most vi^d;
Has Natures Laws pulled down, Gods Laws defiled.
Faiths Nerves and joints it reaues and cleaues in sunder:
And brings in Doctrines ^ew, with hideous wonder.
These working-Words, This i^ my Body; They,
No Type, or mysticke meaning have, do say.
Yet here is a Trope: for, here is a Transmutation:
Thus they deny, even their own affirmation.
Truth's Force and Strength is great, most certainly:
And makes Hi^ Foes her praise to testify.
Thus, oft-times Thieues, fatally faults confess:
Traitors own mouths their trecheries express.
For Sacraments, the Papist places Toys;
And, for a Trope, Tropicall Tricks employes.
Deiects what He erects; grants, what is gainsaid:
Pulls down the House which his own Hands have made.
Perverse Conversion does pervert Sense sound:
An impious Gloss does Truths pure Gl^sse confound.
For, forced by the words true force and scope:
The Test'ment, called a Cup, they says a Trope:
And why is it not a Trope, when Bread is named
Christ's body? is here other speech, form from'd*
He Is non-plusd, now; his fond opinion frights him:
And Heresies own hand, herear, even smites him.
Incredulous, quite faithless may I be,
Y'ere I (dull Papist) fix my Faith to thee.
Many such false, feigned Iliads, yet have I:
All which to whip, one day cannot supply.
Not all of Christ, but whole Christ, each where stays;
This, ancient Fathers faith affirms, and says;
If, then, Christ's flesh be not in every place;
Sure, it is not flesh, in the Mass, in any case.
If, Bread it be, and must his Body be:
Then, of his Body, it is no Sign to me.
The Body's not the Type: the Type, It, shades:
If things themselves be Types, the Type (then) fades.
All other holy things, their Signs never change:
That Signs change only here; Is it not strange?
Surely these pendent Seals assure, alone,
That Promise which Gods Word had me fore-showne.
And sacred Seals their Patents never oppose:
Therefore, both Sign and Substance, Christ enclose.
But by the Word our Mouths must not Christ chew:
This Supper (then) Words Seal, makes not this true.
This Reason's Eagle-ey'd, in truth quicke-sighted:
And what It sees, is quickly erudited,
This Reason seems with radient Sunbeams written:
With so pure Light, the sight is. thereby, smitten.
But now, here is one, and one in stead of All:
Which, thunder-throttles Romes faith mystical.
If, under, show of Bread, Christ's flesh be made:
Are snares of death in this flesh closely laid?
Henry the seventh, Emperor of Germany,
By Poison in a Mass (foul fact) did die.
But, sure, Christ's flesh, with Poison, never, was mixed:
True Life, not Death, is to Christ's flesh affixt.
It Is strange, Christ's flesh in the Poison did not die:
When venom in that Murthering-Masse did lie.
I wonder, when the Friar, in the Fire, did throw
The Host: whether Christ's Flesh he did it know.
Fond fool, thy learned lectures thee confound:
And thine own cords, have thee in snares fast bound.
What need I strive to oppose, Thee with my Shield?
When thine own Sword wounds Thee, wins Me the field.
If consecrated-Bread so altera^e,
That Mass Priests may God to Christ's flesh create:
As many Lo^^es, so many Bodies be,
As many Bit^, so many God^ we see.
And, when Christ (first) his Body made our meat:
He did, himself, in form and substance eat.
For, what he to his twelue-Disciples gave;
Himself (I think) did eat; This, all Feasts crave.
And (sure) that Vine whose Wine Christ then did drink,
Gave plenty of our Saviors Blood (I think)
And, even so often, as Bi^s, Christ's Body, be:
So often, his Soul from's Body torn has he.
For (I believe) his Soul they cannot bake:
Their foule-mouth'd-Masse, thereof no power can take.
If Thou Wilt on points (as Vowels Vassal) stand;
And not permit true judgment thee command:
As Bread Christ's Body is ( witness Gods Writ)
So is the Cup, his Blood; (Truth proving it.)
Any Cup, forged, by any, any Art;
To the Testament in Christ's blood, does convert.
Nor was (O Christ) blessed Marie, more thy Mother,
Than Goddesse-Masse would be to thee another.
Nor were thy Bones (O Christ) broke on the Cross:
But Popelings Teeth bruise, break them, short as Moss.
Nor could one Body, all Christ's Guests suffice,
To take least part thereof, their Souls chief price.
And whilst heaven, earth, (at once) this flesh contain:
His flesh continuous, Christ cannot retain.
And, mouldie Bread (we all know) Worms will breed;
Which, from Christ's Flesh ('it is plain) cannot proceed.
And Wine kept long in Cups will (sure) wax tart:
But, thy sweet Blood (O Christ) still cheeres my heart.
And in thy hand, crucified flesh, did keep:
(O Christ) before thou crucified, did sleep.
Who e're does strive these strifes to reconcile:
Does lose, abuse, his cost, and care, the while.
Though the Popes triple Crown thrice wreathed be:
It cannot, from these Cobwebs, sweep thee free.
Why strive I then, Mad-Masses fantasies
To rouse to Me, or set before Thine eyes?
Behold, I quickly come, (says Christ, and yet,
He comes not down, to be with men's teeth bit.
Remains, oth' Passe-ore (once) were burnt in fire:
Did they burn ought of God (then) I require?
Once, without sprinkled Blood, Offerings were vain,
And can a bloudlesse-Masse, Gods love (now) gain?
Over much Wine works Wits intoxication;
And has Thy Blood (O Christ) like operation?
When amongst these Mass Priests, Wine with Wat^r greets
A Whay-like flood of Blood and Water meets?
In shows of Bread, lies Christ's true Body here?
And does the Same in many a Place appear?
It Is All, in All, and All in every Bit:
Yet, in this All, no Part, a part does sit.
Head, Foot, Mouth, Shoulders, Stomach* hand and Breast,
Conioynd by Place, never disioynd from the Rest.
Pendulous Signs of Substance void, stand still:
Thus, does this empty Air Their Hunger fill.
Bakers bake flesh, which is with Blood well knod,
So please the powerful Will of Romes great God.
Corn, the commands of this Masse-God, obeyes;
Bids he a Bit? the Bit turns flesh straightwayes.
And when his Skill the Mass Priest list to show,
A coat of crumbs he gives and takes God fro.
When Magic sounds the Misser once gives out:
The flesh is fled, the Meal gone out of doubt.
This Maker of his Maker, moves his Lips;
And straight, the Bread into Christ's Body skins.
A Change most strange, four wondrous words do emake:
This comes, That goes; something, does nothing take.
When I, by Masses* Popes made Lasses, see,
Then I Will believe, Flower turned to flesh may be.
Here Is no dimension of the Quantity:
Sensible Bodies Sense cannot descrie.
No Rul^ of sigh^, no set Position being,
No Judgment, Sign, of Things, no Real seeing.
Whether we eat Christ's Flesh, clothed or bare,
This, to disclose is Romes Apollos ^are.
For, when That Suppers Rites Christ did ordain,
Or fine Linen.
Syndon or Priest-like clothes, he wore, it is plain.
But Christ in the Supper, naked to eat, now,
Neither Religion, Custom, Shame, ^llow.
If we eat Christ in's clothes, in that array,
What do we eat? is flesh a Garment gay?
Had I an hundreth-fold Apollo's skill,
Did Verses flow, like Oceans from my Quill:
I never could cleanse the Augaean filthy Stable,
Lernaean Fen, found in this monstrous Fable.
The Bread being coniur'd, by the Mass Priests mumbling,
(As cursed Ghost) a headlong pace runs tumbling.
The blessed Crust, being crossed, a fleshy-lumpe,
Into Breads harbor joyfully does iumpe.
Strange things I tell: Priests blustering breath can frame
Christ's Body, as it was, in All, the same.
Imbak't in flesh, incarnate in the Bread:
Christ, in the banished Meal, is covered.
And, Who (said Tully, once) so void of Wit,
Thinks, that, his God, which he eats at a Bit?
Substance of Bread is trans-elementated:
Yet nought's in the Bread, which was not there first stated.
This flesh, lacks flesh; This ruddie Red's not Red;
Much difference, here, twixt Flower and Flower is bred.
Can flesh lack flesh? And must not Red, Red be?
Who then in the Popes Brains, Brains can hope to see?
The same's, here, not the same, not known the same;
Every Sense, here, deceiues, erres, limps, is lame.
The same thing's not the same, at the same hour;
What e're is, yet, It self, straight, leaves selfs power.
This is my Body, Is not (if changed strait)
The Body first to a Bit does alterate.
The Subject fickle, Adi^nct firm does stay,
The Effigial's fast, Material, flies away.
Something makes Naught, a Body, Body makes not.
What Is done, is not done; what is formed, fashion takes not.
If any maine Madness, all others pass,
It Is this, Romes nimble slight, strange sight in the Mass.
This monstrous Metamorphosies strange charms,
Has brotch'd abroad, uncivil, civil harms.
All the Winds blustering Battles, here, have met,
Numberless Numbers, with cross Coiles do fret.
Strife follows Strife; and, Errors ancient Crew,
Though payr'd, impayr'd; yet hatched are Hydra's new.
For the Body of Christ, scarce is Christ's Church (O woe)
A Body: thus from Peace great War does grow.
But here, we only sing the furious fight
Twixt Romes Erichthonius was the son of Vulcan, having feet like a Dragon.
There was also one Erichtho, a woman of Thessalie, famous for her multitude of
poisons.
Ericthons and Andabata were certain Fencers that fought blindfold.
Andabats hight.
Who are these Cha^pions whom their drink makes good:
Bloud-suckers, and God-eaters, their dire food.
Friars do sret, and Sophisters contend,
Schoolmen conscold, and threats on all sides send.
Discrepant Bands, their Banners pitched, flock, flow:
Hoarse Academies vaunt; full Theaters, lowd-low.
Grammaticke wars do rage, yea wars indeed,
Whence, last Opinions (often) make, first to bleed.
Grammaticasters rise, Munkes mighty swarm^,
Clatter together, man to man, arm in arm.
Petrus de Quercu, pugnes, oppugn'd is he,
By John d^ Monte* both fight valiantly.
Alphonsu^ fumes, hot Hugo frets much more:
Poor Polus pants, and Lyra loud does rore.
They which want Proofs, with wrangling clamours rave*
And seem even Mad, when they no Matter have.
Iodocus proves Fab'^ improues, Occam approues;
Scotus even foames at mouth; Thomas, war moves.
Andradius, Driedo, Cathrin, Carthusian,
With sharp confronts, each one does play the man.
Guido, Capistran, Sote, Cope, Canus stout,
With vpstart Errors, drive the Old-ones out.
This, beats the Air, That Is light makes all more dark:
This, opes no Knots; nor That, can hit the Mark.
The Victour's vanquished; Cut-throate killd by's foe;
Assayld the Assaylant; Wounder's brought to woe.
Biell brings bloody Mars; Bellarmine great,
Romes Rabbi, wars, woes, blows and threats does threat.
Bonner, he bleats, Lindan loves Lullabies;
Lumbard belubbard, to's dull Doctors hies.
Echhius and Hosius, Dorbell, Duns, at duel,
Pighius grunts Pigge-like, Alan is most cruel.
Whos'ere may belch whats'ere, against Whomsoere,
Cadmaean troops by their own swords fall there.
O Pope, worlds winking-light, life's Rule, faiths Guide,
Do even Thine-Owne; thy damned Decrees deride?
With what brass Brow will Thou deny, so bold,
This Duell-Champion-flocke, of thy Sheepfold?
OF THE CORRVPT LIFE AND CONVERSATION, CVSTOMARY IN THE CITY OF ROME.
THE SEVENTH SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
Know thou not, in what City, sin (most) grows?
He which but knows the crimes of Rome, This knows.
PErchance thou would know the holy conversation
Of Rome, renowned, for her seuen-fold foundation.
Old-Rome (if we may true Historians trust)
Now in new-Rome lies buried in the dust.
Papistry is a Sprig sprung-vp from Hell:
An All-vice-bearing Branch, whose Boughs excel.
Rome is a Den of Thieves, Worlds common-Stewes:
A beastly Cell from whence all Sin issues.
He, that knows not, Rome on seven Hills to sit:
Is ignorant in Stories, has no Wit.
Why art thou wroth (O Babylon) with me?
If, by my Verse, thy known Crimes scourged be?
O Wedlocke-hater, whose anointed Host
Of fat-cram'd Clergy; war serves for thee most.
So much do Thou and thine sweet Marriage hate?
Whores, before Wives, to Love and estimate.
Thou, and thy Flocks are (sure) Spiritual:
So much that Evil Spirit defiles you all.
While Pope, Siricius, Priests their wives gaine-saies:
The Temples Sodom shield, to God they raise.
Your Single lives, how chastely, closly led:
Often, Infants Golgothaes have witnessed.
Oh how much better were their foul Vows broke?
Than of Lewd Lives to bear so shameful Yoke.
Masculine Virtues never to Rome befall:
Things carnal fit not men Spiritual.
Oh, Romes Faith all her Males Emasculates:
The World, with Pregnant Virgins exornates.
And that her most pure Church, may purer be,
Pure Friars, from their pure Nuns pure Broods may see.
Many a nimble Nightmare Sp'rit is known,
To make such pure Sp'rit-hanted Virgins groan.
Wives of their own thei'l none, Neighbors have these:
In such Flesh (may be) they can God well please.
Religion, thus, has foamed up Luxury:
A Lazy Life bred many a Prodigy.
But yet (I hope) Romes Church and Chair to pleasure,
Thais (in the Church) may justly purchase treasure.
Besides, much Gain, much Godliness makes grow:
No stinking Savor can from Lucre flow.
Oh, must Romes Corban, Temples pure profane?
Must God take Gifts from Strumpets filthy gain?
To horrid Whoredoms do thou Pardons grant?
From all good men all pardon thou must want.
Captines have Freedom, not for Ill, but Good:
This Freedom was procured by Christ's blessed Blood.
But now, behold, huge Swarms from Romes full stock,
Rare Pomp Pontifical, Spiritual Flock;
Myriades of Munckes, Armies of Eunuchs kind,
All which twigs, sprigs sprung from thy Root, I find:
Flocks of fat Sheep, large Droues of Weathers fair:
Cling close to Thee, thy Warfare stout they are.
So many holy Fathers grave, thou have,
So many Nuns, angelike Virgins chaste:
So many fat Papasinines unmarried;
Grylls Offspring, in religious Armies carried:
So many Sister-hoods, Fraternities,
As there be twinkling Stars in Frost-faire Skies.
Devouring Sons in Numbers Numberless;
Sardanapalus Bands, in foul excess:
Legions of Locusts, Herds of holy Hogs;
Foedifragous full Flocks, Worlds muddy Bogs.
Their old-Religion holds of nothing more,
Than Bacchus and their Bellies to adore.
Monsters, whom Virtue cannot free from Vice:
Such as from fertile Rome, spring in a trice,
To feast at Fun'rals, and to drink pots dry:
Is Work enough, is enough Piety.
Much quiet, dainty Diet, Lazy Feast-dayes:
Their fatted Bellies like blown Bladders, raise.
Feasters to be, not Fasters, they are known:
Whose glutted Paunch so far is ouergrowne.
What is a Munck? A Flesh-lump, A Wine-Pot:
Whose Salt is Life, lest he corrupt and rot.
Circes (sure) turned, by Magic Medicine,
Swine into Munckes, or else, Munckes into Swine.
'Twixt Countrymen and Moules there is no such ods:
As 'twixt old-Muncks, and our new- Munckey-clods.
What Is Friars frothy Troop? A Stygian Brood:
Pamphagean Swarm of Locusts, lacking food.
Wise Grasiers will not for one fa^ Ox, buy
A thousand two-foote, bare-foote Friars most fly.
Many seem proud, Christ's naked Name to embrace:
Whose wicked Lives deny Christ to his Face.
Many are fired with Zeal, whose Piety
Is but gilt ore, Religion, Cruelty.
Many of this Christ-preaching holy Host,
Build Heaven in Word, in Life build up Hell most.
Whoredom with these is a small-Sinne, and they,
Guilty themselves, mild Mulcts upon it lay.
Thus, Rome one Stews, these Stains permits in any:
All Rome is (now) one Stews, where first were many.
Bishops, sweet Swarms, in euer'y Cell, Muncks, Friars,
Are Fathers, All; who this deny, are Liars.
For, they that Children get, must Fathers be:
I know they are Such; This Reason's firm for me.
Have I not stirred this muddy Ditch of thine?
Shall I thee show the Popes Guarde soft and fine?
Romes Purple Peers, and Latian Cedars tall,
Cardinal Chorus, glorious unto all;
For Worldly Joys, Earths Toys no jot contending,
Do even contemn, what each New-Moone can send-in.
With Visage Sage, Gowns Flame-like, red Hats fine:
Oh how their Lives do show, their Zeal does shine?
But truly (truth to say) their purple Clothes,
Wax red, being di'd^ in Blood and bloody Oaths.
Christ's Lambs they Butcher with inhumane spite:
Thus, their Roabes red, thus wax their Bonnets bright.
Red-caps, disdain pure Wine, drink ye pure Blood:
The Spirit springing thence, is much more good.
Thus, by such Ghostly guides Christ's Flocks are fed:
And Card'nals Functions are thus finished.
Thus, Christ they serve, thus Christians lives they live:
Thus, unto Christ they holy Worship give.
These Fathers fitly may be props of Hell:
But, of Gods House, they cannot, half so well.
Why seek I Samplars? since full Stories writ,
Romes Fathers filthy Lives set out most fit.
Even Sol does shame, their cursed Crimes to see:
My modest Muse may now (then) silent be.
Here, oft-times fell a Star, from a clear Sky,
A Cloudie Day brought unchaste Chastity.
Roman Records do filthy Foggs exhale;
Her Scene obscene is as a loathsome tale.
Rome, Vicious Rome, the Worlds Metropolis,
The Metrapolitan Popes foul Chair is.
Gomorrha, scarce excelled it in strange Crimes:
So many Sin-Monsters reign in their Climes.
And, sure, but by that-fire which All must fry,
Their frozen-Sins, naught else can liquifie.
Rich Rome, for triumphs, Rome, most honored:
Is now the Empires Tail, which (once) was Head.
A Shambles of much Murder, Sincke of Sin:
Shames Cell, Lusts Seat, a place to quaffe Wine in.
Where you may many Harpeies, Mastiues see:
Where proud Ambition, fly Sedition be.
Rome, thou art blessed Salems Character as right,
As Christ is typ'd in thy Metropolite.
OF THE COVETOVS BVYING AND SELLING OF ALL THINGS UNDER THE POPES Power and
Jurisdiction.
THE EIGHTH SATYR.
THE ARGUMENT.
That Simon Peter was at Rome, Who knows?
That Simon Magus was there, All Truth shows.
OF Rules, reformed to strange got-gaine I write:
Effected by the Popes Command and Might.
Who laps-vp, wraps-vp, all the world like Floods:
Like Water scoures, deuoures all Neighb'ring-Goods.
A private Plague Romes monstrous Maw does fret:
The more she gets, the more she gapes to get.
Furred with Gold is every Popelings Bull:
(As Load-stones Steel) This, yellow-gold can pull.
Let Shauelings serve the Pope, their Patron grave:
For, at his Pleasure, they their Treasure have.
Here, Ezraes siluer-Sense, Moses does open:
To All, all wrong is right, if Gold they grope.
Great Golden Glisters purge all Crimes committed:
The Guilty, are by argent Agents quitted.
Thus to the World affy'd, not crucifide:
Worlds thirsty Love, Romes Father has even fry'de.
His Works He works by sacred Policy:
But, these to God are Atheism most high.
Christ's Throne is Heavenly, Heavenly things do muse:
But Papal Pride, an earthly Throne does choose.
Yet, vaine's this Choice, which chooses Earthly things:
For, by such choice, toward God he folly brings.
Satan stalks, walks, seeking whom to devour:
The same does Romes Cosmopolite each hour.
That this Possessour poor may gape for more,
'Twixt Riches, Rapine, his great Thirst does grow.
Bohemoth hopes to drink up Jordan dry:
And none Romes gaping Gulf can satisfy.
With unseen Shackles, Law-snares intricate,
This sharking Sepheard, Sheep can captiuate:
Thy Church (O Christ) a Money-Mart He makes*
Seeks not thy Lambs, but Lands to himself he takes.
Good Manners, not great Mannours God best prizeth:
His Steward Mannours Loves, manners despises.
For, This Priests Polipheme and Atlas stout,
By these Tricks, trimes and props Gods House throughout.
Most craftily strange Grins and Gins he lays.
His hollow-heart has thousand wilie-waies.
Of which, Gold-Bringer, brauest of them all,
His Love, his Life, his Wife, He (well) does call.
His zeal is Amphisbaena is a Serpent in Lybia, with 2. heads, one in the
rig^t place, and the other at his tail, both very poisonous.
Amphisbaena; serves two Lords:
The World good service; God, he none affords.
The Gifts of Good-gift-Giuers make them Popes:
Who want at home, at home may sit, like Mopes.
Vice-Christ, Laws firmes, and them repeales by Bribes.
But, he Gods Law, prostitutes and proscribes.
John Baptist, Herod did forbid to wed
His Brothers wife; This Popes have suffered.
Paul became All, to All, a Soul to get:
All Vice-Christs care is on his own gain set.
Oh Christ, Thy Guests Thou Wilt first inuit, then urge:
Thy Vicar, will them threaten, force, and scourge.
Thy Head (O Christ) a Crown of thorns did tear:
Vice-Christ, a Triple Crown of Gold does wear.
Thus, strangely better, is this Head Papal,
Than Peter, Paul, John Baptist, CHRIST, and all.
This Fee-Fowler, Wealth-watching Argus fly,
Spreads Gold-catching Snares, most cunningly,
Sinners by Sums being taxed; Is Coin so vicious?
Gold (sure) is Heresy: To Have Wealth, pernicious.
Thus, guilty-Gold, in Bird-lime Laws is caught:
And Nothing deadly, but a man to have Naught.
If Gold-death Antidots, yer dead, thou have:
From deadly-Sin thy Soul He Will (surely) save.
For, Romes Bullipotent, indulgent Pope,
All evil of pain and guilt remooues, I hope.
Touching least Trifles, he does Laws ordain:
All which are quickly void by precious Gain.
The truncke is little, whence a Fly sups blood:
And to the Pope least Laws bring greatest good.
At Toys He Will rage, winkes at most wicked things:
If happy Gain fly forth with golden wings.
Sins shackles shaken off, thou wilt quickly see,
And pure Souls fly to Heaven, if Gold them free.
Give to the Pope, and dare each damned deed:
Actours foul Acts no punishment can breed.
All Is pardonable to Gift-giuers All:
Their Sin's as Vendible, as Venial.
Thus theirs at Rome the Purses dire decay:
But no souls health, no forcing sin away.
Give, Give, Give often, this Romish Horse-Leach cries*
And, by her food, fierce hunger still does rise.
All unction, all compunction is from gold:
And he wants Naught, that has most yellow mold.
Romes Mother Church, her Teats ties-vp from none:
By whose good Gifts, she fat and fair is grown.
But, here observe (for this distinction stout
With often ing^mination they giue-out.)
Peter's chaire's great, above all Laws his Might:
And to the Pope Gods power is due by right.
A Sym^nist he is not, Gratis gives he:
Give, and he will Give; take thou, he will sharer be.
He gives to thee, thou to him, what is more clear?
Thus, Love reciprocal must love endeere.
Why mention I, the traps, toils, money-Meanders,
Of Romes world-thirsting covetous commanders?
Romes vnfill'd intricate Charybdis broils;
And, though too wealthy, swallows wealthy spoils*
The Church of Rome, has power Omni-potent;
And lively liuer-veines Omni-p^tent.
Deformed R^les, enormed Rites, Romes Court,
Does at her wicked will invent, support.
Her Courts with wranglings ring, Goodness is whipped:
Her tatling Troops, with Gold, their tongues have tipped:
Gold-griping Eloquence pleades free from scath:
Such power Romes Rhetorician (Riches) has.
Besides, at Rome (whens'ere no causes be)
Cause-pleaders, straight, cause-coyners turned, you will see.
Here Lawyers may fell Laws, most lawfully;
Because by Bribes a Lawyers Bench they buy.
In plodding Plebeans many matters, they
Despise dispatch; devise and watch delay.
If Wealth come, Rome will welcome thy dispute:
If thou bring naught, then stay at home, be mute.
Wealth-wanting Lovers, Lais love in vain:
And Rome loves none, that bring not gold and gain.
Rome streines at Gnats, and swallows Camels down:
The Guilty sh^'le forgive, on Guiltless frown.
She Will vex poor Lambs, and let proud Lions go:
For Wolves and Foxes faults, her Sheep feel woe.
Thus, is Romes Papal Justice to be sold:
And Goddess Ionis filia and Iustiti^ Dea.
Themis to be hirde for gold.
The Popes foul faults are facts Apostolic:
His flocks frail facts are faults Apostaticke.
Wonders I write: but what, has not Romes throne,
And all ore-ruling power of Bishops done?
Great Grand-Sire, Guide of Guides, Romes demi-God:
Thus are thy flocks ruled with a Golden-Rod.
O how (besides Romes Abaddon) the art right,
Nummipolizing Pope, Law-breaking wight?
OF THE MOST FORMIDABLE AND ABOMINABLE POWDER PLOT BY PAPISTS, WITH THEIR
horrible authorized liberty to perpetrate any Villainy.
THE NINTH SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
At Rome, by Rapine there is a Golden-Age,
By Cruelty, there is still an Iron Age.
WIth Gods Law to dispense, makes deadly wounds;
Yet, Rome does This, and All things else confounds.
Right, Faith, and Troth, Oaths, Promises, Vows given;
(These wronged, thou wilt say, are keys of hell, not heaven)
She wrongs, vnbinds, breaks, kicks at: thus past doubt,
No Obstacle her free Decree bolts-out.
Why should not she free all with others pelf?
Who, all else (soon) dispenses, of her self.
Popes will's a Gen'rall-Rule: do do his mind?
None then, thee Guilty of the Fact can find.
Any, against Any, Any thing commits,
Whilst God as Priest, the godless as Judge sits.
Parricides (once) against this Realm arose;
And did a desperate damned Plot compose.
A machinated Treason, strange and true:
Whose like, no past, no future Times, can show.
I quake to speak, my trembling Tongue sticks-fast:
My hands do shake, my Muse is mute aghast.
Twelve Ringleaders did meet, deep Hels blacke-Band;
A new strange bloody Birth to take in hand.
At Rome 'twas shaped, Romes Whore 'its Damme became:
Monstrous Maegaera Midwife to the same.
The King, his Queen, the Prince, Peers, Bishops grave,
Superior and Inferior, Nobles brave;
The Scarlet Judges and wise Justices;
The chiefest Knights and choysest Burgesses:
All pious Patriots, met in Parliament,
On State affairs (as custom was) All bent:
All these, by those base Traitors marked to die,
(Had not Heavens foresight made discovery)
Smothered in Smoke into the Air blown up,
Had drunk full draughts of deaths most direful Cup.
O woeful, fearful, Stygean damned Act:
Likest it self, paralelld by no fact.
O mischief, murder, massacre most strange:
New Snare, base Ware, brought forth from hells Exchange
Naught under heaven was (once) new: but our time
Brought forth a new, nefarious, monstrous crime.
First was a Golden-Age (as Gods dear daughter:)
As the Popes Niece, a powder-Age came after.
What sacred, sugared love at Rome there dwells?
This fathers love all Fathers love excells.
For, that we might not dead to heaven go:
Alive, by Powder, he would us thither blow.
"These are the Briefes of Romes Religion brave:
"To make one-day all-Brittaine bring to grave.
Romes Monsters mouth and throat is large and hollow:
And, at one draught, can many thousands swallow.
O Popish cruel crew, inhumane, quite,
Monsters in Gods, Monsters in all Men's sight.
As Peace perturbers, as Bloud-suckers, all,
That see you, fly you, find you, from you fall.
O woeful wrack, such and so many slain:
This, work they would; but wrought their work in vain,
Is this life-giuing true Christianity?
Is this firm faith, pure Popish Piety?
Ill deeds to good-ends, None may enterprise:
And yet may Rome do such that Rome may rise?
Had all our heads upon one Neck (then) stood;
As Nero (once) desired (Romes man of blood:)
That Neck, with one crack of sulphurious smoke:
Had been smit-off, had not God stayed the stroke,
O wretched Work, to which all woes are due:
Great wrack, more great, than may be held for true:
Who present saw All, noted, All, he saw:
To trust all seen, his own eyes scarce could draw.
With such fierce flames of quick sulphurious scath,
Does Rome promoue, approve her Cath'licke Faith.
Alas, Christ's truth into Kings Courts, never came,
With Swords, with Poisons, Pistols, Powder-flame;
Covered with Satan's knauish-cloakes, to slay,
Till Romes Philistims grew so great, so gay.
Did Peter fish for Kings in streams of blood?
No, Beelzebub can fish best in that flood.
To be catcht-vp in Blood, as Peter's fish,
And pay so dear for Rome, I Will never wish.
O thus, even thus, each Romish-Traitour, has
A Vault to hide his Treason, as his Faith.
Often bloody blasts from Romes Tarpeian Tower,
Brake forth, and did thousands of Souls devour.
Fire-spitting Brats, igneous Ignatius bred:
If Jesuits be his Brood (as so it is sed.)
Religion has been ever fringed with fraud,
And Piety been made foul Treasons Bawd.
While Jesuits do what them the Pope has bidden:
Under their Mealy-mouthes foul Fiends lie hidden.
The Churches Weapons (once) were Prayers and Tears:
Romes Weapons (now) Swords, Firebrarnds, Poisons, Spears.
Viperous-Imps are in Romes bowels bred:
And truly barbarous, boystrous is her Head.
Boasters in Blood, in Fire, in Swords, in Rapes:
Thou Would Papists judge; foul Devils in Men's fair shapes.
Though many props do Romes Religion stay;
Their Chiefest hold on Sword and Fire they lay.
But, whilst thus often their Flocks they fleece, o're-throw:
They Signs of Romish Faith and False-hood show.
Within, foul Crimes; without, Revenge they bear:
Acts against Christ none vnaueng'd appear.
Alas, why by two deaths, thought Tisiphone,
On ours to prey, and then to slay her own.
For, Rockey Peter's Chair, Faiths Rock to be:
Thou, by Saltpeter, Powder, Fire, would see.
But now, the World their Papal pranckes espies:
And Romish Rhea shames at her own Lies.
Romes Ram-like Actors came upon the Stage:
But God opposed their hateful Actiue-Rage.
O Rome, thou buildest Nests; Birds, can not hatch:
Acknowledge then, Gods Hands, Gods Eyes thee watch.
Thus Babels brood her Birth could not bring out:
Whereof prime pregnant Hope, made them past doubt.
Damned Dirae sighed and hells furies fumed:
Yea, Plutos palace shook, as nigh consumed:
Because their hellish hopes took none effect,
And heaven did timely their deceit derect.
Rejoice blessed Britain in this New-saluation:
And keep That day with endless recordation.
Christ freed thy Soul from hell fire, and this fire
Than ever any flame, to hels, came nigher.
That day which they Britains blacke-Day would see,
Nouembers fifth, Britains bright-day shall be.
The day was Tews-day, but by Popish spite,
Papists Ash Wednesday, it had been more right.
Daniell, delivered from the Lions den,
Had not such cause to praise God, as We, then:
For, rage of roaring Lions, often, is tamed:
But, Romes fierce Wrath is quenchlessely enflamed.
For ever, then, fell Papists, howl, lament,
Your Popish Powder-Pieties Intent.
For, all the Oceans floods will never make clean
(Perfidious Rome (thy knauish Sink obscene.
Englands Transalpinated Papistrie.
Has wrought such often Blood-smeared cruelty.
Breeds our Transmarine Travail so light mind?
Let Us then by Law be to our homes confinde.
For doubtless, this detestable foul fact
Was counseled, courag'd, by the Popes compact.
For, he which bids do, what is almost done: he
In's will does work must stay't or author be.
Had he not cast Paternall care from's heart:
He Would never have played such a Step-fathers part.
Who from his Bubble-bellowing Bulls boiles out,
All Caco-curses, hellish Broiles about.
And thus he says: Let one-day England make,
One Grave, whose note on future day shall shake.
Vices Viceroy, or Vice It self, is He,
Who, Peter's Chair dares foul with Villainy.
We read, that when the High Priest used to enter
Gods Holyest-Place: without Blood He Would not venture.
So, Romes High Priest unless some blood he taste,
To's Shiloh Synagogue does seldom haste.
Thus one of many facts we have found out:
Hear Others (now) not better Ones, I doubt.
To All Sins, fuel this Dispenser finds:
And much fine-Flowre out of Crimes-corne he grinds.
Popes Pardons purge foul Homicides most white:
Makes blots and spots of bloody Daggers bright.
And if, this Priest of Romes rare Rock, dispense,
Thou quit may sit free from all foul offense.
Or, if the Laws strict Act thee guilty make:
Deaths deadly Act on Thee no hold shall take.
Antichrists Bull and Christ's Blood are nere kin:
For, that, as this, pardons and pures All Sin.
If Romes blessed Bishop wars, wiles, perjury,
Commands as just; just they are, instantly.
For, the Popes pleasure is all deeds direction:
It Is Law of Laws to yield him sole subjection.
Thou, then, Who bids, not what He bids, take heed:
And do his Will, with Courage and with Speed.
And do his Will; for Christ did All Command,
To the Lord God of Romes high Hests to stand.
His Fist, Arm, Shoulders, Warlike Engines are:
Least He grow Mad (then) have a special care.
For, first, these regal Rites Christ Peter gave:
And to Romes Peter, Prot^-Pope most brave.
But, Romes rich Patriarch to be Peter's Heir,
Saint Peter's Chair and Miter, There, declare.
All Crowns, Thrones, Kingdoms, through Earths ample scope;
Christ gave to Peter, Peter to the Pope.
And He which Fathers moves, Himself approues,
Patrician; But, He, Father Peter moves.
Therefore, all the honor Christ to Peter gave,
Our Lord the Pope (I surely hope) must have.
And, in prime Peter All rare Acts you see,
Must this Petreian-Patrons Actions be.
The word is vain, virtue comes not by kind:
Saint Peter's Offspring we excepted find.
But, Peter's pious Life, and last Confession:
In the Popes Chair, find no Chair, nor Impression.
Peter's faint-Faith (O Christ) Thee thrice denide:
Full often the Pope (Vice-Christ) does Thee deride.
Yet, Peter's tears showed Peter penitent:
But, no man ever saw the Pope repent.
Lastly, for Thee, Peter did gladly dye:
The Pope thy Members murders cruelly.
See, who will deny the Pope to have (as due)
Sure Shape, Staff, Stool, of Peter Martyr true,
Rules not wise Palinurus in Romes Ocean,
Peter's tall Ship, without least Slip in's motion?
Peter's Ship (sure) on many a Rock and Shelfe
He drives; and is the Ships worst Rock Himself.
AN EPILOGVE OF THE ANTECEDENTS.
THus Romes Dictator All the World directs:
Thus He Gods holy Bible, fowls, infects.
Thus Sacrilegiously Gods Gifts He Will sell,
Simon (not Peter) Magus matching well.
Thus faines he Fancies fond, Heretical;
Of Heretics being Head Spiritual.
Thus Monarchs he to iarres and Wars incites:
And like a Martial Priest, with two Swords fights.
Thus Popes permission outlaws Laws most just:
And Canons (when he lists) Canons forth thrust.
Thus Cai'phas calls black white, wrong right, and still,
All gain is good: and Lawful what He will.
Thus Rome runs-ore with Wanes of Wickedness:
Though Gods wise Steward dwell there, ne'rethelesse.
Thus Pro-Christ, Procrust that rate Thief, is like,
To Christ's true Tipe and Pattern most unlike.
Thus He Christ's Work promoues by slaughters fly:
With sitting still a Stock, Block, Dullard dry.
Thus He sels Smoke, and turns his Lead to Gold:
Thus finally He robs Christ's Sheepfold.
Is not this Prophet (think you) from God sent?
Yes, sure as Night does Daylight represent.
OF THE HOLY RELIQVES, TRADITIONS, AND OTHER ADMIRABLE INVENTIONS OF THE CHVRCH
OF ROME.
THE TENTH SATYR.
The ARGUMENT.
O how the Pope loves pretty pranckes and toys!
How Peter-Priests and Mitred-Men, Him joys!
NOw, full fraught Legions, and prodigious Bands
Of Romes Patrician, hasten to our Hands; find,
Whose pregnant Whore does Rags and Relics
The Universe with trifling toys to blind.
Look at, and laugh at the fond Fantasies,
This Fabling-Father means to Moralize.
He Will show you many Nails (if truth ha'nt faild)
Wherewith Christ's Hands and Feet, to the Cross were naild.
And of Christ's Cross a pretty piece, not rotten:
Which pregnant Piece, has thousands more begotten.
Why do they not the Thorns, Nails, many more?
And (as the Cross) Longinus Lance adore?
Gave thou (O Christ) the Church, thy Spouse, sure prizes?
Her Dow'ry (sure) was no such Marchandizes.
Traditions Caucasus so huge is grown;
That Hi^ great growth thy Church has nigh overthrown.
Romes deepe-learn'd Doctors in Divinity,
Make th^se, Religions firm Profundity.
Traditions Pillars, prop Romes Papal- Power:
These fortify her gorgeous high-top'd Tower.
Much honor, hence, has Romes great Grand-Sire got:
And of this Mould, has made a glistering Pot.
But by the dismall-doctrines which he preaches:
He is Gods Traito^r, and Himself ore-reacheth.
Traditions ghastly Gorgons he proiects:
And by these Rockey-Rules, Men's Faith infects.
Vnwrit Decrees He with Gods-Word compares:
Yea, them prefer before Gods Handwriting dares.
A mere Inck-Doctour he is held most fit:
Which knows and shows nothing but Pen-mens writ.
With these poor shreds, this Latin Bishop frames
A Fig-leafe Coat, to hide his Whorish shames.
But I, Traditions loathsome Lees most vain,
Spu'd from Romes Nauseus-Maw; spue-vp again.
The Scriptures (says He) are not Faiths Foundation:
Traditions are Faiths Basis, Propagation.
Scripture is not Faiths Prop, Mai^-Mast, Chiefe-Poste:
Truths Horologe, Rule, Canon, Guiding-Coaste.
Nor was Gods Word given, as Faiths guiding-Queene:
But that it might Faiths Chambermaid be seen.
The Popes opinion is Faiths Conduit-Head:
But by Gods Word Man's Faith must not be fed.
O proud presumpt'ous, vain, profane Decree;
And which proves plain Asses-eares Popes Ears be.
Yet anxiously almost All Popery rests,
In untaught Teachers, blockish, brutish Breasts.
Now comes the Scribbling Age, Arts honor brave,
Romes pretty Page, the Popes fine fawning Slave.
And many Wonders wondrously does write,
Whereto (in doubt) I Faith deny and plight.
These Packes of Pick-thanks, flattering Gnathoes base,
With luscious Larde fatten the Popes fat face.
These are dull Doctors, as dull Carcasses;
He these fond Fools conformes, forms as he please.
All these skinne-o're foul Antichrists deep wounds:
But what is the Salve, when God the Sore confounds?
The golden-Legends of their Saints they will show?
Whereof, He is most wise, which least does know.
For senseless Writs and sottish Writers rare:
Rome long has borne the Bell, past all compare.
To which (deuoid of Light and Learning quite)
What Popes (each hour) put out, put in, is right.
In wondrous witless wise, many seem wise:
Who little teach, and less do exercise.
TO Apollo's Kitchen I Would not bring their Books,
But for Pie-papers, and for Spice for's Cooks.
And their mad making many Books, I fear;
Is it which makes me buy my paper dear.
He which as forged Writings does suppose
Canons-Apostolike, with Truth he goes.
But when Decrees, they Decre^als would call,
Gods true Religion, then, began to fall.
Neither my Mars, nor my Minera^, may
Their New-Religions often divorce, diplay.
Thalia, bite thy Nails, thy writings rend;
For, one-thing yet will not thy Verse attend.
Yet be courageous; courage much assists,
With strong-arm'd hopes to re-attempt the Lists.
Black and White-Friers, Priests, in gay Coats dressed:
A two-foot Cordeleire a barefoot Beast:
Friars Mendicants and Manducants increase,
Fat Epicurean-Calues, besmeared with grease:
All these fair Sprigs, fat Pigs, Romes Sow does breed:
From Romes most pregnant Dam, such Broods proceed.
Here thou may see Christ's Name make many white:
Whose devilish deeds make their lives black as night.
Their hours devotion is their deuoration:
And to their throat to give a fat oblation.
But some do fast, that they by Fasts may merit:
And thereby think (fond fools) Heaven to inherit.
Each one his Sect observes obsequiously,
Does Deeds forbidden, bidden Deeds does fly.
This Sect, wears Linen; That will woollen wear:
This Sect, holds Fish; That, Herbs more holy fare.
This bald-pate narrow is; That Is bald more wide:
This, wears his Gown more loose, That Is closer tide.
This, Augustine serves best; That Benedict:
This (O Carthusian) is thy Copesmate strict.
This, bears the Cross, That bears the Cool about:
This, is for the Altar; That, for the Kitchen stout.
This (sweet Saint Francis) is thy follower bold:
That, as his Slave, Saint Anthony does hold.
This, like an Auchorite, lives in a Wall:
That, strange to the World, loves the World most of all.
This, to Hee-Saints; That, to Shee-Saints, does pray:
This, Woodden-gods; That, Stonie-gods makes gay.
This, to things framed, feigned, pictured, prostrate vows:
This, one knee; That, to's Image both knees bows.
This, Christ's; That, Peter's; This, Paul's Ape will seem:
This, you will an Oxes, Asses, Sowes Mate deem.
Finally; fitly, coth' Bos, Fur, Su^, alq, Sa^erdo^.
Ox, Thief, Sow, Priest, meet:
And many, hold this Sect to be most sweet.
Yet every Sect thinks his Rites holiest:
And, of all Orders, his to be the best.
Diuorcement of Religious Romanists;
Their Faith may se^er, never firmly twists.
There are, whom IN Suita, de Suc.
Suites; from Sowes may name:
For, they their Names from Jesus falsely frame.
These are Peace-spoylers; Bellows for to blow,
And Brands to kindle, flames of quenchlesse woe.
This fraud-blood-borne base-brood, dissembles, faines:
And with sweet words to hide sharp Swords takes pains.
'T's enough, that they ye^ Luther, Papists were;
This is their Faiths and their Religious Sphere.
See the Devotion of these brave Whip-bearers:
How they with whips are daily selfes-flesh Tearers.
Giving themselves forty Stripes lacking one:
For, this in thee (O blessed Saint Paul) was shown.
Francis (they say) Christ's wounds in's Body bare:
To Romes Stygmatickes, He Is the Pattern rare.
He only had with Christ Conformity:
In's body therefore ^hey fiue-wounds can spy.
I wish them, this devotion still to hold;
This whipping-Cheere, Christ's Coat, thus bought and sold.
But let their Whips three stinging Cords contain:
And Tiburn-like, triangled Marks remain.
But why do such huge Troops of Wenches throng?
In Popish Camps, Their Couents, struggling long?
Obedience (sure) and vowed Chastity,
They there perform; true Popish piety.
Nymphs strangely pregnant, this Religion makes:
And from Maid-mothers their sad burden takes.
In many Cells, this Hell-Spawne Papal Crew;
Vow-breaking Brood, their belly-gripes can show.
If, in Romes holy Coope, hat^ht-chickens peep:
It Is chaste enough, if closly they it keep.
In every Cloister and religious Cell,
Their order, Rites, and Rules, do all excel.
Each, for Religions Rule, his Order has:
Their Orders order Fools; disorder Faith.
Among all their honored Sects by Order graced:
Romes Order rules, Gods Order is thence chased.
Alas, does Romes Schismatike train by fractions
Sound praises Harp, or discords Dram to factions.
At Festiuals approach, Good-Workes they praise:
But to perform them use most long delays.
Feasts ornate, onerate, each month, each day:
That, all the year (almost) brings days of play.
Then, with their Feet (not Hearts) to Church they go:
Where prayers, performance, all their fingers show.
And who'd not swear that they to Christ pray not?
When, as amazed, they pray, but know not what.
Thus they their frequent Mattens Vespers utter:
And Orizons to Hee-Saints Shee-Saints mutter.
Thus, for Hearts Vows, Harps various harmony,
They give to God, Songs for Sincerity.
I often admire, Romes Bacchus-like oblation:
It Is strange, yet see, things of more admiration.
Popes Bulls, Popes Pardons, Oh how dear they be?
Yet, this dear ware's not worth a Rush to me.
Brave Balsome, the Agnus-Dei, Fools to gull:
I hold as dear as is a Lock of Wool.
In Romes rare Riches and facetious-Treasure,
None but mere Madmen, or fond-fooles, take pleasure.
He that is wise, Romes Bulls, blown bubbles makes:
He Is wise, Romes Fathers Lead, as Feathers takes.
What speak I of the Frauds and lying Tricks?
From which, this holy Sire much money picks.
Romes Popes, the Worlds prime Pedlers, Chapmen brave,
Much gain, from many Wares created have.
Are Merry-Stewards of all sorts of toys:
Chief Schoolmasters, of Schools of ioylesse Joys.
Yea, Romes quick- Sight, such money-Snares does frame,
As, to relate, do want, Means, Number, Name.
That gain may grow, and Rome may Riches see:
Base Hucksters, Pedlers, Panders, Popes will be.
What-ere Romes fingers feel, his eye does spy:
His Heel kicks-at, is holyer, instantly.
For, from this holy Prelates spicey-lips,
Into All-things, rare sweetness strangely skips.
If Satan's filthy throat beltch-vp Infection:
The Pope from's mouth breathes forth a fine Protection.
Besides, His holy Breath (strange to be told)
Makes all his Sons, the Holy Ghost to hold.
Creating Mass Priests, hands on them he lays:
Breathes; then, Receive the Holy Ghost, he says.
Since Christ said, so; He must needs wicked be:
Says, the Pope may not say it as well as He.
What-so is Christ's, the holy Father claims:
And, this* the Head of all sound Faith he names:
For, whatsoever Gods-Word our Savior gave,
The Pope, Christ's Little-Ape, the same must have:
As to Jerusalem, an Ass, Christ bare:
So, should the Pope ride Asses, Horses spare.
Alas, one-day, would nothing near suffice,
To reckon-vp all Romes fond Popperies.
By great good hap, to hunt for store of Coin,
The Pope has got neat Gins and Engines fine.
Since, never Bishop thriu'd by Subtlety:
The Popes Throne only thriues by knauerie.
Fair Marts of Arts, and Crafts to get much gold,
He has ordained; where mud for money's sold.
Antichrist, first Babe-like, then a Roarer stout,
To his great Grand-Sires dealt rich doales about.
But, now, his Tributes have a Fever got:
Which Grief, to cure, he must contriue a plot.
What once was held Jupiters Image brave:
Fishing Saint Peter's picture, now they will have.
But this I Would never believe, unless my Creed
With a strong Mountaine-mouing Faith he feed.
So strong, long, loose a Faith all Popelings find:
To trust whats'ere Popes wills their conscience bind.
Peter's Conclaue, long after him wan't known:
Nor Rome to be Popes Sacro-sancted Throne.
The Carriage of the Host, so up and down,
Knew no such use, as now is come to Town.
The Master of Romes Market, sells vain things:
And to Gods House, he, thus, base Riches brings.
He makes his Buyers, re-buy things fore-bought;
And yet the Sale his wares abateth naught.
He gives what is sold, what is given, he will keep, he will hold:
And the same-thing to many, at once, is sold.
He frees, for fees, and (if the Pope thou pay)
His pitteous-Pardon is thine own strait-way.
Romes Broker (trust it) has all sorts of ware;
And Pearls of Bliss, for Gold, can soon prepare.
Reprobate, run to Rome, for (there) behold:
Heavens holiest Household-stuff thou'l^ buy for gold.
Was this rare selling-Trade given Peter tho?
The Popes Bull (sure) shall never make me think so.
But now of Wonders wondrous rare, I write:
Unworthy Credit, worthy Fools to fright.
In many Temples made of Marble Stone.
Whereof proud Romes big brags abroad are blown.
Their Stones sweat Blood, their wood yields trickling-teares
But he whose Faith here fails, is freest from fears.
Their mumbling strange, makes devils, them obey:
And can enforce fiends fast to fly away.
Fairies, Hobgoblin^, Witches, Fantasies,
Can do no hurt, if the Pope play his prize.
In holy Fonts, their Bells baptized are:
Pay for a peale, and Sprites they quickly scare.
Incense they burn, their Altars to perfume:
Whereat the Devil soon flies forth of the room.
Yea Romes blessed Bishop by his sovereign skill,
Can make the fiercest Fiend fly when he will.
Satan would rage-about, his Chain being broke,
If Romes rare Art did not that yongster yoke.
Much talk they have of holy-Waters good:
Whether it is not more powr'full than Christ, blood?
For, from sins spots and blots it frees the soul:
And Satan's malice quickly can control.
If sprinkled with this holy-dew, thou art blessed:
For, of all Liquours, this is purely best.
Hemerobaptists, Papists rightly show:
Who, madly must, each day, have holy-dew.
O Puppet-playing Papists, Triflers vain:
Crafts-Enginers, Deluders, most profaine:
He (I believe) which taught you this blacke-Art:
Than Satan's self, plays better, Satan's part.
Holy Lambes-wooll, is very dearly sold:
This, the Popes Cassocke makes more rich with gold.
If the Pope sell pure Wax, it purges Sin:
This truth, than Truth it self more truth must win.
With the Popes finger, to be blessed is rare:
Deny this, and deny Seuens Stars there are.
O what great power, has holy Unction, Spittle,
Honey and Milk, to Grace? sure, it is not little.
But, if thy fiercest foes the cross do spy:
This conquering Sign, will (surely) make them fly.
Her circumspectiue care does cure, keep All;
Is the souls Target, Tower, to save from thrall.
I wonders write: By it, the world is guided:
And with the cross, Christ has his Crown divided.
Not Christ's coats hemme, not David's harp, to God;
Elias Mantle, Moses Sea-cutting Rod:
Unto the Cross, in power, half equal were,
For, it, even Gods own might and grace does bear.
When to the Cross Christ's Body was made fast:
Gods power upon it (doubtless) then, was cast.
Fly Birds in the Air? A sign of the Cross is made,
By their spread wings; by which sign, They are staid.
By Sails and Masts, cuts a ship Neptunes waves?
Even these do, make a Cross, and this, it saues.
The Plowman with a Plow-share, plowes the ground:
A blessing-Crosse, there, also (sure) is found.
A Crosse-line cuts the heavenly Axle-tree:
In Heaven the holy Cross (then) figured see.
On the Seashore men do a Cross erect:
The waves thereby That bound to pass are checked.
Poison, though drunk can do thee no great ha^me*
If, with the sign of the Cross thy lips thou charm.
Great Father, worthy Fauter of the Cross:
One question of It twixt us, let us toss.
If, in the Cross, the euill-sprite fears ought:
It must the matter or the form be thought.
Fears he the matter? why then d'ont the sight
Of Pyles of Wood, Stones, Metals, him affright?
Fears he the form and merely figured frame?
Why then do not all house-crosse-beames him tame?
A mad Crosse-worship then mad-Zeale displayes,
When in the Cross, a Cross to be she says.
But yet, the Crosse-waxe, which Popes Bulls do wear,
Is most unlike the Cross, which Christ did bear.
O Romes dear Dedalus, expert in toys;
Who, Wealth to win from fa^ Farm^s, them, emploies:
Think thou thus fondly me to Foolifie?
To trust thy Tricks as Truths sound certainty.
My Head (I then) should hold blunt, void of wit:
And wish thy Triple-Crowne thereon to sit.
Now with thy Nifles, Trifles, relics vain,
It Is time to end, since they no end contain.
For, thou with all, all sorts of relics rare,
Gods holy Temple to profane do dare.
Thou searchest Tombs, thy Relics to increase:
Not suffering buried Bodies rest in peace.
Thus thou to the vnknowne-land of Relics go:
And all thy Relics all the World-ore showest.
Thus what with Relics and such superstition,
To thee (O Christ) they scarce can give admission.
Yet, all is sound Religion: for, hereby,
From the Popes Coat, all Errour's forced to fly.
Thus, he to himself alone Christ's Church fast chains:
Here, dwells pure Truth; here, Faith, no Fraud remains.
And now the Old-worls mustie Household-stuffe,
Brings to my ready Muse, Matter enough.
Much, now, swims-vp, which, sunk to the bottom lay:
And store of Rubbish shines, now, clear as clay.
The Image brave of grave Antiquity,
Has Signs of new, Signs of true dignity.
Old Laws, old Sawes, Primitiue-Church, most sure,
All old-Traditions, old-Religion pure:
All are at Rome, seen plain, yet do thou doubt?
Pure and sure Faith to dwell, all Rome throughout?
Why, hence, it is plain, they Faith retain, that they
Have Gods pure worship banished quite away.
And Rome for all her new-come Novelties,
Straight brings out Signs of old Antiquities.
And hereby Papists, Gibeonites, are grown:
For, All that is theirs, is old, and ancient known.
That gentle Asses-taile, which Christ bestrid,
They have with Gold and gorgeous gems quite hid.
Joseph's cast..coats, times Teeth, have torn and worn:
Yet, Signs of their first-beautie, 'bout are borne.
A Pot the Virgin Mary's Milk does hold:
O it is dear Ware, indeed, and dearly sold.
Much moldy Masse-Hosts in hid Pixes lie:
Which smell of Mice-prodigious Battery.
He which does sacred Sions wealth, call these;
Let him Milk Waspes, and join together Bees.
Yet, lest Romes Mill grind thee to powder small;
Though Faith may fail, thou must believe them All.
So many Bones, they will of one Martyr show;
That (past perhaps) the like in no Ox grow.
And often for Martyrs bones, such bones are shown,
As formerly, were Hogs and Dogs bones known.
Scarcely one tomb, one coarses leauings keeps;
So quick, each relic from Sepulchers creepes.
Rome, teeming Rome of fraud and cousenage full:
These Guiles holds godly, grossly men to gull.
But He that is well in's wits, spits at them all:
And smites them with Gods Sword Spiritual.
Alas, how much of Christ's most holy Blood,
Is daily drunk by Romes dry Saints so good?
Yet, a poor drop of Christ's his blood most pure,
This zealant Bottles-vp (believe it sure.)
This rank Religious Prelate puissant,
These things to please God wond'rously, does vant.
But I believe no Pythagorean-Asse,
Nor his brute thundering Threats a pin do pass.
Delphicke Typhaeus, rattling rage, I scorn;
His deadlyest drams (if not drunk) may be borne.
His comb is cut, his power impaired, of late,
Nor buts he half so hard with his three- crowned pate.
This great Cumanus, yerst, did Monarchs fright:
But, since his horns were hewed, they scorn his might.
For, Vulcans Caecus, vomits but in vain;
Fumes with fond fury, flames, which, Most disdain.
Yet, Romes Law-giuing Moses horns has left:
Only, He Is of Noes noble Arc bereft.
A CORROLLARIE TO THE PREMISES.
MAny more Maruels marvelous
In Rome are kept most Curious,
Which in a Bundle and brief Scope,
I Will binde-vp closely with a Rope.
Christ's Girdle, Shoes, Coat, Hair, they have,
His Nightcap, Napkin, Shirt, they save:
Last Suppers household Implements,
His Cradle, wounding- Instruments:
His Crown of Thorns, the Sponge and Reed,
His Sheet, Whip, Lance that made him bleed.
Our Ladies Haire-Lace, Slippers good,
Comb, Girdle, Gown, Ring, Cloak, Hair, Hood;
Much, given by Will, to the Triple-Crowne,
Pure, precious Things, her gay Silke-Gowne.
John Baptists Head, kept with great care,
Saint Peter's Key, Crook, Sword, and Chair:
Full many Stones, that Steven slew,
Old- shewred, sure, pure Manna-dew:
The Holy-Ghosts Claws, Wings, and Bill,
Michaels Sword and Buckler still.
Of Euch'rist Iarres, large Histories,
Entities many, Quidities:
Inexplicate, Inextricate
Contentions how to consecrate.
Popes Palaces and Princely Courts,
Crimes Sanctuaries, Sin supports;
Vice-teaching Schools, ills Enginers,
A Shop of shameless Slanderers.
A gaping Gulf, great Giants-court,
A College where Prey-Birds resort.
A House of boystrous blustering Winds;
A Seed-plot for Seditious-Minds.
A filthy Mart of Holy-things,
Which to Gods house abuses brings.
A fierce Confounder of firm Faith,
Which Romes most rammish Father has
Abolisht quite, by deuillish Dreams;
And thereby quencht-out Truths bright Beams:
That Catacath'licke Popes might place
Romes Cacolike Religion base.
Religion, veterate, false, ill-bred,
Past all Hels Spel^ that er'e I read.
A dead, deformed, f^ultring Faith,
Blunt, blockish, which no Groundwork has.
Hid Mystery of Iniquity,
Masterpiece of Impuritie.
Many a Souls unsavory Me^te;
Worme-wood to All that thereof eat.
Sweet Nectar most pestiferous,
A deadly Drug pernicious.
Couents in Combats duellizing,
Papisticke Armies martiallizing;
With Censures censuring diversely
As with Foes Blows even forced to die.
And many Scotists and Thomists,
And Occamists and Gabr'ellists.
And Nominals, Reals not Any,
And Syllogists, and Critics many.
And many Muncks and Seculars:
And Regular Irregulars.
And many sottish Censurers:
And many sly Ly-Enginers.
And many Rowles of rare Decrees,
And many Romish Vanities.
And many Lightning sore Complaints,
And many thundering strict Constraints.
And many Sects and Sophisters,
And many bawdy Batchelers.
And many Saints most inquinated,
And many Nointed and Bald-pated,
And many burned with sacred Zeal,
And Foes and Fools to the Co^mon-Weale.
And Parricides and Regicides,
And Demi-Gorgon Popes besides.
And many Card'nals Coapt in Red,
And many a proud vainglorious Head,
And many dect with Miters, Rings,
And many Whores, and fat Kitchins.
And many Hee-Saints, Tombs most rare,
And many Shee-Saints, Chapels fair.
And many Idols, and Colosses,
And many Masses, Asses-Glosses.
And many Head-Bana's, and Head-Tyres,
And many Droues of fatted Friars,
And many Miters, many Hoods,
And many, more, most impious Goods,
And Bishoprics, mere Mockeries,
And Bishops, Papal Trumperies.
And monstrous Lies of Miracles,
And of Loud- Lies strange Oracles,
And Toys to load three-hundred Barks.
O then, Who-e're These sees and marks,
Must needs cry-out in admiration,
O Rome, the Wonder of each Nation*
Deo soli omnis gloria.
UPON THIS BEE-HIVE OR HONEY-COMBE.
THis Booke's a Be, not Elephant: Much Gain
The Readers Care, not Writers Crop, may bring;
Small Bee^, small Iems, small Pearls, much good contain;
Is Thy small Good (small Book) a baser Thing?
Fools in their Breasts (as Chests) Envy do treasure;
But in such Riches (Reader) take no pleasure.
FINIS.

