REASONS METAMORPHOSIS, AND RESTAVRATION. Whereunto are annexed two other
Treatises. viz.

1. Choice and Applications. 2. My Friend.
By Charles Goldwell Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods word.

LONDON Printed by B.A. for John Pyper. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr. Lionell Cranfield Knight, Master of his
Majesty's Court of Wards, and Liueries, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
WHat I have read of Sisimus; experience resolves me of your Honor: that you
are temperate, virtuous, liberal: whereof my sight, hearing, feeling, have
made me, a sensible, and just witness. Therefore though I were often
discouraged, whilst my unpracticed hand was traveling in this Tract, and
thought (as David, when he put off Saul's armor, because he could not go with
it, being not accustomed) to have retired, with the loss of some pains:
especially seeing, both opportunity, place, and requisite furniture, were
wanting to favor my attempt: yet these reasons, not ceasing to allure me, I
followed them, faintly (as I could) so far, as any time would give me leave;
For as there can be none, more challenging then your Honor: so great favors,
freely deignd unto me: so would my negligence (at lest to strive, in some
measure) to requite them, I considered, sprinkle me, with the fowlest blemish
of ingratitude. And finding your Honor so fit a personage, in regard of the
gracious temper of your mind, to Patronize a Work of this nature, which
handles that ancient argument, given at the first conquest, of our first
Parents in the Garden (Pleasure; and Ambition) (both so incident, to their
noblest wisest, and mightiest offspring after the flesh, that Saint Paul in this
respect notes, their condition to be most dangerous: and consequently, that
they have most need of all others, to be put in remembrance) whereof I have
apertly, and briefly displayed the vanity: as being the maine, and professed
adversaries of a conscionable care, of religious duties; I humbly crave your
Honorable acceptance of it: that it passing under the protection of such
virtue, others may be animated, (like Adonijah flying for the safegaurd of his
life, to the horns of the Altar) to hasten from these extremes, to the
constant, and safe Pillars of Temperance, and a Christian rejoicing, which I
have like wise pitched up unto their view, and these will be able, as to defend
them from infamy in this life: so to present them blameless, in the day of our
common apperance. I must acknowledge my self to have written this Treatise, in
a boisterous Tempest, that by looking downward, I might not see the threatening
clouds over my head, nor greatly fear their fall: therein imitating Ulysses;
that stopped his ears with wax; and would be tied to the maine mast of his
ship, that he might not hear the Sirens to his destruction: so have I put of
with silence, occasioned by this employment, the busy whisperings, and
sometimes the public clamors, of a distempered multitude: that I might retain
patience, in their highest displeasure, which was kindled with no other fire,
but of mine earnest, and double industry, in serving two allied Chapels in one
day. For which causes, I knowing these labors of mine, unworthy of so grave,
and approved a judgment: submissly desire, that the sincerity of my
intention, may rectify, or at least excuse my faults, as your Honor shall
meet with them. The Lord speak peace unto your soul: and grant your Honor
many prosperous days on earth, that God may be glorified in you, you in his
Christ.

Your Honors most humbly devoted in all christian service. Charles Goldwell.

Lectori.
Cum serpentino, mea sit caro sparso veneno,
Et men's criminibus, commaculate suis.
Cum nos pelliciant, illectamenta, volentes
Saepe sit and sacro, nunc opus eloquio:
Hic ege (quem facile scripsit meacura) libellus
Sit medicina meis, (opto) tuisque malis.
Thine in the Lord. C. G.

REASONS Metamorphosis, and Restoration.
MAN (if relinquisht to himself) were comparable to the veriest Brute for
immanity (says Saint Augustine) whom Chrysostom affirms to be the worst of
all Evils; Nulla homine, immanior fera si sibi relinqueretur.
for as much as every irrational creature has but one evil (and proprie) of
property belonging to it, but Man abounds in all: So that though he wash him
with Niter, and take him much Soap, yet his iniquity is marked before God,
Ierem. 2.22.

Now the first thing that transports the mind, from settling on the most
settled, and sweetest happiness; is voluptuousnes; His Reason in the Infancy
approves least the integrity of manners, dissolute Pleasures best: and this
is warranted from the pretense of weakness, which refuses laudable, and
virtuous actions, as too difficult, such as most barren of content; and sucketh
on the breast of delights, as only suitable to the tenderness thereof. In the
growth and maturitie, when it is able to distinguish according to the worth,
and excellency of things, and should therefore make discretion of it self,
from that mere nature which is in Brutes, not only in the appetite, but also
in the choice, and prosecuting of good: then the objects of Pleasure grow more
specious and delectable in our eyes, and we more diligent to execute her
unlawful motions: for that we are then cunning to discharge our parts with her.

This proceeds not from the debilitie of Reason, but partly from the force of
allurements, which are in Pleasure, and partly from Natures refractarie
headiness, which having gotten some advantage of Reason, will be ruled no
longer by it; for so it appears, Nature is the Beast, Reason the Bridle, and
Man holds the Reins; Man sits fast upon the Beast, but here loses the
reputation of manhood, in that he cannot curb and guide it as he should; but
suffers himself to be run away withal: so preventing the due efficacy, and
genuine operation of his Reason, through unskillfulness to use it.

Behold then Pleasura, Her policy.
amiably adorned with whatsoever may persuade the senses, stands sweetly
inuiting: Her lips drop as an Honey comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil:
Prou. 15.12. Licentious Nature runs lasciuiously unto her, ignorant Man is
carried violently with it, and abused Reason, as a dumb Picture, must neither
see nor speak, that best Minister of the soul, is peremptorily put to silence.

This has advanced the head of Pleasure; Her preferment.
There is not a vanity in her shop, but cries out to our shame, In me
turbaruunt luxuriosa, proci: A wanton troop,
incenst with lust,
(with hearts resolved)
upon me thrust.


So she having fortified her self, with friends of all sorts, the Presidents
have chiefly given her preferment, and now she sits as a Lady, and says; I
am, and none else, I shall not sit as a Widow, nor see the loss of Children.

It was woe with Rahel, Her prosperity.
with many natural and godly Mothers, in the bitter tempest of their tears
which fell for their Children, because they were not; But Pleasure is an
Harlot, and speeds better, not subject to this loss, not capable of this
sorrow; she is ever in youth and lust, ever pregnant, and ever bringing forth:
if she bury one, she has one borne: if she lose an hundred for one, she
bewailes them not; being sure of a motherly respect, so long as but one ^iueth.
For her dition and command is as spaciously extended as our Earth, Super
Garamantas, and Indos prosert imperium It was said to the Egyptian Woman, whom
Solomon married (being a Type of a Christ's Church) she should have Children, As
far forth as it consifted of the Gentiles.
whom she should make Princes through all the earth, Psalm 45.16. This inuerted
is verified of Pleasure, as the most notorious Church-robber: there are Princes
in all Lands whom she makes her Children; this good luck has she with her
honor, to see an infinite augmentation of it, and bring all the world to
Idolatry for her sake, whilst it passes that sacred testimony of her, which
the Ephesians profanely of their Diana: Great is voluptuousness.

As Jonathan loved David, Our dotage.
so are our hearts knit to pleasure, and we love it as our own souls: when
they parted they wept, till David exceeded; if any sinister casualty sequester
us from our pleasure, we wring the hands, with sighs and tears, pining in
discontent, ready to despair; shall we receive good at the hands of God, and
not be patient of the evil? No, we must have health, without disease; wealth,
without want; liberty, without restraint; friends, without failing, or else
our passion breaks out so far beyond the bounds of patience, that no
contemplation can appease it, nor comfort arrest it, til it be wearied with
that careful and bootlesse Elegy of a too fond Father, Oh our Pleasure, would
God we had dyed when we parted from thee.

Although She gains this universal love, by the incestuous prostituting her
self to her whole progeny, so many as have but the least vnde, to pay her with
all: (leaving the rest, as the careless Ostrich does her Eggs, in the sands
of hourly dangers and adversity) yet the more Noble and notable the
personages are, the more obsequiously does she incline to their condition,
presenting her self fairer then her self, with an artificial complexion;
and framing her dittie in a stately and heroical style unto them: and for as
much as diverse are diversely affected, some love her at home; others would enjoy
her abroad; she has her several stations on the coasts of several Countries,
where (like the tempting blossoms of A tree, whose blossoms are poison.
Alpina, or the fair seeming fruit of Sodom) she pronounces her huc ades;
come hither and taste, according to their several likings. Upon their
arrival, she would seem to be at large expense for their entertainment,
spreading her banquets in every street, in every house, in every chamber,
where she acquaints them with her bed, decked with ornaments, carpets, and laces
of Egypt, and perfumed with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cynamon, Prou. 7.16. that after
they have surfeited at board, her proffered medeale may be the better accepted,
which is thus compounded; Come let us take our fill of love till the morning. A
pill ouerlaid with Gold; but of this virtue to purge the soul from piety, and
the pursse from plenty. Indeed she has nothing, whereof to show choice to her
customers, but a pack of odious sins, and those of unspeakable variety; and
therefore is termed Malorum esca, the bait of Evils, which who so deuoureth,
shall be surely caught, and drawn into a maze of impieties, to lay sin upon
sin, luxury upon gluttony, pride upon covetousness, irreligion upon
security, till neither line upon line, nor precept upon precept can help him
out, but he sink farther into a gulf of irreparable miseries. That certain
rich man, (vnwerthy to have his name mentioned in the Euangell, which was never
to be inserted in the book of life) swallowed her every day in his delicious
dier, put her on daily in his sumptuous apparel, and daily locked her up in
his glittering coffers: and this so benumbed his heart, against all sense of
grace, mercy, and goodness, that for the same cause, after death, being in
hell, it was told him from heaven: Thou art tormented, Luke 16.25. and that so,
as no man could repair unto him with tidings of relaxation, or present comfort.

The form of Pleasures Commonweal, is Demecraticall: and whereas Aristotle
constitutes four kinds of Democraties, this of hers is the last, and very
worst of the^, where every one lives as he list himself, without respecting
or regarding the Laws, and Magistrates; and as he says of that, so is the
administration of this tyrannical, through her slatteries and persuasions: the
Kings Guard is of Citizens, the Tyrants of Strangers Pleasure is not guarded
with virtues, which are civil and princely; but with vices, which are
barbarous, and foreign: by whom she labors to subdue and yoke virtue,
that it may bear no sway, nor make any show among them: or else to put it to
utter exile, that without fear of opposition, or interruption, she may rule
and domineere as she will; hence is that truth of Cicero. In voluptatis regno,
non potest virtus consistere. Virtue can make no quiet residence in the
Territories of Pleasure.

Christ authorizing his Disciples to go abroad into the world, and preach,
said; I send you as sheep among Wolves: In the manner of which his Mitto, he
(as it were) paints the World, with an open mouth, roaring at piety, and ever
ready to devour the professors thereof: neither did they discharge their
office, only with long hazard, but at length, to the loss of their lives;
Those earthly Spirits, that draw breath in darkness, cannot endure the sacred
sunshine to detect their sensualities. The auaritious Pharisees, heard Christ
reprove Covetousness, and they mocked him, Luke 16.14. Moses sought to make
peace between two Hebrews that strove, and he that did the wrong,
reproachfully tanted him, Who made thee a man of authority, and a Judge over
us? Exodus 2.14. When the blind man restored to sight, confessed Christ to the
faithless Jews, they cast him out with this reprehension, Thou art altogether
borne in sin, and do thou teach us? John 9.34. Religion suffers many a
sharp repulse, by them that are the Proctors of Pleasure, to plead for her
sins: they remove it farthest from the heart, and resolve to have no
encounter with it; If it be a doctrine of renouation, and new birth, without
which no man can see God, they reject it out of ignorant admiration, as a thing
impossible, saying with Nicodemus, How can a man be borne when he is old? John
2.4. If of divine worship and holy duties, then auersly with Gallio. Iudices
nos horum nolumus esse: We will be no Judges of these things, Act. 18.15. They
are so infatuated with the cup of her sorceries, that (as an Infant chooses a
Rattle before a wedge of Gold) they run affectionately after her featherie
toys, and cast off heavenly treasures: so eluded with her impostures, that
they can discern nothing in the true color and proportion, from whence they
confound Christ with Belial, sin with Sanctimonie, loosing the sense of
grace, the horror of their sins, the desire of things eternal, the fear of
punishments infernal, even by that near and arct conjunction they have with
corporal delights. The natural man perceives not the things that are of God,
for they are foolishness unto him. 1. Cor. 2.14.

I said in my heart (says the Preacher) Go to now, I will prove thee with
toy, therefore take thou pleasure in pleasant things, and behold this also is
vanity. I said of laughter, thou art mad: and of joy, what is this that thou
do? Eccles. 2.1.2. He did here but purpose this course to himself, which
after he had considerately discussed, reputauit errorem, he concluded to be so
erroneous, and so merely vain, that it was not worth the undertaking: yet
afterward, he withheld not his eyes from whatsoever they desired, nor withdrew
his heart from any joy: and when he had looked on all his works, and on all
his travel, this was the sum again, Behold, all is vanity, and vexation of
the spirit. So that if any Libertine, distracted too far with the
concupiscence of deceitful joys, shall seem to challenge his judgment in
the first, it will be safe for him to credit his experience at the last, and
not venture on so slender a bridge, over an horrible abyss.

Immoderate laughter stirred up by outward aspects and occasions, compared with
Christian sobriety, which should terminate our behavior, is more then reputed
madness, and such joy makes us seem to do we know not what. As well might
Sampson have ioyed in the cruelty of the Philistines, when they put out his
eyes, etc. Judge. 16. as we in those transitories, which by the fixing of our
hearts upon them, obcecate our understanding, and so become the breeders of our
confusion: and Saul as well when he took his sword in his hand wherewith he
slew himself; we take hold of vanity, and falsehood a refuge, which pierce the
soul with anxious cares, and wound it to the second death; and what is it for
us to triumph in these things?

Christ himself chose the hardest part, a part full of asperitie, and
bitterness, as it is noted from the evidence of his manifold poverty, and the
absence of all terrene pleasures, in his conversation, in his death, and by
that means entered into his glory; whose whole life was to us, disciplina
morum, that we should imitate him, in morality Moses conceived no matter of
rejoicing in the pleasures of sin, therefore accepted rather to suffer
affliction with the godly: and many Saints wandered up and down, in Sheep
skins, and in Goats skins, Egentes angustati, afflicti, destitute,
bestreighted, afflicted, Heb. 11.37. And all these through faith obtained good
report, ver. 39. But the Princes of Israel then waxed careless of requisite
virtues: then forgate to sorrow for the afflictions of their brethren, and then
loathed the patience of godly adversity, when they betook themselves to ease,
to fare daintily, to the drinking of Wine, to Music, and singing, Amos 6. So
when we are wrapped in this supputed heaven, which we are seldom out of: we
say, of laughter, thou art grace; and of joy, thou art the sweetest solace:
looking to the souls health through these pleasures, as at a remote object
through a prospectiue glass, which makes it to be thought near, being in
truth, far off: whilst we mistake these gross, and vanishing mists, to be
pellucidum Coelum, as if we were then in Abraham's bosom, when we are in Satan's
bondage.

Belshazzar, and his noble associates, when they were in carousing of wine,
praised their gods of Silver and Gold, etc. supposing there was some virtue in
them to do them good: but what saw Belshazzar? Found he not a God above all his
gods, that did annihilate their power, and frustrate his own expectation? He
saw an apparition, and was it not a little one? It was but a hand, but it was
sent from heaven; and was it not a mighty one? His heart was hautie, and his
limbs lusty, yet could he not behold it, without the fainting of the one, and
the feebleness of the other: before he knew the true meaning of it, his
countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, a sad presage of a
fearful consequence; he dishonored his Creator, and did glory in the
Creature, therefore was he degraded from his honor, deposed from his kingdom,
and deprived of his life, for he was to light.

As it cannot be (says Chrysostom) that fire should flame in Water: so
neither can the heart labor of compunction for sin, when it is taken up, and
made insensible with pleasure: for these are repugnant one to the other; Illa
enim matter est fletus, haec matter est risus, illa cor constringit, ista
dissoluit; Because that is the mother of lamentation, this of lightness, that
composeth, and settles the heart, this dissolues, and disorders it. It makes us
laud the gods of our delights, as if they were powerful to deliver us, and
contemn the Author, and finisher of our faith, as if the Story of his
mercy, power, and passion, were but a fable. In quaffing we extol Bacchus,
take him for our high Priest, and pay him tenth upon our knees, Alij stantes,
discumbentes alij, omnes ex animo which way soever, all do it with all their
hearts: in banqueting, to Epicurus; in Music, to Apollo, we swear all
allegiance; having no more stay of our affections, nor soundness of fidelity,
then to become servants unto al, that will serve us but with a fit of slippery
content. The finger of the Holy Ghost has written our judgment, we have read
it, we have heard it, but are no whit changed, nor abashed. Christ has spoken
as it were from heaven, to every one of us, with that voice that came to Saul,
Why deest thou persecute me? But we neither tremble, nor ask what will thou
Lord that we shall do? We are more brazen, then timorous Belshazzar, more
impudent then trembling Foelix, more obdurate then half persuaded Agrippa,
whom no inuectiues against sin, no lift up voice of any Crier on earth, no
judgments exemplified from above, no terrors conceived from beneath, can truly
convert to true Christianity: When I saw (says Jehovah) how that by all
occasions rebellious Israel had played the harlot, I cast her away, and gave
her a bill of diuorcement: yet her rebellious Sister Judah was not afraid, but
she went also and played the harlot, Ier. 3.8. After both their backslidings
in fearful rebellion, and the manifestation of Gods indignation toward them,
we also a little Sister unto them, Can. 8.8. come on careless, fearelesse, and
commit fornication with our pleasures. It is recorded by Plutarch, of Julius
Caesar, that for his singular sobriety and temperance, he was the only
mirror of Italy, who by ouercomming himself, overcame all Europe; A worthy
precedent for the imitation of Greatness, who are to know, that Parui sunt
foris arma, nisi est consilium domi. To master our little world, is the first
step to the mastery of the whole world; albeit they mean not to contend for
Countries, vi, and armis, yet are they bound to endeavor virtute, and
abstinentia, to that christian fortitude, whereby not to fear what man can do
unto them. Let Temperance keep the door of the stomach, and exclude
superfluities, and the foul spirit, shall find no place of habitation in the
heart, whereby to subject it to worldly fears: for that which is recti iudicij
tenax, doctrinae capax, bonae famae semper auida, salubria atque vtilia creans,
as is Temperance, of a right and orderly judgment, of an able capacity for
doctrine, covetous of a good report, creating profitable and wholesome Theorems
in the soul, is to well resolved, and to heavenly affected, to let in so
hostile a guest, so dangerous a truce-breaker between God and Man. Daniel,
that he might not be entised to forget his Religion, and accustomed sobriety
(for so was the Kings purpose in appointing him provision of his own costly
fare) determined in his heart, that he would not defile himself therewith, but
eat pulse, and drank water, being a certain preservative for them both; for
so Origin observes, that sobriety is the mother of all virtues; and Saint
Austine, Dan. 1.8.12.
Est virtutis singular auxilitam, cuncta cum ratione disponens: It is a
singular aid to virtue, disposing all things with reason: For which cause
could not the most temperate Agesilaus be overcome by the importunity of the
Noble Thrasians, to taste of their prepared dainties; he fed only on their
bread and drink, commanding his Foote-men and slaves, to feed if they would
upon such cheer, for that (he said) Princes might not pamper themselves, with
delicate cheer, and Wines, but use abstinence, and temperance; the one being
vicious and shameful; the other a free Nurse to virtue and Fame. He respecting
himself as (he was) a King turned over this pleasure, as a sordide and
slavish exercise to his meanest servants, least using it himself, he might
through forgetfulness, have become as infamous as the worst of them, having
lost that Jewel, which is of best note, and most valuable, in the Diadem of
Princes.

So did Eliah, and John Baptist, nourish the Spirit by Prayer, and abstinence:
Mat. 3.4.
his meat was no flesh, neither drank he Wine, nor strong drink, Luke 1.15.
The other was contented with bread, and flesh as the Ravens brought it him
morning and evening, and drank of the river. 1. King. 17.6. Woe be to thee, O
Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes (meaning Magistrates and
Rulers) eat in the morning, (that is) intemperatly, for surfeiting, and not
for strength. Prou. 10.16. In this sense spoke Queen Bethsheba, to her Son
King Solomon: It is not good for Kings O Lemuell, Pro. 31.4.5
it is not good for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink, least
he drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment of all the children
of affliction.

We may stay our eyes at home, upon our famous and sacred Lemuel, who has (as
uprightly as ever any) obeyed the voice of wisdom his Mother, to eat her
meat, and drink the Wine that she has drawn, Prou. 9.5. And published the
fruits thereof, to the incomparable comfort, and satisfaction of his people,
feeding them with a faithful and true heart, and ruling them prudently with
all his power, Psalm. 78.73. of whom all our Israel, impartially confesses,
They have heard the judgment which the King has judged, and they fear the
King, for they see the wisdom of God is in him to do justice. 1. King. 2.28.

Would the Stars of our Sphere, I mean not the sixed, but the wandering ones,
take luster from this Sun, considering themselves to be eyes of a maigne
body, through whom it should see to walk safely: never would so many stumble
at their vices, lying in the way, as having nothing to excuse it withal, but
want of light. It were not credible, that the servant would smoke his
flitches, with his Masters Indian fuel, and after bathe them in the foolish
forfeiture of his wits, till he farther ieopard his salvation, by the
heedelesse aggravating of hartfrighting oaths, in his sight and hearing; were
such commanders any better then dark Lanthornes, which shine not back to
those that follow them. How clearly do they cast off, not only the desert of
imposed dignity of Men, seeing that, Nemo est dignus nomine hominis, qui vnum
diem totum, velit esse in voluptate. He is unworthy to be called a Man, that
will waste one whole day in pleasure. Whereof Saint Paul rendereth a strict and
unanswerable reason, in telling us the end of all things is at hand; and
therefore we must be sober, and watch in prayer. There is no allowance
permitted unto us, for the loosing any time, in offensive pleasure: for then is
there no hope that we shall stand in the judgment Psalm. 1.
, or quit our selves like men, if we neglect to prepare our souls, with those
commanded Graces (sobriety and Prayer) against the coming of the Lord; and
yet is a day but a minute, that is, but a moment, that as nothing with them
that will make to morrow as this day, and much more abundant, crying out after
delight as the sluggard for his sleep, yet a little more, so holding out their
progress. Until the strong men bow themselves, and the grinders cease, and
the dust return to the earth as it was. Eccles. 11.13.

It was the demand of the Prophet Haggai to Zerubbabel, a Prince of Judah, and
Iehoshua, the high Priest, concerning the Temple of the Lord. Is it time for
your selves to dwell in your scaled houses, and this house lie waste? The
pleasure taken in stately edifices, is oftentimes enough to drown the care of
Gods service: they being now become (as in the old world) holes of
Cockatrices, and teguments of iniquity, where out seldom creepes a virtue,
for want of grace within, to give it liuelihood and strength; rank prouender
grows about them plentifully: but latet anguis in herbis, it is not gathered,
nor spent, without sin and shame. Christ's impotent members lie begging of the
crumbs, (which Christ in his own person vouchsafed from the Table of his mercy,
to the Canaanitish Dog) but there is no man to give unto them, for (as Saint
Hierome truly) Cor habet in ventre gulosus, lasciuius in libidine, cupidus in
lucro; The glutton has such a mind on his belly, the wanton on his lust, and
the auarous on his gain, that by that time the Cormorant has spent all, in
feeding his luxurious appetite, and the covetous spared all, to the consumption
of his own carkases; the poor may depart empty as they came, bearing in their
hunger bitten cheeks, and dejected Spirits, an example of that approved rule;
Semper eris pauper, si pauper es.

If (wretched soul)
thou live in need,
The richer sort
will let thee bleed:
The Dogs may lecke
thy smarting sores,
But pity none,
peeps out of doors.
Sometimes the pretense of Justice, in observing the Statutes, is a bar to
their devotion: but Oh! unjust cruelty, when as their love to true Justice
indeed, is nothing less then they would herein praise it to be: Experience
proclaiming another right deplorable cause thereof to be. Nil tamen attuleris,
etc. For gifts blind the eyes of the wise: yet so, that they will never see to
undertake the indigent, till they have thus put them out.

Gods house calls upon such pompeous Landlords for tribute, to repair her
ruins: but they have so many evils, Devils, fashions, conformities,
deformities, lie nibling at their bags, gaping for maintenance, that Caesar
cannot have his due, neither can they spare ought to the honor of God; whereas
to the former, Noctes, atque dies,
patet atri ianui Ditis.
Their bags, the mouth
of Plutoes sable cave
Which bear this thirsty
Motto (still we crave;)
Lie ever open, to the
hand of sin,
Where Grace in vain,
petitions to come in.
It shall neither move them to passion nor compassion, to pity, nor piety, to
see the gates of Sion (which the Lord so highly prefers) to lie waste.
Again, this Sanctuary opens her door that the King of glory (according to
his promise) may come in, when his servants shall repair to that place where
he has put his Name, to do him worship. But here is found usually, as a
confluence of a great many, so not of many great: whereof some rest satisfied
with a few typid petitions of their own at home, being only a morning
sacrifice for the whole day: and offered up in a Closet, without any testimony,
but of their own consciences, that is enough to free them of hypocrisy, and
(as they are persuaded) to obtain remission here, and a reward in heaven.
Others hear them from other men, but without a mental consent, or joining of
the heart, as the sequel of their behavior, shamefully confesses; neither of
them, loves a fiery zeal: for affecting a carnal prosperity, they cannot
bear, to be eaten up with the zeal of Gods house. Howbeit the Church stands
not as a Rock in the Sea, to be avoided, but as a Cliffe on the shore, to
show us that thither we should direct our course. Neither did the people of God
in their banishment, vow the prelation of Jerusalem to their chiefest joy, but
that they were there most happy, where they could freely serve the Lord. For
all this they having builded their sumptuous houses, by the might of their
power, and for their honor, (as proudly said Nabuchadnezzar) they resolve it
is time for them, wholly to repose in these, and leave their rooms in the Lords
house empty.

The Adamites were a Sect, whose custom modesty is loath to mention. But they
devised them a Church after an hot-house; for the space of service time, they
went all naked, Men and Women, and the virgins preached unto the rest. Are not
such houses, made (if I may so say) our most frequented Churches? Or I would
such Preachers were not most reverenced, and best beloved. Being with them,
our Adamites (as those other) judge themselves in Paradise; one word distilling
from the tongue of such an Oratresse, gains souls and bodies to her service,
more then many vigilant Divines can overcome to God. The Ark of the Lord was
accounted the glory of Israel; The glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken. 1. Sam. 4.22. But we like Gentiles of uncircumcised hearts,
do not so esteem of his Temple, but cast up our accounts another ways, and
go a whoring after heathenish abominations: yet not imagining a Queen of
Heaven, but imagining an earthly Mistress to worship her: who works a stranger
effect with her flexible audience, then Saint Paul's long Sermon did with
Eutichus: he fell down in a sleep, and was taken up dead: Act. 20.9.
notwithstanding his heavenly doctrine: but they, if half dead, are by her
mortal incantations, thoroughly quickened and revived.

This is a pleasure conceived partly in the eye; and for that the Philosophers
condemn our choice; saying, it is praeclarius, and homine dignius, Coelum
potius quam coelata intueri, and hoc pulcherrimum opus (inter micantibus
astrorum luminibus tanquam floribus adornatum) quam ficta, and picta, and
gemmis distincta mirars: More excellent and worthy of a Man, to behold the
Heavens, then any thing fashioned, and set forth by the art of Man: and rather
to admire the beauty of that fabric, graced with luminous Lamps (to put us in
mind of our Creator, of our calling, of our Country, that the first is God, and
not Man: secondly, that we being christians, have lastly not Earth, but Heaven
for our Country) the^ (as the sense may fairly bear it) women (in respect of
their monstrous, uncouth disguisments, feigned) painted, and adorned with
Jewels.

It has also its conception; partly in the ear, by reason of effeminate
adulation, and bewitching blandishments: for (as Lactantius aply) Oration cum
suauitate decipiens capit mentes, and quo voluerit impellit: Speech sweetly
seasoned,
does entrap men's minds,
And as it list seduce,
in sundry kinds.


And forasmuch as such pellacious charms, do undoubtedly draw them to a
dislike, and aspernation of the simple speech of the Gospel of Christ, and are
irratamenta vittorum, quae ad corrumpendos animos potissime valent; the spurs
of vices which mghtily prevail to the corruption, and deprauation of our
souls, it is needful to conclude with the Author of these words, Ergo
tollenda sunt nobis, We must therefore void, abandon, and renounce them.

WHAT, AND HOW FAR PLEASVRES ARE lawful, and to be used.
ALbeit affliction was dictated by Christ to his Disciples, and through them to
all the faithful, for the very portion, which they are to expect and receive
from the World, in this world: yet was it not with an absolute inhibition, of
all outward pleasure, or any full exception taken thereunto; it being meant
only so much as was necessaty for them because it is a Point in Christ's
Church, that through many tribulations they must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And the godly have been sometimes excited by the Prophets, from God
himself, to rejoice, in regard he would remove this grieuance from the^, and
in stead of affliction, cast out their enemies, giving them rest, and a release
from his judgments, Rejoice, O Daughter Sion, be joyful, O Israel, be glad,
and rejoice with all thy heart, O Daughter Jerusalem; the Lord has taken away
thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemies, Zep. 3.14.15.

The Preachers comparatiue position; It is better to enter into the house of
mourning, then into the house of feasting, does not overthrow our privilege of
some recreation: it proouing chiefly the prestantiority of mourning, as it
serves to express the mortification of our members that are on earth; and the
inconvenience of inordinate feasting, as it is the usual brother of evil
concupiscence.

There is a twofold joy lawful, and granted: 1. The one a mere outward joy:
rising either from the beneficial temper, and constitution of Nature, of
which, Prou. 17.22. A joyful heart causes good health: by this means do
some lightly ouerpasse crosses, and accidents of trouble, with small
imparagement to their health and content, which do melt and consume the hearts
of others. This then is requisite for the occasioning and conservation of
health: to the recuperation and maintenance whereof, upon the fainting or
deficiency of nature, is also commended unto us, the use of Oil, and Wine, and
Bread, Psalm. 104.15. 1. Tim. 5.23. and under them, of all Creatures that may
profit to this purpose. Zibah met David flying from Absalom, with two Asses,
laden with provision, and a bottle of wine, that the faint might drink in the
wilderness. 2. Sam. 16.1.2. Wine comfort the living, Eccles. 10.19. Should
I leave my Wine (said the Vine) whereby I cheer God, and Man, and go to
advance me above the trees. Iud. 9.13. And thus far it is given by God for a
blessing to them that love him. Deuteronomy. 11.14. But the love of these which
causes excess, is threatened with woe. Esaias 5.11. and with poverty, Proverbs
21.17. Now health is necessary to our prompt and alacrious serving of GOD;
for, by the sorrow of the heart, the mind is heavy. Proverbs 15.13. and such
deiection, does forcibly suppress good, and comfortable thoughts and actions.

2. Or else from those material and external blessings, which God has
conferred upon us granted, Eccles. 3.12.13. I know there is nothing in them
but to rejoice, and to do good in his life, and also, that every man eats and
drinks and seeeth the commodity of all his labors, this is the gift of God.
And Chap. 5.17. What have I seen good, that it is comely, to eat and drink,
and to take pleasure in all his labor, wherein he trauelleth under the Sun,
the whole number of the days of his life, which God gives him; for this is
his portion.

2. The other is a spiritual joy, respecting Gods promises, touching
protection and deliverance, in the military course of this life, and a future
indeficient felicity in the next: and therein is not tied in the Sympathy, to
our weak, frail, and changeable bodies; but howsoever they decline, and
languish, this remains immutably the same, in respect of joy: but yet is
capable of increase, for that, it comes not to perfection, till this mortal
has put on immortality. The seat of this joy.
It is properly seated in the soul, there begun, cherished, and confirmed by
the comfortable presence of the Spirit of God. To whom it belongs.
It is the joy of true believers only, Est gaudium, quod non datur impijs. It
is not communicable to the impious and ungodly. It serves to moderate that
other external joy, The use of it.
that it exceed not due measure, and to direct it, that it point not at a
wrong end. The excellency of it.
Est gaudium ineffabile, quod non abscondi potest, nec sermonibus aperiri. It
cannot be verbally expressed, for the extent and excellency, yet neither can it
be concealed, but quibusaam proditur moribus, (as Saint Gregory) it is
manifested by outward signs and gestures. Whereof some are recreating the
body, as David's dancing before the Ark of the Lord, 2. Sam. 6.14. and Miriams
dancing with other Women, to signify their great joy after their delirance,
Exodus 15.20. Others only solacing the mind, as singing, and playing on
Instruments, to the praise of God. Psa. 150. So sang Deborah and Barak, after
their victory achieved against Iabin, King of Canaan. Paul and Silas sung a
Psalm in the prison, Act. 16.25. It is also testified, sometimes by other
behavior, as by that of Zaccheus, when he came down, unto Christ hastily, and
received him joyfully, Luke 19.6. by that of Marie Magdalen, and the other
Marie, who declared their joy, when Jesus after his Resurrection appeared unto
them, in taking him by the feet, and worshipping him, Math. 28.9. Here is an
Eden of Pleasure able to give a plentiful satisfaction, to the mind of any
sincere Christian. We are not denied a sober and competent delight, in any
temporals we have received: and touching the internal releuating of the
Spirit, we are exhorted to rejoice more then it is possible for any worldling
to do, that is 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
evermore. Whence is objected the sound, and permanent quality of this joy,
that is impossible of any Eclipse, or deminution through adversity; and
moreover preuailes to the lightning, and easy ouercomming of all tribulation.
The Apostle Paul replenished with this joy, spoke indifferently of all
conditions, disrespect, and honor, satiety, and hunger; scarsity and
abundance, were to him alike; the one neither affected him with pride, nor the
other with pensiveness, but he embraced them all, with an equal good content,
because in every of them he held the peace of conscience, and a rejoicing in
Christ Jesus.

Who also witnesses of the Thessalonians, that they received the word of God
in much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost. It was such as did not only
prepare them, to a voluntary and cheerful undergoing, but enable them also,
to a constant supporting, and bearing of the Cross for Christ's sake and his
Gospels. Therefore having straightly prohibited all vainglory, in wisdom, in
strength, in riches; Let him that glories, glory in this, that he knows and
understands me, says the Lord, Isa. 9.23. Rejoice in the Lord, again I say
rejoice, Phil. 4.4. For this joy is of Christ, and exhibited by Christ, and no
Man shall take it from the faithful, John 16.22. It only leanes to a steadfast
and infallible ground, which is our Adoption, the Redemption of our bodies,
Romans 8.23. Or that, We shall be clothed with our house which is from heaven,
2. Cor. 5.2. that so being changed we may for ever, with thousand thousands of
Angels, Ascribe unto the Lamb, honor and glory, and praise, Revel. 5.12.
Wherefore when the Apostle wills us to run: and Saint Gregory says, Curramus
and sequamur Christum, Let us run and follow Christ. We are taught
concerning this World, that we must use it, as if we used it not, 1. Cor. 7.31.
So that, if there be in us any zeal, or fervent desire of laboring, we are
to address our selves therein, toward heaven, by setting our affection on
things which are above, Colloss. 3.2. for non sunt hic vera solatia, sed ibi
ponuntur, vbi vera vita est. Here is no undoubted comfort to be found,
(therefore is our labor lost, when intended to that, which cannot be
compassed) but there is the sweet refreshing, the settled consolation, and the
abiding joy where Christ ever reigns, and life never ends: Illud est verum,
and summum gaudium, quod non de creatura, sed de creatore concipitur, (as
Bernard sweetly) the chief, and sole joy, and the sum of al joys, is that we
conceive of our Creator; in comparison whereof, all our pleasure is but care,
our contentation no better then vexation, all sweetness bitter, and whatsoever
delights us, is but troublesome.

We can build nothing in the flesh but ruin, nor reap ought besides
corruption, Gal. 6.8. Momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat: the
flashing pleasures of the flesh are extiguished with infinite, easlesse and
endless pains: (whereas in the kingdom of Grace, with the Saints of God it
is otherwise: Momentaneum quod cruciat, aeternu^ quod delectat: Their light
afflictions, which are but for a moment do cause unto them a far most excellent
and eternal weight of glory.) Found Ephraim any honor in her pride? any
advantage in her drunkenness? Or that Babylon of spiritual, and fleshly
whoredoms, has she carried away any Christian reputation by her idol service
(as they term it) and cautelous prostitutions? Or the raging Heathen any
victory, by combining themselves in a conspiracy against the Lord, and against
his Christ? They made a covenant with death, and with Hell they are at
agreement, Isa. 28.15. Yet do they from hence vainly indulge themselves with
a confidence of impunity: for Christ having purchased a universal Lordship over
the quick and the dead, by dying and rising again, Romans 14. exactly
challenges a proportionable fealty, that all knees shall bow before him, and
all tongues confess him; And they that provoke him shall be ashamed, Isa.
45.23.24. It is an adventure as hopeful, to sail to the golden Mines of Peru
in a Ship of Glass, as that we in pride, in covetousness, in pleasures, may
have a welcome access to God, in die nouissimo, that great, new, and last day,
and so enter the sweet Elysium of heavenly rest. For as, when the children of
Benianim, and Judah went to help David, he said unto them; If ye be come
peaceably, my heart shall be knit unto you; but if otherwise God behold it, and
rebuke it, 1. Chron. 12.17: So if we will be reconciled to God, to fight his
battails under the tuition of his own banner, we must make a peaceable repair
unto him, with the spirit of meekness, obedience, and love, and not with the
signs of hostility, and defiance, as are those sins, wherein the wisdom of
the flesh does instruct and animate us: for that being enmity against God,
suggesteth unto us nothing, but to be stubborn, to rebel, and stand out in
our own conceits, and not submit our selves to the yoke of Christ: and so long
cannot he knit his heart unto us, nor behold us, but as an incorrupted Judge,
with due austeritie to reprove and reject us: for his own hand is against all
our iniquities; therefore unless we confess and forsake them, they may not be
cancelled. It was Darius his case, who after he had sealed the writing against
them, which should ask any petition of any God or Man for thirty days save
of himself; when Daniel was accused that he regarded him not; he could not
deliver him though he labored till the Sun went down. Dan. 6.14. How then
shall God be inconstant in his word and purpose, in whom there is no
possibility of mutation?

The fashion of this world passes away. (says the Apostle) 1. Cor. 7.31.) So
that by uniting our hearts to things transitory, we basely confine our hope to
a period of time, to the moment of death: When the wicked man dies, his hope
perishes, Pro. 11. having no ways to send it up, past the confusion of
despicable and dying Objects, to the Throne of heaven, there to relieve and
strengthen it, with a certain apprehension of eternity: but our submisse
relying on Christ, as a sure soundation, is whose fear is assured strength.
Pr^^. 14. It is a good hope, and an everlasting consolation, which lesus Christ
that loved us, has given unto us.

Nevertheless, wicked men, whose ways for the most part prosper (as the
Prophet David notes, Psalm. 10.) contemn God, and say in their hearts, they
shall never be moved, nor be in danger: securing unto themselves a perpetuity
of perfect blessedness from those unstable adminicles, which God has cursed
unto them: how they insult we see; who bear rule? who command? who are obeyed?
Who feared so much as they? they prate and speak fearfully, All the workers
of iniquity vant themselves, they smite thy people, O Lord, and trouble thine
heritage, Psalm. 94.45. We shall not have a good Christian triumph in the
deceitfulness of things present, here being no Theater of exultation for them,
but a vale of mourning, a bryerie desert, and a warring pilgrimage, who are
hereafter freed from all infirmities and miseries, to be governed by the
Lamb, who shall lead them to the lively fountains of waters: And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, Apoc. 7.17. So that the impious boasters
are only to expect a horrid and desperate end; whom if God were not determined
most severely, and incogitably to torture in flaming fire, Rendering vengeance
unto them, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. When he shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ. Romans 2.16. He would not now permit to transgress, and provoke him as
they do: but for his greater glory, in the manifestation of his highest Justice,
does he suffer them in this life, to make full the measure of their impieties,
that he may discharge the full vials of his wrath, upon their odious souls at
last; giving to every quantum of scandalous pleasure, a tantum of insufferable
torment. Hell has enlarged it self, and has opened its mouth without measure
(says the Prophet Isaiah,) for them that royne house to house, and field to
field; for them that rise up early to follow drunkenness: and for them that
continue until night, till the wine do inflame them: and have the Harp and
Violl, Timbrell and Pipe, and wine, in their feasts: but they regard not the
work of the Lord; their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he
that rejoices among them, shall descend into it, Isa. 5.14. Saint John presents
them as it were standing at Gods Tribunal, where what he saw in the Spirit,
revealed, concerning such, he reuealeth thus again; I beheld, and lo the
Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty men, and every bond man, and every free man, (being
ungodly and disobedient) hid themselves in dens, and in the Rocks of the
mountains, and said to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from
the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb;
for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Apec. 6.15.16.17.

These are our sensual, prosperous, and delicious livers, see what they come
to. They are made to be taken and destroyed, and therefore they shall perish
through their own corruption, and shall receive the wages of unrighteousness,
as they which count it pleasure, daily to live deliciously, 2. Pet. 2.

They judge Christ, and condemn themselves; according to that of St.
Augustine; Qui pro modica delectatione, dat illud pro quo Christus, se
tradidit; stultum Christum, reputa^ mercatorem. They repute Christ no better
then a vain merchant, whilst for bubling delights they give their souls into
the jaws of death, for which he gave himself, that he might redeem them from
death.

But now let the faithful of the Lord look up, though in the extremity of
Egyptian servitude, though in the fire of persecution, though under the rage of
envy, and speak cheerfully to their souls? Why are ye cast down? Why are ye
disquieted? Trust in God. For they have a twofold cause of rejoicing in the
Spirit. Gaudendum est de ijs quae expectamus, and gaudendum de ijs quae
sustinemus. Present sufferings, and hoped glory, are both matter to feed their
joy. It was the hope of a better resurrection, that so notably confirmed the
faith of our Ancients, and made them joyful in all sorts of trials, refusing
deliverance. If it were not for this, we are (says S. Paul) of all men the
most miserable. 1. Cor. 15.19. but now (as he should so conclude the most happy.

Touching the other, There is no chastning, for the time seems to be joyous,
but grievous; yet whither it be inflicted for siune, if ye endure it, God
offers himself unto you, as unto Sons, and in the end it brings the
quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are thereby exercised. Hebr. 12.
Thus much we gather from the confession of that holy King, Before I was
afflicted I went astray: but now I keep thy word. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I may learn thy Statutes. Psalm. 119.67.71. Or
whither they be afflictions, laid upon us by the malignant Church for Christ's
sake, they tend most directly, and infallibly, to the eternal tranquillity, and
salvation of our souls: for this cause that miraculously converted servant of
God, after he knew the holy ghost had witnessed concerning him, that bands,
and afflictions did abide him in every City, for the name of Christ, set
light even by life it self, which he no longer counted dear unto him, so
that he might fulfill his course with joy, and his Ministration, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God. Act. 20.24. He accepted them as a tempest raised
to further him toward his wished City. For there is no reigning with Christ,
unless there be first a suffering for Christ: For hereunto ye are called, for
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. 1. Pet. 2.21. By patience and Faith, in tribulations and persecutions,
we are counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which we suffer. 2 Thessalonians.
1.5.

Then let us be manfull in our Christian profession, and so suffer; not
suffering any longer, that ignominious imputation on us, wherewith we are
justly blotted. Solus homo non compatitur, pro quo solo, Christus patitur.

If we be his members effectually ingraffed, we will do any thing we may,
for the glory of our head, as he has done, and does still for us; in so much
that the Spouse daily tasting the matchless comfort of his merciful presence,
is so more and more inflamed with delight, that she is even sick of love.
Whose cure he undertakes, and performs by holding his left hand under her
head, and with his right hand embracing her, Cant. 2.6. Where can she have a
more wished repository, then in the bosom of her beloved? or what joy may be
compared with hers? She finds it is incomparable: For he is the chiefest of
ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. His arm supporting her, is the strength of her
life, the exile of fear, her warrant of prosperity; the other encompassing
her, a bed of rest, a Paradise of full content, the port of safety, an
vnpregnable fortress of perpetual protection: so that she shall never perish,
neither shall any man take her out of his hands. John 10.28. Fight
principalities and powers, with the mad threatening Sodomites of this world,
against the righteous Lots of Gods heritage, until the passage of their fiery
darts offend them, and their violent prouocations, discruciate, and perplex
them, it is but a customary combat they have; and the more usual, the better
it is for them: seeing all things work together for best unto them. Romans 8.28.
and their joy is never so exceeding, as when their faith is held in exercise,
with diverse tentations. Iam. 1.2.3. they being permitted either to dispossess,
or prevent security, that they may not decline from a watchful care, and
pious observation of him, through whom they have victory, 1. Cor. 15.51. and
restitution unto peace and perfect liberty. Arise my love, my fair one, and
come away, for behold, the winter is past, the rain is changed and gone away,
Cant. 2.10.11. which his husbandly tenderness, and propitious eye, continued
to the happy experience of all that love him, allures their subscription to
those testimonies and honorable evidences, which his Apostle Paul has left of
him. That all things are but loss, and no better then dunge, in respect of the
knowledge of Christ, and being found in him, Phil. 3.8.9. That the glory which
he will henceforth reveal unto them in the kingdom of his Father; far
passes the worthiness of al present sufferings, Romans 8. and consequently,
that there is nothing so good, nor so desiderable, as to be with Christ, which
is best of all. That great Sophy, who diligently employed his heart (as is
said) in the curious exploration of all things, sounded a fair and fearful
palinody from the love of pleasure, when he descried his own aberration
therein, from the fundamental principle, and beginning of true wisdom, The
fear of the Lord. Prou. 1. And his father before him, valued it his most
eminent glory, that he could safely say; The Lord is my portion, and the
inheritance of my cup. Psalm. 15. Thou art my house of defense, and my Castle,
thou art my hope from my youth. Psalm. 71. (Howbeit he might otherwise have
largely boasted of his strength and valor, of humane amplitude, and dignities)
forasmuch as in Christ, nothing avails but a new Creature, Gal. 6.15. therein
standing a pattern unto us, whereby we should endeavor before all things; To
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof Romans 13.

We have all things in Christ, and Christ in us is all things, (says Saint
Ambrose) therefore upon our righteous seeking of him, are we assured of a
convenient supply of all necessaries: that though the Lions starve, and suffer
hunger, we shall want no manner of thing that is good. Psalm. 34. But shall
cate the good things of the Land, Isa. 1.19. We shall possess the earth, and
have our delight in the multitude of peace. Psalm. 37.11. Saint Bernard
glorifies him by the style of Thesaurus indeficiens, an incorruptible, never
failing treasure: So is he more then perishing food to the hungry, For my flesh
is meal indeed, Ioh. 6.55. not such as our Fathers are in the wilderness and
are dead. Drink also to the thirsty; not like that of Jacobs well: but
flowing from the inexhaustible fountain of himself, which whosoever drinks
shall never be more athirst. John 4.14. The sound and ever healthful
restoration of the spiritually sick, and wounded that cast their burden by
repentance upon him. He took our iniquities with their due chastisement upon
him, and by his stripes we are healed. Isa. 53.5. Here spoke also the
corporal wounds, of that noble Wrastler (remembered in Ecclesiastical
History) Blandiua, Eusebius.
as so many inspired mouths, collauding the merciful power of Christ; and the
indelible honor of a Christian profession, who so often as she pronounced, I
am a Christian, was recreated, and felt no smart of her torments, which were
pitiful. Finally, he is so all, and so eternal, that by the miss of him, we
are disabled as withered branches, from all spiritual fructification, as
himself teaches: Without me ye can do nothing, John 15.5. Therefore let us
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to
him be glory, both now and for evermore. Amen.

HOW GOD WILL accept us.
THe poor sick child that does attempt
To do his Fathers will,
Ought not of pity to be shent,
For striving to fulfill.
Although he do not perfect that,
was charged him to do;
For reason good, requires but what
His strength can reach unto.
So we poor Weaklings faint and sick,
Our du^e to discharge:
If but desire in us be suicke
To show our strength at large.
God does accept the fruit we bring,
Though short of that we owe:
And to assure each needful thing,
His blessing does bestow.
A CHRISTIANS state in this life.
A Man plunged in the Sea by chance,
Does strive with might and maine,
And never cease to advance,
Till he the shore attain.
But when upon his near address,
A new resurging wave,
Of his hard fortune pitiless,
Gives him small hope to have,
By forcing back his tired limbs,
About a mile or more:
Then loving life, a fresh he swims,
with (...) arms to shore.
So is this world the Christians Sea,
Where he is touched with sin:
And does his best, with speed to be
Arrived with his King.
But when he is approached so near
By grace: he thinks all well:
More sinful billows meet him there,
And turn him back to Hell.
Then new obedience he begins,
And freely turns his race:
To break that furious heap of sins,
And reach his resting place.
AMBITION the second transporter of the mind from the Objects of true
blessedness.
Satan like a tyrannous Nahash, moved by an utter antipathy, between the
Father of light, and himself the Prince of darkness, seeks by all means to
bring the reproach of blindness upon his Image, that he may not be able to
lift up a longing eye to heaven, or have his heart touched with so much as a
thought of alienation from his pernicious policy, and cursed government: and
forasmuch, as it was a discontentednes with his present state, whereby he
proudly aspired past his reach, to his eternal ruin, and now remains
separated from the Angelical beatitude, the vision of God, he proiects, and
attempts the same course, as current (from his own experience) hereby to
captiuate the maine Pillars of the world, the wise, the rich, the noble, vt ex
Angelis daemones faciat, that he may make them like himself: by holding the
pleasant apples, of preferment, of honor, and dominion over their heads:
wherewith nature is so ravished, that although it perceiueit self in a Sea of
sorrows up to the chin: yet with Jupiters unfortunate son, it will be
catching after them: Sape qu^s vita nulla delectat, quos nulla potest mouere
luxuria nulla auaritia subruere facit ambit iocriminosos, (says Ambrose)
Oftentimes, they whom no other kind of life contenteth, whose affections
steadfastly withstand the tentation of luxury and avarice, become criminous and
culpable through ambition.

Ambition draws life and sustentation, from those three fountains, of
carnal wisdom, of wealth, of potency: for (as matter desires form) so they
being incomplete, and naked endowments of themselves, study through the
ministry of ambition for perfection, and clothing, though it tend more to
their imparagement, and diminution, and happily to the extreme dirution of their
possessors.

He that has wisdom must inuest it into honor, or he becomes desperate;
rather then Herod Agrippa, being learned, and wise would miss the honor and
estimation thereof, he was contented to be saluted as a God, and confessed to
be above all mortal nature, (as Josephus) which wiser Hanno (as it should
seem) sought more cunningly, and painefully, by teaching a bird to sound,
Hanno est Deus, and then letting him fly, to report it to the world. This made
Achitophel do violence to himself, that being wise, and accounted for his
Council, as an Oracle of God. 2. Sam. 16.23. he saw his council confounded,
and that it was not followed. 2. Sam. 17.23. And if any do wishedly accomplish
their desires herein, what is this their purchase? true honor? how can that
be? when the Prophet says, Paupere^ sunt and stulti. Surely, they are poor,
they are foolish; for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of
their God. Ier. 5.4. No truly, but a Preface of horror, The strength of Pharaoh
shall be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion, Isa.
30.3. Thus was the wisdom of the Jews, which carried them from God, to seek
the subsidy of earthly Princes rewarded: and to all those, which by their
craftiness (for so is their wisdom called) 1. Cor. 3.10. endeavor to
establish themselves without God, it is menaced, Your turning of devices, shall
it not be esteemed at the Potters clay? Isa. 29.16. He that has wealth, must
have preferment, or else it will be thought he has no wit, which is the
greatest prejudice to the rich that may be: and when promotion is come, and
his heart insolently dilates it self, in that flattering reverence, and
temporizing observation of the people, which he has dearly paid for, how
stands his case with God; Behold (says he unto him) thou art utterly
despised, for the pride of thy heart has deceived thee. Obad. 2.3. And after a
while how soon it is unknown, but his destruction shall be sudden, (as the
Apostle says) when the Lord is purposed apparently to exemplify his Justice
on him, by humbling him from his Throne of celsitude, according to that woeful
denunciation against the Crown of pride, His glorious beauty shall be as a
fading flower, Isa. 28. How then, will his repute hold out with Men: or what
profit shall he have by all that went before? That stately, arrogant Courtier
Haman, surfeited of this poison, and fell into this plague, and from thence,
grew contemptible to his inferiors, to his Prince, odious, and lastly to his
everliving infamy swole to death.

The potent man must rule, there is no remedy. For this purpose did Absalom
being a Kings son, use a smooth, affable, and enticing behavior toward his
Fathers Subjects, there by to draw their unanimous inclination toward him, for
his settling in the Kingdom. 2. Sam. 15. This moved his next Brother Adonijah
to exalt himself, and usurp where he had no right to rule. 1. King. 1.5. But
grant he were, in as ample authority as Magistracy can allow, suppose in
imperial pre-eminence: what is his condition safer? What more excellent, then
was the Governors of Jerusalem, who deuiating through a secular and sensual
spirit, from a pious and equal carriage in their functions, were justly noted
by God himself with the aspersion of filthy, polluted, and robbing, and
abandoned with a fearful detestation, Zeph. 4.1.

The object of Ambition is not ever temporal: but sometimes does it collimate,
at things supernatural and immortal: but in a presumptious, and prohibited
manner, whereby our commanded striving to enter in at the straight gate, is
hindered by vain and ignorant petition: as we see in James and John, the
sons of Zebedeus, suing unto Christ, that they might sit one at his right
hand, and the other at his left hand, in his glory. Mar. 10.37. A course in
familiar practice with many, that will bestow some time only in making request
for the matchless privilege of inhabiting the mansions in Gods house, as if
they were streight-waies worthy to enter: not respecting how Gods promise (that
they which ask shall receive) is limited to those only that ask in faith,
and labor in sanctity of life thereunto: and that none others can receive,
neither shall, because they ask amiss, as the Lord himself professes, When
ye shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and though ye
make many prayers I will not hear: for your hands are full of blood. Isa.
1.15. they were not cleansed from their sins.

Sometimes it leuels at divine and sacred gifts, past our fittingnesse, and
capacity: such was the ambition of Simon the Sorcerer, that offered money to
buy the power of giving the holy ghost. Act. 8.19. And of this are they
notoriously conscious, that not contented with that course, wherein they are
confirmed, by a lawful vocation, do covet, and ambitiously take upon them the
offices, and persons of more worthy men: as the Plough-man, when he will sit in
Moses chair, and the mechanical Seperatist be a Preacher.

To this is allied, that Ambition of hypocrites, (that I may not present the
Name of pragmaticall Nouatians) whereby they intrude into Christ's sheepe-fold,
as if they were faithful members of the Saints fociety, and deserving an
equal honor, for only washing the outside of the Cup and Platter. These
are known to God by their hearts, to man by their fruits, they swear by the
Name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor
in righteousness, Isa. 48.1. When they are invited to return, and the Lord
(most ready to forgive) promises thereupon that he will return unto them:
the pride of heart has so lifted them up, that they cannot see from whence
they should return; Wherein (say they) shall we return? Wherein have we
spoiled thee? Mal. 3. Per arrogantiam deprauantur, quum paratiores sunt mort,
quam corripi, (as well says Gregory) they are so corrupted with arrogance,
that they had rather suffer death the^ rebuke: so much their soul delights
in their abominations, Isa. 66.3. But how long, (cry the godly) how long Lord
holy and true, do thou not judge them? Apoc. 6. This is the first part of
their judgment, that though they deceive for a time, as the Devil Judas, valed
in his Apostleship: Yet shall they be uncased to tha world (though not all)
and to the joy of the righteous, be visibly cut off from their communion,
(though not at an instant.) Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and make
thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down (says the Lord.)
Obad. 4.

The extent of Ambition, is generally without period. Empedocles was not heigh
enough upon the top of Etna, but from thence would have climbed the skies to
rule the Heavens, and undertake the government of the Stars. Some are so
transcendent in their proud conceits, that without all regard of the mean, and
end, Quos vltra citraque nequit consistere rectum: which only should praise
their actions to be just and right, they proceed in hope of an vnattingible
sum of glory. In which restless and hapless task, diverse are employed
sundry ways: some caring how they may effect unto themselves the wish of
Pirrhus, not only to be enriched with the spoil of one City; but after that,
to subdue and command Countries, till they become Lords of the whole world.
These great world devouring Helluos, are epitomized in the bosom of every
Commonwealth, where is at the least one swarm of Hornets, that snap the Bees
in sunder, to cram themselves with that sweet, which they have industriously
gathered: and this not of a few, but even of very many, till they have begotten
a crew of honest beggars, by their impious dealing, for their own ditation:
and so rule rather by force then favor.

Others, like Perithous, that made a voyage to Hell to steal Proserpina from
Plutoes bed, seek by rare adventures of impossible expedition, to merit same,
and popularitie, though in so doing, they must make shipwreck of faith, and of
a good conscience, and even bequeath their souls to Satan. Of this sort are
they, that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, whose works are in
darkness, and that say, Who sees us, and who knows us? Isa. 29.15. We may
without injury, take here for instance the Romish Catholic Cannibles, the
insaturable appetite of whose Herodian tyrranny, nothing can satisfy, but a
deluge of Innocents blood: wherefore they wait with a daily thirst, and
inhiation after that, which Gods tender clemency toward the faithful
profession of his true religion, does most mightily, and admirably disappoint
them of: upon the execution of which their infernal indulgence, they retain a
strong persuasion (besides the assurance of their Masters benedictio^, and
countries applause) of a Saints remuneration in the heavens.

Thus far it appears, that Ambition is, tinea sanctitatis (as Bernard) the
fretter out or consumer of piety, ex remedijs morbos creans, ex medicina
longuorem generans, turning the best remedies into pernicious diseases Which is
also Cathedra pestilentiae, (as Saint Augustine) the seat of pestilence, and a
cruel plague to the Church of God. For they which love to have pre-eminence,
do enuiously oppose, and open their mouths against Christ's Pastors; and so
stop (what lies in them) the Gold sanded current of his glorious Gospel. Thus
Saint John complains of Diotrephes: I wrote unto the Church, but he which
loves to have the pre-eminence among them, receives us not, but prateth
against us, with malicious words, and not therewith content, neither he
himself receives the brethren, but forbids them that would, and thrusts
them out of the Church. 3. Epist. Ioh. 9.10.

Furthermore, it is in our Adversaries, the mother and Nurse of strife,
raylings, evil surmisings, and vain disputations, (which beget in the minds of
the unresolved, often doubtings, concerning the truth, and sometimes
translating them into the fearful state of Apostasy, whereof examples are
not scant this day.) If any man (says S. Paul) teach otherwise, and consents
not to the wholesome words of our Lord Iosus Christ, and to the doetrine which
is according to godliness, he is puffed up (through ambition) and knows
nothing, but doteth about questions, and strife of words, etc. from such
separate thy self. 1. Tim. 6.3.

But if any Greatness, should here enter an Apology for Ambition; saying,
they could not rise without it: forasmuch as nothing is more prosperously
achieved, then what is attempted with importunate desire and dignity, is the
life of nobility; it may suffice for farther resolution, that such an earnest
will, to aspire to civil dignity (before sufficiency and desert make way unto
it, whereby there may be a likelihood of the answerable performance of those
weighty duties, which are required in so high a calling) is contrary to true
contentation; which being one of the most notable virtues of a resolute
Christian, that other, by consequence, is justly branded for a hateful sin:
and therefore unworthy the entertainment of Noble hearts; whither S. Bernard
as a careful Watchman, for the good of the Church, highly commends a better
guest, in this his feeling confession of him. Dignus est plane morte, qui tibi
Christ, recusat vinere and qui tibi non sapit, desipit, and qui curat esse,
nisi propter te, pro nihilo est, and plane nihil est. Christ only must be the
object of our wisdom, of our life, of our being; that we may live to be wise
in him, and be wise to be found in him, or else our sentence ends not, in
dignus morte, but in morte morieris, Thou shall dye the death; for whilst we
delude-our selves in the glory of a fleshly wisdom, we incur not only the
censure of being fools: but that more strict one, Nihil sumus, whatsoever we
are, we are nothing in estimation with God. To aspire unto Christ with the
wing of spiritual graces, and celestial virtues, is the only true Nobility,
and the beauty of both the other; of the natural, which is derived from
Parents; and of the civil which is imposed by supreme Authority.

Nobility (says Boethius) est laus quaedam proueniens ex merit is parentum. It
is a certain praise, issuing from the merits of the Parents: Thereby
insinuating, our Ancestors to have gone through the Temple of Virtue, to the
Temple of Honor, and deservedly to have reached their dignity: which so long
continues an honorable praise to their posterity, as they hold on a
correspondency with them in virtue: but if otherwise they inherit their
Nobility, and not the soul by which it lives; they do not only demolish the
Trophe of their Fathers worthiness, but open the passage of just dishonor to
themselves. For who seeing a letter of Gold in a mud wall, will not judge it out
of its place, and where grace and virtue have not their character in the
forehead, and polish the actions, that face is to foul, that heart to
unworthy, of the fair titles, Christian and Noble.

A great Man should be like the Sun, which as it is more excellent then the
other Planets, so it sends forth more light, that he may say as Paul:
Brethren, be ye followers of me, and look on them which walk so, as ye have
us for an ensample. Phil. 3.17.

It is memorable of him, that being a King, thought nothing could suit better
with Majesty, then wisdom to govern his people: and therefore the Ambition
of all other things seposed; he asked of God only that, wherewith honor and
riches stand bound: but are not the principal. The affluence of honor and
riches which are to virtue, no better then iniusta nouerca, checking her over
preciseness, for awaking the conscience to look scornefully upon Ambition and
Avarice, are not to be sought or coueted of those that stand charged with the
administration of a commonweal: but wisdom principally to dispossess, and
cleanse the heart of those choking corruptions, that it may be free, for the
lodging of equity, justice, and liberality. For they being (as it were) the
East, which Aristotle calls Dextrum Coeli, or (for them more aptly) dextram
Reipublicae, it is natural to their high ascent, and dexterious location for
virtue to rise, but never to set in them.

What could be more prejudicial to the States of Israel, then that the Prophet
(having nominated those duties, which are pertinent chiefly to their eminent
quality: and he expected to have found in them) should through their dissolute
distemper, and extreme corruption, be enforced to complain the contrary: But
they have altogether broken the yoke, and burst their bonds. Ier. 5. in not
seeking the truth, nor executing Judgment: by which two, the man in authority
is known to be Gods lawful and approved delegate and Minister.

When David heard, that Saul was about to come up to Keilah, to destroy the
City for his sake, he inquired of God: Will the Lords of Keilah deliver me
into his hands? He made a question, though it concerned the ruin of their
City and lives, whither they would betray his innocence; 1. Sam. 23.12.
noting the duty of good Governors, that they should be so chaste, constant, and
faithful, in defense of integrity of the truth, and of a well deserving
cause, as that no hazard should impell them to pervert justice. Although
Balack offer large gifts, to blind the eyes, and allure them to curse, where
they should bless; yet must they answer, as Elisha to Naam in, I will not
receive it, 2. King. 5.16. and as Michaiah to Nahabs messenger (who prayed him
to speak good unto the King his Master, as the false Prophets had done)
Whatsoever the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. 1. King. 22.14. If thou will give me thy house full of Silver and Gold, I will not pass the
commandment of the Lord. Numb. 22.18. which is to do justly, to love mercy,
and to walk with God. Mich. 6.8.

The tooth of avarice, (for the most part) biteth like a fiery Serpent, to the
death of the soul, having made impression, it so inflameth, that no earthly
medicine can prevail to assuage it. Riches, of all others, seem the surest
Lenitiue, which yet work a contrary effect; Non satiando, sed irritando, as
Seneca, kindling, where they should quench, and laying on more load where they
should exonerate and lighten: for which our dignities have to cast their eyes
on the brazen Serpent of their Nobility, which if it be right by
participation of Grace, will cure it by fundamental extirpation.

For the Nobles of Berea, when Grace saluted Greatness, in the Parlour of
their hearts, discharged the world freely, and with all readiness received the
word, and searched the Scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. their opinion was then
altered, which as it seduced them formerly to a secure dependence on earthly
supplements, as the essential props of honorable eminence; so being
illuminated, they were soon resolved; that the true and only aduantagious
glory was, that they had learned Christ.

But let no man endanger himself so far, as once to cope with this fell
Monster, or let in this heart gnawing Vulture, covetousness, either of honor,
of riches, or of the favor of men, in hope of absolution at the length by
Grace: for after that, upon our relishing some sweetness from it, we have made
it habitual unto us, and given our wretched souls a miserable rest therein:
the remedy will in all likelihood, seem most irksome unto us, that shall offer
to disroost us from our downy nest of such a dulce venenum.

The young Earth-worm that had lost himself in his golden laborinth, though he
had direction given him upon his demand, and a thread vntwound to guide his
soul to heaven: yet was his heart so fast locked up, in the Arc of his
Treasures, that he could not choose, but rather make a sorrowful proceeding to
destruction, then accept a joyful issue to eternal life. Balaams wish was for
the peaceful end of the righteous, yet though he knew the way unto it, (which,
was to obey the commandment of the Lord) he still loved the wages of
unrighteousness, 2. Pet. 2.15. Aura sinum ex pandens, lying open to the
reward: with this dregge he was seasoned, and of this he retained the savor:
no: we cannot cohibit our affections, as we would when we would, after they
have long ranged under loose reins.

Saint Augustine sleights these inferior things, which we so much ouervalue,
with the style of transitoria mendacia, fugitive lies, for making no answerable
performance to their promise. The Prodigalls patrimony might promise him the
love of the World, this love a full satisfaction to his unbridled appetite; but
it was not long ere he heard that voice of the world, and found it true, which
Saint Bernard echoes from it. Ego deficiam. I will fail thee.

Christ would not for all the Kingdoms of the world, fall down before Satan
and worship him; neither suites it with any Christian, that has his feet
loftily pitched upon a Mountain, vily to prostrate his affections before
Mammons dunghill (as Ambition binds him) though he were sure to win the
whole World thereby: for it cannot be without the loss of his soul; for this
is the lure which the Devil casts up to the Fondlings of this World, bearing
this inscription (were we wise enough to observe it) Ego decipiam. I will
deceive thee.

Abraham refused to take so much as a thread of the King of Sodom, lest he
should say; I have made Abraham rich: Where is this generous resolution in the
seed of Abraham? where are those Noble Patrissants, that disdain to be
enriched with the substance of sin? Look unto the Rock from whence ye are
hewn, and return true Israelites, in whom there is no guile, and ye shall sit
down with your Father Abraham in the kingdom of heaven.

But Esau that profane person shall rise in judgment against us, and condemn
us, for repining at what we have, and unlawful seeking what we cannot with
godliness enjoy. With much ado did Jacob compel him, to take his blessing;
who answered at the first with a contented mind. I have enough my Brother:
keep that thou have to thy self. Genesis 33.9. Now such is the emulation, or
rather envy of many murmuring Esaus, that if deserving Jacob carry away, but
the better part of the blessing, though they have enough besides, they are at
no rest, till with Eliab they have discovered their anger, (as he did toward
his Brother, imputing that to pride and malice of heart, which was done by the
providence and appointment of the highest) so they in raising obloquies and
disgraceful fames against them. How it displeased Saul, that David was praised
for his excellency, and renowned victory above him, to what height of envy did
it drive him? and how seriously did he complot his death? We must have every
man, all the Manna in his own Omer, all the blessings on his own head, all the
preferment on his own back, and all the praise to his own self, or else a
grudging of envy will stay behind, and make us stomach sick. No marvel that
S. Paul put Timothy in mind to charge the^ that are rich in this world, that
they be not high minded. 1. Tim. 6.17. For pride (as Chrysostom notes) is
one of the followers of riches, but experience shows us, that in short time she
becoms their mistress, and commands the^ at her pleasure that she may be
vpheld, quo iure, quaque iniuria, hence (says Austine) toll superbiam and
diuitiae non nocebunt. Riches in themselves are harmless, if possessed without
pride: for she among other fiends of her family tertaines that of all other the
foulest usury; and imployes it in all offices about her house; she has not a
delicate dish of meat, but Usury must bring it to the Table. She puts on a
stately Roabe, but Usury must pay for it; the Laborers hyre must needs be
discharged, how? By Usury. There is a purchase to be sold, and how shall pride
compass it? By Usury. This is now grown so entire with the pride of our
time, that it is tota in tota, all in all, and all in every part, and in all,
the very soul of pride. Usury buys the Devil, and all his inheritance, with
the price of a bad conscience; The Devil brings Hell his whole patrimony with
him, and sets them into perpetual possession: And there is an end of Pride and
Usury. And therefore as Christ said, Take heed of Conetousnesse, so does he
in the same words, imply this cave, beware of Usury. I pray you let us leave
off this burden said Nehemiah to the Rulers of the people: Restore I pray you
this day, their Lands, their Vine-yards, their Olives, and their houses, and
remit unto them that part of the Silver, of the Corn, and of the Oil, that ye
exact of them. Answer this as they did, we will restore it, and will not
require it of them, and therein is your life, (ye Usurers) but though a man
have abundance, yet life stands not in riches, Luke 12. but they that will be
rich, fall into tentation, and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition and destruction. 1. Tim. 6.9.

But I doubt it were as good to strike upon Goliahs brazen Helmet, as upon
these sins, being they are all the fashion: for if we affect Vice, we
entertain it as a Virtue; as it may be seen in them, that will keep their
fools at their elbowes, when their discreeter attendants shall wait aloof.
Flattery was no fault in the Court of Alexander that loved it; but regarded,
and rewarded as a virtue, whilst he more esteemed the vulgar Medes and
Persians, for reuerencing him for the son of Jupiter, then he did the Nobles
of Macedonia for their loyal and faithful dealing; so where voluptuousness,
ambition, and avarice, get hands to their pass, they are disputed by some as
necessary, by others as convenient to be used, loosing the note of sins. Why
so? As in Egypt sometimes they that were unlearned in Necromancy, were
accounted infamous: wherefore the best and wisest would apply their study unto
it: So not to be skilled in these black Arts, were enough to bring disease,
disrespect, and poverty upon us, (besides the accumulating of other unworthy
contumelies:) Therefore to avoid the tax of being cruel to our selves, which
Saint Austine lays upon them that neglect their fame) meaning the good report
which a christian should be careful to preserve:) we in a misconstruction of
his sense, will be tyrants to our souls, that we may be famous sinners.

This ignorance springs from our non proficiency in the School of Christ, as
Saint Paul's example effectually proves against us, who being ripe in that
measure of divine knowledge, (which is given as diversely to the Saints in this
life, so to all sufficiently toward their eternal state) would not rejoice,
but in the Cross of Christ, whereby the world was crucified to him, and he
unto the world. Gal. 6. teaching the same to be the duty, and practice of all
well governed christians, to hold fast with the rock whereon they are founded,
and not to suffer the external respects of riches, reverence, and time-seruing
to loosen their anchor from this shore, and bewitch them from his obedience, on
whom they ought merely to depend, as being wholly his.

We are either old learners, and too young proficients, or but young learners
and no proficients, who having in Christ's Gymmasy but one word to learn, have
not yet learned it as we should. Christ faith, Discite a me, quia cord mit is
sum, et humilis; We must learn of him, humility: but pride commune nobilitatis
malum that common mischief of Nobility, that too common misery, imo pene
omnium, almost of al men, does so often put them all out, as they go about to
pronounce it; yet necessity lies so hard upon us (deuiating Pilgrims) if we
will be happy, (and happy are we that we can be taught) that we must not think
our direction hard, and thence be discou raged from following it; but labor
(and thereby we shall be able) to take the low way, which is the right way, for
there is no high way, to that high country, and heavenly inheritance.
Quicunque desiderat primatum caelestem sequatur humilitatem terrestrem; non
enim qui mayor fuit in honor ille mayor: sed qui iustior ille mayor. (as
Chrysostom) Our humility on earth must help us to preferment in heaven: for
the most honorable here, shall not (in that in that respect) be the greatest
there; but the just shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they
that turn many to righteousness shall shine as Stars for ever, and ever.
Dan. 12.3. The lesson is but short: the understanding sweet: our obedience unto
it, gracious: the reward glorious: therefore detesting pride the enemy of
prayer, and bane of all godly motions. Humilitate omnia facto nostra
condiantur, (as S. Augustine advises) let us season all our words and works
with humility.

CHOICE, AND APPLICATIONS, Which may serve partly for the use of the precedent
Treatise.

Not unprofitable for direction as well in Sacred, as in civil duties.

By Charles Goldwell, Master of Arts.

LONDON Prined by Bernard Alsop for John Pyper. 1621.

TO THE WORTHY and right nobly disposed Sir Walter Tichborne Knight: the
blessing of heaven and earth be multiplied
SHall not my hand
present my heart to him,
That gave my feeble arms,
more strength to swim:
Then fail my hand,
to guide thine artlesse pen,
And heart forget,
good nature unto men,
If both prefer him not
to lasting praise,
That made me happy,
in my dysmall days.
This be a Record,
of your noble mind,
Seated in blood,
of a most loyal Kind:
That Prince, and
people cannot wish to see,
Hearts better stockt,
with true integrity.
Nor any blame my
grateful heart, that gives
Advancement to your
worth, where merit lives.
SIR.

I Have entered so great a Bond to your worship, that I am hopeless ever to say
(as the indebted servant to his master) upon your patience I will pay you all:
yet do I not desire, that upon proof of my willingness, your clemency should
pardon all. I would not be so secure; lest ingratitude corrupt me; but that
having justly to consider, your free and frequent favors my best endeauours
may still be striving to procure your acquittance: so shall your Worship be
sure not to loose what is worth the requiting: I hopeful still to receive
those benefits, which may continue my study thereunto. Sir I could make choice
of no better thing to present you with all, then what my heart has chosen to
rule, and content it self withal, desirous to persuade you so much hereby,
that no greater service shall be wanting, which may derive a promise from this
brief Hierogliphick. The shortness, is to be measured by the straightness
of my time, not by the defect of my love: the matter to be examined by my
purpose of profiting others so well as my self, not in any thing taxable of
presumption: the vnfiled composure to be tolerated, for the condition of the
matter. As they are, I heartily wish they may at least content you, if not add
a scruple to your happy experience. The Lord who has abundantly blessed you
with many sweet hopeful branches, likewise enrich your hearts with his
graces, that you may be thoroughly and perfectly blessed in body, and soul,
and evermore protect, and direct all yours to the glory of his saving health.

Your Worships ever bounden. CHAPTER GOLDVVILL.

TO THE Worshipful my dear Father, John Goldwell Esquire, the continuation of
blessings temporal: the increase of graces Spiritual: and the assurance of
life eternal: be granted and sealed, by God, and his holy Spirit.
SIR,
AMong many your necessary, and wholesome rules, laid down, by way of Fatherly
advertisement, unto me, this has been one, as not the least repeated, not the
least worthy: Efficacius est vitae quam linguae testimonium. It is better
(specially for a Divine) to make his life, then his tongue, his witness unto
the people: that in being an example unto his flock be may save himself, and
them that hear him: wherein howsoever I have failed, or may hereafter; yet I
intended hereby to express my desire (even by this my resolution) unto a
constant setlednesse, and composition of life. Who shall thankefully entertain
the friendly reprehension of any, noting my going astray from that which I have
chosen. Sir, that I have not made the dedication of these my labors unto you,
the world knows, that under the name of Father, you comprehend (by undeniable
right) both this, and all other interest in me: and therefore I trust you will
not deny them as an aliene, when they are offered; but accept them as the first
birth of my hard traveling youth; afoord them such favorable entertainment,
and succor, as without too much partiality you may. Neither will you, in your
affection unto virtue (I presume) but take it well, that I have thus disposed
part of your right. In which affiance (with the tender of my most humble duty)
I commit you to the protection of the Almighty.

Your most obedient Son, Chapter Goldwell.

1
GOds bounty in bestowing his gifts, shall teach me moderation in using them:
lest wronging the purpose of his liberality, whilst I exceed, he thrust me out
of the Garden, into the field, and give me thistles in stead of figs.

2
God being wholly, and perfectly good, could make nothing evil. When I bebold
my self, an impure, and spotted leper, I know therein I am none of Gods
making, but of the devils undoing; so that I will pray before all things to be
renewed, that he may acknowledge me to be the workmanship of his hands, and I
have assurance of protection from him, that will take notice he made me.

3
The definition of God (says Cassiodore) is that has no end in Sacred
praises: though it be an endless work, duly to praise him, I will not
defer to begin: it argues not an impossibility of my performance: but the
infiniteness of his excellency. The heavens are accounted more noble, that
execute their office toward their Creator, in a restles motion: then the
sluggish earth that is enforced to all, by the influence, and operation of the
heavens. It were more grauefor any being earthly, to imitate the heavens: then
waiting for the adoption, to be transported, with eartly affections.

4
I had rather be a reviving, then a dying Phoenix: not to have my soul wasted,
and destroyed, in the sweet burning spices of sensual contents, but from their
ashes, their viler relics, which may breed my distaste of them, and teach me
to loath them, to be revived unto a second birth.

5
Of all terrene things, man is master: God is Lord: man secondarily to
command, and use, God principally, to dispose and finally to take account. I
were better with a little well ordered: then a slothful servant with a large
talent: for God that lets all unto man, and lets him have all, expects
for the least portion a rent of glory: so that my homage, and duty, to him
discharged, he will secure unto me, a quiet and contentable fruition of what I
have: when the ungrateful rich, shall stand at hazard, having forfeited all,
even their very souls, for lack of payment.

6
The Dove, with the olive branch in her mouth, brought better news to Noah's
Arc: then the Raven, that returned empty. So does the grace of Gods Spirit,
impart great comfort to the consciences of his children, in the promise of
rest, and liberty: when the black intelligencers, man's three dangerous
combitants, inform nothing but matter of trouble, and confusion.

7
God in cursing Cain, took from him the grace of adoption: but not his other
graces. As a bird only admired for the beauty of some few feathers, having
cast them is of no reckoning with the rest: So were I, deprived of that grace,
which is the beauty and crown of a Christian, cursed, and despisable,
notwithstanding all other endowments: for as the Sun sends light to our
earthly mansions, and makes them delightful, and fit for our daily use, which
are without it, in every room unpleasant, and obscure: So are external
graces, by this of adoption, illustrated, and adorned, bringing to estimation
the person so qualified, who by the miss thereof is like a fair man with his
eyes out. I had rather have the sum of all riches in one jewel, then many
jewels of no price: be rather found serving with Joshua, then sacrificing with
Cain.

8
Saint Augustine says; All things are unpleasant besides God, and there is no
pleasure but in him: and Seneca represents the worlds indignity, by the
mutability, and danger of the Sea; which he says is troubled in a moment, and
where the ship now sailed hopeful, it is incontinently swallowed up. Why then
should I affect it? if for riches, I may possess them, and yet be miserable,
poor, and naked: if for honors, and superiority; I may aspire unto them, and
still be infamous: if for delights, in the midst of them, I shall have but a
distracted conscience: if it fare better with me then thus for a time, I am
sure it cannot be long. But if I delight in God, it is otherwise; in him I
enjoy all things, having nothing: true comfort in apparent crosses, and the
assurance of glory, in many disgraces. I will quarrel with the world unto
death, to be at unity with God; trample embroidered shadows under the foot of
scorn, that my soul may be wholly vacant, for the contemplation, love, and
desire, of that certain sweet and eternal good.

9
When Abraham in his iournying came to any place, he sought before all things,
a place to serve God in. To manage all actions and affairs, under prayer, and
Gods patronage, is the property of a christian; to refer them to fortune, or
to warrant their success from man's proper sufficiency, and endeavor, is
merely heathenish. The benefit of the former, is certain prosperity: the
punishment of the latter a doubtful event. I had rather in uncertain attemps,
be resolved of a wished end: then in a plain case, be unhappily intercepted.

10
It was a Tenent of Apelles the Marcionite: that none might fitly reason of
religion: but that every one should continue, as he believes: a fit master for
our days, who warranting our blindness, and freeiug us form all industry in
Sacred employment, who will not learn of Apelles? The Eagle to the carrion:
dull nature, to the dead tree of fruitless knowledge: poisoned heresy, and
voluntary mistake: But as I am curious not to take Physic for my health, of
him that wishes my death; so will I not stick to the precepts of nature, for
ray experience in grace: holding it no reason that is not informed and
strengthened, by the rule and warmth of religion; and that but cold religion,
which a man will not maintain, by the force of his reason: or when he thinks
it needless to better and confirm it, by reasoning. As I am my self
naturally: I believe that God neither hears blasphemy, nor sets his eyes
upon any enormious acts of disobedience, and therefore am pleased with the relax
reins of licentiousness; but as I am recombined to God in religion, and have
mine own eyes opened; I know that his eyes behold in all places the good, and
the evil: and so am timorous to provoke him. Therefore I would have none to
continue as he irreligiously believes, (and I will not be guided by him,
that would be guyded by a woman) but will so believe, that I may continue to
the end.

11
The bread, and the sword, which Abimelech gave David in his flight from the
face of Saul, were more welcome in that his penury, and perillos state, then
richer presents could have been in the time of his safety, and abundance. I
had rather be fed with moderate supplies in my necessity; then find many
friends in my sufficiency: by the first I know who love me: by the other,
who flatter me: and therefore deem worthy censuring, that more subtle and
politic, then loyal, and friendly condition, branding it with the note of
impiety, as I find it familiar, and customarie: whereby men power liquor into
replenished vessels, that the superfluity may return unto themselves, with
advantage: and judge all benefits lost, where they cannot be requited.

12
I will choose rather, to be a beggar with the Samaritan unto Christ, for the
water of life to quench my thirst, after flying shadows, and dying vanities,
then to have the well of worldly prosperity, and sinful pleasures lie open
unto me, which is but the stirring up, of an immoderate appetite after that
which can never satisfy; And to have my cogitations, and travail eased,
touching the procurement of things present: then roll the stone of that young
man which thinking to get to heaven by keeping the Commandments, lost his way,
by loving his riches.

13
It is a sure rule, that he which will learn to speak, ought first to learn to
hold his peace: for silence does not only gather knowledge, from the more
wise, and judicious; but it takes notice of their dispositions with whom we
are to co^uerse, thereby helping us to free our speech unto them, of distaste:
It also allows a space of premeditation, whereby we may reason without error,
or not at all. I will use speech rather too sparingly, then too profusly; for
the multitude of words engenders folly: which paucitie conceales from a
public discovery: the first casts a just reproach on the author: the latter
may move a suspicion of ignorance: but it is without proof.

14
The Smaradges is most of value, that is clearest from glassy pimples. This
smoothness is always laudable in the heart; in the tongue but sometimes. As
bolsterd apparel, argues a crookedness, and imperfection in the body: So
words being as it were the apparel of the mind, are more to be suspected
of lightness, and vanity, for their great swelling show, then when they are
uttered in a modest euenesse, anp plausible plainness; But as in a clear
untroubled fountain, we easily discern without much prying, what is in the
bottom: so in a calm, honest, and settled heart, we find truth, and
trustiness apparently objected, so that we may credit them, without our too
curious disquisition: or their too verbal profession.

15
Contempteously to wrong an inferior, is oftentimes to incur the danger of
an equal revenge, or the miss of a pleasurable office: for albeit the Eagle
flies with the help of her great feathered wings, yet the lesser feathers
keep her warm. Great men may live maugre (as we say) the vulgar, yet many
helps conducible to their estate, and reputation, are ministered by them, the
untimely want whereof, (if not wisely prevented) may infer their prejudice,
not curable by to late repentance.

16
The wise man contrary to the sott, carries his mouth in his heart; As a
faithful servant, in a message., imparteth only what he is advised by his
Master; So shall his tongue utter only, what it is mistrusted by the mature
deliberation of the heart. Seeing there is no wise man at all times, I will
endeavor to be wise as often as I can: when I feel my heart rising to my
mouth I will qualify that passion, by enforcing silence to my self, or else
withdrawing from company: when I find my tongue subject to my heart: I will
serve occasion, and do my best.

17
A wise man in civil affairs should resemble the best Turquesse: In religious
duties the worst: that which is most perfect, appears of his own usual
color by day: but by candlelight greeene: So must he vary with the state of
his occasions; security befits not trouble, but circumspection: and jealousy
wrongeth familiarity. David was amiable to his friends: but marched valiantly
against his enemies. The basest is never seen but of one color, so ought his
carriage to be immutable, always the same: constant in his pious denotion:
for true christian zeal, neither admits Apostasy, mutation, nor wavering.

18
To be of great fame, is as dangerous as to have an ill report (says
Tacitus.) Men of great puissance, potencie, and credit, through affection of
popularitie, or being singular, have the commonest instigations, to strange and
haughty enterprises, and are most flexible thereunto: never foreseeing the
danger till they be plunged in it. Such is the spur of ambition, it never
cease to prick forward to honor, and eminency, till by an insatiable
pursuit thereof, they bewray a desire rather of domination then of ruling
well: and to become great, rather then worthy of greatness: which yields
forth the unsavory fruits of pride, and arrogance in austerity, and
oppression, not of gravity, and wisdom in an equal, and commendable
government, grows generally odious. Therefore in rising such should be
cautelous, and provident making the means of their preferment, rather merit
then much forwardness; and the end of it, rather well, then good.

19
An hypocrite, and a flatterer, are tried like an Emraud: which being rubbed
on a Touchstone, leaves the color of copper.

02
The tears of a distressed Soul, are the sweetest, and best spoken orators
for sin: they please Gods eye, they pierce his ear, and compel him to mercy:
though I cannot always weep, when I pray, yet when I only weep for my fins,
I pray effectually.

21
Nimrod proved his presumptuous audacitie, and bootlesse cunning, in devising
a Tower to rescue the people from being drowned, if happily the waters should
ouerflow, as they had done formerly, and so haled down a greater judgment on
them, then it was possible they should ever sustain thereby. I will build the
hope of my safety upon Gods mercy, not on the wisdom of the greatest Monarch.
If I fall under Gods hand, he can, and will assuredly raise me, upon my sorrow
and submission. If I lean to man for issue, in my troubles I shall anger my
God, and gain from thence no other assurance but of my certain confusion.

22
The accustomed folly of choleric revenge may take an end, from that notable
precedent Architas, whose servants were ever happy, when he was angry: because
he would never at such times correct them. Anger (says the wise King) rests
in the bosom of fools: and therefore undoubted wisdom, it is to vanquish
that unruly passion. It is the opinion of some that not to right themselves
being wronged, shows them sottish, and insensible of an injury. Rather had I
be so reputed, then of a fiery spirit, and quarrellsome. Gloriosius est iniuram
tacendo fugere; quam resparendo superare: more glory it is to put off an
injury, by holding ones peace, then get the upper hand by wrangling, and
contention.

23
Since the Phisitia^ knows better what is good for the patient, then himself
does, I will not doubt of Gods mercy, though I do not always receive what I
pray for; for being he knows my imbecilitie such, as asks often amiss, and
what would be hurtful, he is no less merciful in not hearing at some times,
then in giving at other.

24
It is a great inconvenience in that, which the world calls good fellowship, not
to see what suffices; whereby it either amitteth the name of good, or else
such as use it account nothing their good, that is not evil: I will leave with
too little, rather then with too much, lest I seem to allow Satan for an Angel
of light: and the Prodigals wandering, the pathway to heaven.

25
War is not unjustly preferred to a miserable peace,: Then seeing carnal
tranquillity, is a very spiritual misery; I will change it, at all times for
a godly adversity: for the goodness of a thing depending on the end: though I
taste the root bitter, I shall receive a full compensation in the sweetness
of the fruit, which is here but green: and ripeness in heaven.

26
It is bad talking with a madman, not so much for that his heart is depraved:
but because his brain is distempered, and his reason for the time perverted.
It is worse arguing with a fool for though he has a reasonable memory, he is
mad in the heart: he denies God, and therefore will believe no truth: he may
be held up as one in a swoune by force: but cannot stand of himself. I will
not spend my strength in lifting at a logge, having a more necessary building
to follow, lest getting a bruise by the former, I proceed with less profit
in the latter.

27
He that would be what he desires, must desire to be what he should: the
wisest to disemble, has the best means to live, according to this world: but
he that bears true love in an innocent heart, is only wise to eternal life:
by how much sweeter the joy of Angels will be at my conversion, then the
shreiking of hellish furies at my confusion: by how much it is better to have
the testimony of Gods Spirit, then of man, and to be found in Christ, then
hanging at the breasts of the world, I will esteem an honest godly life,
before deceitful, pernicious hypocrisy.

28
For every joy the worldling has, I will choose to receive a stripe at Gods
hands, and yet live more contentedly then he: for how can those joys content
him wherewith he is never filled, but still hungreth, and hunteth after more.
Or how can I be discontented, that unable of my self, to purchase the least
grace, have this means allowed to cause unto me, a most excellent, and
eternal weight of glory.

29
Of the wicked, some hear Gods word willingly, as Herod heard John Baptist:
other tremble in their hearing, as Felix when he heard Paul: but neither was
of grace, the first being occasioned by the fame of the person: the second
enforced by the efficacy of the Scriptures. Some utterly refuse to meddle with
religion, as Gallio; others sleep in the Assembly, and hear nothing, as
Eutichus; others hear, and profit nothing, as the rich man by hearing of
Christ. They differ in show, they are one in effect. I were as good to be
unwilling to hear, as hear, and not practice: as good have mine eyes shut, as
mine ears heavy, and my heart fat; I am each ways the devils subject: and by
trembling at judgment if not thirsting for mercy, I am made his fellow; there
is never a good: the head, the hand, and the foot, cry out together, they are
all damned.

30
By the principles of natural Philisophy, the abundance of honey is chiefly
ingendered in such regions, where the heat of Summer is temperate, and
continual, as well by night, as by day: and by experience, that heart most
commonly nourishes spiritual motions, and sweet contemplation, that is of a
mild, and temperate disposition, not subject to extreme passion, or not often
inflamed therewith: for when passion arises like an angry storm, it tosseth,
and troubles the mind, that during the agitation thereof, it cannot admit the
settling of any calm, or comfortable apprehension.

31
Some I have known observe their friends, for a time more then God: that
having reaped a wished harvest of profit by them, they might after resolve to
a strict, and religious course of life, whereto a mean estate, and a troubled
mind, would not before admit them. Gehazi was clean, before such corruption
made him loathsome. Zaccheus having offered away half his goods, and dissolved
his league with the world, was knit to Christ in love and familiarity, that
was before a stranger: and as I have read, the Loadstone, and the Iron will not
meet, so long as the Diamond lies near. It is impossible for our hardened
hearts to yield unto God or be drawn by his word, whilst the love of riches
sticks in them: If I cannot resolve well being poor: I shall not persist in
a good resolution being rich. If in a clear day I cannot discern colors,
less should I, in a mist; not at all, if I were blind: I will first seek
God, and then no farther. If I want, I know it is my good: for whilst he is my
shepherd, I shall want no manner of thing that is good for me; Rather had I
sustain poverty for my good: then have abundance to annoy me.

32
It is not the mere leaving of all, which seldom happens without grief:
but the contemning of all things, which is a voluntary forsaking of what we
have, even whilst we enjoy it, for the love of Christ; that fitly prepares us,
to run the race of Christianity. Many for lack of this preparatiue, cannot
run at all: others run but faint by the way, and return with shame, and
loss of victory, as Demas; Before I run, I will consider who has run
before me what I run for; and whom I shall encounter by the way. Christ led
the way: I shall follow him: therefore I will be resolute. The prize is a
crown of righteousness, which he holds in his hand ready to set upon my head,
when I shall have overcome: therefore remembering what I have purposely
contemned, and that I have denied my self: neither life, nor death, things
present, nor things to come, nor prncipalities, nor powers, shall set such a
fainting period to my race, but that I will hold it out: for this cause I will
run naked, and stripped of all, by preferring Christ before all, that he may
assist me with his grace, in all; because knowing who, and what my assailants
are, how full of subtilty, and rage, they may not lay hold on me to my
hinderance.

33
The natural man in regard of accelerating death, can say that grief is light
to him that can bear it: howsoever, it is short to him that cannot bear it.
But the child of God dying daily, respects not grief by the measure, and
length: He takes up his cross joyfully, carries it hopefully, and lays it
down gloriously; A natural death turns the momentary crosses of some into
eternal; a Spiritual death unto sin, reduces that eternity to a moment
here, and turns it to a happiness everlasting, in the kingdom of Christ. I
will not lighten my burden, by the memory of a corporal death: but make my
yoke easy, by dying daily without which to die well, can never be.

34
The Laborinth of nature is more intricate, and unsearchable, then the
mysteries of divinity. Man has a whole world of causes, effects, and ends: of
scruples, and ambiguities, in the one to exquire and discuss, by himself, and
the help of his own invention, and when he has strained his capacity to
the highest, he must leave more knots, and difficulties, untouched, then he
has cleared and untied: and what he imagines perspicuously resolved, lies
still in the way of reasonable opposition, as partly true, and partly false, in
all; like the Sun, with the better half eclipsed. But in the Theory of
salvation, if any more causes be necessary to be known then the efficient,
meritorious and isntrumental, which are the Father, the Son, and Faith: any
other effect, then the saving of the soul: or other end, but the glory of God,
we may find them truly revealed, by the Spirit of truth. I will pass by
that immense University of Gods inscrutable wisdom with admiration: and
contain my self in the survey, and search of mine own little world, where I
find a tenement of mortal clay, inhabited with an immortal guest: the reason
whereof in their differences I conceive to be: that the body being framed, out
of so frail, and contemptible a matter, should waxing lofty be beaten down
with that inherent apprehension. Thou art but dust, and ashes; And thy soul
contrariwise, ennobled with the divine image of her infusor should loath to
vouchsafe, an inglorious descent to the allectations of the flesh. The end of
their conjunction also, that the body, as through the ponderousnes of the
predominant elements, it declineth, and sinketh downward: so through the
property of innate corruption it yielding to a sluggishnesse, sleep, and
death in sin, should by the lively, and quickening faculty of the soul, be
elevated, and ronzed up, to associate her in an heavenly conversation.

35
I find an even carriage is best, that may impart courtesy to all; too much
familiarity, and secrets unto none. It was a wise shift of a noble Roman,
whose Lady importunate to know what was debated of, that day, at the Council
Table (when he could not but in some sortsatisfie her instant demand) he
answered the Priests had seen a Lark flying in the air, with a golden helmet
on his head, and holding a spear in his foot: which being heard, she broke
the matter immediately, to one of her maids: she again to an other of her
fellows, and so forward, till it was spread through the City, and passed for
current: but then it received a check, and so was stayed. Some friends are of
that sort, they will curiously diue into ones breast, and by serious
inquisition, make themselves privy to the secrets of his knowledge: to such I
will commit no more then what my mind is ouercharged withal, at the present,
meaning to take it up again in another place: others are faster locked; but as
faulty otherwise: though Musk be one of the sweetest perfumes, it is none of
the wholesomest: and familiarity, though delightful, is incommodious for the
concomitant disrespect, and following contempt.

36
So far as ancient Fathers accord with holy Writ, I will make use of them:
and thus, I will carry Augustine in my heart, Bernard in my mouth, and the rest
of them before mine eyes: for soundness befits our faith: a patheticall, and
feeling speech is requisite in prayer: and religious precedents, are necessary
for the whole life.

37
Humane society is like a Ruby that being put into the fire certain hours,
becomes afterward of the color of a burning coal: If I addict my self to
the company of the virtuous, I shall be answerably affected, if of the
laciuious, and disordered, of a like blemished reputation.

38
Alfonsus King of Aragon, after an orator had concluded an ample Panagerick of
his praises, answered if thou have said truth, I thank God for it: if
otherwise God grant me grace, that I may do it. Vicious philaty, is now
general Vmpire, insomuch as he that praises most, pleases best: and it is
hard to say whither that good King did more heartily attribute glory unto God:
or most now arrogate merit to themselves. The faithful here, see God darkely
through a glass; which may be a reason the greater part see him not at all,
and therefore glory, in a sacralegious usurpation of his due praises, as not
acknowledging any supernatural efficient cause, besides their own nature, and
dexterity. If any thing praise worthy proceed from me; I am but the
instrument, God is the principal agent: It is the effect of his grace, and the
manifestation of his goodness. God in every creature, set a chracter of his
glory, in man his whole image, that he might be known to be wholly his, and
not his own.

39
Cruel inventions, when flowing from ambitious policy, are usually laid
frustrate, to the vexation of the complotters; the proceedings of Pharaoh, and
Haman against the Jews, do witness it; wherein we see cares, and anxieties
(by due justice) aggravated upon them both, and Gods people safely delivered
from the malice of them both. If I be not conscious I will not fear the
disfavor of the mightiest: their most envious proiects of injustice shall be
reflected from the glass of mine innocence, to their own trouble and
disgrace.

40
When the Sons of God joined themselves, to the fair daughters of men, they
brought forth no other fruit but Giganticke, and monsterous ofsprings: and
when the soul condescendeth to the smooth enticement; of the flesh; thereon
follows the conception of hellish thoughts, which break forth into horrid
and mischievous designements.

41
The Scythian will accuse the Roman air as infectious, and breeding fevers,
which is nevertheless, very wholesome: The Blackmoore will deride the Indian, as
ill colored, less beautifufull then himself: So custom, and nature
acquainting every one best, with his own, confirms in him also a better
liking of it, then of others. I will accustom my self, so near as I can, to
that which is good, that I may dispraise nothing in others, but what is evil:
and like nothing in my self, but what I cannot live well without.

42
I will not be to liberal in praising any, nor to forward; this savors of
folly; that of flattery: be his virtues resplendent, they will shine to
others, as well as to me: if more concealed, and private, they shall be
mistrusted of the ignorant for all me: and I happily for them, if more particular,
in application to my self, then to others: they will be neglected as less
material, and impertinent; much forwardness, is a a note of indiscretion,
euincing my affectation rather of the party, then of his good parts. Whatsoever
I know of the well deserving (though I may speak it publicly for the
encouragement of others) yet will I be no common actor, but rather a studious
imitator thereof. Else am I like a prodigal Painter, that pourtrates every
well favored face, he sees in the street, and gives them, to as many other as
he meets; I will more advance the worthy after death then before, as
honoring chiefly their virtues, which are simply amiable, and man for them.

43
When I remember Joseph in prison, I consider the faithful in oppresion: But
being favored by his keeper, enlarged by the King, and advanced to be Ruler
over all Egypt, I see in that a merciful calm ensuing every tempest of their
misery. I will esteem Gods rod as a mundifying plaster, and hope for cure
when I find it applied: yea I will desire to sail in such storms, that I may
look for mercy, and obtain it, which else is not due to me being a bastard,
and no son.

44
Devotion is the fuel: meditation the fire: prayer the bellows. Devotion is
cold till warmed by meditation, and then burns not, till kindled by prayer.

45
Drunkenesse is the blab of secrets, the author of frivolous discourse, the
dissolution of amity, the advocate of adultery, and pandore to the soul,
excluding virtue, and letting in a crew of all beastly outrages. I will dread
it as a pestilence, and shun it as a Basilike, for the loathsome, and
dangerous infection: seeing it costs that in a short part of the shortest day,
which has been with much care, many years preserved: a good name: and so
wrongs the weal of the soul before consecrated to God, that then it lies
insensibly buried in the overwhelmed dunghill of the body.

46
I have read of a bragging Spaniard, that sought to advance his credit; for
that in one night he had lost ten thousand crowns, at dice. In temporalls,
an honest, frugall purchasing most avails the estate, and credit, in Gods
Church: the good usage and augmentation of our stipend is most commended, as
most beneficial to the soul; only in Satan's dominion, his vassals gain
grace by impiety, and thrine by scattering; for being a kingdom of disorder,
and confusion, all things are carried there in a contrary course: they are best
with him, that are worst with God.

47
The Sables have their hair thickest in the winter, and cleaning fastest to
the skin: and are therefore then chiefly hunted. The faithful in
adversity, are richest in good works, and most exemplary in their virtues,
and therefore are then much hunted by the Devil, to draw them to distrust, and
drive them to despair.

48
Jacob in his journey to Haran, would have bread to eat, and clothes to put on:
so let God grant me to feed on Christ by faith, and be clothed with his
righteousness, and I shall freely confess the Lord is my God: and faithfully
hold out to my iourneys end.

49
Religion is like the holding up of Moses hand, when Joshua fought with
Amaleck, whereby, if it be forcible carried with zeal, we are sure to prevail
with God, for the pardon of our sins, and peace of our souls: but if feeble,
and defective, it gives our roaring adversary the upper hand of us. Therefore I
will not pass the time present in loosnes, and vanity, wherein I should make
provision for the future: but I will be always laboring to augment my stock
of christian knowledge, for the strengthening of my religion: thinking I can
never be to covetous of such a good, because the happiness thereby procured,
I am sure, can never be to much.

50
True zeal (like the fire upon the Altar) must always burn and never go out
or as the stone Abestus being once hot, it must never wax stark cold: for if
the flame be thoroughly extinguished, it becomes from a real to a bare
nominall: and then were the case mine own, I know I should soon fall from
grace to a reprobate sense, and so from hope, to desperation, and from heaven
to hell.

Finis.
To the generous my worthy Friend, Master T. A. e Soc. Temp. Inter.
If that you muse, to see your Name so short,
My Muse does render this just reason for it.
I grudge the paper should take any part.
Of what is written wholly in my heart.
Kind Sir, you may think it fit, I should have dedicated this practice to
some very enemy: that hereby, I might have taught him to become my friend, and
Suitable to mine own humor: but knowing that a horse marred in the breaking,
will ever after retain some iadish trick; and that an ill bred nature, can
never make a good Friend with all the after teaching; I have on the contrary,
committed my Friend unto my Friend, where it shall be sure of friendly
entertainment: were it but my servant, I would not send it to Nabal, for a
churlish repulse: much less to Hanun to be shorn, and torn, and after
scorned, and laughed at: if not my servant; how then my Friend? which being
right, and such an one as I desire to have, I Kindly recommend it to your
self, which shall ever tell you, in my absence, that I love you; which (I am
sure Isocrates says) is the property of a true Friend: and only enough for
me, who being present with you, receive such supply of your courtesies, by the
minute; that I have not time enough to count them: less, to study to requite
them, till I am parted from you. The God of peace be with you: and guide your
steps to the glory of his saving grace.

Your loving Cousin, and faithful Friend C. G.

Lectori cuicunque beneuolo.
Excipe (quod fas est) Nebulonem to^le Nouatum.
Integer, and ounctis, Author, amicus erit
Neutamen nisanus videar, necposse vouere.
Omnes sic vellem, me redamare pios.
Tui cupientis. C. G.
FRiendly Reader, there be a great many whom I desire to have occasion to know
by the name of friends: which nevertheless I would not choose to carry in my
bosom, nor make them my familiars: I have resolved thee why. I desire
whatsoever thou art, no exceptions may be taken, but if thy conscience check
thee, amend: knowing it is more laudable to be a Damon, then a Damocles, a
firm friend, then a fawning flatterer. I have taxed none in particular, (which
to do I ever counted envious, odious) but made it known, that there are some
false, selfelouing, temporizing, of all sorts, with whom I will in no sort, if
I can choose, be sorted.

Farewell.
My Friend.
IT is a happiness to have Friends: but a greater happiness not to stand in
need of them: for they serve most, in these days, (like a Gown, over a
Ierkin) to keep him warm, that is warm, already: or as bladders under the
arms of a cunning swimmer to offer him help, that can shift well enough,
without them.

2 I would have my friend in one respect like a Gloeworme: to shine most in the
dark: but not in an other, to make show of that he has not to perform.

3 I would have him in one respect like a fish, that will come best to the
bait, in rainy weather: but not in another; then to be most to seek, when I
should use him. Or in one respect like an Eele: to be found most certainly, in
a thunder: but not in another: then to slipp from me, when I think my hold
surest.

4 I would have him in one respect like a Toade: to carry a Jewel in his head
(wisdom:) but not in an another: to bear poison in his heart.

5 I would have my friend of whither sex, in one respect like the purest
metal; to waste nothing in the trial: but not in an other: to be common to
all, as well, as to my self.

6 I would have him in one respect like a green Peasestalke; not only to show
fair blossoms, but perform answerable fruit: but not in another; to be so
temporary, and wither before winter.

I would have him in one respect like the Horseleach, to cling fast to me for
my cure: but not in another, when he has sucked his fill, to fall from me.

8 I would have him to me as I would be to him: when occasion shall make me
the Orb, then him to be the Planet, and on the conrrary: that we might follow
one another motion: and help finish each others course, more then our own.

9 I would have him like the Rainbow, a messenger of fair weather after a
tempest: but not like two together; neither do I desire him, of so many
colors.

10 I would have him like Hesperus: though it bring news of night: yet it
shines, and gives light, with a steadfast, and incomparable clerenesse, above
all other.

11 I would not have him like a Comet that makes a starlike show, but differs
from it, in matter, nature, and place.

12 I would not have him like the twilight to carry the face of day, and night.

13 Nor like a snaile, that being gently handled, and apishly talked unto put
forth its horns, and discouers it self: but with the least prick striks into
the shell.

14 I would not have him a Meteore imperfectly mixed.

15 I will be to him a bow of steel, to shoot his arrow, as well as mine
own, without breaking.

16 I could endure my she friend, in one respect like a Be, that is busy for
the wealth of her hiue: but not in another: to sting me, when I use her but
kindly, and touch her softly. Or else like a toothlesse Snake, I would be glad
to possess her, when all her poison is out. Otherwise if she will needs prove
treacherous. I can wish her a very Sloeworme, blind, and deaf, that having a
sting, she may neither hear any cause why: nor see, how to anoy me with it.

Equals are best in every kind,
To bear two bodies of one mind,
All disproportion, Nature flies
Friendship enstrang'd from nature, lies.
Were I therefore worthy to enjoy a Friend of mine own choosing; I would not
have him much greater then my self: for greatness is commonly attended by
ambition: and that suggesteth, how it is unfit for Eagles to play with flies;
they cannot rise by stooping, but if they will build their neft in the Sun,
they must still be looking upward, after it: to look a squint, marrs the
grace, and comeliness of that part, which should be the seat of fear, and
respect. Therefore such an one, will not, unless in private bestow the
hear^les comfort, of a minutes familiar conference; or a pleasing aspect; and
to be commoner with the Camelion, will quickly starve me. It may be good to
have such a Favorite: would he put into my hands a deed of gift, for mine
authority, I will say so to. But for me to gather peables, till I have
promised pearls come from India, I had as good creep into the ground, there
to take up a certain, and durable rest, as be over wrought, and pined, with an
empty expectation of causuall promise. Relation unto him will somewhat avail
the credit. I am content to justify it: but to have credit to take up, and not
ability to lay down, will imparage the honesty; yet will I reverence him as
my superior, and esteem his proferred courtesies: but never with overmuch
confidence, least through such presumption, neglecting to provide otherwise for
my self, I become at length utterly destitute.

I would not have one, though mine equal in birth; yet too rich, being my
self but poor: for riches will transport him, so far from reason, that if
he be a young denizon, and has a rib less then a married man, he becomes
proud, luxurious, and prodigal, which are three parasites, that will flatter
his estate from himself, his good liking from me, his fidelity from all. His
clothes are fitted for the Stage of great men's Tables, where he procures, the
hierogliphick of the Seruingmans larger observation in a clean trencher: and
the vulgar to salute his worship: whersoeuer he bathes his liver with wine, he
must purge his reins with women: to all conuentions of good fellowship, an
affirmation, if you shall meet us there, stands as firm as an inuitation, with
entreaty, in such obedience, does he subscribe unto his pleasure; and after
he is blown up with a fiery whiffe, and that Bacchus, has tied the wings of
Mercury, to his tongue, then to every insinuating humorist, does he break his
heart by corners, which is round to none; and in the dissoluing of the
dissolute and drunken Session, he lets loose his Angels, to return him the
superscription of Bonus socius.

If an old Stoic whose heremitical affections have wandered alone, past the
cape de bona spe: he shall have more cosins, then kindred, be better befriended
then Nature ever meant him, and some will rather derive their alliance from
Iapheth, then they will be excluded his entertainment, which is the blood of
their hope, that they shall have the wearing of his shoes after his death: they
hang up their bags, as spiders their cobwebbs waiting with his fall, what may
fall into them. So that I, once moved from my station, and looking that the
bias of his love should hold (as anciently) toward me, can blaze no other
Arms but a dog, snatching at a fly, with this Motto, (By chance I catch, or
miss) Therefore I will not cast up my lure, to a Buzzard, when I am sure to
catch the best Faulcon by the means; I will pass no estate of my love to him
that will give me no better security for my pay.

If an Adamite, that has his Eve, and young evils about him he will in things
forbidden, obey the voice of the woman, therefore not hearken to mine that
first violated Gods; so unless I be hers, as well as his, I shall stand with
my foot in the Sun, and my head in the fire: if I be affected of both, and
the children unnatural, not yielding to the Parents will, a law to them, nor
sealing with awful consent, what they determine, I shall have love with a
vengeance: no kindness without a curse; and yet in future time, I, or mine
stand engaged to them, for the good turns done by their Ancestors without
them. I must thank the Kite, for my hens well brooding her chickens.

I would not have him of the lowest condition, my self being fairly
forfortunate: for such imparitie, is like a change, that has one link of
Iron, another of thread, which being used, is of no durance: as there is no
comparison between our estates, so cannot he prosecute any frienely office for
me, to the credit of my cause, the cause that I trust him withal, being his
greatest credit. Neither can his love, be in the incorrupted nature of true
friendship toward me: but as the Touchstone, to the gould, that upon every
trial, takes away some of the substance: he will love me, for that I have, so
that what I should love in him he has not, neither trustiness, nor loyalty.

But I would have him indifferently estated: single, discreet, and faithful:
that by the first I might use him (upon occasion) to cover my fortunes
imperfections, like a two leaf'd curtain with all, keeping his own
undiscovered: for being by by love united, as two flowers upon one stalk, it
is natural, to receive our nourishment from the same root: one soul to
quicken two bodies, and with that better part, all secondary, and inferior
things, to be made common, for our sustentation, else were he, but as painting
to nakedness, that will not hide it, but make it seen the more; for notice
taken of our loue^; but that it is weakest in the most useful operation, does
mark us out for Elephants cast upon the ground, that being down, cannot raise
themselves;

Single that he may be vacant for me above all others; his affectious free to
himself, not distracted with diverse objects; nor surprised with the mistaken
merits of strangers: that I might be to him, a wife, a friend, an ally, a
self, and all in one, whose several fruition, were more troublesome,
uncertain, commonly interlaced with solicitude, and grief. So should he have
most of his wealth, in one Jewel, that is lighter of carriage, and my self,
be an happy heir of so many loves; yet would I not be so injurious to his
virtues, nor selfe-louing, to stop up that cunduit, to mine only use, whose
springs might pleasure others, and me, at my pleasure before others: nor desire
to confine the Sun to mine own Garden: Let him be courteous, friendly, and
affable unto all, so I live under his Equenoctiall, to be cherished with his
most forcible, and lively influence: or have him always for my Zenith. If I
seem partial in my desire, to have him single to me, as I cannot be to him:
this shall suffice, that where two, or more stand bound, the Obligation is the
surer.

In counsel, and difcretion, as a Seamarke to the Mariner, that by observing
him in both, I may beware all dangerous passages, keep a loofe from the
extremes of Rocks, and quicksands, and guide the ship of my body, safely
between them both: And I will requite him with this conceit that I am never
secure, but when I have him in view, In fidelity like a Butlers Box, whose
heart none may open, to take account of my secrets, but my self.

True faith is rare on earth with all,
Says wise (but faithless) Inuenall.
Above the Phoenix, builds that Swan,
That never looks so low as Man.
It makes Arabia fortunate,
Alone to have a matelesse mate.
The world besides, is not so blessed,
To make this bird (true faith) a nest.
Among the inferior Court Relatiues, there is scarce one to be found so hardy
as a Nightingale, that will for his friend, endure his breast against a thorn:
or be so watchful, to do him good in his necessity: but like the subtle Hiena
they are ever gaping toward the coast that is cleerest, and turning with the
Helitrope, only to the Sun: if they stand in need of you, for the furtherance
either of their credit, or commodity, then you shall find them active in the
addition of fractions: piecing up many broken terms of Art, to make one
haulting, incredible sentence: and in multiplication of no simple numbers of
promises, when the product shall be nothing, but two semilunes, with a Vacuum
interstitium () And if they do profer, an example of their gratitude, their
fingers are so contracted with the crampe of covetousness, that they cannot
without much ado be rid of it: which is as much correspondent to the true rule
of friendship, as a straw to the strength of Hercules.

There is another kind of politicians, whom union, that mother of necessary
peace has made us acquainted withal, among whom if we will obtain a friend,
(but enjoy him long we cannot) we must deal as for trash at Fayres, give money
for him; and he will afterward be to us, as Esops Snake to the husbandman,
when we have relieved, and franked him, then he explode, and scorn us.

There is a sort of gentry, among whom if you taste a friend, you shall find him
like mustard, sauce for most kinds of meat, which some like, and some loath, to
much of him, will make your eyes run over: every one that list may enjoy him in
like manner, and measure, but one grain of him, is better then a spoonful for
relish; he is aloes covered with sugar, and has nothing sweet but the
superficies: If you believe him you are sped of a friend, as Paris was of
Hellen, that was fair enough: but if you weigh him, he becomes altogether as
light: he will make you freely two firm premises in Darij, from whence you shall
expect to gather somewhat for your turn: but will conclude (like the former) in
celarent, with a nihil minus: to these this is also coincident with the rest,
that reproof, and advice will be like a fly, in a dogs ear, they will make
them the^ fly from you, or at lest, like a thorn in a horses foot, cause them
to halt, so long as you use the^

If you seek in a pair of hie shoes for a friend, you shall find one in
appera^ce, of a simple, ingenuous and honest composition: but he will stand
you in no more stead, then an addle egg, which seems fair in the shell,
till it be broken: and then it smells: his head shall be so foxfurred, with old
fragments of Law, and preventing suspicions, that it will be hard for you upon
trial to escape from him, with any matter of courtesy, or if you do, he will
make you smell of it.

FINIS.

