Natures Cruel Step-Dames: OR, Matchless Monsters of the Female Sex;
Elizabeth Barnes, and Anne Willis.

Who were executed the 26. day of April, 1637. at Tyburne, for the unnatural
murdering of their own Children.

Also, herein is contained their several Confessions, and the Courts just
proceedings against other notorious Malefactors, with their several offenses
this Sessions.

Further, a Relation of the wicked Life and impenitent Death of John Flood, who
raped his own Child.

Printed at London for Francis Coules, dwelling in the Old Bailey. 1637.

A Narration of the Diabolical seduction of Elizabeth Barnes, late of
Battersey in the County of Surrey widow, mercilesly to murder Susan Barnes her
own natural Child.
A Whole month, as she confessed in the public hearing of diverse persons of
good repute, this Savage continued with this hellish fire kindled in her
breast, violently at the last breaking forth into the unnatural deprivation of
the life of the fruit of her own womb. The subtle serpent Satan, that thus
long time had possessed her, puts into her mind the manner how to put in
execution her diabolical execrable intention on the innocent child, without
its least suspicion, as you may perceive by the sequel of the History. To
entice the child unto its slaughter, and to go abroad with her, she provided
the 24 day of March last 1637. very early in the morning, an Apple Pie, a
Herring Pie, Raisins of the Sun, and other fruits which she carried with her;
accustomed baits, used by loving Parents, to quiet and still their children in
their unquietness, but this creature otherwise, to destroy her child by that
means. These things being thus prepared beforehand, and the child beholding
them, did set an edge on its affections, willingly to accompany her cruel
mother, in her travel toward her long home.

The innocent Lamb and ravenous Wolf both spend out the day together; with
joyful expectation, the one willingly endures the travel and heat of the
day, to go to be placed with a kinswoman of hers, as was pretended, but alas
this was but flattery to shed innocent blood. Toward the evening of the same
day, these her alluring kind of deadly junkets, she brings with her child,
into a Wood called Wormewall Wood, being in the Parish of Fulham in the County
of Middle-sex, some 4. miles distance from the place where she dwelt; being
there in secret, and covered with darkness, she faineth unto the child this
excuse, saying, that she was very weary, and was not able to go any further,
but must upon necessity stay a while, there to rest and ease her self, the
which the poor child, as she said, most lovingly entreated her to do, being
also glad of such repose. Being set down together, she takes out of her
basket, the Pyes, and fruit, and sets them before the child, for to eat of
them, which did so.

Thus having eaten of such things formerly provided for it, being tired with
going so far a journey, it being but of the age of eight years, afterward
sweetly falls into a fast sleep, which was very oportune for her mothers
accursed design, for that same night about the hours of xj. and xij. she
drew out of her sheath a knife, and with that knife barbarously did cut the
throat of the child. Soon after this bloody fact, being done by her, her eyes
were opened, that she beheld her miserable condition, and that, that by her
bloody hands had been done, that could no way be again undone. She resolved
before hand, how to dispose of her self after the fact committed. For she
carried with her the instrument of her own death, as she did the child's; for
it a knife, so a halter, wherewith to end her own life, and attempted it, but
had not power to lay violent hands on her self, being mercifully thereof
prevented by the all-powerfull hand of heaven: after this first attempt, as she
said, she was strongly set on again by the Devil to drown her self, but
that prevailed not against her, but forthwith brake out then into a great
passion, as it were a fountain of tears, humbly and heartily imploring
Heavens mercy and forgiveness for her bloody crying-fact.

Her guilty conscience, will no way permit her to rest, of show her any place
of refuge for safety; but according unto that saying of the Psalmist, it
falls upon her. Evil shall hunt the wicked person to overthrow them, and so
it did, to the full satisfaction of all the beholders. For whither does this
affrighted Creature, run or flee suppose ye, but even unto the gates of
Justice, crying, as it were there, for Justice to be rendered according to her
demerit? From the wood she flees into Kensington, and there hides her self all
in straw, in the Barn of one Disney: and being there found, suspicion of this
murder was laid unto her charge, which she confessed to his wife and servant,
and afterward she was carried unto Master Pen a Justice in that Town, unto
whom she confessed the same fact.

This fact being rumored abroad, I went unto Newgate to visit this miserable
delinquent, who at my first view of her matron like aspect, induced me to enter
into present discourse with her, to prevail if I could possibly, to find out
the cause that moved her unto such unheard of cruelty: she answered me again,
none but the Devil alone tempted her thereunto, and with tears fast trickling
down her cheeks, desired my self, with the rest that stood by, to pray unto
Almighty God, to take mercy on her poor sinful soul, to save that from hell.

A second time I urged her, to discover the cause of that fact, and disburden
her conscience, and somewhat then fell from her, thus saying, that she had spent
all the estate she had upon one that pretended love unto her, and being by
that means become poor and indebted, knew not what would become of her, but
instantly resolved on this desperate course, leaving such deep impression in
her mind, with the continuance of time in not disclosing of it, that the
temptation, and resolution waxed daily stronger, and powerfully wrought on her.
Being demanded what she thought should become of her after the fact done, thus
replied, that she attempted to hang her self, but had not power, nor
doubtless could not have such a hard heart, to kill the child, had it been but
awake, as it was a sleep. For that time I departed from her, and freshly the
third time endeavored to discover more but could not, but constantly she
adhered to her former confession, no whit varying.

Serious advertisements unto all good Christians, and cautions, by this
ignorant sinful woman's sudden downe-fall.
IF this woman's house had been set on fire, doubtless she would have made
such an out-crie in the streets, that all her neighbors must of necessity
rise, and add unto her all help possible to quench the fire. Her heart was
here set on fire by hell, musing to perpetrate mischief, her tongue is silent,
and mouth is shut, when it should have been wide open, to cry aloud unto God,
for grace and mercy, and to crave the help of the effectual prayers of Gods
holy Ministers, and Congregations of his Saints here on earth, to deliver her
out of the snare and bondage of Satan, whom she voluntarily obeyed. If a limb
had been broken, she would not rest satisfied till a Chyrurgion had been
present for to cure her.

If she had fallen suddenly desperate sick for fear of death, hastily they
post and run to seek for a Physician; but her soul is sick, and draws
nigh downward into Hell, whatcare or cure of that, where was God or his
Ministers thought of all this while, blessed Saint Paul so soon as the Viper
seized on his hand, shook it off immediately into the fire: a whole month
this venomous Viper, Murder, lodges in her heart; God, prayer unto him, and
hearing of his Word all this while was laid aside. Cunning deluding Satan
sits likewise on her tongue, as he took seizure on her heart, that he tyeth
fast, not able to pray, which might have prevailed against him. Devoute Prayer
is his scourge, and faithless faint-hearted people only give place unto him,
and sink down at his feet.

The Devil is but a weak faint-hearted Coward, Resist him, says the blessed
Apostle, and he will fly from you. This kind of evil spirit, says our
Savior Christ, cannot be cast out, but by fasting and prayer. Our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ in the disconsolate time of his most bitter passion on the
Cross for our sakes, to encounter Satan, to comfort himself in that great
Agony he was in, and to get the Conquest of that grand captain of all
mischief, prayer unto his heavenly Father in the Garden, inculcates frequently
this duty unto his distressed followers, Watch and pray, and joins the
necessity of it, least ye fall into Temptation. Is a weak child able to
stand in the way of a Lion stirred up unto fury and rage, no whit possible:
much less is a sinful weak man able to grapple with the powerful strength
of sin and Satan; and therefore pray, that power may be given unto you from
above, to resist, the least of whose temptations, ye are no ways able to
resist of your selves. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, and watch for your adversary the
Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Diabolus
non dormit, the Devil is not idle, neither sleeps nor slumbers, but watches
to take his advantage, seeks which way unawares to rush in suddenly upon
poor souls. By lamentable late experience, Satan has foiled many, witness
those weekly bills of casualties for London and Middlesex. The Devil although
he is impudent and potent, the holy Apostle in the ninth verse, shows a
means there, to abate his pride who resist in the faith, a faithful Christian
makes him to fly, fear, and quake. In the first of Samuel 17. chap. 40. verse.
There is mention made, that David chose him five smooth stones out of a brook,
with one of them he flew Goliath.

Medici utuntur diversis medicamentis ad diuersos morbos at Christianis contra
omnia mala unicum remedium est praecationis medicina Granatensis.

Learned Physicians apply various medicines unto the nature of the disease, but
unto Christians only, one Sovereign medicine, as an Antidote is prescribed,
against all manner of malignous diseases, the only remedy is medicine of
Prayer, the healthy man prayer preserves alive, the sick man Prayer restores
health: In time of war prayer is the victorious Conqueror; In the time of
peace prayer is the infallible Defender of King and people, in health and
prosperity: Saint James 5 chapter 15. verse. Sins are promised to be
forgiven, and the prayer of a righeeteous man avails much if it be seruent:
Praecibus, non passibus itur ad Deum, ergo ascendat oration, ut descendat
gratia: as the foot by paces carry the body, so the soul is carried up unto
Heaven by Prayer; therefore let thy prayer ascend up unto thy God daily, that
he may send down, the dew of his holy Spirit into thy soul. Deijcitur Satan
cum tu ascenderis, ascendis duobus modis, meditatione et oratione, meditatio
quod decet docet, oration quod deest obtinet, Gregory. Satan is cast under thy
foot when thou raisest up thy soul toward Heaven by Prayer. Two manner of
ways there are that man may climb up unto the top of Heavens holy hill,
namely meditation and prayer; meditation is prayers hand-mayd, Meditation
instructs, what becomes the soul to do, prayer supplies what is wanting
unto the soul.

Good King David in the 5. Psalm. ver. 3. made a promise unto Almighty God, and
what was it. My voice shall thou hear betimes, Oh Lord, early in the morning
will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up: A domino hoc iubemur
orare, ut ab eo qui secretorum cognitor est, recipiamus orationis occultae
mercedem: Chrysoftom. in Math. Homil. 8.

We are of the Lord Jesus commanded this chiefly (to pray) that of him unto
whom the secrets of all hearts are manifest, we may receive openly a heavenly
Reward of our Prayers offered in secreets, to conclude this, as the Psalmist
advised, Power out your prayers before him, without which no minuite of the day
can be happy unto us. I will commend unto your daily meditations and practice
that repleate zealous Collect prescribed to be read in the second Sunday in
Lent, and the Lord give a daily blessing to those that do embrace the
instruction.

The last Caution is the neglect of Gods Minister in not repairing unto him.
Sin is like a spot in a garment, at the first it may be easily expunged, but
by continuance, it gathers more and more soil unto it, making it so
difficult that it freteth the garment into pieces, before it can be clean.
Ignorant people behold their sins, through the spectactles of their own
fantasies, they extend or extenuate their sins as they please, thereby
deceiving themselves, some make sins lesser, and and others greater than they
are, and it cannot otherwise possible be; because, they are not able to judge
of the difference being ignorant and unlettered, than a blind man can
distinguish colors.

A stumbling block into this women's way the Devil casts, not to go unto her
Minister unto whom the Almighty GOD had given the pastoral Cure of her soul,
to reveal her mind unto him, for fear of revealing it again, what does GOD
entrust us with your dear souls? and will not you trust us with your filthy
sins? to discover them, to disburden your heavy laded consciences, will you
not make nice to show a noisome foul ulcerated body, and show the place where
it paineth you most to the chyrurgion, to have thereby ease, and be too too
curious in the matters of your soul; your abominable sins let them alone
untouched, or not confessed at all, which by confession may be lessened, and
people made wary to walk more circumspectly, and the heinousness of sin
being set before men's eyes, may deter them from committing of them again.
Beloved, a weak slight and subtilty in the Devil, that withholds the poor
pensive sinner, from his ghostly comforter (Confession) what then? oh no, by no
menaes, I will not do it, he will reveile me, will you not blush for shame,
nor hold it no blemish, to harbor wicked thoughts in your hearts, which GOD
knows, and sees, and in the open day of the world exorbitantly commit them,
and is this a greater offense to confess them, and to turn from them, judge
ye? Our aim of the Church of England is not such, as that of Rome, to creep
into men's secrets hearts, to hold them in awe, but discover their sins, to
save that way their souls, and as for disclosing of such kind of persons, let
me advise them, not in the least manner to doubt our secrecy, we have learned
better, and desire our Auditors to be otherwise persuaded of us. Whether is God
or men wiser? the holy Spirit advises unto this duty of Confession, by that
means ye lessen sin in you, and cast out the Devil. Christ cured none but
those that showed their disease, and believed his power, by confession of sin
the way for the Lord Jesus is prepared, and by the prayer of the faithful
Minister unto God for the poor penitent sinner, his sins are forgiven him,
Satan cast out, and his soul better armed against his future strong
temptations. King David resolved saying: Palm 38. verse 18. I will confess my
wickedness, and be sorry for my sin.

Magnus accessus ad Deum, cognitio est infirmitatis suae, the step that we set
forwards Hsaven, after we have fallen into sin, is the unfaigned confessing of
our downfall by sin. S. Luke 15. chap. with the prodigal? I will go to my
father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and thee. Psalm.
15. Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight, at last he
prays, O cleanse thou me from my secret faults, there is none whole in my
body or soul by reason of sin.

32. Psalm. 5, 6 verse. I will knowledge my sin unto thee, and mine
unrighteousness have I not hid. I said, I will confess my sins unto the
Lord, and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. These were the ensuing
comforts and favors of God to the sinner; remission of sins for confessing of
them. Read the 5th. Chap. of James, ver. 6. Acknowledge your faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. Our blessed Savior,
when he sent his Disciples into the world, as he gave them a Commission for to
preach, so likewise power over unclean spirits, to cast them out. In a word,
he gave them power of sins in the total lump: Whosoevers sins ye retain
(says he) they are retained, and whosoevers sins ye remit, they are remitted.
What greater comfort could Christ pronounce then say, Son, thy sins be
forgiven? and how did the Jews disdain at those words, saying, Who can
forgive sins, but God only? Christ readily replieth, and giveth-them a token of
the truth thereof, by the peraliptick man to rise up and walk before them,
That ye may know the Son of man has power to forgive sins here on earth, I say
unto thee, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk. Primus ad indulgentiam gradus est
agnoscere delictum. The chiefest way to obtain mercy at Gods hands for sins
past, is to acknowledge the offenses done. Dum agnoscit reus, ignoscit Deus.
and the sinner is not readier to confess his wickedness, but God is as ready
again for to forgive them. Novit Deus omnia, vocem tamen tuam expectet, si
taces Secretarius es Diaboli, says S. Ambr. God knows all things, yet the
voice, and confession of penitent sinners, he regards, and expects; If a
sinner be at any time silent, he is but the Devils Secretary.

The Confession of Elizabeth Barnes, the 26. of April, 1637, at the place of
Execution.
DVring the time she was in prison, she concealed her Adultery, that she was
begot with Child, by him on whom she had wasted her estate, and deluded with
hopes of Marriage. His name, as she said, was Richard Evans, a Tailor dwelling
in Battersey in the County of Surrey: upon whose conscience lies very heavy,
his false dealing with the poor woman. I wish that he may heartily ask God
and the world forgivenes for his impieties in public. Through whose deceits
and flatteries, this poor creatures ruin was occasioned. And so much for
Elizabeth Barnes.

A Relation of Anne Willis, the manner of of the murdering of her own Child,
confessed by her at the place of Execution.
Upon an Inquisition of one of the Coroners Inquest, for the County of
Middlesex, upon the view of the body of her Basterd-child, taken out of a vault
in Rosemary Lane, by Tower Hill, by her therein thrown, being by the Jury
made, return unto the Coroner of Murder, Warrants were immediately sent out
unto all parts for the apprehending of the said Ann Willis, who upon the
seventh day of March, 1637, was taken, and brought before Sir Thomas Iaye, unto
whom she confessed the fact: That the Child was borne alive: there was two upon
oath justified it, that she said it was alive. Oh cruel Monsters of that
tender Sex. Can a woman forget the child of her womb? Isa. 9. Heavens infinite
compassion is compared unto the Mother and Infant, the near tie between them,
and the entire care of mothers over their children! When I lift up mine eyes
toward the Heavens, and again cast them down to the earth; Birds and Beasts,
me thinks, do rise up in judgment against these unnatural cruel Beasts in
women's shapes. The Swallow flies high, and in the towering Trees, Churches, and
Houses build their Nestes, to preserve their young ones (...); The Sparrow
watches alone on the House top, as careful what it had hatched and brought
forth. Beasts, such as Lions, Woolves, Tigers and Foxes, have secret caves and
woods where they hide there young, to preserve and foster them alive: But these
bloody dogs degenerate from them. O let therefore the memorial of them perish.

A Relation of John Flood, late of S. Giles in the Field, for the committing of
a Rape on the body of his own natural child, being under the age of ten
years.
THis man was most notorious, and generally reported to be of a most dissolute
conversation. The fact which was laid unto his charge, fully prooved by the
Testimony of diverse grave and sober Matrons, which searched the Body of the
Child, and said, she had been abused by a man without all question. The
Honorable Judges, before whom this heinous fact was tried, inquired to find
out the Actor of so horrid a deed. The Child on whom it was done, produced, nor
accused any other person but Flood her own Father, and related very
confidently the manner of their carnal knowledge of each other, to the full
satisfaction of all that heard her, that none but he could be the man. Being
demanded the reason why she did not immediately reveal that her Father had to
do with her, she answered, That she durst not speak of it again unto any
body, because her father said, If she should at any time tell what he did
unto her, the Devil would presently tear her in pieces. This the child
averred unto the Court before his face, at the time of his Trial.

What Flood said at the place of Execution.
As he impudently denied the Fact at the time of his Trial, he persevered to
the instant of his death, of the denial of the fact, with many fearful
imprecations of judgments, and renunciation of Gods mercies if he were any
ways guilty: In great passionate hot terms he brake forth against his wife,
on this wise saying, That three years she was conspiring to work his
downfall, which now by her was effected. And thus this barren Tree at the Tree of
execution stood and fell.

The Confession of Ioane Burs, taken before Sir James Cambell, Knight, the 8.
day of April, 1637.
She said that the Saturday before Christmas last, her Master having given her
sharp correction, for the stealing away of a Runlet of Wine, and expending it
out in the company of Lewd creatures lazing about the City; in revenge unto her
Master and Mistress, she went and bought Mercury, and put it into a Posser, and
gave it unto them both for to drink, which did endanger their lives; but
blessed be God, are both yet alive: And for that exorbitant Fact, was by the
Court fined, and remains in the Goal to this present. Being demanded why she
did so unto her Master and Mistress, She stood mute: but it was justified unto
her face at her Trial, that these words should proceed out of her own mouth,
That if her Mistress were dead, she might afterward have better Clothes; And
to her Master she did it, because he did beat her so cruelly. But observe in
this silly Girl a passage worth note: Who perceiving the Mercury to work
violently on her Mistress, brought some thereof in a Paper, and showed it unto
her Mistress, saying, that doubtless her Master had put something into the
Posset, that made her so sick; craftily intending by this, to cast off all
suspicion from her self; but that fastened it upon her, as just cause there was.
And so much for that.

The Confession of Anne Holden, before Sir James Cambell, the 16. day of March,
1637.
THe said Anne Holden confessed, as it was in the Court read, That last Night
was seven weeks, she being lodged in the house of John Atkins at Colebrooke,
was delivered of a Child, no body being with her; which said Child she threw
into a Ditch, on the Backside of the said House, because it should not be
known nor seen. But she was spared her Trial, because she is to be removed
unto Buckingham, there to be tried upon another Murder.

Lastly, there is one Notorious Bawd Rebecca Smith, who dwelt at the
Seven-stars in White-cross-street, convicted for a Bawd; who according unto her
deserts, is to be Carted about the City, and thence ought to be banished.

FINIS.

