POEMS BY Robert Gomersall.

LONDON. Printed by M. F. for John Marriot. M DCXXXIII.

The Booke-seller, to the READER.
TO praise the work, were to set my self to sale, since the greater its worth
is, the more is my benefit, and not the Authors: He good man may have an Ayery,
but I a real profit. An Ayery one, I term it, for I judge others by my self,
who cannot feed by praises. But thus much I must needs say of it, that if ever
it were worthy the reading, now the worth of it is multiplied, the whole being
perused by the Author, and some, not deformed pieces added, which as they mend
the bulk, so they take nothing from the Dignity of the Poem. But for this I
put my self upon my Country. Thus far the Author thought it not unfit, to
please thee and his youth: from hence forward, you must expect nothing from
him, but what shall relish of a bearded and austere Devotion. And this, I trust
will be no small incitement to thy approbatio^ of the work since it is the
last: All men we know, delight in Benjamin. One thing I must not forget to
acquaint thee with; Some men, (that would be wise without book,) have excepted
against a passage in Sforza, concerning Galeazzoes revealing his wives
counsels to his enemy, as a thing beyond Probability, or Poetry: but it shows
that they are short of History, for let them read almost the first leaf of
Guicciardin, or the eighth book of Commines, they shall there find what they
carpe at here, and that this fond opennesse, was Galeazzo's, and not the
Authors weakness: I would say somewhat of the Levite too, but it needs not,
seeing the Authors blasphemy is turned into the Calumny of the ignorant
Detractor. But I begin to talk rather like a Maker, then a seller of Books:
I have nothing now more to add, but this, love the Author, and me for
bringing you acquainted.

Thine John Marriot.

An Elegy upon the death of Mris. ANNE KING.
I Dare not say that Death in heaven has power,
Or that we have a second fatal hour:
It Is impious to believe that souls do range,
Or that they can affect that foolish change
Of happiness, for Earth, (as if they thought
Gadding to be felicity, or sought,
A moderation of their joys) that heaven,
The rooms being empty which she first had given,
Strives to make good afresh, that this should be
The cause, dear Ghost, why we are robbed, of thee.
Yet pardon Heaven, if I am bold to dare
A question: you do know how few they are
That suck your Air and goodness, how the earth
Looks like the error of a monstrous birth,
With scarce one perfect member, and will you
Rob us of our one piece, and make the few
No number? Pardon then if for this wrong
We leave your precepts, to live ill, and long.
Be we once good, we shall not be at all;
Virtue does only have a funeral.
If that a mortal may but give advice,
Teach not the world sin by your Avarice;
Spare us a while that little which we have,
Let (...) find somewhat besides a Grave;
You first command us to be good, and then
You take away the goodness with the men,
Will not the bad say, Justice here is scant,
To take our store, and punish us for want?
But you are just, and wise, nor will acquaint
Man with your reasons: Why an Embryon Saint
Suddenly drops into the Earth, which he,
Had he lived long, would but have lived to see,
And not affect, does pose all earth, and so
Now we may weep, because we cannot know:
Now I but weep, that we have lost the wife
That Overbury would have feigned, my strife
About your Justice I disclaim; for I
Know it is just that what was borne must dye.
Yet without touch at your prerogative,
I may sum up my loss, and dare to grieve
With a full sorrow, I may say there died
One that was Heavens, as well as Henry's bride;
One that was matched unto the Church, that she
Might learn a Marriage with the Deity.
Sure there were Velvet-cloakes that wooed, and those
That could wear Scarlet for a need, and close
Which Ladies out of play books, that could earne
A Mistress with a congy, and could learn
How many sighs must carry her, which she
By her wise choice, left them to multiply.
And would they only grieved, would I could raise
Their tears a fresh, by adding to her days
More years with Henry, that their envy might
Cause them to burst, and dye for her in spite,
Such funerals were fit: but since that Heaven
Has harshly snatched what it had kindly given;
And thou must be the Sacrifice, and he
Must have thy sorrow that erewhile had thee,
I Will spare my tears which must of force cause his:
It Is rudeness when we cannot restore bliss
To add more to unhappiness (then thou
Sometime the happy choice of her, and now
The sad survivor) pardon if my strife
To grieve enough, give thee a grief, not wife.
If that my sighs could her to life repreeve,
I would create as well as now I grieve,
In obitum Serenissimi Regis Jacobi.
SVperbe tene as consciam vermis gulam;
Agnosce tandem regias satur dapes,
Quae cultui sacrantur, and non esui:
Iacobus hic est, abstine, Iacobus est,
Qui cum relictas senserit partus moras
Vagivit infans Caesar, ut faceret fidem,
Quod non Mariae natus, at Monarchiae,
Foret estimandus, crederes genitum Deum
Simulac Monarcham, quisque certe liberum
Putare mortis potuit humanae jugo
Aeque acremota vulgo erat nativitas.
At hic fidelis vermibus, praestat dapes
Non vendicatas, obstupent tali cibo
Fati helluones, parciusque urgent famem:
Ipso cibantur tutius miraculo,
Eheu verendum sentio maestus caput
I am jam minatum: siste, quisquis impium
Audere morsum fortis, agnoscas caput
Quo velsepulchri doctius moles tumet
Minusque hebescit terra. Iacobum tegens
Sapit ille pulvis, qui suo gaudens hero
Tumulum negat sibi and asserit palatium,
Semesa facies regis, and lacerae genae
(Discriminandae jam fere vix vermibus
Antiquiori a pabulo) quod non suo
Horrori adaptant corpus? ut tandem miser
Sit quod queratur: qui do let levius, stupe^
Mala non fatetur ni suis addat malis
Et causa fiat luctus, and lugens simul.
Aliud.
Vnde nova haec macies? quae quadragesima vera est
Cum carnibus Regem negans?
Number superi efficerent magis ut jeiunia constent?
Luctumque paenitentiam?
To the Deane, from Flower in Northamptonshire 1625. now the worthy Bishop of
Norwich.
STill to be silent, or to write in Prose
Were a like sloth, such as I leave to those,
Who either want the grace of wit, or have
Untoward arguments: like him that gave
Life to the flea, or who without a guest
Would prove that famine was the only feast:
Self tyrants, who their brains doubly torment
Both for their matter, and their ornament.
If these do stutter sometimes, and confess
That they are tired, we could expect no less.
But when my matter is prepared and fit,
When nothing's wanting but an equal wit,
I need no Muses help to aid me on,
Since that my subject is my Helicon,
And such are you: o give me leave, dear Sir
(He that is thankful, is no flatterer)
To speak full truth: where ever I find worth
I show I have it, if I set it forth:
You read your self in these, here you may see
A ruder draught of Corbets infancy,
For I profess if ever I had thought
Needed not blush if published, were there ought
Which was called mine, durst bear a Critics view,
I was the instrument, but the Author you.
I need not tell you of our health, which here
Must be presumed, nor yet shall our good cheer
Swell up my paper, as it has done me,
Or as the May'rs feast does Stowes History,
Without an early bell to make us rise,
Health calls us up, and Novelty; our eyes
Have diverse objects still on the same ground,
As if the earth had each night walked her round
To bring her best things hither: it is a place
Not more the Pride of Shires then the Disgrace.
Which I Would not leave had I my Deane to boot,
For the large offers of the cloven-foot
Unto our Savior, but you being not here,
It Is to me though a rare one but a Shire,
A place of good earth, if compared with worse,
Which has a lesser part in Adams curse.
Or for to draw a simily from the Hig'st
It Is like unto Salvation without Christ,
A fairly situate Prison: When again,
Shall I enjoy that friendship, and that brain:
When shall I once more hear in a few words
What all the learning of past-times affords,
Austin epitomized, and him that can
To make him clear contract Tertullian,
But I detain you from them: Sir adjeu
You read their works, but let me study you.
To Mr. Holiday Archdeacon of Oxon: from Flower 1625.
NOw that you dare receive a messenger,
Now that the tyr'd-out plague begins to wear
It self away, not people: when the street
Begins a new acquaintance with the feet
Of loud coach-horses and the bells high call
Is for Devotion more then Burial,
Now you dare read, accept what I here send
A poor remembrance of an healthy friend.
Trust me (dear Sir) I linger, and the day
Though by the method of the year he may
Truly be said to shorten, and to slight
Former conceits, make Britains know a night
Long, unto tediousness, yet to me
Seems like Alcides night lengthened to three,
Whilst I want you: Yet do not misconceive
The earnest of your friend, as if to leave
My former company I were so feign;
I would have them, and you: if I complain
Hotly of times delay, expound that fire
Not to have flames of anger, but desire.
To see the poverty of man! he still
Receives but curtall'd happiness, his skill
Makes him not capable of a full store,
But if he have some, he must want the more.
How could I prize myself less then a mark
For an high envy, when (as in the arc
Only poor eight were rescued from the waves,
And that which drowns the world, their vessel saves,
The depth of the devourer) not uneven
In Fortune, though in Number, not past seven,
Our preservation lasts unto this hour
From the fierce plague in the dry arc of Flower?
When that I had the daily happiness
Of conversation with my Deane, when less
Then Heaven I could not think on, when I saw
A face, that might heaven to affection draw,
When I enjoyed beauty, and wit, to try
Which could be more delighted ear, or eye;
Yet I was not delighted, not that ought
Was wanting, which I Would covet to be bought;
Nor what was bought was envied me; it is true,
Yet I had a near want, the want of you.
But had I wanted them had I lived still
With my dear Holiday; had there to my will
Been an agreeing luck, I can conceive
Happly I might have wished those, whom I leave.
Nor is this accusation: fancy not
That I am changeable: if in the hot
Rage of the dog, I go but thinly clad,
And in the winters other rage am glad
To bear a fire too in my clothes, there is none
Will call this Lightness, but Discretion.
Nor is it Fond, which I profess my suite,
To wish the good of which I Am destitute,
He cannot be accused like to the weather,
Who'd have by parts, what he must want together.
You are that part now: whom if I enjoy,
No thwarting chance shall possibly destroy
My bliss: the other want strikes not my soul,
I Will swear this half does comprehend the whole.
Upon the death of his worthy friend Mr. John Deane of New-Colledge.
NAture, will it ever be
That we must complain of thee?
Shall then all our search never find
Age at least to worth assigned?
Must this constant truth be known
Virtue dead as soon as Grown?
Happy Deane then, who may call
Thirty, Climactericall,
And in spite of Envies sport
Prove thy good life by thy short,
Thus when others that do dye
Old or in their Infancy,
Must (if our Divines say true)
Be transformed and shaped a new,
That at length they may appear
Much about our Saviors year
(For in Heaven there never shall
Enter either Old or Small
Since that these can never agree
Weakness and Aeternity,)
Thou, dear shadow, needst not have
Any wonder in the grave,
Done for thee, nor think upon
Future augmentation
Reader, he that herein lies
Died as old as he shall rise.
To his Detractors.
DEane, (then which no other name
Is of better, of more Fame)
Sleep in quiet: if there be
Tongues of that Malignity,
That will dare to wound thy grave
And not suffer thee to have
Slumber here, I Will say no more;
May they when they have played ore
All their scenes of life, but know
The same Rigor, that they show
That it is not generous, nor scarcely safe
To make a Libell, for an Epitaph.
A Song for the Music lecture.
STrike again; o no, no more
I implore,
Such another touch would be
My destiny.
What bewitching soundes are these
Which so please;
As that we begin to fear
What we hear:
Sound yet louder, raise a Tone
Which to own,
The caelestiall Quire would be
Suitorst' ye,
Sound yet louder, that if Fate
Make this date
To my years, I yet may dye
Speedily,
And that this Ditty sweetly strong
May be my Death and Fun'rall song.
An Elegy upon the Noble Merchant Mr. FISHBORNE.
Do they walk London still, and can we meet
With any now but mourners in the street?
Such a stupidity exceeds belief,
To have so great a cause, so small a grief:
The kinder Marble weeps against a shower,
And can these more then Marble-hearts not pour
One tear for Fishborne? shall that Worthy lie,
Like vulgar trophies of mortality,
Vnwept, and unremembred? or at best
Have common showers, such as become the rest,
Vassalls of death? who never thinking why
They were placed her, do only live, and die,
Who by no worthy act ayding their Name,
Perish at once in person and in Fame.
Where are our Cataracts? where is the eye
That strives for sorrowful praecedency?
That Poet now shall be accounted chief
Whose wit is not the highest, but whose grief:
And he is most officious to this hearse,
Who flows more in his eye, then in his verse.
Fishborne is dead, alas that Fishborne can
Only in goodness be above a man
And not in lasting! that such men should have
For all their worth, but a more noted grave,
A sigh in earnest! Piety we see
Will not afford us an Aeternity,
And hence we may collect the reason why
So few are studious of Piety,
So few are like to him: whom shall we see
His holy rival in Virginity?
Whom shall we find, that in an active life
Like his, enjoyed the means, without the wife?
Nay I may ask how few there are that shun
Like him, the sin in the occasion?
How few there are that looser thoughts defy!
And only in good deeds do multiply.
Him no deformity, no want of Fire,
Of lively blood did tame in the desire
Forced to cold goodness, but his mind, as free
From the tyrannical necessity,
As from the vice; he therefore lived not well
Because he did not know the way to Hell,
Chaste out of weakness, no, he might have been
A strong delinquent, powerful in sin,
He might have made, had he but heard his sense,
His lust as famous as his continence,
As was his friendship: which none can express
So full, but that the praise will be the less.
How like unto a fable we esteem,
What heretofore did most Heroicke seem,
The Grecian frendships, when that we do crown
Our happy thoughts with Fishborne and his Brown?
His beloved Brown, with whom he joined in all
Which Avarice would it is particular call,
Cares, pleasures, hopes, and fears, nay they go on
Heavenly in a combined devotion,
That they appear, when ever we would scanne
Which were the kinder or the better man,
Aequall in all, their charity the same,
Their continency too, all but the Name,
So ready unto good, to bad so loath,
They one another, love, but Heaven loves both.
O what an heat! what constancy was there!
How did their love teach them how to persevere
In holy duties! as if they had meant
By such an exquisite astonishment
To show there was no difference in effect
Between the Friendly man and the Elect;
How were they never asunder but to meet!
How all their parting was to make more sweet
Their next embraces! nothing had the power,
Dear Shade, to make thee fear thy latest how'r
But a divorce from him, from his loved sight,
That thou should thy Brown too with the light.
Add yet it was a kind of friendship too
That thou so rare a courtesy would do,
To lead the way to death, in which alone
Thou could not wish him thy companion.
But is he dead? and does that harsher bell
Toll with such horror noble Fishbornes knell,
Sure here is no funeral, or if there be,
It is a Funeral of Poverty.
Where are the preparations, the rich dress
Of Death, the gaudy tire of Rottenness?
Where are the Hearlds? those great gods of earth,
Who can bestow on man a second birth?
And make him stand upon his honor now,
Who yesterday did lean upon the Plow?
Those grand Logicians, who exactly just
Can show the punctual difference of each dust,
And satisfy the most ambitious Dame
Discreetly, from what noble worm she came?
No, none of these does he vouchsafe to hire,
Who only make a well-clad Gull admire
At his full vanity, which fill our mind
With pride, I fear, far higher then our kind,
Then our progenitors ere knew: but he
Chooses the Heralds of that Majesty,
Who swaies the world, those men who heavenly wise
Instruct us to below in our own eyes;
Who show us that the way to the most High
Is by dejection and humility,
Which blazon to us our Original,
The lowly earth, and then our baser fall
Beneath that lowness, unto these he pays
A tribute after he has spent his days:
When natures due was pai'd, his wealth is theirs,
Whose life did call the^ fathers, whose death, heirs,
By his wise zeal the Churches the Priests are,
And they have now the means, who had the care*
Nor do they longer find, to breed despaires,
The tithe another's, when the Pulpit's theirs.
I have no Art of wonder, nor no skill
To make an action greater by my quill,
Yet thus much truly can say without the aid
Of figure, It Was an act fit for a maid,
For him, who leads us in the way he trod,
Bringing himself, then others unto God;
That if the world have such another birth,
Our Savior coming, may find faith on earth*
It would be injury after this to call
Him the true Surgion of the Hospital,
Which he has so releiv'd, that there are found
Some, who are sorry that they want a wound,
That they have no defect in any limme,
Which they should venture to be cured by him.
Thus when the greater sort after much care,
Much watchfulness, much cos'nage too, who dare,
So they may raise their states, ransacke the Seas
And after all their toil cannot appease,
Their endless thirst of gain, although they mine
So deep in earth, Hell has some hope to shine,
And all this only but to change a sin,
That what in covetousness did begin
Might end in riot, that to mock their pains
Their spending might be worse then were their gains:
Thou gatherst with much conscience, and then
With greater goodness do disperse again,
That this praise to thy memory may be given
Here lies the merchant which has purchased heaven.
Upon a virtuous Magistrate.
Sleep loved soul, and let those eyes
Which to rest were enemies
Be atton'd at last, and lie
Quiet to Aeternity,
Lie they quiet, but let ours
Earnestly distill salt showers,
And though they do see the less
Make a mourning business:
'Twere an act too near to hate
Him in rest to imitate?
Howl ye Poor, now he is gone
Who shall stop oppression?
Who shall make the wary Law
Speak uprightly, and not draw
Specious colors, to indeare
What were foul if it were clear?
Now there is none your cause indures,
Not because it is naught, but yours,
Who will make the rich to see
That unto an injury
They are poor themselves? and find
All their sins within their mind.
For his wisdom did provide
That they should hurt none beside.
But now all the world may do
What they are addicted to:
Lie, dissemble, cogge, and cheat,
Make the easy poor their meat,
And when they have raged thus
Still be counted virtuous,
Have the name, which he deserved
And be praised though they have swerved.
This in public. But his life
Did maintain a glorious strife
Which should be commended most,
Whether we might trulier boast
Close, or open acts: If we
Look on that, which we can see
That is thought the best, but then
What we hear excells again;
So that which to trust we fear,
If our eye, or else our ear,
And there is no mean debate
Twixt the Man, and Magistrate.
But I interrupt the rest,
Thou, who now amongst the blessed
Lookst on thy Creators face,
Countst our praise a kind disgrace;
And do fear those acts were bad,
Which no better praisers had.
Sleep then still, and let those eyes,
Which to rest were enemies,
Be atton'd at last, and lie
Sealed up to Aeternity.
THE EXPLANATION of the Frontispice.
IT was when Industry did sleep
The Wolf was Tutor to the Sheep,
And to amaze a plainer man,
The thief was made the guardian.
But can a Wolf forget to prey?
Can Night be lightened into Day?
Without respect of laws or blood,
His charge he makes to be his food.
With that triumphant he sits down,
Oppressed, not honored with a Crown,
And on the lesser beasts does try
A most Authenticke Tyranny:
This the French Lion hears, and when
He Is thought fast sleeping in his den,
Vengeance and He at once do wake,
And on the Wolf their fury flake.
Bad acts may bloome sometimes, but never grow high,
Nor do they live so sure, as they shall dye.
SFORZA by Rob: Gomersall.
London Printed for John Marriott. Tho: Cecill. sculp.



THE TRAGEDY OF LODOVICK SFORZA DVKE OF MILLAN.

By Robert Gomersall.

The second Edition.

Printed at LONDON in the year M DCXXXIII.

TO HIS MOST VVORTHIE FRIEND Mr. FRANCIS HIDE PROCTOR OF OXFORD.
HAving resolved what to print, I could not belong doubtful unto whom: it had
been an unfriendly absurdity not to have intit'led him to my second, who might
not unjustly have challenged the patronage of my first Labor. But if until
this time I had had no reason for such a dedication, if the same most fruitful
College had not for these many years known us of the same time and
friendship, if in all offices of life I had not still found you most
inseparably one with me: yet this Work at this time could not offer it self
to any so justly as to you. It is to your name that I owe what ever fruits of
my spent time shall be preserved, it is to your name that I owe what ever
fruits of my former time, being unhappily lost, may have a possibility of
recovery. And could I dedicate any of my remaining Labors with more justice
unto any, then to him, by whose friendly care, I dare almost assure my self of
them which are remaining? But some perhaps may say for this, that it had been
better if it had been lost, or at least that these kind of Labors are more
judiciously suppressed then published. Sermons had been fitter for my setting
forth, and to preach more proper then to write. But is not this to preach? I
have heard diverse speak an hour, who preach not, and there are many, who
effectually preach, that are more sparing of their breath. If I make the
ambitious see that he climbes but to a fall, the usurper to acknowledge, that
blood is but a slippery foundation of power, all men in general to confess
that the most glorious is not the most safe place: is not this to cry down
Ambition and Usurpation? or is it less to show, then to threaten? and are not
men so much moved with the event it self, as with the commination of the
event? And yet in this age, wherein only Heresy or Sedition prefer a
Boooke, wherein Contradiction is called Learning, and Zeal wonders that she is
become Faction, I can expect but a few Readers, whose small number shall be no
discouragement at all to me, if that your judgment shall counterpoise them,
which is the only desired crown of

Your true friend, R. G.

The Argument.
LOdovicke Sforza, after he had cunningly supplanted the Duchess from the
wardship of her son Galeazzo, as cunningly practizeth to be the murderer of
him, of whom he would seem to be the Protector. To this end he was to remove
this impediment. Isabella daughter to the Prince of Calabria, and Grandchild
unto Ferdinand King of Naples, was wife to Galeazzo. A woman of a spirit as
high as her birth, and equal to Sforza in all things but the sex: she
perceiving the stupidity of her husband, and how that whatsoever she projected
for his safety, he discovered to his uncle, for his overthrow, makes her father
secretly acquainted with all the passages, desiring him to vindicate his son
in law from the usurpation of his Protector. This could not be so privately
dispatched, but that Sforza had an incling of it, whether out of his own reach
he guessed it: or by his Nephews sottishness he understood it. To prevent
then his own ruin, whilst he intends his Nephews, he ventures on those
remedies which the height of fear rather rusheth on, then chooses, which more
express and exchange, then remove, or avoyde a danger. He knew the French
claim to Naples, to the prosecution of which he sollicites the young King;
whom either his right, or inconsiderateness quickly arms unto the action. But
before his coming, he by continual messengers deludes the old King, and makes
him believe that there was no purpose of his coming, and that the French
journey unto Naples, as it was only the child of rumor, and had no being but
from fame, so in a very short space, in the age of a wonder it would vanish and
expire. Thus was Ferdinand persuaded from his necessary defense, till having
certainly understood that all defense would be too late, the French being
already very strong upon his frontires, cheated, not conquered, he dies, and
leaves his son Alphonso heir of his kingdom, and his troubles. The French
king being now entered in person into Italy, Galeazzo dies of a poison at Pavia,
when Sforza has brought this worse poison into his Country. But the French
growing prodigiously victorious, and almost by the very seeing overcomming
their opposites, Sforza begins to be apprehensive of his own danger, and
strives to rid himself of these encumbrances, in the which a too much
providence had entangled him. A consideration without doubt necessary, but
almost past the season, it being near unto an impossibility to expel him now,
whom it was far from any difficulty at the first not to admit. So that this
second resolution did only proclaim the folly of the first, which either in
wisdom he should not have ventured on, or, in honesty not have altered. But
howsoever, he enters into a new league with the Venetians, and gives the French
after their victorious return from Naples half an overthrow at Taro. And now
when he thinks himself confirmed in his Dukedom, when he as little feared
ruin, and he deserved preservation; the French King dies suddenly, to whom
Lewis, the true Duke of Orleans, and titular Duke of Millan, succeeded: with
him Sforzaes late friend, the Venetians, conclude a league. Thus Sforza being
left alone, raises two armies under the conduct of the two Sanseverines, men,
whom he had highly favored and advanced. But it is scarce seen, that a
faithless Master should have a trusty servant, and he that has no respect to
his own word, shall in the extremest of his necessities, find all others
promises but words. The elder revolts, and the younger, without the least show
of resistance, flies; and Sforza himself is so closely pursued, that he can
scarce get away safe into Germany. The French abusing their late victory, the
Millanesi with a general consent, recall Sforza; who, like a melting snow,
overflowes all before him, and recovers most of his Duchy, with the same
easiness that he had lost it. The strength of his Army consisted especially of
Swizzers, whom the late overthrow of the warlike Duke of of Burgundy, and these
Italian wars, had raised to the height of admiration. But to be valiant is not
to have all virtues: these were as strong in treachery, as in battle, they lead
Sforza in the habit of a Swizzer into the French camp, through which in the
same habit they had promised to conduct him. Thus having been twice betrayed,
and now a prisoner, after a ten years harsh confining he dies in France,
having lived in his misery, longer then in his Duchy, and leaving instruction
to succeeding Princes that height should not be their aim, but integrity; and
that they would not (that I may use the words of our Poet) tempt their stars
beyond their light.

The names of the Actors.
GIovanni Galeazzo the young Duke. Lodovick Sforza His Protector, afterward
Duke. Galeazzo Count Caiazzo
two brothers of the house of Sanseverin, Sforza's favorites. Lucio Malvezzo
Carlo Burbiano Count Belgiosa
two of the Nobility. Iuliano Picinino
two old Courtiers. Vitellio Malatesta
Poysoners. Ascanio Sforza's brother, a Cardinal. Triulcio The French General.
The Captain of the Swizzers. Isabella Galeazzo's wife. Iulia. Bettrice wife to
Sforza. Ambassadors, Soldiers, Servants.
The Prologue.
CAn horror have an auditory? can
Man love the spectacle of ruined man?
We feared we should have been alone, that hence,
The Actors should have been the Audience.
Are you not frighted yet? do you not rise?
Can that invite, which should dismay your eyes!
We show near murders, and in that degree
Where Marriage is unlawful, then, the free
Progress of crimes, by nimble Justice met,
Aequally horrid, this we show, but yet
Unless your Courtesy, your Judgment sway,
We suffer a worse torture, then we play.
Actus primi
Scena prima.
Galeazzo Duke of Millane, Isabella his Wife. Gal. WHy weeps my Dear?


Isab. Ask why I do not weep*
(Poor Isabella are thy tears denied thee?)
Ask why thus long such a succession
Of sorrow clogs my bosom, and does rob
So much of Woman from me, as complaints.
Ask why I do not rave, tear my hair, thus,
Create a grief, whieh Fate would spare me, then
Cloud the sad Air with sighs, and at the last,
With a bold stab take from insulting Fortune
The miserable object of her sport:
Ask why I do not this, not, why I weep.

Gal. Or stint thy tears, or mingle them with mine
By a relation of their cause: these eyes,
Trust me, my Isabella, are not dry,
Nor has strong sorrow ere exhausted them,
To make them banckrout of a friendly tear,
Do thou but prove it once a friendly tear
And not a fond one. Why, my Isabella,
Why do thou hasten those that come too fast,
Sorrow, and Age? If it be true, I heard
Of Sforza, my dear Sforza, there is no joy
But either past, or fleeting, and poor man
Grows up but to the experience of Grief,
And then is truly past minority
When he is past all happiness:

Isab. My Lord,
My sorrow dares not argue with your love,
This smile expels it.

Gal. Be it banished far,
Aeternally, or to the years of Age.
I, these unclouded looks become my dear,
And give me joy too. I must hunt to day
With my dear uncle: O he is a man
That alters all those fond relations,
Which Nature gives, who in an uncles name
Out loves a Father: I could praise him still,
But that I stay too long from him: farewell. Exit.

Isab. O Galeazzo! O not Galeazzo!
How has Man fled thee! how thy soul has fled thee!
Only thy lineaments belly a Man.
Thou hunt? alas poor Prince, thou art the Game:
Thy uncle hunts: and yet he does not neither,
But stands a glad, and idle looker on,
Whilst thou insnar'st thy self, sinfully fooled,
Flattering thy Executioner, and so
Do nor prevent thy misery, nor yet know.

Enter Galeaz. Gal. I am returned once more, before I Am gone,
To see if thy fond grief be not returned;
What joy is there in a forbidden grief?
What comfort in the eyes sad flux? once more
Is it my fault gives you these tears?

Isab. My faults;
For which so strange a sadness seizes me*
That it increases when I strive with it,
And makes my face rebellious to my Lord,
When my heart yields

Gal. Then once again, adieu,
Forsake your grief, or grief will forsake you. Ex.

Isab. Forsake my grief -- O bid me forsake heaven,
My reason, and mine honor: only sighs
Do keep me in opinion of Being,
And without them I were a stupid coarse.
Shall I obey impossibilities?
Forsake the sorrow, and retain the cause?
How can I think that yet the untyr'd Sun
Has journy'd but a twelvemonth, since I was
In Ferdinando's Court, the Paragon
Of happy Naples, when his Palace seemed
Guarded whith Princely suitors, and mine eye,
Caught with so many rarities of men,
Taught me that too much choice did hinder choice,
That Galeazzo then must carry me?
This Galeazzo, neither Prince, nor Man,
Fooled out of both by Sforza, his dear uncle.
Can I think this, and think of joy again?
Can I think this, and dare to think again?
Why should some toys of after-torment fright
A resolution of easing me
From present ones? O it is the curse of man
To be unhappy at arbiterment, Enter Iulia.
Till heaven please to relent* My Iulia,
Breath's Naples any comfort? quickly speak.

Iul. None, Madam, and your courteous Grandfather
In steed of Armies sends you Patience.

Isab. What? patience? he should have sent me rage,
Aided my anger, if nor my revenge:
Patience? O God! can grief be patient?
Can Thunder whisper? or chafed seas not roar?
In me is Sea and thunder, I will be
A pattern of Revenge not misery.

Scena secunda.
Sforza. SForza, as yet thou but beginst to act,
And yet beginst to stagger: were thou not
A Princes son? why art thou not a Prince?
Protectors are but subjects, and this staff
But shows me under whose command I am.
Is this our hindrance that our mother first
Swelled with another? what her womb denyde
Our head shall give, or we will lose our head.
What was her labor to a Crown? Perhaps
A monster might have filled her first, a thing
Of royal prodigy, and should this thing
Grow to be hooted to a crown before us?
Or if that crowns be due to the most years,
Why should the Nephew be the Uncles Lord?
And Laws of Nations conquer those of Nature?
Nature intended Sov'raignty to them
Of sovereign understanding; to the rest,
How ever aged, but subjection,
Which Isabella would detain us in:
And whilst she trusts to Naples, our sad brow
May sooner wear willow, then Diadems. Enter Belgiosa.
Returned so soon, my Belgiosa? thanks,
Before I hear thy message, for thy have,

Bell. My Lord, our sudden coming into France,
Left fame behind us, where ariv'd, we craved
A private audience.

Sf. But had you it?
Did not our enemies sharp espies descry
The depth of our hid counsels?

Bell. They might first
Descry the subtle path of a swift ship,
The voyage of a bullet, or of thought,
Before your more mysterious purposes?

Sf. Then since we are alone, and in a place
Free from the bold intrusion of an eye,
Feign Us the Prince to whom we sent you forth,
And speak our Embassy unto our self.

Bell. Great Prince, to have the offer of a Crown
Is rare, and your felicity: my Lord,
Millans Protector, but your servant, knowing
The ancient right your predecessors had
In usurpt Naples, by us wooes your Grace
(Consider unto what he wooes your Grace)
Not to maintain his power, but make your own,
To take a Kingdom that e'n sighs for you.
So shall the infamy of a lost crown
Rot in the earth with your dead Ancestors,
And the recovery revive their names
To wait upon your triumph with your foes:
For so much justice needs no other power,
And yet such is your power, that it is able
To make what ever you should fancy, just:
But that your virtue is above that power.
I will not call you usurer of Fame,
By this large act, when the astonished world
Now fifty Ages off from us, shall read
Not in the boastings of a painted tomb
(The flatteries of great rottenness) but your name
Writ in Aeternities true Characters,
For making conquered Crowns the rudiments
Of your victorious infancy in arms,
When France shall know no other Charlemaigne

Sf. But should we fail in the attempt? what then?


Belg. Can Heaven fail Justice? or those powers commit
Sins which they punish? O my gracious Lord
Sin not with that weak thought: but if they should,
Sforza will never:

Sf. He is always noble,
But he will undo us with a benefit,
To give a kingdom is above requital.

Belg. His hopes are but the praise of honest deeds,
If in the rereward of your spreading Fame,
That fills all mouths, some happy tongue may glance
At him, as a poor engine of your glory,
That could impart, but not possess a Fame.

Sf. Excellent man! if to this welcome speech
Thou give as fair an answer.

Bell. This in brief
After some scruple, and a little pause
He whispered he would come.

Sf. Exactly done.
But leave us now, my noble Belgiosa,
Till we may study a reward for thee. Ex. Belg.
The twilight hastens, when Vitellio
And Malatesta one of an high trust Ent. Vitell. and Ma.
with our fond Nephew promised co^fere^ce.
And here they are. Is it decreed brave friends?
Shall it be swiftly done? nay, it is no matter,
Your color says you dare not,

Vit. It lies then:
If that my color show me disobedient
To my good Lord, be I for ever pale:
But when shall Galeazzoes wished for death
Show we dare somewhat?

Sf. We would gladly have
A poison teach him linger to his death,
And a month hence we shall expect his knell. Ex.
Now are we entered, and now to retire
Were the worse treason: like an enraged fire
The more we are opposed, the more we will spread
And make our foes our fuel: to be head
We Will cut off any member, and condemn
Virtue of folly for a Diadem,
Banish Religion, and make blood as cheap
As when two Armies turned into one heap
Of carcasses, lie groveling, what care we
For the slight tainture of disloyalty?
None will commend the race till it be run,
And these are deeds not praised till they are done.

Scena tertia
Iuliano, Picinino. Iul. MY Picinino, holds this sad news true?


Pici. My Iuliano, yes; it is in each voice
That some persuasion flattering Ferdinand,
That the French journey was but a report,
Made him revoke Alphonso, his brave son
Who with an Army had endangered us:
For the wise old man fearing, a deep fear
Might arm an enemy, else too weak for him,
And make us hasten the French war, gave over
His war with us: but when he understands
That all this quiet does not purchase peace,
The coozen'd Prince seeks the sure peace of death,
And leaves his ruin to destroy his son.

Iul. Will the French come? then prithee, Death, come too.
Why should our eyes dulled to all other sights
By Age and sorrow, be reserved for sight
Of war and sorrow? o discourteous heavens!
Why have you dally'd with us to white hayres?
Why kept till this time, must we perish now?
O wherefore are we come so near the grave
And are not in it yet? yet pardon me
Good heaven, your acts are above question:
Yet I may shed these tears for Italy;
Slave of that world, which once, her valor slav'd,
Restoring back her triumph's with her spoil,
Distracted in herself, and only fit
To make a bankrout Poet heal his credit
With matter for fresh Tragedies.

Pic. Good heaven!
Is this to ease misfortune, or increase it?
If Passion could whine out felicity,
Or plentious tears could drown unhappiness,
I have eyes too, and they contain their showers,
Nor would I ere be niggard of a Grief.
But tears being only tears, an easy dew
Of childish eyes, and all the rest of Grief
Commanding smiles, more then Compassion,
I thank my Genius I am resolute
To laugh at Fortune when she is most angry.

Iul* Such laughter may have little mirth in it,
And I shall have more comfort in a tear.

Pic. You may, good Fountain, yes, drop on, to see,
If so much moisture will revive thy cheeks
Whilst I Will be young with laughter. I am he
That fears a sorrow, more then misery.

Scena quarta.
Vitellio. THis is the place, and this the time: good heaven!
What an odd place, and what an uncouth time?
Had I been hyr'd to murder Sforza here,
Hell could not prompt more fit occasion.
I like nor it, nor him: but here he comes.

Ent. Sfor. Sf. Welcome Vitellio, thy have is welcome:
Nay complement with him, who^ thou would kill,
Be free to us as we do know thee true.
Speak, yet I need not bid thee, for thine eye
Sparkles a joyful answer. Is it done?

Vit. It Is done my Lord, and now my Lord, it is told
(That Galeazzo is no more a man)
And with an even scruple, for to me
The act's as easy as relation.

Sf. Thou speak true manhood: it is thy art alone
That gives us certain honor: there are some
Strive for Aeternity with loss of life,
At least with hazard of the loss of it,
And think they are revenged when they are killed;
These are our valiant duellists, and these
Do bleed whilst we do co^quer; heal their wounds,
Whilst we receive none: then, at last, unfold
(Man of deep Art, that can prevent the Fates,
And cut a thread, which they had thought to spun
Forty years longer) thy wise mysteries.
Thy constant, never failing stratagems,
Which cause a death, without a fear of death,

Vit. Here are some drugs, but of these some, not one
But can command a life where ere it is,
And ruinate the strongest workmanship
That Heaven ere bragged to have composed of earth,
Powders of speedy Fate, but above all
The instruments, which make me near to death
Of such indear'd familiarity,
This glass has nimblest operation:
Whose liquor cast upon the face of man
Straight dulls him to an everlasting sleep.

Sf* Is this the liquor of Aeternitie? Vitellio falls as dead. Ent. Ma.
Then take thy Lethe, and go sleep for ever.

Mal. I am deceived, or else this is the place,
Which Sforza chooses when he is alone.
Yes, this is it.

Sf. What Malatesta come?
What Devil brought him hither? O cross stars!
Be sudden, Sforza, now, or thou art lost:
He must believe our guilt was accide^t. He falls upon Vitellio.
Speak my Vitellio, O tune thy lips.
But to one syllable, but to one groan
And I am satisfied,

Mal. What sight is here?
Vitellio dead, and Sforza turned a Mourner?

Sf. Should thou die thus, how would thy name be soyld!
For though I am as guiltless of thy death,
As Innocence, or if there be a name
That has less being: yet the envious world
Will quit cursed Fortune of so great a crime,
And give it me: yet speak.

Mal. I Am bold my Lord,
To ask your Honor when this dismal chance
First frighted Heaven?

Sf. Now, Malatesta, now:
When could unhappiness reign so, but now?
As if he meant to be before his Lord,
He had no sooner told the Prince must die,
Bull he straight died.

Mal. Then courage, my good Lord,
Since it is thus, make the best use of it:
For now you need not fear to be revealed,
When one mouth's stopped, and the other is your own.
But since your last retyrement, we have been
Instructed by the speed of frequent Poasts,
Of the arrival of the King of France.

Sf. With thanks, a while, my Malatesta, leave us. Ex.
Why should we longer think of other powers,
And not bring offerings now to our own brain?
Which gives us Agents of all kinds of men,
And Kings as well as poys'ners: this wise King
Must trouble Naples, who would trouble us,
Divert invasions which are yet not made,
And thus our ends are cheapely brought about,
We only at the charge of plott: they fight,
And Galeazzo dies, whom either King
Were they not thus entangled, would preserve:
We shall be conquerors without fighting, thus,
And their poor swords shall cut a way for us. Surg. Vitellio.
I Am for you France.

Vit. And I am for you, Sforza,
Not poisoned yet, unless it were by thy tears.
The other liquor had an Antidote.
Happy suspect! had I been credulous
And thought his love as free as it would seem
I had not been, distrust has ransomed me.
But Malatesta is intrapp'd, I know
Sforza for nothing did not ask the skill:
My equal villain perishes, and I
Thus being accessory to his death
May sin to Innocence, by poasting off
The Princes fate to him: whilst a disguise
Shall keep alive the fame that I am dead.
And thus half truth shall come to light, and I,
Be wisely cleared by double villainy.

Scena quinta.
Caiazzo, Sanseverin, Malvezzo; Sans. AS I am noble, 'twas a glorious sight,
To see two Princes, in their State at once*
As if two Suns had harmlesly conspired
To beautify, and not to fright the Heavens.
Why should the formal nicety of State
Debar these often enterviewes? I think
They would be medicine against Tyranny:
For, when a Prince sees all things under him,
Heads of eternal nakedness, and men
That make their glory of their servitude,
He thinks he is uncontrollable, that none
Without a saucy imputation
Dares warn him to his duty: but suppofe
An equal Majesty should once become
His usual object, one, whose uncheck't blood
Runs full as high as his, then he does learn,
That there is a Common wealth of Princes too,
Not one sole Monarch.

Cai. Yet, Sanseverin,
If you observed, some clouds obscured both Suns
For, when they smiled most freely, and expressed
Their nearest friendship by a strict embrace,
They looked so jealously, as if they feared
A closer stab: and then the King took leave
With that excess of have, that one would think
(After this eager preparation,)
He did intend his journey to leave us,
Not to win Naples

Mal. It Is a dangerous time,
(And yet I seem to cross the truth I speak
When I not fear to called a dangerous time)
Sforza is over-wise, and so attempts
Upon the confidence of his own brain
(A brain, though wise, yet I may safely say,
Within the possibility of error)
Things, that can only hap by miracle
To any good.

Sans. Why, what can happen ill?
Fear you a war? and what is to be feared there?
Least that a mortal die, least that the life
Due to a knotty gout, or grating stone,
Have a more easy period by the sword,
Let them fear war, who fear to see their gold,
Lest that the Sun should have a sight with them,
Holding so much of Earth, they are turned to it,
Who have no more life then their durty acres,
Men, I may say, in the worst part of men.
And why like these run we an idle race
Of threescore years, and then sneake to a Death*
Whilst soldiers master their mortality
And dye by men, if that at all they dye.
Malvezzo know, when all things fifted are,
Peace only pleases them that never knew war.

Actus secundi
Scena prima.
Iuliano, Picinino. Iul. HEard you the general whispering?


Pic. No, what is it?


Iul. The Duke is ill. --


Pic. And do they whisper that?


Iul Yes: and they say he has strange fits.


Pic. How? strange?
Is poison strange in Italy? why, know,
As Princes live above the vulgar, so
Their death has a Prerogative: mean men
May dream away their time to fourscore years,
And when their rotten joints drop to their dust,
Only some trivial infirmity,
A Palsy, or an Ague bears the blame:
But'tis not State for Princes to be old,
And yet they must not be supposed to dye
By the respectlesse treason of disease,
But by some strange unheard of accident
That Fate did never dream of: but no more,
You know Vitellio, and the hight of grace
Sforza has showed him, it is suspicious
When wisdom flatters villainy: then come,
Let us be private, and discourse some treason.

Enter, after solemn Music, Sforza, Sanseverin, Cajazzo, and Soldiers. ^hen
after some private whispering they depart several ways. Iul. But stay, my
Picinino, who are here?


Pic. O the grand favorite, Sanseverine,
A most full bubble, valiant vanity:
That in high terms can swear down fortresses,
Blow away Armies with a powerful breath,
And spoil the enemy before he sees him:
But when he comes to action, lie as still,
As in the tale, that lumpish King of Frogs,
Which Jove did give them in his merriment*
Were tilting, valor, I never knew a man
Of larger worth: could he but break the ranks
Of enemies as well as he does spears,
Millan never saw a braver General.
But there is his brother too.

Iul. I, that's the man.


Pic. (It Is wonder we can know so much of him)
He that can sound the depth of that sly brain
Has a large plummet, trust me Iulia,
An hundred Lawyers make up that one head,
And scarcely too: quick Proteus to him,
To this Cajazzo was an Idiot,
A plain flat Idiot, I tell thee man,
Meander never knew so many windings;
If, as they say, an Aemulation
Is bred by likeness, I do wonder much
How Sforza is induced to employ him,
Who has more Devil in him, then himself.

Iul. But why is this employment? why these Arms?
When all but Naples are our friends, and they
Not able now to show themselves our foes,
Engaged, and almost lost in the French war.

Pic. Tricks, Iuliano, Statists call them Arts.
Not to be fadom'd by a vulgar reach:
But though I want the villainy to know,
Yet I have so much spleen to laugh at them,
And take a comfort in this plainer sense,
No subtilty can coozen Providence.

Scena secunda.
Ascanio, Galeazzo, Isabella, Iulia. Asc. HOw rests the Prince?


Isab. O my good Lord, he rests,
But it is a quiet, such as the Seas have,
When that the winds have spent their violence,
And out of impotence bestow a calm:
It Is more a death, then slumber, you may see
His senses rather weary, then at rest.

Asc. Are then his fits so raging?


Isab. Nothing else,
Should he but wake, youd think two Armies met,
And strove together for the loudest shout.
Disease has spread herself ore all his parts,
And only spared his tongue, as if some star
Not knowing otherwise to clear itself
From imputation of tyranny,
For such exact plaguing of Innocence
Had left him that to curse withal, that so
To all that heard his fury, he might seem
To be thus tortured for his Blasphemy.

Gal. Water, some water.


Isab. Now the fit begins:


Gal. Some of my slaves run, and exhaust the Po,
Charge him no more to vent his idle streams
Into the glutted Maine, but rather pour
All his moist mouths on me: do you stare, begone,
Use not your eyes at all, unless to weep:
And that, not tears of sorrow, but of help,
Such as may cool me.

Asc. Patience, sweet Prince,
Add not unto the fire of your disease,
The heat of passion,

Gal. What red thing is this?
Ha, Isabella, tell me.

Is. It Is your uncle
The noble Prince, Ascanio.

Gal. It Is false;
He is nor Prince, nor noble: hark you friends,
He talks of Passion, and of Patience,
Let him discourse of Aetna, or Vesuvius,
Or of a greater heat then I do feel,
And I will answer him: Patience to me?
Go bid rough seas be patient.

As. He grows worse,
And opposition does inflame him more:
Me thinks I see his eyelids faintly strive
Against Deaths closing.

Gal. O! my joints are fire.
Why does not heaven shed Cataracts, and lowre
Once to my comfort? are they hot as I,
Have they no moisture, for a Suppliant?
The^, though hot heaven oppose, when once my breath
Has left this corpse, I Will have a cold by death. Mor,

Is. Heard you that groan my Lord -- o he is dead;
Crack then ye tardy heart strings, quickly crack,
And give me leave to over-take the flight
Of my dead husband.

Asc. What is past our help,
Let it be past our grief: it is fortitude
To suffer chances counterbuffes as one
That by his expectation had deceived
All her faint threatenings: till this sadder time
Your life has had one constant scene of joy,
Which here is interrupted: you should thank
The heavens because they were not tedious
In their delights: for this variety.
As hunger praises feasts, so it may be
You Will love joy better for this misery.

Scena tertia.
Sforza, Beatrice. Sf. HOw covetous thou art to learn mishap?
Beatrice the answer kills thee.

Beat. Kill me then,
But not deny me

Sf. Dearest, I am lost,
And in my ruin, thou.

Beat. I would be so,
Safety were ruin were it otherwise,
Yet tell me Sforza, how are you so lost?

Sf. O what a busy torture woman is!
I must say somewhat, but the maine is silence,
Vitellioes loss, yes, that has lost me too:
No sooner killed then lost, so strangely gone,
As if the dead had learnt a motion
So to convey themselves unto the grave.

Beat. Will you be still unkind?


Sf. Thou shall hear all.
The French have co^quer'd Naples, and which draws
Blood from our soul, without a drop of blood:
When thus we plotted it, that when both Kings
Had wearied out themselves with equal slaughter,
And here Alphonso tottered, and there Charles;
When loss had seized the conqueror, then we
Would have amazed the conqueror afresh
With new alarmes: when by the flattery
Of chance, France gets a kingdom without blood,
And by dry victory has undone a plot
Worth many Kingdoms: I presumed on this,
Naples had soldiers enough to last
Killing a year, in which space, we resolved
To arm all Italy against the French,
And cunningly drive out, whom we called in:
Which, ere we could accomplish, is disclosed,
And conquering France intends to hinder it,
By our invasion: o my policy!
Must I be wounded with the sword I gave?
And find those enemies, whom only I
Enabled to my injury? well; heaven,
Your kindness is a miracle sometime,
Beyond all reason, but your curse is wit, Enter Ascan.
My fault is my faults punisher.

Asc. Long life,
And happy to our Duke.

Sf. How my Ascanio?
Recall thy self, good Cardinal, what Duke
Whilst Galeazzo lives?

Asc. Most truly Duke,


Sf. For Galeazzo's dead.
Alas poor child,
I could have wished thee longer life, but since
Heavens will is otherwise, twere blasphemy
To storm at that which is the will of heaven.
I hate that impotent rebellion. Enter Sansev.

Sans. My Lord, so cross was Fortune, that you were
Made almost banqu'rout by a too much thrift:
For when you had discharged those numerous troops
Whose charges lay as hard upon the State
As an invasion could, then Orleance moved
And stole Navarra, which disastrous news
So heated the remainder of your troops
(As if you had added to their valor more,
When you abated from their multitudes)
That by a nimble victory, they made
His conquest be his prison.

Sf. Noble friend
Stand thou, and our State stands: o why do men
Cry out on Age, on eating Age? as though
Our many griefs were from our many years,
And the last times were worst: we rather find
That nothing is so dangerous to Kings
As a young Principality: for it is
With them almost as with young plants, which yield
Unto the least entreaty of the wind,
And need no stronger blast; but gaining Age
Scarce stoop to thunder: may we once arise
Unto this happy firmness of estate,
This blessed maturity of Prince, we stand
Fearelesse of fall, but if heaven envy us
And have decreed our ruin with our rising,
Yet such we will have it void of all base fears
Our foes shall grieve our ruin was not theirs.

Scena quarta.
Cajazzo, Belgiosa, Malvezzo. Mal. MY Lords, since we are met so happily,
(If you esteem me not too bold, to ask
The story of your high-fam'd actions)
Bless me with the Relation.

Caj. I much fear
Mine are not worthy your attention:
Yet if it please you, noble Belgiosa,
(Because my story will depend on that)
To show the reason why the giddy French,
So strangely left their conquest: such your power,
Such a full conquest have you of your friend,
I Will shame my self for your content.

Bell. Then, thus:
From us France hurried through Lumbardy
And fled to conquer, who had seen that have
Would easily supposed it to have been
Rather a flight then an invasion.
The Pope quakes at the progress, and admits
Young Ferd'nand into Rome, that if the French
Should dare a fight, they might find Naples there.
France slights that fainter opposition,
And speaks his scorn in thunder, Naples flies,
And all his army has no other use
Then to become unwilling harbingers
To show their lodgings to the conquering French,
Who like fierce winds that sweep away their lets,
Or like incroaching tides, take swiftly in
The offered Countries, not defended: now
Saint German yields, and saucy Capua
That dared a competition once with Rome,
Aversa takes the president, and now
The King of Naples finds home foes, and such
As durst be valiant against their Prince,
And use their fond arms in a mutiny,
Which were not safe enough for a defense.
He taking the advantage of their crime
Unconquered by the French, to these he yields,
And chooses rather to become no Prince
The keep the Crown, which they would take away.

Mal. What was the issue?


Bell. Strangely pitiful:
He that had Navies yesterday, has now
Scarce a bark left him, scarce a planke or two,
To trust him to the mercy of the Seas,
The Seas more courteous then the multitude:
In which he makes for Ischia, and leaves
His enemy his successor.

Cai. And he
(As I have seen some wavering amorist)
Neglects his conquest for the easiness,
For when it was certain Ferdinand was fled,
Whilst they might justly yet fear his return,
The French return, as if they meant to try
Which would be soonest weary of the have,
Who had the swifter pace to run away:

Bell. That is no new act of new governors,
Such stories are as ancient as the world.
Till they do try what they can do, they think
They may do all things, their first act is war
(As if they meant rather to kill then reign)
It matters not upon what ground: there is
Pretense enough to quit a conqueror
From the least show of injury: but then
When they have felt the least of wars extremes
They rave, they faint, they cross what they first did
And are even weary of a victory.

Cai. France made this certain truth, who in his brags
Had sworn the fall of Mahomet: but now
When he might hear the groans of Graecia
Delivered by the echoes of their sea,
To make them more, he thinks on a retreat,
And chooses home before a victory.
It was a valley, where our Taro laves
The root of Apennine, and a large plain
Spheard with a row of swelling Earth, makes war
A spacious Amphitheater: where we
Stayed for their coming; when mature advice
That crowns most actions, strangely injured us
For rashness would have stole a victory
Which tedious consultation gave away,
Success had smiled on our temerity
Had we assaulted them upon the hills
And added to the mountains with the French.
But I am tedious: only our vanne fought,
And it was the Frenchmens victory to resist:
Both were overcome, both conquerors, for they
Still kept the field, and we still kept the prey.

Bell. O what is valor joined with Modesty!
This conquers both our Fortune and your skill.
Should you but write a story, and profess
That pureness from al passion which you have shown,
You would be credited, though twere your own.
But what reward is it to be but believed?
You shall be ever praised: what you have done
Fears neither envy, nor oblivion:
And for this act succession shall see
Cajazzo as long-lived as Italy.

Scena quinta.
Vitellio disguised. I Wonder Malatesta still survives:
Sure Sforza has forgot himself; my death
Does but half clear him, and if the other live,
He cannot look for a full innocence.
It is not mercy, certainly: o, no,
Mercy with him is folly: but t'may be
He fears that had he killed us both at once
Rumor would be too busy, and all mouths
Would cry, that Chance had too much project in it.
This is the place of Destiny, it is here
Sforza does actuate his bloody arts,
Mistaking privacy for innocence,
And thinks he is good, because he is not seen.
Here must I wait for a discovery.

Enter Sforza. Sf. I must once more be cruel, yet not I,
This is the murder of Necessity:
But what has he deserved, who has done naught
But what we charged, and so performed our thought?
Is Death due to Obedience? can this hand
Yield to his Fate, that sealed to his command?
Yet he, or I must perish: shall I see
My life, my honor, my Aeternity,
Lie at his mercy, and be safe, so long
As he is pleased to temper his rude tongue?
Till he be drunk, or treacherous? I Will first
Study amongst all actions, which is worst
And over-act it: though our former deed
Was from ambition, this is yet from need:
Death is too good reward for such a slave, Enter Mal.
And sure there is no blabbing in the grave.
But here he comes: why are thy looks so grim?
Why Malatesta, in thy furrowed face
See I the signs of Anger, or of Grief?
Command thy face to a more smiling form,
That I may think thee pleased when thou do tell
What does displease thee.

Mal. 'Twas a foolish dream,
That stole my color from my paler cheeks.
Last night I saw Vitellio.

Sf. And what?
Can thou fear shadows?

Mal. Yes if shadows speak,
If that their threatenings be substantial.
From such a paper as your Highness holds,
He forced me breath in Death.

Sf. This Paper holds
A strange perfume, of such a cunning virtue,
That at a distance it scarce smells at all.
And at the nose it gives the best of sents.
Make the experiment:

Mal. O! I am slain.


Sf. Heavens what a stillness here is? what a death
Of the whole man at once? the wandering eye
Now finds a station, and the busy pulse
Is now for ever idle: where is the tongue
That but even now could say as much as this,
When that the soul could prompt it? but even now
Here was a thing could speak, and poison too,
That knew more ways to kill, then ever Heaven
Did to make man: and could his subtlety,
That could give death, not know to keep out death?
Fie, what a bulk it is, what a great lump
Of nothing, that shall lose that nothing too?
What a dead toy is Man, when his thin breath
Flies to its kindred Air? o why at all
Did Heaven bestow, or why at all bereave
Man of this Vapor of Eternity?
And must we one day be a stock like this,
Fit only to enrich the greedy Earth,
And fill an house of Death, perhaps before
We see the Issue of another Plot?
Must we lie subject to be trampled on,
By some, perhaps not Politicians?
Where Is then our Wisdom? our deep Providence?
Are they dirt too? o heavens! but if they are
Enter some Negroes to carry away the body. Or dirt, or nothing, I Will enjoy my
fame.
And rottenness shall seize me, not my name.

Vit' Are those the Instruments? well my black friends,
I eased you of a labor: all succeeds
According to the flattery of my wish,
And my suspicion turns to prophecy.
But my so bloody, and so wary Sforza,
Your Agent's dead, but not your crime: 'twill out,
And by this carcass: I will fly to France,
Divulge loud papers, -- they are writ already, --
And here they are, these I will swear were found
In the dead pois'ners pockets: by this means
Sforza's proclaimed a murderer, I Am freed,
And make it be his guilt, which was my deed.

Vitellio going forth meets with Isabella. Scena quinta.
Vitellio, Isabella, Iulia. MAdame I have some news of that import,
That (if you please to command privacy)
Will both desire, and fright your patience

Is. Be brief


Vit. First know I am Vitellio.


Is. Thou art a villain, and a pois'ner then,
Have thou a drugge for us?

Vit. Yes such an one
Shall make you love a poison: read, and wonder.

Is. I do: and more, how thou could purchase this
Without a guilt.

Vit. I did peruse the spoils
Of Malatesta's carcass, whom I found
Most strangely guilty, and as strangely dead,
Whose pockets furnished me with these instructions

Is. Thus we learn Murder from thy Felony:
But what should make me trust a confessed rogue?

Vit. My villainy: my credit is my crime:
Had not I stole, you had not understood.

Is. I must beleev't: but dare thou poison well?
Commit a crime, which thou may glory of?

Vit. On whom dear Lady?


Is. Nay I care not whom.
But I can give reward to a wise crime.

Vit. My quick dispatch shall make you gladly know
I understand, what you desire, and hide. Exit.

Is. Now should he poison Sforza. O fond hope!
That make us think all true that we desire.
Should he betray us now? for what? that we
Entreated him to kill, we knew not whom.
By this expression thus much I have won:
I may be made, but cannot be undone.

Scena sexta.
Picinino. FOrtune is merry, and the heaven disposed
To play with me, I am turned Favorite.
Me thinks my hairs ashamed of their white hue
Should blush to youth: O how I could look big,
Take Giant strides, dote on my lovely self,
And talk as fillily as any Lord.
To see the prettiness of action,
Of State employment: Sforza's to be crowned,
And I must win the popular suffrages.
Good Heavens! was ever such a merry load
Imposed on Man: some cry the times are ill,
Others could wish them better, and a third
Knows how to make all well, but tells not how,
And, cause that he is silent, would be wise.
But in conclusion I do find them ready
(On supposition of no more expense,
And that their voice is su'd for, not their purse)
To give a lusty acclamation.

Sforza, 3 Ambassadors, Cajazzo, Sanseverin, Malvezzo, as in procession, they
offer up the French Banners at the Altar, whilst this is sung. Song.
Io, Io, gladly sing,
Till the Heaven with wonder ring.
He is fled, let Millan say
Once more, he is fled, the day
Cleares again, and makes us see
A braver light of victory.
Io, Io, etc.
Yet he had before he fought
(By the speedy war of thought)
Conquered Italy, and so
Has hastened his own overthrow.
Io, Io, etc.
Henceforth let them learn to live
In the peace, that home does give,
Nor again so fondly rave,
To travel for a foreign grave.
Io, Io, etc.
Sf. First we thank Heaven, by whose most gracious aid
We have the means, and reason to thank you.
Now we begin to lift up our faint heads,
And entertain, though scarce believe a peace:
Now Italy at length has lost her yoke,
Which she was wont to give, but never bear,
And therefore wondered at the strangeness more
Then at the weight often: in this noble act
Sforza claims nothing but the happiness,
Which he acknowledges received from you.

1 Amb. Sforza's deserts exceed the height of praise.


2 Amb. He has slav'd Italy by freeing it.


3 Amb. Millan must know him for her Romulus.


Sf. We know our self so underneath this praise,
That could we but suspect untruth in you,
VVee'd call all this but mockery.

Pic. Do You doubt?
Make you a question of the name of it?
Why call it as it is, plain flattery.

Cajaz. We wondered lately at the prouder French,
And gave too high a value to their acts:
When in a serious estimation,
Their chiefest victory was of the miles,
And more a journey then a war: if they
Could gain a fame by nimble traveling,
How shall we rear a trophee to his name,
That made them go far faster then they came?
For my part (though I know his Modesty,
Which will refuse the honors he deserves)
I Would have him forced unto the government,
To rule that happy land which he has saved.

Omnes. A Sforza a Sforza. Ascanio crowns him.


Sf. Sforza will never gainesay the general voice,
Your love I like beyond your gift: kind Heavens
Show by my governments integrity
You were the peoples prompter, and I Will show
(If you but actuate my just desires)
I only am their Duke in goodness: since
Millan has chose, it shall applaud her Prince.

Actus tertii
Scena prima.
Umbra Galeatii. NO rest in death? why then I see they err
That give a quiet to a sepulcher.
It Is our hard fate, nor can Man choose but die,
But where Grief is, is Immortality.
This draws our juicelesse bones to a new day,
From Lethes banks, where we have learnt the way,
(An easy learning) to return our woes,
And laugh at our misfortunes in our foes.
We Will draw felicity out of our fall,
And make our ghost revenge our Funeral.
That our dim Eyes, and with pale death benighted,
May by revenge be cleared, and we be righted
(If other punishment should come too slow)
By the exacter justice of our foe.
When being betrayed by them he trusted most,
He shall be prisoner in a foreign coast,
When wanting sustenance, his teeth shall chaw
His arms for food, and their once feeders gnaw.
When Hell shall have but part of him, when he
That now triumphs shall be less ghost then we.

Scena secunda.
Sforza. Ascanio. Asc. SForza, you are undone.


Sf. Why my Ascanio?
Fortune is fearful of so foul a crime.

Asc. You durst be bad, and yet improvident,
And so it is not Fortunes, but your crime.
Which shall I first begin to blame? your fault
Or (pardon if I call it) Foolishness:
I faint to think, that you are past excuse,
Both with the honest and the Politic.

Sf. Come nearer, my dear Cardinal, and tell
In easier terms what it is that troubles you:
Is Galeazzo's death divulged?

Asc. It is:
The time, the manner, and the murderer,
Nor am I free from the imputation.

Sf. You speak what you suspect, not what is true,
Dos speech come from the dead? can their dried nerves
Borrow a tongue for accusation?
This is no other then the voice of Guilt,
The speech of our home-executioner:
And yet I fear -- and yet what should I fear?
Blood has strange organs to discourse withal,
It is a clamorous Orator, and then Enter Sanseverin, Halberdeers and Vit.
Even nature will exceed her self to tell
A crime so thwarting Nature

Sans. My good Lord,
Pardon the zeal of my intrusion,
I bring hid danger with me: 'twas my chance
As I was passing to the bedchamber,
Just at the door to find this muffled man,
Waiting some treacherous opportunity.
Each circumstance swelled with suspicion,
The place, the time, the person, all did seem
To bear a danger worthy of your fear,
At least your wiser disquisition.

Sf. Thou art all goodness, and deserve of us
Beyond the niggardly reward of thanks:
But what are you that thus becloud your face,
Who not unlike that over-bashfull foul, He discovers himself
Delight in darkness? Ha! Vitellio!
The wonder is resolved by a new wonder. Ex. San.

Vit. Sforza I live: do ye stare? I live: these words
Are not the fond delusions of the Air,
As you officiously would gull your self;
But from a solid substance, had not we Ent. Sans. with 2 Negroes.
Bin by your dilligent spy too soon surpised,
Before our projects full maturity.
Thy death more fully should have proved my life

Sf. Fool that I was, who thought to take thy life
By that which nourisht it: there is none so mad
Would poison Serpents, I Will work surely now.
Once more Iletry your immortality.
Strangle the Monster.

Vit. 'Twas a doubtful chance
within this hour who first should own those words
But, Tyrant, weary thy invention
To find variety of punishment,
Yet all that thou can do, exceeds not this
A pin could do as much: weak, silly Sforza.
All thou can do to me exceeds not that
Which I did on the person of thy Prince:
Disease would prove a better murderer.

Sf. Stop that malignant throat. -- O my Ascanio,
Thus must they toil which work an hight by blood,
How I could wish an innocent descent
To new subjection? how I hate that wish!
How scorn all thoughts that have not danger in them!
Get us more Remora's, sweet Cardinal,
Or rather then to droope to Idleness,
We Will work to be no Prince, our self re-calling:
In rising, most, some wit there is in falling.

Scena tertia.
Cajazzo. ASsist me, Hell, for I intend an Act,
Which should your puny fiends but think upon,
Would make their blacker cheeks receive a blush,
Would give a redness which your weaker Fire
Had never that heating power to work in them:
An act, the Heavens did only then declare
They would permit to be performed by man
When they created Night: for were all Day,
Could such a Crime be as well seen as done,
Their Immortality might justly fear,
Lest all the guilt should be removed on them,
As Idle, or as Cruel lookers on,
Whilst heaven on Earth did suffer: this black night
Must Isabella dye, dye, by this hand:
This Chapel is her ordinary walk,
Discovered to me by her Iulia,
Where when she comes to see her husbands tomb,
This hand shall make her fit for such a room.

Enter Isabella and Julia with two torches, she places them at either end of
the Tomb, and Exit. Isabella draws toward the Tomb, and speaks. Is. PRince
of shades, (for unto me
Still thou keep'st thy Majesty)
If thou art not wholly lost,
And there is something in a Ghost:
Hear thy Isabella's vow:
If hereafter I allow
Of a second match, or know
Any man, but for a foe,
Saving him that shall engage
His revenge unto my rage:
(Hear just heavens) may I then be
Made another Ghost like thee,
May I dye, and never have
What I visit now, a Grave.

Caj. O do not hear her Heaven, and kill me straight
If I dare touch her: he that sees those eyes
And dares attempt to make those eyes not see,
Has a blind soul: burn clearer, you kind lights
O do not envy me the sight of her:
But what is there in a sight? I must be brief,
If not for love, yet for ambition:
Her Marriage makes me greater then her Death,
And she has taught me the condition.
Pardon, bright Angel, and return the sword,
Which Sforza made me swear to sheath in you,
Into my bosom

Is. No, obey your Prince,
If you have goodness in you keep your oath,
Murder is nothing unto perjury.

Caj. By this fair hand you injure me, and more
Then ever Sforza did: can you suppose
(Though you had heard the vows he forced me to)
I meant what I protested? that this hand
Which ever yet has used a sword for you,
Would use it now for your destruction.
Revoke that thought, dear Lady, that harsh thought,
And let not so much sweeter innocence
Make it self guilty by suspicion,
Suspicion of impossibilities.
Rather command, and you shall quickly see
That he, who would have armed me against you,
Shall find in his own entrails the just steel.

Is. aside. What traps are these to catch the Innocent?
Sforza I smell your project, it is too rank.
My Lord, no more: your speech is dangerous,
I must not hear it.

Caj You shall see it then:
Do not believe me Madam till I Have done,
Till I do bring my credit in my arms,
The Traitors head, and when you see that time,
Confess you owe your life unto my crime.

Scena quarta.
Picinino, Iuliano. Iul. WHat will become of this declining State?
Can we believe that the yet patient heaven
Will any longer suffer? and not give
Destruction as notorious as our crimes.
Awake, stern Justice, and unsheath thy sword.
The Scabberd will not heal us, but the edge,
Nor is it enough to brandish, but to strike:
Let then thy terror give us innocence,
That mildness may no longer injure man.

Pic. Why, thou perpetual Murmurer, thou sea
Tossed with eternal tempest, thou dark sky
With everlasting clouds, thou -- any thing,
Whom, being angry I can call no more:
Think better of those acts thou can not mend.
Will Sforza be less bad, because thou whin'st?
Or do thou think thy pitiful complaints
Can beg a goodness of Ascanio?
I never knew that mighty use of tears,
That they could wash away another fault:
When thou shall want a tear for a fit grief,
Sanseverin will be a Coward still:
And when thy groans are turned to thy last gasp,
Cajazzo will not be less treacherous.

Enter Sanseverin, with diverse suitors following him, some of whose bills he
tears, others laughs at, others puts up. Exit. Iul. Now for thy thunder,
heaven, now now for a piece
Of thy most eminent Artillery.
Are you still silent? see, he tears their papers,
Papers, perhaps, wherein they worship him,
Give him more titles, then they give their God;
And yet he tears them. O vast Favorite!
Swelled by the airy favor of thy Prince,
Till thou have dimmed the light that made thee shine,
Till Sforza's less then his Sanseverin.
Tell me, good Picinino, does the Sun
Spend all his rays upon one Continent?
Or have you ever seen the partial Heavens
Upon one Acre lavish all her showers
While the rest moulder with dry barrenness?

Pic. I have not, Iuliano, but what then?


Iul. Are you to seek for the collection?
Why, has not Sforza made himself our Sun?
Are not his favors our refreshing showers?
Why should one suck up what is due to all?
Why is the Prince made a Monopoly?

Pic. Thou make me laugh at thy fond question:
What? are not Princes men; of the same mould,
Of the same passions with inferiors?
Do not they fear, desire, and hate (as we)
And shall we only hinder them from love?
Cobblers may have their friends, and why not Kings?
Because they are higher then the rest of men,
Shall they be therefore worse? and therefore want
The Benefits, because they have the Rule?
O hard condition of Majesty!
The former accusation of Kings
Has been their cruelty, that they did hate
The people they should govern: O hard plight!
O strange perverseness! shall their love at length,
Their frindship be imputed as their fault?
Would Heaven our Sforza had no worse a crime.

Enter Sanseverin again with his train of Suitors. Iul. You are a worthy
Advocate, and here
Comes your great Patron: go and ask your fee.

Sans. This is a saucy importunity:
You have your answer.

1 Suitor. O my gracious Lord,
Look on these scarres I gained in the French war,
Where I have lost my Fortunes,

2 Suitor. So have I,
Scarce left alive to tell my misery.

Sans. You have bin drunk, and quarreled -- must the State
Find plasters for your broken heads? -- no more --
Nay if you will take no answer, I must call
Them that will drive you hence. O my tired ears!
Henceforth I vow to stop them at your suites,
And be as Deaf, as you are Impudent. Exit.

Iul. Yes, do, good Aeolus -- how he blows the^ hence!
How cleares his passage with a lusty frown!
And yet it may be that despised wretch
Worn out of clothes, and flesh, whom his high scorn
Would not vouchsafe once more to look upon,
Durst in the field do more, then he durst see,
Then he would there vouchsafe to look upon,

Pic. As if that Valor were the only praise,
And none were to be loved, but they that fight:
Where were we then? what would become of us?
Thou think it paradox, but is most true,
A Soldier is the greatest enemy,
Of whom the Commonwealth can be afraid,
Prefer you which you please; yet unto them
Which are the sole Physicians of State,
Who with the teeming of a pregnant brain,
Search the diseases and the remedies,
Valor is nothing but a desperate vice,
And there is no safety, but in cowardice.

Scena quinta.
Sforza, Ascanio, Malvezzo. Sf. WE are not man, for such an empty thing
Could not have this solidity of joy:
Say the French King is dead, and say withal
We are immortal, and ones happy truth
Shall expiate for the others flattery.
But speak the manner too as well, as death.

Asc. When now his gadding thoughts had won the world,
And Italy was to be taken in
But only as an easy seat, from whence
He might derive his further victories;
Ottoman quaked, and 'twas in chance, if now
New Rome, should be new French, and the proud Turks
Be brought to know what their beginnings were:
When Fortune had advanced him to that height,
That grown forgetful of a lowly tomb,
He reared huge Pyramides, and troubled Art
To match his fancy with magnificence
Fit for a conquering builder, who had learnt
To ruin first, and then to build a City,
When Marbles were to be inricht with wounds,
And cut for their advancement: the^, Heavens sport,
He raised competitors to dare the Heavens:
Nor dreams his own descent into low Earth.

Sf. Ascanio, you make him live too long,
Tell how he di'd, without more circumstance.

Asc. He went (such was his use) to see the play
At Tennis court, when by his trembling Queen
He sanke into halfe-death: thence he is conveyed
To the next room, where on a couch of straw,
As if a downe-bed were too soft for him,
Whom rottenness attended, and the grave,
That harder lodging of Mortality,
A King, a conquering youthful King expires.
Thrice from deaths slumbers he awak't to speak,
Thrice did he cry to heaven, unto deaf heaven,
And after nine hours death he died.

Sf. I find
A certain grumbling against Fortune here:
Which that I may whet to a lively rage,
Repeat Malvezzo her last treachery
Against the French, and Neapolitan.

Mal. Naples now won, and the unstable French
(As if they were afraid of their own luck)
Ridiculously leaving what they had won;
The Deputy was Mompenseer, a man
Of an high birth, but of unequal deeds.
For when young Ferdinand with some few boats
(Which only fear might make a Navy of,
And nothing but the strength of cowardice
Could possibly judge strong) approacht the shore,
As if the poor Prince once more had desier'd
Only to see his ancient government,
And therefore had adventured to the Sea,
The Sea was in the City, for never was
Such a confusion in the vulgar waves,
All cry a Ferdinand, a Ferdinand,
Even those who latley banished Ferdinand:
Part open the gates to him, and part shut up
The French into the Cattadells, where he
Besieges his once Conquerors.

Sf. It Is true
Not the world only, but a man's a ball,
Will Fortune never leave her tossing him?

Mal. Whether their own neglect forced them to want,
Or want to yield, it is doubted: but they yield:
Thus as in trivial sports we often have seen
After too tedious inconstancy,
The Cork return to him that struck it first,
So in this fatal revolution,
Fortune gives Naples unto him again,
Whom she first injured in the taking it.

Sf. Who hearing this would not erect his soul
To a contempt of Fortune! that blind wretch
Whom only sottishness has deifi'd?
Man has a nobler Godhead in himself,
His virtue and his wisdom, unto these
Bend all our knees, let us still honor these:
And count it comfort in our l^^^est state,
He that is wise, would not be fortunate Exit.

Actus quarti
Scena prima.
Sforza, Ascanio, Cajazzo, Sanseverin, a Boy. Sf. WE leave it to your care,
Sa^severin;
But see, the night grows old, good rest my Lords, Ex.
Why stayst thou, my Aurelio? good boy
I Will see no bed to night; then go, yet stay,
If they have not escaped thy memory
Sing me those verses which you made to sleep.

Song.
HOw I laugh at their fond wish whose desire aims no higher
Then the bayts of Midas dish?
What is Gold but yellow dirt? which the unkind heavens refined
When they made us love our hurt.
Would to heaven that I might steep my faint eyes in the wise,
In the gentle dew of sleep?
Whose effects do pose us so, that we deem it does seem
Both Deaths brother and his foe.
This does always with us keep, and being dead that is not fled,
Death is but a longer sleep.
Sf. Pretty Philosophy! go boy, go sleep, Ex.
Enjoy the good thou sing'st -- this boy can sleep,
Sleep quietly, and sing himself a sleep:
Making that gentle Rest unto his Song.
But I Will go read: what have we here? a Map?
VVelcome thou lively picture of the world:
Now I Will peruse my large Dominions,
What a vast compass they do fill in thee?
How Poe is wearied with his tedious course,
But running only through our Continent?
Ha! where is Poe? which is our Continent?
If that my eyes deceive me not, I see
My Empire is comprised within my nail:
What a poor point I Am Master of? a blot
Made by the swiftest tincture of the Ink?
But what did this point cost me? this small blot?
My innocence, my conscience, my soul;
I killed a Nephew, to obtain this blot?
O horrid purchase! all this toil, this guilt
For so despised a Nothing? let me see,
Here is no room to sit, to walk, to stand,
In all my land I cannot place my self,
Nor be at all, where I would be the Duke,
But the sad tapers do deny their light,
And stranger fire supplies an horrid day
Of Lightning: help us, heaven, make us co^fess,
There is a Power in your Mercy too.

Ascendit Umb. Gale. Umb. Is then a time, when all our time is spent
That thou of us should fear a punishment?
O happy purchased privacy! to have
The free possession of an humble grave,
VVu't poison us from that? why startst thou so?
We do not shun a kinsman, but a foe:
Believe it Sforza, I am a near ghost,
Nor is our kindred by thy murder lost:
Raise thy cheered look, see Galeazzo here:
Traitor, and coward, does thy faint breast fear
The shadow, which is made? or is a soul
Vncloath'd of Earth, more abled to control
Him that unclothed it! Then I see to dye
Is more to right then suffer injury.
Know I am still thy prince, and if that man
In such a Miracle of villain can
At last be found, in this thy manhood show
That thou dare hear thy doom of overthrow.

Sf. Villain be dumb: we are too tamely mild
That dead men dare affront us, assume flesh,
And we will make a second ghost of thee.

Umb. Thy threats are Air, like us: but to go on:
In curse; now that thy wisdom hopes upon
A joy in unmolested royalty,
Now shall thou have only a certainty
Of high unhappiness, and be undone,
Losing thy rule no better then it was won.
Fetters shall bind thy legs, not Crowns thy head,
And as a cursed beast is prohibited
From common show, so thou, of beasts the worst,
Must die imprisoned, and, what is most accursed,
Obey to death, all comforts taken away,
Robbed of the light, and the sweet heaven of day:
Then flatter not thy miseries, to know
Is not to hinder Fate, fall shall thou low,
Sink to despair, despair to naught, and dye,
Then lower fall, and then as low as I. Discen. Umb.

Sf. Sink into earth, and do not reach thy hell,
Propheticke bubble: might thy threats prove true,
For we could wish the death that thou foretell'st
That our feirce shadow might pursue thee still,
To fright thy Ghost to nothing: O weak Heaven!
Was this a terror for a man? to send
A Bug-beare, framed out of the empty Air.
This does confirm, not fright us: this might be
A terror to my picture, not to me.

Scena secunda.
Cajazzo. Cai. IT must succeed: Fortune may show her spite,
Her power she cannot, in the hour I Am made
A Princes Lord, or murderer: I Have placed
Close at the outward door, Sanseverin,
That if success do crown my hopes, his cares
May give me safety, with my happiness,
That I be not surprised: but if I fail
I have enjoined him on the noise he hears,
Straight to go call the Duke, and enter hither. Ent. Is.
Madame, it is done: and now the guilty head
(Which whilst it stood, made all to fear their heads,
Who durst affirm it did usurp a crown,)
Most humbly bends, and offers it to you.

Is. Which I accept: but for no other end
Then to revenge his death, base wretch on thee:
If that head be not planted there, 't shall off:
You shall enjoy your Masters death

Caj. How Is this?
Is this a love trick, Lady? I had thought
After your thanks parted twixt heaven and me,
You would with greediness have given you self
To him that gave you your desires:

Is. Fond thought!
Do think I Would love a man that kills a man?
Make him my Prince, who has dispatch this own?
Was Treason ever Preface unto love?
Had thou monopoliz'd perfection,
And shared a thousand Cupids in each eye:
I would contemn the proudest of their shafts,
And give thee only what is due, Disdain.

Caj. You Will urge me to just vengeance; do you hear
Madam ingratitude, quickly profess
That this harsh language was but a wise bait,
To make him faster, who was sure before,
Or I profess I Will join your death with his
With thy loathed Sfroza.

Is. I believe thee now
And trust me, so believe, that I could thank thee,
I love thy cruelty, though not thy person.

Caj. Has death so little horror? well I Will do
What shall enforce you to desire a death.
This ponyards point shall nail thee to the earth
Struck through thy arms: where do not hope upon
A noble ravisher, my swarty slaves,
Slaves hated of their fellow-Black a mores,
Shall on thy Honors ruin tire their Lust,
And kill thee in thy loathfull suffering. Ent. Sforz. Sanseverin. Belgiosa.
What dare you struggle?

Is. A rape, a rape.


Caj. O my good Lord, you come in such a time
As I could wish for, for this hour or more
This wicked woman has been wooing me,
To murder your most sacred Majesty,
And for reward has promised me herself,
Together with the Duchy: my good Lord,
In detestation of such treachery,
I gave her some harsh answers, with which moved,
She used a woman's craft, and cried a Rape.

Sf. Is this truth, Isabella? see, she is dumb:
Have I then lived to have you seek my death?
A Cosin-Traitor? yet you shall not die,
Nor know another prison then my Court,
I love to see my Murderer: O heavens!
Why, should I fear to kill her? yet it is reason:
Who is no true Prince, can never punish treason.

Caj. And I shall take you at your word, dear Sf. Ex.


Scena tertia.
Iuliano, Picinino. Pic. IT cannot be, good Julian, no more:
I do not love these over-earnest dreams.
The French invade us? when their jolly King
With limber staves does only mock a war,
Which like so many reeds against a stone,
Punish their own attempt with their own ruin,
Breaking themselves, not armors: when we know
The Court is lost in Maskes, reality
Is so far fled since the last victory,
That we may think the Court it self a mask.
Aeternall Music, revells without end
Tire the too-much delighted soldier,
Whose arms have now forgot their ancient use,
His spirits only active in his heels,
And can thou think they will dance to Italy?

Iul, I Have heard some tell that a great City once
Was built by Music: would we might not find
Our Country to be ruined by a dance:
O fear the toying of an enemy.

Pic. What cannot be believed, cannot be feared,


Iul. You Will not believe, not you, till the French swords
Dive to the bottom of your doubting heart,
Till that th'unkinder news is brought so near,
You cannot have the power to believe it. Ent. Sansever. with sold.
Can you believe this is a drum that beats?
That this is the courageous General
Can you believe, that he believes it is true?

Pic. But who assists us in this dreadful time?


Iul. As many as we have deserved: not one:
Sforza has too much wisdom to have friends.

Pic. And we have too much -- I said nothing, did I?
I did not speak against the State, I hope?
Nor said that we had too much patience?

Iul. Is Picinino then ore come at last,
Now I could change my sorrow for a smile.

Pic. I must confess an anger though not grief:
O how I love to fit me to mischance!
And when that has no reason, the^ I Am mad.
Why should our Millan blood stain the French swords
Unto a glory? Sforza does offend,
Deny's the heavenly powers, or names them then,
When he does dare them with bold perjury,
Loades his black soul with murder of a man
That could have made his execution, justice.
This Sforza does, but what is this to me?
Why shall this throat be cut for his? why thine?
Why shall our Countries ruin fill his penance?
The heavens do know no mean, but either wast
Their benefits on dull ingratitude
Or throw away their thunder, so it hit,
So it not fail, they care not whom it strike,
Whether the guilty, or the innocent.

Iul. This is a grief of higher fault then mine,
You make a war with them you should appease,
And urge the heavens to our calamities.
First we were punished with, and now for Sforza,
Could any justice have more method in it.

Pic. Well Julian, I Am sorry for my grief,
And so persuade thee to that holy truth,
I now could rave against my self, not heaven,
But it is as fruitless, as to wish good luck:
Then let the French press upon victory,
Let them amaze the Air with stranger fire,
Raised by our Cities flaming Funerals,
Swell they the Poe with blood, act o'r, what ere
Has been the brag of royal murderers,
Yet our defense is here: Fortune may fail
But our true souls shall never, we may lose
An aged life, but not Aeternity:
And with this strength the field must needs be ours
Who do not fear, do beat the Conquerors.

Scena quarta.
Sforza. Ascanio. A Guard. Sf. WHat noise is this that from a foreign foe
Recalls our anger? yet our purer hands
Know not the die of blood: we should be loath
To learn a valor on our subjects first.

1 Nunc. The people now have raved to quietness:
But till that Landriano, whom you used
About the last taxation, was become
Their rages sacrifice, I durst have sworn
The French were in the City.

2 Nun. This sad hour
(I Am sorry that you hear this truth from me)
Your Duchess is departed.

Sf. VVhither villain?


2 Nun. To that free Crown, where she shall fear no French,
To Heaven.

Sf. O envious heaven! why do you give
Men such hard precepts of mortality,
And take them hence before that they can learn?
Must not she live, because she lived too well?
Alas my wife!

Asc. Alas my sister, o!


Sf. Who dared that groan? good Cardinal, no more,
I know not what I could deny to thee:
Take to thee all for what the French so toil,
But kindly leave my grief unto my self,

3 Nun. Pardon, my Lord, ill Fortunes eloquence,
Unless you hear you cannot cure your harms,
The French, now entered Lombardy, sat down
Before Valenza: where the mouth of Death,
The thundering Canon being scarcely brought,
But just presented to the yet sound wall,
Discovered there was some what more unsound:
For Rattagnino, the false Governor
Entreats a Parley, gives away the strength,
Swears the town French, and gives the key to them,
With which they open Lombardy.

Sf. My fact;
None can be guilty of this crime, but I:
That after Treason durst again trust treason.
This very man, whose easy heart relents
At a French death, and wisely is afraid
His manners might be called in question,
If he should put them off to sue again,
To ask the second time, for what he held:
Out of his zeal to virtue, and good luck,
Did the like act for us, and gave a strength Ent Mal. wounded
Which al our Duchy never could have forced.
What more revolting yet?

Mal. O my good Lood!
I fear this is beyond Addition.
O my blood fails me, but my tongue does more,
Fearing the story that it must relate.
Your Army being parted, and this half
Cajazzo leading, that Sanseverin,
My troops did fall amongst the French men's scouts;
From whom we learned their numbers, and intents,
To march with speed for Millan: this sad news
We sent to Count Cajazzo, with advice,
That he would instantly rejoyne with us,
To stop their further entrance: he pretends
That the Venetians hemming in his camp
Have made his danger greater: yet he moves,
Makes to the river, and when now our thoughts
Had left their wavering, and did seem assured
His actions would be better then his words,
I saw, O misery that ere I saw!
That crossing o'r the Po he did embrace
Those men which he in duty should have killed:
(O it is this kills me, not my want of blood)
I in just anger set upon the Rear,
And after many vain attempts, have brought
My carcass, to entreat for my revenge.

Sf. This is conspiracy: Cajazzo false?
Tell me that contradictions then are true,
Tell me the heavens no more do travel now
Being grown inconstant to their motion:
Or that the Earth pursie with too long ease
Would with a walk at length refresh her self:
Tell me that Princes may be fortunate,
Those that like me are credulous: or if
You Would speak of things more hard to be believed,
Tell me, there are, that birth of fear, called Gods,
And if they be, that they do think of Man:
Tell me, O prithee tell me somewhat else,
Or I shall think thee false, and not Cajazzo,
But I do know thee true, know thy wounds true.
And must conclude Cajazzo is most falls. Ent. San.

Sans. To be overcome, my Lord, is wretched chance.
But not to fight at all will be thought crime,
I n're durst think so to surviue ill luck
As to become the fatal messenger
But I must say, I durst not fight, and more,
I must entreat your cowardice, your foes
Are strengthened with your Army (o pardon me
Let me not tell you (how) and all our troops
Have no power left us but for a safe flight.

Sf. I did expect this: was not man at first
Placed on this curious Theater, to see
How he could act all parts: do we not know
What we can fear is nothing? providence
Long since has spent our fear; for a wise man,
When he does found his happiness, forecasts
Mischiefs, that Fate had never practiced yet,
Which if they happen, if they prove too true,
They meet, not overtake him, and so find
A scorn, because a preparation.
I knew it might be thus, though I not feared,
And know it may be better, though not hope:
Yet let us never despair, nor by low thoughts
Excuse Fate for her present injury,
And when once more her favors we shall feel,
Then say, that Fortune has no standing wheel.

Scena quinta.
Enter at one door, Triulcio, Aubeny, Cajazzo: at the other, some Senators of
Millan, who deliver the keys of the City. Sen. WE here present you with our
keys, great Lords,
Yet do not think us cowards, who do part
So easily with that, which if we pleased
We might, in spite of force, as easily keep:
We know your right, justice does open these gates,
And not your swords, nor our disloyalty;
We leave a Traitor that has first left us,
And now are glad to entertain our Prince.

Triu. Is he fled then? O our unhappy sloth!
Why ran we not as well as we did fight?
Are Cowards swifter then their Conquerors.

Above as in the Cittadell appear Isabella, and Iulia. Is. Do not dissuade me,
Iulia, it is true
I may escape, but whither? all is lost,
In Naples we find France, as well as here.
O who'od endure the tyranny of hope,
That could so quickly gain a liberty?
If I but fall I Am free; o Iulia,
The greatest distance twixt my bliss, and me,
Reaches no farther then to the next earth.
Can I behold in a perplexed flight
(Of which I know no comfort, and no end)
This my sweet infant crying for the food,
Which I Am uncertain where to beg for him?
No, I Will descend, and if the greedy French
Will have our blood with our dominions, She comes down with some soldiers.
Yet I shall joy to have a speedy end
And call a nimble enemy, a friend.

Tri. What answer from the Citadel? once more
Give them a summons, if they yield not then Ent. Isabella
Give an assault.

Is. You shall not need my Lords,
What you could wish you have, most cheapely have
The conquest of a woman; and a child.
I Am Isabella, (let not that sad name
Be ominous to conquerors,) and this
This Pretty Infant, is my lucklesse child,
Borne Prince of that, which you have made your prey.
Why do you one consult another face,
As you would see, who could be cruel first?
Be not at all, or if at all, to me.
O do not war with infants! can these hands
Deserve your fear or anger? these weak hands
That cannot reach themselves unto their teat?
Who have so much of young infirmity,
They cannot lift themselves to ask you mercy?
O let them have, because they cannot ask.
How many dismal accidents may chance
To take him hence, before he grow to man,
And so excuse, and yet fulfill your purpose?
O let disease be cruel, and not you.

Tri. Madam, you shall be honorably used,
You, and your fair son: take your liberty
To choose your own free course: for this young Lord,
He must to France with us, where he shall learn
The good of royal education:
Where he shall know the happy difference
Between a petty, and a kingly Court.
Some wait upon the princess.

Is. O my stars!
What have I done? ay me. I have betrayed,
What Tyranny had left me, my sweet boy,
For whom I never knew a grief; till now;
I brought him forth with pleasure, when I think
Upon this pain of parting: my dear child,
O too too like thy mother; if thou chance
To draw thy self unto that hated length,
That thou arrive to the discretion
To know, what by my folly, thou have lost,
Call it no more, o do not call it crime,
No mother willingly would lose a son:
Whilst in some darker cell I will intombe
Thy ruins cause, where whatsoever tear
Sorrow did once force, now devotion shall:
That my new name unto the heavens may reach
Whom misery the way to bliss did teach. Exit.

Tri. Never till now had we the victory,
And now no single one, this happy hour
Has gained a conquest for Posterity.
They may be idle now, now the French youth
May grow up without wounds, and at their homes,
Steal to a private grave, no more being forced
To death, though by a glory; nay this Land
May thank us, for our thrift of victory,
For lighting on this blessed occasion,
Which makes us need no more to conquer them:
If heaven continue us this kindness still,
We Will measure out our conquests by our will*

Actus Quinti
Scena prima.
Sforza, Ascanio, Sanseverin. Sf. O What is man? and all that happiness
That puffes him to security? to day
One acts a Prince, and swelled with Majesty
Fills a proud throne, from whence the Multitude
Thinks he rules Fortune too, as well as them,
Whilst she in just esteem of her own name,
Makes him forgot, or odious, that none
Can be so miserably fooled, to wish
His well-apparell'd misery: thus we
That did enjoy beyond a Crown, a brain
Able to meet, or challenge the worst chance:
Yet in the space of a few days, a space
Of too short lasting to expel a man
(By the most subtle fetches of the Law)
Out of a false inheritance: we lost,
We were expelled out of a Monarchy;
But does Fate make a stand at this? O no,
She is not constant, no not in her curse,
But giving most again, which once was mine
She gives me too the capability
Of a new curse.

Asc. Of a new joy: for shame
Give thanks at least for your felicity:
Can you repine being crammed, and so deserve
A bountiful unhappiness? I Have known
Some that have long endured a tedious siege,
Or a more tedious sickness, who have been
Forced to a lasting Lent, when they have come
Or to their health, or to their liberty,
Not dare to take the nourishment they might,
Making themselves their sickness, and their foe:
Is not my Sforza one of these? you grieve
Because you have no longer cause to grieve.

Sans. O I do fear your grief, that it does glance
With a most undeserved disgrace at me;
As if I were a-kinne unto the fault
Of my false brother: O repeat that thought,
It is no great thing I request you to,
But trust unto the faith that you have found.
Would I betray, and follow you? do you think,
I Would be so mad to buy my banishment?
No man would be unprofitably false,
Nor I for any profit: speak your self
If I have left you, when your Fortune did?
Nay, then my love was greatest, when you least,
I was your subject, when you were no Prince.

Sf. Sanseverin, thy fear is too too fond,
And like the people, the Authority,
Who make an impious confusion
Of an high birth, and of an higher crime:
Who in a saucy thwarting to their Prince,
Count him still worst, whom he has made the best,
As if we gave him, with his honors, crimes,
And made him vicious, when fortunate.
No, let them spend their breath in idle talk,
Count thee or treacherous, or cowardly;
Whilst to thy Sforza thou art still the same,
Most valiant, and with thy valor, wise,
That by thy abstinence a while from war,
Have saved us forces for a victory.

Sans. The Subjects life lies in the Princes voice:
Now you have cleared me I dare hasten war,
And wish more enemies, then cowards fear:
That you may see, by my neglect of blood,
(Which I shall only love when shed for you)
How slander was my most feared enemy.

Sf. No more, my dearest friend: we lose all time
Which we do save from fight; still there does flock
New forces to our Army, and the French
Are now as much amazed, as proud before:
We lately took the Swizzers into pay,
Those that dare sell their lives to any cause,
Whom Gold has armed for me: if they proceed
In their first heat, we win: but if they fail
We cannot be more wretched then we were:
The vilest chance of luck can make us know
But an Addition to an Overthrow.

Scena secunda.
The Captain of the Swizzers, with a Soldier, as a fugitive from the French.
Soul. NOw we are alone I dare reveal my self,
I am not what I seem, a Fugitive,
But one that from Triulcio do bring
Letters that much concern you.

Capt. What? to me?
Letters unto his enemy? let us see: Ex. Soul.
Expect an answer in my Tent. -- What Is here?
Letter.
THou Man of Action, whom the Italians
Feel their Achilles, both to wound and heal:
Triulcio salutes thee: what is past,
As past recall he will not mention,
But for the future this; you aid a man,
From whom you cannot any way expect
Reward, or Honor, such his poverty
Both in desert, and means; but against whom?
I will not urge they are your Countrymen,
Partakers of the same sweet soil with you,
Who only differ in their better choice:
Yet so far do I prize your worth, to think,
You have not put off Nature, nor have changed
With your home-ayre your home-affections,
That you are still a Swizzer: think of this,
And that at other times twere shame to fly,
Now only flight shows Magnanimity.
Triulcio.


What shall I do? O I am lost in doubt,
Nor know, what to refuse, or what to grant.
Shall then the Swizzers to their valor add
A tainture of disloyalty? to whom?
Who can accuse us for our treachery?
One that has patronized it by his act:
That has betrayed his Nephew: shall a man
Be counted treacherous; that betrays vice?
It was a crime to aid him, can it be
A crime to leave him too? O paradox!
Resolve me Goodness what it is best to do:
And that does whisper a dislike: for what,
What goodness can there be in civil war?
When we shall kill them that were borne with us,
When we shall make the Father dye his sword
In the sons blood, and strangely give a death
To him, to whom he kindly gave a life,
When the mixed blood of the same Family
Shall make a cruel incest: this we do
If we are honest: I Will learn treason first,
And the most accurate sin. Triulcio,
Our Country calls us, and not thou, To be
Dishonest then is the best honesty. Ex.

Scena tertia.
Picinino in his study, with a Deaths head and a Watch. Pic. THis is the sum,
I can but be like this.
After the prouder threatening of the French,
After the sure impression of Diseases
I can but be like this: then let me think
What loss I have when I am made like this:
This fears no French: a piece of ordinance
Can break, but not astonish this, no force
Can draw a tear, no not a sigh from hence:
And can it be a loss to be like this?
O Death why art thou feared? why do we think
It Is such a horrid terror Not to Be?
Why, not to be, is, not to be a wretch,
Why? not to be, is, to be like the heavens,
Not to be subject to the power of Fate:
O there is no happiness but not to be. to the Watch.
But thou discloser of the stealth of Time,
Let me inquire how much is worn away
Of this sad hour: the half? O speedy time!
That makst us feel, ere we can think of Age,
Ere we can take an order for the Grave. Ent. Iul.

Iul. What? deep in meditation, noble friend?
So studious of your Watch? alas good man,
Thou needst not this faint help to guess at Fate,
These silver hairs are watch enough for thee.

Pic. I only look how many minutes hence
Millan expires.

Iul. O swift Arithmeticke,
To sum by minutes our sad Duchies age.

Pic. This Watch does teach real Philosophy,
There is no tutor to this active brass:
What is a Kingdom, but a larger watch?
Wound up by Fate unto some scores of years,
And then it falls: good Iuliano list,
Hark how it beats, how strongly and how fast,
Beyond the motion of a nimble pulse.
Who would not think this were a lasting noise?
And yet it ends: after some date of hours
The watch will be as silent as the head.
O it is our folly, folly my dear friend,
Because we see the activity of States,
To flatter them with false Eternity:
Why longer then the dweller lasts the house?
Why should the world be always, and not man?
Sure Kingdoms are as mortal as their Kings,
And stay but longer for their period,

Iul. I fear our Climactericall is now:
When all professions turn to soldier,
To that cursed Art that thrives by Destiny.
The sithes are straighted into swords* and the Earth
Being not wounded is undone, where once
Stood buildings, which an humble Poetry
Without too bold a swelling might give Kings:
Whole Mines undone to beautify one roof,
Now only Desolation dwells: weak grief,
To say Corn grows, where once a City stood,
That sustenance is there where no men are,
This is a trifling, and half misery:
Our Lands now only furnish us with Graves,
Can hide us, but not feed us; we would think
Our Cities standing, though the buildings fell,
If we had no grief, but Fertility.

Pic. But on what strength does Sforza still subsist
Against so powerful foes?

Iul. The Emperor
Has sold him some few Almaines, but his hopes
Chiefly depend upon the valiant Swizze,
Who were the chief in his depression.

Pic. Has his gross brain not learnt the danger yet
Of bringing strangers into Italy?
He called the French to Naples, who have now
Found Millan too: O what is the difference
Betwixt a mercenary and a foe,
But that we kill one for his outrages,
And hyre the other? Iuliano, I
May feel misfortune, but will never buy. Ex.

Scena quarta.
Sforza, Sanseverin. Sans. THe French are mighty, and portentously
Rise by their fall: strong shame begets a rage,
And a disdain, that you whom they expelled
Should hazard their expulsio^, makes them hazard,
What ere being ventured, adds a fame to Man,
And gives a glory to his misery.
They are so far from the base fear of death,
That they embraced, and like those fiercer curres,
That spend their anger on the senseless stone
Not daring to attempt on him that threw,
They with a senseless anger break the darts
That nail them to the Earth, as if they scorned
Their killer should survive them: other lets,
As heat, or hunger are their exercise:
That one would think they would lost all part of man
When they did mean to show the best: my Lord,
I wish a swift, but love a certain conquest:
I think twere wisdo^e to protract the fight. know,

Sf. I know thou speakst what thou think best: but
It Is wisdom to delay on equal fame:
But when a foe has won opinion,
Which draws all eyes, and hearts to him, O then
A valiant desperation fits a man:
For victory is not impossible,
And honor necessary: my best friend,
Call forth our Swizzers, and if happy swords
Though few, may cut a way to glory, come: Ent. Capt with Swiz.
The purchase is above the pains: but here
Come they that shall fill histories: brave friends
Now is the time we shall employ your swords,
And teach the world your valor.

Capt You may fail:
It Is better to be wise: Sforza, I Am come
To take my leave of you, nor shall much breath
Be spent in ceremonial complement,
I am the French Kings soldier.

Sf. Speak low,
Let not the air feel such a treason, know
There is a power above us, and that power
Thunders sometimes, I know, thou dare not stand
In contestation with the power of heaven:
Revoke thy words.

Capt, I Will do no miracles:
My voice and faith are past.

Sf. Yes they are past:
Thou art made up all of disloyalty,
Reason has nothing of thee: yet relate
(If thou have any relics left of sense,
I Will not conjure thee by strange Honesty)
Why do thou leave the heavens, and us, and so
For nothing do commit a double Treason?

Cap. I Will satisfy you thus, you see I do it:
Srike up a march.

Sf. Yet stay: what is the price
That makes thee treacherous, I Will turn prodigal
To buy thee to a virtue: stay: be rich,
Without a curse, without a fault.

Cap. It Is vain,
I Am deaf to Rhetoric: yet say thou have met
With a good perjurer, my word is past,
And to be twice a traitor, is a fault
No sorrow can atone for: yet thus far
I Will strain my self to please thee, it is well known,
Unless you get unto Ascanio,
Your hopes are at the last, but between you
And him, the French have interposed themselves,
Nothing remains but that you trust to me,
And in a Swizzers coat disguise your self,
That you may pass their Army.

Sf. O hard strait,
Must Sforza impotently hide himself?
Or can a Prince be hid? I have often heard
Sparks of Divinity adorn his face,
To clear him from the multitude: why then,
Then being a Prince will make us be no Prince,
We being betrayed by our own Majesty.
Yet off, ye envied roabes, fall to the Earth,
O fall so low, that henceforth Man may scorn
The labor of descent to take you up:
On, on, ye happy roabes, that like good clouds
Do not obscure, but for a time defend
The threatened Sun, that he may after shine
With higher vigor: I have heard of some,
That wear their flesh with hair cloth for their crimes,
As thinking to be good if they were rough,
By such a wild repentance: be it so; Ent. Triul. with the French.
These robes offended, the^ there is an hope
These rags may expiate heaven

Tri. Brave soldiers,
How we rejoice we may embrace at last,
Not with armed hands, without the guilt and shame
Of civil murder* but are these the troops
That now must learn to use their valor well,
To give a death without a prodigy?
A conquering cheerfulness adornes their face.
These are not common soldiers: look you pale?
Then I must know the mystery.

Cap. I Am betrayed.


Tri. Yea I know all, but yet from thy forced tongue
Will I extract confession; fetch a rack,
To make him howl the truth he will not speak

Cap. I can dare torments for wise honesty,
But when you know as much as I can tell.
Should I conceale't, all policy would judge,
I did deserve the worst that I endured:
Who told you this was Sforza?

Sf. O my brain!
Must subtletie perish by subtlety?
And our high wisdom find a Conqueror?
Make an end Nature, the great work is done,
Sforza is over-reacht -- weak, childish rage:
Is this to lessen, or make misery:
Can passion loose us, or a courteous tear
Wash off our fetters? if it can, pour eyes,
Pour out wet comfort; if it can, refuse
The curse of slumber, but it cannot, then
Covet a slumber everlastingly,
And be like me, imprisoned in your lids.
Convey us quickly hence, kind friends, you know
Sforza can never be a prisoner here,
Convey us thither where we are no Prince.
And must we woo our Ruin? never man
Is a true wretch, but when he loses all,
And wants the sad Election of his fall.

Scena ultima.
Iuliano, Picinino. Iul. I Am lost in this confusion: one reports
We have lost all, another instantly
Kills all the French at once: thus every street
Is filld with wondering people, some cry, Arm,
Others run crying, to persuade a flight:
All have an earnest business in the stir,
But in the help not any.

Pic. These are they
That if an happy messenger should come
With Sforza's victory, would pretend at least
To be overcome with joy: the gorgeous walls
Should shine with painted triumphs, and the French
Should be again vanquished in pageant
But if his fortune yield to the French force,
What obloquy's will be enough for him?
Disgrace will then be wit, and any brain
Will venture on a Libell.

Iul, It Is the use,
The popular folly to admire events.
And those low souls think that the sword is just,
Proportioning the reason, by the end,
Of the chief acts, of the best enterprise,
And so by folly run into a crime.

Pic. No matter for their wisdom, were they good:
O why are such termed Innocents? but friend,
What is our aim? a flight our age denies,
And whither should we fly, but to the grave?
O I have so much people in me too. Enter Malvezzo.
That I could wish thy company

Mal. Good Heavens!
Am I escaped? may I stay safely here?
My fear has left such near impressions,
I scarce dare think that this is Liberty.

Pic. Noble Malvezzo, is there any hope?


Mal. As much as in despair: we are betrayed,
Sforza is made a prisoner, all is lost,
And Millan, without blows, is once more French,

Pic. Now I remember what I dreamed last night,
(If it be safe to call a vision, Dream,)
I saw our Sforza in so pale a shape,
That Envy never was described more wan,
Who frighted me with this relation.
STart not astonished mortal: let no fear
Chill thee to my pale image, but fix here:
Let thy once Prince be thy now spectacle,
Whilst I the direst Tragedy shall tell
That ever challenged wonder: briefly then
I was betrayed, betrayed, and by those men
By whom I conquered: it is an happy end
To perish for, but never by a friend,
This our first death: but then -- O could cursed Time
Dare ever such a Minute, such a Crime?
Then was I pinioned, then these royal hands
Were forced obedient to the base commands
Of an insulting Conqueror, and knit
Unto a hated union; it were fit
If ever Heaven shed tears, then to distill
Mournings Elixar, though the expense should kill
The hopes of after Ages: but Heaven smiled
Nor any courteous clouds were wisely pil'd
Over the Suns sharp beams, but they gazed on
With the same visage of compassion
As did my torturers, by whom I Am brought
Unto a place the which some shallower thought
Has faint by termed a prison, but to tell
The truth of horror, it was on Earth, an Hell:
Darkness so dwelt there, that I might be won
To wish the cruel comfort of the Sun,
Which erst I rav'dat: it was a narrow cave,
Formed to the model of a lesser grave,
Or straightened Coffin, all was length, for they
Left not the hight that I might kneel to pray,
Was ever such a bed? could ever yet
Cruelty boast of such a subtle wit
To bury so! some that have entered Earth
Alive, like me, yet by the usual mirth
Of justice had their burial with meat,
As if it should be their punishment to eat,
From which I Am barred, I had no food, but me,
And yet a guest of famine; Courtesy
At last ceiz'd heaven, I died, and so though late,
I both appeased and triumphed over Fate.
But where am I? what ecstasy was this?

Iul How quickly we learn misery? no ghost
Would have so courteosly relinquisht Hell
To teach us happiness: if a kind star
Had cast a Fortune on us beyond wish,
We might expect the story from the star
As Soon as the dear benefit: but when grief
That against which we would seal up our ears,
When that is meant us, we shall surely hear,
Though heaven do strain for a new Miracle,
So to amaze us to a certainty:
Though rotten carcasses regaine a voice,
And hell is bounteous of intelligence,
To give us tears.

Pic. Why, then an end to tears,
Let Us scorn the sorrow, which we owe to hell:
How learn we the prodigious effects
Of wise Ambition: for twere easy justice
To ruin foolish usurpation,
Heaven needs not stickle in it: but when those men
Who are as accurate, as bad, who can
So shape their vice into a virtuous mould,
That we repine at the accusers more,
Then at the guilty: when that these men fall,
Who then will call that wise, which he sees bad?
Such wisdom made, and ruined him: then ye
That dazzle with your Majesty, and sit
Too near to thunder, and not fear it, know
Sforza, and learn a wise contempt of wisdom,
Frailty attends your best, and strongest trick,
And there is no fool unto the Politic.

The Epilogue.
SOme what beyond an end? and can there be
Tediousness counted an Apology?
It was prolixity of speech offended,
And can that error by more speech be mended?
Your patience stints the wonder: that is it
Has dared us to be public, and to fit
These times of tempest, with a blustering scene.
If ought do please, if we have hit the mean,
That neither cloyes the Auditor, nor starves,
Felicity has crowned us; if ought swarves
From plausible invention, know 'twas it
Which we intend, which is in stead of wit.
Tears grace a Tragedy and we are glad
To have the happy power to make you sad,
Continue it, and our applause is high,
Not from your Hand so much; as from your eye.
To the Ambitious.
TEll me, mortals, if there be
Ought beside stupidity
Hidden in you at the least,
If you are not all one beast
Wherefore do you cloud your face
If you want the chiefest place?
Why do you respect? O why?
Not how good it is, but how high?
Would you all be Kings? o vain.
This is but to entertain
Such desires, that you may fear,
Lest the heaven should lend an ear,
Lest you have what you desired,
And in your own bogges be myr'd.
Height is baseness, if it be
Levelled by A^quality,
And the Earth were a plain still,
If it were but one great hill.
Would you all be Kings? as though
Standing poole should wish to flow,
Or a river make his plea
To exceed into a Sea:
As if of the stars not one,
But should strive to be the Sun,
Or the Lark would partner be
In the Eagles sovereignty.
Would you not be mad to see,
If a beast, a stone, a tree
To the heavenly powers ran
Angry that they were not man?
Nay in us consider well
To what Monsters we should swell,
If but any Part should be
Of the Man's infirmity.
What should lead, or what be led,
If the feet were made the Head?
What should speak, or what should see,
If this itch of Majesty
Made the mouth, for being nigh,
Beg advancement to the eye.
Would you all be Kings, poor men!
Wish, what you would wish again,
Which within your thoughts dares bide,
And's not fearful to be tried.
What Is a King, consider well,
But the public Sentinel?
But a Beacon, which we find
Highly subject to the wind:
And can any still desire
To be worse, so he be higher?
Are you weary of your sleep,
Can you count it bliss, to creep,
To take pains unto that height,
Whence your fall may gain a weight,
Would you all be Kings? you may,
Every man has regal sway,
And it is this the fault does bear,
Not that he commands, but where.
Do thy thoughts rebel? would Pride
Have thy worst acts magnified?
Does Ambition make thee flee
To forbidden Sov'raignty.
Know it is a braver way
To forbid, then to obey:
Know it is a nobler deed,
To give over, then to speed.
Were this all? would every one
But command himself alone,
But command his own desire,
From the thought of rising higher:
It would not be a grief to see
An universal Monarchy.
FINIS.
The explanation of the Frontispice.
A Levite in his journey goes
To wicked Gibeah for repose,
Which is denied, but having found
Another lodging then the ground,
(Such is the unkindnesse of their sin)
They make a prison of his Inn.
From whence he shall not issue free,
But by his wifes Adultery,
So when from thence to have he minds,
Her dead before the door he finds,
When to express their crime, and make
The villains at their own guilt quake,
Into twelve pieces he divides
The body that was once his Brides,
Now Gibeah is besieged, and though
They twice have given the overthrow
Unto their betters, yet at length
They find Vice has no lasting strength:
For now their town's as hot as their Desire,
And as they burnt in Lust, so that in fire.
THE LEVITES REVENGE. by Robert Gomersall.
LONDON. Printed for John Marriott.



THE LEVITES REVENGE: Containing POETICAL MEDITATIONS UPON The 19. and 20.
Chapters of JVDGES.

By Robert Gomersall.

The second Edition.

Printed at LONDON in the year M DCXXXIII.

TO HIS VVORTHILY RESPECTED FRIFND, MASTER BARTEN HOLIDAY ARCHDEACON OF OXFORD.
WOrthy Sir; whilst others are ambitious of an honorable Dedication, I am
thankful for a friendly one, this in the mean time being mine happy advantage
over them, that they expect, but I enjoy a Patron. And yet I have not such a
scarcity of great names, to whom I might pretend with as good a confidence as
the greatest part of VVriters, but that some of the higher rank (to whom for
their frequent courtesy I confess my self an unequal debtor) might have
expected, others almost challenged my Dedication: to whom I know no other
answer of more respect and satisfaction then this, that I concluded the work
to be below their notice, how much more their protection; and that I would
have others to take notice more of my Friendship, then of my Ambition: But it
may be that some will conceive an Ambition in this Friendship, when I of such
an infancy in study shall boast the favors of so grown a virtue, and intrude
upon his fame. If this be an offense, I must profess I glory in it, this
accusation I confess and am proud of: such is the ambition of him that is
enamoured on virtue, of the man who would be indeared to heaven, whose desires
would not be so good, were they not so high, and the Angels might have stood,
had they never known another Pride. But not to insist on that (which
nevertheless I can never too much insist on, the remembrance of our
friendship) to whom could I more fitly dedicate a Poem, then to him that has
showed such excellency? or a Divine Poem, then to him that has showed such
Religion in his composures? Of this truth Persius is a witness, whom you have
taught to speak English with such a grace, that we can understand when we
hear him, and find no one syllable in his Dialect offensive either to the
Elegant, or to the Chaste Ear. Of this truth Iuvenall may be a witness, whom
though we do not yet hear in public bettering his expressions by your exact
rendering him, yet they that have enjoyed the happiness of your nearer
friendship, confidently and upon the hazard of their understanding affirm,
that he is far unworthy of such an imprisonment, that he should be
obscured by that hand which cleared him. But it is Divinity that is the subject
of these verses, and it is Divinity which is the exercise, and glory of your
studies, which makes you an inhabitant of the Pulpit, nay which makes every
place where you will vouchsafe to discourse, to be a Pulpit, for such is the
bounty of your religious conversation, that howsoever the place may be
changed, the Sermon is perpetual. Sermons that at the same time make us devout
and witty, which by first winning the Preacher, have the easier Conquest of the
Auditory: who are never with less difficulty entreated to their happiness,
then when they see they do not go alone. So that now when I consider what I
present, and to whom, I begin to suspect the lightness of my work, and
think I have some reason to fear the censure of such a Friend, to whom if I
shall be excused, I expect some glory from others, not because the Levite, but
because He was mine, to whom, having thus far tried his patience, I have
nothing more to add but this, that I am his,

In all the duties of Affection, ROBERT GOMERSALL.

TO THE READER.
REader, I must first entreat thy Patience, afterward thy Ingenuity; thy
Patience, that thou will read somewhat before my verses: thy Ingenuity, that
thou will not censure them the worse, because thou shall find them censured to
thy hand. The purpose of this Poem is Religious Delight, which if thou shall
find in any place wanting, or disjoined, understand, that it was either not my
intent, or mine Error. And yet I dare affirm no man shall be the worse by it,
and that if there be any want, it is more of the Delight then of the Religion:
If I intended excuses, I could tell you, and that truly too; that these verses
were not now first made, although they are now first published, and the
Composure was a younger man's, though the Edition be a Divines. This I could
say, if I thought Poetry incompatible with Divinity, if it were a serious
truth, that God could be only magnified in Prose: But when I consider that
Nazianzen could be both a Poet, and a Saint, and that it was heresy that cast
Tertullian out of the Church, and not his Verses, I dare acknowledge these for
mine own, and fear not to suffer in that cause, wherein those Worthies were
so magnified: Especially, since these Essays (which I fear their weakness
will too strongly testify) were not my study, but my Recreation, when in the
vacations having for a time intermitted my more serious affairs, I chose
Poetry before Idleness; yet I have not chose Poetry with the hazard of my
Conscience, and so instead of a Divine have writ a superstitious work;
howsoever Malice or Ignorance may wrest a passage unto Popery, I mean that,
where Abraham prays for the victory of the Israelites: But besides that the
Intercession is general for the Church, which no judicious Divine but will
allow for Orthodox, it is made by him, whom a Popish Divine will deny at that
time to be able to intercede: there was no soliciting of him they saw not,
and the holiest of the Patriarchs (as they will tell you) saw not God till
after the Resurrection: I have the more fully expressed my self in this, because
I would not be esteemed as one of the^ (whereof there is too great an harvest)
who play the wantons with Religion, that will halt between two parties, and in
spite of the Prophet, at the same time serve God and Baal, who like not
Orthodoxe truth, unless delivered in heretical terms, and so by a notable
new trick of Iugling, call that Pacification, which is Conspiracy, of whose
proficiency in Religion I can speak little; but this I may most confidently
affirm, that (perhaps not after the Apostles mind, yet certainly in his
words) they go on from Faith, to Faith. Of this crime, and of the suspicion of
it, I trust I am sufficiently acquitted: for other errors which Malice and
Curiosity will abundantly multiply, I only refer my self to the truly
Judicious, who know that a good Poem is as a good Life, not wherein there are
none, but wherein there are the fewest faults.

To my learned and highly esteemed Friend, Mr. ROBERT GOMERSALL.
HAd such a Labor in this juggling age
Sought after Greatness for its patronage,
Not after Goodness, I had then been free
To love thy work, though not to fancy thee;
But thou have won me: since I see thy book
Aims at a judging eye, no smiling look.
Greatness does well to shelter errors, thou
Not having any, fear no frowning brow,
But wisely crav'st a view of his, that can
Not only praise, but censure of a man.
Thou needst not doubt severer eyes, if he
Add but applause unto thy Poety.
His works such monuments of fame do raise,
That none will Censure if he once but Praise.
Commend I would, but what? here is nothing known
Can be called thine, when each has claimed his own.
Iove-bred- Minerva challenges the wit.
Mercury flies and swears he languag'd it.
Thy Arts the Muses claim; the History
Savours of nothing but Divinity,
Transcribed from Gods records; then nothing's thine
(But grief for the Levites sin) since the use is mine.
But now dear friend, though this sufficient be
To raise up Trophies, and eternize thee:
Give leave to him that loves thee to desire
To serve thee friendlike, though in mean attire.
The glittering star that darts a glorious light
Were lost if not commended by the night?
So stands it with thy verse; I writing set
Their beauty off, as Crystal is by Iett.
Nor does it trouble me; since that my end
Is not to be a Poet, but a friend.
And yet perhaps these looser lines of mine
May prove eternal; cause they usher thine.
Midd. Temp. C. L. I. C.

Epitaphium Concubinae.
Quae tristis ignes, Gibeah, passa est tuos,
Cultrumque sponsi, cujus amplexum petit
Non unus ardor, ecce in amplexu perit,
Non una facta victima, and multus rogus.
Discant pueliae forma sit quantum Nihil,
Virtus venusta est, pulchra men's solus decor.
Englished thus.
Who suffered Gibeahs Lust, and her Lords knife,
Whom not one Suitor would have had to wife;
By many Suitors perishing, here lies,
A not-one Coarse, and many sacrifice.
O who would trust in forms, that hours impair,
Virtue's true shape, and only Goodness fair.
PSALM. 9.2. I will be glad and rejoice in thee, yea my Songs will I make of
thy name, O thou most High.


FAther of Lights, whose praises to rehearse
Would pose the boldness of the ablest verse;
Who art so far above what we can say,
That what we leave is greatest: show the way
To my weak Muse, that being full of thee
She judge Devotion the best Poesy,
Teach her to shun those ordinary ways,
Wherein the greater sort seek shameful praise
By witty sin, which ill affections stirs,
Whose pens at leastwise are Adulterers.
O teach me Modesty: let it not be
My care to keep my verse from harshnes free
And not from lightness; let me censure thus,
That what is Bad, that too is Barbarous.
Then shall my soul warmed with thy sacred fire,
Advance her thoughts, and without Pride aspire,
Then shall I show the glory of my King,
Then shall I hate the faults which now I Sing,
THE LEVITES REVENGE.
Canto. I.
The Argument.
The Levites Love, her flight, his stay
In hope to bring his Runne-away:
Gibeahs harsh usage, with the free,
Unlooked for old man's courtesy:
Their base attempt, her wretched fate;
This song to Time does consecrate.
WHilst Isreal's government was yet but rude,
And Multitudes did sway the Multitude,
Whilst all the Nation were so many Kings,
Or else but one great Anarchy: Fame sings
That there a Levite was (Levites may err)
Who had a Concubine, and doubted her.
Durst Lust and Jealousy so high aspire
To one that only knew the Altars fire?
Must he feel other Flames? to wanton eyes
Must even the Priest be made a sacrifice?
Or has he offered incense so long time
For Judah's fault, that he has gained their crime?
Appeased for sins to learn them? in times past
Whilst yet the ancient innocence did last,
Levi could kill a Ravisher, but now
Levies base offspring does not disavow
To be a Ravisher. Perhaps to show
His Grandsires bloody rashness, who would so
Punish that crime, which some years past might be
His own, at least in his Posterity.
For so 'twas now: the Levite loves, and more,
Suspects at last, whom he did first adore:
For Fame speaks hardly of her: but poor man
Fame speaks no more the^ thou should think: for can
One that has broke with honesty, be true
To him that made her break? or else are you
The only Tempter? does there no blood boil
Besides the Levites? can they only toil
In sins, that preach against them? if they can,
Yet such as she are made for every man.
What none can challenge his, is due to all,
Lust should not imitate a Nuptial.
She now suspects her Levites jealousy,
And hasts home to her fathers house: o why
To go or come again could thou dispense,
And bring not back again, what thou broughtst
Was then a Father to be visited
When thou were made a Mother? what hope bred thence?
That madness in thee, that unto a mild
Father, thou should be welcome for a child?
But unto whom would thou have welcome been?
A Father? it is the nature of thy sin:
To make them doubtful: they that live like thee,
Ashamed of nothing but of modesty,
Banish themselves from all, but their dear sin;
And lose at once their virtue, and their kin.
But when the Levite saw that she was gone,
That she was lost, whom he so doted on,
Reason almost forsook him too, to prove
Anger can blind a man as well as love:
It may be Israel was holy then
And sacrifices for the guilty men
Came slowly in, this might increase his grief,
And be an accessory, if not chief:
This might confirm him in his angry sin,
Robbed of his profit and his concubine.
But he will not lose her: will thou seek her then
That does fly thee? that to an host of men
Has given thy due? as if she meant to try
Which were the most unvanquisht luxury
Of Priest or people: whom if thou should find,
Thou have not yet recovered her lost mind,
That wanders still, and will thou fetch her thence
To try, or else to teach thee Patience?
Can she teach any virtue? can there be
Ought learnt from her besides immodesty?
All that this journey can effect, that thou
Can promise to thy self, if thou speed'st now,
Is, that she will lose the bashfulnesse she had,
And only prove more confidently bad.
You now may think him near his journeyes end,
Where long before his thoughts had met his friend,
Scorning his bodies sluggish company,
And now both are arrived, where to his eye
She first appeared, for whom alone, I find,
He thanked the heaven that did not make him blind,
For which he should have thanked them: he had been
Then nor a Lover, nor a Priest: no sin
Had crept in with the light, nor ever made
In that good Darkness, an unhallowed shade
But who had seen him when he first descried
Who'twas that met him, how he slipped beside
The wearied beast, and with full speed did run
As if he meant to tempt temptation;
He would have judged that women strongest were,
And men object the weakness which they are.
Thus when he should wisely have understood,
And thanked the kinder heavens, who made him good
Against his will almost, having removed
That which did hinder him from being beloved
Of God, and goodness, not unlike the Fish
Which seems to be desirous of the dish,
(As if for his delivery he did wait,
And therefore were ambitious of the bait:)
Into a known snare, he does gladly run,
And foolishly pursues, what he should shun.
And is not this, I Would know, the readiest way
To make God think, we mock him when we pray?
When we pretend desire, that we may be,
As from the Fault, so the Temptation free:
Whilst (as we had not known what we had said,
Or hoped, that God observed not how we prayed)
Lest that we should receive our hurt from far,
We both the Tempted, and the Tempters are,
And thus the holiest name we take in vain,
Praying as never meaning to obtain.
And now her father comes, who after words
As kind and elegant as that place affords,
Entreats her pardon: but alas, good Age,
Who shall entreat thy pardon, or assuage
The Levites passion now? who does aver,
That he alone does sin, who taxes her:
With this he smiles on her, and yet does fear
Lest she should think that this a Pardon were,
Or reconcilement: without much ado,
You might persuade him now he came to woo,
And not to fetch her back; but by the have
Of carrying her from thence, fearing the wast
Of the least minute, she might well descry,
What ere his words, his deeds spoke Jealousy.
Hardly he condiscends to one nights stay
Though 'twere with her: but how he spent the day,
How his desires were speedier then the Sun,
(Whom then he thought to creep, and not to run)
Twere tedious to relate, though the old man
With all the Art, and all the Cheer he can,
Detaines him three days longer, which appear
As long as fancy can extend a year.
Minutes are Ages with him, and he deemes
He has out-lingred grave Methusalems
Nine hundred year by such a stay, and fears
That she may once more shun him for his years.
Sure such accounts the wise Egyptians made
Who added wings to Time, as if he had
Moved on too slowly, or as if they meant
To take his fore-top from him, with intent
To make him bald before too, whose records
Had very near as many years as words.
Making full forty thousand ere the fall,
And pu'ny Adam of no age at all.
The fifth day dawnes, but ere the rising Sun
Had showed the victory which he had won
Of cloudy night, before the sleepy Cock
Had proved himself to be the Country Clock
Showing the mornings hour, when now we might
Have spoke no falsehood had we called it Night:
Our Levite for his journey does prepare,
And his are dressed, ere Phoebus horses are:
To whom the Father comes, and gently chides
His early sonne-in-law, who, forced, abides
Till after noone with him, and then he goes
Not from the house so fast, as to his woes,
Sure the old man did prophecy the harm,
Which would ensue, when he did seek to charm
Our Levite to a longer stay: but O
It Is double misery beforehand to know
We shall be miserable! then why has man
That cursed ability, that well he can
Prognosticate mishapps, when they are near?
And all his knowledge teaches but to fear.
Which yet our Levite has not learnt, who rides
Doubting no danger: now the worlds eye glides
To his west Inn, when Iebus he espies,
Whom he counts his, because Gods enemies.
Hearken ye Gallants that will cross the seas,
And are industrious for a new disease,
If you will needs be gadding, and despise
For foreign toys, our homebred rarities,
Take this example with you, if you go
Travel not from Religion: why, although
You never touch at Rome, or else perchance
You scarce see Spain, and gleane but part of France,
You may be weary, think your travel great,
And spare at once your conscience, and your sweat;
You see our Levite though the night draw near,
His love be weary, and no town appear
Where she may rest her self, although the way
Were troublesome enough even in the day,
Yet he resolves gladly to undergo
More miseries then Night and danger know,
Ere he will venture there to make his stay
From whence the Idols had drove God away:
O far unworthy of thy future Fate
By this best Action! miserable state
Of too great virtue ill-imploy'd! to be
Punished, when he did shun Iniquity,
As he did Iebus. How he spurs, how rates
His tardy beast! how his own slacknesse hates?
Which forced him by his traveling so late
If not to stay, yet to deliberate.
Within the Center of the Earth there stands
Near to the fiery streams, and ashy sands,
A dreadful palace, of such uncouth frame,
Each part so shaped as if twere built to shame
All Architecture, that if one did see
The vastness of it, and deformity,
He would not make the least demurre to tell
That 'twas a lodging for the Prince of Hell.
What ere does beautify a house, here wants,
The walls are black as the Inhabitants,
Made out of Iett, into such figures framed
That Nature dare not own them, nor be blamed
With so much Monster: we in doubt may call,
Whether the trimming, or material,
Had the more horror. No birds here are heard,
But such whose harsher accents would have feared
The most resolved: they punish in their rimes,
And all their ditty does consist of crimes.
They sly Praecisian that could gull the eye
Of the most sharp, by close hypocrisy,
Whose mischiefs only he that did, could tell,
Who, we may think might even have cheated Hell
With such dissembling, sees his vices bare,
Naked, and foul, as when they acted were:
One lays oppression to his charge, another
His sisters incest, murder of his brother.
They show his zeal was only to contend,
And all his reformation not to mend
But to confound the State, that his knit brow
(Which looked so stern as it would disallow
The most indifferent act, and like of none
But such as did pretend perfection)
Was but an easy Vizor, such as Rage
Can give it self, and must receive from Age.
That he did only know external Grace,
And all his holiness was in his face.
Is goodness in a wrinkle? can we find
That what does cloud the face, does cleanse the mind?
To me it is a trick of rarest art
That hollow brows should have the soundest heart.
These are the sounds, but then the smells are worse,
Enough to make that Harmony no Curse.
Under the walls there runs a brimstone flood
The top of flames, the bottom was of mud:
Of such gross vapor, that to smell was Death,
Prisons are sweet, compared unto that breath.
And to maintain the fire and stench at once,
The fuel is prepared of usurers bones,
Loose Madams locks, the feathers of their Fan,
With the foul inside of a Puritan.
In this sweet place as sweet a Prince does dwell,
The chief of fiends, the Emperor of Hell
Grand Lucifer, whom if I should relate
In the worst figure that the eye does hate:
I should but faintly his foul self express,
Nor reach unto his unpattern'd ugliness,
Death keeps the entrance, a tall sturdy groom.
Who emptying all places fills no room,
But like the fond Idolater of pelf,
Denies men, what he cannot have himself:
Here does this shade send challenges to all,
Who would have entrance first to try a fall,
They try, and they are thrown; there is none so great
But yields to him, who knew but one defeat
And that long after, but his prime was now,
His bones some marrow had, some grace his brow.
No plagues as yet, no famines had been known,
The sword was thrifty, making few to groan
Under his edge. Death yet had lusty thighs,
Nor spent himself with too much exercise.
Here there stand numbers, which exceed all sums
(For they refuse none here, who ever comes)
The murderer first, and without much ado.
Sometime he will admit the murtherd too.
Then the incontinent, but if that he
Be known by Incest or Adultery
His seat is chief: nor have they a low place,
Who with an open and alluring face,
Delude their trusting friends, till they have wonn
Their deeper projects, which they built upon.
The rest of lower crimes, whom we may call,
Downright offenders, such as after all
Their time of trespass, have not gained the skill,
And only know the taint, not art of Ill:
Have no distinguished rooms, but venture in
As headlong to their pains, as to their sin,
But now some other enter; for a charge
Past from the Prince of shadows, to enlarge
The imprisoned Crimes, that they might all confer
(Such is his will) with their Lord Lucifer.
What noise there was? what striving at the door?
This would be first, and that would go before:
Pride claims precedence, and cries who ere
Ventures to make a step before her there
Is impudently foolish, that the place
Is hers by due, and only theirs by grace,
When she would yield it: unless first they would
Bring more convincing reasons then she could:
For who should to the Prince of Hell first go
To visit him, but she that made him so?
And who had made him so, she would know, but she,
When with his God he claimed Aequality?
Peace, wrath exclaimes, and with so deep an oath
As all those fiends, with Hell to boot, were loath
To hear another such, he vows no more
To bear the bravings of that scarlet whore,
He Will first a Rebel, first a Virtue be,
And no more Wrath, but Magnanimity.
She smiled, and bid him be so, but whilst they
Were hot in this contention, Envy lay
Gnawing her breasts: feign would she have bin higher
Had but her spirit equaled her desire.
But since she cannot be revenged of them,
She uses an unheard of stratagem,
Tears her own hairs, and her gimme face beslimes
Thus punishing her self for others crimes.
By this time Idlensse comes in the rear,
As proud, thoug not as active, as they were;
He scarce would take the pains to speak, but loath
To lose his dignity by too much Sloth,
He gives them these few words, Why strive you so
About the place which all to me do owe?
Do not ye know, I am the reigning Crime,
Most general, and most lofty of the time?
I mak^ (...) Lawyer silent, though he see
His clyent full; I am beyond a Fee:
When Laws do not, I make the Preacher dumb
Even when the Tiger, or the Wolf do come:
But above all, I in the Court do grow,
Beggars are proud, but Emperors are slow.
Drunkenness could not answer, but does think
It Was fit that Idleness should yield to drink:
And reeling to encounter him, does fall
Just in the entrance, and excludes them all.
Now is the skirmish hotter then before,
Now Pride begins to scratch, and Wrath to roar;
Drunkenness lies unmoved, and Sloths intent
Is to sit still, and to expect the event.
But in this civil broyle, at last comes Craft
Of whom no Painter ere could take a draft,
He had such change of shapes, who when he saw
These tumbling warriors, and that no awe,
No fear of Lucifer could teach them peace,
He Will try his skill to make these broils to cease,
Fie Pride, says he, What? give your self the fall?
And Wrath are you no more discreet withal
Then quarrel with a woman? Come agree,
If not for fear of Hell, for love of me.
But out alas, you do too well agree,
When Wrath is Proud, and Pride will Wrathful be.
Go hand in hand (thus friendly Craft decides)
Only the upper hand let that be Prides.
They enter the great hall, where they do see
The Hellish Monarch in his Majesty,
Where having made obeisance, he begins,
Thus to break silence* and upbraid the sins.
The reason why I called you (not to dwell
On an unnecessay praeamble)
Is to inform you, that we find of late
You have not been officious to the State:
It Is true, you bring me daily what is mine own*
And plentifully reap what I have sown.
In the gross Heathen you do hourly cause
Vices, which never were forbid by Laws,
Because never thought of? but what is this to me,
Whether that Lust or Infidelity
Fill Hell with those, nay and oppress it too,
Which must come thither, whatsoere they do?
You do like those, who in the other life
Buy their own lands, and woo again their wife.
A goodly act, and wherein's danger store,
You give me that, which was mine own before.
Whilst Judah all this while has me withstood,
And dares, when I forbid them, to be good.
They honor Parents with a zealous strife,
And with their goodness do prolong their life.
In them no malice nor no rancor lies,
Nor shed they blood, but for a sacrifice:
Adultery's scarce heard of in a life,
And they are men only unto their own wife.
In such a loved community they live,
None need to steal* all are so apt to give.
While you suppose that highly you deserve
If you can say that you have made them swerve
From goodness that never had it: well you have done
If that Semiramis once doat upon
Her wondering issue, and begin to swell
With such a birth, that would pose us to tell
How she should call it; and what she did bear
If it her daughter, or her granchild were,
You have discharged your office, if you make
Some bloody Nations their own issue take
And offer unto me; or if you draw
Some to the practice of that wicked Law
That after fifty they their parents kill,
And not that only, but suppose that ill
To be their duty. O fond thought! and thence
Do estimate their child's obedience.
Hence truant Crimes, avaunt, no more appear
In my dread presence, no more let me hear
Those petty actions, if you do not straight
Revenge my wrongs, and ease me of this weight,
Which thus oppresses me, if Israel still
Shall dare to cross what I shall call my will;
By Hell I Will do -- but what? I say no more,
If you are wise, prevent, if not, deplore.
This said he star'd so fiercely that they feared
He would perform much more then they had heard,
Nor know they well how they their tongues should use,
Whether 'twere best to promise or excuse.
At last Lust rises, and becalmes him thus,
Why do you loose your wrath, great Prince, on us?
Us your sworn vassals? who nor think nor do
But what your will is their command unto.
What though w'ave spent our pains not the right way?
Yet they were pains, nor can an enemy say
But we were active Furies, and have done
What lesser fiends durst not have thought upon.
And yet (if that I may have leave to tell
From your dread grace) preciser Israel
Has not escaped us wholly, nor has bin
More noted for their Law, then tor their Sin.
Was that a Virtue too, when being led
By Gods own hand, and filled with Angels bread,
They did, (I joy to caus't, but blush to tell,)
They did repine even at that miracle.
Fasting and full they murmr, nor are less
Angry with Manna then with Emptiness.
I could speak more, and truly: but in sum,
To prove my past acts by my act to come;
If by your gracious leave, I have the fate
To have a joint commission with Debate,
I Will make a fire within their blood to burn,
Shall their proud Cities into ashes turn:
And they shall know how foolishly they err,
Who are not willing slaves to Lucifer.
Lucifer nods, and Lust does swiftly run
With his unlimited Commission:
Which with what Art, what mischief he did use,
Is now the grief and business of my Muse.
But now she must to our sad Levite have
Whom we left trav'lling, when the day was past.
The sun sets over Gibeah; when that he
Draws nearer thither ward, but then to see
The blush of Heaven, with what a red it shined,
(As if the Sun his office had resigned
Unto those clouds) to all that understood,
It would have showed that it did figure blood,
And now our Levite is arrived, but finds
The walls more courteous then the peoples minds:
For these had gates which let him in, but they
Were merciless, and rougher then the way:
Men that had only studied to oppress,
Whose minds were shut against the harbourlesse:
And yet he sees large houses, some so high
As if they learned acquaintance with the sky,
What ever pleased their fathers now grows stale,
Their buildings to the hills exalt the vale:
And such thick Palaces the mountains fill,
As if the quarry grew without the hill.
Some are of that circumference you would guess,
They had been built for him, who had no less
Then the whole world his Family. But when
Our Levite was inquisitive, what men
Filled up that Princely dwelling; and if there
Might be found hope of rest for them that were
But two more then the Family; they tell
That two are the whole Family, 'twas well,
And stately too (as state is at this day)
So might they live at home, and yet away,
O the great folly of Magnificence!
Houses are little Cities, and from thence
Cities are lesser worlds, that man may have
Room enough here that cannot fill a grave.
He must have Halls, and Parlors, and beside
Chambers invented, but not named by pride:
And all this for one man, as if he sought
To have a several lodging for each thought,
But none for any stranger: this truth seems
Too certain to our Levite, who esteems
That prisoners are in better state then he;
Nay, even the prisoners of mortality,
Such as are fast immured within the grave
Who though they want a life, a lodging have.
Inhumane wretches! have you then forgot
That you were sometime strangers? Were you not
In Egypt once? where the Propheticke land
Did justly scourge your baseness before hand,
Knowing you would be barbarous, and so
Made you to feel the harshnesse which you show.
O cruelly forgetful! that endure
To act, or else out-doe the Epicure,
Whilst he feeds on the Air; that think it meet
To lie in Down, while he lies in the street!
An old man thought not thus, but to his house
Entreats the strangers: it is malicious
To lay the imputation upon Age
That it is covetous (as if the sage
Hairs of the Ancient were therefore white
To signify their silver Appetite.)
Peace you blasphemers, see an aged man
Covetous only of a Guest, who can
Repay him nothing, but his Prayer, and be
Indebted once more for his Piety;
But if my Muse have any power o'r time
And sin has more mortality then rhyme,
Old man thou shall be ever old, and have
No entertainment in the silent grave
For this thy entertainment: here a while
Let me admire how that a town so vile,
Which we would think with strangers had decreed
To shut out Virtue too, should rarely breed
Such a strange Virtue? quietly we hear
Of courtesies in Rome; of kindness there
Where Greece is named, who counted it a sin
Not to have made each noble house an Inn
For worthy strangers: but when one shall fall
In commendation of the Canniball,
Shall say that they, who on their guests do gnaw
And entertain their strangers in their maw,
Are hospitably minded, that even there
May be a mouth which is no Sepulcher:
We stand aghast, as if we did conspire
Not to believe the good we did desire.
Whence sprung this Singularity? whence came
This worth which so deserves and conquers Fame?
Our Virtues are not borne with us, and they
Which will in noble man till times last day
Live after them they make to live, what we
Call goodness, is the gift of Company,
Our study not ou^ Nature, and could these
Teach any other thing besides disease
In manners? it is fit then we confess
Mercy is learned amongst the merciless,
And rather then a Levite shall want rest
Avarice self shall entertain a Guest.
But now the Levite has forgot that he
Had left the hard streets hospitality;
He finds such kindness, that he does suppose
Courtesy wore no other hairs then those.
To grieve the honest world, who now might fear.
That she was hasting to her sepulcher.
Into an anticke room he leads him first,
Where one would guess that Abraham had been mirst
Or a more ancient Patriarch, the walls
Composed of that which from a wett shoe falls
In weeping winter, which a man would think
Their age had now dried up into one Chinke.
Yet such a room one comfort does afford,
It was not built to ruin its sad Lord.
For who will beg a Cottage? who would make
A guilty wretch, that he his rags might take?
To that whence nothing comes is no regard:
None would be vicious too but for reward.
No, let them fear who dwell in arched vaults,
Who in much room do seek to hide their faults.
Where hundred columns rise to mate the sky,
And mock their Lords with false Divinity.
Envy is proud, nor strikes at what is low,
And they shall only feel who scorn her blow:
She on no base advantage will insist,
Nor strive with any but that can resist.
Now is the table spread, and now the meat
Be'ing set, each takes him his appointed seat:
No courtship here is showed, no carving grace,
The entertainment (homely as the place
Spoke only hearty, and that plain intent
Which greater entertainers complement.
So Abraham feasted heavenly guests, as when
He made the Angels eat the bread of men:
So on the like guests, hospitable Lot
Bestowed the diet which they wanted not;
In this ours differs, nay in this exceeds,
That he bestows his kindness where it needs.
One would have thought so, when he heard the noise,
Of confused multitudes, men mixed with boys.
All ages in the cry, as if they meant
That now the Babes should not be innocent:
Bees do not murmr so, and angry hounds
In their full rage send forth but easy sounds,
Compared to this: their in land Sea stood still,
Wondering to hear him self out-roar'd, and till
This time, that noise has such a silence bred,
That ever since it has been styled the Dead.
Now they besiege the house, and one would fear
That their loud tongues so many engines were
To batter it: down with the Gate, cries one,
Another laughes at that, and with a stone
Threatens to force a Gate, and deeply swore
To give them entrance, all the House was Door,
But then another that would needs be wise,
And counted chief in this great enterprise,
Exhorts them to a Parley: Why, my friends,
Make you such have, says he, to lose your ends?
Have you indented with the stones you throw
To miss the Levit? Do you think no blow
Can fasten on him, or do you mean to prove
If that the stones are rivalls in your Love?
Stones and not men! with that the hands were still,
But all the noise, the Hubbub, with an ill
Consent, cries for the Levite, whom they feign
Would only know, and so return again.
And could you see him in the street so long,
As far from being hid, as this your wrong
Shall be from after-Ages, when he had
No cover, but the kinder heavens, (whose sad
Compassion hindered them from shedding tears,
Left such a grief should make the unkindnes theirs)
Had you so full a view of him, and yet
Do you desire to know him? No, forget
That ever there was such a one, and then
Posterity may think that you were men:
How will they wonder else, when they shall hear
You loved him in the house, whom you did fear
To bring into your house; that you were mad,
In the pursuit of that you might have had?
You ai'm'd another, a worse way, and just
His answer is, that calls your Knowledge, Lust,
But how, were they so long time innocent?
How was this Prodigy of Desire even spent
Before it was expressed? here we may see
In impudence there was some Modesty:
They would not sin at home, the worst abhorred
To be a beast, where he should be a Lord.
And it seemed better to the vilest breast
Not to receive, then to abuse a Guest.
Now the Old Man not fearing any harm
That might ensue, whether he hoped the warm
Lust of their Youth, would by his Age be quelld,
And that those flames would to such winter yield:
Or whether he was then rather addressed
To offer up himself before his Guest
Unto their Fury, forth he goes: they thought
That now they should obtain what they had sought,
Whom thus he does be speak; Have Patience
My friends, I come, not to entreat you hence,
But to fulfill your pleasure, only change
The Sex; I have a daughter, and what is strange
In this hot town, a Virgin: at your suite
I am content to make her prostitute,
So that my stranger may not injured be:
Nature shall yield to Hospitality.
O constant goodness! O best act, which can
Conclude the Virtue, older then the Man!
How I could lose my self in praising thee,
Man not of Age, but of Aeternity!
Who did respect thy guest beyond thy blood,
And knew'st the difference betwixt Fond, and Good.
Henceforth scorn all comparisons below,
Only thy Maker, thy Superior know:
Such was his Mercy that he did bestow
His only Son a ransom for his Foe;
(This was a pattern fit for the most High)
Yet next this Mercy, was thy Charity,
Thy Act in this is second to the best,
Thou would not spare thy Daughter for thy Guest.
But they will not be prescribed in their desire,
Who think, to alter, were to quench their fire:
They must the Levite or his Sister know,
(For Sister they interpret her) to show
Our saucy Laymen how they should expound
Their Preachers actions, not to be profound
To search their faults, but well and wisely too,
Do what they speak, and not speak what they do,
This they exclaim, and this our Levite hears,
Who now has spent his Reason, and his Fears.
Such a Confusion he is fallne into,
He knows not what to shun, nor what to do.
So in raised Seas, when that the angry wind
Threatens destruction to that daring kind,
Who to a flying house themselves commit,
(Seeming at once to fly too from their wit.)
The well-stor'd passenger, (when he does find
That all this fury of the wave and wind
Is for his Treasure) now resolves to dye:
(Death is not so much feared as Poverty)
And now resolves that he will venture on
More loss, before that Resolution:
He does from this unto that purpose skip,
And now his mind more totters then his ship.
Till after all this tedious, foolish strife,
Which he shall save, his treasure, or his Life,
He shall save neither; and thus being loath
To hazard either, he does forfeit both
And now she shall be Passive. O Fates sport!
He Will now betray that should defend the Fort,
Such Revolution did you ever see?
Who erst was Jealous, will a Pander be.
O Life thou most desired, and wretched thing!
Thy love betrayed his love, from thee did spring
This Contradiction of cross Faults, O why
Chose he not rather to do well, and Dye?
Why did he so desire to shun his Friend,
And call that Misery, which was an End?
The Dead do fear no Ravisher, no Lust
Was ere so hot, to dote upon cold dust,
Were he once dead he should fear no crimes then,
Neither his own, nor those of other men:
And could he wish a longer life? let those
Who do not know (but by inflicting) woes,
Hugg that desire, but he who wisely waighs
What many miseries are in many days,
Let him not be so mad to wish his fears,
And only prove his Dotage by his Years.
Never did Morning blush so much as that
Which next appeared; when up our Levite gat,
And running nimbly to the door, he sees
His love before the door with her fair knees
Grown to the Earth, so close, that one would fear,
She took a measure of her Sepulcher,
With hands out stretched, as if, fearing to fail,
She meant to make a Sexton of her nail
To dig her grave: or else (for who can tell?)
Suspecting by her injuries an Hell
Not to be far, where such sins had a birth,
She lay so close, to feel if it were Earth.
He wonders at the posture, nor knows why
She had not chose to rest more easily,
And now he will be satisfied, but she
Had lost her tongue too, with her Chastity.
He thinks she sleeps, and therefore louder cries,
Why do we dally here? Wake, and Arise.
But let him cry on, she has heard her last,
Deaf to all sounds now, but the latest blast.
And art thou dead, he cries? what dead? with that
You Would wonder which had been alive, as flat
He lay, and speechless, glad of the same death,
But that thick sighs betray that he had breath:
Which only serves his Anger: now he hyes
Home to mount Ephraim, all his jelousies
Are dead with her, and now he means to make
Her common after death: each Tribe shall take
A piece of her; O the obdurate mind
That so could part, what God had so combined!
I faint in the relating it, nor well
What he durst act, dare undertake to tell.
Twelve made of one? O who would not be mad,
To think upon that madness? if she had
But such another grief, with both oppressed,
My Muse would the^ be dumb, which now does rest.
Canto. II.
The Argument.
The twelve pieces of his wife
Cut out by the Levites knife,
To the field to do him right,
Draw the angry Israelite.
Abraham's Prayer, Heavens decree,
Benjamins glad victory
Twice repeated, do prolong
My story to a second song.
SVch crimes amongst the Israelites? I fear
Incredulous posterity will swear
Mine was the fault, and when they muse hereon
They Will judge the Crime was in my Fiction,
When Vice exceeds a Probability
It gains excuse, so that to sin on high
Is politic offense, for he that shall
Sin so, is thought not to have sinned at all.
It Is the corruption of the minds of men
To judge the worst of actions, but it is when
The fault is frequent, when the daily use
Gives it at once, the guilt, and the excuse:
But if a crime swell to the height of this,
Murder, or Incest, or if any is
Of fowler name; when man will man abuse,
We do absolve more gladly then accuse,
Can it be possibly presumed that they
To whom the God of Jacob showed the way,
Both of their feet and manners, who had seen
His frequent Miracles, nay who had been
Part of the wonder too, so to have fell
As to commit a greater Miracle?
Sodom in Judah? now the Fable winnes
Credit, and is out-acted by true sins:
Report has made Pymalion to have loved
That which he made, who by his Art was moved
To palpable Idolatry, yet so
At least he loved a woman in the show:
He Is fixed on his fair Image, so that one
Would wonder which had been the truer stone.
Yet 'twas a Woman Image, so that I
Wonder at's luck, more then his vanity,
A Painted Woman will cause love: I Am moved
More, how he did obtain, then why he loved,
These do affect what to obtain is worst,
What in the very thinking is accursed:
In other loves the wife may barren prove,
In this the barrenness is in the Love,
In other faults there have excuses been,
This has no other Motive then the Sin.
And can this sin be theirs? Yes know it can,
Man forsakes God, and then he doates on man.
But who did tutor them to this offense?
For, though we find it in each conscience
That we are naturally vicious,
That there is no true good in the best of us,
That we pursue our ill, as drawn by Fate,
Yet it is example does specificate,
That teaches us This sin: it is mine own Vice,
But that I am more lost in Avarice,
That I do choose Adultery, or prefer
The lustful man before the Murderer,
I have from Praesident: and thus our ill
Comes from the Pattern too, as from the Will.
Egypt denies to have an hand herein,
(Egypt the house of bondage, not of sin.)
Their cruelty I hear, and which is odd,
I read that their chief sin, is their chief god.
They make their gardens heavens, and in each plant
They find a Deity: If that any want
Be in their fields, if thence they do not gain,
It is their gods they want, and not their grain.
Their superstition might issue hence,
The Calfe, on which they placed their confidence,
Which act this glory to them does afford,
They make themselves the beast which they adored
Or did the Desert make them thus to stray,
And cause them lose their Manners with the Way?
Did those vast places, which wise Nature framed,
Wherein wild man should by his fear be tamed,
His fear of wilder beasts, instruct these men,
That there are beasts which are not in the Den*
And that when ever we neglect, or scanne
The Lords commands, the Monster is the Man?
No, these suspicions may suspected be,
As far from Truth, as they from Honesty:
Egypt was free from this fault, and much less
Can we impose it on the Wilderness.
They had no King: as well the fools as wise
Did all what did seem right in their own Eyes.
And Sodomes crime seemed right to some: to see
When every man will his own Monarch be,
When all subjection is taken quite away,
And the same man does govern and obey;
How there is no obedience, nor rule,
How every man like to the Horse and Mule,
Which want the understanding of their bit,
And neither have their own nor Riders wit,
Make a swift pace to Ruin. Give me then
Leave to admire, and pity those poor men,
Who think that Man should his own Ruler be,
And exercise Home-principality:
Who in one speedy minute strangely do
What Alexander but aspired unto,
Conquer all Kingdoms, which they affirm to be,
No better then a well-nam'd Tyranny.
Let me inquire of these, if they have read
Any such crimes where people had an head?
Let me inquire of men, as yet not wild,
Whether they think themselves Lords of their child?
Whether their servants Masters? whether they
Suppose that God did not make some to obey?
In Innocence there was Dominion,
And the first man was the first Lord: that one
King of the Creatures, whom for this none blames,
He proved his Sovereignty by their Names.
That he was his wives Sovereign, in the Fall
He fell not from his Monarchy, when all
His Righteousness was vanished, that remained,
And so a knowledge of this truth he gained,
(A truth he could not know had he still stood)
We can be longer Powerful then Good.
Nay let us look on Hell, and we shall see
That there is a Prince of that obscurity.
It is a torment such as Hell has none,
To want that order in confusion:
That is the best; we may conclude from hence,
That is in Hell, and was in Innocence.
But I do wonder at the fault so long
That I defer the punishment: my song
Must to the Levite turn, or rather be
No more a Song, but a sad Elegy.
He having carved his Love, as you have heard,
And done that act, which Hell and Furies feared;
Sends a choice piece to every Tribe, to plead
Their injuries, and tell why she is dead:
Benjamin shall have one of them, lest he
Might dare commit a crime, he durst not see,
A several messenger to each Tribe is sent:
But he that unto Princely Judah went,
Carrying the head of the dismembered coarse,
With such a voice which sorrow had mad hoarse,
(Least he should rave too highly) thus begins!
Is there an Heaven? and can there be such sins.
Stands the Earth still? me thinks I hardly stand,
Feeling the Seas inconstancy on Land.
After this Act, why flows the water more?
Why does't not stain, which always cleared before?
It is not Air we draw now, it is a breath
Sent to infect us from the Land of Death:
The Fire, whose office it is to warm and shine,
Grows black and downwards, as it did repine
To see the fact, and sheds a kind of tears,
Quenching his heat, because he cannot theirs.
Can you behold these eyes without a tear?
Can you with patience longer think they were,
And are not the worlds wonder? yet I err,
It is Revenge, and not a Tear fits her:
Let women weep for women, then you shall
Show you have sorrow'd heartily, if all
Do sorrow which have injured her, and be
Examples, as of Crimes so Misery.
Gibeah 'twas (O 'twas not Gibeah)
Credit me not, believe not what I say,
I scarce dare trust my self, and yet again,
Gibeah 'twas that did this Fact: and then
He tells them all, what I before have wept;
Now Judah storms, and as a River kept
From its own course by Wears and Milles, if once
It force a passage, hurryes over the stones,
Sweepes all along with it, and so alone
Without storms makes an Inundation:
Such was the peoples fury, they are so hot
That they will punish what we credit not,
And be as speedy as severe: but some
Who loathed the bloody accents of the Drum,
Who thought no mischiefs of that foulness are,
But that they gain excuse, compared with war,
And war with brethren; these, I say, of age
The chief amongst them, do oppose their rage,
Exhort them to a temper: Stay, says one,
And be advised before you be undone.
Whence is this fury? why do you make such have
To do that act which you will repent as fast?
Are any glad to fight? or can ought be
Mother of war, beside Necessity?
Be not mistaken; brethren, take good heed,
It is not Physic frequently to bleed.
He that for petty griefs incision makes
Cannot be cured so often as he aches.
Are then your sisters, daughters, wifes too chaste?
Or are you sorry that as yet no wast
Deformes your richer grounds? or does it stir
An anger in you, that the soldier
Mowes not your Fields? Poor men, do you lament
That still you are as safe as innocent?
We yet have Cities proudly situate,
We yet have people: be it not in fate
That your esteem of both should be so cheap
To wish those carcasses and these an Heap.
Me thinks our Jordan has an happier pace,
And flows with greater majesty and grace
In his own natural wave, then if the sword
Should higher color to his streams afford;
Should paint and so deforme it: to mine eye
A River's better then a Prodigy.
But I desire, dear Countrymen, to know,
Whose is the blood that we must lavish so?
Perhaps the Philistines ambition
Would to our Shiloh bring their Ascalon,
And these you would encounter: or it may be
Egypt still envying that you are free
Intends a second bondage: or perchance
Your daily conquered Enemies advance
Their often flying ensigns, those at hand
Possessors and destroyers of the Land;
Whom God reserving for our future Pride,
Left to our eyes as thorns, pricks to our side.
No none of these, but all your swords intend,
I grieve to speak't, the ruin of a friend:
And all the sons of Israel do press
That Israel may have a son the less.
Joseph I Have read suffered his brothers hate,
( Joseph of near acquaintance unto fate.
The mouth of Destiny,) they would kill him first
But after sell him, to try which was worst:
And yet no reason for this spleen appears,
But that his glory was beyond his years.
To hate the younger still is too much sin,
And after Joseph to spoil Benjamin.
Has twelve no mystery? do ye ascribe
Merely to Chance, that there is no odd Tribe?
Trust me my brethren, they do injure God,
Who say that he delights in what is odd:
I think it is parity best pleases heaven;
And what is most just, loves what is most even.
Do I excuse them then to please the time,
And only make an error of a Crime?
Am I sins Advocate? far be it from me
To think so ill of War as Sodomy:
For Sodomy I term it, Justice calls
That, fact; which never into action falls,
If it has past the license of the will:
And their intent reached to that height of ill;
But whose intent? O pardon me, there be
Benjamites spotless of that Infamy.
Shall these be joined in punishment? a sin
You Would war against, O do not then begin
To act a greater, as if you would see
Whether Injustice aequall'd Luxury?
This madness was from Gibeah, it is true,
Yet some do more distaste the crime, then you*
Even in that City: hear then my advice,
And God shall prosper what you enterprise.
Exhort them to do justice, if that then
They still be partial to these guilty men,
Their guilt is greatest, let them perish all
And equal their offenses with their fall.
Thick acclamations break off his discourse,
They Will hear no more because they like't: Remorse
Ceizeth each conscience, they already hate
The civil war, which they so wished of late.
Ambassadors by general voice are sent:
But Benjamin conceits that to repent
Were the worse sin, and that who ere will do
A wicked act, he ought defend it too.
But are not we true Benjamites in this,
And aggravate what ere we do amiss
By a new act? as if the second deed
Excused the former, if it did exceed.
Did we not thus, an end were come to war;
Did we not thus, no more should private jarre
Molest our peace; Kings might put up their swords,
And every quarrel might conclude in words:
One conference would root out all debate,
And they might then most love, who now most hate,
The most sworn foes: for show me, where is he
Would seek Revenge without an injury?
A wrong received, or thought one? then no need
But to deny, or to excuse the deed,
Why is Defense? O what do they intend
Who justify those acts, which they should mend!
O Pride! O folly! O extreme disease!
O Fact, which he condemns who practices!
Who in his soul confesses he offends,
And yet doubles his guilt when he not ends.
Great crimes find greater patrons: impudence
Follows each fault, to make us think that sense
Has fled us with our Virtue, and that men
By such an hardness were turned stones again.
So wifes of Entertainment (who do know
More then one Husband) in the public: show
As virtuous as the best whilst undescry'd,
Whilst they have this good left, that they will hide
And veil over their offenses: but if once
Either their husbands just suspicions,
Or their security betray their fact,
No more do blush to answer, then to act,
As if 'twere meritorious, and so, did
Appear no sin no longer then 'twas hid.
Why should the bad be bold? why should there be
Audaciousnesse joined to impiety?
Whence is this daring? Sin was child to Night,
How dares he then approach and blast the light?
How dares he stand the examining, and try
If men can find out his deformity?
I have the reason, we are flatterers all,
And to our selves the most; if any fall
Into gross errors, still he thinks he is free,
And Pride supplies the place of honesty.
He thinks it is good to have a virtuous name,
And cares not for the goodness, but the fame.
Which makes the Benjamites reply: we admire
(To say no more) at your so strange desire.
And at the craft on it most, that you pretend
Love and advice* when you subjection send:
Are we so stupid, and so senseless grown
As to be thought not fit to rule our own?
Benjamin was the youngest we confess
Of Jacobs sons, and yet a son, no less
Then Levi, or proud Judah: he that gave
Life to each Tribe, intended none a slave,
Nor shall you make us. But you will say that you
Out of a general love to goodness sue
For justice against her Enemies. It Is poor
If what we would we cannot cover over
With specious pretenses: it is an ill
Physicians part so to betray his pill,
That children may perceive its want of dress,
And choose disease before seen bitterness;
But let me tell you, who so ere does deal,
In the affairs of a strange commonweal,
Is tyrannous or mad: he would be known
Either another Lord, or's not his own.
Yet what is it your grave Masters do advise
Our sleepy Council of? whose duller Eyes
See only open vices: we have heard
The Levite and his Concubine, we feared
You Would have us punish him: then you relate
That coming unto Gibeah some thing late,
And willing to depart the earlier thence,
He found his Chaste one dead: O dire offense.
She had the punishment she deserved, and just
It was, that who had lived should dye by Lust.
And yet for fear Levits in time to come
Might want such easy favorites, and some
Would leave their courteous trade, if there be found
No cure, no remedy for such a wound:
We are content to be severe: but then
We do expect, you name those guilty men.
Our's the more hard and thanklesse task I trow,
For we will punish those whom you but show.
These mockes do whet the Isra'elites so far,
Nothing remains now but a civil war:
When all the Tribes have unto Mispah ran,
With such consent you would think they were one man.
If war had ever reason, or if men
Had ere authority to kill others, then
Certainly these, in so divine a cause,
It Was not the peoples quarrel, but the Laws.
Here no ambition, no untamed desire
Of Principality, of growing higher,
Put on these Arms, nor was it fault enough
That Benjamin was rich, to raise these rough
Spirits of Mars, nor is it a true surmise
That private wrongs did cause these Enemies:
These fight the battle of the Lord, herein
Justice on the one side fights, on the other Sin:
So that in height of blood, heat of the wars,
They rather Judges are, then Soldiers.
The Israelites if they now spare, are shent,
The more they kill, the more they are innocent.
Our Age makes us again these actions see,
An Age of war, though not of victory.
For it is not victory to win the Field,
Unless we make our Enemies to yield
More to our Justice, then our Force, and so
As well instruct as overcome our Foe
Call you that Conquest, or a Theft of State,
When in a Stranger region of late,
The Eagle built his nest, having expelled
(Upon a mere pretense that he rebelled)
The former Ayry, for no other cause,
But that his bill was strong, and sharp his claws.
To see the malice, and the power of hate,
That made even the Elector Reprobate.
When Caesar did not stick, nor blush to do
What they detested, who advised him too,
When that all laws their ancient force might loose,
He made a Choice of him that was to Choose.
Now all occasions can persuade to fight,
When Power is misinterpreted for Right.
There is a Lust of killing men so great,
Rivers of blood can scarce assuage the heat
Our lives are cheaper then the lives of beasts,
Then those whose very being is for feasts;
Who have no use but for the throat: hard plight!
Anger not kills them, but our appetite
If we have eaten once, we spare: and then
If we are full are kind: but to kill men
We have a lasting appetite, shedding blood,
Our famine is increased even by our food:
Such Erisichthons are we; they that have
Unlimited desires, Death and the Grave
But shadow this affection, and to it
Compared, the Horse-leach wants an Appetite:
It may be weighing man's high faculties
(Which make him claim a kindred with the skies)
We seem to doubt of his mortality
And only strive to know if he can die.
Nor do we care on what pretense (lest ought
Should make our crime the less) no reason's fought
To mitigate our fault, and we are thus
So far from good, we scarce are cautelous.
But it is a sore will fester, if you touch,
Away my Muse, sometimes a truth's too much
For Honor, or for safety: he alone
Prospers who flatters. But if any one
Shall ask a color, a pretense for this
How such a multitude, such a swarm is
Assembled of the Israelites (for then
There met at once four hundred thousand men
Against their brother Benjamin,) whilst yet
They had not dispossessed the Canaanite,
(There was a mixture not a Conquest made)
How durst they then so foolishly invade
Their brethrens Country, when they left their own
Subject to imminent destruction?
Or when was this invasion made? To me
The Number has a more Facility
For credit, then the Time; do we not find,
That Israel wanting Judges was assignde
To bondage, as to Anarchy? they groan
Under a foreign yoke, wanting their own.
Carries it any likelihood; or can
It sincke into the fancy of a man,
That when they were oppressed, they should oppress?
As full of folly as of savagenesse:
This were to perfect Eglons victory,
And act what Iabin but desired should be.
And yet it might be, Joshua being dead,
Then was the time, the people lacked an head:
Who taking no care for posterity,
It Was the worst act of Joshua to dye.
Moses deputed him, and if that he
Had left another Governor, it might be
Our Levite had been chaste, and Benjamin
Been noted for his virtue; not his sin.
Then were those multitudes no miracle,
And Canaan so often beat by Israel,
In likelihood would rest quiet, and expect
If these would do what they could not effect.
Besides, their dwellings in the Valleys be
So that their seat teaches humility:
And then to climb the mountains was such pain
As that the labor did exceed the gain.
And thus you see, that they may fight, but ere
Their enemies Countries by them wasted were,
They to the Oracle repair, to know
If victory shall grace them, or their Foe.
Yet pardon me, I err, they are so strong
As that they would imagine it a wrong
Done to their valor, if we should suppose,
That they entreated conquest of their foes;
No, being sure of victory, they ask
Which of the Tribes shall undertake the task
Of the first on set, and the Tribes refused,
Envy at Iudahs choice, as if abused,
And injured they esteemed themselves, that they
Should lose the dangerous honor of the day.
Such was their pride, such thoughts their Numbers bred;
Numbers, whose fear might strike the Enemy, dead:
Whose hands deserved a fiercer Enemy,
And matter of an higher victory.
With these they think, they might to Memphis pass,
And make the Egyptians know, what bondage was.
With these they thought with ease to force a Way
(Though nature did oppose) to India.
And in a saucy victory out-runne,
The primitive uprising of the Sun.
How large are our desires? and yet how few
Events are answerable? So the dew
Which early on the top of mountains stood
(Meaning at least to imitate a flood)
When once the Sun appears, appears no more,
And leaves that parched, which was too moist before.
That we are never wholly good! that still
Mixed with our Virtue, is some spice of ill!
The Israelites are Just, but they are Proud,
As if a lesser fault might be allowd
For punishing the greater; yet I Would know
Whilst yet they might suffer an overthrow,
Why they rejoice as if they had won! or why
They have a Pride ere they have Certainty?
Their numbers are incredible, it is true,
Yet multitudes have been overcome by few:
Their army is complete, it is right, but then
We know it is an army but of men.
Of future carcasses, so quickly some
They have no time to think of death to come:
To whom no star a certainty does give,
That they at least to the next Field should live.
Four hundred thousand carcasses; enough
To give the beasts a surfeit, and allow
Fertility which Nature had denied
Unto those Lands: So that their height of pride,
Of hope, of glory, and of all their toil
Is to enrich the Land which they would spoil.
So thought the Benjamites, who though they saw
That Power too was against them with the Law,
Yet resolutely they intend to die,
And such despair gives them the victory.
They are not Cowards, yet, though they are bad,
They slay more numbers then we will think they had.
Whence comes this Courage to the Desperate?
The bad me thinks should be effeminate,
And as the Bees (the subject or the King)
Having abused it once, do loose their sting:
And to enforce a Stoic unto laughter,
Being once too fierce, they are always sluggish after
Converted unto Droanes, so it seems fit
(And not so much heavens Justice, as its wit)
That who has lost his Virtue once, should straight
Lose courage too, oppressed with his own weight.
The Israelites though amazed at this defeat,
Yet gather head, and to their Camp retreat;
There might you see Sorrow and Anger joined,
Nor do they grieve so much as they repined.
Here fathers weep their only sons, and there
Brothers for as dear losses dropp a tear,
Accompanied with threatenings, they are mad
Till they bestow the sorrow which they had.
Once more to Shiloh they repair, to hear
If God at last will aid them, and for fear
That it was pride did frustrate their first suit,
They Are now as humble, as then resolute:
In stead of fighting they now weep a day,
Sighs they do think and tears can make a way
Where swords are useless, they will gain victory
No longer by their hand, but by their Eye,
Great and just God, says one, we do confess
That all this heavy anger is far less
Then our deservings: should thou fully weigh
Our sins enormity, it is not a day
Loss to the Foe, can expiate: did we feel
What ere we saw in A^gypt, did the steel
Pierce deeper in our bowels, should the skes
Shed those hot showers in which Gomorrah fryes,
We could not tax the Justice of our King,
But after all, owe still a suffering.
Yet thou have ancient mercies, we have been told
Of all thy courtesies, which were of old
Showed to our Fathers; O vouchsafe them still,
And make us heirs of those: we have done ill,
Prodigiously ill, there is no offense
Which we are guiltless of, each conscience
Accuses, and amazeth us: yet now
Our flinty hearts to a repentance bow:
Yet now at last vouchsafe thy favor to us,
And as thy rod has scourged, let mercy woo us;
We dare not look for victory: O no,
Give us at leastwise a more virtuous Foe.
Thy wrath is just, great God, and it is our suit
Only just men thy wrath may execute.
We beg not for our lives, they are thy loan
Which when thou will receive, yet as thine own.
Let not their swords bereave us of our breath,
And we shall find a benefit in death.
Yet what a glory can it be to thee
That we are dead? and that the Heathen see
Thy anger on thy Children? that thy wrath
In stead of being left, is told in Gath,
And published in fierce Ascalon; spare us then
If not for us, yet for thy self; and when
Thou think of plaguing us, thy self exempt,
Since that our Ruin will breed thy contempt:
Let then thy mercy above justice shine;
If we are bad, consider we are thine.
Thus grumbled they a prayer: and he that sees
Counsels unhatchd, and what he will, decrees,
(Yet ever justly) does perceive that they
What ere they feign, do murmur, and not pray.
Which he decrees to punish: they would know
Whether that once more they shall fight or no?
Once more he grants that they shall fight: and thus
They Are not so craving, as he Courteous.
If they but ask him, he will not deny,
Fight's their desire, and then his answere's, I.
Had they but asked the victory, as well,
He would have heard his troubled Israel:
He that delivered them from foreign arms,
And taught their weak hands to repair their harms
With admirable victory, He I say
Would have bestowed the honor of the day
On them, had they desired it; they have known
How he has warred for the^ from heaven, and shown
Such miracles in their defense, they fright
Those whom they save, as when the wondering night
Thought herself banished from the world (the Sun
Standing unmoved, forgetting how to run,)
If they now lose the day, the fault is theirs,
God does no mercy want, they want right prayers.
But they suppose it too too fond to stand
Begging of that which is in their own hand.
This they conceive were to mock God, to crave
That to begiv'n which they already have,
A power to use their arms: No, if once more
They may have field-roome, may but fight it over,
Though Heaven do not fight for them, they suppose
They cannot lose, if Heaven do not oppose.
They think no chance can possibly bestow
The foil on them, the Laurel on the foe.
What though they lost the praise of the first day,
And fought as though they came to runne-away:
It Was not for want of courage sure, but either
The foe had got advantage of the weather
Or else the wind had raised the dust so high
That they supposed fresh enemies to be nigh,
And feared to be environed round: what ere
Occasioned their first overthrow, no fear,
No chance, shall cause another; and the slaves
That now triumph, shall find their trenches, graves.
Is this their Crime alone, or do not all
Partake as of their fault, so of their fall?
Israel is not only mad, there be
Some vices which we give posterity,
And this is one of them: O how vain is man!
O how his Reason too is but a spanne,
And not his stature or his Age! we have long
Injured the beasts, and done them too much wrong,
By calling them Irrational; could they speak,
Thus in rough language, they would fiercely break
Their mind unto us: O you only wise
To whom kind Nature has imparted Eyes,
Leaving all other blind; pardon if we
Do tell you where you have forgot to see,
Where we are clearer sighted: can you show
Where ever beasts did to that madness grow.
As to pronounce of that, which is to come,
Of that which only seems in Chances doom?
Yet thus you do; and doing thus have shown;
Reason's your title, our Possession.
The Israelites had to their cost of late
Found confidence to be unfortunate;
(Their confidence in Numbers) and yet still
(Though now contained in smaller room) they will
Forespeake their victory: why, because they see
That they are many yet; poor vanity!
When they were more, they were overcome, yet dare
Conceive a Conquest when they fewer are;
Because still some are to be killed: as though
Success to Multitudes did homage owe,
And multitudes impaired: as if the way
To win another were to lose one day.
But had we seen the City now! what joy
Reigned in those streets, sufficient to destroy
Those whom it comforted (for pleasue too
Can find a way to death, and strangely do
The work of heaviness and grief) I say
Had we but seen the glory of that day:
The whooping, dancing, and the general noise
To which the sea and thunder are but toys;
We should have thought it (so the sounds agree,)
No noise of Triumph, but Captivity.
At last they do repose themselves, and one
Of highest judgment and discretion,
Instructs them thus: My dearest Countrymen,
Who ere intends his private ends, does pen
A speech unto the Ear, his study is
Which words sound well, and which are thought amiss,
He tryes all ways, he lays all colors on
To cheat the Judgment, sooth the Passion,
So that he hopes at last that it must hit
Either the subject, or the clothing it:
But I whose end is Public good, intend
Nothing but that which caryes to that end:
Pardon me then if I am harsh, and round,
If that I am not Plausible, but sound.
We won a victory last day, so great
We hardly dare believe we were not beat:
Our conquest easier was then our belief;
And with great reason too: for tell, what chief,
What petty captain is so vain, so mad
As to ascribe to his conduct the glad
Event of last days hazard? to my sense
The Conqueror was only Providence,
And we but instruments: then I Would advise
That as you have been happy, you would be wise:
That man does still in greatest glory stand,
Whose brain is better thought of then his hand*
And so I wish that yours should be: we know
That what is gained by Fortune is lost so,
She has no constant Favorite; then now
Whilst yet our victory does means allow
To purchase peace at our own rate, and thrive
By Covenant more then Battle: let us drive
All thought of war far from us, it is in vain
To get that hardly, which we may obtain
By easier means, and he does more then rave
Who hazards that which he may certain have.
More was he speaking, when a thousand tongues
Made his be silent, one would think their lunges
To be unequal to that noise, so fierce
Their clamor is, such sounds the heavens do pierce.
So have I often heard in our Theater
(When that a daintier passage wan the Ear)
A thousand tongues, a thousand hands rebound,
(As if the Plaudite were in the sound,
And most noise were most pleasing:) they express
Their liking so, as these their frowardness.
Who rave from noise to action, one stoopes down,
To reach a stone, another fiercer clown
Shakes a steeled Iavelin at him, all the hands,
Against which Israel but weakly stands,
Aim now at one; who dreadlesse, unimpair'd
In courage, neither wished life, nor despaired.
At last a serious Counceller stood up;
Much had he tasted of the liberal Cup,
And thankefully expressed it in his face,
To which a larger wound would be a grace
By hiding his rich pimples: This brave man
Raises himself, and with what speed he can
Stutters thus to them; Cease my noble boys,
Quiet your threatenings now, and stint your noise.
It Is a just anger you have shown, but yet
The time in which you show it is unfit.
Now should we dance, my bloods, now should we sing,
And make the wondering firmament to ring
With joyful acclamations; now brave spirits
To show the most joy, is to show most merits.
Sadness is only Capital: in fine,
Now should we shed no blood but of the vine.
For you Sir whom we doubly guilty see,
Of Treason first, and then Philosophy,
If these do please, thus we pronounce: to show
How little we do fear you, or the Foe,
We Will send you first unto their camp, and then
We Will fetch you by our conquest home again.
This is a mercy if well understood,
You shall enjoy the fortune you think good.
Here his breath fails: when all the people cry
He has spoke nobly, none this day shall dye.
And yet the Traitor shall not escape at last,
Whose execution is deferred, not past.
It Was neither peace, nor war now, either side
Having sufficiently their forces tried,
Take breath a while: O happy men, if still
This mind continue in them! If they kill
Their appetite of killing! if this rest
Can at the last inform them what is best!
To bury their slain friends, both sides agree
Unto a two days truce: Stupiditie
Not to be borne with! had they known the use
At first of that which they now call a truce,
This truce had been unnecessary, then
They might have spared, whilst now they bury men.
And that they now may bury, they entreat
Respite a while from war: thus all their heat
Is buried for the time: good heaven to see
The Omnipotency of Necessity,
Whom all the nearest ties of Neighborhood,
Religion, Language, nay of the same Blood
Could not contain from fight, but that they would
(To see if it were theirs) shed their own blood,
These are entreated to a form of peace,
Their fury for a day or two can cease,
Commanded by Necessity: they fear
Lest the Air by so much carcass poisoned were:
Lest to revenge the blood which they had shed,
They now might feel the valor of the dead,
Of strong corruption: these thoughts hold their mind
These thoughts a while enforce them to be kind
On both sides (for they do not jarre in all)
Nature prevails not, but a Funeral,
Nor does this long prevail, for when they had
Interred some carcasses, they yet are mad
Till they have made some more, till they have done
A second fault, as not content with one,
They see their Error, and commit it, thus
Who are not eminently virtuous,
Are easily entrapp'd in vices snares,
And want the poor excuse, that unawares
They were engaged; we greedily run on
Offending with Deliberation.
And can you call this but Infirmity?
Nickname a Vice? O call it Prodigy.
Call it -- O what? What name can well express
The miracle of humane guiltiness?
Could he pretend an ignorance at least
And be in Nature as in Fact a beast,
He were not worse then they, then he might be
Both from the Use and fault of Reason free.
But what new horror ceizeth me? what fire
Reigns in my thoughts, and prompts me to rise higher*
Hence you low souls, who grovelling on the Earth
Basely deject your selves below your birth,
Sold to your senses: I intend to tell
What none can know but in whose breasts do dwell
Celestial fires, and unto whom it is given
To have a nearer intercourse with Heaven.
Yet pardon you pure souls, whom no one dares
Eased of our flesh, to trouble with our cares:
Pardon I once more ask, if my weak pen
Fitting it self to ordinary men,
Attain not to your height (to us unknown)
And give you those words which you shame to own.
The Lawgiver, who saw as in a glass
All in the Word, what ever 'twas did pass
In these near enmities, as far as Man
Perfectly happy knows a grief, began
To feel Compassion: Have I then said he
Delivered Israel for this misery?
And did I free them from the Egyptian
Only to find them graves in Canaan?
I did foretell their Land shall overflow,
But never thought to be expounded so;
Never with blood: I meant that they should have
More blessings then the covetous can crave,
The flowing Vdder, and the untir'd Be,
An happy Deluge of Fertility.
O how would now proud Pharaoh rejoice!
How he would have a joy beyond a voice,
Beyond his tyranny, could he but know
What Israel does endure without a Foe!
Was it for this I did so often repeat
Wonders before him, wonders of so great
Exuberance of power, so highly done,
That they contemn all admiration?
How were thou Nilus bloody'd into Red,
Thy waters as unknown as is thy Head?
When all thy finny progeny did find
That to destroy now, which did breed their kind,
When by a nimble death they understand,
The River as discourteous as the Land?
Can I forget that when I did bestow
A liberty as heretofore to flow
Unto thy now pale waters, there did pass
An issue stranger then his Color was
From the too fertile river? Frogs are found
With such a multitude to hide the ground
That there is no grass appears, no corn is seen.
The spring does blush because he looks not green.
Their numbers and their noise equally harsh
Make Egypt not a Region but a Marsh.
What a small portion of my acts where these?
How scarcely to be counted passages
In my large story? Dust is changed to Lice
And now begins to creep, which the most nice
And curious eye before could never find
To move at all, unlesse't were by the wind:
Which could not scatter those thick clouds of Flies
That would not let them, no, not see the skies.
When I but threaten, all the cattle dye,
And Egypts Gods find a Mortality.
But lest the men should think that they were free
From the fault too, if the Calamity,
I taught their bodies with black goare to run,
And imitate their souls corruption.
What was a Face, is now a pimple grown,
And in each part is plentifully sown
A store of blaines, so ugly, that to me
It was a kind of Judgment but to see.
And if this were but little, was it not I
That called those candy'd pellets from the sky,
Which in a moment overwhelming all
Did badly change their color in their fall:
And by the murdering every one they found
Within their reach came red unto the ground?
When to repair the numbers they had slain
(Beasts of all sorts) the land is filled again,
But it is with Locusts, such a swarm they see
Made for the shame of all their Husbandry,
That they could wish, so they were rid of these,
The former Murrein, ere this new increase.
But who can tell the following Prodigy?
Last day the Earth was hid, but now the sky
Chaos returns, the Sun has lost his rays
And Nights obscurity is turned to Days.
Who could a greater miracle afford?
God made the Light, I Darkness by a Word,
Which had it lasted, had it never been spent,
They would have called it a kind punishment,
They had not seen then their first borne to die,
To challenge death by their Nativity:
All this I did, but why? was it to see
My people suffer fuller misery?
To gain the Country which they could not hold,
From which their own arms ignorantly bold
Expel their own selves: O let no man tell
That Israel did banish Israel.
My prayers forbid, nor let it ere be said
That Moses was unkind since he was dead,
That in the grave I left my goodness too;
And could not pity when not feel a woe.
Having said this, with all the speed he may
He seeks out holy Abraham, who that day,
By his dear Isaac seconded did sing
The ancient mercies of their heavenly King.
One tells how having now worn out a life,
And so being fitter for his Grave then Wife,
Nay then when she had lived unto those years,
To be accounted with the Grandmothers,
When Sara now was so unweildy grown,
Her legs could scarcely bear her self alone,
She bears another burden, and does swell
Not with a child, but with a Miracle.
This said, he stops; and then again goes on
No more with story, but Devotion.
O praise the Lord my soul, let me not find
My body was more fruitful then my mind.
O let that teeme with thankefulnes, and be
Made sweetly pregnant by my memory.
Father, says Isaac, I have often heard
That we do tell with Joy what we have Feared,
And what in suffering terrifies our sense,
Does in relating please: what violence
Of bliss possesses me when I compare
My dangers past with joys that present are!
Me thinks I yet carry that fatal wood
(A burden which I hardly understood
Should carry me) me thinks I still enquire
Where is the sacrifice, and where the fire?
How little did I think, or fear till then
That God commanded sacrifice of men!
How little could I guess in any part
That God in such sort did desire the Heart?
Yet pardon Father, if you now must know,
Your silence seemed more cruel then your blow:
Could I oppose my mind against your will,
Or wish him spared, whom you decreed to kill?
Wherefore was as all this circumstance? what need
But first to tell, and then to act the deed?
I never knew what disobedience meant.
And your distrust was my worst punishment,
I must confess I was amazed, my blood
Congealed within me, and my faint hairs stood
Yet not for fear of death (Death was my profit)
But for the manner and the Author of it.
Was this the heavenly promise? and must I
So strangely borne, somewhat more strangely die?
What should I say now? or what should I do?
That frustrate by my death Gods promise too.
Should I invoke Heavens aid? alas, from thence
Came the injunction for this violence:
Should I implore my fathers help? why, he
Would sooner hearken unto heaven then me.
And so he did: for when the trembling sword
As if he knew the temper of his Lord
Theatned a death, most fortunately then
He that did arm you did disarme again;
Showing your will was all he did require,
Commanding you to that you most desire,
To be again a Father: O the power
And mercy of our God! who in an hour,
Who in a minute, can make all things well,
Can bring and then deliver out of Hell.
These were their Accents, when that Moses says,
It is an holy business to praise,
To magnify our Lord, so to go on
In the intent of our Creation.
To this all times, all reasons do obey,
And we may praise as often as we pray.
But now let us change these tones, let us be mute
In all discourses now, but in a suite;
Let us at once conjoyne our prayers, and see
If our one God will hearken unto three.
Your issue, and my charge, whom I have led
Through those paths that never man did tread.
(As if they feared a scarcity of foes)
Do their own selves against themselves oppose,
And their destruction (unless we repair
Sooner to aid them) will prevent our prayer.
It was a place above the Air, the Sky,
Whither Man cannot reach, not with his Eye,
Nay if th'exactnesse of the height be sought,
Whither Man cannot reach, not with his thought.
Beyond the place where hail, and rain do grow,
Above the chill-white treasures of the snow;
To which compared the starry heaven is fell
Unto a nearer neighborhood with Hell.
And when I shall of Gods abode entreat
It does become his prospect, not his seat.
To which compared, the Crystal heaven does meet
With Earth, to be a stool unto his feet,
This was the Place (yet pardon 'twas not so,
Places are things which only bodies know,
Our bounds of Air, from which the heavens are free
As from Corruption and Mortality)
But here it was His sacred throne did stand,
Who with a word created Sea and Land:
Who with a word was Maker of his Throne,
Who till he made it never wanted one.
Bring me the richest goldsmiths treasuries
(Those baits that do allure our hearts and eyes)
The dusky Sapphire, the Pearl richly white,
The sparkling Diamond, yellow Chrysolite,
Or if there be a gemme Nature has framed,
Of so high price that Art has never named,
Ransacke the Inga's tombs, where there does lie
With their corrupted dust their treasury:
(Who to that pretty bounty do attain
That they bestow their gold on earth again.)
Search me their graves, or if you fearful be
Of treasure guarded by Mortality,
Rob all the mines fenc't with so many bars,
(Where Nature in the Earth has fancied stars,
Whose luster lest our weakness cannot bear
Her kinder wisdom made her store up there)
Bring these unto the view, to an exact
Figure, which Phidias durst call his act:
Yet to this throne compared, it will appear
So far from shining, it will scarce look clear.
Here does the Ancient of days disclose
The glory of his Majesty to those
To whom he daignes his presence, who enjoy
At full, what would a weaker eye destroy:
Whose bliss shall never have a period,
Who therefore live because they see their God,
How could I ever linger, ever dwell
In this so blessed Relation! O how well
Should I esteem my self entranced; if I
By staying here should lose my History!
Here thousand thousands wait upon his call
Of humane servants, and Angelical,
And such a multitude invest his throne
(Millions of Spirits waiting upon One,)
That it may be we should not say amiss,
Their Number stranger then their Nature is:
Here sound the Hallelujahs, here the Quire
Of Heaven is high, and full as their desire:
No voice is here untuned, they do not find
A jarre, more in the sound, then in the mind.
Their power of singing grows on with their song;
And they can longer sing, because thus long;
Thus here them selves they fully strengthened see,
To a melodious eternity.
Here Abraham presents himself; and says
O thou above the injury of Days;
Who making Times art subject unto none,
Who giv'st all knowledge, and art never known;
Who in my days of flesh did gladly lend
An ear unto my suite, and would not bend
Thy plagues against thine enemies; until
I knew the intent, and thou had asked my will,
The will of me poor mortal, nay far worse
Of me a sinner then, the ancient curse
Stuck deeply in me, that I might have feared
My faults, and not my prayer should have been heard:
Could I speak then, and am I silent now?
Did Sodom move, and cannot Israel bow?
O pardon me if I bewail their state,
If I their Father prove their Advocate,
Did not thou promise when I had given ore
All hope of Father, when I wished no more
Then a contented Grave, that then from me,
Should come so numerous a progeny:
That all the cleerer army of the sky
And the thick sands which still unnumbred lie
Should come within account before my feed,
Which not my Sara, but thy truth should breed*
How often I thought that promise did include
Their lasting too as well as multitude;
That their continuance should be as sure,
As long as either sands or stars endure.
If they have sinned, thou know they may repent
And be the better by a punishment,
Never by Ruin: O then use thy rod
Think that they are thy People, thou their God,
And if they are so, O then let not be
Any more strife, but who shall most serve thee,
If they are so, let Abraham once more
Receive those children which thou gav'st before.
Now they have left their heavenly ecchoing,
Now all the Quire does wonder and not sing,
When from the eternal Majesty are heard
Speeches, which all but the dread Speaker feared.
Am I as Man that I should change? or like
The son of man to threaten and not strike?
If I pronounce my wrath against a Land
Shall that continue, and my word not stand?
If I do whet a sword, shall it be blunt,
And have no direr sharpness then it was wont?
Benjamins crime h'as such an horror in it,
(Who have confirmed their faces like a flint
Against all dye of modesty) that till
Their blood (which now their too hot veins do fill)
Flow in their fields, till that their numbers be
Of as small note as is their Chastity,
It shall not be remitted: yet to show
That I can pay that which I do not owe,
A remnant shall escape: but for the rest,
(Those other Tribes which boast they are the best.)
And yet to verify their goodness less;
Speak, as if they were injured by success,
So making the fault mine: who therefore have
Been lib'rall benefactors to the grave
By their thick deaths: until that I do see
A confirmed truth of their humility,
They shall not see a victory: I Will make
Benjamin punish these, and after take
Vengeance on the Revengers, till they see
My mercy has not spent mine Aequity.
This I pronounce, this is my constant will.
Now all the holy company do fill
The heavens with shouts of praise, and loudly cry
All Honor, Glory, Power to the most High.
But now the Israelites once more have brought,
Their troops into the field, once more have fought;
And whether 'twas the fault of them that led,
Or of the Soldier, once more they have fled:
And now because their battle was not long
I will not be more tedious in my Song.
Canto. III.
The Argument.
The Levites vision, Phineah's Prayer,
The Israelites late caused despair
Now turned to courage, when by them
A new invented stratagem
Draws the enemy from the walls,
Until within their net he falls,
With the full righting of the wrong
Does both conclude, and crown my Song.
WHen will Vice fail? when shall we see the event
Of wicked acts as bad as the Intent?
As yet the worst are prosperous, and worse,
The good as yet have never missed their curse:
Review the Levites wife, and you shall see
When she had forfeited her honesty,
Her father entertained her; but once more
When she was come to what she left before,
Her Lord and Virtue, when that all her strife
Shall be to gain the name of a good wife,
Gibeah will not harbor her; O poor!
Gibeah were guiltless had it done no more:
But Gibeah will murder her; review
The Camp awhile, and that'th camp is true
Which was in her; Twice had that army tried
The valor of their enemies, and twice died
The fields with their best blood, so hardly crossed
That they have fought no oftener then the have lost:
And yet their cause was best: neither were they
The only people which have lost the day,
Which they deserved to win: search the records
Of every Age, and every Age affords
Examples of like strangeness: who can tell
What the Assyrian did to Israel?
How in despite of all their lofty towers,
(Which hoped a standing to the last of hours)
He made one hour their last: unlucky hour,
Where vice showed what't could do when it had power*
The sword did sport with life's, nor were they such
Whose loss or preservation did not much
Pertain unto the State: but the Kings sons
In the same time, the same Pavilions,
By the same tyrant are enforced to die,
And which exceeds all, in their father eye.
Poor Zedekiahs kingdoms first is gone
And then his heyre's, O harsh inversion*
If he had lost them first, it might be thought
His kingdoms loss would not have moved him ought
He would have made the best of the other cross
Esteeming it an easing, not a loss.
As he might now to be deprived of sight
When he should covet the kind screene of Night,
Between his woes and him: if in his mind
He saw, it was a blessing to be blind:
That then he should be forced to see no more
When he could not see what he saw before,
This Israel suffered, and this Ashur did,
And yet I dare affirm it was not hid
No not from Ashur even in his own doom
That they were better who were overcome.
Or if the goodness to his side he draws,
It Is that his sword was better, not his cause
I could go on in presidents as true,
Actions between the Heathen and the Jew,
Between the Turk and Christian: but what need
To show there is no birth without a seed?
No speech without a tongue? or if there be
More truths of such known perspicuity.
How do they doat then, who would tie the Lord
To be so ayding to his childrens sword,
As that he never should use his own, nor do
Any one act, but what they wish him too?
Are they so good? or is his love so fond
As of a courtesy to make a bond?
Shall they indent with him? and say thus far
Thou may correct, but if thy judgments are
Of longer date, they are unjust? for shame
(All ye that glory in a purer Name,)
Hence those blasphemous thoughts, far hence remove,
Lest they deserve the plagues they would reprove.
Is it injustice to suppress our pride,
To bring unto our eyes what we would hide,
Even from our selves, our close deformities?
Or, may not God, to show how he does prize
His servants labors, make them thus appear,
As does the Sun after a cloud, more clear?
His judgment certainly we will says too quick,
Who Will prove one bad because he sees him sick;
These judgments are diseases, and bestowd
At pleasure, and not where they most are owd:
Yet due they are where ever they are found,
Since there are none so Catholikely sound,
But in a word, but in a thought have strayd,
Perhaps in those Afflictions, when they have wayd
Their deeds and sufferings, which they think to be
Of far more rigor then Aequality.
Then courage noble Countrymen, nor fear,
Though you should want success a while, to rear
Your names up to your ancestors, (who did
Those acts which now were better to be hid:
Lest that they should upbraid us) do not fear
That Spain is nearer the Almighties Ear
Then our devotions: he that could bestow
A victory after a second blow
Upon the doubting Israelites, can still
Create our better hopes even out of ill
Or if he do not, if he have decreed
That our just plague shall be their unjust deed:
That Israel shall be once more overcome,
And David fly away from Absalom:
Yet let this glad us in our chiefest woe,
Man may be good and yet unhappy too.
Now are they truly humbled, now although
No curious eye could guess their overthrow
When he had seen their numbers, yet at length
They will rely upon another strength,
Or if to numbers they will trust again,
It Is to Gods numerous mercies, not their men.
He can deliver (they have seen) by few,
And they do think it possible and true
That he can help by many too, they find
Without him all their actions full of wind,
Of emptiness, and with him they not doubt
To be as well victorious as devout,
Now Pride has left them, now they goodness yield*
Now have they lost their vices with the field.
Such holy lessons do misfortunes teach,
Which make our once bad thoughts bravely to rea^^*
At Heaven and glory: if you mark it well
Whilst yet it was a populous Israel
It was a proud one too, but when that now
God looks upon them with an angry brow,
When all their troops half weary and half sick,
Are grown to easier Arithmeticke,
They Are truly penitent; hence we may see
The power, the good power of Adversity,
We Are bad if we are happy, if it please
Heaven to indow us with a little ease,
If riches do increase, until our store
Meet our desires, till we can wish no more,
If that our garners swell (until they fear
Ruin from that with which they furnished were)
We but abuse these benefits: our Peace
Brings forth but factions, if that strangers cease
To give us the affront; our selves will be
Both the defendant, and the Enemy.
Our riches are our snares, which being given,
To man, to make a purchase of the heaven,
We buy our ruin with them, the abuse
Is double, in the getting, and the use,
So that our sums unto such heaps are grown
When Avarice succeeds Oppression.
In brief, our garners so well stuffed, so eramm'd,
Detain our Corn, as if that it were damned,
To everlasting prison, none appears,
And thus we give dearth to the fruitful years:
Being to such a proud rebellion grown,
Famine is not heavens judgment but our own.
So wretched are we, so we skillful grow
In crimes, the which the heathen do not know.
We wrong God for his blessings, as if thus
We then were thankful, if injurious.
Why should not mercy win us? why should we
^e worse by that, whence we should betterd be?
Blessings were never intended for our harm,
Nor should the snake have stung, when he was warm
Him that had warmed him. O how base is man!
How foolish Irreligion has wanne
Upon his reason too! Do we not say
That he is a beast, whom only stripes can sway.
O what is man then! who never hears his Lord,
Till that the famine call him, or the sword.
Who (as he meant to tire his patient God)
Yields not unto his favors, but his rod.
And can we yet entreat him to be kind,
To alter his, when we will not change our mind?
If we are heard, we will offend again,
And all our prayer does but entreat a Sin.
Thus prayed the Israelites, but if they are heard
If he that made them scorned, will make them feared:
It is in chance, no, it is as sure as fate,
Having forgot their misery of late
They will rebel again: like those good hearts
Who though they know the pains, the many smarts
Which fruitfulness is fruitful with, still give
Death to themselves, to make their issue live:
And if they escape this death, they try again,
And boldly venture for a second pain,
As if twere pleasure, or as if they meant
Rather to dye, then to be continent.
Thus have we seen a barren, sandy soil
(Made only for the husbandmans sad toil
And not his profit) when the full heaven powers
His moisture down, easing himself by showers,
Drowned with the drops, to make us understand
A figure of the Sea upon the Land;
When once those drops are spent, when that the sky
Smiles with his new restored serenitie,
Swifter then thought, before that we can say
This was the place; the water's gone away,
There Is a low Ebb, again we see the Land
Changing its moisture for its ancient sand.
Yet he that knows this their infirmity,
At last will pity it, and from on high,
(When now their thoughts of war they will adjourne
When there is no talk now, but of their return)
He Will hinder it by victory: with that
(About the time that pitchy night had gat
The conquest of the day, of which being proud
He wrapped himself within his thickest cloud,
Thinking perhaps his conquest to be void,
If any saw the triumphs he injoyd)
Unto our Levite he a vision sends
Clad in her dearest shape, in whom he ends
All thoughts of Fancy: Whom when he had seen
(And quickly he had spied her) Fairest Queen
Of heaven, he says, what is there here on earth
That could persuade thee to a second birth,
Thus to appear again? needs must thou know
(For ignorance belongs to us below
Excluded out of heaven) that our sad state
Is for its goodness proved unfortunate;
That Benjamin is conqueror, and that we
Could not revenge, but only follow thee*
Nor was it one loss, one petty overthrow
Has daunted us, but (as if fate would show
All her choice malice on us) we have tried
How many ways 'twas possible t'ave died.
Believe it, heavenly one, no cowardice
(Which heretofore being base; is now tearmd wise)
Lost us the day, no providence; no zeal
Nor that (which can the maymes of actions heal)
Council, and grave advice was wanting to us:
Only the heavens, which we had thought would woo us
To prosecute thy vengeance, and from whence
We looked for days, like a good conscience
Shining and clear, with cruelty unheard
Give us an overthrow for a reward;
That we can only (such our wretched fate)
Deplore the loss, which we should vindicate.
Is this your Justice heavens? nay I would know
If it at least be wisdom, thus to show
Your wrath upon you followers? if there be
Such a desire in you to make us see
What power you have, wherefore do you not use
That power on those, who impiously abuse
Us and your selves? O there are heathen still,
People that neither fear, nor know your will,
If you will ruin these, or any wise
But lessen, you have the fewer Enemies:
On these be powerful; but if you doubt
Whether such nations may be singled out,
That sin has fled the world, then here begin,
For all the Heathen are in Benjamin.
Are we the only faulty? or am I
Picked out for eminent Iniquity?
All lights on me, it was I that raised these wars,
It Was I that this thick people like to stars,
Have lessend into Number; I alone
Merit both peoples curses joynd in one,
Benjamin does detest me, and I guess
Isreal's hatred is more close, not less.
What shall I do, what course is to be tryde
When safe I cannot go, nor safe abide?
No more says she, nor foolishly conclude
To give complaints in stead of gratitude
Wee' are heard my dear, and he at whose command
The earth will learn to move, the heaven to stand
Fast as the Center, who brings down to hell,
And out of deeper mercies (which to tell
Would pose the^ that they bless) brings back again*
Making the pleasure greater by the pain,)
Has crowned our wishes; O joyfully good!
Not to be had on earth, nor understood:
Heavens high superlative, for unto me
Revenge is better then Aeternity.
Revenge upon Gods enemies: know my dear
(And know that thou must do what thou shall hear)
It is the will of heaven, when once the sky
Is proud of the next mornings livery,
All Israel should meet, where what shall fall
Just with our wishes, or exceed them all,
I must not now discover, yet thus much
I dare deliver (my affection's such)
A truth, that is confessed as soon as heard,
That he who knew to plague, knows to reward.
Our Levite wakes, but stretching out an arm
He feels no body, no, nor no place warm
To prove she had been there, he thinks 'tmay be
No vision, but a birth of Fantasy:
An issue of a troubled brain that framed
Forms to it self which Nature has not named:
Have I not slain enough he says, but still
Is it my office and my curse to kill?
It Was but a dream enjoined me to be bad,
A dream, a vapor, and am I so mad
For nothing to be monstrous, and commit
A crime, that men shall fear to dream of it!
But can I disobey what it has pleased
Heaven to command me? O how I am ceaz'd
With strange extremes! nor readily can tell
Whether this Revelation should dwell
Closed in my breast; or whether I go on
As counting it a Revelation:
There may be guilty silence, if we fear
In the affair of heaven to wound an ear
With threatening Rhetoric; this will not be
Excused by a pretense of modesty:
Rather twill prove the judgment of just heaven,
We shall receive the doom we should have given,
Now all the people know what he has heard,
Now they have all their forwardness declared
In sacrifice, when Phineas appears,
One that had lived unto so many years;
He knew not how to count them, and that knew
The Desert wonders, and could prove them true
By his own sight, that could the more engage
Men to believe, not by his tongue, but age.
Nay I have heard some having duly waigh'd
How long in that high office he had stayed,
Conceive they may affirm without a check,
Him of the order of Melchisedec;
And prove (as only judgeing what they see)
Their Priesthoods, by their Priests eternity.
Who having entered, all the people bowed:
(For 'twas not yet as perfect zeal allowed
To be irreverent to their Priest, that name
Which now is proved a title but of shame,
Then was the badge of glory) he indeares
Himself, more by his office, then his years,
To those, who think these two can never agree,
To scorn the Priest, and serve the Deity.
Before the Altar his weak knees he bends,
Which age before, but now devotion sends
Unto the ground, where with a voice so low,
That he could only hear it, who could know
What it would have before it spoke, he thus
Whispered a prayer;
King of Heaven, of Earth, of Seas,
And of men exceeding these:
Thou that when thy people ran
From the proud Egyptian,
Leadst them through aliquid path
Safe, and scarce wet, when thy wrath
Wonderfully made them know,
It Was a Sea unto the foe.
Thou that when the heat, the sand
Of a barren thirsty land,
Made our tongues be so confined
To our roofes, they scarce repined,
But in secret, so that we
Only feared a blasphemy.
Thou then by a powerful knock
Made a Sea within a Rock,
And gav'st Israel to know
For them drought should overflow:
Thou art still the same, and we
Stand in the same need of thee,
Pardon then if we presume
To an hope, and so assume
Courage to us, when we join
Our wants to that power of thine.
Yes our wants, for we can find
None of merit, w'ave declined
Every good way, and have still
Been ambitious of ill,
So that when we are exact,
And have all our good deeds rackt
To the highest rate, there is none
Dares appear before thy throne:
Only this desert we see,
Continuance of adversity.
Nay such monsters have we bin,
Such proficients in each sin,
That we durst not look on heaven,
Nor entreat to be forgiven.
Had not thou vouchsafed to do
What our wishes reached not to:
Had not thou vouchsafed to be
Tutor to our Infancy:
And bestowed when we were mute
Both our prayer and our suit.
O the Courteous
Respect heavens bears us! Scarcely had he done,
Scarce finished his imposed devotion,
When on the sudden, ere you could have said
The Priest had sacrificed, or he had prayed,
Through all the Camp a light was spread, to this
Compared, the Sunn but a dark body is:
And in respect of so divine a light
Our day is honored, if he be tearmd night,
Nor this alone, but that they there might see
And fear their God in his full Majesty,
Such voices and such thunders fright the Air,
That they suppose they want another prayer
To be assured from them; so they declared
They were afraid to hear, that they were heard*
Down on the pavement every knee is fixed,
Some grovelling on their faces, when betwixt
Astonishment and hope, whilst yet they doubt
What all this preface means, and whilst the rout
Feared judgments which they merited, they hear
A voice for which they wish a larger ear,
It was so sweetly merciful: Once more
Go up (it says) and though that heretofore
You Have had the worst: yet thus my sentence stands
I Will now deliver them into your hands.
Have you beheld how some condemned to die,
When they were fitted for Aeternity,
When life they did despise, and all below,
Received a pardon, when they feared the blow
That should unman them, have you seen them then
Almost forgetting that they were but men;
How to express their mind they want a word,
Joy having done the office of the sword,
And made them speechless? then you may in part
Conceive the wonder of their joy; which Art
Confesses it exceeds her power to show
At full, which only they that have can know.
Thus brave Corvinus, then whom fame nere knew
Any that to an higher virtue grew,
When once it pleased Fortune to leave her frown,
Made an exchange of Fetters for a Crown,
Thus, not to seek a foreign president,
Our Henry, whom the Heavens courteously sent
To set a period to our Civil broils,
To join both Roses: after many foyles,
Received and conquered, after he had seen
Himself an Exile, who a Prince had been,
When banishment was envied him, when naught
Would please his Enemy, unless he bought
His death of him that harbored him; even then,
To fool the projects of the cunning'st men,
This withered root begins afresh to spring,
And from a banished coarse revives a King.
Thus (not to seek out a stale president,
Mentioning mercies after they are spent,
And lost in story) Englands present Joy
(Whom Fate can only threaten, not annoy,)
How has he tried variety of grief!
How been in dangers, as in Rule our Chief;
That when there is a speech of suffering,
He is no less our Pattern, then our King,
The Seas spoke loud, yet if we rightly poyse,
There was more danger, where there was less noise:
Yet was he freed from both, when in man's eye,
Success had seemed to smile on Treachery.
These are your wonders, Heaven, and not so much
Favors, (although the Favor too be such,
That it does pose our gratitude, and so
Only proclaims that we are made to owe
Our proverty of merit) to be short,
They Are not so much your Favors, as your Sport.
You in an instant raise, whom we would swear,
Nayl'd to the Earth, him that had left to fear
More then he suffered, that had been so long
Acquainted with ill luck, with such a throng
Of misadventures, that he does not know
What it is to be free from them, and so
This courteous intermission he expounds
Rather a Change then Cure of his near wounds:
You in an unthought Minute can depresse,
Whom we believe in league with Happiness.
And as upon the Stage we often have seen,
Him act a Beggar, who a King has been:
For no default, but that the Poets art
Thought at that time he best would fit that part:
So in our serious Theaters, when you please
Kings are as varying persons as are these*
Only in this their disadvantage lies;
That they may fall, but cannot hope to rise.
They, whom the bands that make a kingdom strong;
Succession to the Crown both right and long
From worthy Ancestors, obedience
At home, and lastly sure intelligence
Abroad has fortifyed, those that supposed
True joy to be wholly in them enclosed:
If you but please to frown, in one short day
(When they not think their Enemies on their way)
Are conquered by them, and at last retain
This comfort only to allay their pain
That their misfortune (if the heavens decree)
May be the portion of their Enemy.
Why then do trifling miseries so grate
Our minds, and make us more unfortunate
Then heaven intended? if out of a sum
Of money (not so rich as troublesome
By the large room, it occupies,) some one
Willing to teach us moderation,
Nibble a little, how we fret! we rave!
How for our treasure we distraction have!
As if we did believe (to say no more)
Heaven had the only power to make us poor.
Israel thought not thus, but does prepare
All things that for the action needful are:
He thinks now double diligence is due,
That he may be victorious, and God true.
On the Eastside of Gibeah there stood
An overgrowne and unfrequented wood,
The trees so thickly placed, that you would guess,
(Had you beheld that horrid wilderness:
How darkness all the Mastery had won,)
It Was made for the discredit of the Sun;
Never did any raye pierce through those leaves,
And if at any time it light receives
It Is only when the heavens do miss their stroke,
And passing wicked men, murder an Oak.
So that the brightness that adornes the same
Serves not so much to'inlighten, as inflame.
Here never did the nimble Fairy tread,
Nor ever any of the Wood-nymphes bred
Within this grove, but it was singled out
For Pluto's regiment, for that bad rout
Of Hell-borne furies, there you might have seen
Alecto stretched at her full length between
Two fatal Yughs, where while her rest she takes,
She gives an intermission to her Snakes,
Who in a thousand curles there hissing lie,
And she sleeps sweeter by their harmony.
Here had the Canaanite in former times
(Whilst that Religion did consist in crimes)
Offered his sons in sacrifice, as though
He meant to pay back heaven all he did owe
Or did conceive, (that which he should despair)
To be without sin, when without an heir.
This horrid place till now had empty stood,
But now the Israelites conclude it good
To plant an ambush there: for thus they plot
That when the skirmish shall be growing hot,
They will draw back, to make the Benjamite
Conceive that stratagem to be a flight,
And leave the town for the pursuit; when straight
Upon a sign given, they that lie in wait
Shall ceize upon the City, and so force
Their Enemy to such a desperate course,
That being pursued by those he put to flight,
He shall not know, whether to fly or fight,
Hearken ye silly ones that do suppose
You ought not to bear Arms against your foes:
Who having cast off ordinary sense,
Affirm that they do war with Providence,
Who providently war, that they distrust
The power, or care of heaven, who will be just
To their own cause, which you will noise to be
A spice of wiser Infidelity.
To these I need no other answer find:
Shall we be foolish because heaven is kind?
And when your industry might do as well,
Will ye enforce God to a Miracle?
It is a truth I grant, which you pretend
That God has destined all things to their end,
Which stands immovable: nor is it in Fate
To alter what he will praeordinate:
Yet never any did so far proceed
In folly, to affirm that he decreed
Only the end, that was in Gods intents,
Whilst we did sleep, to bless us with events
We dream not of: Such fondnes cannot find
Any excuse (unless they were designed
Inevitably to it:) for I would know
(If they suppose it possible to show
Their mind in these affairs, or if they be
Not hindered from an answer by Decree)
Why they do eat; and why they do not hence
Conclude rebellion against Providence;
Why they do cloth themselves; and why desire
When cold oppresses them to choose a fire;
Have you forgot that for his holy ones,
God can at ease produce e'ne out of stones
As solid sustenance? or is it lost
In your frail memory, that when Israel crossed
The Desert out of Egypt, forty years
Nor Tailors they employed, nor Shoomakers?
Trust me if you your selves think your selves true,
Your care does vilify Gods care of you;
And every dish that to your board is brought
Vpbraides him to his face, as if you sought
To mend his purpose; and by this odd feat,
You do blaspheme as often as you eat.
The Israelites are wiser far, although
They have that unknown happiness, to know
Their victory aforehand, though they hear
This truth from him, from whom they cannot fear
Any deceit, (whose powerful word alone
Makes that a truth which he resolves upon,)
Although they will allow his Act for chief,
Yet they will do their part too: to be brief,
Every soldier to himself says thus;
God will bestow the victory, but by us.
The night they spend in prayer, but when the morn
Had dimmed the pride of Cynthia's cleerest horn
By higher luster, being called away
Nor by the Cock, the Trumpetter of Day;
But by an earlier trumpet, then you might
By her unwilling, and yet hasting light,
Discern, and seeing, almost rightly poyse
Whether were more, their number, or their noise,
And unto which more fear was to be given.
Who fill the Earth with Numbers, with noise Heaven.
Benjamin takes th'alarme, and having chose
One in whose faithfulness they might repose
A wary confidence; they quit the wall
And to the wider field issue out all.
Lest if they stayed within, and did oppose
Rampires and ditches only to their foes,
They might have bragged, (as if that they had won)
Making a prison of their garrison.
Now both the Hoasts themselves so near do find,
That it would ask more labor to have declined
The field, then to have won it, yet they stay
Hoping that innocence is in delay,
If they are slowly guilty: now spears fly
Shivered in thousand fitters to the sky;
And whether it revenge or fortune were,
Every piece becomes a Murderer,
And from their bodies frees a many soul,
Doing that broken, which they could not whole.
Could Xerxes here have sat upon an hill,
To see these warriors, he would not still
Fondly lament, nor lavish out a tear
Because they could not live an hundred year,
But melt into just passion away
Because they could not live out all that day.
Now might you have beheld the fiery horse
Proud of his own, and of his Masters force.
Robbed of his Master, whom you now might see
Running, as if twere after Liberty,
Or you would conceive, had you but seen the race
That 'twas no more a battle, but a chase.
No stroke falls idle, nay they are so near;
They need not strike at all: death is caused here
By their bad neighborhood, the whole and sound
You might have seen here dead without a wound.
To save the guilt and labor of the sword,
Bodies to bodies their own ends afford.
Now nothing but the dust is to be seen
Which like so many Emblems flies between
They mingled armies, which in silence says,
They are no better then the motes they raise,
The^ those poor Atoms: but they think to shrowde
Their acts from sight of heaven under that cloud,
And therefore do their utmost: yet as though
Those hands were sluggish, or this fury slow,
The trumpets chid them to a lustier guilt,
And the loud drums proclaimed, you have not spilt
Blood enough yet: O what were they that found
Out first the use and malice of that sound?
Which makes us kill with greediness, and when
It Is the Corrupted Nature of most men
Hardly to yield unto the destitute,
These will not suffer us to hear their suite.
This drowns the groans: but now both armies reele,
Now this gives back some ground, now that does feel
That it is pressed too hardly. Thus the seas
When over it the angry winds do please
To exercise their fury, do not know
What course to take, nor whither they should flow:
This wave breaks that, and then another blast
Makes that the conqueror, which was conquered last.
At length the Israelites give back indeed,
And though in order, yet with such a speed,
Benjamin calls it Flight, all is ours they cry,
If we can run we have the victory:
With that, what ever men the town affords,
Skillful to use their fingers or their swords,
For spoil or for pursuit, issue out thence
With such a noise, they give intelligence
That they have left it empty: O the vain
Attempts of foolish man! O deserved pain!
They Are made the spoil, that they intend to make,
So wisely can just heavens their vengeance take
On bad attempts, so all our heat assuage,
And make our Ruin greater then our Rage.
It never entered into their proud thought,
They should receive the damage which they sought
To give unto their brethren: who having left
Their woody covert, and the friendly cleft,
Which entertained them, by a quick surprise,
Take the unguarded town: O who can prize
Those losses to the full? or who rehearse
Those misadventures in an equal verse?
They spare no age, but (cruel) take away
From the old men, the solitary day
They could expect to live: now Infants dye,
Even those, who yet within their mothers lie,
Finding a Night before they see the Morn,
Being buried thus, before that they were borne,
For whom their murderers no crime could choose,
But that they were* and had a life to loose,
Nor does the weaker sex escape the rage
Of these intruders, and as every Age,
So every Person suffers, only here
May be the difference, (if that any were)
Either they are killd outright, or which is worse,
They think their life to be the greater curse.
Here mothers see their daughters whom they bred
As Votaries unto their Maiden head,
Vn-virgin'd in their sight, where having lost
That peerless jewel, which they valewd most,
They do receive to vindicate their name
A death from them, from whom they had their shame.
Avarice follows Lust, now they have leisure
To ransacke all those Mineralls of treasure
Long peace and thrift had hoarded up, at last
As children when their Appetite is past
Spoil what they cannot eat, and badly kind
Pamper their dogs with that they leave behind:
So these, as surfeiting with such a store,
(Which made them lose all fear of being poor)
What is not ready spoil, give to the fire,
Whose conquering flames unto the heavens aspire,
As boasting of their service: through the town,
Swifter then any thing that has renown
For speediness, they run, one hour does spoil
(Unlucky hour) what was an Ages toil,
Now crack the houses, now the Temples fry,
Now the poor Citizens resolved to dye,
Doubt of what death: and know not which to try,
The fire, the downefalls, or the Enemy,
Had this misfortune happened in the Night
(Though Nature had opposed) such a full light
Had made a day, and so again had won
A Conquest of the town, and of the Sun.
Never did Sailor with such joy behold
Castor and Pollux when his ship was rolled
Upon the angry Ocean, (whose proud waves
Made the most haughty minds freeze into slaves
With a base fear,) as Israel does view
Those flames, which he does fear not to be true
They are so great, and yet he hopes to see
These flames to light him to a victory.
Now all the face of things is changed a new,
Now those which erst seemed vanquished, do pursue:
The Israelites confirming by their Fight,
That they could cause as well as act a Flight.
Benjamin grows amazed, and does not know
What he should do, nor on what grounds to go,
Which probably seem safe: if he should fly
He runs away unto the Enemy:
And shall he fight? alas! but he will find
It is impossible to fight behind,
Where he shall be assay'ld: yet he shifts ground,
And figures out his battle in a round.
And since he has no hope to escape away,
He Will nobly sell, not give away the day.
They never fought till now, all the whole day
Before, was only somewhat fiercer Play,
Murder in jest, but now they are so fierce
As if they would enforce their swords to pierce
Beyond the body; this a while, at length
Despair does yield the victory to strength;
And Fortune (that the world henceforth might find
That they had injured her who called her blind)
Crowns the best side, and providently tryes
At once to prove their Conquest, and her Eyes.
The Parallel is easy; was it not thus,
When Heaven was pleased to be as kind to us?
We felt the prickles first, but then our Nose
Sucked in the sweeter virtue of the Rose.
We had success, as it were chose, and picked,
And, what we feared to suffer, did inflict.
When Brett and Burrowes (that I speak their due)
Revived to France, Talbot and Montague.
(O too like Montague, that lost thy breath,
By the same fatal Engine of quick death.)
When the choice valor of each rank, and fyle
Made up a double Sea within the Isle
Of blood and tears, O give us thanks, kind heaven,
And add a virtue to our Fortune given.
But soft, I hear the wise man say, Commend
No man, nor action till you see the end.
Our night is not yet past, or if it be
It Is but the dawning, not the day we see,
And but a misty dawning, we must know
That yet we have not paid God what we owe
And that would worse then any Madness be
To have a joy ere a security,
Under the rodd to laugh: yet we conclude
Patience does please no less then gratitude;
And he that can overcome a loss, nor be
Too much cast down for want of victory,
Is in some part victorious, and can say
It Is blessed to be a conqueror any way.
That we may all acknowledge his desert,
Who nobly gained a conquest of the heart
Of them, whose bodies he had conquered first,
To whom he then discovered, what he durst,
And after what his Nature was, when he
In the sad field had spent his Cruelty,
For when they offered to redeem their dead,
Sums which another would have vanquished,
He freely yields unto the suitors breath,
And gives the Grave, as easily as the Death,
Whilst they do give -- O how I blush to tell,
A poisond knife, a poison that will dwell
And eat into their fame till earth be gone,
Till poison have no more to work upon.
Teach us our right to him, but then to you
What shall we give? and yet what not leave due?
Then, O kind Heaven, for this let me be pleader,
May we still sing your praise, who led our Leader,
And now I have unto my songs conclusion;
Isreal's conquest, Benjamins confusion:
Of all that valiant number which but now
Made treble numbers to their valor bow:
Only six hundred escape away, so few,
They were scarceable to commit anew
The Crime for which they suffered; had not Night
Became their Vmpire and forbad the Fight,
Those few had perished too; then at the last
Let future Ages learn of Ages past
How vice rewards her servants! Let them be
Afraid at leastwise of the misery,
Who slight the sin: why should a beauteous face
Make my soul foul? and an external grace
Bereave me of my inward? O despair!
Shall I be bad, because another's fair?
Hence that poor folly, rather let us win
A conquest by the loss of Benjamin.
To know that those belied, and stolen delights
Are not of so long lasting as the Nights,
In which we did enjoy them, how the Day
Takes both their darkness, and our sweets away:
To understand that tardy heaven is just,
That Ruin is the consequent of Lust.
And now O Father, once more I repair
To thy great presence, O thou only Fair,
(Who dwelling in the light that none comes near,
Can not be seen of us, because too clear;
To whom created beauties if compared,
Even such as have the wisest eyes ensnared,
Are nothing but Deformity at best,
Dirt somewhat better colored then the rest)
Instruct my youth, O teach that I may know,
What mischiefs lurk under a seemly show;
What a sweet danger woman is: O thou
To whom the knees that do not love, do bow,
Whom all obey, even such as have no sense,
Who do not know their own obedience;
Whom all obey, even such as do go on
In a perpetual Rebellion,
The Spirits accursed: Grant me, that chastely wise
I enter into Covenant with mine eyes,
Never to look on Woman, not to see
What would persuade my soul to forsake thee,
To make a God of flesh: But if that I
Forced by Temptation, or Necessity,
Must see my Ruin, yet thus much, O thou
Who^ my soul loves, and would more, knew she how,
(For his dear sake and worth, in whom was found
Only a place, no reason for a wound)
If I must have the sight, yet I require
I may at leastwise not have the desire,
If I must see, let it be to despise
So shall my heart be chaste, if not mine eyes.
FINIS.
A Thanksgiving for a recovery from a burning Fever.
I Burn again, methinkes an holy fire
Kindles my dull devotion, and far higher
Raises my spirit, then my hot disease
Inflamed my blood: how with a sacred ease
Feel I these flames through my glad soul to rush!
Like those, which made a Chapel of the bush
Whence God did tutor Moses; would 'twere found
That this place too were such an holy ground:
Then should I boldly vent my Gratitude,
And being Godly, not be counted Rude,
The Night approacht, when by my pains I might
Suspect it would have been my lasting Night:
I had a grief beyond a Cowards fears,
And such a grief, it robbed me of my tears.
I was all Fire, the greedy Element
Left no one part unsing'd, as if it meant
To cross the vulgar notions of our birth,
And prove that man was not composed of Earth;
That he was made of Flames, that past all doubt
To dye was nothing, but to be put out.
And yet the truth of this, this truth denies,
Man is not made of that by which he dies.
And had I died thus, they had been unjust
Who had pronounced, we give dust unto dust.
Ashes they well might term me, and so turn
My Christian burial to a Pagan urne.
Without a tedious pilgrimage to Rome,
(If that the torment make the Martyrdom)
I might be Canonized, and sooner far
Then some whose names in the gulld Calender
Burn in red letters, of whom none can tell
Whether they only felt a Fire in Hell.
O heat! O drought! O am I quenched as yet,
Or is not this Remembrance a new fit!
Yet in my fiercest fit how often I thought
(Whilst yet there was some moisture left, which fought
With my hot Enemy) how durst liberal men
Give us a freedom of our wills, that when
Ever we list we may be good, and so
Owe to our selves as well the Cure as Blow?
Who gave us this strange power, can any tell,
Not to be Bad, and yet not to be Well?
Can we command our sins so easily,
And faint at a poor Fever? tell me why
You will consent to dye? and wherefore still
You plead not then a liberty of will?
My God cried I, though I must needs confess
Unto my shame, that all my pains are less
Then my demerits, yet I grant as free
That they exceed all possibility
Of mine own cure, and yet I sooner can
(Spite of disease) turn my Physician
Then my Redeemer, thou alone can do
A powerful cure on soul and body too.
With that I felt recovery: my flame
Was kindly lessened to a lower name,
To moderate heat: Sleep did my senses charm,
And I that burnt before, was now but warm,
Health and Devotion ceize on me, my fire
Had left my bones to live in my Desire,
And I was sick of thankfulness: then now
Teach me O Lord not why to praise, but how:
Bow my stiff knees, that they may beg a power*
Of full thanksgiving to my Savior.
Some praise for less: I Have read of Ionah's arc
(Which was of surer carriage then his Bark)
Th'inhabitable Fish, and yet we see
That he gives thanks for his Delivery
From his Preserver, and shall retchlesse I
Delivered from a nearer death, now dye
In the Remembrance? first, O Lord return
My tutor-torment, let me again burn.
And now great God, I do entreat and change
My praise into a prayer, (for it is not strange
That benefits should make a suppliant,
Since courtesies cause prayer as well as want)
It Was thy great mercy made my body whole,
O let me find that mercy to my soul,
Then shall I boldly hasten to the grave,
And wanting Life, not want what I would have.
In illos qui Crastinum faeliciorem putant, Hendecasyllabon.
HEu quam tempora ludimus diferti,
Heu quam quaerimus improbi dierum
Successus, quibus invenire tandem
Possimus miseri repent mortem.
Injustus tamen imputare Fato
(Fato quod melius meretur, aut nil)
Audet quisque suam subinde mortem.
Aude quisque suum vel inde crimen.
Optamus celerem Leves ruinam,
Et stulte cupimus quod execrandum est,
Sic ut pectore pullulent in uno
(Heu sors prodigiosa!) Men's et Hostis.
Quis primas adeo probavit horas,
Ut semper cupiat manner primas
Ut non turbine raptus impotenti
Laudaret magis ipse quae sequantur:
Acsi tempora sera quae sequuntur
Non morti magis obviam propinquent,
Acsi tempora sera quae sequuntur
Non sint tempora sera sed beata.
Hoc ex vbere profluit parentis,
Infanti tenero, nec invenire
Quenquamtam puerum, rudemve possis,
Quisi forte minus queat loquendo,
Non mutire tamen velhiscere ausit
(Quamvis hoc violare, non precari
Divos, auribus esset eruditis)
Annos ut videat, homoque crescat.
Et jam Numina prorsus annuere,
Et jambarba virum satis probavit,
Number constant ibi vota, number morantur?
Number non alter adhuc rogatur annus?
Hic tandem rogo vota nu^m fatiscunt?
Rotatus citius jacebit aer,
Et rivus sciet inquies quietem,
Luctus, quem fero; sit, sit et voluptas
(Expertis onus est quin et voluptas)
Quicquid sit Modo, Crastinum petemus
Quin curas fugat ille pertinaces
Quin et spem quoque longiusfugatam
(Si men's certius autumet) reducit
Sic men's stultior autumat: quin illa
Quae non novimus anne sint futura
Laudamus nimium, parumque certi,
Incertissima perperam probamus,
Cum praesentia tedio futura, et
Sint desiderio nimis futura,
Advenit modo Crastinus petitus,
Advenit quoque Crastinus secundus,
Tot demum, quibus impar omnis esset
Annorum fuga, computus dierum.
Quid tandem inveniunt? quid, oro, tandem
Non abunde leves, ut ante, quaerunt?
Et quaerunt modo, denuoque quaerunt,
Donec jam leve sit velinvenire.
Usque ad tempora verticis soluti
Rasi tempore, number severa frontem
Non tantum ceperat ruga, sed omnem
Obnubit faciem, atque luscus intus
Abdit sese oculus, ut inde possit
Visu cernere clariore mentem,
Cum nasi stupeas videns acumen,
Donec longa dies rogare fecit,
An hic quem videas homo vocetur.
Cum sulcis lacerata tota frons sit,
Donec tempora jam irruant suprema
Expectatio tunc suprema fati,
Et voti male compotes perimus.
Upon our vain flattery of our selves that the succeeding times will be better
then the former.
HOw we dally out our days!
How we seek a thousand ways
To find Death* the which if none
We sought out, would show us one.
Why then do we injure Fate,
When we will impute the date
And expiring of our time,
To be hers, which is our Crime?
Wish we not our End? and worse,
Mak't a Prayer which is a Curse?
Does there not in each breast lie
Both our soul and Enemy?
Never was there Morning yet
(Sweet as is the Violet)
Which man's folly did not soon
Wish to be expired in Noone;
As though such an have did tend
To our bliss, and not our End;
Nay the young ones in the nest
Suck this folly from the breast,
And no stamm'ring ape but can
Spoil a prayer to be a Man.
But suppose that he is heard,
By the sprouting of his beard,
And he has what he does seek
The soft clothing of the Check:
Would he yet stay here? or be
Fixed in this Maturity?
Sooner shall the wandering star
Learn what rest and quiet are:
Sooner shall the slippery Rill
Leave his motion and stand still.
Be it joy, or be it Sorrow,
We refer all to the Morrow,
That we think will ease our pain,
That we do suppose again
Will increase our Joy, and so
Events, the which we cannot know
We magnify, and are (in sum)
Enamored of the time to come.
Well, the next day comes, and then,
Another next, and so to ten,
To twenty we arrive, and find
No more before us then behind
Of solid joy, and yet have on
To our Consummation:
Till the baldness of the crown,
Till that all the face do frown,
Till the Forehead often have
The remembrance of a Grave;
Till the eyes look in, to find
If that they can see the mind.
Till the sharpness of the Nose,
Till that we have lived, to pose
Sharper eyes, who cannot know
Whether we are men or not*
Till the tallow of the Cheek,
Till we know not what we seek;
And at last of life bereaved,
Dye unhappy, and deceived.
FINIS.
TO the READER.
REader, my Profession is not versifying, but this is part of the King of
Swedens power, that he can transform a Divine into a Poet, and indeed he that
cannot make a verse upon this Argument, is an Argument for verses to be made
upon. But thou shall have nothing of a Poem here besides the Ryme, it being
this Kings singularity, that he who writes his History, shall be thought to
write a Poem, and he that would write a Poem of him, cannot but write an
History. It is impossible, that invention should exceed his actions, or that a
Pen should dare more then Sweden. So that now an excuse is needless, a
Divine may write an History. And why not such a Poem? I am sure a Prince in
Israel is fallen, and therefore it can be no shame for David himself to follow
the Beer. Which I trust thou do in a true sorrow for him, and an hearty prayer
to the Almighty that he would raise up another to perfect, who thus far has
advanced this royal instument in his cause. Thus thou art advised by

R. GOMERSALL.

AN ELEGY UPON the untimely, yet Heroical death of Gustavus Adophus the
Victorious King of Sweden, etc.
ARe all our hopes but this? did we expect
that thou our falling Fortunes shoulst erect,
And must thou fall thy self? a little dust
Remain of him, who, we did surely trust,
Should into dust have brought Romes prouder walls,
And hastened the great whores just Funerals?
Is this the noble Conqueror? this he,
Who was the Favorite of victory?
Who, whatsoever he attempted, wrought,
Event still gladly lackying his wise thought,
Who wrought no other thing, then what he should,
His power being still confined to what was good:
How could he choose then but be happyest,
Who had his will, who willed that which was best?
Alas how pale he looks! sure it is not He,
This is the countenance of the Enemy,
When Sweden pressed him, thus did Tilly look,
When in the field of Leipsich, that sad book,
He read his following miseries, which did reach,
As far as Elve is distant from the Leach;
Where he received his Death at his proud knee,
Because before he would not bow to thee,
This was Bavaria's color when he saw
His Arts could not diswade, nor forces draw
Thee from thy high designs, this was his hew,
When after all his projects, he not drew
A sword in his defense, and threw away
His lands without the hazard of a day,
As if he would see, how nobly thou would use them,
Or he had had his countries, but to lose them.
Or thus looked Fridland, when he saw the field
Strewn with his slaughtered soldiers who do yield
Riches ^o those grounds, whence they took the spoil;
And their dead bodies do manure the soil,
Which, living, they had wasted, in that hour,
When Sweden foyld the Emperors Emperor.
If these look pale it is fit, a pretty art,
That their own cheeks, should represent the heart
Of their dead forces, should want blood as well,
And by their Faces, show us how They fell.
Let Us look again: Alas! it is He, it is He,
This was Gustavus, was? o misery,
Was it, and is it not? o that face! those eyes!
Where Spain and Austria read their destinies
Are they the dainties for the worm? that hand,
Lift up to Prayer always, or Command
Must that lie still for Ever? must it be,
So still, as it would make the ^nemy?
Was it for this thou leftst thy native soil,
Thy Queen, thine Heir, was it for this? to toil
For others benefit, and after, have
For all thy travells but a German grave?
Could not thy Sweden bury thee? nor give
Rest to thy bones, which whilst that thou did live
Bestowed a Crown upon thy head? was it more
To give a Grave, then a whole Realm before?
Yet this is thy reward, that thou do lie,
In the, by thee twice reskew'd Saxony:
Yet what reward is this for thee? they have
From thee their Right, from them thou but thy Grave.
Far be all blessing from that man, who first
Found out that Fatal instrument, who durst
Thunder on Earth, and teach mankind a way
How they might send mankind unto their clay,
Not knowing who 'twas sent them, by whose skill
The Coward is instructed how to kill,
And the brave man must at a distance dye
By him, whom nearer, his own livelyer eye
Would look to Death: how could he have the brain,
To teach the world, by what a world is slain,
Or since he knew the mischief of his Art,
If he could have the Brain, yet how the Heart?
Is this the Cloysterd study? cannot they
Deny the world; unless the world they slay?
Is this (I Would know) their own selfs to deny,
To cause, besides themselves all else should dye?
Are they cooped up for this? but I admire
In vain, how from the Devil, and the Friar
Comes ought, that is not, Hellish, how those two
Should think, what 'twas not a loud crime to do?
Were not for them 'twould be no wondered thing
To see at once one Aged, and a King,
Since we do learn in Sage experience School
Crowns would be sacred were not for the Cowle.
Nor are we longer ign'rant now, who gave
Birth to our sorrow, to our joy a grave,
What ever mist to blind our eyes they spread,
The Hand we do not know, we do the Head,
Which that we may curse home, to pay his due,
Let us their triumph and our loss review.
Many have been victorious, every Age
Has once produced some Worthies on the Stage,
Sacred to glory: Rome does Caesar praise,
Carthage her Hannibal to Heaven does raise
Thy Bruce o Scotland is far famed by thee,
Their Henry, France does boast, our Edward we.
All these were Conqu'rours, but upon what right
May we inquire, did some of them first fight?
Some were but Royal robbers, and the best
Made man so cheap for their own Interest,
Revenge, or Profit drove them unto Fame,
And thus they injured, whilst they gained their name:
Whilst all Thy power is spent in doing good,
And thou gain'st nothing but the loss of blood,
Whilst all thy power is spent the wronged to right,
And thus thy acts are Judgment, and not Fight,
Thus whilst their actions in this current ran
To make the Oppressor greater the Man,
Had there been none oppressed, thou had lien still
That thou might Save, thou were enforced to Kill:
Whilst all thy power is spent in Gods own Cause,
To plant, or to establish his pure Laws
To make Professors fearelesse, that it might
No longer be a crime to be in the Right,
Nor a sufficient cause to make one Dye
That he would seek a true Aeternity.
These are thy Acts -- to make the Enemy yield,
By force to make him quit the blood-died field;
To take in towns with as much ease, as though
Their walls were like to those of Jericho,
Would fall to give thee entrance; to over come
Whole countries with more speediness then some
Could view them, all these are thy acts it is known,
But these, with others, thine; those, thine alone.
I challenge thee proud Greece and prouder Rome,
From their first birth unto their latest tomb,
Peruse your Heroes, read their actions over
Make what was somewhat, by your Fabling, more,
Add lie and all to boot, then if you dare
Bring them: if with Gustavus you compare,
They shall as much that competition shun,
As a weak Taper yields to the bright Sun,
Which of them ever fought for others gains,
That theirs might be the Profit his the Pains?
I could be infinite thee to commend,
But thou thy self do not despise an end
I therefore hasten: having done thus much
Thou now would see whether another such
Would after thy departure rise, or why
May I not say, that thou would therefore dye
That man should grudge no longer at his Death
Nor strive to keep when heaven would take his breath?
Must we all Dye? proud death then do thy worst,
What ere thou can, Sweden has sufferd first
And he being dead who now would live? mine eres
Begin to flow a fresh, new fountains rise,
Which threaten inundations, but I stay,
When I consider, thou have found one way,
Not to do all for others: Princely shade!
This is thy Art of war at length to invade
Heaven for Thy self, there all the gains are Thine,
Thou were not Killed for the Prince Palatine:
When I think this then do I spare mine eye:
For others thou do Fight, for thy self Dye.
The Epitaph in Latin.
SVecia me genuit, Borealis gloria plagae,
Lipsia bis palmam dat mihi, fata semel.
Erexi oppressos, incurvavique prementes,
Sceptra alijs, mortem comparo at ipse mihi.
Nescio quae balista meum jaculata Sepulchrum est.
Sic cecidi, incerto vulnere fixus humo:
Occubui, per quem non certo novimus, Author
Non licuit cuiquam dicere caedis Ego.
Lachrymulam funde unam lector, funde vel unam
Qui vivus plures fundere te vetui.
In English thus.
ME Sweden bred, there I received my breath,
Leipsich twice gave me honor, once my Death,
I freed the oppressed, brought down the oppressors pride,
Won crowns, that other men might wear the^, dy'ed.
A bullet, out of what piece none can tell,
Brought me that dismal message, thus I fell,
Death at adventure my last blood has spilled,
No man must boast that he has Sweden killed.
Reader shed one tear for my death, but one,
Whose life took order, that thou should shed none.
FINIS.

