SERMONS ON St PETER.

BY ROBERT GOMERSALL BACHELAR IN DIVINITY.

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER for JOHN MARRIOT. 1634.

Imprimatur.

Tho: Weeks. Cap. domest. Episc. Land.

TO Sr JOHN STRANGVVAYES OF MELBVRIE KNIGHT.
WORTHY SIR,
GIve me leave for your many favors, to present you with S. Peter's Net: his
Net, I call his Epistle so, for if our SAVIOVR made him a Fisher of men, I am
sure, with this he has caught many; and indeed, if the Church has had any
profit by these labors in the delivery, if these have taken some, it was the
Nett caught them, and not I. To give you a brief reason of the end and manner
of this Work; the end is Religion and Thankfulness, (and indeed Thankfulness
is a part of Religion:) Religion toward GOD, by setting forth a Divine Work;
Thankfulness toward you, by setting it forth in your name, whose obligations
are so strong upon me, that, next to him, I am bound to honor you: these are
the End, and the Manner is such, as that I hope it has hit upon the mean;
sure I am that I abhor Barbarism, and I would not doat upon Curiosity. My
words are those of my every days discourse, which I would strive to have more
full of sense tha^ sound; and for my part, I never cared how big they were,
but how expressing; 'twere but folly to see a golden Key that would not open,
and to cast away a Leaden one that would; in S. Aust. not leaden similitude.
Yet I could never be of the mind, that Religion and Wit must needs be at
odds, that the Mistress can never agree with the Handmaid, that those Preachers
in the new language are Dawbers, which are not Downright. It is their own
Partition of Preachers, and those terms must be co^tradistinct if it be a good
one, that neither the dawber ca^ be downright, nor the downright a dawber.
But, is Wit, is Elegancie dawbing? Are Esaias, Job, Solomon, Moses in his Songs,
but dawbers now? I am sure nothing can be inve^ted more witty than their
writings, more sublimely Elegant. Oh holy Dawbers! oh profane Down-rightnesse
if it be opposed to this Dawbing! But why do I plead for Wit and Elegancy,
when, after all the most forcible reasons, they who speak against it, will
speak against it, because they have it not, and no reason will bet hought
needful, to commend it to those, who have it, and indeed the most Downright
need not to fear that dawbing here. Yet if here were some of it, I trust it
would not be esteemed an inexpiable offense: Sure I am Solomon speaks it for
no disgrace of himself, The Preacher sought out acceptable words; or, out of
the Hebrew, Words of delight, observe, Words of delight, pleasing words, no
less than saving words; and that, when he had said immediately before, Because
the Preacher was wise: Not only the wise Preacher sought out these words, but
he sought the^ out of his wisdom, because he was wise; as who should say, he
had been, others would be, but foolish Preachers, if they imagined that any
other would be the words of salvation, besides those which were the words of
delight. Oh unwise Solomon! who would take such pains to be a Dawber? who would
seek out those profane words, which he should have cast away in an holy
anger, yea even when they had offered themselves unto him? Well then, they
forbid others to write finely, but they themselves will not write their own:
they say, that the more Elegant preach their own selves, but they their own
selves do not preach; all that they have is what they filch from others; a
Sermon perhaps they deliver, but it is not their Sermon, and they have not so
much as their absurdities, but by stealth: What a misery is this, that they
must have the disgrace of thieves, and yet want the commendation of cunning
thieves; that they have nothing but what they steal, and yet could never
learn to steal the best? Charity forbid, that I should say, that their heart
is never inditing a good matter, but confidently I dare say that few of them
can truly say, I speak the things which I have made. But inveying against
ignorance, I have expressed not a little of it, by being too talkative, and it
is enough to discourage you from the rest, if this be my manner of entreating.
It remains, that I pray GOD, that, for the general, it may be received with
the same mind that it was set forth, that whereas it is an Exposition of S.
Peter, it may have part of S. Peter's happiness; and where he converted
thousands at one, these labors of mine may convert some in many Sermons. And
in particular, that I entreat you (as you have hitherto done) to protect the
Work, and love the Author, who still prays for your happiness, with your
truly Christian and noble Family: These are the supplications of

Yours in all Christian service, ROBERT GOMERSALL.

1 Peter 2. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme.

14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment
of evill-doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

15. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God.

ST. PETER told these brethren before, that the Gentiles spoke evil of them as
of evil doers; either in general that there was no thing so evil, which they
would not do; or more particularly, that they would do this evil; they would
not submit unto authority; Our Apostle therefore comes from his general to
his more particular advices, by which he would make it appear unto all, that
Religion was at no fewd with civil polity, that the best man was the best
subject; which that he might be and so acknowledged of al, he exhorts them to
submit, etc. Which words contain a Duty, and the Motives; the duty, subjection
to the Magistrate; the motives, 1. from God Christ Jesus our Lord v. 13. 15. 2.
from the end why the Magistrate is sent (...) punishment and praise, v. 14. 3.
from their enemies, described to be (...), and to work (...) in their unjust
slandering of them, who must be silenced by their obedience, v. 15. 4. from
themselves, that though they are free, yet they are withal servants of God,
and therefore must not use their freedom to cover their Rebellion, to make it
a matter of conscience to disobey, v. 16.

1. Of the duty, submission or subjection, and to whom we must submit, to wit,
the Magistrate, him that is in Authority; which is first described from his
matter, an humane Creature, he also is but a man. 2. from his supremacy, and
subordination: The King, and they, who are sent by him, (...), the Presidents.
I enter now upon a subject, I know not whether more necessary or distastful;
necessary it is, for we must needs obey, Romans 13. and yet nothing is more
distasteful to corrupted nature than to submit. Whilst I told you that you were
a peculiar people, a royal priesthood, etc. then I was heard with a greedy
attention, every one of you then would be ready to alter the question of the
Apostles, and say, Is it not I? Is it any other than my self that you mean?
but now that I am to show that these priests have no better sacrifice to offer
than Obedience, that these kings are but subjects and must submit themselves
unto the King, you will be ready to answer as the King of France did to our
conquering Edwards letters, wherein he barely termed him Charles de Valois,
that he had read some such thing indeed, but he could not conceit that it
concerned himself: so whatsoever you shall hear of this argument, I am afraid
too many of you would believe that it concerns not your self. The refusing
of this submission was the first sin, and if Adam before corruption thought it
too much to submit himself to his Divine Creator, it will be no wonder, if
after so many sins, we add this unto the rest, that we will not without
grudging submit our selves to an humane Creature. But whether we like it or no
it is our duty, we must submit. The word in the Greek is (...), which comes
from two words, that signify be ye under order: we must submit our selves to
our superiors, that we must be under their order, that which they order we
must do, whether that order concern us or ours; whether it have a reference
unto our persons or our goods. Concerning both of these their order may be, and
it is our part to submit, to be under their order. All men, even the
Christians, the Regenerate must thus submit. Let every soul be subject, Romans
13. 1. Every soul, that is, every person; if then a Christian be a person, he
must be a subject; he must have obedience, if a Being. Be subject, that is,
unto commands, and the commands of the Magistrate reach and that justly too, as
well to the body as the purse. Honorthy Father and thy mother, thou must needs
remember this, if thou have not forgot the Commandment, if they are not fled
as far from thy memory as from thy practice: thy Superiors are thy Father and
thy Mother, therefore thou must honor thy Superiors. Now honor in Scripture
signifies no less maintenance than good speeches, that both ways thou
should submit. You will say this was Moses his commandment: but you cannot
deny that this which follows was Christ's; Render unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's, Mat. 22. 21. But who can deny that Caesar has a right to thy full
subjection? Where the word of a King is there is power, Ecc. 1. 4. now, what
power were there in it, if it could not make thee every way submit? it
follows, and who may say unto him, What do thou? as who should say, If thou
say so unto him, thou say what thou can not justify, as he writes in
his Epistles to Atticus, Hoc quod dicis and turpe, nec tamen tutum est, such a
speech has the disgrace of shamefulnesse, and not so much by way of recompense
for that disgrace, as the benefit of safety. If thou say, What do thou, he
may do that with thee that thou shall not be able to say again. In the
multitude of the people is the Kings honor, Prove. 14. 28. but the multitude
must be obedient then; it is a dangerous honor if he have a multitude of
refractary people, of such who know not to submit. Put them in mind to be
subject, etc. Tit. 3. 1. to obey Magistrates, to be ready in every good work:
they are backward in every good work, if they be not ready in this one; to
obey Magistrates. And mark you, he does not say simply, Let them obey, or be
subject, but put them in mind; this duty comes so harsh unto the most, that
they must be often put in mind of it before they will be perfect in it. I
exhort or desire therefore first of all, says St. Paul, that supplications
etc. be made for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet
and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1. we must pray
for them that we may lead a quiet life, then likewise we must submit to them
that we may live a quiet life, otherwise they will trouble us into
peaceablenesse, we shall not be quiet unless we will be obedient. It is a
proposition in the School, Quaelibet res perficitur per hoc quod suo
subditur-superiori: Every creature receives perfection from its subordination,
it would have more defects, if it did not submit its self to its superior; we
must be subject therefore for our own good, we should be worse if we were not
under. Had God intended that all should be equal, that none should command,
none should submit, without doubt he would never have made heaven and earth,
the one so much higher than the other. What in Kings toward the subject is
command* that in the heaven toward the earth is its influence, and what in
subjects toward their prince is obedience, that in the earth toward heaven is
the receiving of its influence. Now as the earth would be barren if it did not
receive that influence, so the subject would have no abundance, if he did not
obey. Is there any harmony if all the strings are of the same bigness? must
there not be some greater, some lesser, some sharper, some flatter, if you:
look for music from the instrument? Even amongst beasts, where ever there is
a flock, there is Dux gregis, the Leader of the flock, to whose direction the
rest submit their selves. Can a Ship be set to sea without a master? and must
not all in the Ship submit to him? Now it would be strange if the Commonwealth
should be of easier guidance than a Ship, that it should not sink without
submitting to a Master. Nay, let us look into our own selves, there is the
soul and the body; the Commander, and that which is to submit. Or let us go
farther into the soul, there is the Reason and the Appetite; in the Divine
part which is indivisible which properly has no parts, there is that which
rules, there is that which is to obey. To teach us our submission to lawful
Governors, God would not let us be without a kind of Commonwealth, a
government within us. Besides, even the Heathens themselves may be our Leaders
here, and teach us our duty of subjection: In the East Country they always
esteemed their Princes to be Gods, and their commands as Oracles; even the
Germans, as Tacitus reports, were so addicted to their Governor to manifest
this submission, that he says of them, Principes pro victoria pugnant,
Comites pro principe, that for what ever reason their Prince does fight, they
fight for nothing but for their Prince, if he be safe they are well, they are
well because he is safe, to whom they may submit themselves: what then was Leo
the tenths Ensign, to wit, a yoke, with this word, It is sweet, (he used it
whilst he was a subject, it was sweet to him to obey, and it was used of him
when he was a prince, that it was sweet to obey him) may be all of ours, and if
it be a yoke to be under Authority, we must account it a sweet yoke, that it
is delightful to submit. But you will say, wherefore is all this? who is there
amongst us that does not think it his duty to submit? only we would know how
far this subjection does extend, and how it can be made appear, that we must
submit both body and goods unto the order of our superior? we must know
therefore, that the Scripture has commanded subjection in general only, the
determination therefore of this general is left either unto the Prince or
people: not unto the people, for if they may ordain that they will obey so
far, by the same authority they may decree one degree short of that obedience,
and so an other and an other, til they had decreed not to obey at all. It
remains th^^ that the prince* that the chief Magistrate is to teach us how
he will be obeyed, unto what degree of subjection we must submit. Besides, we
are to take notice who this Magistrate is, to whom S. Peter exhorts to submit,
to wit, the Roman Emperor, with all the Laws and ordinances, by which that
Empire was commanded; amongst which Laws this was one, that their persons and
goods should neither be exempt from serving of the commonwealth. And indeed if
we consider the blindness of our understandings and the depravation of our
wills; we shall find that there is a necessity fully to submit our selves to
those, whose direction may direct our understandings, whose power may take
order that our depraved wills may hurt no other than our selves. You will say
then, if my understanding be clearer, and my will more reformed than those, who
are in authority, may I choose whether I will submit to them who are not so
wise nor so good as my self? no, by no means, since thou may be too
partial a Judge of thine own good parts, and their Right confirms them in
their authority, what ever their parts are; nay, what hinders but that weak
Princes may have able Ministers, and that is all one for thy direction. Again,
wilt not thou submit thy self to authority? why, by the same reason a second
will not, nor a third, and so, because we know not where to stop, none will.
Now judge thine own self whether it were not better to live with wild beasts
than in such a place where there were no authority but what the stronger would
usurp to his own self, which must never be accounted unjust against the
weaker. Breifely, thou will live alone or in Company. If alone, who shall
defend thee? if in Company, thou must have a Magistrate to defend thee, or that
Company will be worse than any solitariness: Lastly, there is none but would
enjoy the benefit of a Commonwealth, why then should any think it too much to
endure the burden. You would all have peace, and riches, and righting from
injury, why then of necessity you must submit unto Government, without which
you cannot possibly enjoy any of the forementioned blessings. If thou will
gather the rose, the prickels must not affright thee; and if thou will not be
miserable, it is as necessary that thou must submit. But must we submit, says
the Anabaptist, we, the Royal preisthood, the peculiar people? wherefore the^
did our Savior say, Then are the children free. Mat. 17. 26. He means from
paying tribute, and so by consequent, from any other law of Soveraigntie.
Again, The law is not made for a righteous man, 1. Tim. 1. 9. Then the
righteous are not under the law, they are not under that which was not made for
them; and if not under Gods, much less under man's law, they should too much
debase themselves, if they would submit to that. The base son of one of our
English Kings sued to the Pope for an Archbishopric, the Pope denied it him,
if he would call himself by the name of his supposed father; the issue was
this, that he should have the dignity, if he would renounce this dignity that
he was a Kings son; upon which terms he refused it, he would not so far
debase himself for any other title whatsoever. And these, because they suffer
themselves to be Gods sons, the children of the King that rules heaven and
earth, think it too low for them to be under any government. Ye are bought
with a price, be not ye the servants of men. 1. Cor. 7. 23. But you are their
servants, say they, if you be their subjects, and in such a service, such a
subjection, you seem to deny that you were bought with a Price. Again, the
same Apostle (though not to the same men) says, Owe no man any thing, but to
love one another, Romans 13. 8. If we owe nothing but love, we do supererogate,
we do more then is required of us, if we pay service. In a word, there is one
Lord, 1. Cor. 8. How then should we submit to any other besides him? Besides,
if Christians must be subject, if these sons must not be free, then either to
Heathen or Christian Magistrates: but not to Heathen, because they are enemies,
nor to Christian, because they are brethren; it is folly to submit to the one,
and that the other should subject us, is unnatural. Brothers must love, and
not command their brothers. Besides, subjection was brought in by sin; Christ
then having freed his from sin, must needs have freed them from subjection,
that they do not sin, if they will not submit. God indeed says to Adam in his
innocence, Have dominion, but over whom is it that he must have dominion? Over
the fish of the Sea; and over the fowls of the air, and over every living
thing that moves upon the earth. Genes. 1. 28. The Creature is subjected to
him and not Man; nay to man, in him, is the inferior Creature subjected, and
thus S. Augustine collects in his 13. book of the City of God, chap. 13. That
God would not that his Reasonable Creature should rule over any but
unreasonable Creatures, non homo homini, sed homo pecori, and therefore the
first just men are taken notice of, to be shepherds of sheep, rather than of
men; to prefer the Crook before the Scepter. But against these and all other
darts of theirs, though we want not other armor, yet for this present we
oppose but this one buckler, that Peter commands us to submit. Whom does he
command? even the peculiar people. And what does he command? that they should
submit: now if we must submit, we must be subjects. Since then truth cannot be
contrary to truth, and S. Peter has told us that we must be subjects, we must
needs conclude, that they have mistook the Scriptures who have cited them for
freedom from subjection. To begin with the first. The sons are free,
therefore we cannot be subject, in that we are the sons of God. But what if
S. Matthew spoke not what was his mind, but what followed out of Peter's words;
if we shall say so, we shall affirm nothing which the Text will not be ready
to confess with us. Christ's demand of Simon is, Of whom do Kings take
tribute, of their own children or of strangers? Simon replyeth, Of strangers:
hence it necessarily follows from Simons opinion, whether it were true or no,
that the sons were free. They are free of whom Kings do take no tribute, and
in Simons conceit they took no tribute of their own children. But if by their
own children he understood their own subjects, then Simons opinion was not
true, for of whom do earthly Kings receive tribute but of their own subjects?
Again, because this is their principal reason, and I fear some seeds of
Anabaptisme have been sown here, I am sure there have been those who would
take away the Ecclesiastical Magistrate, and that is no good proof of their
subjection to the civil (especially seeing the Civil has established, or at
least wise confirmed the Ecclesiastical Magistrate) for these reasons I say, I
would give the fuller satisfaction to this reason, and that is this. Sons in
this place cannot be generally taken for all Sons of God whatsoever, for so
no men should be subject at all, which yet the Anabaptist himself denies,
seeing that all men in some sense are the Sons of God; it must admit then of a
limitation, and such a limitation as shall agree unto the scope of the place:
now the scope is, to prove that Christ had no necessity of paying tribute, that
all his subjection was from his own will, because he had received the command
from his Father. To prove this then, there is no other thing to be required
than that sons should be understood for natural sons. So Peter's answer is
true, Earthly Kings receive no tribute of their natural children, so Christ's
inference is most firm, Then ought I to be free, who am son, natural son of
that King, in whose hands are all the corners of the earth. Thus the son is
free, and yet for all his freedom, they may still be subject, because they
are not the son, the natural son: and by these opinions they cause us to
have a shrewd guess that they are not sons, his sons by grace. If they were,
(though indeed it were true that the adopted sons were free likewise) they
would imitate at lest the natural son, and though they were not bound to it,
yet least they should offend, lest they should be scandalous, they would pay
tribute. But, they are Righteous, and the Righteous are under no law. True, to
be condemned by it; false, if they understand to be directed by it. Nay, in
that they are righteous they are under a law; there is no righteousness
without a law, in our conformity to which we are righteous. But, they must not
be the servants of men. Well, what are the former words, ye are bought with a
price, from whence the immediate deduction is this, therefore you must be his,
that has bought you: and therefore in the next place you must not be so the
servants of men, as not to be his, who has bought you with a price; so then
you are not forbidden to be men's servants, unles that service hinder you from
being his servants; where both can stand together you are enjoined to both.
Nay, in that you are bought with a price and are Christ's servants, for that
very reason ought you to submit your selves to men since here he has commanded
it, and in doing his commands you show your selves his servants. But we must
owe nothing but love. What then? this place exhorts you to a speedy
satisfaction of your Creditor, not to any disobedience against authority; for
your money that you have borrowed, pay what you owe; but for mutual love, so
pay it, that you think you still owe it, that you never conceive you have
paid enough. Lastly (for the answer to others will be clear out of these,)
There is but one Lord, that is, originally and supreme, but many by
participation and subordinate. Now as it is a weak kind of arguing, We must
be subject to the King, therefore not to the Governor; so it is of the same
force, we must be subject to the Lord, therefore not to the King, since as the
Governor is sent by the King, so the King himself is sent by the Lord, and to
the end that we should submit unto him. But the Anabaptist proceeds farther,
and as he would have no Christian to submit, so, which is an apparent
contradiction, he would have Christians only to submit; he thinks command and
rule and empire to be things altogether incompatible with a Christian. Diverse
places they wrest for their purpose, but none seems to make more for them than
this present. S. Peter exhorts all those unto whom he writes, and al those unto
whom he writes were Christians, that they should submit. Must all submit? then
none must rule, it is impossible that submission should belong to him, to whom
the rule does. Now all Christians must submit to the King, and therefore it is
utterly unlawful, in their opinion, that any Christian should be a King.
Against this madness (for it is to be esteemed no better) let us take this
into our consideration, that from their opinion it follows, that in Christian
times, either there must be no Magistrate, or an Heathen Magistrate; no King,
or a bad one. That there should be no King, no Magistrate, I have showed you
before how absurd it was, (not to speak how ridiculous it is to imagine that
Christ who came to take away sin, came to take away princes, that he so spoiled
principalities and powers:) but then, that Christians should be perpetually
under an Heathen Magistrate, is equally inconvenient. For that there should be
an Heathen Magistrate unto the end of the world, implies that there should be
Heathen until the end of the world, out of whom the Magistrates may be chosen,
but where has God promised or threatened so? or who shall question the
Almighty, if at this instant he will have all come to knowledge of the truth,
and seek out their wickedness till he find none? Christians therefore may be
Magistrates and to them we must submit. Of which one word more. We read,
Submit your selves, and not let them enforce you to submission: as therefore
we must submit, so that submission must be voluntary, we must be freely
subject. What the Stoic said to his God, we must to our Prince, Nulla parendi
mora est, adsum impiger. I deny not mine obedience, I am ready to be commanded.
Here then we see, how true the opinion of the Papists is, whereby they would
exempt the Clergy from subjection, by which they would so prove them Priests,
that they do deny them to be Citizens. It is their opinion, that whosoever is
in holy orders, for that very cause even by the Law of God is freed from paying
tribute, and so should be slavish, if he did submit; as if with shaving away
their hair, they had shaved away their obedience, and their ointment had wiped
off all that which belonged to the King. And indeed this fancy though it has
no ground has some age, even Hierome in his time could say, Christ suffered
the cross for us and paid tribute: nos vero pro honor illius tributa non
reddimus, but we for his honor do not pay tribute but are freed from it as if
we were Kings sons: where yet you observe that he speaks of the Fact, not
of the Right; he shows, That he does not show wherefore they did not pay
tribute. Indeed Bellarmine minceth it and says that they are not exempted
from the obligation of those Civil Laws, which are not contrary to the Canon
Prop. 2. But then his third Proposition makes this obligation to be just
nothing, when he affirms that Clerks cannot be judged by the secular Judge,
allthough they will not observe these Civil Laws. A strong obligation that
binds not at all, as that does not bind them to the punishment when they have
loosed themselves from their obedience. But if there were no other word for us
against them, yet we cannot imagine, but that there were some Ministers amongst
those to whom S. Peter writ, nay it is manifest that there were 1. E. 1. 2. Yet
he exempts none, he bids them in general to submit. But though the Clergy
cannot challenge this exemption, I am far from their mind that think they
cannot receive it, or that it is unlawful for a Christian Prince to free them
from every Command of a secular Magistrate. When the times of greatest devotion
were, then were the times of their greatest freedom; it was unheard of then,
that any should judge a Prophet, but a Prophet, when that noble Constantine
could say unto them: Vos Dii estis, and non est aequum ut homo judicet Deos;
ye are Gods and it is not fit for men to judge Gods. Breifely, for a Minister
with the Papist to claim this exemption as a due, is an Imposture, but for a
Christian Prince to bestow it on them, is a great expression of his Charity.
Joseph in the general subjection of the Egyptians to Pharaoh, could exempt
the priests though idolatrous; and Artaxerxes himself an Idolater, could free
the Priests and Levites etc. from paying toll, tribute, or custom, though they
were of an other religion, Ez. 7. 24. If one of these could free the Priests of
a false, the other of a strange religion, then sure it will be lawful at least
for a Christian prince to be equally indulgent to his Clergy, who are of the
same, of the true religion. But lastly, this submission is both in body and
goods. What then shall we say to those, who if there be an office, which as it
challenges their personal employment, so it brings in profit, they will be
most greedy after it, and seek it though it be denied; but if it be only to
do service to the Prince, and it have not the sauce of profit, they would
avoid it, even when it is imposed upon them; do these submit their persons?
Others there are that stand not much on that, they will vouchsafe to be
Constables, or Sheriffs, or the like, they can swallow the trouble which they
are not paid for, only, because in such places they may overtop and bear
down their neighbors; but if the King have any use for their purse, that he
shall still find shut, or if it be opened, it shall be with a mouth opened
also; he shall have a reviling with his subsidy. But these consider not, that
they are both ways to be under, that they must thus submit. Submit we then
and that without any force, any constraint. Our Savior says, that a Kingdom
divided against itself cannot stand, and if you do not thus submit, you will
of necessity be divided, the humane ordinance will not easily part with his
divine right. I told you that the Anabaptist would prove subjection to be
unlawful, because it was brought in by sin, from which they by our Savior are
freed; but they err grossly in saying so, for even in innocence there of
necessity must be rule. There would then have been fathers and children,
husbands and wives, older and younger together, and to think that all these
should have been equal, that there should be no subordination amongst them, is
a fancy which in absurdity has no equal. What a motive then is this, why you
should be subject, since even man in innocence was to submit, he should be no
longer innocent than a subject? If thou will not be thus instructed, O
Jerusalem, says the Prophet, my soul will depart from thee, the Hebrew word
signifies shall be loosed or disjointed Ier. 6. 8. Subjection and Command are
the ligaments of the Commonwealth; if then you will disjoint the commonwealth
by taking away subjection from pule, take heed lest you disjoint his soul from
you. If he do, you must needs perish. Rather be ready with the Israelites to
Ioshuah, thus to bespeake your Prince All that thou commandes^ us we will do,
and whither soever thou sendest us, we will go, Josh. 1. 16. To your Prince I
say, for that is he to whom you must submit, He is that humane Ordinance.

DEO GLORIA.
1. Peter 2. 13. -- To every ordinance ((...)) of man, whether it be to the
King, as supreme ((...).)

14. Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him etc.


OBedience cannot be but to a Superior; if I am subject, it is to one that is
above me: since then I have showed you the necessity of submission, it will be
necessary to show you unto whom you must submit, and that is To every etc.
where we have first the Distribution, 2. the Appellation of Magistrate, and 3.
the universality of them. 1. The distribution is into King and Governors (...)
and (...) supreme and those who are sent by him; to these, every one of these
we must submit; to the King because he is supreme, to the Governors, because
they are sent by him, who is supreme; the chief power in the Commonwealth,
that is the King; all subordinate, that is the Governor: you can suppose no
power but it falls within this distribution, and you must be subject to all
that falls within this distribution. The chief Magistrate then was the Roman
Emperor, and among the Romans the name of King was odious, yet the Greek
called him by that name which signified a King, this Prince had by league and
conquest and inheritance, made himself Master of the greatest part of the
known world, and so of necessity, where he could not reside himself (as
Princes persons are not so great as their Empire) thither of necessity he was
to send Deputies, Lieutenants, and those are the Governors in my text, to
whom, together with him that sent them S. Peter exhorts these brethren to
submit. All then that I have formerly spoken of submission, is here to be
understood. I showed you, that you were to submit, and the Apostle tells you
that that submissio^ must be to the King and to the Governors. But you will
say, there are many unprofitable Princes, of whom the Com^onwealth may cry, as
that seditious Bishop did of one of our Kings, Mine head, mine head* others,
that are harmfull likewise, who will exactly represent the King, that Samuel
speaks of, 1. Sam. 8. 14. who will take the fields and vineyards, and
oliveyards, even the best of them, from his subjects, and give them to those,
whom he pleases. Nay worse then this do not many of them blaspheme that
worthy name by which you are called, as S. James speaks: And farther, strive
to make you blaspheme that worthy name likewise? Is it not possible, that a
Turk, an Infidel may have command over Christians? and is it fit, that
Christians should submit to a Turk, or Infidel? Shall he be my King, who is a
Rebel against the King of Kings? or shall not the faithful subject labor with
all his power to deprive and depose that Prince, who if it lay in his power
would depose God? Who is so impatient, that he would not suffer the Lord to be
King? No surely, because he is a bad Prince, this does not give thee license,
to be a bad subject, and the Christian man must not be a Traitor to an Infidel.
Submit ye to the King says S. Peter (...), as to the Supreme. But if the
subject upon any ground, either of Policy or of Religion, either because he was
a weak, or a wicked Prince could depose him, then he could punish him, if he
could punish him, then he could be his Superior, then in the same
Commonwealth, there could be one above him that is highest, more supreme than
the supreme. Every King in his own Kingdom is (...), the supreme, and
therefore for no misdemeanor whatsoever can he be punished by his Subjects,
for, that were to make them supreme. Neither let any man object against this,
that S. Paul says, that all Magistates are (...), we render, in authority,
1. Tim. 2. 2. And yet we are sure that all Magistrates cannot be supreme,
since we have already distributed them into subordinate and supreme, I say
this makes nothing against us, since in a diverse respect, the same authority
may be supreme and subordinate, and even the inferior Magistrate, may have a
supremacy in respect of the people, who, if we consider the King above him, can
glory in nothing, but his subordination. That (...) has given him his (...),
his supremacy is under an others supremacy, and there are higher than he. Thus
it is manifest, that unless there be Higher than the Highest, no subject in
any case whatsoever can depose his Prince. Does Saint Peter tell us this alone?
or is it not the verdict of the whole Scripture, which does so uphold Majesty,
that though it is the word of God, yet you will suppose that it is For the King.
Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and to Princes, Ye are ungodly?
Job. 34. 18. It is not fit, in his opinion to say to a King, that he is wicked,
and do you think he would have conceived it fit, to have deposed him for his
wickedness? Does the speech dislike him, and would he have been contented with
the action? Would he have given you liberty, to depose your Prince in case you
were so mannerly as not to term him wicked? In a word does he tie your tongues
only against your Prince, and would he give a full liberty to your hands? No,
he would not have thee to disgrace him, much less to depose, to unking him.
According to that of Moses, Thou shall not revile the Gods, (for all thy
reviling, the holy Ghost esteems them Gods,) nor curse the ruler of thy
people. Exodus 22, 28. Give the King thy Judgments, O God, is the Psalmists
prayer; that is, grant that he may be good; but he says in no place, that in
case he is otherwise, it is lawful for the people to give judgment upon him,
that if he be not according to their mind, the wrath of the people, likewise
should be as Messengers of death. If this be true; I know not why Solomon
should say, that, The Fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, if there be
so many roaring Lions against him, of whom, upon the case of misdemeanor, he
may justly be afraid. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, says the
preaching King Prove. 21. 1. But if subjects may judge their Prince, if there be
some case, wherein they may not submit to him that is supreme, the Kings heart
too often will be in the hands of his people, torn out of his royal breast in
a popular insurrection. A Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord; then how
wicked soever it be we must leave it unto his turning. Briefly, By me Kings
reign, says the Lord; and shall they be deposed by any other, than by him, by
whom they reign? How then does Solomon number amonst those things which are
comely in going A King against whom there is no rising up, Prove. 30. 31. If
there be so many cases, in which the subject may rise up against him, and throw
him down? Out of these then and the like places let us strongly conclude, That
we cannot lawfully rise up against wicked Princes, that we must submit to
those, who are supreme, though they be supreme in wickedness likewise; and as
in their dominion, so in their iniquity, they have no equal. But because this
is a truth, not affected of the most, because it is opposed by those, who in
many other things are contrary, and do chiefly agree in opposing this, to wit,
the Papist, and those who would seem the more reformed Protestants, I shall
not think too much, to speak a little more of it, and defend that which one
would think, none durst assault, Majesty. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, says holy David; says he, that would not mince his sin. Ps. 51. 4
How? is the holy Prophet to be reckoned amongst those men, who go on ad
excusandas excusationes in peccatis, who aggravate their fault by depressing
it, who augment the iniquity of their sin, because they say, that never or at
lest not fully they will confess? What do I hear? Against Thee only have I
sinned? Recollect thy self o blessed David, and thou shall find that though
against him chiefly, yet against him only thou have not sinned. Have thou not
sinned against Vr^jah in taking away first his wifes chastity, and afterward
his own life from him? Have thou not sinned against Bathshebah, sinned against
her, whom thou so lovedst; nay have thou not sinned against her, in such a
love, by which thou have made her to be reckoned amongst the foolish women?
Have thou not sinned against the Commonwealth, by giving such a bad example?
against the Commonwealth I say, unto which their Kings actions are the more
prevalling statute? Have thou not sinned against the Church likewise, against
which thou have opened the mouths of the adversary, who from thee will judge
of all other Professors, and say, that lust and murder are the best fruits of
thy Religion. Nay, have thou not sinned against the Enemies of the Church
likewise, by making them to continue enemies, still to hate the Church, of
which before these enormities of thine they might happily have desired to have
been members. Have thou sinned against all these? and yet dare thou say and
that in thy profoundest humiliation, when thou would be thought rather to
weep than speak; nay when thou pretendest such a grief, that thou would be
thought rather to bleed it out than weep, dare thou then say, that thou have
sinned only against God? yes he dares say it, and that with as much truth as
confidence. He has sinned in all those respects, which I have mentioned, and
yet he may boldly say, that he has sinned only against the Lord; he has
sinned only against the Lord, as against him that can take notice of, and
punish him for his sin; against whomsoever he has offended besides, it is all
one as if he had not offended, in respect of punishment; they may dislike, they
cannot judge him, they must still submit even to such a Superior. But you will
say, that David was a King, and therefore might be partial in his own case, he
might affirm that in no respect, the subject might rise against his Prince,
not because he thought it true, but because he found it to be convenient, that
he did not think it safe to divulge that mystery of State, That notorious
wickedness subjected the Prince to his subjects, who could be no longer
supreme than virtuous. Well, suppose he was partial in his own cause, shall
we think that he was in Saul's likewise? and yet even then we see that upon no
pretense whatsoever will he make an Inferior of the Supreme. And yet Saul was
as bad as we can imagine, a man that spared those, whom God commanded him to
kill, and killed those, which all the motives of Humanity and Religion would
have persuaded him to spare, Clementior in Dei hosts quam in Dei sacerdotes,
says one, who exercised more clemency toward Gods enemies than Gods priests,
for he spared the best of their sheep and oxen 1. Sam. 15. 15. but these he
utterly destroyed, both men and women, children and sucklings, oxen and asses,
and sheep with the edge of the sword, 1. Sam. 22. 19. and which might inflame
David the more, all this cruelty was exercised on them, for his sake. What
shall I speak of his Tyranny, against the Gibeonites, against the league which
God approved of; of his perpetual seeking of David's life, who though he was
anointed King by Gods appointment, yet he was kept so far from the Crown that
he had no great assurance of his Being; and yet for all this, for all Saul's
badnesse in general, for all his particular hatred against him, though he
himself likewise was elected by God unto the Kingdom, yet when he had him at
advantage, his heart smote him, because he had smote but the garment of the
King, Dum timuit Deum, non laesit inimicum says Optatus. It was Saul's oil
defended him and not his armor; David could not in any respect lift up his
hand against the anointed of the Lord, nor not submit himself to him that was
Supreme. Against this nothing can be replied, but that David made conscience of
what he needed not, that he was too just; Saul's death had been an Execution
not a murder, and therefore Magister hic non tenetur, they will remember David
and all his meekenes, as the Sept. read it, Ps. 132. 1. They will remember but
they will not imitate it. And yet the Primitive Church would imitate it: For
300. years they were under ungodly Emperors, and yet for all that time they
did submit. S. Augustine has a memorable passage, concerning those Christians,
that served in the army of Julian the Apostate: When it came, says he, unto
Christ's cause, then they only knew him for Supreme who is in heaven etc. but
when he said, Go forth with the Army, go against such or such a Nation,
without any more ado they presently obeyed; Distinguebant Dominum aeternum a
Domino temporali, and tamen subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum, etiam
Domino temporali: They could well distinguish between their temporal and
eternal Lord, and yet they willingly submitted themselves to their temporal
for their eternal Lord. But for this they have an evasion; S. Paul enjoined,
and the Christians for so long a time performed obedience to the higher powers,
not because they were bound to it, but because they had no strength, to loose
themselves from it; this subjection was more out of weakness, than out of
Conscience; or if it was out of conscience, it was out of conscience only of
their weakness; thus Aquinas, and out of him Bellarmine, with all the modern
Jesuits: So that in these men's opinion they did submit for wrath only, for
fear of punishment; could they once but have pleased themselves with their
own strength; had they but consulted with their limbs, and found that they
were able to try such a mastery, they then would have broke their bands
asunder, and cast away their cords from them; when they could stand up, they
then upon no terms would have submitted. But this very objection did
Tertullian answer a thousand years before ever it was made. Do you think,
says he, to the Heathen, that if we would right our selves by war, we should
want numbers or power. As if the Moors, or Marcomanni, or Parthians, people
but of one Nation could be compared with those which fill the whole world. We
are strangers to you, and yet we replenish all, that is, your Cities, Islands,
etc. only we have left you your Idolatrous Temples. Cui bello non idonei, non
prompti fuissemus etiam impares copiis, qui tam libenter trucidamur? What war
are not we fit for, even though our numbers were smaller, who count it nothing
to be slain? Only this hinders us, that apudistam disciplinam magis occidi
liceat, quam occidere, that our profession thinks it far more lawful to be
killed than kill; as long as you are supreme, we can do no other then submit.
Besides, were it true that weakness only caused the Christians to continue
subject to the Heathen, (which I deny,) yet it were a truth not to be divulged,
unless we would divulge that which should cut the throats of all Christians;
for if once bad Princes shall be informed, that good men will obey them no
longer, than till they are strong enough to resist; how will this cause them to
keep down, to oppress good men, lest when they ceased to be weak, they
would cease to be subject likewise, and do them most hurt, when they might do
them most good. But what says Jeremiah to the Jews Seek the peace of the
City whither I have caused you to be carried away Captives, Ier. 29. 7. They
are carried away Captives, yet they must seek the peace of them which carried
them away Captives; they had caused their trouble, and yet they are commanded
to seek their peace. Besides, according to the vulgar we read, He makes the
Hyprocrite to reign for the sins of the people, Job. 34. 30. And we our
selves read, I gave them a King in mine anger. Hos. 13. 11. What God gives in
anger, and for the sins of the people, must be Gods just judgment: now it
seems to be too much sauciness, that any man should strive to exempt
himself from Gods judgments; which they seek to do, who when it is in their
power, will depose a wicked King. God gives his judgments unto Kings, nay
diverse times he gives Kings his judgments, and I should think, that he did
merit a new one, who would not submit unto the former. And, to see the
perverseness of it, those men that think it unlawful to fly from a place
infected with the plague, because it is Gods judgment, to which we must
submit, from which we cannot fly, are most earnest to maintain that we may
depose bad Princes, which yet they cannot deny to be Gods judgment. And yet
the Plague is so Gods judgment, that I know not whether it be particularly
intended against me or no, and in that respect may fly from it, when they
cannot be ignorant that a bad Prince is their judgment in particular, and yet
for all this will fly upon him. But they should consider, God gives him in his
anger, and he takes him away in his wrath he, and no other; it is not good
that they in their wrath should take away, whom God has given in his anger. In
a word, if Infidelity, or Heresy were a sufficient ground for the subject to
rise against his Prince, there were no Prince in Christendom, but might every
day fear an insurrection; since by diverse of his subjects, he will be no
better esteemed of then an Infidel and Heretic. Where there is a Protestant
King, he will be an Infidel to his Popish subjects; and where there is a
Popish King, he will be an Heretic to his Protestants, especially if either
shall be any ways vehement in his profession. Now if on these pretenses either
side may take away their submission, who sees not that the red horse will be
let out, who has power given him to take peace from the earth, and that they
should kill one another. Rev. 6. 4? I conclude this point with this Argument,
If it be lawful to depose a supreme Prince, then it is lawful in this
respect, that he hinders and opposes true Religion; But we cannot depose him,
because he hinders and opposes Religion, as I have already showed: and
therefore in no case it will be lawful to depose him. But you will say, may he
do what he list, may he play with the throats of his subjects, make murder his
delight, ravish their wives, assault their consciences, and yet never be
questioned for all this, because he is Supreme? We must understand therefore,
that such Princes as they, take notice of David's sentence, Against thee Only
have I sinned, and so are sufficiently protected from the punishment of men; so
they should remember, Against Thee have I sinned, and so that they are not free
from the punishment of God, which therefore shall be the greater, because it
was not prevented by an inferior chastisement, and they shall at length find,
that it is a fearful, horrendum, a most horrid thing, to fall into the
revenging hands of the Lord. May we then upon no terms seek to depose him,
that is supreme? Harken then to this ye Papists, that in case of heresy
affirm, that the Pope may excommunicate the subject; nay depose his Prince.
Your dictates these are, Defuisse Apostolis Reges, etc. That the Apostles
wanted Kings to depose, and not a power of deposing Kings; that the Apostles
could have exempted faithful people from the subjection of Infidel Princes,
if they had thought it fitting, or if their power could have effected that
which they thought fitting. In a word, that they then endured their
Persecutors, not for conscience sake, but for want of power to resist, if they
had hearts to be Soldiers they would never have had mind to be Martyrs; and
they would never have filled the Calendar, if they had had numbers enough to
fill an Army. And here I cannot sufficiently wonder at that gross doting, of
the acutest of Schoolmen. Infidelity, says he, does not of it self destroy
Dominion; his meaning is, that it is possible, and, with the good, safe, to be
a Prince, and an Infidel together, that a man who has not faith, may have
dominion over them, that are faithful; and yet in the same place he affirms,
Infidels who have formerly been faithful may and ought to be deprived of their
dominion by the sentence of the Church. Is not dominion founded on Faith? How
then can it be lost by Infidelity? Does the Houses foundation stand, whence
then is there a necessity of the houses falling? But if such Apostata Princes
could not be so punished, Hoc vergere posset in magnam fidei corruptionem, such
their impunity might turn to great damage to the Church; this pitch would
defile shrewdly, well: is that the reason why they must be deposed, by the
Popes sentence? But before their Apostasy, when they were yet but bare
Infidels, they might do, and perhaps did great harm to the Church, and yet
then himself confesses, they were under no Censure of the Church. Briefly,
the harm that they do to the Church, is a just ground of deposing, or, it is
not a just ground: if it be not, why does he urge it? if it be, then contrary
to his own acknowledgement, even negative Infidelity will uncrowne; and
against the Apostle, The Church will judge of those who are without. Again, is
it in nocase lawful, to depose the supreme power? Then what shall we say to
those pretended brethren of ours, who though they confess it unlawful for the
people, indulge it to the Superiors? who dare affirm that in regard of
incorrigible excesses, a Prince may be put down by subordinate Magistrates?
But what are subordinate Magistrates? are they not the (...) here mentioned?
these Governors in my Text? and what is said of these Governors? is it not,
that they are sent by him, who is supreme? Now it would be most strange, if he
that were sent should have a power over him, that sent him; that the Governor
should trample down the Supreme. This sending is his delegation, now he that
has a power to make, has a power to revoke his delegate; and he were too
unwise if he would not revoke it then, when he saw that they would prove
Authentical rebels against his own self. It is true, he that has the sword,
has it not in vain; but it is as true, that he that put the sword into his
hand, can pull it out again at his pleasure, and few will be of Traians mind
in any case, to charge inferior Magistrates to employ their swords against
themselves. I had thought that what S. Peter had said of servants in respect of
their Masters, had been appliable to inferiors in respect of the Supreme, Be
subject in all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
Froward. 1. Pet. 2. 18. Name what vice you will in a Prince, it is but his
Frowardness, and God forbid, that we should be rebels, because he will be
Froward. And they that resist, says S. Paul, shall receive to themselves
damnation. Romans 13. 2. They whosoever they be, People or Magistrate, You or
They which are sent, if they shall resist the Supreme, there is nothing
remains but damnation; they shall be Fiends in Hell, who in Earth will not be
good subjects. Lastly, we must submit to them who are sent likewise, to the
Inferiors; he must not resist the Supreme, but we must obey him. Now those
Governors are either Civil or Ecclesiastical, your obedience to the Civil I
have fully pressed before, and I shall need to say no more for your submission
to the Ecclesiastical likewise, but that he is sent by the Supreme, and we are
to obey him, and those, who are sent by him. Let us not then with some perverse
men judge of Religion by our stubborn^es against Bishops, nor prove that we are
called from hence, because we can be bitterly witty against their calling.
Rather consider we, that such are in dignities, and S. Jude terms the^ but
filthy dreamers, who speak evil of dignities. O let not us be filthy, who would
be accounted Pure, nor be dreamers who would be esteemed of all men to be the
only wakefull ones. But because I shall speak more of this in my next
discourse, concerning the appellation of Magistrates, that they are called an
humane Creature, I will add no more at this time, but a Thanksgiving to our
Divine Creator, to whom, Father, Son etc.

DEO GLORIA.
1. Pet. 2. 13. To every Ordinance (...) (i.) Creature of man.
WE have heard the Distribution, let us now proceed to the Appellation of the
Magistrate: they are either supreme or subordinate; Kings, or they who are sent
by them: but supreme, and subordinate; Kings, and they who are sent by them,
are here called, their Appellation is but, an Humane Creature. This therefore
shall be the method of of our proceeding: We will first show why the
Magistrate is called an humane Creature, according to the Greek, and then what
the humane ordinance may signify, according to the English: Submit your
selves, therefore, unto every ordinance; or, to every Creature of man.

1. To the humane Creature, and why the Magistrate to whom we must submit is
termed 1.
so. And that may be principally to humble him; that they may learn what David
taught the Nations, that they are but men. Natural it is for all those that
are in high places to think too highly of themselves, to raise their mind and
countenance and outward port unto their places, that so others may have the
greater estimation of them, nay they do too often forget their own condition;
and when once their mountain is made so strong, they are ready to give out,
that they shall never be removed. Nihil est quod credere de se non possit, cum
laudetur Dii^ aequa potestas, Make a God of a Man once, and he will be ready to
persuade himself, that he can do all things. When Moses did first deliver his
message to Pharaoh concerning the dismission of the Israelites, all the reply
he could get from that proud Prince was this, Who is the Lord? Exodus 5. 2. as
who should say, I know no other Lord but my self, there is no God but Pharaoh.
Thus Rabshakeh, when he would have won Jerusalem by words, when he would have
entreated them out of their necessary defense, what argument does he press
more eagerly than this, that they should not believe that the Lord could defend
the^? Who are they amongst all the Gods of the Lands, that have delivered their
Land out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand. Es.
36. 20? The Lord could not deliver them, why? because the King of Assure would
oppress them, then of necessity in his judgment the King of Assure was of
greater power than the Lord. So the King of Tyrus, if he enjoy a City enriched
and fortified by the Sea, his heart is straight lifted up, as it were with a
wave of the sea* and he is ready to say, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God,
in the midst of the Se^. Ezech. 23. 2. Thus, not to trouble you with
multitudes, the Pope calls himself, at least suffers others to call him
Vice-God, the only Deity on Earth, the Best and Greatest. Lest then those,
that are in authority should imitate these impieties, left they should make
their irreligion of higher note then their dignity, the same Spirit that terms
them Gods, says in the next breath, that they shall die like men, that they
shall find at length themselves to be but Humane Creatures; that they are but
humane Creatures, I say, whose breath is in their nostrills, whom the Poet
could call (...). a thin shadow, a very nothing to talk of. Do they not come
into the world the same homely way with their subjects? and when they are
entered in thither, are they not as weak and froward infants as the meanest?
Can they command away those years of childishness, that they may suddenly be
men, that they may suddenly be sensible of the glory of their height? And when
they have attained unto those years, when they think of nothing but Empire
and Dominion, yet how many things are there then, which if they should be so
foolish as to command, they should never be so fortunate as to see done? They
cannot make the Sun rise a minute before his appointed time, and when he is
once risen, till his own time again they cannot cause him to set; it is in
their power to take men's lives away, that they shall not see the Sun, but it
is not in their power to obscure the Sun; even but for that one instant, that
he might not see their Cruelty. What can he do to the Air? unless perhaps
this be much, that he can build a Tower, which shall look up high into it; to
the top of which if he do ascend, he may perceive the small birds flying about
him, and securely smiling at his commands: and for the Sea, there is a pretty
story of our Canutus a Dane, that sometimes conquered England, who being
magnified by his Flatterers to be one, that could do what he pleased; to whom,
as unto God, nothing that he willed was impossible, and so that he was more
than an Humane Creature; he to express his modesty and cause their shame,
commanded his Royal throne to be set near to the seaside against the coming
in of the Tide: in brief, he forbad the sea to touch his throne, but that
remitted nothing of its pace, for all his forbidding; and had not his servants
been more officious than the Sea, he might have been well washed for his
labor; but this he did to the end that they might see how that he did not
esteem so highly of himself, but that with the Kingly Prophet he kept his
soul down, like a weaned child. But you will say? that though he have no
power over the Elements, yet he can command men. I reply, that he can neither
command those that are dead, nor those who are not yet borne, he commands but
men, and he cannot command all them neither. And for diseases, which of them
can he injoine, to punish any of his rebels? nay which of them can he forbid,
when God sends it, to punish his own self? But in a word, he can by no means
free himself from death, after all his glory, all his pomp, all his
magnificences, (...) one Night or one Fever sends him to the grave, and
teaches him then, that he is but an humane Creature. Man, even this man, even
a King dies, he wastes away, yea he gives up the Ghost, and where is he?
Job 14. 10. Which makes the holy Ghost to insult over the overweening King of
Tire, Will thou yet say before him that slaieth thee, I am God? Ezech. 28. 9.
as who should say, at that time thou have learned perfectly that thou art but
man. Mors sola fatetur, quantula sunt hominum corpuscula, we never know our
true quantity till our death, till in the Prophets phrase the worm be spread
under us, and the worm cover us; till that alone covers us which will leave
nothing at length to be covered. Which meditation did so inflame Origin, that
he cries out in his first Hom. in Ps. 36. You that do so admire these great
Men, these Kings and Governors, go says he, ad Cadaverum eorum reliquias
etc. to the remainder of their carcasses, if so be it be possible to find them,
if this humane Creature be not altogether lost, by being the food of some other
Creature. But last of all, they are as subject unto judgment as the meanest of
their brethren; We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Romans
14. 10. Kings and Governors are not exempted from standing there, and they who
have commanded all upon earth, if they have dyed out of Gods favor, shall
entreat as vainly as the poorest, that the mountains would cover them from
the fierce anger of the Lord. Thus you see that they are but men, and that it
is fit they should know it. What comfort then is here to them who are unjustly
dealt with and oppressed by proud greatness? Let them threaten as fearfully as
they will, yet it is possible those threatenings may want effect. A man cannot
do all that he would, nay and if they have done any great harm, either in
their body, goods or name, yet there is comfort for the unjust sufferer; they
are but men, and it is possible to outlive a man: nay, if finally they have
taken away al hopes of expecting their death, by taking away their life, yet
their comfort ends not with their life. Still they are certain that their
Enemies are but Humane Creatures, and with Solomon's rejoicing young man, God
shall bring them into judgment. And then what will it profit them to have been
great men, and to have done what pleased them, when they shall be found but
men, miserable men that cannot avoid the damnation of hell? S. Paul says to
the distressed Christians for the loss of their friends, Comfort ye one
another; and let us say to tyrannizing Superiors, to Kings and Governors who
will trample on them, that do submit, fright ye one another with these words.
But again are Kings and Governors, Supreme, and those who are sent by them,
but men? Why then inferiors cannot be excepted from the common frailty,
without doubt they cannot be more than Humane Creatures. What then shall we say
to the Covetous, whose eye lusts after whatsoever it sees, from whom Naboth
cannot keep his vineyard if it lie commodious for him? surely this man has
goods laid up for many years, but he has forgot, that this night they shall
take away his soul from him, and then whose shall those things be which thou
have provided? Luc. 12. 20. As who should say, Whosoevers they be, thine they
cannot be, wherefore then do thou so strive to get what thou art sure thou
can not keep? Why would thou prove an eternity by thy unlimited love of
riches? and by the perpetual laboring for them flatter thy self that thou
art a divine, when indeed thou art but an Humane Creature? In a word, thou art
either God or man; if God, thou have no need of riches; if man, thou can not
have an eternity of being rich; that must have an end, which is no more than an
Humane Creature. In time then forsake this vanity, enter at length into thy
self, and say with him in the Preacher, For whom do I labor and bereave my
soul of good? Eccl. 4. 8. For whom do thou labor? for thy self? but thou
shall not live to enjoy it, thou art but a man. For another? but perhaps he
does not deserve to enjoy it, at lest he does not deserve it thus far, that for
him thou should bereave thy soul of good: and if it were possible that he
could deserve that likewise, yet because he is but an humane creature, it is
possible that he may die before thee, and than the question will still return a
question that thou can never be able discretely to satisfy, For whom do I
labor and bereave my soul of good? if thou do labor, thus labor etc.
thou bereavest thy soul of good, as of others principally, so of this also, of
the longer stay in the body: thou art so covetous because that thou have forgot
thy mortality, and by that covetousness thou do but hasten thy mortality,
and so only the sooner prove thy self to be but an Humane Creature.

2. The Magistrate may be called an Humane Creature, because he is elected by
men, as we know diverse nations do choose their Kings, according to that of the
Panegyricke, Eligatur ex omnibus, qui imperet omnibus, all must have the choice
of him, who is to have the rule of all. But, this we shall have a better
occasion to discuss, when we come to the first reason of our submission, which
is, for the Lord.

3. Then, the Magistrate may be termed an humane Creature, because he is
ordained for the benefit of humane creatures; nothing does better agree with
man, than a good Magistrate; and yet because I shall speak of this in my
second reason of submission, to wit, the end why the Magistrate was given, I
shall say but little to it in this place, only this, that if the Magistrate be
for our good, this can be no small motive to our submission. In the Fable, the
Horse quarrels with the Heart, who being too hard for him, he desires the
assistance of the man, the man promises if he will let him ride him; in brief,
the Heart yields to subjection, so he may have defense, he will suffer the man
to ride him; rather than his enemy to overcome him. Nay, in the History, the
Campani having many factions amongst themselves, and powerful enemies of their
neighbors the Samnites, willingly offered themselves up, to be servants to the
State of Rome, so that the Romans would protect them from the Samnites, so
their enemy might not prevail they would be content, with what Magistrate
soever, and they were so in love with this humane Creature, that they would
sell their liberty for it. How then can we disapprove, what they so generally
liked of? How should we think our selves reasonable men, if we did not affect
this humane Creature? And thus much for the word as we read it in the Greek.
Come we now to our English, ORDINANCE, which I told you might be taken for law,
and from henceforth enforce, that as we are obedient to the Prince, So we must
be to his law likewise, to every Governor and to every law. But before we
handle that: do not we all conclude, that All good things come from God, and
that Laws are amongst the numbers of good things? Do not we know that they
are only inferences and deductions and determinations as it were of the Law of
nature? and is not the Law of nature immediately from God? for instance, that a
murderer should be put to death, is the Law of nature, but, that he should be
put to this death, is an humane Constitution: God says, Let him die, but the
King, Hang him. Are laws from God, and yet shall we dishonor them, as an
invention of man? are they a divine, and shall we term them but an Humane
Ordinance? Surely all good Laws even of men are Divine and Humane: Divine in
their Principles, Humane in their Conclusions. God says, That the thing shall
be done, and man, So. And that determination of man's may be termed an humane
Ordinance, as the Magistrate himself is called an humane Ordinance; not so
much because man made it, as because it is made for the good of men. To a good
Law, therefore it is required, that the Efficient should have Power, and the
Matter, Goodness, at least no ill in it. If the Lawgiver has authority, if
the matter of the Law be good, or at least not evil, it has all the
Conditions required to an Humane Ordinance, and to such we must obey. The
Ancients did shadow a Law under the figure of a Crown, because as a Crown
compassed and kept in what was under it, so should the Law likewise, and
therefore S. Hierome expounds that Pythagorean Rule (...) that we ought not to
violate the crown, after this manner, we ought not to tear or violate the
Laws, but keep them in their full vigor. And for this reason likewise they are
compared to hedges, because as the hedge defends, and incloseth, so likewise
does the Law, it defends from violence of others; it incloseth and keeps us
in, lest we should violate others, it is a strong hedge. And therefore well was
it termed by the Greeks (...) because it gave every one his due, defense to him
that wanted it, and punishment to those who deserved it. If all this will not
move thee to submit to it, yet consider it is an humane Ordinance, and to that
God has commanded thee to submit. But, what if it be bad, you will say? what
if it command me to blaspheme my God, prostitute my wife, or with those wicked
Barbarians, after certain years, in case they lived too long, to become the
Executioner of mine own Father? Shall I submit then? No surely: for I exhort
thee, to submit only to a law, but these are no Laws, but authorized
impieties, but transgressions with a privilege. Mihi lex esse non videtur,
quod non justa fuerit, says S. Austine; in his Opinion what was not just could
be no Law, and nothing can be more unjust than these tyrannical Injunctions.
In brief, I commend the Obedience performed unto Humane, I detest that which is
done to devilish Ordinances. Take a reason out of the Text. We must so obey
the Governors, those that are sent, that at the same time we must not disobey
the King, the Supreme; solikewise we must submit our selves to the Laws of the
King, of the Supreme, but never when they contradict the known Commands of
God, who has sent them. But in case they are not contrary to Gods Laws, we
must submit, and that to their Ecclesiastical Laws likewise. The greatest
Enemy of the Churches government can, in disgrace say no more than this, that
her Canons are but an Humane Ordinance, and yet we bring an infallible
demonstration of the necessity, of our Obedience to those Laws, even because
they are an Humane Ordinance. The text says, Submit ye unto every ordinance
of man. How justly are they then to be reprehended, who, although they make
conscience of other Laws, do securely contemn and deride these? insomuch
that they who break them, are termed good men, and whosoever stands up in the
defense of them, and would by reason first, and in case that prevails not, by
punishment, bring them to their observation, are said to be Persecutors of
goodness and of good men. A strange delusion of the Devil, that whom S. Peter
calls presumptuous, selfwilled, because they speak evil of dignities, 2.
Pet. 2. 10. they for the same reason should count the only godly. I was
informed by one, that before my coming hither, here was flourishing Holiness,
as if since, there were no holiness, at least that it was decayed by my fault.
Now I appeal to your Consciences, whether I have not as my Text led me
exhorted you to all virtues of the first and second Table, and I am not guilty,
how I have any way hindered Holiness, unless it has been by opposing
Religious disobedience. What their Holiness was before my coming, and whether
Flourishing or but a Flourish, I judge not, God will; but if it were no other
Holiness than that which I oppose, they must give me leave to call it but
Holy Faction, for only with that have I an enmity: whereof a part is this,
that they will not obey that part of the Churches Law, which binds every one at
the time of prayer, to frequent his own Church. We urge the Law why they
should come, and they this reason why they will not; The Law that binds us to a
presence at the afternoon Service is either absolute or else admits of some
Exceptions. If Absolute, then in no case whatsoever may a man absent himself,
then he must not follow his merchandise abroad, then it will be a sin to be
sick, for at that time he cannot come to his own Church, but if the Law admit
of these Exceptions, then why not this likewise, that since for their
temporal, much more for their spiritual benefit they may be absent. Before I
answer this, I will give them a like argument, that so by comparing both
together they may judge whether theirs be solid or no. The Law that binds us
to a presence etc. in the Forenoon, or when we have Sermons, is either Absolute
or has some Exceptions, if Absolute, then all the former inconveniences
follow, if it has exceptions, then if for our temporal good, why not, much
rather for our spiritual good may we not absent our selves even in the
Forenoone, or when at home we have a Sermon? since others may preach more
effectually than our own Minister, and so from others, I may have more
spiritual good, than I can have from him. I appeal to their own Consciences,
whether such an argument be sound or no. If they say it is, then one Church
shall be oppressed, when another is empty; one Minister will suspect an other,
as if he drew away his flock from him; there would be as many schisms as
priests; and because amongst the Ministers, none is so well gifted, but some
are, or would be thought better, whilst all run after the best, there would
be no certain hearing of any, and we should have nothing but Confusion. But if
they confess the truth, that it is a weak kind of arguing, then they spoil
their own reason, which was the same in effect with this. To which in brief I
answer, That the Law concerning etc. admits of Exceptions, but only of such
which are not against the intent of the Law. The intent of the Law is to
prevent Schism, and therefore to cause men to frequent their own Churches.
Now they that travel, do not cross this intent, there is no fear of Schism
in them; and when they can, they do frequent it, but they that go to hear
sermons abroad, for their spiritual good, as they pretend, take the ready way
to make a Schism, and do never frequent their own Churches. Now it would be
strange, if the same Law, which was made to cause men to frequent their own
Churches, should admit of an Exception by which they never should come thither.
But they may be absent for their Temporal, why then not for their spiritual
good? Surely, because there is not the same reason: should they not trade
abroad, they were not able to live, but you will not say, that should they not
hear abroad, it were impossible that they should be saved. This truth will be
clear in some few syllogismes. If it were lawful to break the Churches Law,
then chiefly for our spiritual good we might break it. But we may not break it
for our spiritual good, Ergo. The Minor is thus proved, If we may enjoy as
much spiritual good, by keeping as by breaking it, then we may not break it
for our spiritual good. But we may enjoy as much spiritual good by keeping
as by breaking it, Ergo. The Minor is again proved. All the good that we can
get by breaking it, is but the Confirmation of our Faith; But, the Confirmation
of our Faith we may have, even when we keep it. The Major appears; For, who
are they that break the Law, but such who account themselves called, and
justified already? Now, I may be Confirmed, I may be strengthened, but I cannot
be called after I am called. And for the Minor that our Faith may be confirmed
though we keep the Law and stay at home, is manifest out of their own
confessions, which yield thus much, that though the word preached alone begets,
yet the word but read only may nourish Faith. Thus if only they keep away,
and break an Humane Ordinance, for their spiritual good, and that spiritual
good be but confirmation of their Faith, and that confirmation they might have
had at home without the breach of any Law, who sees not that it is far safer
to obey than to contest, to be subject to, rather than to subject under us,
these humane Ordinances. I will press but one reason more, and that upon a
ground by themselves confessed. Where ever God has commanded a thing in
general, there the Church may determine the particularities; as where God
says, Let all things be done in Order, the Church may particularly describe,
what that order shall be, and such a Command of the Church is to be received as
a Law of God; this ground is confessed: But concerning Hearing there is a
Command of God in general, and a particular Command of the Church, concerning
what persons and in what place, to wit, their own Pastor in his own Cure;
therefore that Law is a Law of God to us, and so by all means must be kept. If
they shall cavil, that they are only bound to hear but when the Minister
does preach; I answer, that in the Law there is no such thing, they must not
leave their Minister when they may hear him, and they may hear him when he
but reads the word of God. Examine and weigh these reasons, (for I stand to my
former Protestation, which was mistook for a threatening:) if these reasons be
firm, follow them, if they be infirm, make it appear, and I will follow you;
but I am certain you cannot make it appear, unless you can produce some
Ordinances of man, and that not contrary to Gods Law, unto which we are not
bound to be subject. O then my beloved, let us no longer walk in the light of
our own eyes, nor follow that which Saint Hierome terms the worst Master, our
own Presumption. Away with those vain words* [I care not for the commands of
men] seeing in saying so you disobey the command of God, who has commanded you
to obey men. You know what Saint Paul says* The powers which be, are ordained
of God; whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Romans 13. 1. 2.
Submit your self to God, though you despise the Humane Creature; and though
you care not for his Ordinance, yet be afraid of damnation. Neither talk, that
you must have your Supper as well as your Dinner, that is, the afternoon as
well as the morning Sermon. Know you not, that if you urge that proportion
between Sermons and Dinners too far, you will find nothing but absurdities?
For if you have two Sermons on the Lords day, and one in the Week, you suppose
you are abundantly fed; but if you should receive no more corporal sustenance
in the Week, you would hardly subsist until the Sunday. Besides, my carnal
nourishment benefits me only at the present, but my spiritual, though it be
almost neglected at the present, may upon Meditation, benefit me many years
after. Add to this, that where you want the afternoon Sermon, you want not
your Supper, as you term it: for where you have a Sermon you may have perhaps
a more plentiful repast, but wherever the word is, there is the meal.
Besides, God regards not the multitude, but the use of Sermons, and if thou
have forsaken thine iniquity, if thou do firmly cleave to thy Maker, it is
all one to him whether it be after one, or one hundred Sermons. Will thou have
him ask of thee, Who has required these things at thy hands? and yet he must
inquire it of thee, if thou will bind they self necessarily to hear two
Sermons a day, which he has never enjoined, and wilt not submit thy self to
the Churches Laws which he has commanded. It is a good thing to hear
Sermons, but a good thing must be done well. It is a good thing to hear
Sermons, but not at all times, not at all places. If thou a poor man shall go
to hear them in the week days when thou should provide for thy Family; by
hearing Sermons, thou may do against the Duty, which thou should learn in
Sermons, the duty being this, that thou should not hear them then; and so if
thou hear not in the right Place, God will not so approve of thy Hearing, as
he will be angry with thee for the Place. For I have showed you, that this
partial Hearing opens a gappe unto Schism. O do not make Preaching guilty of
that Crime, nor let it be truly accused, to be the scattering of that Church
for whose collecting it was ordained. But if man's Laws thus bind us,
certainly Gods Law far more; and one of his Laws is, concerning the
receiving of this blessed Sacrament. Which that you may do well, consider what
you are who are the Guests; what he is, who is the Food. We poor, sinful,
miserable men; He, the rich, most pure and blessed God. God I say is our Food;
our Food, whosoever draw near with Faith unto this Table. It was a wonder when
man was fed with the bread of Angels; what wonder then is this, when the
Believer is fed with him, that made the Angels? He opens his hand and fills all
other things with his blessing, but the Faithful with himself. For as sure,
as we receive the Creature into our mouth and stomach, so sure our Faith makes
us receive our Creator in our heart: and if we shall receive him into our
Soul, he will receive us into his Kingdom, there to reign with him for ever.

DEO GLORIA.
1. Peter 2. 13. --, for the Lords sake:

15. For, so is the will of God.


WE have already showed you what you must do, you must submit; you have
likewise heard, unto whom this must be done, and that is every Magistrate,
every Ordinance of man, whether Supreme or Subordinate, whether they be Kings,
or those, who be sent by them. But because proud nature cannot endure to
submit, and always striveth that it self may be Supreme, our Apostle does not
only praescribe the duty, but he gives us reasons for it, and the first of
them is drawn from the First from the Alpha of all things, as S. John terms
him. We must submit, and that, first, For the Lords sake, For so is the will
of God. Where I shall show you that we are exhorted to obedience, from Gods
institution, and Command; from his institution of the Magistrate, and from his
Command, that we should obey the Magistrate. The Institution we have verse. 13.
For the Lords sake; as who should say, Obey the Magistrate for the Lords sake,
who made him so: and the command verse. 15. For, so is the Will of God, so, to
wit, that you should submit to every Ordinance of man etc. And that the
Magistrate, the Ordinance of man, is a divine Institution, an Ordinance of God,
is most clear to every one, that respects God and that Ordinance. Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee in all the Gates which the Lord thy God gives
thee throughout thy Tribes Deuteronomy. 16. 18. The people shall make the Officers,
but it is by Gods Command that they shall make them, he that gives the Gates,
gives the Magistrate likewise, who shall execute judgment in those Gates.
This is acknowledged by Daniel, He (he means the Lord,) removes Kings, and
sets up Kings. Dan. 2. 21. He that removes, sets up; he that takes away does
institute Kingdoms, and he is no other than the Lord. Give ye unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, is our Saviors command Matt. 22. 21. Caesar has
some Things which he may challenge, and it is our Saviors injunction, that
those things should be given him, now what could he challenge, had not God
given him a right, and he gave him that right when he made him Caesar, when he
bestowed his Magistracy upon him. When Pilate was boasting of his Authority,
daring to affirm, that it was in his power either to release or Crucify the
Son of God; Christ replyeth, not by denying his power, but by showing whence
he had it, Thou could have no power at all against me except it were given
thee from above. Joh. 19. 11. He does not say, thou have no power, but he
affirms, that if he has any power, he has it from above; Pilate has his
Power from thence, from whence Christ has his nativity; in a word, Daniel
frights Nebuchadnezzar, that they shall make him to eat grass as the Oxen,
and expresses how long this shall continue, to wit, till thou know that the
most High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.
Dan. 4. verse. 25. that, which Nebuchadnezzar was to know by such a miserable
experiment* was most true, and he was to know that God only made this
Ordinance of man. A truth confessed by the Poet (...) and confirmed by the
Historian especially Justin out of Trogus Pompeius that at first the Governors
were Monarchs, and their Wills, the Laws; which could not have been, had the
people been their Creators, had they not received the^, and that with all the
inconveniences acco^panying them, as a gift of God. But you will say, No man
doubts whether that God be the Author of the Magistrate, whether it be for the
Lords sake, that there is government amongst men, since God is the God of
order, and not of confusion; now what order would there be, where there not
some under, and some above, some that were to command in chief, and others,
whose duty was to obey. But the question is, whether God be the immediate Author
of the Magistrate? whether as he ordaines, that there shall be a Magistracy, so
whether he purposes that there shall be this kind of Magistracy, and this man
Magistrate? I clear it thus. That God ordains Government, no man doubts,
since it does not depend upon the consent of men whether they will be governed
or no, for if it did they might refuse to have any government, which were the
ready way for the destruction of Mankind, whose liberty is so dangerous, that
he can last no longer, than he is governed, that cannot be if he be not
subject: but whether he ordains, that people shall be governed by one only,
which rule we call a Kingdom or a Monarchy; or by the chiefest and best of the
Commonwealth, which is called an Aristocracy; or lastly, by the command of the
people, which goes under the name of Democracy; and whether God at the first
did invest any particular man or men in any of these forementioned kinds of
government; this is disputed amongst Divines, some affirming that as Magistracy
is Gods Ordinance, so is the Magistrate also, others being peremptory, that as
one is from God, to wit Government, so the other is from man, to wit, the kind
of Governor, that so at least in some sense, the Magistrate may be termed an
Ordinance of man. Man must needs have somewhat to do in his Election,
otherwise if God do all in all, how is he in any respect termed man's
Ordinance? But these suppose, that which Sensible men can never grant, that the
Accident could be ordained without the Subject in which it is, that Magistracy
could be executed without any Magistrate to execute it. Now we know that
Magistracy is a thing, which cannot exist without a person, who should execute
it* as absurd therefore it is to say, that God ordained Magistracy and not a
Magistrate, as to affirm, that he made whiteness, and no Wall nor other solid
body, in which it should subsist; or that he made Faith and Hope, and yet no
Creature in the world, which should have Faith and Hope: if then God be the
Ordainer of Magistracy, he ordaines it in some Magistrate, he that executes
this Authority is from the Lord. And that upon better consideration our
Adversaries will at length grant; Common sense tells them that he which
institutes a Ministry, must institute a Minister; and what Schismatic would
care for Episcopal jurisdiction, were there no Bishop appointed to put it in
execution? So then they confess, that this power is in some subject; that God
ordaining Magistracy, ordains a Magistrate: but they make the Subject of this
power to be the people. Bell. 3. l. de Laic. ca. 6. Secundo mira. But surely
these men forget, what they have said before, and the proceeding in such like
discourse is not to fill a book but to blot it; that which follows being
directly contrary to the former. They confess the Magistrate to be from the
Law of nature, and they cannot deny but that the Law of nature as it will be of
force to the end, so it was from the beginning of Mankind. But was Mankind
created in Multitudes? Did not God of one blood make all Nations of men? as
Saint Paul teaches us Act. 17. 26. We know that there was a time; when there
was but Adam and his wife, Cain and his brother in the world. I demand, was
there then a Magistrate? if they say there was not, they must deny that
Magistracy is from the Law of nature; if they say that there was, they must
unsay, that the Magistracy is in the multitude, unless they will make the
Accident to be before the Subject, and Magistracy in the Multitude, whilst yet
there was no multitude, in which that Magistracy should be. But if they will
make three a multitude, and Eve with Cain and Abel are those three, I shall
again inquire, why they shall rather place the power of government in them
than in Adam, since all they sprang from Adam, and even the light of nature
will guide us to this truth, that they which proceed from one ought to be
subject unto him from whom they proceed? There is a Divine, and he of some
note too, who having made the question, whether subjects were before Princes,
and ordained them; or Princes were before Subjects, and caused those to submit
to their Dominion: answers, that both in regard of nature and of Time,
Subjects were before Princes, and gave them their power. But to omit, that
these words Subject and Prince are Relative, and so neither can be before, or
after another, for as soon as ever there is a Prince, he is the Prince of some
Subjects; and as soon as ever there is a Subject, he is the Subject of some
Prince: to omit this I say, it seems when he wrote these words he had forgot
the first chapters of Genesis where Adam without doubt was before his grand
children, and it remains (an hard task for him to prove) that Adams
Grandchildren chose him to be the Prince over them. But if they shall reply,
that Adams power was rather Fatherly than Princely, such an answer will prove
no better than mere wind; for if it were so, yet as Saint Augustine has well
observed, Even as in speech one letter, so in government one Man est quasi
Elementum Civitatis and regni, the first element, the beginning of a City and
Kingdom; now one letter is before the whole speech, and the government of one
man is before the government of many: in brief, a Family is ruled before a
Kingdom. But it does not from hence follow, that a Kingdom is ruled quite
contrary to a Family; that whereas in a Family the Fathers authority does not
depend upon the Children, in a Kingdom the Princes authority should accrue to
him by his Subjects. Besides, a Fatherly power is but over one Family, a
Princely over many; they then who deny Adams Princely Authority must confine
his Authority to his own Family, must deny it to extend unto his childrens
children, which with what authority they do, it stands upon them to consider.
But if those first times are so far removed from us, that in the search of
them we can find nothing but obscurity, yet immediately after the Flood, we have
evident confirmations of this truth, that one Supreme Magistrate, (call him
King, or Judge, or Father etc. but one supreme Magistrate) is immediately from
God, that the Lord ordaining the power, ordained the numericall person, that
should execute it. Genesis 9. 6. we read Whosoever sheads man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. Here on all sides it is confessed, that there is an
institution, or at lest a Confirmation of the Magistrate. He that kills, must
be killed; but not rashly, nor by any one that lists, for the intent of the Law
is to prevent murder, and such an interpretation would increase it, one would
kill another, because he had killed his friend, an other would kill him for
killing, and so a third him, and thus in infinitum; then to prevent this
mischief, the murderer must be killed by him that is in authority, which
presupposes that there is one in Authority, who lawfully may kill him. But,
who were then in the world? Surely, only Noah and his Family, amongst these we
must seek the Magistrate who might lawfully shed the blood of the Murderer.
In Noah's wife and Sons it could not be, we cannot imagine them to have the
command of their Father, of necessity it must be in Noah, that alone Emperor
of the world. So that I hope it appears sufficiently by this, that as the
Magistracy is from God, so the Magistrate likewise; in particular by man shall
the murderers blood be shed, and, that man in those days was Noah. Is then
the Magistrate the Ordinance of God? How should this inflame the Magistrate to
all goodness, keep him back from all Evil, that being from God, he may be for
God likewise, that he may not by his bad life call in question the Author of
his Calling. Is he a Divine Ordinance? why then, as Solomon tells us, A Divine
Sentence should be in the lips of the King. Proverb. 16. 10. according to that
advice of Iehosaphat, he says, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for
man, but for the Lord. 2. Chr. 19. 6. and we may say, that they are therefore
to take heed what they do, because they judge not from man but from the Lord;
he only is the Author of their power. Again, is the Magistrate, and more
especially the government by one, the ordinance of God, how thankful ought we
to be unto God, that out of his tender mercy has bestowed this best and
primitive kind of government upon us? There is none amongst us ignorant, What
Peace, what riches, what safety, and beyond all, what a truth of the word, and
for what a space of time we have enjoyed this truth: and all these blessings I
dare say, next unto the merciful providence of God, we owe unto our form of
government. Not that I condemn other forms, no I condemn them not, I know
that there is no power but from God, only I desire leave to prefer our own,
wherein we have had the so long experience of multitudes of blessings, that all
Christendom put together, may well envy them, but hardly be able to show the
like; In a word, God has not dealt so with any nation; neither has any
Christian Kingdom so full a knowledge of his Favors: If then we shall despise
this government which I showed you that God did institute in Adam and Noah; if
contrary to the Israelites, who desired to be like to other nations by having a
King we shall desire to be like other nations by not having a King, but fancy
to our self a better form of rule, if either the nobles or the people were
the Magistrate; shall we not show our selves wondrous unthankful unto God?
shall we not deserve to lose his mercy for our disrepute of it? But you will
say, you are not so traitorously foolish, you find, and would still enjoy the
benefits of a Monarchy. Well, it is my desire, and hope that it is so, but I
remember what our late King was wont to say, No Bishop, no King; as if they,
who would pull down Bishops would pull down Kings likewise, and bring that
parity into the Commonwealth, on which they so doated in the Church. I am sure
the Anabaptists urge the same text, against the one as plausibly as they do
against the other. It shall not be so among you, to wit Rule and Superiority;
amongst Christians, says the Anabaptists; amongst Ministers says the
Diseiplinarian: yet both wide enough from Christ's meaning, which is not to
forbid Government, but Ambition; nor to deny them to rule at all, but so as the
Princes of the Gentiles. Let us then in Gods name submit unto Gods ordinance,
and that for the passionatenes of S. Peter's exhortation, he does woo us unto
this duty for the Lords sake: for whose sake will we do any thing, if we will
not do this for the Lords sake. For the Lords sake I say, which brings me to
the second General, for, that we should submit, is the will of God. But you
will say that this is to rack, and not to expound the Scripture, since S. Peter
does not say, that to submit, but that to put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men is the will of God. If there be any amongst you that shall be so
curiously idle, I would ask of them, what thing these brethren should do,
which being done would put to silence etc. surely, if they search the text,
they will find it to be no other than this, their submission unto every
ordinance of man. If then their submission to Authority will silence the
ignorant, who sees not, that he who affirms, that it is Gods will, that they
shall silence the ignorant, must imply necessarily, that they must submit to
Authority, since by that submission to Authority, the ignorance of the foolish
would be silenced. In a word, if God would have us stop the mouths of
Detractors, and the mouths of Detractors are only stopped by our obedience to
the Magistrate, it follows, that he will have us obedient to the Magistrate,
that we may stop the mouth of Detractors: So then God wills our obedience to
the Magistrate. Now the places wherein God has expressed this will of our
submission, I have already abundantly handled, and they require more your
practice than my repetition. But, is it the will of God, that we should submit?
then the chief ground of this submission is his will; were it not for his
will, for his command, it were in our choice, whether we would submit or no. I
desire you to observe this the rather, because that some late Divines would
bear us in hand, that Gods nature, and not his Will was the rule of our
goodness. Their meaning is, that then we may be said to be truly good, not
when we do what God commands, but when we strive to make our selves like God,
who has commanded us: as, we must be just because he is just, pure, because
he is pure, holy, because he is holy. But I conceive this to be at best but a
plausible error, I am sure, if we shall put this rule in practice, we shall
never perform the duty of this text. By their rule, we must do a thing,
because God does it, then likewise, we must not do a thing, because God does
it not; now God does not submit to any Magistrate, therefore we should not be
subject neither. A goodly rule, whereby Disobedience to Gods law will prove
conformity to Gods nature, whereby the Traitor will boast, that he is like unto
God. Do we not know, that there are diverse virtues, which we cannot perform
without a body? now in the exercising of them, it is impossible to be like unto
the nature of God, unless we will heretically, and blasphemously in our minds
paint out the Almighty with a body. If we abstain from unlawful lust, if we
use temperance in our diet, discretion in our speech, moderation in our
apparel, we shall exercise many virtues; yet who dares say, that in doing these
things we shall co^form our selves unto the nature of God? Besides, God
commanded Abraham to kill his Son, The Israelites to robb the Egyptians, and
by strong hand to dispossess the Canaanites of their Country, which for 400.
years, or more, they had quietly enjoyed, shall we imitat him in these
actions? Shall we kill our children, rob our neighbors, cast strangers out of
their possessions, and then discreetly sooth our selves, that we have been
imitators of God? How then can Gods nature, be the rule of ouractions, which
neither we can perfectly understand, and when we understand, we understand
thus far, that in many things it is to be admired and not imitated. But our
Savior has said, Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect. Matt. 5. 43. where he seems to propose the perfection of
our heavenly Father, as a pattern which our perfection should represent; and so
our goodness will prove to be nothing else, but a resemblance of his nature.
But, one Swallow they say, makes no Summer, neither does it follow, that
because in some particular respect, we are commanded to set God for our
pattern, that therefore he is to be our pattern in all things, and because
that by doing one duty, I must resemble him, therefore I do no good duty,
wherein I do not resemble him. Our Savior in that place exhorts us to the
love of our Enemies; this that he may the more easily allure us to, he presses
us with the example of God, who loves his Enemies thus far forth, that he
makes his Sun to shine upon the Evil, and the Just, Matt. 5. 45. Now this
would be strange, because we must do one act, and which is commanded us
likewise, that in so doing we may be like unto God; therefore our goodness is
not in doing that, which is commanded us, but only in being like unto God.
Rather let us hearken to our Savior, who says, If ye love me keep my
Commandments; keep my Commandments, he does not say Imitate my Father,
unless it be in some particular cases, where in imitating the Father we keep
his Commandments. To the Law and to the Testimony; these, as they are the
Canon of Faith, so they are the rule of goodness. In a word, the secret things
belong unto God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us; they
belong unto us, to make us good. Let us then in all things square our selves
unto this will of command; leave we unto God why he has enjoined it, and let
us be diligent to do that which enjoined, whether it be harsh or pleasant,
whether it will make us like or not like unto God, yet if it be his will, let us
do it, though they who are sent for the punishment of Evill-doers, and praise
of them that do well, should for our obedience punish us as Evill-doers, which
yet they will not do, for, it is against the end of their sending, which is
etc.

DEO GLORIA.
1 Peter 2. 14. For the punishment of Evill-doers, and for the praise of them
that do well.
WHen Isaacs servants dug one, and a second Well, the Heardsmen of Gerar
strove with the Heardsmen of Isaac, Genesis 26. 20, 21. but when they came to the
third, that which he called Roboboth, or Room, for that they strove not: the
name of the later shows us why they strove for the former, to wit, because in
the two other there was scarce room, it would not suffice for Isaac and for
them of Gerar likewise. Would you see the true Reboboth, the place where there
is room enough? cast your eye upon the Scripture, more particularly upon this
Text,; we have discoursed amply upon it already, and behold there is still
room for more; we have showed you that you must submit from the Author of
Authority, and now we must exhort you to the same duty from the the end of
Authority, which is, for the punishment, etc. But sent by Him for, etc. By
whom? Immediately before we read of the King, of him that is supreme. Is that
He that sends the Governors for the punishment, etc. or is not he himself
likewise sent unto the same end? But we read in Story, where Kings have
preferred diverse men only because they would prefer them, without any
respect at all unto this end; nay sometimes with a contrary respect, for the
praise of evildoers, and for the punishment of such as do well; and we are
not ignorant likewise that the King, the supreme Magistrate himself, is sent
for this end, for the punishment, etc. If then diverse Governors are not sent
for this end by the King, and if the king be sent himself for this end by God,
how comes it that it is here said of all inferior Magistrates, and of them
only that they are sent for, etc. For answer: Sent by him may be understood
for, sent by the Lord, which, though not immediately, yet not far off
neither, precedeth these words; and then the very Text will show us, that both
King and Governor, the Supreme and He that is sent, is sent from the Lord, and
howsoever they do too often violate it, yet that this was the end of their
sending: But if you had rather that, sent by him, should be understood of the
inferior Magistrate and the Prince, this excludes not the Prince himself to
be sent by God, and for this end too: neither does it enforce, that he always
proposes this end unto himself in their sending, but only that this is the
duty both of him that sends, and of him that is sent, They should punish,
etc. Or lastly, why may we not say, that though it be possible and too
frequent, that the chief Magistrate may mistake in the offender, as when he
takes the true Christian for an evill-doer, and thinks he does well which
persecuteth him, and so punishes the true Christian, and praises the
persecutor; yet he does aim at the discharge of his office, since he
punishes him whom he thinks to be an evill-doer, and he praises him, of
whom he is persuaded that he does well. Thus whether we refer these words,
Sent by him, to the Lord, which is the fuller sense; or to the King, which is
the better Grammar, neither interpretation will be absurd; and the inferior
Magistrate, though under a wicked Prince, may be said to be sent by him
likewise, for the punishment, etc. So then in respect of two kinds of people,
here is proposed to us a double end of the Magistrate: The two kinds of people
are, good, and evil; the two acts of the Magistrate proportioned unto these
people, are, praise, and punishment, The punishment of Evill-doers, etc. I
begin with the first, where we shall observe, that unto them who do ill,
besides those eternal torments which are to come, temporal punishments are
due likewise at the present. If this were not clear to the sense, it would
abundantly be collected from this place, the Magistrate will not neglect the
end of his sending, and he is sent for punishment; Tribulation and anguish upon
every soul of man that does evil, Romans 2. 9. upon every soul, and every
tribulation likewise; there is no person shall escape that will be wicked, and
he shall escape no kind of punishment; against such God has threatened, that
he will make the heaven as iron, and the earth as brass, Deuteronomy. 28. 23. that
there shall come as much rain from one, as much corn from the other, as you
may look for out of Brass and Iron. Here he threatens them with famine and
poverty; has God nothing else to do think you, but to enrich transgressors?
if thou art of the number of them, who go forward in their transgression, the
Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the Emerods, and with
the Scab, and with the Itch, whereof thou can not be healed, Deuteronomy. 28. 27.
Here he threatens such with sickness, which with the pain has shame
likewise: Who is not ashamed of Scabs and Itch? especially if they be lasting,
if they be such whereof he cannot be healed? and indeed what punishment is
fitter for the wicked? what can be more prudently just than this? For, why
should he be well who will not be good? why should he have health, that will
not have righteousness? But to come nearer to the words of the Text, to show
that they shall not only be temporally punished, but punished by the
Magistrate, Whosoever sheds man's blood by man shall his blood be shed. By man?
by what man? surely by the Magistrate, by the ordinance of man, otherwise one
man's fault would give another license to commit the same fact; and because one
private man had shed man's blood, another private man might shed his; and then
to what end should God have said, Thou shall not kill? It is the Magistrate
therefore that can kill the murderer, only He, but he without doubt; for, He
bears not the sword in vain, Rom* 13. 4. The sword is born in vain with which
we strike not, and who^ should he strike with that sword but the evill-doer? Is
it not fit that they whose evil is against man should be punished by man? now
the evil of the wicked is against man, some in act, and all of it by example.
Do thou hate and slander thy neighbor? thou do evil to him in act: do
thou spend too much time in good company, and art no man's foe but thine own as
they term it? thou do evil to him in example; the malicious man does him a
more sensible, but the drunkard an harm likewise: so likewise the luxurious,
the proud, the Schismaticke, the perfidious, or what other vice you can name
contrary unto sound doctrine, whether it be by act or example, it matters not,
still they do harm unto men; and shall not men punish them then? Shall Achan
trouble Israel, and shall not the Lord by Israel trouble Achan this day?
Joshua 7. 25. Again, what can be more wisely done than to inflict upon an
offender the punishment which he most fears? Now the wicked stand most in awe
of temporal punishments. The Schools have noted well, that as all sin is
from, so all punishment ought to be against the will. Let the Act be never so
bad, yet if my will subscribe not to it, it is more my misery than my sin; as
if a madd man should kill his Father. And let the torture be never so hideous,
yet if I delight in it, it is in it self a torture but to me no punishment;
laesio, but not ultio, as they speak; an harm but not a revenge: Now they are
only these temporal punishments of imprisonment, loss of members, and life,
which the wicked stand in fear of, which come against their wills; they are
frighted with death when they will be damned. There is a pretty strange place
in the Psalms, that, According to thy fear so is thy wrath; or, as you
usually read it, Even as a man fears, so is thy displeasure, Psalm 90. 11.
Is Gods wrath no greater than our fear, do his punishments depend upon our
apprehension of them? then if we fear but a little, GOD has but a little
wrath; if we have no apprehension of it at all, there is no punishment at all
for us to suffer? who then would not bless himself in his evil acts? who
would not strive for obduratior that so he might be without fear, if being
without fear he should be without punishment* then the best way would be to
turn Libertine whose chief perfection was, Omnes scrupulos abjicere, Bell. l.
2. ca. 2. de Amiss. Great. to cast away all scruples; and indeed who would not
do so, if by so doing he might cast away all judgment, which our
timorousness did bring upon us, and not Gods vengeance? We must understand
therefore that David speaks of Gods wrath, displeasure and judgments, not as
they are in themselves, but as they are in the conceit of the ungodly: in truth
his anger is beyond the sufferance of Angels, but it is conceited by the wicked
like a fire of thorns, which with much noise does soon go out. Were there
then nothing else but the fear of hell to restrain them, who could live with
safety by them, since they fear not that at all? Of necessity therefore there
must be somewhat else, which, though in it self it be nothing near so
terrible, yet in their conceit has more power to keep them in. I remember a
Story to this purpose in Justin, A whole Nation went out at once to war, and
left at home only their wives and slaves, and in their absence their slaves
marry their wives, and enjoy all that they had left, so that at their return
in stead of a welcome they had a repulse from their own houses; to make short,
Masters and Slaves come to battle, where the Slaves were hard enough for their
Masters: in brief, against the next day the Masters take counsel, and in stead
of coming into the field with swords, every man had provided his whip ready;
upon the unexpected sight of these, the slaves instantly ran away, as being
frighted with that, with which they were so often before punished. The sword is
more terrible than the whip, yet those slaves run away from the whip, which
could not be frighted with the sword; and damnation is infinitely more
fearful than any torture of the Magistrate, and yet many may abstain from
evil for fear of those tortures, which care not for damnation; which will
run upon the sword, but away from the whip. Lastly, S. Austine has given a
good reason why temporal punishments should be inflicted on the ungodly; for,
says he, if nothing should be punished in this world, Gods justice would not
be known at all; and if all things should be punished here, then God would
not be thought to be just hereafter: that therefore the world might know his
justice, he causes diverse to suffer in this world, especially by him that is
sent for punishment. But then you will say, they are punished twice for the
same fault, and what justice can there be in that? I reply, that every offense
in it self merits eternal damnation, and so, that no man can be punished
twice for the same fault, since if for one fault only he should be punished
for ever, every days torment would be but a part of his one punishment. Is it
so then that unto them who do evil, temporal punishments are due, and that
from the Magistrate; what then shall we say to those mild Magistrates that
will not punish, but rather reward the evill-doers? sure these do not
consider, that in the Arc there was laid up as well Aarons rod, as a pot of
Manna; why therefore will they have nothing but sweetness, but Manna for their
Inferiors, when a Rod will be needful for the wicked? The old Egyptians
figured GOD by an Eye and by an Hand, by an Hand as well as by an Eye, and by
an Hand immediately under the Eye: If the Eye did signify his Providence, it
nothing hinders that the Hand should intimate his severity; God is an eye
therefore he can see all wickedness, and God is an hand underneath that eye,
and therefore he will punish that wickedness which he does see; why then
should any Magistrate whom GOD has called god, imitate him but in one of
these? why should he content himself with the eye, when the hand is expected
from him, and think it enough that he can find out lewd practices, if it be
not his intent to be revenged of them? A wise King (says Solomon) scatters
the wicked, and brings the wheel over them, Prove. 20. 27. This scattering
proceeds from his wisdom, not from his cruelty; there may be terror, but
there is no injustice in such a wheel. If a body be full of corrupt humors,
will you say it is cruelty to take a Purge? or, if the blood be overheated, is
he an enemy that opens a vein? These then should know, that necessary severity
is the commonwealths purge, and seasonable execution is the opening of the
kingdoms vein. Did David's guard consist only of the Pelethites? did not the
Cherethites belong unto that number also? as you may read, 2 Samuel 15. 18. A
Pelethite signifies a deliverer, and a Cherethite a killer; now David's guard
consists as well of the killers as of the deliverers. Let those Magistrates
then consider with themselves, whether half of David's guard be enough; whether
it will suffice to have the Pelethite without the Cherethite, the deliverer
without the killer. Indeed it was an old saying, Romani ignosce^do crescunt;
The Romans obtain their Empire by their mercy; their pardoning of others
advances the^, and it holds good still: the Romans increase by their pardons,
their indulgences do principally reflect homewards, and they would not be so
rich, were they not so gracious. Indeed mercy raised the^, but not to punish
incorrigible evildoers, is not mercy, was not their mercy: had it bin, what S.
Peter complains in the Church, would have bin verified in their co^mo^wealth,
Qua^ta putamus impunitas ista parturiret punienda; How many things that ought
to be punished would that want of punishment have brought forth? After a great
drought Elijah at length heard the sound of abundance of rain, but it was
after he had destroyed all the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 42. to teach them
that are in authority, that if they will look for favor, they must, where it
is deserved, show severity; if they will have rain, they must when occasion
serves, give blood. But, so they shall show themselves cruel men, men of
blood? No such matter; let them hear what the same Elijah says in another
place, If I am a man of God let fire come down from heaven and consume thee
and thy fifty, 2 Kings 1. 10. as if the consuming of the wicked were the only
testimony of a man of God; as if such a punishment did make one not an harsh,
not a cruel, but a divine man. And if they are thus reproveable who will not
punish, what are they who will reward the evill-doer* as some have set a price
upon drunkenness; the Spartans rewarded theft, if it were cunning, and the
thief was rather punished for his bodging than for his felony; because he was
unskilful, not because he was unjust. And no doubt many such there are at this
day, who invert their office, who punish and praise, but the contrary way, who
punish those whom they should praise, and praise those whom they should punish;
as too many are suffered and encouraged, and that by some of the civil
Magistrates in their opposition to the Churches discipline: but these should
think of the doom of Ely, his children he corrupted not, neither did he
exhort them unto evil to be done, neither did he reward them for doing it,
nay, he reproved them likewise, and that with those words which are full of
gravity and holiness; yet because he went no farther, because he so remembered
he was a father that he forgot he was a Judge, the Lord would suffer him to be
no longer Judge nor father; and so because he would not be troublesome, he
proves pernicious to his children: His reproof is not enough; and do thou
think that thy soothing, thy flattering of men in their offenses is not too
much? especially since his weakness may be somewhat excused by fatherly
affection, which, as Chrysostom says, is a kind of natural tyranny; when
thine can have no other name but a devilish corruption. Again, must the
Magistrate punish the wicked? why then let me entreat all those who as yet are
not reformed, to see in what a dangerous estate they are that are in no safety,
whether they look up to the heaven, or remove out their eyes from the earth? if
they look upward, there they may see God writing grievous things against them,
sealing their iniquity in a bag, and treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath for them; if they look downward, there the Magistrate has prisons,
rackes, haltars and swords for them, what then shall they do, when for being
of the world God hates them, and yet the world does not love these that are of
the world? Indeed if they could persuade God to be like unto them, which the
Psalmist says they foolishly imagine, they then needed not to care what man
could do unto them, or if they could effect that the Magistrate would not
punish them, it would prove a kind of Repreeve unto them, though no pardon;
but now that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, and the Magistrate on
earth bears not his sword in vain, when the one will judge, and the other
must punish, in what straits is the evill-doer placed? A child, if either the
father or mother be fond of it, will be wanton, but if both frown, it will
be ruled; nay, a dog, as long as there is any to set him on, will be
violent, but quiet enough if he see all against him: The wicked then are more
sottish than Children, or the very beasts; who, though God and man oppose them,
will not give over to be wicked. Lastly, must the Magistrate punish the
wicked? is it the end of his Office? was he ordained for that purpose?
wherefore then should the wicked be offended with the Magistrate for punishing
of them? He is a madman who would be angry with the fire because it did burn,
the water because it does moiste^, the earth because it does dry; and the
reason is, because drying, moystning and burning were the end of the earth, the
water and the fire; they are made for those purposes: Certainly then his
judgment is to be called in question, who is angry with the Magistrate for
his just punishment; when one end of the Magistrate is to punish justly. Great
Malefactors on the Scaffold and the Block, forgive their Executioners; and
why? because they do nothing but what they are commanded: Is it sufficient for
their forgiveness that they are commanded by the Magistrate, and is it not
more sufficient for the forgiveness of the Magistrate, that he is commanded by
God to punish thee? Whosoever the^ by his deserts, whether for drunkenness,
filching, or faction has bin punished by the civil or Ecclesiastical
Magistrate, let him not blame them, but his own self; and with the good
Thief, Luke 23. 41. affirm, We indeed justly suffer, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds, but this Ordinance of man has done nothing amiss for
punishing us according to our deeds. And if Magistrates are not to be hated for
punishing, neither are they, who, by their Office and place, are to certify
the Magistrate of our offenses, that they may punish us, since the Magistrates
Office is to punish the evill-doer, and if he do not know him, he cannot
punish him; and, unless he be informed, he cannot know him: And yet how many
are there, that if after all other ways tried, they are complained of to the
higher powers, suppose it be for faction, for dividing the Church, for making
new Parishes of their own head, etc. are so far from reforming themselves,
that they hate him who would reform them; and cannot endure neither the
Magistrate which is to punish, nor him who informed the Magistrate: If any such
be here, I would advise them, that if they cannot take away their hatred, yet
they would place it rightly, and that against their offense, that so they may
be bettered, and not against the Magistrate, that so they may increase their
judgment. Well then, the Magistrates duty it is to punish: But here you will
first ask me, why the Apostle when he speaks of punishment and praise,
sets the punishment of the evill-doer, before the praise* etc. which seems to
be quite contrary to Gods method? The Angel cries in the Revelation, Hurt not
the earth, nor the Sea, nor the trees, before we have sealed the servants of
our God in the foreheads, Revel. 7. 3. Here is sealing before hurting, here is
a preventing of the harm of the godly, before God will inflict any punishment
upon the wicked: And so, the Angel can do nothing till Lot be out of Sodom;
the good man must be praised, must be delivered before the punishment of
those evill-doers. Why then does not the Magistrate imitate God? why does he
punish first? it may be it is to intimate the corruption of the subject, who is
so bad, that if he have a Magistrate, the first thing that that Magistrate can
do, is to punish; or, to express the nature of many Magistrates, who had
rather be feared than loved, Quibus Gratiaon^^i, etc. as the Historian
observes, who, whenever they will praise, they will first be sure to
punish. Again, is punishment due to evill-doers, and but praise to the good?
but punishment is somewhat real, when praise is nothing but a word; are words
sufficient reward for the well-doers? I take it the Holy Ghost does thus
express himself, either because that the covetousness of great ones is such,
that at most they do but praise, they do not bountifully reward the
well-doer; or, he so speaks to raise up the wel-doer to the expectation of an
heavenly Crown, and in that respect he would have him content himself,
though for all his good deeds upon earth he have no other reward than praise:
Or lastly, praise may be taken for reward in general, since, whosoever is
rewarded for any good act, is, in that reward, praised; the Magistrate and all
good men praise him whom they see worthy of a reward for goodness: and thus to
reward the good, the Magistrate was ordained: where I shall be very brief. This,
Scripture, reason, Christian and Heathen Authority make good; all agree in this
verdict, that the great are to respect the good, that the Ordinance of man is
to praise the well-doer. what then shall we think of those great ones, who are
so far from praising, that they disgrace; from rewarding that they injure the
well-doer? Such as Caligula, who put his friend to death for giving him good
counsel, Qui officiu^ ut co^tumelia^ excepit, says Philo; who esteemed his
duty to be no other than contempt: or such as Heliogabulus, who being himself
given to incredible sensuality, and willing to bring up his Successor in the
like, banished all the Philosophers from Court, upon a pretense that they did
debauch and corrupt him, as if luxury had been the only prevention, and the
sole way to be spoiled were to be bettered: Such have forgot their end, which
is to reward, and praise, not to injure nor dishonor goodness. And must
well-doers be praised by greatness? who then would not be a well-doer, a
meek, a peaceable, a conscionable man, if not that he may be saved, yet at
least that he may be praised; if not for the good hopes from his God, yet for
the good word of the humane Ordinance? Will thou not be afraid of the power?
do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same, Romans 13. 3.
there is no medium between fear and praise; the Magistrate frights him whom
he does not honor, and he must honor all that do well. Do well then, and
that because in so doing thou shall be praised, because in so doing the
Magistrate will praise thee. Who is there that is not affected with praise? who
is there almost, who when he cannot be drawn to any act by profit, cannot
easily be persuaded unto it by glory? in so much that Tacitus observes of
Thrasea Pato, otherwise a very rigid man, that he was somewhat, desirous of
glory; Quando etiam sapientibus cupido gloriae movissima exuitur; where he
affirms, that they who care for nothing else, care for this. Oh then, why
will we not strive to be welldoers, when we shall be praised for for it,
which you should strive to be if we were dispraised for it? but for it we
shall be praised by Princes; Princes which did sit and speak against David,
shall speak for us if we do meditate in Gods Statutes. Many seek the Rulers
favor, Proverbs, 29. 26. It is there an accusation, but thus it may be
advice, if that favor be to be obtained by goodness: in the mean time it
shows us what all desire, and how joyful Haman will be the only subject
that is invited to Queen Esthers banquet. But yet if man should neglect thee,
which yet he ought not to do, he was ordained for this end, to praise; yet
GOD will never fail thee; with him there is always a reward for the
righteous: To him therefore, the Father, etc.

DEO GLORIA.
1 Pet. 2. 15. That with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men.
THE motives by which S. Peter would persuade to obedience, are drawn from
Heaven and earth, from God and from man. From God, Submit for the Lords sake:
from man, and him either above you, the Magistrate, which we have handled
already; or, against you* your enemy, which we are now to handle: or lastly,
your own selves, of which hereafter. Now then we must obey, and that for our
enemies sake: as if S. Peter should have said, Has God ordained the
Magistracy? has he ordained it for such necessary ends, and will you not yet
submit? why then, where reason will not prevail, let fear do it; if you will
not submit for the Lord, submit atlest for your enemies sake -- Aliquisque malo
siet usus in illo; for your enemies sake I say, that so by well-doing ye may put
to silence the ignorance of those foolish men. Where we shall observe three
propositions. 1. That foolish men are commonly speaking evil of the good. 2.
That the ground of this evill-speaking, is their ignorance. 3. That we must
silence them; and how? 1. Foolish men, etc. It is clear from the Text, Prop. 1.
we are commanded to silence them, but we cannot silence them who do not
speak; as blindness presupposes sight, and silence of necessity implies a
former speaking. The foolish then speak evil, etc. Be merciful unto me, O
God, says the Prophet; and why? for man would swallow me up; Psalm. 56. 1. the
word in Hebrew signifies, does breathe against me: what is this breathing, but
his evill-speaking? and it is so terrible to him as if that breathing were a
swallowing up. They made me pay that which I owed not, Psalm. 67. 4. The Fathers
interpret the place of Christ, and make this the meaning, that he which knew no
sin was made sin for us; he owed no punishment, to wit, for himself, and
yet he paid it. This exposition I reprove not, and yet the words may make for
our present purpose. What they speak of punishment in general, and of Christ,
give me leave to apply to defamation in particular, and of the faithful; they
deserve no evil speeches, yet they shall not want them; they shall pay those
bad words which they do not owe: Otherwise, if it were not thus, if it were
not so lamentable to be thus, the Psalmist would never have complained, My
soul is amongst Lions, and I lie even amongst them that are set on fire, even
the sons of men. Here you see the sons of men are put in the last, in the
aggravating place; as if it were more dangerous to lie amongst men than amongst
Lions, and why so? truly, because their teeth are spears and arrows, and
their tongue a sharp sword, Psalm. 57. 4. It is not enough that their tongue
be a weapon, unless it be weapons, and that not of defense only, but of
offense also nay, it must offend both at hand and a far off likewise: it
contents them not, that it is a sword to hurt them that are near, unless it
be a spear and an Arrow which can harm at a farther distance. Indeed, what
distance can secure us from it, when they set their mouth against the Heavens,
and their tongue walks throughout the earth; in so much that a man can almost
as well hide himself from Gods presence, as from its malice. Indeed such men
show that they are of near kin to the Serpent, whose chiefest mischief is
in his mouth. Take out the teeth of a Snake, and you may put it in your bosom;
make it so gentle, and tender Ladies will make a Playfellow of their terror:
And so if these men's tongues were gone, they would be far more tractable; as
long as those remain, they account them their own, and they will use them at
their pleasure. In a word, SOLOMON says, Every fool will be meddling, as
otherwise oftentimes, so always with his tongue. Does not Joseph's Mistress
impute that fault to Joseph, whereof her self is guilty? does she not speak
against his lust, whereof she was desirous? The Hebrew servant which thou have
brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me, Genesis 39. 13. where I take no
notice of her womanly malice, or cunning, that would make her husband Author
of all the mischief, ( Which thou broughtest unto us; here would have been no
mischief, had not thou brought it in:) to pass by that, I say, you see she
would make her husband believe, that whosoever had brought him in, had
consulted shame to his house; had brought in an Adulterer, and not a servant:
And yet by the way, see how she betrayeth her self in her own speech; how
she accuses her self in that solemn speech wherein she would lay the fault
on Joseph: To mock, to deceive one, is to do that which he expected not, or
not to do that which he expected. Potiphars wife then confessing that Joseph
came in to mock her, does withal confess, that he came in not to do that
which she expected; now she expected, she hoped that he would have committed
folly with her; so that in accusing she absolveth him: his coming in had
been guilty, if he had not come in to mock her. How ready is the Devil to
speak ill, at least to mince, to extenuate Jobs well-doing? Does Job serve God
for naught? as who should say, A great piece of service! if he serves thee,
thou rewardest him; nay, thou rewardest him first before he serves thee; had
thou no reward thou should have no service: Have thou not made an hedge about
him? says he, Verse 10. Does he serve thee? certainly he can do no
otherwise, thou have taken order that he cannot be a fugitive, that he
cannot run away from thy service, thy hedge will keep him well enough in for
that. Nay, all that tedious discouse of Jobs friends harps only upon this,
they conclude his wickedness from his soars; they see he is exceeding
miserable, and hence infer, that he must needs be exceeding sinful. And
though words are wind, and quickly fly away, yet these words remain even at
this time; otherwise how should that of S. James hold good, that a bad tongue
sets on fire the whole course or wheel of nature, as it is in the Greek, if
that part of the wheel which runs in our time were free from it? But we see,
that if a man oppose faction, foolish people will give out, that he opposes
religion; if he cause some seditious persons to be punished for hearing,
where they should not, it shall be given out, that he is an enemy of the
Word, that he punishes them for hearing. But here we must observe, that all
are not foolish who speak evil of others, no more than all are Saints of whom
evil is spoken. Of a man that is a perpetual drunkard, swearer, or
irreformably seditious, good cannot be spoken, if we speak the truth; and
such cannot with any color challenge righteousness unto them upon this
ground, because they are spoken against: I therefore point at this, because
there are a generation in the world that do much abuse this doctrine, that
when ever they hear that foolish men speak against the righteous, they take
it for granted, that they are the righteous, and those are foolish wicked
people that speak against them, whilst yet in the mean time they live in
manife opposition against authority, and when they are censured one day, for a
fault, like the drunkard in the Proverb, the next day they commit it again. If
you tell these, that these courses tend unto schism, their reply is, That by
that which we call schism they worship the God of their Fathers; if we say,
they are seditious for doing so, oh say they, men will speak evil of the
righteous, as of evill-doers; thus applying all those Scriptures, which the
Apostles, in a good cause, have used against the Jews and Heathen, in their
bad cause against Christian and Ecclesiastical Magistrates. But do not they
see that they say no other thing than any damnable Heretic would allege for
himself in the like case? Tell the Anabaptist, Familist or Papist, that most
of their opinions have a strong sent of heresy; what will be readier in their
mouths than, You call it heresy, but we know that it is the worship of the
God of our Fathers? so then you see that it is not enough to urge the Text, but
to have a title, a just right to urge it, which I deny that any seditious
Archdisciplinaria^ has; the reason is manifest: that falsely called heresy was
the true worship of God, but they shall never be able to make their schism to
be any part of the worship of God; for indeed, how specious soever, it is
against it: I instance in voluntary absenting after admonition from their own
Church: God has not commanded the^ to absent themselves, therefore their
absenting is no part of his worship; and the Magistrate has commanded them to
present themselves there, which nevertheless they will not do, which must
needs be against Gods worship, since that is against his worship which is
against his command, and it is against his command to disobey the Magistrate.
When then we shall see such hate to be reformed, they must pardon us if we
call them what they are, I hope they will not count us foolish, if we shall
say, that in so doing they are evildoers: But, though this Text makes nothing
for the factious, it makes for the good, they have the greater incourageme^t
to persuade themselves that they are good, because they are spoken against by
foolish men; why then should they be dejected with such speeches* such
speeches are but part of their momentany affliction, and that petite affliction
shall work a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory. In Exodus 24.
10. God sets his feet upon a paved work of a Sapphire stone, the word in Hebrew
is, Of a Brick, which had the shape of a Sapphire stone. Wherefore was this
apparition of God? surely, for the comfort of his people, to show that after
their bondage they should have glorious liberty; their Brick with which they
were plagued in Egypt should be changed into Sapphire stones: He suffered
thee to hunger, and he fed thee with Manna, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Why after hunger does
he presently make mention of Manna? surely for no other reason but either
because that hunger was Manna, that affliction was a blessing to the^; or
because that hunger should get the^ a better stomach to their Manna, their
affliction should make them only more sensible of their blessing. And obseve
the phrase, it is, He suffered thee to hunger, but he fed thee, etc. as if the
cross were but by permission, only the blessing were Gods act. And here we
may be the more ravished with that mercy, which would not so much as suffer our
hunger, if it were not to feed us with Manna, he would not permit that men
should speak evil of us for his names sake, but to the end that he might
make us blessed. And hereupon it is, that whereas we read, Deep calls upon
deep, because of thy water-spouts, Psalm. 42. 7. which are expounded for
miseries and crosses, it may be read, Deep, etc. because of thy Pipes, thy
music, as if miseries to Gods children were to no other end, than that they
should be his music. David says of the wicked, especially of his
evill-speakers, The Plowers ploughed upon my back, Psalm. 129. 3. You will
easily understand this of the tormenting of David; the ground is as it were
tormented when it is torn, when it is ploughed up; but what if it be for the
comforting of David? It will seem strange, but yet the ground would not be
fruitful were it not ploughed, and David would not have been so good, had he
not been afflicted; thus to injure was to right him, thus to tear him was to
make him whole: And therefore Chrysostom wittily calls the wicked, The
husbandmen of the righteous, Hom. 4. ad pop. Ant. the Husbandman ploughes the
ground, these the righteous; ploughing makes the ground fruitful, affliction
the righteous; and will any man be dismayed with that by which he is made the
more fruitful? But if foolish men speak against thee, beware that thou do
not become one of those foolish men, and speak evil again, that thou may
give him as good as he brings, as too commonly and foolishly they use to say.
The same Chrysostom says, A woman dispraiseth thee, will thou turn woman? as
if to use or return bad speeches were to fall down from the nobleness of our
Creation, and to new mould us into women; and therefore David when he would
reprove Abishai, who whetted him unto revenge against Shimei, for his
evill-speaking, says, What have I to do with you ye sons of Zerviah? 2 Samuel 16. 10. he calls them from their mother, not from their father; to show,
that they who are too impatient of evil speeches, have too much of the mother
remaining in them. We read that Annah suffered harsh speeches from Peninnah,
we do not read that she did return them; we hear the one objecting
barrenness unto her, and we find it true too, but it is of reproaches not of
children. Neither is it any excuse for thee, that another begun first; for if
one rail, and thou railest against him, what difference is there between you,
but only in the time? he first, and thou after, but both of you do rail.
Now Tertullian has acutely said, Nulla in maleficio ordinis ratio; God has no
regard of order in evill-doing; thou should not do ill, no though thou be
the last that does it. Does this seem strange? then that of S. Basil will
amaze us, in his judgment, He that returns evil speeches is more faulty
than he that began to speak evil; for, says he, such an one has time to
consider the deformity and ugliness of the fault in another, and yet
nevertheless he dares go forward in it, in so much that he uses his enemy
for his teacher; (he does that which he sees him do before him) nay, he
carries his image in his countenance, whose hatred in his heart, that so he
may be as it were a looking-glass of his adversary. And indeed, bad words
are as burning coals, put one by it self upon a pavement, and he will do
little hurt, but add others to him, they will flame then; who then is the
occasion of the flame but he that added the other coals? So, let there be a
bad word unanswered, there is one single burning coal which will do no great
hurt, but reply, you add many other burning coals, you are the occasion of the
mischief. Chrysostomes similitude is excellent, Hom. 11. in 1. Epist. ad
These. If two doors directly against the other stand open, and the wind blow
fiercely, shut one of them and thou shall take away all the power of the wind:
There are two doors, says he, thine enemies mouth, and thine own; shut
thine own and thou have taken away the greatest power of that stormy wind and
tempest. Again, who would willingly do that which his enemy would have him?
now thine enemies desire is to grieve thee, and to make thee confess that thou
art grieved, Idcirco quis te laedit ut doleas, quia fructus laedentis in dolor
laesi est, says Tertullian, If the^ all the benefit of the hurter be in the
grief of him that is hurt, grieve not, rave not, and thou have made him lose
all the benefit that he hoped for. And in this respect Hagar is to be
preferred before Sarah, for she by her harsh speeches amongst the rest, caused
her to fly; but Hagar being demanded of the Angel the reason of her flight,
gives no bad word of her Mistress; she does not say, She has turned me out of
doors, but, I went away from my Mistress; as if she had rather confess her
self a fugitive, than her Mistress cruel. Let then the so often before
mentioned Chrysostom close this point, where he exhorts unto suffering, his
words shall be mine, Non exeas, etc. in this case of evill-speaking, Go not
forth to fight, and thou have overcome, strive not and thou art crowned. But
then, what discomfort is here to those evill-speakers? They should consider,
that even Heathen Philosophers term those things which are the fountains of
these speeches, Passions, and not actions; as envy and malice the ground of
evil speaking in their language are passions of the mind; that we might
learn, that when ever we were envious and malicious, etc. we our selves did
rather suffer than inflict harm upon others. Was not the Viper burnt that
leaped upon Paul's hand? the Text says, He shook it off into the fire: and all
these viperous mouths which are filled with the venom of evillspeaking, they
may touch Paul, but they shall burn themselves, and that with fire
unquenchable, if they repent not; since we read, that the reward of such
tongues is a sharp Arrow, to show the swiftness, and hot-burning coals; or,
out of the Hebrew, Juniper coals, to show the lasting of their judgment. In a
word, the good man is called a stone, a lively stone, as I have already showed;
now they that bite a stone hurt their own teeth, and not that which they would
bite; they are but Curs, and those foolish ones too, that will wear their teeth
out against stones. For shame or fear then at last, leave off this evil
speaking, especially since by continuing it thou shall but show thy self a
fool, since the principal foundation of it is but ignorance. 2. Proposition.
Here I could show Prop. 2.
you their ignorance of God, and how they opened their mouth against the
Saints, their ignorance of themselves likewise, who, as Esau for Jacob, so
themselves likewise are made for the service, and nor for the contemning of the
faithful; but I will now only insist upon their ignorance of the godly, we
need seek no farther for the ground of all their evil speeches. Now it is
most manifest that they do not know them; God, we know, does esteem them as
gold, as Jewels, as precious stones, nay, he has called them his peculiar
treasure, such of whom he glories, and that to Satan the accuser of the
brethren. We find that the fine linen in the Revelation is the
righteousness of the Saints; how then does God respect their persons, to whom
he gives such rich clothes? How shall not they which are arrayed with this
soft clothing, be of the Palace of the geat King? Thus it is manifest he
respects them highly, when on the other side the world thinks of none so
basely as of them; they account them worms and not men, the outcasts of the
people, the off-scourings of the earth: If they see them sorrowful, they say
they are disdainful; if they see them merry, they affirm then they are madd,
all their actions shall be interpreted the wrong way; and what would not be
taken notice of in another, shall be sufficient to condemn them. What can be
more contrary than the estimation which God and the world have of the same
people? Now we know, that the judgment of the Lord is most true, (and
therefore diverse times the Holy Ghost in Scripture, when he would affirm that
a thing was done indeed, affirms, that it was done before the Lord, as, Noah
walked uprightly before the Lord, etc. that is, he was upright indeed, he
appeared so in his eyes, which no affection can blind:) so then the judgment
of the Lord being true, and their judgment of the same persons being so
thwart, so co^tradictory to the judgment of God, it appears that their
judgment is most false; if God knows, then certainly they must needs be
ignorant of the righteous. S. Paul says of the Jews, that had they known
him, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory; and we may say of the
wicked, that had they not been ignorant of them, they would never have so
grossly defamed the most beloved servants of the Lord of glory, nor reproached
the footsteps of Gods anointed. Oh the glory of the righteous, of whom no man
could speak ill if he did know them; unto whose fame nothing is required but
their knowledge! whom, whosoever reproacheth, must in that reproach his own
self, must confess his own ignorance* But, oh the folly of the wicked, which
will hate them of whom they are ignorant! who will open their mouth to the
contumely of those, to whose praise (if they knew them) their mouths ought to
be more open* We know that they do not know the righteous, and yet we know
that they speak evil of those whom they do not know; Cum oderint and
ignorent, as Tertullian, they hate those of whom they are ignorant, when they
should rather hate their own ignorance, and strive to love and know them. But
was ignorance the ground of their evil speeches? surely, we shall bewray our
own ignorance, if we lay no other ground for them: without doubt, living
together, they could not choose but know their meekness, their patience, their
contentedness; and therefore when they spoke against them, they spoke of
purpose, not of ignorance. Saint Paul says, He obtained mercy because he did
it (that is, he persecuted the Church) out of ignorance: not that ignorance
was the cause of mercy, not that GOD therefore did know S. Paul, because S.
Paul would not know his people; but because his ignorance being not affected,
excused him a ta^to, though not a toto, because he should not have obtained
mercy so easily, had he done it of purpose, and not of ignorance. Why then of
these enemies of goodness is no more said than that their enmity was
ignorance? Perchance because S. Peter would show that he did slight them; as
who should say, They speak grievous things against you, but take them not to
heart, they are but fools for their labor, and you should suffer fools
gladly. The heart of the foolish proclaims foolishness, Prove. 12. 23. It is
most certain, that what ever comes into their hearts they will proclaim,
but who cares for a fools proclamation? or rather it is our Apostles charity
makes him speak thus, and not his indignation; it is unlikely but that
amongst so many evill-speakers, some speak evil out of malice; and yet
because he would not seem to despair of any of them, he says, that they
do it out of ignorance. When God had commanded Ezekiel to speak to the
rebellious house, he again commands him to speak to them, And be not thou
rebellious like that rebellious house, Ezekiel. 2. 8. S. Peter, where he taxes
their evill-speaking, speaks but mildly of it; as if God had said unto him,
Be not thou a bad speaker like unto these bad speakers. Does Saint Peter use
the Heathen so gently, and shall we be harsh unto Christians? does he make
the best of the enemies actions, and shall we make the worst of our brethrens?
Rather, if they do an indifferent act, let us think they do it out of a good
mind; and if we see that it be bad, let us not make the worst of it; let us not
say, quite contrary to S. Peter, that it was out of malice, when, for ought we
know, it was but out of ignorance. But though we must not make the worst of our
adversaries, we must do the best that we may for our selves; we must silence
it howsoever, whether it be from malice, or but simple ignorance. 3.
Proposition. The Prop. 3.
word in Greek is (...), which signifies to muzzle, and is used by the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 18. We must not muzzle the Ox which treads out, but here
we must muzzle those wild Bulls which tread down the corn: for (...), which we
render ignorance, Clement Alexand. reads (...), which we may render, work;
as if, either those foolish men did work nothing but ignorance, or, if we did
well, we should thereby take order that they should do nothing, that they
should be without work: Not that we must use any violence against them, like
him that sealed up the mouth of one that railed against him; not that we must
strive for the last word, and gain the victory by our good sides, not by our
good manners; no, this silencing must not be physical, but moral; we must
do such good acts, and so often, that they can speak no more against us, than
if indeed they were become speechless; and this the Text tells us is effected
by well-doing, (...). It was well-doing made them first speak against us for
envy; and now they must be silenced by the luster, by the frequency of our
well-doing. Now well-doing is either taken for a particular duty, for our
obedience to the Magistrate, or universally, for our faith, hope, patience, for
all our duties both toward God or man. If we understand the word in the first
sense (which is most litterall and shall be hereafter proved at the next Verse)
we may conceive how highly God esteems of our loyal submission, how he
counts it in effect all our duty; how he terms it well doing indefinitely, as
who should say, If we did so, we could not do ill. But if we understa^d the
word in the second sense, we shall then find, that only virtuous and religious
actions, and all of the^ too, (they will not serve the turn single) can
silence the ignorance of foolish men. Would thou then not be spoken evil
of? can thou not endure to hear disgraceful speeches? do well, do nothing
else but well, do it constantly; upon these terms God is not silent, that
thine enemy will be silent. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his
enemies to be at peace with him, Pro. 16. 7. and surely they will not speak
evil of them, with whom they are at peace. In vain then do thou strive,
whilst thou art yet bad, by Authority, power of friends, or by bribes to stop
the mouth of thy detractors; thou must never look to compass that by
evill-doing, which is the reward of doing well. But I told you that the word
here did not so much signify to silence, as to muzzle; indeed the difference
is not great, for he that is muzzelled will keep silence, and yet some there
is. We do use commonly to muzzle the mouths of such beasts of which we are
afraid, as of Bears, and such like; which whilst they are so held, are
tractable, but dangerously unruly if they get loose. What then will you think
of those who shall unmuzzle them? will you not suppose, that they thoroughly
deserve all the inconveniences which they shall suffer,? And yet this is the
case of every negligent Christian, of the secure Professor: only well-doing,
universal, perpetual well-doing muzzles up the mouths of these beasts: If
then we fail in either of these respects, if we do some bad actions; who
sees not then that we unmuzzle them, that we open their mouth to our own
devouring. And this may be the reason that GOD would punish David, even where
he pardoned him; in one Verse we read, Thou shall not die; and in the next
Verse, Nevertheless, because thou have given great occasion to the enemy of
the Lord to blaspheme, thy child, etc. shall surely die, 2 Samuel 12. 14. As if
God could have freely forgiven him, had he not caused the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme; as if it had been a greater crime to unmuzzle them, than to
un-man, to kill Vriah. Let us then be wary of this fault, and let not our bad
lives open those mouths, which our good lives should silence; and if we live
well we shall silence them. Say ye unto the righteous, it shall be well with
them, Esa. 3. 10. it shall be well with them in this respect likewise, that
they shall be well spoken of. Indeed, this is not frequent; many would not
believe it, did not the Lord again and again repeat it, did he not give an
express charge that the Prophet should say so. But, since he has said it, it
must be, nay, more likewise; whatsoever man says of them, the Angels shall
never cease to praise GOD for their conversion, and them for their. obedience.

DEO GLORIA.
1. Pet. 2. 16. As free and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the Servants of God.
WE are at length come to the last motive, which S. Peter uses, and that is
drawn from their own selves. If neither because God is the Author of the
Magistrate, nor because the Magistrate is ordained for praise and punishment,
nor because upon the neglect of this, your foolish enemies will cry out against
you; if for none of these reasons you will submit, yet consider what your
selves are, what your selves call your selves, the Servants of God: Now then a
Servant must do that which his Master will have him, and your God, your Master
will have you to submit unto the Magistrate; howsoever then you are free, yet
you are Gods Servants, and therefore, upon his command, to submit; otherwise
you shall be Atheists, as well as Traitors; by not honoring the King you shall
show that you fear not God. Or, which I will now insist upon, these words do
not so much contain a motive to obedience, as they satisfy an Objection,
which might be made against the necessity of obedience. Should we submit, might
they have said? but we are free, what has freedom to do with submission?
Saint Peter therefore grants their proposition, but denies their Inference, he
denies not that they are Free, but he denies that their Freedom is
incompatible with Submission to Princes, nay he concludes that therefore they
must submit, because they are Free; this Bondage is very natural unto their
liberty, as I shall hereafter show you. So that this shall be our Method for
the present 1. S. Peter's Grant, You are Free. 2. The limitation and restraint
of this Grant, which is double. 1. That we must not abuse our Freedom, not
using your Liberty etc. 2. That for all our Freedom we must know, that we are
Servants, as the Servants of God. As free and not using etc. Then whosoever is
a Christian is Free, Freedom is annexed unto Christianity. But before I show
you the Christians Freedom, it will not be amiss to make it appear, what a
desired thing it is, to be free: it is indeed most desirable, and therefore S.
Paul where he speaks of liberty, knows not what better Epithet to bestow
upon it than that of glorious, Romans 8. 21. the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God. Adam was content to exchange his innocence for his liberty, and had rather
not be immortal than not Free. Not that Adam got a liberty by sinning, for he
ran into a most miserable slavery, but because so the Devil persuaded, and
such was the presumption of his folly: Ye shall be like Gods, faith the
Tempter; now They are most Free. And therefore Heathen Philosophers have termed
man (...), as we should render it, one who is under his own rule, and
certainly such an one cannot complain of want of liberty. Yet I am persuaded
that they could not think that this was true, but that they imagined it was
fit; it could not be convenient in their opinions, that so excellent a Creature
should not be free, and only under his own rule. Nay, the Jews themselves
were so in love with this liberty, that they would boast of it, even when they
had it not, as if they could have more willingly heard any other reproach, than
the want of that. When our Savior said unto them The truth shall make you
free. Ioh. 8 32. they in a great fume reply, We be Abraham's seed, and were
never in bondage unto any man; to be made I'ree supposed that now they were not
Free, and they could not endure to hear of that. We were never in bondage
under any man? Why? but at this very instant, they were under the bondage of
the Romans, who had lately conquered them, and made a Province of their
Kingdom. We were never in bondage under any man? But when the wind turns we
shall have you cry, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, and, was
not that a part of your bondage? and, we have no King but Casar, and had not He
taken away your liberty from you? if you were conquered how then are you yet
Free? if the Roman yoke lie heavy upon you, how can you deny that you are
under bondage? It may be that they said so because the Romans had suffered them
to retain many of their former privileges, which they called liberty, showing
by that esteem of the shadow, how highly they would have valued a true
liberty. All then being so desirous of liberty, we shall speak no mean thing
of the Christian, when we shall show that he is Free. Stand fast in the
liberty, says S. Paul to his Galathians 5. 1. therefore he presupposes that
they are Free; a man cannot stand fast, no nor at all, in that which he has
not. In the former mentioned place of S. John, our Savior tells them, that if
they know the truth, the truth shall make them free. What is the truth but
Christian Religion? and this all Professors are supposed to know. For the Law
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free Romans 8. 2. where, as
we take notice of the author of this liberty, the Spirit of life, together
with the instrument by which he effects it, the Law of the Spirit of life; so
likewise we shoud not forget the Subject, in which it is effected, to wit Him,
to whom there is no Condemnation; Him, who is in Jesus Christ. How often in the
New Testament do we read, that we are bought, that Christ has redeemed us?
God sent his Son to redeem them that were under the Law. Gal. 4. 4, 5. Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ
Romans 3. 24. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us, Tit. 1. 14. now
as redemption takes away our pride; they were slaves who are redeemed; so it
confirms our gratitude, they who are redeemed are Free. Men have freedom
either by nature or by Courtesy; by nature when they are borne, by courtesy
when another makes them free, and that is either by giving away his own right
when they are slaves to himself, or buying out another title, when they are
in bondage to another. Freedom by nature we cannot have; by nature, we are no
less the children of bondage than of wrath: so then if we have any Freedom,
it must be either by manumission or Redemption; by Manumission it is not, for
so we should not be Christ's, by Redemption therefore it must needs be, or else
we should be the Devils Servants. In a word Christians are redeemed, and the
Redeemed are Free. You may observe that at the resurrection of Lazarus when he
came forth of the grave, bound hand and foot with grave-cloaths, Jesus said
unto them, (his Apostles, S. Aust: says,) Loose him, and let him go. It is in
every man's Spiritual rising verified, what was seen in this Resurrection. He
is loosed before he go to Christ, he is free when a Disciple. Amongst the
orders of the Nazarites, this was one of them, that all the days of his
separation, there should come no razor on his head Number. 6. 5. if the Nazarite
signified the Christian, I am sure the not coming of a razor on his head
signifies the Freedom of the Christian; since amongst the Ancients, as they
who were Captives had their hair shorn, so to wear it at its length was a
manifest sign of liberty, as if their Freedom grew with their hair; and he
that cut off that, had cut off their liberty. Shall not Christianity make her
Professors free? But the Heathens imagined that Philosophy made her professors
free: now it were hard if Christianity should yield to Philosophy, the Mistress
not have so great a privilege as the handmaid. Hac ipsum Philosophy servire,
libert as est, says Seneca Ep. 8. Had he put out Philosophy, and put God in
the place of it, we might have thought he had stole his sentence out of our
liturgy, which affirms of God what he does of Philosophy, That his service
is perfect Freedom. Briefly, the Sons are free, says Christ, now the
Christians are Sons; he then that denies their liberty, must deny their
filiation also, he must cross that which the Scripture so often averreth, that
they are born of God. But the doubt is rather of the kind than of the Thing.
Supposing then that the Christian has liberty, we will now inquire what it is,
and in what it consists, which that we may the more solidly perform, we must
distinguish of the Christian. For there are some, who say, that they are Jews
and are not, others that are true Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile,
many that have the form of godliness, denying the power; others that with the
son have the power also; not a few, who are in the Church but as corrupt
humors, not as sound members; others that are not so much in the Church as the
Church, even that blessed company, which shall at length reign with their
Savior for ever. And yet though all, that bear Christ's name shall not enjoy
Christ's Kingdom; nevertheless, they shall enjoy many Privileges, even for
bearing the Name, to show what benefits they shall enjoy, who give their souls
to Christ. Those are no small savors whereof they are made partakers, who only
give their names to Christ. Even this freedom, this liberty after a sort
belongs to them. First then, whosoever calls upon that name is for ever free
from the burden of the Ceremonial law. Now therefore why tempt ye God to put
a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, says S. Peter to the^ who would have
the Brethren to be circumcised, and to keep the law of Moses, Acts 15. 10. If
once they are Disciples, the yoke is not to be put upon their neck, and mark,
he says, if any urge these ordinances, that They put on the yoke, They and
not God, they put on the yoke, from which God had loosed them. Nay when S.
Peter out of humane infirmity had forgot in practice his own Doctrine, and by
a dangerous example, had given occasion to the Gentiles to suppose, that they
were to live after the manner of the Jews, S. Paul withstood him to the face
because he walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel Gal. 2.
14. Let him once any manner of way cause the Gentiles to Judaize, the brethren
to loose their liberty, he walks not uprightly; he stoopeth himself if he
would bring them down unto this yoke. In a word, he is our Peace who has
broken down the middle wall of partition between us, having abolished in his
flesh the Enmity, even the Law of the Covenant Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. The wall of
Partition between us and the Jews, was only the Law of Ceremonies, for to
that of Manners all Nations were bound, that was a wall of union and not of
partition. What a perverseness then is this of them who will build again what
God has pulld down; and like Hiel the Bethelite lay once more a foundation of
a cursed Jericho? Jacob a little before his end cries out against Simeon and
Levi, because in their self-will they dug down, and we may as justly
enveigh against those, who in their self-will, will raise a wall, a wall which
God himself has razed. For truly if man must not separate what God has
conjoined, neither may he join again, what God has separated, our obedience
unto those precepts. Especially our madness will be the greater in reviving of
them if we consider what they are called, and they are called Enmity; Having
abolished the enmity even the law of the Covenant; that law has no better name
than Enmity, whether it were so called because it occasioned hatred between the
Jews and the Gentiles, of which the one was proud, and the other envied; or
because by reason of its neglect or not due performance, it caused hatred
between God and the Jew, the Jew detesting so many burdensome commands, and the
Lord detesting their detestation: whether for these or any other reasons, it
were called Enmity, it matters not, still they are fools, who would again
bring in Enmity. What then shall we say to some amongst us, who seem to be
desirous of this Enmity, who would again at least in part bring in amongst us
the Ceremonial Law, and write again those contrary ordinances, which Christ
has cancelled on his cross? I mean those rigid and Jewish observers of the
Sabbath. And yet you must not expect here a full dispute upon the controversy,
whereof I shall only briefly show you the Sum. In the fourth precept of the
Decalogue all agree, that there is somewhat alterable; which may be changed,
somewhat unalterable to which we are obliged for ever. Alterable, as the
particular Detormination of the time, to wit, that the Rest should be just
upon the very seventh day after the Creation, and the strict Observation of the
day, as that therein a man might not gather sticks, and had made himself a
brand of Hellfire, if he had but made a fire: these all agree to be alterable,
to be altered, and at this day to bind none. Now that which they say is
unalterable in the Sabbath, they affirm to be some certain time of Worship and
a Solemnity carefully religious; and yet in this agreement they differ, for
some will have that time which is unalterable to be, though not a certain, yet
one day of the Seven, though not Monday or Tuesday, yet at least they or one
between them, which God or his Church should determine: whilst others think,
that time to be no more bound to the week than it is to the Saturday to any
other time, than it was to the Jews Sabbath: and so likewise, as touching the
observation they vary; the former prescribing a rising before day, quick
arraying, private prayer, til the Minister be in the Church, repearing and
prayer after, till he come thither again, then hearing a second Sermon, and
then a third, if they may; and so having other forms till midnight: the other
thinking that they have conscionably discharged their duty if without so many
observances, fit rather to tire the body than refresh the soul, after their
private Devotions they religiously frequent the public Service of God; which
being ended, they believe they may as well bestow moderate Recreation as
temperate Diet on their body. But I would ask of the former sort of these,
when they say, that somewhat is unalterable in the Sabbath, by whom they mean
it is unalterable? if they say by man, it is no great matter which they say,
all men know that what by God is established must needs be unalterable by him;
to change another ordinance is the only privilege of an higher power. But if
they say, that it is by God unalterable, I shall again ask whether it be
simply unalterable or upon the presupposed approbation of his will and
pleasure. Not the latter, nothing in the Sabbath is so unalterable, if there
be, they must show it in the Scripture. If they shall reply, that he has
expressed his will in the fourth Commandment, which being placed amongst the
moral precepts must needs have something moral in it, and seeing that is not
the seventh Day, therefore at least it must be a seventh which is moral: I
shall only desire them to review the Commandment, where we shall find that
the Jews are commanded to keep that day holy, in which the Lord rested, nay
therefore to keep it holy because in it the Lord rested, they are to hallow
that Day, which the Lord had hallowed; now, in what day did he rest? What day
did he hallow? was it not the seventh day? For in six days, they are the words
in the commandment, the Lord made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh
day; so that from hence they may prove the Jews Sabbath, but they will destroy
the Lords Day. The seventh day is established by this commandment, but it is a
weak Foundation for One in Seven. Well then at length they are driven to this,
to affirm that there is some what in the Sabbath, to wit, the necessity of
sanctifying one in seven, which is simply and absolutely unalterable. But to
omit, that they but affirm and cannot prove this, see what the consequence of
this wouldbe, if there were as much truth as there is the confidence in that
Assertion If it be simply unalterable, then it was simply necessary that at
first it should be ordained, then, observe it, it was then simply necessary,
that either upon Saturday or Sunday, or some other one day in seven, God should
ordain a Sabbath, but he could not ordain one in seven to be a Sabbath,
unless he had first ordained that there should be seven days, so then it was
simply necessary, that there should be seven days, and because the Sabbath was
made for man, therefore, if there must of necessity be a Sabbath, of necessity
there must be a man for whom the Sabbath should be, and since Time is only the
measure of the creatures actions, therefore if time be by necessity (as it must
be if the Sabbath is) by the same necessity the Creature must be, whose actions
are to be measured by time. And thus we have learned a new and goodly Divinity,
that whereas the ancient Fathers affirm that, Deus nihil agit ad extra
necessario that God does nothing necessarily but beget the Son, and breathe the
holy Ghost; and that, whatever he does outwardly he does freely, that is; he
might either do it, or not do it, these men's opinions would cause him, to
make the world out of a necessity, and that he could not possibly do
otherwise: the sum of all is this; That God makes laws for man, not for
himself, he might have chose whether he would have made man, and when he has
made him whether he would make a Sabbath for him; That when ever you shall
hear men laying stumbling blocks in the way, and making scruples, when the
Sabbath begins and when it ends, and whether you may lawfully dress or eat
your meat that Day, you desire them to show you Scripture for that which they
require, which if they cannot, know you are not bound unto Judaisme, S. Peter
acknowledges that you are free. But are Christians free from the Ceremonies of
the Law? How can it be? Since a man is not said to be freed from that, under
whose bondage he never was, and the Christians, especially such as spring from
the Gentiles, were never under those ordinances. He showed his word unto
Iaacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel, Ps. 147. 19. Besides as I
showed you before, those Ceremonies were the partition wall between the Jews
and Gentiles, now it could not have parted, had they both agreed in it, had it
been given to the Heathen, also; if then they were never under it, how can it
be properly said, that they are free from it? S. Austine has well satisfied
this point discoursing of an other argument, where he says, that this word.
Freeing in Scripture is not only taken for a deliverance from some danger, or
burden which is past, but sometimes for a preve^ting of that to come: he
instanceth, as I remember, in that speech of David, thou have delivered my
Soul out of the nethermost Hell, the nethermost Hell is the Hell of the
Damned, and into that the Soul of David, of a penitent Sinner, never did,
never shall come; to deliver out of Hell, therefore, must be expounded to
hinder him lest he should come thither: here the Preventing is the Freeing; and
so likewise, when we say, that Christians are freed from the yoke of the
Ceremonies, we do not suppose that they ever were under them, but that they
never shall be under them, that that handwriting against them is for ever
blotted out. But thus you will say even the Heathen, the Infidel are Free,
they likewise never were, never shall be under the Ceremonies of the Law: What
a privilege then is that for the Christian, which is communicated to the very
Infidells, when all the world, which Claudius only thought to make partakers
of the Privileges of Rome; are made partakers of this immunity? It Is true, none
of the Heathen are bound unto the Law, and yet they cannot boast of their
freedom from it, as the Christian can, because though he be free, yet God has
not revealed so much unto him, God leaves him in his times of ignorance,
wherein he is subject unto most miserable thraldom by worshipping of stocks
and stones, which he does because he thinks he is bound to it, and because he
thinks he is bound, he is not free, as the Christian is. In the second
place, from the bondage of all indifferent things, to wit, thus far forth,
that in respect of Conscience, he may either do or omit them; by these
performed he hopes not to please God, neither does he fear to offend him, by
neglecting of them. This is the Doctrine of the Apostle in the 14. to the
Romans, 1. Cor. 8. and where not^^. All things are lawful unto me, but all
things are not expedient, 1 Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful? why then
Murder, Prophanenes, Atheism are lawful: no, he speaks not of things
generally, but only of indifferent; in the use of which as we must avoid some
as not convenient, so we must account none as not lawful; and that I persuade
my self to be the meaning of the latter part of the verse, All things are
lawful unto me, but I will not be brought under the power of any, to wit, of
any indifferent thing, that which is in it self Adiaphorall, shall never have
the power over me to make me do it of necessity, or to make me think the not
doing of it absolutely unlawful; there may be a circumsta^ce that may bring a
non-expedit, It is not profitable; there is none can bring a non-licet, that it
is against the Law. This we shall make manifest in the point of observing of
days, excepting the Lords day; a man may according to his occasions either do
or abstain from the works of his calling, either the Act or the Omission is
then indifferent unto him. But, if Authority shall appoint such a day to be
kept holy, and will have this to be part of the hallowing of it to abstain from
all works of our vocation, it will not be lawful to do the^ then, not because it
is not indifferent to work or not to work, but because it is not indifferent to
obey, or not to obey; to obey is commanded, is a duty. So likewise according to
my means I may wear silk or garments of meaner Stuff, it is all one in
point of conscience, what raiment I ordain for my body; but if the Magistrate
shall confine me to a meaner we^d, I sin if I wear silk, not because the
silk, but the Disobedience was unlawful. In a word, S. Paul has taught us
that meats commend us not unto God* 1. Cor. 8. 8. therefore neither if I eat,
am I approved of him, neither rejected if I eat not. In point of Religion it
matters not much whether for my ordinary provision, I have fish or flesh,
whether I go to the Sea or the shambles for my Diet. Meats then being thus
lawful in themselves, there comes an Injunction from Superiors that I shall
abstain from some kind of Meats. Are those meats that are thus forbidden
unlawful? What God has cleansed, shall we or any commandment of man make
common no certainly, to eat is not unlawful, but to eat against the
command; the meat retains his indifferent nature still, but the Magistrate
for a time has restrained its indifferent use, and that without any prejudice
to thy Freedom, whose liberty must not cancel thy obedience, because as
Saint. Austine has well said in Ps. 71. Nihil (...) expedit anima quam
obedire, meat is not so wholesome to thy body, as to thy Soul obedience. And
cannot the Magistrate then make things of themselves indifferent, in themselves
unlawful? what then shall we say to those, who on the contrary side will put
such a rate upon indifferences, as if they were enacted by the Law? Such we
have too many of Ministers and others who propose to us a kind of preaching by
doctrine, Reasons, use, means, motive, and that, in this order, and they must
be named too, as if it were absolutely necessary, in so much that they who use
it, are esteemed, sanctified and powerful, they who either use an other, or
do not say that they use this, must be either ungodly or unfruitful. But to
the Law, to the Testimony, where there shall we ever find, that we are tied to
this or any other Form of Method? There I find that the manifestation of the
spirit is given for every man to profit withal. 1. Cor. 12. 7. I do not find
that Doctrines and uses, proclaimed to be such, are the only manifestation of
the Spirit, it is our duty to employ our gifts that way, by which they may
profit; but it is man only and not the holy Ghost who says, they can only
profit this way. Christ says to his Apostles Go teach all Nations Matthew. 28.
19. He does not say: Teach them thus: he would have one Doctrine taught* he
does not say, he would have one manner of teaching. All Scripture is given etc.
for Correction for instruction, 2. Tim. 3. 16. We may safely say that the
Method of the Sermon may be the same with that of the Scripture, and there if
Correction and Instruction be the same with Doctrine and use, yet Correction is
put before Instruction, sometimes the Use is set before the Doctrine. In a
word, Saint Paul preaches to his Timothy, that he should preach the word, be
instant in season and out of season, here you see he binds him unto diligence,
but he leaves him free to his own Method. And indeed, I cannot but wonder that
they who would have no set Form of Prayer, should tie all to a set Form, to
one set Form of preaching, that they should think the Form a confining of
the Spirit, though there be many forms of them, and this no confining where
there is but one. If any after so often instruction shall urge the necessity of
this kind of instruction; for my part I would only confute him by my practice,
I would use another form and so confirm that I were free. Again, there are
others that think themselves bound in conscience to hear two Sermons upon the
Lords day, (though some of them will scarce practice one of them in any day of
their life) and therefore if their Minister preach not twice on that day, they
suppose, that they are bound to hear an other. But I desire these to direct
me to the Scripture, where this is required of them. It is required of them
indeed to hear, but how often in one day, I find not; only this I find, that
they must not be their own choosers, nor hear whom and where they list. I am
sure they hear but ill by the Apostle, who heap to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears 2. Ti. 4. 3. If they must not heap up to themselves, then
they must accept of those whom Authority has set over them, those and only
those. But what if they do not speak, how can we hear then? What if the mute
devil be in them, shall the deaf devil be in us, and shall we be bound to
starve if our own Pastor will not feed us? I answer, Either he preaches not
so much as his Duty requires, or not so much as an others Fancy; if he speak
not as much, as they in their fancy would have him, it matters not much, he is
their Minister not their Martyr; he must use means to bring them to the
spiritual, he must not throw away his corporal life. But if he speak not so
often to them as his duty requires, he offends indeed, but, they are not to
punish him, neither must the defect of his tongue be mended with the
nimblenesse of their legs. Plainly, they have no Commission that I know of, to
leave him, they have, to accuse him to Superiors, who will either urge him to
his duty, or take order that an other should perform what he neglects. But,
we go away to increase our knowledge. Would it were no worse, and yet if it
be so well, we are not to gain knowledge with the hazard of our obedience; a
good end does not justify that action which is not good. Saul might not
reserve any of the forbidden spoil though it were for sacrifice. But, you have
heard the contrary heretofore. I question not what you have heard but whether
it be true, which you have heard, neither do I much care unto what it be
contrary which I said, so it be agreeing with the truth. But lastly, some will
object that this Doctrine of frequenting our own Church where there is but one
Sermon, does not make so much for the flourishing of holiness, as that which
would have us hear two or more wheresoever. God forbid that I should hinder,
that I should not promote the flourishing of holiness, and yet God forbid that
I should affirm that it made for the flourishing of holiness to hear
promiscuously, whom we pleased. It makes for the flourishing of Schism* and
if it be generally permitted, it will make for uncleanness too and not for
holiness. But that let Superious look to. In the mean time if my opinion did
not in some men's opinion make so much for holiness, as the contrary; yet it is
a saying of one, whom you cannot except against, and I honor, Doctor Twisse,
that it is a very preposterous course, that when ever we dispute of the truth
of a thing we should bring the controversy to this issue: An eo sc. ad officia
hominis Christiani aptiores fiamus, whether by holding such an opinion, we
should make our selves more fit for Christian Duties, when certainly a man is
more fitted unto such Duties by Truth than Error. So then the last issue is
this, if we are commanded to hear two Sermons upon Sunday, all Ministers must
preach, all the people must hear twice; but if we are not commanded, let no
man lay a snare upon his conscience, even a pretext of piety must not take away
our Freedom. And thus I have showed what liberty agrees to Christians in
general; Liberty from Ceremonies, liberty from indifferences. What remains
but that I restore those words to religion which Seneca usurps of Morality, O
ars vere liberalis quae liberum facit! O how liberal, how free this Art, that
thus many ways does make us free. As it does the true Christian in an higher
measure. But of that hereafter. Now to him, that has brought us all out of
service, at least unto this Liberty, and which if we will be obedient children,
will bring us through an higher liberty, unto Glory, be all praise, etc.

DEO GLORIA.
1 Pet. 2. 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of GOD.
THere are two vices extremely opposite to themselves, and no better agreeing
with the right, Profaneness I mean, and Superstition. Profaneness, by
which a man will do according to no law of God; Superstition, by which he will
make himself more laws tha^ God has: the one of the seturneth our liberty
into lice^ciousnes, the other into bondage; by the first we are the more
daring, by the second the more solemn and grave offenders. Of the former,
Profaneness, I shall have occasion to discourse ere long; of the latter,
Superstition, I have discoursed already, and yet must add a few words, since
this over-service, this voluntary worship, this invention rather than devotion,
carries it self to the greater deceit of the beholders, under the shape of
piety and religion; and for antiquity challenges Christianity it self, since
these Tares were sown almost as soon as that Come; since this restraint was
as early very near, as that publishing of liberty. In Acts 15. 5. it is said,
that there rose up certain of the Pharisees which believed, saying, that it
was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.
No sooner had they received the faith, than these Pharisees would have filled
them with superstition; they had but scarce begun to be Christians, and they
are already tempted to become Jews: And so in the Fathers time there rose a
sect which were termed Minaei, of whom S. Hierome elegantly, Dum Iudaei cupiunt
esse and Christiani, nec Iudaei sunt nec Christiani; Whilst they strive to be
Jews and Christians together, they are neither Jews nor Christians: not Jews
because they were bapti^ed, not Christians because they joined Circumcision to
their Baptism: Nay, would to God that this mischief had stopped here, and not
derived it self unto our times, wherein diverse men, more cunningly, and yet as
truly, restrain our liberty. Not to speak of Judaizing Sabbatarians, who
scrupulously dispute of the beginning, and the end of that day, whether it be
natural or artificial, whether if they sleep in any part of it they profane
it, wherein they rest, and so rather keep it. Whether they may make a fire
upon that day, and venture upon that high offense of dressing meat, which yet
they will eat on that day, as if the eating were not a labor to their teeth,
as well as the dressing to their fingers: With many such impertine^t queres, of
which you shall not find one, either in the Scripture or the Ancient, and were
only invented, as so many thorns and pricks to wound the tender consciences
of the godly. I say, not to speak of these, you shall have others, and those
at best but private Ministers, make orders themselves, which they will not
forsooth have to be called parts, but only helps unto worship, which yet they
do so press and urge, upon such terms of necessity and inforcement, that a
man having accidentally omitted any one of the^, begins instantly to doubt
whether he be called, or no; as if the certainty of his calling depended upon
these observations. And then will it not be high time for us to demonstrate
and insist upon the doctrine of Christian liberty, to make you know how far you
are free? which freedom I told you, was more general, and agreed to all that
were called Christians; or more particular, and only belonged unto them who
were Christians. Of which freedom we are now to entreat. And indeed were
there not this liberty, what where the former freedom but a milder bondage?
for what comfort could it yield to any man's soul, that he was not under the
Ceremonies, if he were under the curse of the Law? or what great matter is it,
that indifferent things cannot bind my conscience, if it be subject to Gods
wrath for the breach of things which are not indifferent, for the violation of
his Law? The true Christian then, the man after Gods heart, he that is borne
of GOD, is not only free from the Ceremonies of the old Law, but from all
laws of indifferent things to bind the conscience, but also from the moral
law it self. This seems strange, Is he that alone amongst mankind strives
to keep the law, free from the Law? are other men damned for not observing it,
and is it in his choice whether he will observe it or no? Nay, is he who is the
only obedient, the only superstitious one? for, he is superstitious, who
binds himself, where he is free, and the true Christian binds himself to
the performance of the Law, to which you say he is not obliged: we must
understand therefore how he is free, to wit, from the rigor, from the curse,
but not from the observation of the Law: There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. Whosoever is in Christ Jesus is so free from
the Law, that it shall not condemn him; Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3* 13. we shall not be that which
Christ for our sakes was; he was a curse, therefore shall not we be
accursed, but be freed from that which he endured: In a word, The Law is not
made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. Which cannot be understood as the words
sound; for, no man can be righteous but by conforming himself to a law, which
conformity is his righteousness; so that it is so far from truth, that a Law
is not made for the righteous, that it is principally made for him, that by
obeying it he may prove his righteousness: they must necessarily then be
understood of some respect, in consideration of which he is not under that Law,
and that is only, the penalty annexed; the just that is under the obedience,
is not under the penalty of the Law: neither is he under the rigid command of
it, that is, he is not bound to it in its strictness, in so much that God
will not impute disobedience to him, though he has not so accurately observed
it, as the letter seems to exact: for Christ he pardons their failings, and
Christ he esteems of them, as if they had not failed at all: And as they are
free from the curse, so are they free from the cause of the curse; their
liberty extends no less to a freedom from sin, than from punishment. Sin
shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under
Grace, Romans 6. 14. where the Apostle from the first inferres a second freedom;
because we are not under the curse of the Law, therefore neither are we under
the dominion of sin; sin is in us, but it has no command in us; we are
free, not from its existence, but from its tyranny. As a meek man is not
without choler, but he over-ruleth it, so the true Christian man has sin,
but it is in fetters; he is freed from it, that it shall not reign, he shall
be freed from it, that it shall not be in him. And this, if it be rightly
considered, is a more glorious freedom than the former; more glorious, more
happy, more desirable to be free from sin rather than misery. Diverse men do
not esteem it so miserable to be in bondage, as to be in bondage to such an
one; Oh, you shall hear diverse say, I care not whom I serve, so it be not
that Master: Pharaoh can pray that he may be rid of that death only, and
Jeremy does not care whither he be carried, so it be not to the house of
Ionatha^ the Scribe; he had rather be under any torturer than under him. If
the^ these might have the happiness, though not to be freed from al misery, yet
from that from which they would choose to be freed, would they not esteem
themselves fortunate men? And this is the case of the truly faithful, they had
infinitely rather be free from sin, than from punishment; and it is Gods
mercy that they are freed from sin, freed from it, that if they cannot root
it out of them, yet it shall take no deep root in them; and even that
scantling which it is not Gods pleasure, as yet, to take out of them, it is his
pleasure not to see: He sees no iniquity in Jacob; not because there is none
to be seen, but because he will take no notice of that which is. Thus, when
he pryeth into the least circumstances of the sins of the wicked, and
seals those in a bag, ready to be opened at the last day, for their eternal
confusion, he will not so much as see them of his servants; for, Blessed is
the man whose sins are covered: Or if he see them, it is that he may no more
see them; it is, as Micah speaks, Chap. 7. 19. To subdue them and cast them
into the depthes of the Sea: as if he thought he could execute no fitter
judgment, than to drown them which would damn us, than to cast them into the
Seas waters, which would plunge us into hell fire. And it is observable, that
we first read he will subdue our sins, and then that he will cast them into
the depths of the Sea, to show, that our sins are terrible monsters, are
furious wild beasts, they require even an Omnipotent arm to subdue them: which
consideration of their power cannot choose but aggravate our happiness, that we
are free from them. But, amongst all these freedoms we do not find that we
are free from the obligation of the Law, that we are not bound to keep the
commandment. The faithful is freed from the condemnation, not from the
observation; and he that does not strive to observe it, is not free from the
comdemnation of it neither. Seneca has well said, Non est libertas nihil pati,
That is not liberty to be under nothing, that is arrogance and not liberty. To
all such as think Christ has freed them to do what they please, as if he had
no other thing to do, tha^ to suffer the most bitter pains of death, that men
might be securely wicked, I must tell, that to them the Law is in as full
force, as it was in the very first minute to the Israelites, as if the Ink
remained yet fresh upon the handwriting that is against them. Divines observe,
that God punishes more severely the faults committed against his, than against
himself; and therefore he was silent at Paul's blasphemies, but Christ
himself must appear and strike him to the ground, when he makes havoc of
the Church: So likewise where Elies sons seized upon their part of the
offering, before they had burnt the fat unto the Lord, which by the law they
were bound to do, the Lord scarce takes notice of it, besides the bare
relating of it; but when by taking away the portion of the people, they kept
them from frequenting the Tabernacle, and so hindered their spiritual good, it
is presently said, That the sin of the young men was very great before the
Lord, for men abhorred the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. as if, had they
not made men to abhor the offering, God would not have esteemed their sin so
great, as for it to abhor them. This shows us, that God does principally
take order for his Childrens injuries, but i^ does not show, that he neglects
his own, that he will free them from the punishment, who have freed
themselves from the observation of his law: Nay, such men should know, that
they are the principal of the wicked, they are the principal of the wicked,
who in Scripture are termed, The sons of Belial; and these despisers of the
law are the sons of Belial. For, to omit the other derivations which Divines
do fancy of that word, as it comes of two Hebrew words, which signify,
either without light, or without profit, or lastly, without ascent, whith all
agree very fitly unto them; they are the children of darkness, their actions
are nowise spiritual, profitable either to themselves or others: and lastly,
they shall never dwell in Gods holy hill, into which none can come but he that
ascends; Heaven is not situate in a descent, or a level. To omit these, as
Prettinesses without much solidity, the true etymology of the word is; Without
a yoke; Those are the true sons of Belial who would be without a yoke: and who
would be without a yoke, but they who would be without a Law? Whomsoever
then we shall see to go forward in whoredom, drunkenness, swearing,
covetousness, malice, schism, or any such notorious offense, we may
conclude, that he would be free from the yoke, that he is a son of
Belial. And thus all unrepentant sinners are, whence the Prophet says, They
were haughty, and committed abomination against me, Ezech. 16. 50. Iunius
reads it, Exaltarunt se, They exalted themselves; as if none could commit
abomination who was not first proud and haughty, who had not first exalted
themselves, which no man can do under a yoke; under that he will be humbled,
not exalted. But, let them look to it in time; God punishes all sinners, but
heeresists the proud only; as who should say, Though many did offend him
besides, yet it was but timorously; none durst fight hand to hand with him, but
the proud, only they put God to his defense, to resist; but though he resist
them, they shall never be able to resist him, When the day of the Lord of hosts
shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty. Esaias has a pretty strange
speech, The earth, says he, shall be removed like a Cottage, and the
transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, Esa. 24. 20. The transgression is
heavy upon the earth, what then? Therefore it shall be removed; but one would
think, Therefore rather it shall stand still; that which lies heavy upon a
thing, hinders it from being removed. Oh the strange power of sin, that by
making a thing weighty makes it the more moveable; for whose sake the earth,
which stands still, must be removed, and removed by a weight! As those then
should suddenly repent, who are yet under, so should they always triumph and
rejoice in the Lord, who are free from the curse of the law: and yet oftentimes
none so dejected as they, especially when the Devil does thus assault them,
Whosoever does not exactly perform every the least circumstance of the Law, is
subject to eternal damnation; thou have not exactly performed every
circumstance, thou have been sometimes unadvisedly angry, rash words have
escaped the prison of thy mouth, thy heart has been a den of corruption,
and thou have again and again done that evil, against which thou have vowed, as
if thou had repented of thy repentance; what the^ remains for thee but the
blackness of darkness? to be cast into that fire which was as well prepared
for thee, as for the devil and his angels. This is Satan's sophistry, but yet
his major is untrue, and his minor, although it be true, does not infer his
conclusion. It is true, Whosoever does not exactly perform the Law, etc. is
subject to the eternal punishment; but it is legally true, and thou art not
under the Law, but under Grace: thou can not deny but that in many things
thou have offended; but thou must answer that CHRIST, in whom thou art
offended, never. The sum is this, the Devil has nothing to do with thee if
thou art free from the Law, and if thou art in Christ thou art free. Neither
let any man think that I would sooth him in his bad courses; that I would say,
The soul shall live, which God has said shall not live; and so that I would
only pitch him a smoother Cawsey unto hell; no, you may remember I affirmed,
that they, who shall be free from punishment, must be free from the dominion
of sin; if then that have dominion over thee (and it has, if thou obeyest it
in the lusts thereof) this comfort does not at all concern thee, a corrosive
is fitter for thee than a cordial; but to those dejected souls, who, after
all their endeavor, find not the comfort of godliness, who have the gift, but
not the joy of believing, and therefore do doubt of the gift, because they do
not feel the joy; to those, who run after Gods commandments, and will not
lie still though they fall: to these I proclaim, that they are free from the
laws curse, and therefore heirs of heavens blessing; one confirmation of which
they enjoy from hence, if they do not use their liberty as a Cloak, etc.
which is the first restraint of S. Peter's grant. Where we shall consider, 1.
What maliciousness is. 2. What it is to use our liberty as a cloak of
maliciousnes. 3. That we must not so use it. Maliciousness in the latitude of
the word, may either be taken for that vice which is opposite to charity, and
termed malice, or for sins in general, which all proceed from the
depravation, from the maliciousness of our nature; or particularly for that
offense, to whose contrary duty he had before exhorted, even disobedience to
the lawful Magistrate. But we are not so much to enquire what the word may
signify in it self, as what it must signify here, and it cannot signify
Malice in the former sense, not that it is lawful to use our liberty as a
Cloak even of that malice, as to abstain from reproving our brother, because
we hate him; as if it were an indifferent thing to reprove or no; as, if we
performed it to our friend we did well, but not ill, if we did not perform it
to our enemy, even when we had just reason to suppose that such a reproof
would amend him; I say, it is not lawful to use our liberty for a cloak of that
malice; but that is not the malice of which our Apostle here speaks, for he
speaks of such a malice which is opposite to subjection; now hatred and
rancor is opposed ^o charity, not to subjection; and he that upon pretense of
his liberty, denies obedience to Magistracy, does it not out of malice,
because he hates him, but out of injustice, because he will not give him
what is his due, not fear to whom fear, nor honor to whom honor
appertains. Not to speak in the mean time, that the word in the Text is not
malice, but maliciousness, between which there is a great difference. It
being then not so aptly to be interpreted of uncharitableness, let us see in
the next place whether it will sound better for Sins in general: they al
proceed from maliciousness or corruption, and we must not use our liberty to
cloak this malice. This indeed is thought to be the meaning by the most, and
that not without good probability; for a general reason may not unfitly be
used in a particular exhortation, and the argument holds good, We must not
refuse subjection by reason of our liberty, because universally we must not
do any bad act by reason of our liberty: But we must know that the word is,
(...), which signifies evill-doing, and is opposed to (...), or well-doing in
the former verse. If therefore well doing, as I there proved, must signify our
obedience, evill-doing or maliciousness must needs import our disobedience to
government. This you see is Gods account of rebellion, of disobedience; he calls
it maliciousness, sin, without any addition; as if it were the only, or, at
least, the greatest sin: and therefore no wonder if we must not use our
liberty to cloak it; the meaning of which phrase we are next to find out. To
use our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, in general, is to pretend,
that those Actions are indifferent, which indeed are unlawful, and upon that
pretense to practice them, and it principally holds, where the Action that
these would do is, of it self, indifferent, or at least seems to be so,
and is only made unlawful by some circumstance. For instance, it is, in it
self, indifferent whether I eat one or two meals in a day, and that meal
which I eat, whether it be of this or that kind of meat; but if Superiors shall
command, Eat not at such a time, or, at other times, eat not of such a meat;
if thou, pretending thy liberty, do the contrary, and feasts when thou
should eat nothing, and emptiest the Bucher-Row, when Authority sends thee
to the fish-market; I say, if thou pretendest thy liberty, that with thy
liberty thou do cover thy disobedience, thou thus make thy freedom a
cloak of maliciousness. Do I sin then, will thou say, if hunger will not
suffer me to fast, if te^dernes or antipathy make fish a kind of poison to my
body? No certainly, thou offendest not the law, if thou contemnest not the
lawmaker; but thou do contemn him, if thou do only urge thy liberty as a
sufficient plea against the obligation of his law: In a word, if thou do it
not publicly, if thou make it appear that thy excuse is true, and after all
this do willingly submit to his judgment, thou sinnest not, though thou
do not what man commands, but this, not by making thy liberty a cloak of
thy maliciousness, but by making thy infirmity to cover thy omission, which,
if it had not been, thou had done otherwise. Thus, He that regards a day,
regards it to the Lord, and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he does
not regard it, Romans 14. 6. which shows, that the regarding or the not
regarding, is, in it self, indifferent; if he had commanded or forbidden
either, both of them could not be done to the Lord. But Authority interposeth
and faith, that such a day I will have you to observe the Nativitie, the
Passion, the Ascension, the Resurrection of our Savior; on them thou shall
abstain from thy ordinary labors, frequent the Church, and make it an holy
rest. Thou nevertheless wilt put off thy business unto this day, thou can
find no such time for sowing, or plowing, or the like, as this, and that by
reason of thy Christian liberty, which has taken away the distinction of
days. But hearken, Christianity has taken away the distinction of days, but
it has not taken away distinction of orders; there must be some to command,
some to obey; it has not taken away obedience; if upon this color thou shall
flinch from it: this is with thy liberty to cloak thy malice. In a word, as
you have some that Jewishly observe, so there are too many that Atheistically
neglect the Lords day; these have no journeyes but only then, as if they would
ride away, not so much from their place, as their duty; to Church they will not
come, their house is a Church: in a word, they give themselves to feasting,
sporting, all kind of excess then, and that forsooth because they are free.
But this is only a cloak, and a threadbare one, which will appear when we
take it off. Thou art free indeed, but yet not from Laws which God has
immediately made, or which he has published by the Church. Now that there
should be a time indefinitely for public worship, God has intimated in his
fourth Commandment, and when, and how that day shall be observed, has been
determined by his Church; to wit, principally in praying, hearing, meditating,
in acts of mercy, and such like. So that thy freedom is not a truth, but a
pretension, not a garment which sits close to thee, but a cloak which the least
wind can blow off, nay, it is not so much a cloak as one of Adams fig leaves*
which, as the fathers observe out of natural Historians, will rather serve to
annoy thee with its roughness, than to hide thee with its quantity. This then
is to cover malice with liberty, and this is utterly unlawful, whether we
consider it in general of any wickedness so covered, or particularly of
disloyalty to Princes. Of which in the third place. And that this is too usual
we may collect by the very position of these words, first we have, As free;
and then immediately, Not using, etc. as if most men did use their liberty unto
maliciousness, as soon as ever they conceived that they were free: and
therefore S. Paul when he had but newly said, Brethren, ye have been called
unto liberty, presently adds, Only use not your liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, Gal 5. 13. to show, that most did use it for an occasion of the flesh,
who were taught, that they were called unto liberty. A place almost the twinne
with this here, As free, there, Called unto liberty. S. Peter speaks against
Cloaking maliciousnes with liberty; S. Paul, Using liberty for an occasion to
the flesh, to wit, for an occasion whereby either the flesh might practice or
cover its maliciousness. But though this be frequent, it is unfit; he that
has put on zeal as a cloak, cannot endure that liberty should be used as a
cloak. Liberty is a great privilege; now it is most unnaturally absurd, that
a privilege should be used against the Donor. If a Prince make one his
Lieutenant in a Province, can he endure that, by reason of that
Lieutenantship, he should not do what he would, he should do that which he
would not have him? No more can God endure that by our liberty, by which we
resemble him, we should take occasion to break his laws, and oppost him. To
do thus, is to deny the faultiness of our Action, and to deny the fault, is
to make it more faulty. All men when they have done that which is evil, either
if they can possibly, they deny the fact, or, if that cannot be done, they
would feign deny the unlawfulness of the fact. Milo, if he cannot deny that
he killed Clodius, will affirm, that he did it justly; and most, if they
cannot say with Gehazi, Thy servant has gone no whither, yet are ready to say
with Saul, Yea, though I went thither, though I did such an act or the like,
yet I have obeyed, or at least I have not tra^sgressed the voice of the Lord:
And thus, when they should rather strive for a robe of mercy, they lay a cloak
of liberty upon their maliciousness, but, as I told you, to the aggravation of
their sin. For, though the quantity be great before, if you add but a little
more to it, it is the greater; now the deny all of the fault, and excusing it
by liberty, or by such pretexts, is an addition to the fault. But this only
proves that it makes the same fault greater, I therefore go further and
affirm, that it makes a new fault, greater than the first; for the former
might be out of ignorance, passion, or vehemence of temptation, when this, the
putting on of this cloak, must needs be out of deliberation and choice; no man
can pretend his liberty to an act, who is not first presumed to have discussed
the point. Briefly, he that sins, hainously, for the most part, knows it,
and knows that he must be damned without repentance, but he that pretends
liberty for his malice; thinks he has done no otherwise than he ought to
do, and such an opinion will rather inflame him to boasting, than to
repentance. No man repents of indifferent, but only of sinful acts. Here the^ I
could justly reprove them, Qui in diem vivunt, as he speaks, Who are dead in
security, who never look unto any of their actions, nor consider whether they
be commanded or left at large, whether they be necessary or free; these
neither know that they are free, nor can use their freedom even where it ought
be used for the justifying of their indifferent acts, but though they live as
if they were fre^ in all things, yet they ca^ give no reason why they live so,
but are rather blocks than men. Others there be, that loose themselves where
they are bound, and tie themselves where they are free, that do not with their
liberty cover their maliciousness, but with their folly smother their liberty.
If any thing be out of order in their clothes, they dare not present
themselves in Gods house, when yet they will impudently enough thrust in
thither, though their souls be altogether out of order; thus to manifest
themselves to be the wicked, they fear where no fear is, and they do not
fear where they should. And thus much for not covering wickedness in general. I
should now show, that you should not cover this wickedness of disobedience by
your liberty; but I have performed it already in the first Sermon on this Text,
and therefore think only this necessary to urge you to that duty, by showing
you that so you shall approve your selves servants of God. Where I shall
briefly consider the necessity and the glory of that Title. For the first, not
(...) speak of our Creation, Redemption, overwhelming with benefits, and the
like; I will only ground my self on that of Aust. Fieri potest ut male servias,
ut non servias fieri non potest: Thou mast serve him ill, but it is impossible
not to be his servant; that, is most necessary. For, suppose thou do not what
he commands, thou do what he will order to his own glory: why then will thou not be his servant willingly, whose servant by force thou shall be? Oh
then seriously and timely address thy self unto this service, and that for
the glory of it. The greatest glory is to be supreme, the next, to be near
unto him, and even he in a mean office is honored, who is the Kings serva^t.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants which stand continually before
thee, says the Queen of Shebah unto Solomon, 1 King. 10. 3. Where she
esteems the servants to be almost as happy as their Master, the attendants as
Solomon: What an happiness then, what a glory will it be for us to attend upon
the true Solomon, the everlasting Prince of Peace? Where observe ye, that of
those whom she first calls servants, she immediately says, They stand
continually before thee; as if it were the same thing to be ones servant, and,
to stand perpetually before him. How this can be true in all other services, I
list not to enquire; I am sure it is most certain in the Lords: be his
servants, and you shall stand perpetually before him, in his favor now, in his
Kingdom hereafter.

DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.

