A brief declaration of the shows, devices, speeches, and inventions, done and
performed before the Queens Majesty, and the French Ambassadors, at the most
valiant and worthy Triumph, attempted and executed on the Monday and Tuesday
in VVhitson week last, Anno 1581

Collected, gathered, penned and published, by Henry Goldwel, Genesis

Imprinted at London, by Robert VValdegraue, dwelling without Temple-barre,
near unto Sommer-set-House.

To the very worshipful and his approved patron, Master Rowland B^asebridge
of great VVickombe, in the county of Buck. Genesis his humble and faithful
anowed: Henry Goldwell wishes that welfare which highteth eternal happiness.
SIr, I stand at a stay like the Lady of TH^SSALI^, and in a ma^mering maze
like ALEXANDERS man, the o^ making pitious plaintes in beholding the picture of
her person, fearing she^ should not be fancied, and always lamented when she
wrote any letter, doubting it should be disliked: The other wept in winter for
extremity of cold, and sorowed, in summer to remember the return of HY^MS.
So rest I assailed with such perplexities, and frozen with like ^eare, not
only douting to discover these hono^rable Actions, for fear of the
misreporting: but also fearing mine (...) vnworthiness^ and want of skillful
eloquence to set f^^th so worthy a matter (as was the last Triumph performed
before her Majesty:) Yet I considered with my self, better an ill reporter
then a dumme speaker, better badly (...) open then quite forgotten, and better
Porredge then no (...) When APPOLLO is a sheep then ^AN is chief^ ^^nstrill:
when PALLAS is absent, then SERES is (...) when TVL^IE is out of town, the^
CRASSVS may crake of his cunning. Therefore s^^h no man vvriteth at al of these
worthies, nor no person publishes the exploits of these nobles, rather the^
oblition should diminish their merits, I have attempted the vvriting. And so
nere as I could I have made a collection both of their names, speeches, and
chiefest inventions, which as they be, I present to your presence in name of
a nevvse or novelty, knovving none more vvorthie then your self, to whom to
present this Pamphlet, both for your knowledge in approved Martial Chivalry,
nor none vvho^ I honor or owe more dutiful loyalty. As report has rong
forth your deserved vvorthynes, and flying FAM^ has resou^ded your service,
both in green youth^ and these your grave years, employed asvvell in vvarres
as in peace, in quailing the enemy, as in ruling your country, in aduenturing
abroad, in aduertising at home, then a conductor, now a (...) valiant as MARS,
now made a civil MAGISTRAT^, then boldly in battle till the last blow,
now (...) home in trayning up soldiers, and to be short, then (...) ted a
Captain, like ACHILLES for coura^ (...) as SCIPIO for singular c^unsaile.
(...) would delight you to hear of the tovvar^ (...) English Nobles, and of
the courage of our courtly crew, since you were absent at the perfou^^ing of
these pleasures, I have at this present for your recreation thus certified
these courtly and knightly discourses, to you who in times past have been, as
gallant a courtier as a valliant soldier: But if you ere this have been told
of this Triumph, it may be you heard not the names of the parties* and though
you have heard of the number of rumors, ye^ paraduenture you know not
theffect of their speeches, and though you have h^d of their several coppies:
yet happily you miss of their sund^e inventions, and though you be privy to
most o^ these matters, yet hope I you will like nere the worse of my labors,
nor make less account of this my well meaning: therefore as one more aduenturus
the^ wary, more presu^ptuous the^ witty, more ^oole hard^^ then praise
worthy, I submit my self to the knees of your courtesy, to like of me and my
present, hop^ng to find that favor at your hands which an Emperor once
shevved to his simplest Subject, who more esteemed his poor dish of vva^er,
the^ the gifts of gold of his richest ma^cha^ts, the one proceeding of love to
his power, the other in hope of a greater gain? whose Image if you imitate I
pronounce my self happy, and tho gain that I look for, is your gracious good
will? whereby I shall be emboldened to attempt some work more worthy, to
gratify your goodness and to make mo^^ manifest my dutiful loyalty, vvishing
you now and eueral things vvorldly to your virtuous will, and after the time
of this transitory life, your soul may sing Alle^ia with the number of
thelect, and reap that revvard which remianeth endless.

Yours most vvilling to be commanded, and most desirous to discharge his
duty. H. G.

A Declaration of the Triumph showed before the Queens Majesty, and the
French Ambassadors, on VVhitson Monday and Tuesday.
TO begin particularly to wright of these attempts, and briefly to run over
^ache s^uerall action, the cause of the same is first to be considered. After
the arrival of the French Ambassadors, and upon their coming to the English
court, The Nobles and Gentlemen of the same, desirous to show them alcourtesie
poss^ble fittest for such estates, and to sport them with all courtly
pleasure, agreede among them to prepare a Triumph, which was very quickly
concluded, and being devised in most su^ptuous order, was by them performed in
as valiant a manner, to their endless fame and honor. The chief, or
challengers in these attemptes, were these. The Earl of Arundel, the Lord
Windsore Master Philip Sidney, and Master Fulke Grevill, Who calling themselves
the four Foster Children of Desire, made their invention of the foresaid
Triumph in this order and form following.

The Gallary or place at the end of the Tiltyard adioining to her Majesty's
house at Whiteball, The excellent ineuntion of the Triumph.
whereas her person should be placed, was called and not without cause, the
Castle or Fortress of perfect beauty, for as much as her highness should be
there included, whereto the said Foster children laid Title and claim as
their due by descent to belong unto them. And upon denial or any^ cpulse from
that their d^s^red pa^rimonie, they vowed to vanquishe and conquer by force who
so should seem to wit^stand it. For the accomplishing whereof they sent their
challenge or first defiance to the Q^eens majesty: which was vttred by a boy
on Sunday, the sixt^enth of April last, as her Majesty came from the Chapel,
who being apparrelled in red and white, as a Martial messenger of Desires
fostered Children, without making any pr^cise reverence at all, uttered these
speeches of defiaunce, from his masters to her Majesty, the effect whereof
ensues.

O Lady, The first defy or challenge.
that does entitle the titles you possess with the honor of your worthiness,
rather crowning the great crown you hold, with the fame to have so excellinge
an owner, then you receiuinge to your self any increase, keeping that outward
ornament? Vouchsafe with patient attention to hear the words which I by
commandment am here to deliver unto you, wherein if your ears (used to the
thanks giving of your people and the due praises of the earth) shall feel a
stately disdain to hear once the sound of a de^ie? yet dare I warrant my
self so far upon the reply deceiving show of rare beauty, as that malice can
not fall from so fair a mind upon the sely messenger, whose mouth is a
servant to others direction. Know ye therefore al only Princess, that hereby
(for far of they are never) there lies encamped the four long h^ples, now
hopeful fostered children of Desire: who having bin a great while nourished up
with that infectiue milk, and to ^o much care of their fiery fosterer,
(though full often that dry nurse dispaier indeuered to vvaine them from it)
being now as strong in that nurture, as they are vveake in Fortune,
encouraged with the valiant counsel of never fainting DESIRE, and by the
same assured, that by right of inheritance even from ever, the FORTRESS OF
BEAVTIE does belong to her Fostered Children, Lastly, finding it blazed by all
tongues, ingraued in all hearts, and proved by all eyes that this fortress
built by nature is seated in this Realm: These four I say and say again,
thus nourished, thus animated thus entitled, and thus informed, do will you
by me, even in the name of Justice, that you will no longer exclude virtuous
DESIRE from perfect BEAV TIE? VVhereto if you yield, (O yield for so al reason
requires) then have I no more to say, but rejoice that my sayings has
obtained so righfull, and yet so blissful a request. But if (alas but let
not that be needful) BEAVTIR be accompanied with disdainful pride, and pride
vvaighted on by refusing cruelty. Then must I denounce unto you (VVoe is me,
answer before it be denounced) that they determine by request to accomplish
their claim, And because they will better testify to the world, they have
been brought up under the vvings of honorable DESIRE, this honorable
forevvarning they send you. That upon the xxiiii day of this month of April
they will besiege that fatal FORTRESS, vowing not to spare (if this
obstinacy continue) the svvoorde of faithfulness, and the fire of affection?
Now if so it fall out, the vvorthie knights of your Court (moved with
passion in them selves) disdain of my senders boldness, or partial liking
(which I most doubt) to the majesty of your eyes, will either bid them
battle before they approach, or suffering them to approach, will after la^or to
l^uye the siege, They protest to meet them in what sort they will choose,
vvihning only it may be performed before your own eyes, whom they know
as even in judgment, as dainty in choosing, where if so they list. First at
the Tilte in so many courses, as your self shall please to appoint. And then if
any will call them to the course of the field with Lance and svvord, they hope
to give such true proofs of their valler, as at least shall make their desires
more noble, vovving on the other side, that if before the night part the fray,
they do not overcome al the^ that come in against them, they vvil yield
themselves slaves unto you for ever? This therefore O Queen (greater in that
you are Queen of your self, then in passing the whole compass of the earth)
have I delivered my charge, not as a challenge to your knights? against
whom, (but in so just a cause) they acknovvledge themselves unable to match
the meanest, But as a plain proclaimation of War, unless the FORTRESS OF
BEAVTIE, that has vvoon so many to lose themselves, be speedily surrendered:
And now it shall be seen what knights you have, whom BEAVTIE may draw to
resist a rightful title, And I for my pore part moved by that I see in you
(though I serve your enemies) will daily pray that all men may see you, and
then you shall not fear any arms of adversaries: Or if enemies you must have,
that either they may have the minds of them that send me, or their fortunes in
that they have long desired.

At which day abouesaid for certain urgent occasions, Urgent ca^ses why the
Challenge was deferd.
the said Challenge and Triumph by her Majesty's commandment, was deferted
till the first day of May. At which day for like causes it was further deferred
til the next Monday following, being the eighth day of May: And so till
Whitson Monday, when they first began to perform it.

The said day being come, the four Foster children had made preparation to
besiege the Fortress of Beawtie. And thereto had provided a frame of wood
which was covered with Canuas, and painted outwardly in such excellent order,
as if it had been very natural earth or moulde, and carried the name of a
Rolling trench, The order of the rovvling trench with most excellent
inventions.
which went on wheels, which way soever y^ persons with in did drive it. Upon
the top whereof was placed two Cannons of wood, so passing well coullered, as
they seemed to be in deed two fair field^ pieces of ordinances, and by them
was placed two men for Gunners clothed in Crymson Sarcenet, with their baskets
of earth for defense of their bodies by them. And also there stood on the top of
the trench, an Ensign bearer, in the same suit with the gunners, displaying
his ensign, and within the said trench was cunningly conveyed, diverse kind
of most excellent music against the castle of Beauty. These things thus al in
a readiness, the Challengers approached, and came from the Stable toward the
Tyltyard, one after another in brave and excellent order. And the manner of
their several entrings was as follows.

First, The Earl of Arundels entry the first day.
the Earl of Arundell entered the Ty^teyarde, all in Gylt and engraven Armor,
with Caparisons and furniture richly and bravely embrodered, having attendaunt
on him, Two gentlemen vshers, iiii. Paages riding on four spare horses, and
twenty of his Gentlemen. Al which aforesaid were apparayled in short Clokes
and venetian hose of Crymson velvet, laid with gold lace, doublets of yellow
Satin, hattes of Crymson velvet with gold bands and yellow feathers, and yellow
silk stocks. Then had he six tump^^^ers that sounded before him. And xxxi.
^eomen that waited after him apparailed in Cassock coats, and venetian hose of
Crimson velvet, laid on which red silk and gold lace, Duble^s of yellow
taffatie, Hats of crimson Taffatie, with yellowe feathers, and yellowe worsted
stockings.

After him proceeded the Lord Windsore, The Lord VVindsors entry the first day.
in gilte and engraven Armor, with caparisons and furniture, richely
embroydered with gold, having attendant on him four Pages riding on four
spare horses, and four and twenty gentlemen, All apparailed in short cloaks
of scarlet, lined through with orange tawnie taff^tie, and laid about with
silver lace, Dublets of orange taw^y Satin, venetia^hose of orange tawnie
velvet, black velvet caps, with silver bands and white feathers, and silu^red
rapiers and daggers, with scabberds o^blacke velue^. Four trumpetters, and ^wo
footmen in cassocke coats and ven^tian hose of orange tawnie velvet, and black
velvet caps with silver bands and white feathers, four gromes of his stable
leading of his four horses, in cassocke coats and venetian hose of orange
tawnie ^affatie, and orange tawnie feltes with silver ^ands, and white feathers.
Then had he three score yeomen in coats of Orange tawnie clothe, with the
Unicorn of of silver plate on their sleeves, and orange tawnie feltes with
silver bands and white feathers.

Then proceeded M. Philip Sidney, M. Sydneys entry.
in very sumptuous manner, with armor part blewe, and the rest gilt and engraven,
with four spare horses, having caparisons and furniture very rich and costly,
as some of cloth of gold embroidred with pearl, and some embroodred with gold
and silver feathers, very richly and cunningly wrought, he had four pages y^
rode on his four spare horses, who had cassok coats and venetia^ hose al of
cloth of silver, laid with gold lace, and hats of y^ same with gold bands, and
white feathers, and each one a pair of white buskins. The^ had he a thirty
gentlemen and ^eomen, and four trumpetters, who were all in cassoke coats and
venetian l^ose of yellow velvet, laid with silver lace, yellowe velvet caps with
silver bands and white feathers, and every one a pair of white buskins. And the
had upon their coats, a scrowle or band of silver, which came scarce wise
over the shoulder, and so down under the arm, with this po^^^e, or sentence
written upon it, both before and behind, Sicnos non nobis.

Then came M. Fulke Gr^uill, in gylt armor, M. Fulke Greuils entry.
with rich and fair caparisons and furniture, having four spare horses with
four Pages riding upon them, and four Trumpeters sounding before him, and a
Twenty men gentlemen and yeomen attending upon him, who with the Pages and
Trumpe^ers were all apparelled in loose Ierkins of Tawnie taffatie, cut and
lined with yellowe sarsenet, and laid with gold lace, and cut down the arm
and set with loopes and buttons of gold, Uenetian hose of the same lined as
asoresaid, laid with gold lace down the side with loopes and buttons of
gold, with each a pair of yellow worsted stockings. And ha^ts of Tawnie
Taffarie with gold bands and yellow Feathers. Having thus all entered the Tilte
yard, they proceeded on with the rolling trenche before them, which stayed
against the Queen, and they passed by, as though they would behold the
Fortress of Beauty. And so went about the Tilt, At last the boy that uttered
the first deflaunce pronounced these speeches to her Majesty.

If the message lately delivered unto you had been believed and followed. The
second defy or challenge.
(O Queen) in whom the whole story of virtue is written with the language of
BEAVTIE. Nothing should this violence have needed in your inuiolate presence,
your eyes which til now have been only wont to discern the bowed knees of
kneeling hearts, and inwardly turned, found always the heavenly peace of a
sweet mind, Should not now have their fair beams reflec^ with the shining
of A^moure, should not now be driven to see the fury of Desire, nor the
fyery force of fury: But since so it is (alas that so it is) that in the
defense of obstinate refusal there never grows victory but by compassion? They
are come, what need I say more, you see them, ready in heart as you know, and
able with hands as they hope, not only to assailing but to prevailing.
Perehance you despise the smalnesse of number, I say unto you, the force of
DESIRE goes not by fullness of company. Nay rather View with what irresistable
determination themselves approach, And how not only the heavens send their
invisible Instrument to aid them. But also the very earth the dullest of all the Elements which with natural heaviness still strives to the sleepie
Center, Meaning the music within the mount.
yet for advancing this enterprise is contented actiuely as you shall see to
move it self upon it self, to rise up in height, That it may the better
command the high and high minded FORTRESS? Many words when deeds are in
field are tedious both to the speaker and hearer, VVhervvith the mount moved
and rose up in height.
you see their forces but know not their fortunes, if you be resolved, it
boots not, and threats dread not, I have discharged my charge, which was even
when all things were ready for the assault, then to offer partly a thing
not so much unused as gracious in besiegers, you shall now be sommoned to yield,
which if it be rejected, then look for the affectionate Alarm to be
followed with desirous Assault: The time approaches for their approches: But
no time shall stay me from wishing, that how soever this succeed, the world
may long time enjoy her cheifest ornament, which deckes it with her felfe, and
herself with the love of goodness.

Which speech being ended, the Rowlling trench or Mount of earth was moved as
nere the Queens Majesty as might be, which being settled, the music played
very pleasauntly, and one of the Boys being then accompanied with Cornets,
summoned the Fortress with this song.

Yield yield, O yield, you that this FORTE do hold,
which seated is, in spotless honors fi^lde,
Desires great force, no forces can withhold:
then to DESIERS desire, O yield O yield.
Yield yield O yield, trust not on beauties pride,
fayrenesse though fayer, is but a feeble shield,
When strong Desire, which virtues love does guide,
claymes but to gain his due, O yield O yield.
Yield yield O yield, who first this Fort did make,
did it for just Desires, true children build,
Such was his mind, if you another take:
defense herein does wrong, O yield O yield,
Yield yield O yield, now is it time to yield,
Before thaslault begin, O yield O yield.
When that was ended, another Boy turning him self to the Foster children and
their retinue, sung this Alarm.

Alarm alarm, here will no yielding be,
such marble ears, no cunning words can charm,
Courage therefore, and let the stately see.
that naught withstandes DESIRE, Alarm alarm.
Alarm alarm, let not their beauties move
remorse in you to do this FORTRESS harm,
For since war is the ground of virtues love,
no force, though force be used Alarm alarm.
Alarm alarm, companions now begin,
about this never conquered walls to swarm,
More praise to us we never look to win,
much may that was not yet, Alarm alarm.
Alarm alarm when once the fight in warm,
then shall you see them yield, Alarm alarm.
Which ended, the two Canons were short off, The shooting of, of the two
Canons, the one with svveet water, and the other with svveet poulder.
the one with sweet poulder, and the other with sweet water, very o^ oriferous
and pleasant, and the noise of the shooting was very excellent consent of
mellodie within the Mount: And after that, was store of pretty scaling
ladders, and the footmen threw Flowers and such fancies against the walls,
with all such devices as might se^me fit shot for Desire, All which did
continue till time the Defendaunts came in.

Then came in the defendaunts in most sumptuous manner, The manner of the
defendants coming in.
with every one his servant, Pages, and trumpeters, (having some more, some
less) in such order as I have here under placed the^, with every one his
sundry invention, which for that some of them be mistical and not known to
many, I omit therefore for bre^ties s^ke to speak of any, yet such speeches
as wear spoken or presented for them to her Majesty, so many as were, or at
the least as I c^uld come by, I have ^^re in their order placed them, whereby
their inucntions for whom they were spoken, are therein plainly declared.
Therefore I refer you to the reeding of them hereafter, But thus the
desendaunts, entered the title yard, one after an other as follows.

First M. Henry Gray, Sir Thomas Parat, The defendant names that run at Tilte.
M. Anthony Cook, M. Th^mas Ratcliffe, Master Henry Knowles, M. William
Knowles, M. Robert Knowles. M. Frauncis Knowles, M. Raffe Bows, M. Thomas
Kelway, M. George Goring, M. William Tresham, M. Robert Alexander, M. Edward
Dennie, M. Herculus Meautus, M. Edward Moore, M. Richard Skipwith, M. Richard
Ward, M. Edward Digibie, M. Henry Nowell, M. Henry Brunkerd. And afterward in
the midst of the running, came in Sir Henry Lea, as unknowen, and when he had
broken his six staves, went out in like manner again.

So passing on one after another, when sir Thomas Parat and M. Cook came to
the end of the Tilt, over against the Queens Majesty, one of their pages
arraied like an Angel, vttred these speches unto her.

Despair, The speech of sir Thomas Parrat and master Cook, to the Queen
no not despair (most high and happy Princess) could so congeale the frozen
knighte in the air but that DESIRE, (ah sweet DESIRE) enforced him to behold
the Sun on the earth, whereon as he was gasing with twinkling eye (for who can
behold such be^mes steadfastly) he begun to dissolve into drops, m^lting with
such delighte that he seemed to prefer the lingering of a certain death,
before the lasting of an uncertain life, such is the nature of engraven
loyalty, that it chooses rather to have the body dissolved then the mind
disliked, Thus consuming with con^ent, (a sweet sicnesse is conceit) and
pining with more then speakable passions, he suddenly beheld that Sun to be
besieged which he so devoutly served, wherewith boiling in no less disdain^,
then surprised with immoderate pensiveness, he uttered these words: O Jove,
if thou mean to resolve nature into contraries, why do I live to see it, if
into nothing, why do I live at all, if the foot scale the head, there is no
rest if DESIRE ouershoote duty, there is no reason, and where either of these
are, there can be no rule. And so setting more sighs then may be numbered by
syphers, this present time, (ah grief) this present time, that honest and
fair hearted frozen Knighte died, (what said I) even that which again with
grief I must say died, whose ghost making speedy passage into the ELISIAN
fields (for what more swifte then a soul) in the midst of the infernal
multitude, with s^re^ches, cries and clamers, made both Heaven and hell to
redouble this Echo, By the Sun is meant her Majesty, called before the
Fortres of Beavvtie.
O times, O men, O cu^^uption of manners, the Sun is besieged, the Sun (O
mischief) the Sun is besieged which strange and unacquainted tea^^es, caused
not only murmuring amongst the Ghosts beneathe, but amusing among the Gods
above, who as well to repress the tumultes which might have risen among the
shadows, as to revenge the pride which began to grow on the earth, sent
down an Angel with this commandment, Sir Thomas Parrat and M. Cook were
both ^n like ar^our beset, with apples and fruit, he one sig^ifiyng Ada^,
(...) the other ^ue, who ^ad hair ^ung all ^ovvn his ^elmet.
Go discende, and cause ADAM and EVE to appear on the earth in that sort as
they were in Paradise, that the world may know them and wonder at them, ^or
seeing out of their loins have issued those preposterous lymmes, I know none
more fit to correct them! Certes none more willing: They will attempt any
thing for thy sake and service of that earthly, and yet (O strange consceite)
most heavenly Sun, for as they were before driven from their DESIRE, because
they desired to know the best, so now shall they be driven to their DESIRE
which they covet to honor most, This shall be their reward, they shall come
neeere and yet shall not search, and be they far of, it shall warm, A
cloud may sometimes bar their sight, but nothing shall deprive them the
sauegarde, yet command them to be humble in affection, though ^^^uente,
least they seem to disdain that pride (...), which they desire themselves,
The Angel speaks to the Queen
The (...) ^he higheste, delights in the shaddowe which (...) shortest, and
nourishes the tree whose root grow^th deepest, not whose top springs
loftiest. This commission and counsel ended all things were in a moment
accompli^^ed with such seleritie (for to the Gods time is tied) that they were
sped as soon as they were spoken, And now most renoumed and divine Sun, Adam
and Eve being present, vouchsafe to hear somewhat in their behalfs pronounced,
Sir Knights, if in besieging the sun ye understood what you had undertaken,
ye would not destroy a common blessing for a private benefit: Will you
subdue the sun, He speaks to the challengers in the behalf of the two
knights, Adam and Eve.
who shall rest in the shadow where the weary take breath, the disquiet rest,
and all comfort, will ye bereave all men of those gl^stering and gladsome
beams, what shall then prosper in the shining, but you will limb it by the
rays. O rare exhalations, brothers you may be to DESIRE, but sons ye are to
ill hap, which thinks you can not sincke deep enoughe into the sea, unless
you take your sal from the sun, Desist you knights, desist, sith it is
impossible to resist, content your se^^es with the suns indifferent succor,
suffer the Ieniper shrub to grow by the lofty Oak, and claim no prerog^tiue
where the sun grauntes no privilege, for being of the same metal that
others are, the sun will work the like effects, as she does (...) others, The
Giants would have been gods, if they could have scaled the heavens and you no
less then star^es, could you co^quer the same But as their throwing hill upon
hill did manifest their pride, but nothing further their pretense, So your
laying challenge upon claim, and conquest upon challeng, may well prove a will
but no worthiness, A desire to reach, but no possibility to recover, In which
your soaring attemptes if you chance to fall, the only comfort you have, is to
cry with PHAETOn MAGNIS EXCIDIMVS AVSIS: But if no persuasions may move your
minds: Know ye proud Knights, there are that have hearts as big as mountains,
and as far above you in provvesse, as ye are above all in presumption, yet not
so vain (which ye term valiant) to assault the sun, and why, because it
is impregnible, we content to enjoy the light, ye to eclipse it, we to rest
under the feet, ye to run over the head, we to yield to that which nothing
can conquer, you to conquer that which makes all men Captives. But wear it
possible, that head could devise, courage attempt, or hand execute any thing
that might show the depth of our vnspot ted Loialty, soon should be seen
(and for your selves to soon) that your enterprises should be of as small
account then, as now they are of lightlihood, to deep an impressi^n is
engraven in our thoughts, for the majesty of that sun which now pearcing
our eyes has fully subdued our hearts, that we are pressed in her defense to
offer the whole world defiance, In proof whereof I am charged to throvve
down his Gauntler, which who so dares take up, shall feel both the heat
of their just conceived quarrel, and the reproach of their own deserved
folly, not my riding in breaking a fevve staves to end the strife, but at
Tournie or what else so ever they can devise or dare adventure for to vvin the
benefit of BEAVTIE, Thus most renoumed and divine BEAVTIE, whose beams
shine like the Sun, have ADAM and EVE adventured to defend the Sun, the same
I call Beauty the light of the world, the marvel of men, the mirour of
nature, on which their encounter, if those favorable gleams may fall, they
vvil not only think to have done good herein, but to be restored ag^ine to
Paradi^e, the one means to repose his trust in a woman, who like Eve cannot
be beguiled, the other to rest on a Saint, which by a Serpent will not be
tempted, Thus being placed in the Garden of your Graces, O of all things most
gracious where virtues grovve as thick as leaves did in Paradise. They will
take heedeto taste of the forbidden fruit, contented to behold, not coveting
to take hold, And for that it has bin long argued, and no arguing can end?
whether the first offense came by the crudelitie of ADAM, or the simplicity
of Eve, the one defending his fault by sound arguments, the other excusing
hers by sharp answers, they most humbly s^e for this, that either by Six
courses between them the quarrel may be ended, or by your highness peremptory
sentence determined, for they both being in the world are desirous that one
might bear the blame of both, And what herein your excellency shall set
down, there is none shall gainsay, For whenever the question shall be moved,
No other reason shall be allowed then this.

Elizabetha dixit.

This speech being thus ended, Sir Thomas Parat, and M. Cook proceeded backward
on the other side of the Tilte, And when M. Ratcliffe came likewise against the
Q^^ene, one of his Pages pronounced these speeches in his Masters behalf to her
Majesty.

So many were the misfortunes, (most renoumed and beavvtifull Princess) of
the desolate knight my master, M. Ratcliffes speech to the Queen
as neither the shortness of the time vvil suffer me to repeat, nor the greatness
af the mystery to remember? But let this su^^ise that some there were and so
manifold, that Geometry where on the body of man hangs could not bear
being intolerable, not the mind which consists in Arithmeticke, number
being infinite. Thus alvvayes crossed by fortune, whose crossing is no
blessing, he determined to separate him self as far from society, as his
actions were from success, who wandering through many deserts, yet finding
as he thought no place desolate, happened at the last to come to a Cliffe
adjoining to the maine Sea, covered all with most vvhereon he was vvalking,
much delighted with the sol^^arie seat, but not well liking the cold
situation, he suddenly sunk into a hollovv vaulte, surprised at the first
with fear, but seeing it at the last a place of succor, he accounted his
former miseries mee^ly appeased by this present fortune. In this Den he used
for his bed moss, for his candle moss, for his ceeling moss, and unless
now and then a fevve coals, moss for his meat. A dry food God vvot and a
fresh, but so moistened with vvette t^ares, and so salt, that hard it was to
conjecture, whether it were better to feed or to fast. Here he gave himself
to continual meditation, seperating his mind from his body, his thought from
his heart, yea deuorcing him self from himself, in so much that with his strange
diet and new conceits, he became so enchaunted, that neither the remembrance
of others, nor a thought touching himself could enter into his mind: An
alteration seldom heard of, that the place vvhere^s he vv^s shrovvded in,
should make him to forget who he is? Living thus a long time for that no
limme should seem short, rising according to ^^s manner to walk in the moss
in the grisping of the day he espied upon the shore certain men either cast
away by shipvvrake, or cast ouerborde by Pyrattes, unto whom he went and
perc^^^ing by their pl^ints one which lay dead amongst the^ to be their
master, enquired whence they were, but they not vvilling to repeat their
misfortunes, opened the bosom of the gentleman, and pulled out as crovvle
containing a claim, a challenge, nay a conquest of BEAVVTIE. At the sight
vvherof, suddenly (quoth he) Beavvtie, and therevvithall apalled paused,
entering by little and little out of his present M^LANCHOLI^S into his former
misfortunes, who as one avvaked out of a long dream, began thus to debate. O
Beavvtie where thy Fortress is sounded I know, but what these brethren
should mean I mar^ile, for as I am assured that to win thee none could be
so fortunate, so did I (...) that to claim thee none could be so fond, when
as thou O divine BEAVVTIE art of every one to be desired, but never to be
conquered of DESIRE. But as the Eagle beholding the sun, cou^teth to build
her ^est in the same, and so dimmeth her sight. So they vevving the brighnesse
of BEAVVTIE are incensed to conquer it by DESIRE. And what then? because she
is invincible shall I be indifferent. No, I will forsake this caytifly
Cottage, and will take Arms to defend that BEAVVTIES CASTLE. Nothing shall
remove me from mine attempt, which being performed, nothing can move me, yea
but she has servants already a number, I but unless I be there, not the
whole number, but many were famous but none more faithful, yet alas, if
thou go, thou shall ever be unfortunate, better alvvaies infortunat, then one
disloyal, which words being ended, he demanded whether they vvoulde in like
case adventure with one of no less courage then their master, but certainly
of greater affection: Whose service he having upon small entreatie obtained,
for that belyke they were desirous to see the event for the which they had
suffe^ed such adventures, he departed to his cave, hevving a shield out of the
hard cliffe enriched only with soft moss: A double sign of his desire,
thinking that nothing could manifest BEAVVTIE so well as PITHAGORAS wallunt, a
tender ^yne and a hard shell. And now most excellent and divine BEAVVTIE,
divine it must needs be that works so heavenly, Here the boy delivered M.
Ratclifs shild to the Queen
since he is called from his solitary Cave to your sumptuous Court, from
bondage to liberty, from a living death to a never dying life, and all for the
sake and service of BEAVVTIE: Vouchsafe his shield which is the ensign of
your same to be the instrument of his fortune. And for prostrating himself to
your feet, he is here ready pressed to adventure any adventures for your
gracious fa^^^r.

Which speech being ended, Here enters the iiij. sons of S. Francis Knovvles.
he retired back as the rest. And after him came the four Sons of Sir
Frauncis Knowles, on after another, according to their age, and all in like
armor, who coming to the end of the Tilt, stayed till these speeches were
vttred by one of their Pages, who being apparailed like unto Mercury,
pronounced these speeches in the Knights behalues to her Majesty.

Report has bruted all abroad, The speech of the four sons of sir Frauncis
Knovvles, pronounced by their page being apparelled like unto Mercury.
that desperate DESIRE with a vvonderfull army of affections has laid his
siege against the inu^ncible FORTRESS OF PEEERELESSE BEAVVTIE, and that the
chiefest champions of this most famous enterprise, are four of ^^incies
fellows, Fosterbrothers to DESIRE, and dry nursed by despair, valiant
Knights, and honorable personages, whose hautie hearts deserve renown at
least, for venturing to vvin the golden fleece without MEDEAS help. The
Gyaunts long ago did scale the clouds men say, in hope to win the fort of
IVPITER. The vvanto^ youth, whose vaxed vvings did ftie with soaring up
aloft, had escaped vnscorcht if he had kept a meaner gale below. So falls it
ou^ in this attempt, DESIRE vaunts to conquer BEAVVTIES FORTE by force, vvherin
the goddess keeps continually vvatch and ward, so that DESIRE may despair
to vvin one ynche of her against her will. Her stately seat is set so high,
as that no level can be laid against her wales, and sooner may men undertake
to hit a star with a stone, then to beat her brave bulvvarkes by battery.
No undermining may pre^aile, for that her forte is founded upon so firm a
Rock, as will not stir for either fraud or force: And is there any hope to
win by famine such a forte as yeeldes continual food to all her foes, and
though they feed not fat therevvith, yet must they either feed thereon or
fast, for BEAVVTIE is the only bait vvhereon DESIRE bites, and love the chief
restoritie that lady BEAVVTIE likes, so that she ca^ no more be left without
meat, then men can live with out minds: Of all affections that are, DESIRE is
the most vvorthie to vvoe, but least deserves to win BEAVVTIE, for in
vvinning his saint he loses him self, no sooner has desire what he
desires, but that he dies presently: So that when BEAVVTIE yields once to
desire, then can she never vaunt to be desired again: Wherefore of force
this principle must stand it is convenient for DESIRE ever to vvish, nec^ssarie
and that he alvvaies want, O rare and most renowned BEAVVTIE, O gods to be
honored of all, not to be equalled of any, become not now a prisoner, your
FORTRESS is invincible, no doubt DESIRE will content him self with a
favorable parley, and weight for grace by loyalty not challenge it by
lavvnce, although he make nere so brave, the vvordle does know, that Ladi^
BEAVVTIE needs no rescue to raise this siege, for that she sits above al
reach, her heavenly looks above when she so listes can dazell all men's eyes.
But though she list not use those means, yet it is meet that all her
servants come and shevve them selves devout to do her vvil^ perchance her
pleasure is to see the fortes tried of these iiii. FOSTER friends. O happy,
ten times happy they whose hap shall be with favor of her D^^^^^, to take
in hand this brave attempt: In hope whereof these iiii legitimate sons of
Despair, bre thren to hard mishappe, suckled with sighs, and svvathed up in
sorrow, vveaned in vvo, and dry nursed by DESIRE, long time fostered with
favorable countenance, and fed with svveet fancies, but now of late (alas)
wholly given over to grief and is disgraced by disdain, are come with ready
hearts and hands, to prove against these other 4. that DESIRE does not deserve
one vvinke of good favor from Lady BEAVTIES smiling eyes, for threatening to
win her, forte by force? They dout not the victory if only they may find
some little show from their Saint in favor of their enterprise. If Mercury
have said amiss, blame those bright beams which have be^eft him of his wit,
if well, v^uchsafe one beck to bid him pack away.

These speeches being ended, both they and the rest marched about the Till,^and
so going back to the nether end thereof prepared themselves to run, The
running of the Tilte.
every one in his turn, each defendant six courses against the former
challangers, Who performed their parts so valiantly on both sides, that their
prowess has demerited perpetual memory, and worthily woone honor both to
them selves and their native country. As Fame has the same reported.

When this days sport was thus accomplished, the boy that uttered the
defiances, in these few speeches took his goodnight of the Queen.

In the trial of this debatefull question (O your self) then with what can
be said more, the boy that uttered the defiance, in this speech took his
goodnighte of the Queen.
you see that seeing begins to fail. Might the ordinary truce maker though no
truce be treated, (if at least your presence make it not lightsome to vvrappe
all in her black and mourning vveedes) perchance mourning that since night
first, was the noblest DESIRE, have been subject to undeserved torments: And
therefore these knights by thaucthoritie of darkness very vndesirously are
compelled to depart from whence they came. (never part yet ere they go) Thus
much they command me in their names to confess. That such excellency they
find in your knights and in comparison of them, such unableness in their selves.
That if Desire did not banish despair as a traitor out of his kingdom, it
vvoulde have already undermined their best grounded determination: but no
inward nor outvvarde wound, no weakness, no weariness, can daunt
Desire, nor take away the natural effects that follow it. T^erfore having
left them no other courage then Desire, no other strength then Desire, no other
beginning or ending cause but Desire. They will continue this hard and hardy
enterprise to morrovve, in the mean time they can find no place in their
hearts that does not vvish you as svveet rest, as Psiche was conveyed unto
by the gentle Zephirus, and if it be p^ssible by the same gueste visited. They
vvishe that when your liddes look up, their Iuelles they may preserve them,
to see to morrow a better day the^ this, and yet not so singular success, s
as you may long, freely, and ioifully enjoy; your self, to the delight of
lookers, and vvonder of maikers: this said, the Knights in order as they came
departed.

The second days sport.
The next days show was done in this order. Here enters a most excelling,
and brave chariot, with rare curious, and costly work with the four
challengers in it, which chariot was very curiously shadowed with fine
Lavvne.
The four foster children of Desire, entered in a brave Chariot, (very finely
and curiously decked) as men f^rewearied and half overcome, The chariot was
made in such sort as upon the top the 4 knights sat, with a beautiful Lady,
representing Desire about them. Whereunto their eyes were turned, in token what
they desired, In the Lu^ke of (...) Chariot was conveyed room ^or a full
consort of Music, who played still very doleful music as the Chariot
moved, the chariot was drawn by four horses according to the four knights,
which horses were apparelled in White and carnation silk, being the colloures
of Desire, and as it passed by the upper end of the Tylt, a Harrault of Arms
was sent before to utter these speeches in the knights behalf to her Majesty.

No confidence in themselves, The first speech the second day.
O most vnmached Princess, before whom envy dies, wanting all merenes of
comparison to sustain it, And admiration is expressed, finding the scope of it
void of conceaueable limits, Not any slight regarding the force of your
valliant knights, has encoura^ed the Foster children of Desire to make this
day an inheritour of yesterdayes action: ^ut the wing of Memory alas the
sworn enemy to the wofullmans qui^tnesse, being constantly held by the hand
of perfection, And never ceassing to blow the cole of some kindled Desire, has
brought their inward fire to blaze forth this flame vnquench^ble by any
mean^s (...) by death the whole fuel be consumed, and therefore not able to
master it, they are violently bo^^e whether desire draws. Although they
must con^es (alas^^) that yesterdayes brave onse^ should come to such a
confession: That they are not greatly companied with hope, the common supplie^
to Desi^es army. So as now from summoning this Cast^l to yield, they are
fallen lowly to beseech you to vouchsafe your eyes out of that Impregnable
Fortress to behold what will fall out betwixt them and your famous knights:
wherein though they be so eu^^pressed with the others vallure that a^ready
they could uneath have been able to come (...)* if the chariot of Desire had
not carried them, yet will they make this whole assembly vvitnesses so fai^e
of their vvil, That sooner their souls shall leave their bodies then Desire
shall leave souls: In that on^lye stands their strength that gave them th^^
first courage, and must be their last comfort. For what resistance is there
where not only they are met with fo^ren enemies, such as stately disdain,
which looks from so high a Tower to pore Desire. That though (in it self) it
be great yet in her eyes (so seated) it seems small or such on the other
side as unfortunate despair, which makes the count^ie so barren where they lay
their siege, that it would take away all the food of fancy: But even civil
war yesterdaye grew betwixt them and others, who bears the same badge of
Desire: that they do so, as thus bestead they are brought to this fayer pass,
to desire no more, but that this death or overthrow, may be seen^ by those
eyes who are only unhappy, in that they can neither find fellows nor see
them selue^.

Which speech being done, the defendants came in, in such order as they came in
the day before, therefore I shall not need to make a new repetition of the
same, since al has been touched already. Then went they to the Tourney, where
they did very Nobly, Tourneyes, and Barriers courageously tried.
as the shiuering of the swords might very well testefie, And after that to
the barriers, where they lashed it out lustely, and fought courageously, as if
the Greeks and Trojans had dealt their deadly dole, no party was spared, nor
estate expected, but each knight endued to win the golden fleece, that
expected either fame or the favor of his maistresse, which sport continued
all the same day, And toward the evening the sport being ended, there was a
boy sent up to the queen being clothed in Ash colored garments in taken of
humble submission, wh^ having an Olive brauch in his hand, and falling down
prostrate on his face, and then kneeled up, concluded this noble exercise with
these words to her Majesty,

Most renoumed Princess of Princess, The last speech to the Queen
in wh^^ can nothing obtein victory, but virtue, The Foster children of
Desire, (but heirs only to misfortune) ^end me to deliver in such words as
sorrow can a^^orde their most humble hearted submission, they acknovvledge
this Fortress to be reserved for the eye of the whole world, far listed
up, from the compass of their d^^tinie, They acknovvledge the blindenes of
their error, in that they did not know (...) (how strong so ever it be)
within it self to be no stronger without it self then it pleased the
desired, they acknowledge they have degenerated from their Fosterer in making
violence accompany Desire, They acknovvledge that Desire received his beginning
and nourishment of this (...), and therefore to commit ungratefulness in
b^^^ing Arms (though desirous Armesl) against it^ They aclovvledge Noble
Desire should have desired nothing so much, as the flo^ishing of that
For^^esse, which was to be esteemed according to it selfs (...) They
acknovvledge the least determination of virtue (which stands for guard of this
Fortress) to be to strong for the strongest Desire, And therefore they do
acknovvledge them selves overcome, as to be (...) to this (...) for ever, which
Tylt they will bear in their foreheades, as their other (...) i^ engraven in
their hea^^s: For witness thereof they present this Olive branch to your
presence, in token of your Triumphant peace, And of their peaceable servitude.

Whereby they present themselves as bondmen by those bonds, which the loss
of life, can only loose: Only from out of that which was theirs they crave
thus much, to give so^e token to those knights which may be judged to hauedon
best in each kind of vveapon, or who by his devise has come in best sort in
this desirous strife, this being don, they being now slaves (in whom much
duty requires) for fear of offense, dare say no further, but wish from the
bottom of their captiued hearts, That while this realm is thus fortified and
beautified: Desire may be your (...) adversary.

Which speech being ended her majesty gave them al praise and great thanks,
which they esteemed so well and thought themsel^es rewarded according to their
own wishing, And so they departed each (...) in order, according to their first
coming i^.

The Aucthors conclusion to the Reader.
THVS have I (good Reader) according to my s^mple skill set forth this singular
pastime that thou may* being far of? peradventure know more, then they
that were present and eye beholders of the same, which so ^eere as I could
either gather or get, I have for thy pleasure here placed it, If any thing be
wanting which is not here mentioned, or ought awry and not right reported, let
this suffice, that my ^il was good to have gotten all, and most vnwiling to do
ought amiss, yet such as it is if thou well accept it, I shall think my pains
well employed for thy pleasure, and gratified enough with that good will:
Therefore wishing thee to think no worse of my work, then I thought the laber
little in working, craving but P^na verba for my well meaning. I give thee the
friendly Farewell.

Thine to command in all courteous manner. HENRY GOLDVVIL.


