THE RAGING TVRKE, OR, BAJAZET THE SECOND.

A Tragedy written by THOMAS GOFFE, Master of Arts, and Student of
Christ-Church in Oxford, and Acted by the Students of the same house.

Monstra fato, scelera moribus imputes
Det ille veniam facile cui venia est opus.
LONDON: Printed by AUGUST. MATTHEW'S, for RICHARD MEIGHEN. 1631.

TO THE NO LESS INGENIOVS THEN ZEALOVS favorer of ingenuity, Sir RICHARD
T^CHBOVRNE Knight, etc.
SIR:
THis Tragedy, a manuscript, with another of the same Authors, came lately to
my hands; He that gave them birth, because they were his Nugae, or rather
recreations to his more serious and divine studies, out of a nice modesty (as I
have learnt) allowed them ^earce private fostering. But I, by the consent of
his especial friend* in that they show him rather Omnium scenarum homo to his
glory then disparagement: have published them, and do tender this to your most
safe protection, le^t it w^nder a fatherless Orphan, which every one in that
respect will be apt to iniure with calumnious censure. Now if you vouchsafe to
receive and shelter it, you will not only preserve vnblemish'd the everliving
fame of the dead Author, but assure me that you kindly accept this humble
acknowledgement of

Your most obliged and ready real Servant* RICH, MEIGHEN.

The Names of the Actors*
Bajazet, Emperor. Zemes, Baiazets brother. his Sons.
Mahomates Tartarian King. Achomates Armenian King. Corcutus Asmehemedes,
Mahomets followers. Selymus Thrizham Hamon Baiazets Physician, Jewish Monk^.
Mahomet
Achmetes a General, Cherseogles Vizer^y of Greece. Herald. Dwar^e. Bassaes.
Isaac Nemesis. Mesithes Captains. Mustapha Ambassadors.
Solomon Selymus son. Ianizaries. Caiubus, Achmetes son. Soldiers.
Alexander Bishop of Rome. Nu^cius.
THE RAGING TVRKE, Or the Tragedy of BAJAZET, the second of that name.
Actus Primi,
Scena Prima.
Enter, Bassaes Isaac* with a Crown in his hand, Mustapha with a Scepter,
Mesithes with a Sword, they Crown Corcutus youngest son to Bajazet. Isaac.
LEt the world feel thee, and those Demigods,
Proud with the name of Kings, debase themselves
To honor thee, this Crown commands as much
He crowns him. Wherewith I do invest thy happy brow,
Happy indeed if that succeeding times
Shall set up virtue, so to lessen crimes.
Thus from the ashes of dead Solomon
Is raised another Phoenix great Corcutus;
Live equally adored, when Princes bend
To better courses, all their subjects mend.

Must. Crowns make not Kings, nor can that glittering show
Perfect thine honor, take another sign
Gives him the Scepter. Of thy Imperial dignity, it is thine.
That adds a God-like grace unto thy brow,
This binds due honor, that prostrates every knee
Before thy throne, then live, and may that arm
Secure thy subjects from all foreign harm.

Mesith. What seasoned knowledge, learnings prudent Queen
Has blessed thee with, must now initiate thee
In the paths of war, all studied Arts
Are but degrees unto some wished end*
And steps of hope whereby we do ascend
Unto the top; and level of our thoughts.
But Kings then prove most happy when they are
Watchful in peace, and provident in war.
Those are their utmost ends, which that they may
O're-take, Art, and the sword, make fairest way.
The Muses no^rc'd thee up, and thou did draw
The pleasant juice of learning from their breasts,
In thy first nonage; here then we bestow
The second help, to which good Princes owe
Much of their welfare; swords are the first ground
Of peace, and war; they both defend and wound.
Thus are we vowed to thee, let thy dread fame
Thunder amazement through the spacious world,
That when thou lifts thine arm, thy foes may say
Showts 3. Not Jove, but great Corcutus rules the day.

Corcut. Which that applause has crowned, and with it
Will ever spite of traitors ioying sit
As now we do; nor shall my watchful care
Be wanting to you, whilst this ^ubtill air
Feeds mine industrious spirits, I shall fill
The good with joy, by cutting of the ill
Corrupted rags of men; Jove let me stand
An object in thine eye, when thy swift hand
Fails in the stroke of Justice, virtue return
From thy sad exile, I will purge the walls
From spotted vice, and make this City free
To entertain so fair a Queen as she.
Then ( Bassaes) I embrace what you have thrown
Upon me, and these signs of honor thus
Gives them ba^ke. We re-bestow; their power still stays with us.
Could this vast body of the Commonwealth
Stand fast without a soul? each man should see
I am not greedy of this dignity:
This burdenous weight which some must undergo,
The gods are busied with diuiner things,
And put Earths care into the hands of Kings.

Actus Primi, Scena Secunda.
After some clamors of applause Enter Ch^rsogl^^, and Achmetes at several
doors. Achmet. And is Bajazet arrived?

Chers. So fame report^
Yet how he does digest Corcutus Reign,
That every Bird sings not; but sure with pain.
A Turkish Bajazet, and suffer wrong,
May for a time conceal his grief, not long.
Eagles soar high, and scorn that shorter Plumes
Should reach the clouds, which their proud wings can touch,
Corcutus must not reign, to keep his fathers right
Due to his father, nor will he if he might,
E^nter Isaac* He Is learned, therefore just, Arts not allow
To were a Crown due to another brow.

Isa. Dare thou oppose his greatness? is not Gr^^^^
Already wrackt enough? have thy proud Towers
Reard up their lofty spires? which steeped in blood,
Threw a reflex of red back to the clouds,
And blush'^ at their own ruins, are thy crude wounds
Already stopped, and is that day forgot,
In which the Turkish Mavors Ott^man,
Wielded a sword of death within thy Walls?
Charon grew weary with hurrying souls to ^ell,
When threescore thousand Greeks in one day fell.

Chers. We know their force, and sad experience says,
Move not again, Greece welters still in blood
And every crackling thunder of the heavens
Speaks the shrill echo of the Turkish drums,
Then are we drawn by you, so let it be,
About these great affairs as you decree.

Achm. This phrase becomes the Greeks, submissiue states
Must bend, (...) Conqueror must rule the fates.

Chers. And such are you, our vanquished hearts must bend,
But bad beginnings have a fatal end*
Me thinks I see great Bajazet in arms*
Spreading his fearful Ensigns in the air,
Like some prodigious Comet, we may fear
Speedy revenge vulesse some quick advise
Work a prevention of his future hate,
It Is he must sway the Scepter, or we shall hear
A dreadful defiance ratled in our ear,
He Is strong in friends, and power, we must descend,
To our just duty, or our latest end.

Achm. Renowned Viceroy, thy persuading thoughts
Have predeuin'd most truly these effects,
And we applaud thy Counsel, let us three
Join our best strength, that these ensuing ^arres
May be composed without the stroke of Wars:
Cor^^te is wise, and mild, and being so,
He hates the rumor of a public foe.

Chers. Nobly resolved (Greece sings) if the event,
Prove but so happy, as honest the intent.
But stand aside, Bajazet is come.

Enter Bajazet. Baia. Am I not Emperor? he that breaths a no,
Damnes in that negative ^illable his soul,
Durst any god gainsay it, he should feel
The strength of fiercest Giants in mine arms,
Mine angers at the highest, and I could shake
The firm foundation of the earthly Globe:
Could I but graspe the Poles in these two hands,
I Would pluck the world asunder; drop thou bright Sun,
From thy transparant Sphere, thy course is done,
Great Bajazet is wronged not shall thine eye
Be witness to my hateful misery.
Madness and anger makes my tongue betray,
The Chaos of my thoughts: under this breast,
An heap of indigested ca^es are pressed.
What is it that I doubt? through every joint
Daunces a trembling agve, this dull blood,
That courses through my veins devines no good.
shout^ of joy within. Ha, shovts of joy, at dead men's obsequies?
I Am in a maze of woes, what thou will throw
On me, Jove, let it come, i will stand thy blow.

Chers. Live happy Bajazet.

[Baia. Happy in my fear,
That word sounds sweet in my distracted ear.
Happy in what?

[Ach. In thy friends,
He turns aside to them That grieve to see thy wrongs.

[Ba. My wrongs,
There sticks the string my thoughts did harp upon;
But who has wronged me in this high content?
The fates do sometime frown, yet bless the event,
And sequel of our woes, it cannot be,
I should be thwarted in my jollity.
But if I can unfold it -- for the more,
I know them not the greater is my sore.

Chers. In that read all thy woes, take there a brief,
He gives him a paper Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.

Baia. How Is this? my youngest son advanced to my seat.
Corcutus Imperator, sure I dream:
These are but ^mpty apparitions
Feigned by the god of sleep to vex my soul,
Were they not so -- ere this black night
Had thrown her sable mantle ore the heavens
To hide me from my shame; but is it so?
I do but flatter up my self, they are true
And real griefs, my Passion says they are,
Isaac, Achmetes, are they not?

[Ach. Too true
Great Bajazet:

[Baia. Corcutus Imperator,
reads again Would I had seen thy name writ in the book
Of dark damnation, rather then these lines.
Cracked not mine eye-strings when I viewed this text?
See how each letter spreads abroad in pomp,
As if they scorned my tears, how I could dwell
On these two words, Corcutus Imperator.
Hither repair, the watchful paper worms
That scan old records over to a line:
Here in two words imprinted shall you see,
The model of a doleful history;
Virtue dishonored, breach of filial love,
Right shouldered ovt by wrong, nor can you feign,
A crime, which these two words do not contain,
But now I ray^e, not grieve. O nimble air,
Let my plaints vanish as they spoken are,
Off with this womanish mildness, I will find
A shorter trick then this to ease my mind,
Pluto beware, I come to reign in hell,
about to ki^^ himself. Fates bid me rule, and birthright to excel.

Chers. Stay Bajazet, that arm can break a path
Unto thy earthly Monarch, ere thou come
To bless the banks of sweet Elys^um,
With thy wished presence: Mahomet forefend
That thou should seal a Kingdom to thy son,
By this untimely death, Corcutus reigns,
But at thy better pleasure; when he shall hear
Thou art arrived, then he will twixt joy and grief,
Start from his throne, and nimbly run to meet,
Thy pomp, and throw his Scepter at thy feet:
If he but slack that duty here are by,
Achmetes strong and bold, Isaacke and I.
Devoted to your service, yet the world stands
On wavering doubts, ready to clappe their hands.

Baia. My desires are crowned,
And from the gate of Li^bo, where I sat,
I feel my spirits knock against the heavens.
Achmetes? In that name I hear an ease
Of all my griefs pronounced, he shall suffice
To banish usurpation from my throne,
Did furyes guard it round, he is able well
To reach my Kingdoms from the gripes of hell.

Ach. My sword, and life, both which are vowed to thee,
Are still at thy command: walk but along,
Corcutus shall resign, thou have no wrong.

Exeunt Bajazet, Cherseogles, and Achmetes, Ma^^nt Isaac, and Mustapha. Actus
Primi, Scena Tertia,
Isaac. Death, and the furies plunge the obsequious ^laues,
Would he have joined with us? we would have kept
Corcutus high, and honored, where he sits
In spite of a whole host of Baiazets.

Musta. Me thinks your power might have bin greater far
Over Achmetes, one adict to you
By no less bond of duty, then the son
Is to the father:

[Isa. Mustapha I Will tell you
Had not my daughter been espoused to him,
I had named his death, and by some plot
Work't him a quick destruction long ever this;
Now let us temporize with Bajazet;
Yet keep thy nature ever, and be true
To thine own profit; Fortune may advance
Some other Prince, worth both thy love and mine.

Musta. We Will stay her leisure,

Isaac See more Harpies gathered to catch a Crown,
O it is a charming bait.

Exit vterque. Enter Mahomet^, Achmetes, S^linus. Mahom. Me thinks these City
walls smile on our entrance,
As if they knew great Baiazets three sons,
Were come to grace their beauty.

Sell. But We should frown
On them which harbor such black treasons, Well,
Were I great Bajazet, I Would ring a noise
Of spightfull horror, that should make the ground
Tremble beneath their weight at such a sound:
A younger son enthroned an Emperor.

Achm. Brother contain your self, come lets away,
To see the end that waits on this sad day.

Exeunt As they go Trizham and Mahomet, two other Sons of Bajazet go to
meet them. Selin. What Mahomet?

Achm. And Trizham? heer^ a sight
Of one man's issue, Noble Bajazet,
Brothers we have iumpt together?

Sell. All save one,
And he is a great deal better so alone.

Triz. Corcutus it is you mean, who though he reign,
Above us now, yet must fall back again,
Into our rank, it is Bajazet must rise,
And he descend, such a report there flies.

Exeunt. Actus Primi, Sccena Quarta.
Enter Corcutus, Cherseogles, Mesithes. Corcu. Did he not frown, and storm?

Chers. It moved him much,
And wrought strange passions in him, when he read
Your name, and found your name so entitled.

Corcu. Cling to my temples thou blessed ornament,
Be ever unremoved, though all the gods
Chide me in thunder for this insolence,
Am I in heaven? in state placed on the sphere
Of eminence, but barely to appear,
With faint, and borrowed luster, then descend,
Rankt with the vulgar heads, first let me feel,
The Titio^ vulture, or Ixions wheel;
And the worst torture hell it self can bring,
To scourge my soul, o let me dye a King;
But stay, I must bethink me at what rate,
I purchase these fair trappings: ha? the curse
Of him that got me: start my daunted spirits,
Shall I usurp a throne, and sit above my father,
Whilst the gaping pit of hell,
With wide stretched jaws, yawnes for my fall,
O I am struck with horror, and the slaves of stix,
Already sting my wounded soul.

Chers, Will you fair Prince reject all future hopes
Of just succession, and afflict your Sire,
By your unjust detainment of his Crown.

Corcu. I am distracted, and me thinks I burn,
Under these robes of state, a boiling heat,
Runs from them through my veins, Jove's hardy son,
When he bewrapt himself in Nessus shirt,
Felt not more bitter agonies, then I,
Clothed in the trappings of my Majesty.
I am resolved; Bassaes, go me^te our father,
Allure him home with this: I am begun
Exeunt Mesithes and Cherseogles. To be no King, but a repentant son.
Pallas I ask thy pardon, I have straied
A graceless trewant from thy happy schools,
Whither I Will now return; there is not a rank,
Place, or degree, can sort us out true bliss
Without thy Temple, there my dwellin^g is:
Amongst the Sacred monuments of wit,
Which Classique authors carefully have writ
For our instruction, I will wast my time;
So to wash out the spots of this sad crime.
Court honors, and you shadows of true joy
That shine like stars, till but a greater light
Drown your weak luster, I adjure your sight,
Even from my meditations, and my thoughts
I banish your entising vanities,
And closely kept within my study walls,
As from a cave of rest, henceforth I Will see,
And smile, but never taste your misery.
I but as yet am floating on the waves,
Of stormy danger, nor am sure to escape
The violent blast of angry Bajazet.
Blow fair my hopes and when I touch the shore,
I Will venture forth on this rough surge no more.
Enter Bajazet, Cherseogles, Achmetes, Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha, Mahomet,
Achomates, Selymus, Trizham, Mahomet^ Zemes disguised. See where he comes, oh
how my guilty blood
Starts to my face, and proves my cause not good.
Our duty to our father,

kneeles. Baia. Ours to the Emperor.

kneeles Cor, Why kneeles great Bajazet? I am thy son
Thy slave: and if thy wrath but frown, undone.
Why kneeles great Bajazet, heavens hide thy face,
From these preposterous doings.

Ba. What, not ashamed
To circle in thy brow with that bright Crown,
Yet blush to see me kneel? though filial rites,
And morrall precepts say the son must bend
Before the Father, yet your high degree
And power bids you rise, commands my knee.

Core. Those ornaments be thine, Here Bajazet
I Crown thee Monarch of the spacious West,
Asia, and Africa: if ought be mine,
Greater then these I here proclaim it thine.

Omnes. Live Bajazet our mighty Prince,
Live, rule, and flourish.

Baia. Is this your zeal? is it? did every voice
Breath out a willing suffrage? I am crowned,
My joys are fully perfect, and I feel
My lightened spirits caper in my breast.
Rise thou starre-bright mirror of thine age,
To Corcutus kneeling. By thee our iron days prove full as good,
As when old Saturn thundered in the clouds.
Be an example to succeeding times,
How sons should use their Parents: and I vow
(When I shall fail) this honor to thy brow.
Attend us Bassa^s, I Will lead on to joy,
Never was Father blessed with such a Boy.

Exeunt omnes manet Corcut. Corcu. Freed from a Princely burden, I possess
A Kingly liberty, and am no less
Princely; observance wait on him, on me
Thoughts vndisturb'd, I shall then happy be.
Exit.
Actus Primi, Scena Quinta.
Enter Zemes the brother of Bajazet alone. Zemes. Scarce had I set my foot
within these walls
In expectation of a solemn hear^e,
Due to the wandering Ghost of Mahomet;
But loud alarmes of abundant joy
Ring in mine ears, and every servile groom
Congratulates the Coronation
A^s^owt within. Of Bajazet: hark how they roar it out.
A cold disturbance like a gelid ^^ost
Settles my blood within me, and I hate
His cheerful triumphs, more then mine own Fa^e.
It Is true indeed, I proved not the first fruits,
An elder offspring of my Fathers breed,
Yet was it so that Bajazet and I
Both tumbled in one womb, perhaps the Queen
Of women's labors doted at our birth,
And sent him first abroad, or else I slept,
And he before me stole into the world,
Must I then loose my glory, and be hurled
A slave beneath his feet? no, I must be
An Emperor as full as great as he.
Exit.
Actus Primi, Scena Sexta.
Enter Isaac alone. Iaack. Deuorc'd my Daughter? fond and insolent man,
I Will crush thee into nothing, if I can
Endure the noise of my disgrace I know
How to return it; I am a flame of fire,
A chafing heat distempers all my blood.
Achmetes thou must cool it, when thy limbs
Are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
And thy stained blood enchanted from thy veins,
Then shall I be appeased, mean while I live
Thy mortal foe: But stay, let me contain
Mine anger undiscovered. Friend how is it?

Enter Mesithes. Mesith. Know you not Isaac?

Isa. What?

Mes. The flight of Zemes
Hence to Armenia.

Isa. O^ Zemes?

Mes. Yes ^e walked
About the City disguised, and unseen
Till his escape.

Is. It Is strange and full of fear.

Mes. We meet him frequent in the vulgar mo^th.

Isaac. Zemes is valiant, and Armenia strong,
Here Is Bajazet, he must beware the wrong.

Enter Bajazet. Baia. What is it thou murmurst, Bajazet and wronged?
Something it is thou know concerning us:
Take thee fair leave, and speak it.

Isa. Yes I know
Matter of weight, such as concern thy life.

B^ia. Such as concern my life? Speak out thy tale,
We are so flesht in joy, bad news proves strange,
And touch my sense too harshly.

Isa. But you must hear.
Your brother Zemes, when swift winged Fame
Told him your father Mahomet was dead,
Flew quickly hither first to celebrate
His funeral pomp, then to assume his State,
His Crown, and Scepter: which he rightly knew,
Unto your hand, and head, both to be due.
But when applausiue joys, and peales of mirth,
Sounded loud Mosique in his troubled ears,
Of you enthroned; then he began too late
To brawle at heaven, and wrangle with his Fate.
So he went hence and cried; revenge be mine:
Quake thou great City of proud Constantine
At my fierce anger, when I next return,
With clouds of misty powder, I shall choke
Thy breath, and dull thy beauty with it is smoke.
This posted he hence to Armenias King,
There to implore his aid, which he will bring
To front thy power: nor does he yet despair,
To dispossess, and fright thee from thy chair.

Baiacet. First from my body shall he fright my soul,
And push me into dust. Isaac make have
To muster up our forces, strike up our Drums,
Let them proclaim destruction through the world.
Clear up your dusty armor, let it cast
Such an amazing luster on the Foe,
As if Bellona danced on every crest.
The bright sun of my glory is eclipsed,
Till Zemes be extinct: he must not shine
To dull my beams, si^ce the whole heaven is mine.
Call forth Achmetes, his unconquered arm,
Shall keep us safe from this intended harm.

Isaac. My Liege, you have forgot Archmetes ^ath,
In which he vowed never to draw his sword
In your defense.

Baia. I had forgot it,
But now I remember, such was the vain
Heat of my youth, but I recall again
What ever I protested, tell him so.
Rash words must be dispensed with.

Isa. Then I Will go.
Exit.
Baia. My Father once in ordering of a Camp,
Preferred me to be Captain of a wing,
So when the Battles joined, and life and death
Where struggling who should win power of our breath,
Our Armies proved the stronger; only my guide
Failed, and a base repulse fell on my side;
At which my Father stormed, and in my place
Seated Achmetes, for which black disgrace,
I vowed a swi^t revenge, even by his shame
That wore mine honor, to redeem my fame*
Which when Achmetes heard, he deeply swore,
Never with wit and strength to guide me more.
But now he must, see where he comes, and armed.
Enter Achm. What strange device is plotting in his brain?
Honored Achmetes.

Ach. Royal Emperor.

Gives him ^sw^rd. Baia. Thine arm must then uphold my Royalty.
Why lies thy valor, prostrate at our feet,
When like fierce lightnings it should run and meet
My harms like a rock unmoved? oppose.
The course, and headlong torrent of my foes.

Achm. I am a man of peace, mistake me not.
I made a vow, nor can it be forgot,
Till you revoke your oath.

Baia. Which here I do,
Great Mahomet be witness, that I mean
Sincerely what I speak, Achmetes now
Gives him his sword again. VVe're friends, and thus I nullify my vow;
Heavens on this concord lend a gracious smile.
Achmetes I have placed thee in my bosom,
Gave thee an honored title in my love;
And of as lasting constancy, as is
The sun which looks so cheerfully on this.
Go fit the Ianizaries to the wars,
Kindle new fire of valor in their breasts,
Thou art their Genius, even the breath they draw,
Raise then thy plumes, and keep thy foes in awe.

Achm. Stood there a Pluto at thy city walls,
And with a band of furies had besieged
Thy people, I would conjure them away,
And send them back to hell: so thou shall stand
As fast as in the skies, under mine hand.

Baia, I am Crowned in thee, nor can I fall,
Whilst such a valor breathes within our wall,
Zemes depose me? he must be more strong,
Then Mars, that can do Bajazet that wrong.

Exe^^^ Actus Primi, Scena Septima.
Enter Zemes, and the King of Armemia, Arm^. We hate thy brother, therefore
lend thee aid,
It Is not our duty to expostulate
Thy right unto the Crown, on to your wars,
Thrive in your proiects, I shall joy to see
A quarrel fought twixt Bajazet and me.
I Will second thy encounters, and we two
Like the two Roman thunderbolts of war,
Will with the flashes of our fiery swords
Keep their composed ranks, that they shall stand
Aghast, to see two Scipi^es in one band,

Zemes. Thanks great Arme^ian King, and when I am
Wheeled to that height, which now my brother holds,
I shall require these benefits, and vow
That kindness, which I can but promise now.

Arm. Come let us away, our armies are well set,
Ready to march, now tremble Bajazet.

Exeu^^ Actus Primi, Scena Octaua.
Enter Achmetes in his Generals coat, and Caigubus his son. Achm. Caigubus,
public dangers call me forth,
And I must leave thee now unto thy self
My son, thou see unto what height of fame
We are ascended, yet the sun shines clear,
And not one dusky cloud of discontent
Dimmes the unspotted brightness of our joys,
Not Bajazet is more beloved then I:
Such strict observance is there showed to me,
By all that know my worth, and hear me named,
As if I grasp't Jove's thunder in my hands:
By all my hopes, I fear some tragic scene
Will trouble our calm fortune* Son beware,
The top of honor is a narrow plot
Of ground, whither we have already got,
It Is brittle, and uncertain, if thou tread
One careless ^leppe aside, thou fall'st down dead,
The shute from thence is deep, and underneath,
Ruin gapes wide, thy body to receive.
Stand firm Caigubus: though thou start'st not away
Yet blasts of envy often force aside
The weariest footsteppe: these where ever they shall,
Blow strong* will make them stagger if not fall.

Caigu. I shall forget to sleep, to breath, to live,
Sooner then these thy precepts, they are fixed,
And printed in my thoughts.

Ach. Enough, no more,
That Isaac Bassa trust him not too much:
I have divorced his daughter from my bed,
For her adulterate looseness, hence, he hides
A mass of fretting ranchor in his breast,
Which he has varnish't yet, and gilded over
With colored shows of love, but he is false,
And subtle as a Serpent, that will wind
Into thy breast, stinging thee ere thou find
Or o^ce suspect his hatred; I must away,
Trumpets soun^. Hasty alarmes call me hence, thus, and farewell,
Envy grows greater, as our states excel:
Exit.
Caigu. Father, adieu.
Exit.
Actus Secundi,
Scena Prima.
A dum^e show: Enter Zemes, and the Armenian King, Trumpets and Ensigns,
Soldiers pass over the stage, and in a solemn march. Exeunt. Actus Secundi,
Scena Secunda.
Enter Bajazet and Trizham, and Mahomet his two sons. Baia. Alaready marched
so near, Zemes make have
To death, as if he longed our wrath to taste.
Trizham, and Mahomet, it concerns you now,
To fly hence nimbly to your Provinces,
Zemes is come too near us to escape,
He cannot fly the ground whereon he treads,
But through your countries, have then, if the wars
Crack not his thread of life, his flight will be
When you may intercept it; if we presume
Only on bold Achmetes, and our selves,
In beds of down supinely, sleep at home,
Zemes may escape the tempest of our wrath.
Then we hope best, when each event we see,
Thwarted with their preventing policy.

Trizham. Doubt not our have and truth, he shall as soon
Break through the fiery fabric of the skies,
As through my Provinces:
Exit.
Maho. Through hell as soon as mine.
Exit.
Baia. Go, I have done my part; Mars and my fate
Give fair success to my designed plot,
And Zemes is intrapt, already dead:
That hand secures me that strikes off his head.

Actus Secundi, Scena Tertia.
Enter Achmetes, Cherseogles, Mustapha, Mesithes, drums and Trumpets. Achm.
The battle will prove great and dangerous,
But were their number double more then ours,
The justice of our cause bids us go on,
And like a cheerful drum strikes panting fear
From every breast. Father, lead you the vangard,
The reare-ward be your charge, the right wing yours,
My self will gui^e the left, this day shall crown
Your valor in full pride, Zemes must down.

Enter Zemes, Armenia, two Captains. Zem. Time has outstript our have, our
foes do stand,
Wauing their golden plumes, as if the gods,
Were come to meet great Zemes in the field,
Their armies planted, and a distilling cloud,
Hovers above their heads, as if it wept,
At their approaching fate. Arm^nia's King
Lead you the vanguard, under your command
The reareward shall march on, the Phalance
Be your care brave Captains, as we are informed,
Achmetes rules the left wing of our foe,
I Will rule the right wing of ours, so when I meet,
Him in his pride I Will prostrate at his feet.

Arm. Our men are ordered, Zemes lead the way,
The skies look duskie black on this sad day.

Exeu^^ Trumpets sound to the battaile^, dumb shows in skirmishes, one of
Zemes Captains and Cherseogles meet, Zemes Captain preuailes, his second and
Mesithes meet, Mesithes retires, ^he King of Armenia and Mustapha meet,
Armenia preuail^s, and pursues the battle. Enter Achmetes with his sword.
Ach. Great Queen of chance; but do I call on this
Unconstant St^pdame? be thou propitious Mars,
Rough god of war: steel up this weary arm,
And put a ten fold vigor in my bones;
What shall Achmetes fall, and in his loss,
Great Bajazet, be wronged? it cannot be
Death comes to wound thee Zemes, I am he.

As he goes out, the King of Armenia meets him, they ^ight, Achmetes makes him
retire from the stage, and pursues him in his fury, enters again at the one
door, Zemes at the other, they meet, drums and trumpets sounding. Ach. Zemes?

Zem. Achmetes? Opportunelie met,
Here staggers all the fortune of the field,
This hour must bless me, and a single fight
Purchase thee honor, and to me my right:
Honor to thee, to die by Zemes hand,
My right to me, an Empire to command.

Achm. Brave Prince, I more lament thy case then can thy self
That runnest with such madness on the edge
Of desperate ruin, thou art but young and weak,
Manhoods soft blossoms are not fully spread
Upon thy downy chinne; but riper years
Have settled the compacture of my joints,
And they are strongly knit: 'twill vex my soul
In the clear morn of thine vp-rising hopes,
To wrap thee in a fatal cloud of death.
Submit thee to thy brother, thou shall find
Me thy true friend, him merciful and kind.

Zem. Submit? had I a right to Io^es high Throne,
And stood in opposition of his power,
Should all the gods advise me to submit,
I would reject their counsel: much more thine.
Guard thee Achmetes, ^ thy stroke abide,
I cannot gore thy Prince but through thy side.

They fight and breath: fight again. Achmetes takes away Zemes sword. Zem. The
day be thine, and Zemes stand thy Fate;
Strike home, I'^e l^st the day, and life I hate.

Achm. Have at thee then.
Offers to run at him with both swords. Not stir? now by my sword
Thou shall have fayrer play before thy death:
Take back thy sword, in that I recommit
My forfeit to thy charge, thy life with it.

They fight again and Achmetes wounds him on the head. Zemes falls. Zem. Oh!
hold thy conquering hand, and give my soul
A quiet pas^age to her rest; my blood
Begins to wast, and a benuming cold,
Freezes my vital spirits: Achmetes go,
Tell Bajazet that thou have slain his ^oe.

Ach. Farewell, brave ^onne of Mars, thy fame shall stay
With us, although thy soul flit hence away.

Zemes I have not ly^d, Achmetes thou have slain,
My hopes, and therefore me, my wounds are shallow,
But my state desperate, Ha? what shall I do?
Armenia's King is (...) acke to his home,
Cold enter^ainment will attend me there;
The field is empty, every man r^tir'd,
Only a few dead ca^casses, and I,
Then whither shall I bend my steps? to Rome!
To Rome then let it be: Bishop I come,
Thou Art a religious thing, and I will trust,
My life to one so innocently just.
Exit.
Actus Secundi, Scena Quarta.
Enter Mahom^tes, Achomates, Selymus three of Baiazets sons. Sely. Indeed we
may be thought upon in time,
When there be Countries more then there be men,
We may get some preferment: sit at home
And prove good boys, and please our father well.
My thoughts are two unbridled, Bajazet,
aside I neither can, nor will endure thy curb,
My comprest valor like a strangled fire.
Breaks out in violent flames, and I must rule.
Trizham and Mahomet are slipped in have
Each to their several Province, we must stay,
That are their Elders for another day;
This Court will prove our scaffold where we stand
Placed in the eye of angry Bajazet:
Who thvvarts him in his fury is but dead,
And in that passions heat, off goes his head.
I must not line thus.

Maho. I could be content,
He fears not death, whose thoughts are innocent.

Sely. I thank you brother, then belike some crimes
Lie heavy on my conscience, and I fear,
Unless I shift my station, 'twill be known;
You think well of me kind Mahometes.

Maho. As well as of a brother I can think.
If by a rash applying to your self,
My words have been distasteful, blame not me.

Sely. Can I apply them then unto my self?
Am I so loose in manners? by heaven and earth,
Thou shall repent this deeply.

Ach. Stop that oath,
Brothers agree, or walk hence but along
Into my garden, where each springing herb
Smiles on my fair content, there you shall see,
How flowers of one stock, so twisted are,
One in the others twinings, that they show,
One stands by the others help, both jointly grow;
These shall suffice your quarrels to remove,
And dumb examples teach a lively love.

Maho. Come let us go.

Exeunt Mahomates. and Achomates. Sely. Straight I will follow you.
Away fond wretches, o that every breast
Were of so dull a temper as you two.
But who come's here?
Enter Corcutus Brother Corcutus whither are you bent*
What from the Court so soon?

Corcu. My father bids,
I go to undertake the charge, his love
Has thrown upon me; That Is rich Ionia.

Sely. You go to rule there?

Cor. Yes:

Sell. Heavens speed you well.

Cor. Dear Selymus adieu.

Sell. Brother farewell.
Exit Corcutus Revenge and you, three furious twins of night,
Ascend up to our theater of ill,
Plunge my black soul twice in your Stygian flood,
That by it is virtue it may be congealed,
And hardened against remorse: Pluto enrich
My breast, with a diviner policy,
Then every trifling brain can reach unto;
I Will fill the world with Treasons, and my wit
Shall put new tracts to death: Charon shall see,
His wa^tage still in use by company,
Sent thither by my care, ^ 'twill do well,
To blast the earth with want, and furnish hell,
Exit
Actus Secundi, Scena Quinta,
Enter Isaac Bajazet. Isaac. Tush, ver^ue makes men fools, Isaac be wise,
Shake off the tender fetters of remorse,
And hug that chance, that opens thee the way
To ruinate Achmetes: did he stand
On terms of conscience, neighbor-hood or love,
When he cashierd my daughter from his house,
And to the worlds broad eye, opened her crime?
No: he was swift and bitter in his hate,
And so will I, he is but now returned
In Triumph from the field, as full of pride
As I of envy, hence I Will ground my hate.
When fierce Bellona smiled on Bajazet,
Amidst the fiery tumults of the War,
She offered Zemes to Achmetes hand,
They fought, Achmetes conquered at his foot,
Fell the proud rebel, wounded, but not slain,
There might Achmetes with a blow of death
Cut off our fears, continued in his breath:
This shall incense the angry Emperor,
And crush Achmetes in his fairest hopes.
True politicians work by others hands,
So I will by the Prince, my plot stands firm:
See where he comes, now sly Mercurius, whet
My tongue, to kindle hate in Bajazet,

Enter Bajazet* Baia. Isaac how thriu'd Achmetes in his Wars,
Fame is of late grown dumb of his renown,
Surely unwelcome news clogs her swift wings,
Else had she now bin freqvent in our Court;
And we had fully known the chance of all.

Isa. We had, yet could not the event,
Lie so concealed, but Isaac found it out,
Which when I first discovered, straight it wrought
Tempests of passions in me, joy and grief
Reigned at one instant in the self same breast.

Bajazet As how?

Isa. As thus. I joy'd that Zemes fell,
Was sorry he escaped.

Baia, Fell and yet escaped?

Isa. Beneath Achmetes feet the traitor fell.

Baia. And yet escaped, good Io^e how may this be.

Isa. Thus it might be, and was so: when sad death
Was glutted with the ruin of each side,
When slaughtring Mars had stained the field with blood,
And cast a purple color o'r the earth,
At length some milder providence desired,
An end of those hot tumults that were seen,
To last in Zemes breath; so that their fire
Would be extinct, when Zemes should expire
Then from the middle skirmish forth were brought
He and Achmetes, being met they fought,
Zemes was vanquished by a violent blow,
Which struck him trembling lower then his knees*
Now whither flattering, or present gifts
Redeemed him from his fate I cannot show
Something they plotted, what, none yet can know.

Baia. Can thou advise me Isaac how to sound
The depth of all his mischief.

Isa. Thus you may,
He being come from Z^mes overthrow,
And yet lukewarm in blood, and full of joy,
You may in way of honor and free mind,
Call him this night to banquet, then being se^,
When the hot spirits of carroused healths,
Have spoiled his wit of smooth and painted tales,
And wine unlocked the passage for the truth,
Bid him relate the manner of his war,
The chances and events; then when he comes
To Zemes, if he err about his ^light,
His ends are bad, his bosom black as night.

Baia. Thou art my good Angel, Isaac I applaud
Thy faithful plot, Achmetes were thy soul
As dark as hell, and thy enclosed thoughts,
As subtle as a winding Laberinth,
By such a guide as can remove each doubt,
And by a quill of thread ^'de tracke them out.
But Isaacke, if we trappe him in this wiles,
How shall we kill the traitor? We have a trick,
Already strange to catch him in the nicke.

Isac* Easily thus: our laws allow a custom,
Not used of late, yet firm still in effect,
And thus it is; when there does breath a man,
Direfully hated of the Emperor,
And he in strickt severity of right
Cannot proceed against him, then he may
O^ewhelme him in a robe of mourning black,
Which we have called ^eaths mantle, that thing done,
The man thus v^'d, is for^et^ed to fate,
And a devoted sacrifice to him
Whom he had er'^t offende^, neither can
Strength or intr^atie, w^est him from his death,
Both which are treason, and inexpiable.
Thus then you may procee^e, when banquets done,
And all their comicke merrim^nt run on
To the last scene, and every man expects
A solemn gift, due to Achmetes vvorth,
Call for a robe therewith to deck your friend,
An^ perfect all his glory, let that be
This robe of fate, in which ready at hand,
You may intombe the traitor, and bewrappe
His pampered body in a veil of death,
So let him dye, dream not on the event,
Vice is rewarded in it is punishment.

Baia. I will be fierce and sudden, Isaac inuit
Achmetes to a feast: he dies this n^ght.
Exit Baia.
Isa. I shall: would not a private warning serve
But open penance must correct my child,
And a severe divorcem^nt q^ite degrade
Her other honored Matrimonial rights?
Were he as strong, as steele-like joynted Mars,
As much applauded through our popular streets,
As er'st Dictator F^bius was in Rome,
Or great Augustus, yet the slave should feel
The wrath of an inflamed father light
Heavy upon his soul, and that ever the next sun
Appear, Achmetes all thy glorie's done.
Exit.
Actus Secundi, Scena Sexta.
Enter A^^metes, and Caigubus his son. Caigu. I fear'^ your sa^ety and
^^voutly prayed
The sword of justice, which your hand did swaye,
Might be of conquering force.

Ach. Thy prayers were heard
And I am here as safe as I went forth,
Untouched by the rough hands of desperate war,
Nor did I once spy danger in the field,
But when I fronted Zemes, then there met
Two streams of valor, since on us was set
The chance of the whole combat, others stood
Expecting which of us should loose his blood:
But heaven was just, and to compose the strife,
This sword at one sad blow took thence his life.

Caig. The heavens were just indeed, but who comes here*
Isaac, Mesithes, and Baiazets three sons,

Enter Isaac, Mesithes, Mahometes, Achomates, Selymus. Ach. They come to
gratulate my late success,
I see their errand ^oulded in their smiles,
How cheerfully they look upon my joys,

Omnes. All happiness attend Achmetes.

Ach. Thanks Noble friends, how fares the Emperor.

Isaac. Well by your guard, and he has sent us now,
All to invite your presence to a feast,
We must be frolike, and this following night,
Shall Crown your joy with revels and delight,
Or else deprive thy soul of that good light.

aside Ach. We must be frolic Captains, think not then
On my loud drums, and staring trumpeters,
Such whose strong ^^^gs roar out a bellowing voice,
Would make a man dance Antic in the fire,
We Will have a choicer music, and my feet,
Shall tread a neater march, then such harsh strains
Can teach them, with more pleasure, and less pains.
Since it has pleased the E^peror to grace
Our slender merrits thus: we shall be there,
To taste his bounty.

Mes. We Will lead on before.

Ach. I Will follow you.

Isa. Never to return more,

aside Exeunt omnes, Ma^^nt, Achmetes, and Caig^bus. Ach. I am happy above
envy, and my state,
Not to be thwarted with (...) ^ate,
I could disburden all my jealous thoughts,
And shake that currish vice supition, off
From my sincere affection, I have wronged
Sure I have wronged thee Isack thy chaste love,
Cloakes not intended mischief, black deceit
Cannot lie hid under so pure a white,
But it would cast a colored shadow out,
Through such a slender veil, thy generous thoughts,
Nourish no base detraction; thy free love
Thy professed actions, say it were no just fate
That good men's deeds should die by ill men's hate.

Caig. Pray heaven they do not.

Ach. fear not, I am guest
To Bajazet, expected at the feast,

Exeunt Actus Secundi, Scena Septima.
Enter Bajazet, and Cherseogles. Baia. The day's far spent, is not Achmetes
come?

Chers. Not yet great Emperor.

Baia. Viceroy of Greece, say now there were a man
Whom my mind honored, and I should command,
To cloth his body in a suite of gold,
Studded with gems, worth all the Indian snore,
D^rst any tongue gainsay it:

Chers. Surely no.

Baia. What if I hated him, and should command
To wrappe him in a sable colored black,
And sentence him to death?

Chers. Then he must die.

Baia. My thoughts are troubled.

Chers. What should these questions mean,
Abrupt demands, one to confound the other?
My liege, your guests are come.

Enter Achmetes, Isaac, Mahometes, Achomates, Selymus, Mesithes, Caigubus.
Baia. Blessed be the hour in which I see Achmetes safe returned
Bring in our banquet soldiers: boys kneel round,
Enter a banquet, all kneel. A ring of brauer lads nere blessed the ground,
Supply us here with nectar, give it me,
takes the cup Achmetes, noble warrior, here is to thee,
A health to thy blessed fortunes, it shall run
A complete circle ere the course be done.

Ach. My duty bids me pledge it. I return
Good health to Isaac, and in this wee'^ drowned
All concealed enmities.

drinks Isa. Jove split me with his thunder, if my breast
Harbor one bad thought, when this draught is past.
And so I greet thy son? health to Caigubus.

drinks Caigu. Mahometes the turn lights next on you.

drinks Mah^. I Will pledget freely, Viceroy here is to you.

drinks Chers. Ach^mates, to you I must commend
The welfare of Achmetes in this cup.

drinks Ach^. To you Mesithes, thus I prove my love.

drinks Mes. Young Prince I do commit this health to you.

drinks Sely. I am the last* be prodigallin wine,
Fill up my bowl with Nectar, let it rise
Above the goblets side, and may it like
A swelling Ocean flow above the banckes,
I will exhaust it greedily, it is my due.

drinks Omnes. We Will drink with Bacchus and his roaring crew.

Baia. Already done, so quickly run about,
One health to me, faith since you are set to it,
Here Is a carouse to all,

Omnes. We Will pledge it round.

As they drink round, Bajazet rises and speaks aside. Baia. It Is the last
draught to some, or I shall fail,
In mine intendments* let a ^oe escape?
When he was trampled down beneath his feet,
There must be treason in it; how my blood
Boyles in my breast, with anger, not the wine
Could work such strong effect; my soul is vexed,
A chafing heat distempers all my blood,
Achmetes thou must cool it when thy limbs
Are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
And thy stained blood vnchannel'd from thy veins,
Then shall I be secure, a quiet rest
Shall rock my soul asleep, it is thy last hour,
Must set a period to my restless fears.
What are you merry friends? drink on your course,
Then all arise: and now to consummate
Our happy meeting, and shut up our joys,
Discourse Achmetes of your finished wars;
After an age of woes it proves at last
A sweet content to tell of dangers past.
Let'^ know your whole events.

Ach. Great Emperor
Scarce had the rosy day star through the East,
Displayed her silver colors through the heaven,
But all the watchful soldiers ready armed,
Dimmed her pale cheeks, with their transparent steel,
And added luster to the dull sight morn,
So stood we in full pride till the bright Sun
Climing the glass pauement of the skies,
Roused the slow spirits of the backward foe,
And urged them to the field; at length stepped forth
Zemes, in all the trappings of his state:
And like a well-taught H^ctor, ranged his troops,
Into their several orders, all prepared
Titan being fearful stepped behind a cloud,
Lest when he saw our limbs bathed all in blood,
And purple streams gush't from our wounded breasts,
Like water from their springs; he in a fear
Should be eclipsed, or startle from his sphere,
The air was thick and dim, our armies joined,
The skirmishes grew hot, and angry Mars
Enthroned upon the battlements of heaven,
Left either side to tugge with their own strength,
Till their oppressing multitude bore down,
The justice of our cause, and our whole side,
Not daring to withstand, scorning to fly,
Stood trembling on the utmost brinke of hope,
Then the propitious Gods singled me out
Zemes, the life and spirit of our foes:
We met and fought, such was my happy fate,
That at the first encounter Zemes fell,
And I disarmed him, when in proud contempt,
He spit defiance in the face of death,
Opened his breast, and dard me to the stroke,
Whereby I might hane sent him hence to hell,
But I in admiration of his worth,
Armed his right hand once more and bad him fight,
Chance did direct my sword upon his head,
He fell before me, and cried, Achmetes hold*
I Am wounded to the death, and Captain go
Tell Bajazet that thou have slain his foe.
I left the dying Prince, our wars were done
And ceased with him, by whom they were begun.

Isaacke. The plot has took.

aside Baia. Treason by Mahomet.
I left the dying Prince.

Isaac. Pursue the project.

Baia. Worthy Achmetes,
Well we may give, but not reward by gifts,
And thank, but not requite thee, I would hate
That liberality which would ab^te
The worth of the receiver* thy true fame,
Outstrips the length of titles, and a name
Of weighty honor, is a slender price,
To grace thy merits with, as for a voice,
To crown thee after death, thou art the choice,
Of everliving glory, on thy crest,
Is her abode, and when the latest rest
Of nature, has betrayed thee to thy grave,
Then shall she print in characters of gold
How brave a man thou wast, how great, how bold;
Though we be dumb, yet shall the world vplift,
Thy name, and thou shall live without our gift.
Yet thy blessed fates, have not created thee
So clearly Godlike, but some other chance,
May cross thy greatness, and thy high renown
The envy of some God may shoulder down,
Then thus we will make thee happy, future events
Never shall oppress thy worth nor envious chance
Blot thy ensuing fame, Ach^^tes know,
Death an immortal gift, we (...)

He casts a gown of black^ (...) upon him, called the (...) of death. Caigub.
Treason, treason. O my Father treason,
Help lanizaries.

Excur^^^. Baia. Stop the furious youth.
Exeunt Bass^^^. Bring in an Heads-man. Traitor, Zemes dead?
He lives to see this hand untwine thy thread.
Enter seven or eight lanizaries with swords (...). What means this outrage?

Ianiza. 1. Cruel homicide.

2. Vngrate^ull wr^tch.

3. Tyrant.

4. Meet hilts in's guts.

Circle him. 5. First let his own hands take that Mantle off.

Baia. Help! Treason! I am slain.

6. Help? why? From whom?
Is not thy Guard about thee.

Baia. Hemn'd in with death? My friends beset me round
Not to preserve my life, but murder me.
B^ush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
That they may see their crimes, and be ashamed
Of this unheard offense: Valiant Ianizaries,
Sheath up these weapons of rebellion,
Print not that ugly sin upon your brow,
Let my tree pardon woe you to submit.
Keep your alleagiance firm.

Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

1 One word more damnes thee.

2 How pretily he began to talk

3 Of sin and pardon. Bajazet behold
Here stands a man mild, honored, gracious,
Valiant, and faithful; gentle in command,
At home beloved, and feared amongst our ^oes,
Yet has thy hand of cruelty assayed
The hated murder of so de re a friend:
Blush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
That he may see his crimes, and be ashamed
Of this new bloudinesse. Wicked Bajazet
These admonitions fit the teacher well.

Baia. But hear me speak.

4 First set Achmetes free, then speak thy fill.

Baia. What shall I be compelled?

5 And quickly too.

6 We cannot brook to see him stand thus clothed.

Baia. Your anger will have way. Achmetes go.
Takes off the Mantle. There take him. They have saved thee from this woe.
Ex^unt showting and leaping. Pernicious villains, they have crossed my plot,
'Twas intercepted even in the last deed:
What should Achmetes mean thus to ingrosse
The best affections of my Ianizaries?
Will he defrand me of my Crown and life?
My life I weigh not: but to loose my Crown
Were to be sentenced to a hell of woes.
I am full stuffed with choler. Slavish Peasants
Held I a sword of power in mine hand,
I would disioynt them peece-meale; can I not?
Am I not Emperor? men call me so:
A reverend title, empty attributes,
And a long page of words follow my name,
But no substantial true prerogative.

Enter Isaac. Isaac. Good health to Bajazet.

Baiaz. Indeed that is nothing, since your counsel failed.

Isaac. Use your best patience it may be regained.
Affection in your stubborn multitude
Is a prone torrent not to be withstood.
Were you as sacred as their household gods,
Yet when you thwart the current of their will,
They Will break the bands of duty, and profane
That holiness to which they bound their thoughts.
Mine eyes are witness with what lively joy
They bore him through the streets upon their necks,
Offering the use of their best strength.

Baia. No more.
I am already gone. Why did not then
His proud ambitious tongue bid them go fetch
My Crown, and with quick speed disrobe a wretch?
'Twas in his power: we are distracted Isaac*
Lend us thy wholesome counsel to prevent
My ruin, and their dangerous intent.

Isaac. Mine is a blunt advice, and deep in blood
To cut off those base Peasants that withstood
The force of your decree.

Baiaz. To cut them off?
Me thinks I see my self yet circled in
With their reuengefull swords, ha? cut them off?
Could I but curse the Traitors from the earth,
Or were my doom pronounced but of effect,
I Would rattle such new torments in their ears,
Should stagger their high courage; but my fears
Strangle my furies, and my envious fate
Forc^th my tongue to flatter, where I hate.

Isaac. Here lies the safest course, to rid these griefs
Give out, you will go to war, so to enlarge your territories,
And to this end fetch home,
Those warlike Soldiers placed in Garrison.
Let them remain without the walls; at last,
When things shall fit your purpose, lead them all
By night into the City, and in one stroke
Strike off so many thousand perjured heads,
As shall amaze posterity to hear,
How many lives redeemed thee from thy fear.

Baiaz. The weight of all mine honor leanes on thee,
That or some nearer course shall quell the pride
Of strong Achmetes, and confound his side.

Actus Secundi, Scena Ostaua.
Enter Zemes and Alexander Bishop of Rome. Bishop. If your intents be virtuous,
and desire
Of eminent place quite banished from your thoughts,
My house shall be your Cast^e: that I deny
My men and Arms to aid you in your broils,
Think it kind usage: should my Holinesle
Feed your ambition, and make strong your hand
Against your brother 'twere too light a brand
Of flaming hot discention, and to set
The world in a combustion: all would then
Quarrel by my example: No sweet Prince
Romes holy Bishop must not so transgress.
If you will dwell within my sacred roof
Sett^e irregular Passions, and begin
A quiet life, repentance wipes out sin.

Zemes. My waxen wings are melted, I will soar
Against the sun, through such thick clouds no more.
The middle Region shall contain my flight,
Your counsel swayes my wishes, my late deeds
Were full of sin: now let my brother know
Zemes repents; (and that is the greatest woe.)
Exit.
Bish. To man's aspiring thoughts, how sweet is hope
Which makes them (like Camelions) live on air
And hug their slender plots: till coo^e despair
Does so benumme his thoughts, that he falls dead
From his sublime height, and his lofty head
Which leueld at the skies, does drop below
His humble feet, this has experience taught
In that man's headlong ruin, whose proud thoughts
Aimed at the Turkish Diadem; but now cross Fates
Have forced his stubborn Fates to bow.
Enter a Messenger. What speaks your entrance?

Messen. Health to Romes Bishop.
And Peace from Bajazet, who commends his love
With this his Letter, and expects from you
Gives him a letter. A gracious answer. He reads the Letter.

Bish. Let Zemes die by an vn^imely death,
Else for our love you shall provoke our hate.
He Is not our brother, but our hated foe:
And in his death you shall prevent our woe.
Return our service back: tell Bajazet
What he has given in charge; shall by my hand
Be carefully dispatched.

Messen. Good peace attend you.
Exit.
Bish. Imperious Turk,
Am I not Gods Vize-gerent here on earth,
And dare thou send thy letters of command?
Or speak to me in threatening menaces?
It grates my patience to obey this monster,
Yet must I murder Zemes, what do I know
Whether my fathers ^oule did trans-migrate
Into his breast or no? be dumb remorse,
The Turk is great and powerful, if I win
His love by this, it will prove a happy sin.

Actus Tertij,
Scena Prima,
Enter Selymus alone, Selym. Am I so poor in worth? still kept so low?
Was I ^egot only to live and dye,
To fill a place, move idly to and fro
Like other naturalls? unmanly life,
The world shall take more notice of my fame,
Else will I with the venomed sting of war,
Deface the beauty, of the universe.
Po^teritie shall know, once there did breath
A Selymus, a mortal diety,
A man at whose blessed birth the planets smiled,
And spent their influence to create a boy,
As brave as Greece ever hatched, or Rome, or Troy.
Enter Isaac Here Is Isaac Bassa, he is already mine,
He courts my father, but intends for me,
And furthers all my counsels; Noble friend*
How stand our hopes?

Isaacke Great Sir, most happily,
The Bassaes murmr at Achmetes wrong:
Seize on their wavering love, their breasts are open,
To him that first will enter there is free scope;
Drop down thy frank affection in their hands,
To bribe is lawful, and it is strongly proved
By good examples, Otho never was loved,
Till he had bought the soldiers, that once done,
Gal^a grew out of fashion^ so must we
Addict them to us by a gaine-full fee:
Give freely, and speak fairly I Will be gone*
Stay, here, the Bassae^ will be here anon.

Exit. Enter Mesithes. Sely. I shall observe thy precepts, Mesithes welcome,
How fare you in these days of discontent?
My duty bids me ask, and wish you well;
I have been long a barren debtor to you,
At length I may prove thankful: wear my love,
It Is yours without refusal, a slight gift,
gives him a ring aside Yet your looks tells me, 'twill help out my drift.

Mesi. This courtesy exceeds my weak deserts
Sweet Prince but when occasion calls me forth,
To help you, I Am devoted to your worth.

Sely. Your kind acceptance of that recompense,
Binds me more strictly to you.

Mesith. Sir, farewell,

Exit. and enter Mustupha Sely. So one has took, see where another comes:
All health to Mustapha.

Musta. Thanks gracious Prince,
Your gentle pardon for my boldness Sir.

Sely. Command my pardon, and commend my love
To thy bright daughter: tell her I admire
Her virtuous perfection; let that chain
gives him a chain Make me remembered often in her mind.

Must. When my weak strength, or wealth shall stretch so far,
As to continue --

Sely. No Cynicke complement, good Mustapha.

Musta. Then I return you thanks
Exit
Sely. Health follow you,
And honor me; here is a third at hand.

Enter Asmehemides. Selym. Continuance to your health Sir.

Asme. Thanks gentle Prince*
Please you to use my service?

Sely. Yes, thus far
Spend me that purse of gold.

gives him a purse. Asme. What means your Highness?

Selym. But to deserve your kindness, and avoid
The hated censure of ingratitude,

Asme. This is your liberal virtue not my deeds,
But you shall find me thankful.
Exit*
Selymus. So I hope;
Three steps are trod already to a Throne,
And I am rich in friends, these pr^fferd gifts
Conjure observance from their servile breasts:
Oh powerful gold, whose influence does win
Men with desire for to engender sin.
Isaacke Bassa?

Isaacke Even the man you wished;
What did the golden (...) work good effect?
And make the Bassaes stoop unto your mind?

Sely. Words are but empty shadows, but if deeds
Answer their words, we cannot doubt their faith,
They stoop beneath my feet, I seem to be
As true as Jove, but slye as Mercury,
Enter M^sithes Here comes Mesithes muttering back again,
But step aside and we shall know his mind.

Mesith. But he is cruel, bloody, and his pride
Insufferable great --

Selymus Ha?

Mesithes Proud Bajazet,
Thou have usurped a title, thy defcent
Could never reach unto, thou wrongst the world
Since thou detain'st the Crown, which heavens decree
Due to a better brow, thou art defamed
With Tyranny and wrong, but Selymus
Is void of blemishes as truth of lies;
Bad stocks must be cut down, the good must rise.

Sely. He davnted me at first, but now I find
The golds bright luster made his judgment blind,
Mustapha comes.

Enter Mustapha Musta. Fortune has wheeled me up above the stars,
Under a Monarch I Will not sell my hopes:
Bold Selymus I Will second thy designs,
And thou shall Queen my daughter, that being done
With mine own splendour I Will eclipse the Sun.

Sely. Is It so? a while I Will feed thy ayrie hopes
Then dash thee into nothing.
Here Is a third.

Enter Asmehemides Asm. A purse of gold? I can untie the knot,
The close aengima says, I would be King.
Brave Selymus I like thy mounting thoughts,
Work out thy proiects, thou can never need
Or ask my help, but thou art sure to speed.
Exit
Sely. What we resolved, stands firm, but the event
Be scanned when leisure serves, we will now prevent
My brothers hopes, and by a sudden ^ate
Unto their lives and days give equal date,
To compass a blessed end: now we begin
Jove has offended if it be a sin
To throw a father down: Saturn did dwell
Once in the heavens, Iou^ threw him down to hell.

Enter Bajazet and Achmetes, hand in hand, Cherseogles, Mesithes, Mustapha,
Mahometes, Achomates, Trizham, Mahomet, Asmehemides. Sely. But stay. Achmetes,
and our fathers friends?

Baia. Achmetes I have injured thy deserts,
Subbornd accusers, wronged my credulous ears,
And my rash censure undervalued much
Thy noble spirits, when it first condemnd
Then of intended treason, rense thy soul
In the dull river of oblivion,
We halt beneath the burden of thy hate,
Think my moved anger made me hot and wild*
I cannot sleep till we be reconciled.

Achm. The gods neglect my welfare here on earth,
And when I shall put off this mor^all load,
Let me be out-lawed from the Court of heaven,
If in this bosom there lie ^id one thought
That does not honor Bajazet.

Baia* We know --
Thy virtues make us happy: ^^liant Sir,
Thy feet once more m^st ^^ead ^ warlike ma^ch*
Under our feare^ull banner, thou ^halt pace
Even to the walls of Rome, there dwells our foe,
Where our half Moon reared in the middle camp,
Like a distempred Meteor in the air,
Shall strike amazement in the cloistred monks
And shake the prelates Miter from his head,
Till he yield Zemes up alive or dead.
When we have moved thee from thy Ianuzaries,
Thou shall not travel far.

aside Isaac A subtle trick
And well pretended, I admire thy wit.

aside Achm. Let me march hence, and Bajazet shall know,
How little I befriend my Princes foe,
I Will cast a ring of soldiers round (...)
The walls of Rome, if Zemes escape thence out,
Cut of my breath: he that is deep in blame,
Must hazard boldly to regaine his fame.

Triz. What means our father, noble Bajazet,
To work untimely horrors through the world,
Desolate ruin, public discontent
Have printed deep impressions in our path,
Danger and fear scare emptied from our town,
The shaken members of our common wealth,
Yet staggers with their wounds, when discord shall
Make but a second breach, they faint and fall.

Mah. Short peace has charmed your subjects all asleep,
And thrown a quiet slumber ore their eyes,
Whilst with a sweet restoratiue she heales
Their Ma^tyr'd joints, and wipeth out their scarres
Writ on their bosoms by the hand of wars,
Zemes is safely cloystred up at Rome,
The prelate dares not aid him, all the gods
Smile on the entrance of triumphant peace,
War lies fast bound, nor can she work our pains
Unless we loose the fury from her chains.

Baia. Our sons instruct us? must your pregnant wits,
Cross my command? Bassae^ prepare for war,
An^ since your grave discourse argues a will,
To stay at home* you shall; we will lay you up,
Where no loud ecchoing drums shall break your ^leepe,
Even in the bowels of your mother earth
I will intombe you: Put them both to death.

Omnes. What means great Bajazet?

Baia. To murder you, unless you strangle them.

Ambo. But hear us speak.

Baia. Stop up the damned passage of their throat,
Or you are all but ghosts. what; stare you friends?
Isaacke and Selymus, a garter;
Twist me that fatal string about his neck,
And either pull and an end,
strangle Trizham. Mesithes come
Join force with me, by (...) ^were best make have,
Or thou art shorter lived then is that bratte.
Tugge strongly at it.
strangle Mahome^. So; let the bastard drop,
We have out-liud our tutors: dunghill sl^ues,
Durst they breath out their Stoicke ^entences
In opposition of our strickt command?

Selym. So: things run well along, and now I find
Io^e hears my prayers, and the gods grow kind.

Baia. Did not I send these to their Provinees
To hinder Zemes flight? and did not they
Dejected bastards give him open way?
Mine anger has been just.

Cherseo. None does deny't;
You may proceed in your edict for wars,
And make Achmetes general of the camp.

Baia. It is enough: Achmetes go to hell,
stabs him The devils have rung out thy passing bell,
And look for thine arrival.
Shend me slaves.
Exeunt omnes. They fly before my breath like mists of air,
And are of less resistance, I Will pursue.
Exit
Achme. Oh! I am slain, Tyrant thy violent hand,
Has done me pleasure, though against thy will,
Had I as many lives as drops of blood,
I Would not outliue this hour: fly hence vain soul,
Climb yonder ^acred mount, strive upwards, there,
There where a guard of stars shall hemme thee round,
Build thee a safe tribunal -- I am gone --
Oh tragique cruelty -- behold -- the end
Of two right Noble sons -- one faithful friend

(...) Re-enter Bajazet in fury. Baia. Have all forsaken me? and am I left
A pray unto my self; did all their breath
Pass through his organs? and in his sad death,
Have I abruptly cracked the vital thread
Of all my Bassaes?
Achmetes groans. Ha? where am I now?
In some Gehenna, or some hollow vault,
Where dead men's ghosts sigh out their heavy groans:
Resolve me Mahomet, and rid me hence,
Or I will spoil the fabric of thy tomb,
And beat away the title of a God.
Do thou not move? a trunk? a stock? to die,
Is to put on your nature, so will I.

Offering to stab himself, Cherseo^les, Mesithes, Mustapha, Mahomates,
Achomates, Selymus, Asmehemides, i^terrupt him. Omnes. Hold, hold, and live.

Baia. How come these bodies dead?

Fili^. Father, it was your self.

Baia. Let me revoke
My wandering sense, Oh what a stream of blood
Has purged me of my black suspicion,
Two sons, one valiant Captain hence are wrought
By mine own hand, to cure one jealous thought,
As it is, they are the happier, I out-liue,
Them whom I wished to fall: only to grave,
Bear forth their bodies; Bassaes carry them out,
We were cursed in this,
And shall intombe with them much of our bliss,
^ndeed we had resolved to spend this day
In things of more solem^itie, less woe.
Now our more wished council shall begin
And bitter deeds weigh up the scales of sin.
Ama^ia is a province rich and strong,
Mahomates it is thine, keep it as long
As I have power to give it go, prou^de
For thy conveyance, at the next fair tide.

Mahom. Farewell dear father.

Baia. Worthy son adieu.
The love my dead sons wanted, falls to you,
As an hereditary good.

Selymus Then we
aside May veil our heads in black, no mourners be.

Baia. Mahomates, thy worth
Deserves some trophies of our love,
Which to let slip vnmention'd, were to add
To this black day, a fourth offense as bad;
Govern Man^sia, now the people stand
Disfurnisht of an head, let thy command,
Be great amongst them, so; make speedy have.
Honor ayes for thee.

Selym. Now the storms are past.

Mahom. Father adieu;
Exit.
Baia. Mahomates, farewell.

Selym. Now to my lot, I thought 'twould never a fell,

aside Baia. Now Selymus, we know thy hop^es are great,
And thine ambition gapes with open jaws,
To swallow a whole Dukedom: but young Sir,
We dare not trust the raines of government
Into the hands of Phacton. Desire,
Rashly fullfild, may set the world on fire;
Green youth, and raw experience are not fit,
To shoulder up a Kingdoms heavy weight,
Mix wit with stayed discretion, and spend
Wild years in study, then we do intend
To settle more preferment on thy head
Then thou can hope for.

Selymus Will thou envious dotard
Strangle my greatness in a miching hole?
The world's my study Bajazet, my name,
Shall fill each angle of this round-built frame.
Exit.
Baiaz. I know he grumbled at it; but it is good
To calm the rebel heat of youthful blood
With sharp rebukes.

Enter a (...)* Messen. Health to the Emperor.

Baiaz. What will your message?

Messen. Duty first from Rome,
Commended by the Bishop to your service,
With a firm promise to dispatch your will
What ever it imployd, and would but stay
Till ^imes ^wift circle should bring forth a day
Secure for the performance.

Baiaz. It Is enough.
Exit. Thanks for your care. This was to murder Zemes.
Wa^re with the Bishop? 'thad been pretty sport,
I knew my powerful word was strong enough
To make him do^ my pleasure: simple Priest,
Only I used it as a trick, to send
Achmet^s from the City and his friends;
But Fate to smiled upon me, that I found
A shorter me^n^s his life and hopes to wound
With my sententious sons, that when my foe^
Fled through their Province, finely let him go;
Which being wholly finished, straight to please
My friends, I played raging Hercules;
Then to shut up the Scene, neatly put on
A passionate humor, and the worst was done.
But who comes here?
A dumb show. Enter Mahomee^es with store of Turks he as taking his (...),
they as coremonio^sly with great humblenes^e, taking their leaves, depart at
several doors. I like not this. Mahomat^s beloved
So dearly of the Comminalty: ha?
He Is wise, faire-spoken, gently q^alified,
Powerful of tongue; why he is the better son,
Not to supplant his Father. I mislike
The prodigal affection thrown on him
By all my ^ubiects. I belyed my hopes
When I presumed this day had freely rid
Me of my worst vexation: I was borne
To be a Jade to Fate, and Fortu^es scoff,
My cares grow double-great by cutting off.

Exit. Actus Tertij, Scena Tertia.
Enter Caigubus Achmetes son. Caigub. If ever man loved sorrow wished to grieve
Father I do for thee. Could I deprive
My senses of each object, but thy death,
Then should I joy to sigh away my breath:
Be Godhead to my grief, then shall these eyes
With tributary tears bedeck thy shrine:
And thus I do invoke thee: nimble Ghost
What ever ^rbe of Heaven, what ever coast
Affords thee present mansion, quickly thence
Flit hither, and present unto my sense
Thy self a feeling substance, let me see,
Acknowledge and admire thy Majesty.
Put off that ayry thinness which denies
Me to behold thee with these duller eyes,
Then shall they sending down a powerful flood,
Rence thy cold members from each drop of blood,
And so return thee back, that thou may soar
Up to the skies, much purer then before.
Had the just course of nature wrought thee hence,
I would have made the gods know their offense,
And back restore thy soul: but thou art dead,
And 'twas a fiercer hand that clipped thy thread.
Fiercer, and bolder, which did ever thrive
By mischief, and once coffinde thee alive
Up in deaths mantle, but then would not use
Such open violence, nor durst abuse
One of such sacred worth, till fury st^uck
His reason dead, and made his treacherous hand
Creepingly stab thee, both unseen and foul,
As if he would have ^tolne away thy soul.
Enter Isaac. But oh!

Isaac. But of indeed!

Caigub. Why what?

Isaac. As bad
A stroke attends thee as thy Father had*
Princes suspicion is a flame of fire,
Exhaled first from our manners, and by desire
Of rule is nourished, fed, and rores about
Till the whole matter dye, and then goes out.

Caigub. Unfold a Scene of murders: Fates work on,
We Will make a path to Heaven, and being gone
Down from the lofty towers of the skies
Throw thunder at the Tyrant; will he press
The earth with weight of slaught'red carcasses?
Let him grow up in mischief, still shall her womb
Gaping, reserve for him an empty tomb.
We do but tread his path; and Bassa since
It stands upon thee, now to cure thy Prince
Of his distempered lunacie, go fetch
The instrument of death, whilst I a wretch
Expect thy sad return.

Isaac. I go; and could
It stand with mine allegiance, sure I should
Employ my service to a better end,
Then to disrobe the Court of such a friend.
Exit.
Caigub. He that is judged, down from a steepy hill
To drop unto his death, and trembling still
Expects one thence to push him, such a slave
Does not deserve to live, nor's worth a grave.
Then Lachisi^, thou that deuid'st the thread
Of breath, since this days Sun must see me dead,
Thus I Will prevent thy pain, thus I Will out-runne
My Fate; and in this stroke thy work is done.
Stabs (...). Eternal mouer, thou that whirl'st about
The skies ^n circular motion hear me out
What I command, see that without control
Thou make Heaven clear, to entertain my soul,
And let the nimble spirits of the air
Print me a passage hence up to thy chair,
There will I sit, and from the Azure sky,
Laugh at obsequious base mortality.
Vanish my soul, enjoy, embrace thy Fate

Stabs himself. dies. Enter Isaac with executioners. Isaac. We are
prevented; see the fates command
False deeds, must dye though by the Actors hand.
Return to Bajazet, and bear that corpse.
Exeunt. So now I am alone, nor need I fear
To breath my thoughts out to the silent air;
My conscience will not hear me, that being deaf
I may joy freely: first thy hated breath
Achmetes vanished, next Caigub^^ fell,
Thus we clime Thrones, whilst they drop down to hell.
The glorious eye of the all-seeing sun,
Shall not behold (when all our plots are done)
A greater Prince then Selymus; it is he
Must share with Jove an equal Majesty.
But for my self his Enginer I Will stand
Above mortality, and with a hand
Of power, dash all beneath me into dust,
If they but cross the current of my lust.
What I but speak, it is Oracle and Law,
Thus I will rule and keep the world in awe.

Selym. Noble assistant.

Enter Selymus, M^sithes, Mustapha, Asmehemedes. Isaac. Happy Selymus.

Selym. It Is thou must make me so, for should I stay
Waiting my Fathers pleasure, I might stand
Gazing with envy at my Brothers pride,
My self lying prostrate, even beneath their feet.
Towns, Cities, Countries, and what ere so ever
Can give high thoughts content, are freely theirs,
I only like a spend thrift of my years
Idle my time away, as if some god
Had razed my name out of the roll of Kings,
Which if he have, then Isaac be thy hand
As great as his, to print it in again
Though Bajazet say nay.

Isaac. No more: I will;
An Empire be our hopes; that to obtain
We Will watch, plot, fight, sweat, and be cold again.

(...). Actus Tertii, Scena Quarta.
Enter Zemes, and Alexander Bishop of Rome. Bishop. Cannot my words add solace
to your thoughts?
Oh! you are gulft too deep in a desire
Of sovereign pomp, and your high thoughts aspire.
All the vnshadowed plainen^sse of my life
Does but contract thick wrinckles of mislike
In your Majestic brow, and you distaste
Moral receipts, which I have ministered
To cool Ambitions Fever.

Zemes. Pardon Sir,
Your Holiness mistakes my malady,
Another sickness grates my tender breast,
And I am ill at heart: alas, I stand
An abject now as well in Natures eye,
As erst I did in Fortunes: is my health
Fled with mine honor? and the common rest
Of man, grown stranger to me in my grief?
Some unknown cause has bred through all my blood
A colder operation, then the juice
Of Hemlock can produce: O wretched man:
Look down propitious Godheads on my woes:
Ph^^bus infuse into me the sweet breath
Of cheerful health, or else infectious death.
If there an Angel be whom I have crossed
In my tormented boldness? and these griefs
Are expiatory punishments of sin?
Now, now repentance strike quite through my heart,
Enough of pains, enough of bitter smart
Have tied me to it. I have already bin
Bolted from joy, content can enter in,
Not at the open passage of my heart,
I neither hear, nor see, nor feel, nor touch
With pleasure; my vexation is so much.
My grave can only quit me of annoy;
That preuents mischief, which can bring no joy.
Exit.
Bish. Now I could curse what mine own hand has done,
And wish that he would vomit out the draught
Of direful poison, which infects his blood.
Ambitious fire? why it is as clean extinct,
As if his heart were set beneath his feet,
Grief has boiled out the humors of vain pride,
And he was mere contrition.
What Is the news?

Enter a Messenger. Messen. Zemes as now he left you, pale and wan,
Dragging his weak legs after him, did fall
Dead on the stony pauement of the Hall,
Not by unhappy chance, but as he walked,
Fold^ng his arms up in a pensive knot,
And railing at his Fate, as if he staged
The wounded Priam, or some falling King,
So he, often lifting up his closing eye,
Sunk faintly down, groaned out, I dye, I dye.

Bish It grieves my soul: let Bajazet know this
Could our own shortened life, but lengthen his
By often sighs I would transfuse my breath
Into his breast, and call him back from death.
Exit.
Actus Tert^i, Scena Quinta.
Enter Selymus, Mesithes, Mustapha. Selym. Let not my absence steal away my
love,
Or local distance weaken the respect
Which you have ever borne me: I must fly
To shake the yoke of bondage from my neck:
My Fathers eyes shall not scan out my life
In every action; then when I am gone,
Our love like precious metal shall not crack
In the protraction, but be gently framed
Into a subtler thinness, which shall reach
From either part, not crazed by any breach.

Mesith. Return with ruin painted in thy brow,
Pale death triumphant in thy horrid crest,
Danger limm'd out upon thy threatening sword,
The Turkish thraldom pourtrai'd on thy shield,
We Will meet thee in thy horror, and unfold
Our arms as wide as heaven to take thee in.

Selym. We trust you: if there lie unspoken love
Hid in your bosoms? we must bury it
In silent Farewells.

Mustaph. Noble Prince adieu,
Since thy frank deeds have printed in our hearts
So true a pattern of thee, we will feed
Our contemplation with thy memory.
When thou art really departed, thus
A better part of thee shall stay with us.

(...). Selym. So the swift wings of flight shall mount me up
Above these walls into the open air,
And I will tower above thee Bajazet.
Farewell soft Court; I have been kept too long
Within thy narrow walls, and am newborn
To golden liberty; now stretch out you heavens,
Spread forth the dewy mantle of the clouds
Thou powerful Sun of Saturn, and remove
The terminating Poles of the fixed earth
To entertain me in my second birth.

Enter Isaac Bassa. Isaac Not yet rid from our wars? Fair Prince take heed,
Treason's a Race that must be run with speed:
Aelus beckons, and the flattering winds
Join all to help our project: quickly hence:
All Is full of d^nger. Did your Father know
He Would stop your flight, and breath at one deaths blow.

Selym. Friend I am gone: thou hoary God of Seas,
Exit. Smooth the rough bosom of thy wrinckled tide,
That my winged Boat may gently on it glide.

Actus Quarti,
Scena Prima.
Enter Bajazet solus. Baia. How the obsequious duty of the world
Hangs shiuer^ng on the skirts of Majesty,
An^ mells out all her footsteps: I could yet
Never steal leisure reform my thoughts,
Since my pale brow was first hoop'd in with gold
Till this b^est hour: and now great Bajazet
Empty thy breast of her imprisoned joys,
Which like the smothring winds, could with a blast
Rip up a passage. I am crowned in bliss,
Placed on the rocks of strong s^curity,
Without the reach of Fate. Envy shall gnash
And pine at my full pleasures; the soft feet
Of laboring Ambition, shall quite tire
Ere touch the starry-height on which I stand.
Achmotes and his son with my two boys
Are fallen, to clear the sunshine of my joys,
Achomates I fear not, Selymus
L^ues cag'd within the compass of mine eye,
All that I doubt is of Mahomates,
That blazing star once darkened, I will throw
The luster of my pomp from me, as clear
As if three Suns were orb'd all in one Sphere.
What news brings Isaac?

Enter Isaac Bassa. Isaac. Unwelcome news.

Baia. Be quick in the delivery.

Isaac. Then thus.
Young Selymus is fled.

Baia. Fled?

Isaac. Fled this night to the Tartarian King.

Baia. Would he had sunk
To the Tartarian deep. Isaac, thou art false,
And every hair dependant from thy head
Is a twined serpent. Isaac I say thou art false,
I read it in thy brow.

Isaac. By heaven I am not.

Baia. Come; answer my demands, first, at what time
Let he the Court?

Isaac. I know not.

Baia. Know he is fled,
And know not when he fled, how can this be?

Isaac After our strickt enquiry, 'twas our chance
To light on one that saw him take a ship,
At the next haven.

Baia. On one; bring forth that one,
Exit Isaac I Will sound the depth of these villainies.
Enter Isaacke with a dwar^^e. What Is here?
A barrel reared an end upon two feet?
Sirrah, you guts and garbage -- did you see
Selymus leave the Court?

Dwarffe So please it your --

Baia. Please it? thou monster, are you now so pleasing.

Isaac My Liege hold in your fury: spend not one drop
Of your fierce anger, on so base a worm,
Keep it entire and whole, within your breast,
That with it is vigor it may crush the bulk
Of him whose treasons move it.

Baia. So it shall,
Neptune reine back thy swelling Ocean,
Invert the current of thy guilty streams
Which further treacherous plots, mild Aeolus,
(That when a peevish goddess did entreat,
Scattredst a Trojan Navy through the seas)
Now Bajazet a Turkish Emperor
Bids thee send forth thy jarring prisoners,
Into the seas deep bowels, let them raise
Tempests shall dash against the firmament
Of the vast heavens, and in their stormy rage,
Either confound or force the vessel back,
In which the traitor sails; now, now begin
Or I shall think thee conscious of this sin.
Enter a ^onke What would this monk?

Monk Only your blessed alms.

Bajazet I Am in a liberal vain --
(...) of a dagge at Bajazet, Mesithes, and Isaac kil^^he Monk Trait^r I Am
slain,
I feel the bullet run quite through my sides,

Isaac. Great Mahomet has kept you safe from harm,
It never touched you.

Baia. Oh -- I am slain,
Open the gates of sweet Elysium,
Take in my wounded soul: Bring forth that Monk,
I Will make him my souls harbinger, he shall
Fore-runne my coming and provide a place
Amongst the gloomy banks of Acheron,
Then shall he dwell with me in those black shades
And it shall be my bliss to torture him.

Isa. He Is gone already, I have sent him hence.

Baia. Fly then my soul, and nimbly follow him,
He must not escape my vengeance: Char^n stay,
One waftage will serve both, I come, away.

Isa. Let not conceit thus steal away your life.

Baia. Me thinks I feel no blood ebb from my heart,
My spirits faint but slowly.

Isaac Hear me Sir,
You are not wounded.

Baia. Ha? not wounded.

Isaac. Untouched as yet;
His quaking hand deceived him of his aim,
And he quite mist your body, here behold
The bullet yet unstained with blood.

Baia. Now I believe thee: oh the balefull fate
Of Princes, and each eminent estate!
How every precious jewel in a Crown,
Charms mad ambition, and makes envy doat
On the bewitching Beauty of it is shine;
Indeed proud Majesty is vsher'd in
By superstitious awful reverence,
But cursed mischiefs follow; and those are
Treasons in peace, black stratagems in war.
But where is the dwarffe? Isaac go send him in*
Bid bold Mesithes, and sage Mustapha
Quickly attend us;go.

Exit Isaack^ Isaacke I shall.

Bai^zet This hour,
Has hatched a richer project in my brain,
Whose wished event, shall strangle envies breath,
And strike ambition dead in every breast.
Sirrah, draw hence the body to the ditch,
(...) Whither the filth of the whole City runs,
There ouerwhelm't in blood;go, quickly do it;
What do thou grin thou visage of an ape?

be strikes (...) Dwarf I Will rather hang my self then endure this.

Baia. Nay, come; be patient and I Will use thee well,
Why -- 'twas a Scepter struck thee, and 'twill work
Diviner operation in thy blood
Then thou can dream of.

Dwar. I Would rather be struck erosse the teeth with a pudding
Then cross the back with a scepter.

Baia. A man would guess so, that ouer-viewes the dimensions
But to thy business.
he carries ^ut the (...) Enter Bassaes. Bassa^s stand ye round,
Stay: who comes here? sure I should know that sature,
Observe him nearly.

Enter Mah^m^tes disguised. Bas^aes. It Is no Courtier.

Mahom. Mahometes it is time to look about,
Selymus fled? Achomates adored?
My name scarce heard of through the popular^ reets?
Had that unhappy arm of that dam'nd Monk,
Not staggerd from the Mark at which he aimed,
Who ever sent him hither, I had leapt
Into the empty throne, and cropped the fruit
Budding from treasons root; but I Will return
Back to my Province, this unknown disguise,
Shall search my Fathers closest policies.

Isaac Mahometes disguised.

Baia. By heaven 'twas he
He pryes unto my counsels: let it be.
We Will forward in our business, which being done,
We Will cool the hot ambition of each son,
As mine already is, quick moving time
Has cast a snowy whiteness on my hairs,
And frosty age has quel'd the heat of youth,
Mine intellectual eyes, which ever yet
Gazed on the worlds rich gilded vanities,
Are now turned inward, and behold within,
Dismal confusion of unpardoned ^inne*
Ever since I first was settled on this Throne,
My cares have clogged the swiftness of the hours,
And wrought a tedious irkesomne^se of life,
Murders have masked the forehead of the Sun
With purple-coloured clouds, and he has blushed
At the blood-sucking cruelty of state.
There Is not one little angle of this Court,
Whose guilty walls have not concealed a knot
Of traitors, squaring out some hideous plot,
Against my safety; now at last I spy
The dangers of perplexed Majesty.
And were it not for a religious fear
Of after-harmes, which wretchedly might tear
And spoil the body of this Monarchy,
Here at this ^nstant would I strike the sail,
And proud top-gallant of mine eminence,
Hurl up my scepter, dis-inthrone my self,
And let the green heads scramble for the Crown.
Age has taught me a stayder providence
Then my rash youth could reach to; I intend
To place this glittering babble, on the head
Of some successor, ever I yet am dead,
So give it out; thereby ^ le try the love
And favor of the people: whom they seem
Most to affect ^'le raise to that esteem,
How do you like the counsel?

Chers. As we could like
A voice of health sent from the careful gods.
This news will lay the ^ury of your sons,
And breed low duty in them all in hope
Of the reward proposed.

Exeunt Bajazet, Ch^rseogles, Ma^ent M^stapha, Isaa^k^, Mesithes, Asmehemides:
Isaacke Awake preventions eyes, we must not sleep
If we would see proud Bajazet displac't,
And Selymus elated to his height.
Name him the people favors; -- heeaffects
Achomates: and knows the multitude
Wrapped with his heavenly wisdom, cry for him,
We must be quick and wary, here are keys
Left, and laid up by Selym^s, that store
Shall visit empty purses, and inchaunt
The needy sort of men, that the ones wealth,
Shall weigh up 'tothers wisdom in the scale
Of their light judgment; lend your best endeavors
We Will cross thee Bajazet, and thy hopes shall dye
By thine own ill-contriued policy.

Exeunt. Actus Quarti, Scena Secunda.
Enter Bajazet, takes Asmehemides by the hand, a Courtier belonging to (...)
Baia. Leave us; We would be private with our friend,
It Is thou must do it sweet Asmehemides,
Mahomates and thou are two near friends;
He will suspect in others close deceit,
Thee, for thy generous virtues he will stand
With obuious embracements to receive
Into his bosom; whither when thou art
Wound in, be sure to strike him through the heart.
I am offended, it is just piety
To sacrifice his body at the shrine
Of my displeasure, do it, I am thine.

Asmehem. Were he as dear to me, as the half part
Of mine own body, as the breath I draw;
I Would do this charge: we mortals must obey
When Gods command, and Emperors are they.
Exit
Baia. So willing to be damned? had I adjoined
Some virtuous office, surely he would then
Have said, that good deeds are not deeds of men.
But let them go; Maho^etes must dye,
And for my other boy fierce Sely^^s
The boisterous hand of war must snatch him hence,
My other son Corcutus liuesimmur'd
Within Mineru^'s cloister, thus I clear,
A path through which Achomat^s shall run
Up to my throne when all their hopes are done.

Exit. Act^s Quarti, Scena Tert^^
Enter Achomates. Acho. The promise was direct and absolute,
To bless my ^emples with a sacred Crown,
With protestations of a quick dispatch,
Ere his own right were cancelled by fate,
So to cut off all rivals in my joys.
What intercedent chance has made his care
So slack in the performance? by heaven I fear,
Delays willproue delusions of my hopes
And that homebred Mercurian Selymus,
Will split the expectation of my bliss,
Forefend it Mahomet, or I shall be
A sad revenger of indignity.
How now? what speaks this bold intrusion?

Enter a Messenger. Messen. Health to Achomates from Bajazet.

Acho. From (...)? unfold thy welcome news,
How fares our Noble Father?

Messen. In full health;
And wills you thus by me: to muster up
Your surest forces, and with moderate have,
Repair unto the Court, where you shall find
Employments worthy of a valorous mind.

Achem. To muster arms? can thou surmise the cause?

Messen. With confidence I dare not; but it is said,
Against that haughty Noble Selymus.
Who of the Tartar King implored aid,
To an uncertain end: himself gives out
To fight with Hungary, and stretch the bounds
Of the old Turkish regiment* But ^ame
With panting voice, bids Bajazet beware,
And whispers in his ear, he is the foe,
Proud Selymus intends to overthrow.

A^ho. Enough, regreet our Father with our love
Tell him we shall not sleep to his command;
Exit. Fly nimbly back* dares the audacious boy,
Trouble the world with his tempestuous arms?
I Will chastise him with iron whips of war,
If either strength or stratagems shall serve,
To spoil the gavvdy plumes of his high crest,
I Will use the strongest violence of both;
I am swollen big with hate, and I could break
Untimely passage with a wholesome ^tabbe
To vent the monster strangled in my womb.
Father I come, he that detaines a Crown
Bequeathed to me, must thunder-strike me down.

Enter Corcutus. Corcu. Buzzing reports have pier't my sluddy walls,
And clogged my meditations ayry wings,
By which I mount above the moving spheres
And search the hidden closets of the heaven,
I cannot live retired, but I must hear
Mine own wrongs sounded in my troubled ear:
What? will my father falsifye that oath;
In which he vowed successions right to me,
When I resigned my honors up to him,
He deeply swore; when the vprising Sun
Of his bright-shining royallty had run
It Is complete course through the whole heaven of state,
And fainting dropped into the Western lapse;
My brightness next should throw it is golden beams,
Upon the worlds wide face, and ouer-peere
The duskie clouds of hidden privacie,
And shall Acho^ates succeed? Shall he
Shine in the spangled robes of Majesty?
Then Bajazet is false, let it be so
I am secured from a huge mass of woe.
Yet I Will toth'Court, that when Achomates
Shall spy me, and rememb^^ but my due
'Twill stain his luster with a blushing hue,

Enter Bajazet, (...). Baia. My cares are grown to great to be compri^'d,
Within the narrow compass of my breast,
Viceroy of Greece, I Will power into thy heart
Part of my secrets; which being entered in,
Lock them as close up, as thou would a sin
Committed, yet not known: I must impart
Things worth thy faithful ^^lence.

Chers. Worthy Sir,
By the enclosure of my soul I swear --

Baia. I Will not hear out^hine oath, in brief it is thus
The Bassaes are all false and love not us;
Nor does my (...) prompt (...) thus,
I read it in their gestures, (...),
Actions, and counsels, my suspicious eye
Has found a great breach in their loyalty.

Chers. Surely this ca^^ot be.

Bajazet By heaven it is true,
Each man that guards mine honor is my foe,
I Will shake these splendant robes of Majesty
From my ore-burden'd shoulders, and to ease
My self, bequeath them to (...).

Cherse. Achomates?

Baia. Even he, vnle^^e the voice
Of the whole City interdict my choice.

Enter (...), Mesithes, (...). Cherse. Here comes the (...),
Sure I see bad news
Pourtrai'd on the Index of their fronts.

Baia. Bad news? We have out-liu'd good days too long,
We can expect no other, come unclasp
Volumes of mischiefs, and make deaf my ears
With an infused multitude of cares.

Bassaes. Young Selymus has crossed Danubius flood,
And seized upon the Provinces of Thrace,
And with a Navy plowed the Euxine Sea.

Baia. Peace bellowing night-rauens, with how cheerful noise
Their pussing lungs croke out the balefull note,
Are these the wars against Hungary? you powers
Of heaven, brush off your cloddy patience,
If you but wink at these notorious crimes,
I Will say you dare not check our stubborn times.
Well as yet, I Will make use of his pretense
Vize-roy of Greece, bear you this Embassy
To that suspected Traitor Selymus,
Tell him the wars against the Hungarian foe,
Are full of dangers and approved harms,
Never attempted by our Ancestors,
Without repulse or damage bid him dismiss
His rough Tartarian youth, then if he stand
Unmoved and stiff^, feign vengeance is at hand.
Make thy best speed.

Cherse. I shall, 'twill be well done
To reconcile a Father and a Son.

Baia. Though he tumultuous vprores could deserve
The favor of his Prince: h'as troad awry,
And mist the path that leads to Majesty.
These bright Imperious ornaments shall grace
No rebell-monster nor base runne-away.
My resolution's firm, it shall not be;
Bassaes, this day an Herald shall proclaim
In the worlds ear, my great successors name.
Are you c^ntent?
Exit.
Mustapha calls in an Herald. Bassaes. We are.

Baiaz. Call forth an Herrauld.

Isaac. As our alleagea^ce binds us we will obey.
But what we grant, the Soldiers will gainsay.
(...). Thou shall not thrive in this: I dare be bold
My golden hooks have taken a faster hold.

Baia. Herald,
Be my loud Echo, ratify my deed,
And say Achomates shall next succeed.

Herald. Bajazet the second by the appointment of our great Prophet Mahomet,
the only Monarch of the World, a mighty God on earth, an invincible Casar,
King of all Kings, from the East unto the West, Governor of Greec^, Sultan of
Babylon, Sovereign of Persia and Armenia, triumphant Tutor of (...), Lord
possessour of the Sepulcher of the Crucified God, subuerter and sworn enemy
of the Christians, and of all that call upon Christ; proclaims Achomates his
second son next and immediate successor.


An alarm of Trumpets Within. None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.

Baiaz. By heaven they are corrupted: none but I?
It Is no love borne to me that moves this cry.

Mesith. Great Baiaz^t the cause why they deny
This just proposal, rises from an use
And customary license long observed;
To wit, when their crowned Emperor is dead,
The interposed vacation is a time
Of lawless freedom: then they dare to spoil
The Jewish Merchants of their traffic wares,
And prey upon all strangers: so that should
Your Honor be conferred upon your son
Whilst you your self yet breath, then should they loose
The long expected gains; therefore refuse
What you proposed.

Baiaz. If that be all the cause,
We Will give them such a Kingly donatiue,
As doubly shall buy out those ill-got spoils
Five hundred thousand Ducats, if they please
With my free choice to crown Achomates,
Proclaimed to be their due.

A flourish of Trumpets. Herald. Bajazet the second by appointment of our
great Pr^phet
Mahomet, etc. proclaims that he will attribute 500.
Thousand Ducats if you yield allegiance
To Achomates his successor.

Trumpets sound (...). Within. None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.

Baia. Achomates I sent for, how he will digest
These gross illusions, I may justly fear:
By this I had discouraged Selymus,
And killed his hopes; by this I had cut off
The growth of hate, and choked discords seed.
Exit.
Enter Mustapha with a Messenger to the other Bassaes. Mustaph. Bear this to
Selymus with thy best care.

Mesith. And this.

Give him Letters. Isaac. And this: fly, let thy winged speed
Return a sudden answer, elie we bleed.

Exe^nt. Actus Quarti, Scena Quinta.
Enter Selymus, Tartarian King. Attendants. Tartar. Go on brave Prince; Lead
on thy marshaled tro^pes,
Degrade the Turkish Monarch, let him faint
At the deep wounds, which thy reuengefull hand
Shall print upon the bosom of his land.
Go on; Me thinks I see Victoria sit
Triumphant on thy steely Burganet.

Exit (...) King. Selym. Farewell; now I will meet thee Bajazet
With a careere as free as if Heavens Jove
Had bid me go: bespeake the stoutest gods
To take thy part; tell them that thou must meet
A Sely^^^, who when the wars are done,
Will scale the Forts and Castles of the Sun,
Break up the brazen gates of Acheron,
And bury Nature with the world together.
Captains lead on; Now shall the sword and fire
By public ruins crown my just desire.
Sleep H^ngary, I Will not break off thy rest
With the unwelcome Music of my Drums;
I Will turn the edge of my reuengefull sword
Upon the bosom of my native soil;
There dwells the motive of my Tragic wars,
Whose ruthlesse sad Catastrophe shall wound
Posterity in us: Infants shall mourn
Over their Fathers' tombs as yet unborn.
But who comes here? I Will meet him.
Noble Vize-roy.

Enter Cherseo^gles. Cherseo. Peace and health to Selymus.

Selym. Health, but not peace, whilst yonder light can see
Mortals, whom Turkish force could never subdue.

Cherseo. Yet what if Baiaz^t our honored Lord
Bid you roll up those flaxen signs of war,
And sheath the sword drawn forth against his foe?
When duty says obey, what shall say no.

Selym My courage and a proud contempt of all
Corriuall Nations, could send back a no,
Able to fright a Parliament of gods.
It could so: but if Bajazet gainsay
My plumy valor flags, my thoughts gave way.

Cherseo. Then thus he wills you to discard your force,
And send the black Tartarians to their home,
Withal averring the Hungarian foe
(Against whose power, you have summoned Arms)
Is full of strength and power, never opposed
Without the bitter downfall of our side.
Nor would the worlds great Monarch (...)
Empaire his fame so much, as to be said,
He tamed a Foe by Tartars borrowed aid.

Selym. Ha: I am vilely non-plust. Courteous Vize-roy
Return our duty back to Bajazet,
Even in the humblest terms wit can invent,
Tell him (...) ha^h a son of that high spirit,
As does detest a cowardly retreat.
Were all the dead Heroes of our foes
All that are now, and all that are to come
Met in one age, I Would face them drum to drum.
Bid our dear Father be secure of me
And my proceedings: then true valor shines
Most bright, when busied in the great'st designs.
Is not this answer fair?

Cherseo. Most true: and yet
'Twill prove distasteful.

S^lym. No, it cannot be:
If there be too much valor in this breast,
Blame him that placed it there, even Ba^azet.
My virtues and my blood, are both derived
From his first i^fluence, and I must either hate
Disgraceful calum^'s, or degenerate.

Ch^rseo. All this I Will tell your Father, yet he will rest
As much unsatisfied as at the first,
He will expect the headstrong pride of youth
Should strike low sail to his grave providence.

Selym. And so it shall: sage Vize-roy I obey,
And reverence his counsel more, then fear
An host of armed foes: tell him I Will come
To his Court gates with neither man nor drum.

Cherseo. I Will tell it him with joy, which when he hears,
He Will be disburden'd of a thousand fears.

Selym. Remember my just duty: it is no matter,
I will retain that till I come my self.
I am not out-reach'd yet by all these tricks,
My hopes are farther strong, I Will to the Court
With a close martch, in no submissiue sort,
And steal upon them: Instantly I go
To meet my Fa^h^r, but a subtle foe.

As he goes out, a Messenger meets hi^, gives him the Letters. Messen. Good
health to Selymus.

Selym Good health: From whom?

Messen. I^aack, Mesithes, Mustapha salute you.

Selym. Those good Trinm v^i what is it they, speak?

Opens the Letters. 1 (To feed on hopes is but a slender diet)
It Is short, but full of weight: to feed on hope
Is but a slender diet. Let it be.
Descants. I Will mend my table though no feast with me.

2 (Fair opportunity is bald behind)
Reads second. It Is true indeed Mes^thes. Never fear
I Will twist my fingers in her golden hair.
What speaks the third? This writes more at large,
And comments on the prefixed principalls.
(Your Father did proclaim who should succeed
Reads. Public denialls nullified his deed,
Your have will be convenient; things concur
To bless your hopes, Fate bids you not demurre)

Yours Isaac Bassa.

Isaac I am thine,
And come to finish up our great design.
Exit.
Actus Qu^rti, Scena Sexta.
Enter Achomates (...). Achom. Unquiet anguishments and jealous fear
Fly from any thoughts, like night before the Sun:
I Am lifted to the highest Sphere of joy,
My top inuelopt in the azure cloud,
And starry rich habiliments: my feet
Set rampant on the face of Natures pride,
The rarest work weau'd by her handmayd Art
Clothes my soft pleasures, I Am as great as Jove.
Only I rule below, he reigns above.
Oh! the unspoken beauty of a Crown,
Whose empty speculation mounts my soul
Up to an heavenly Paradise of thoughts.
Father, I come that thou may crown my head,
Whilst apprehensiue reason stands amazed,
Amidst the blisfull shades of sweet conceit.
Then I Will call back my wandering intellect
From dreams, and those imaginary joys,
I Will teach my soul to twine about a Crown
To sweat in raptures, to fill up a Throne
With the bigge-swelling looks of Majesty,
I'leamble through a pleasures Labyrinth,
And wander in the path of happiness,
As the true object of that faculty.
Great Bajazet I come. Thou must descend
From Honors high Throne, and put off thy right
To build me up an heaven of choice delight.
Exit.
Actus Quarti, Scena Septima.
Enter Mes^thes, Mustapha, Isaac. Mesith. The Emperor begins to smell de^eit.
I know by his ill looks and sparkling eye
That he affects us not.

Musta. I doubt as much.
Young Selymus has wronged our loyalty
In his so slack proceedings; we were rash
And indiscreetly-forward in consent,
When we joined on to raise his government.

Isaac. Peace, it is too late to chide at what is done,
We have so deeply waded in the streams
Of those procellous plots, nor can revoke
Repentant footsteps, or securely creep
Back to the Throne of safety, it is now good
To venture on, and swim quite through the flood.
Here comes the Emperou^.

Enter Bajazet and Asmehemedes. Baia. Attend us Bassaes.
Ar't sure he is dead?

Asm. Mahometes is dead.
There Is nothing moving of him but his soul,
And that robbed of his body by this hand.

Baia. Enough. That soul reuiues to see him dead
That wronged the body; Oh! my bloody heart,
Must in his frenzy act an horrid part.
Follow thy Prince to hell.

Stabs him. Asmeh. To death! Oh deuillish ingratitude:
I Am slain. I dye.

Moritur. Baia. And justly: would each foe
And Traitor to my state were thwarted so.
Bassaes convey this hated body hence,
The sight of that damned villain moves offense:
They carry him out. Now pause a while my soul, and reckon up
What obstacl^^ are yet to be removed
Acho^ates must stay the peoples leisure.
Corcutus dally with Minor^aes Nymphs.
The last and worst, proud Selymus shall dye.
Thus I Will compose a firm security.

Enter Bassaes with Cherseogles. Baia. Arrived already noble Cherseogles?
You Are careful in our cause: but speak the news
From our pert Soldier. What means Selymus?

Cherseo. To track the path backward from whence he came,
To strip himself of martial ornaments,
And to fill up the duty of a Son,
Come visit you in low submission.

Baia. These are too fairly promised, to be meant,
Ambition has already chained his soul
Too surely in the captive bonds of pride,
Then that he now should cloth his stately hopes
In the pla^ne sordid weeds of penitence,
He does but varnish over some treacherous plot
In this smooth answer: come, wee'^e lead along
To our Imperial seat of (...),
That strongly fortified, we need not fear
The weak attempts an homebred foe can dare.

Excunt Bajazet and Cherseogle^. Mesith. Ha! we are sweetly plunged, if cold
despair
Benumme his youthful courage, and he faint,

Mustaph. Would I were fairly rid of all these cares,

Isaac. Dejected Cowards: are you not ashamed
Thus to give up the goal of dignity
To heartlesse fear? Here comes the Messenger.
What news from Selymus?

Messen. Even nothing certain:
Ambiguously he promised to be here
As soon as I.

Mesith. Is It even so?

Mu^ta. We are quite dash't -- undone.

Isaacke Lift up your downe-cast spirits -- who comes here?

Mesith. Who? Selymus?

Enter Selymus. Musta. Where? sweet Isaac do not tell him,
That we were sending forth faith's latest breath.

Isaac. Enough, I will not -- happy Selymus.

Bassaes Long live great Sely^us.

Sely. We thank you friends:
Your care has fostered up our infant hopes
Beyond the pitch of expectation.
We hear that Bajazet is going now
From hence to Constantinople; my men
Lie closely ambusht in the middle way,
Close by a ruinous city, there expect
A sudden onset, but till then farewell.
When we meet next, our ensigns wau'd on high,
Shall shine like Meteors blazing in the sky.
Exit.
Isaac Fortunes best care go with thee.

Mesith. Brave boy in faith.

Musta. I shall adore him whilst I breath for this.

Isaac Again in heart?
Let Us follow Bajazet, come lads away,
The sun of all his glory sets this day.

Exeunt. Enter Selymus with soldiers. Selym. Come on the honored youth of
Tartary,
My brothers and joint sharers of my woe,
Draw forth the weapons of inflamed revenge,
Against this horrid monsters Tyranny;
I ^eeme like Romes great Caesar, when oppressed
With Pompeys grating malice he led forth
His noble Frenchmen through the snowy Alps,
I have my Curio Isaacke in the Court,
And Cherseogles like grim Catoes ghost,
Soothes the rough humor of fierce Bajazet,
These men's examples, were we faint and loath
Would set sharp spurs unto ourslow paced wrath,
And whet our dull-eged anger* but I see
In your smooth brow perfect alacrity;
We stand to thwart the passage of a feind,
Through whose wide yawning throat has coasted down.
The blood of Princes, in continual streams,
Has fed and pampered up his appetite
With the abhorred destruction of his own,
And glutted on the blood of jnnocents.
Stood we like marble statues in his way,
And had no use of policy and wit,
Our Irefull Prophet Mahomet would send
Sense, life, and valor through our stony joints,
That we might ruinate this ghastly bore,
Made by some hellish fury to confound
The order of this wondered Universe.
I Will grapple with the monster, he is at hand,
If you stand firm* the Common Wealth may be,
A slave to Bajazet, but I Will live free.

Enter Bajazet, Cherseogles, Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha. Baia. No Drum nor
Trumpet has disturbed the air,
Within the reach of mine attention.

Isaac. And I admire it, '^were a miracle
If that ambitious boy intend no harm.

Omnes. What noise is that?

A confused noise of exclamation within, arm, arm, arm. Soldiers Help
Bajazet, the vauntgard's almost slain,
The Tartars lay in ambush.

Baia. What? so near?
Set up our standard, I Will give battle here,
Hang out defiance, scorn, and proud contempt,
Write in the blood-red colors of your plumes,
Summon our Army
Enter a drum From these skirmishes,
Speak out the traitors doom in thine alarmes.
Thought he to daunt our courage?
Drum sounds. Enter ^ouldiers se^erally, dropping in sweating, as from fight.
Valiant soldiers;
When I behold the manner of this war
Then treason copes with awful Majesty,
A graceless son, with his own aged Sire,
Me thinks to bid you fight, were full as vain
As to bid heavy clouds fall down in rain:
But when I view the Chaos of the field,
And wild confusion striking valor dead,
I called you, not (as Captains do to boys)
To read a lecture of encouragement,
But that your ancient virtue may be shown
In this my last defense: I wish to dye
Revenged, that death sorts best with Majesty,

Drums sounding, A confused noise, with clashing of armor. Ex^urrunt Bajazet,
and Selymus. Baia. Selymus?

Selym. Bajazet?

Baiaz. Jove lend me but a minutes patience.
Unnatural son.

Selymus. Vencharitable Father.

Baia. Father? My sword shall hew that title off.
And cut in twain kindreds continued line,
By which thou can derive thy blood from mine.
Abortiue monster -- thou first breath of sin,
We had but slender shadows of offense,
Till thou crep^st forth to the offended light,
The very mass, and stock of villainy.
Crimes in all others, are but thy influence.
Nature has planted viprous cruelty,
In thy dark breast, the scandal of her works
Her error, and extract perfection
Of vices; the first wellhead of bad things
From whence the world of ills draw their weak springs,

Selym Then hear me speaketoo: you have bin to me
No Father, but a sour Pedanticke wretch,
One that with frosty precepts, strived to kill
The flaming heat of my ambitious youth,
As vainly as to strangle fire with straw:
You sit so daily houering on your Throne,
As if you would hatch new Monarchies to feed
The hungry gulf of your unbridled pride,
You Have surfettted on titles, you have ingrost
Honor, you are the moth of eminence,
And liberal fortunes answered your desires;
You had deflow'rd th'infinitie of Crowns,
With your adulterate ambition,
You Are Soveraignties horse-leach, and have spild
The blood of State, to have your own veins filled.

Baia. Hold, hold thy venomed tongue, if there be hid
More of this kind vn-vttred, I le rip up
Thy full fraught bosom, and to save mine ear
Mine eyes shall ouerview what I Will not hear.
Dare thou fight Traitor?

Selym. Dare I^ be eal'd a King?
Dare I vnsheath my sword, or gather might?
If I dare ought of these, I dare to fight.

Baia. Guard thee, I Would not omit the sweet desire
And pleasure of revenge, were heaven my hyre.
They fight, Selymus is beaten off, Baziazet pursues, reenters at another
door. The slave has escaped the power of my wrath,
Midst the disseur'd troops of scattered foes
I lost him in a smoky cloud of dust,
So thick as if the tende^ Queen of love,
Had wrapped her brat Aeneas from my sight.

Enter Isaacke, Mesithes, Mustapha. Isaac Joy to my Liege, of his last victory.

Mesith. The bold Tartarians flew like fearful Hearts
Before the hu^ters rage.

Baia. So let them fly;
Heaven rain down vengeance on their cursed heads;
It is our honor that the frighted slaves
Enter a (...) Owe their lives dearest safeties to their heels.
How now, whence come you?

Dwar. From yonder hayricke Sir.

Baia. Did thou see Selymus when he fled the field?

Dwar. No indeed, I was two far crept in.

Baia. O you are brave attendants.
Let Us forward in our journey; these affairs
Achomates must know, his golden wish,
The people have delayed, perhaps heel frown,
And trample filial duty under feet
As this has done: but let them storm their fill
Vertu's not shipwrackt in a sea of ill.

Actus Quinti,
Scena Prima.
Enter Achomates alone, with a bloody sword in his hand. Achom. An honored
Legate? an Ambassador?
As if that title like Meda^s charm
Could stay the untamed spirit of my wrath,
Had he bin sent a messenger from heaven,
And spoke in thunder to the slavish world;
If he had roared one voice, one syllable
Cross to my humor, I Would a searched the depth
Of his unhallowed bosom, and turn out
His heart, the profane seat of saucy pride.
Slain an Ambassador? no less: it is done,
And '^was a noble slaughter, I conceive
A joy ineffable to see my sword
Bathed in a blood so rare, so pr^cious,
As an Ambassador s; must we be told
Of times delays, and opportunities?
That the basesoldier has gaine-sayd our bliss?
Thought Bajazet, his son so cold, so dull,
So ^nnocently blockish, as to hear
An Embassy most harsh and grossly bad
The people to deny me? we contemn
With strange defiance Bajazet, and them.

Actus Quinti, Scena Secunda.
Enter (...), Mesithes, Mustapha. M^sith. Mischief on mischief, all our hopes
are dead,
Slain in the hapless fall of Selymus.

Mustapha I think the devils fought for Bajazet
And all the infernal haggs; how could he else
With a confused army, and half slain,
Break the well-ordered rancks of a strong foe?

Mesith. And unexpected to -- now Isaacke! what
Sadly repenting for thy last misdeeds.
Plots and conspiracies against thy Prince?
Faith we must hang together --

Isaacke Good Mes^thes
It Is nothing so: they say (...)
Disdaining to be mocked out of his hopes,
And most desired possession of the Crown,
Has in contempt of Bajazet and all,
Slain the Ambassador, and vows revenge
On every guilty agent in his wrong.

Mustaph. I looked for that; and therefore first shranke back,
When Bajazet made choice of one to send
On such a thankelesse errand as that was.

Mesith. Grant the report be true: what is that to us?

Isaac Fame in mine ear nere blab'd a sweeter tale,
This shall redeem our low dejected hopes,
To their full height. no more; be it my charge,
To chase out the event -- what is this comes here?

Mustaph. Upon my life, the body of the slain
Ambassador.

Enter the Ambassadors followers with the dead body Mesith. It Is so.

Isaacke We greet you friends,
And your sad spectacle.

Followers It Is sad enough
To banish peace and patience, from each breast
That owes true loyalty to Bajazet.

Isaacke And so it shall; lay down the injured corpse.
Achomates has wronged his Fathers love,
To grossly, in the murder even of him
That bore his sacred person, and should stand
Inviolably honored by the law
Of men and nations,
But here comes Bajazet.

Enter Bajazet and Cherseogles. Baia. A tragic spectacle? whose trunk is
this?

Follow. The body of your slain Ambassador.

Baia. Slain? by what cursed violence? what slave
Durst touch the man that represented me?

Follow. Achomates.

Baia. Achomotes?

Follow. The same
Highly displeased with the unexpected news
Of a denial from the peoples mouth,
His reason slipped in fury, and contempt
Has thus abused your gracious Majesty.
Withal, he threatened to maintain this sin
With force of arms, and so resolved to win
Your Crown, without such tarriance --

Baia. Oh! no more,
I am unfortunate in all my blood.
Has he thus guerdon'd my fair promises,
My daily sweat and care, to further him,
And fix him in the paradise of joy?
Nations cry out for vengeance of this fact,
I Will scourge this black impiety to hell.
Muster our forces to the utmost man,
Once more I Will bury this my aged corpse
In steely armor, and my colored crest
Like a bright star shall sparkle out revenge
Before the rebels faint amazed eyes.
Loose not a minute, Bassaes hence, be gone
Muster our men, stay not; that from the tide
Of our fierce wrath, no drop may ^bbe away
By causeless lingering.

Musta. Whom speak you General?

Baia. Whom but my self? whom does the cause concern
More nearly then my self?

Isaak^ My honored Liege,
Bear your best care about you; it is a time
Of double danger, but remove the one,
The other straight called forward, Sely^^s
Great in the favor of Tartaria's King,
Is manned afresh with soldiers; his assault
Threatnes as much as fierce (...),
And must be borne off with your ablest forces,
Then if you leave the City to subdue,
One of these two, expect e're you return
The Other possessed, and seated on your throne.

Baia. Distraction rends my soul: what shall I do?

Isaac. Force out one nail with the other of these two,
Choose him you most affect, and best dare trust,
Allure him fairly home, wink at his crimes,
And then create him you^ high General,
To lead against his brother, since your self
Cannot at once oppress two foes so stout
Try if one heat can drive another out.

B^i^. Isaac we like thy counsel: but of these
Which can we pardon? either so deboyst,
So guilty of rebellion, so (...)
From pious loyalty, that my soul even both
With bitter hatred equally may loath.

Isaac First weigh their f^ults, the one a brainsick youth,
Endeauor'd to supplant your Majesty,
The other in defiance, and contempt,
Of God and man profaned the holy rights
Of an Ambassador.

Mesi. For which dire fact,
Should it slip up unpunished, the name,
The fearful name of (...) would pro^e
The subject of each libell, and the scoff
Of petty Princes.

Baia. Enough, we have decreed
Achomates shall quake beneath the stroke
Of our fierce anger. Isaac speed away
To Selymus, he shall con^ront the slave
The best of two so bad, go -- stay -- yet go,
It Is hard when we beg succor of a foe:
Beg? stay again -- first will I drop before
The sword of proud Achomates -- go -- tell him,
Upon his low submission we will daigne
To make him Champion to his sovereign.
Enter Co^cutus to his Father. Exit Isaac. My dear Corcutus welcome.

Corcu. Royal Father.

(...). Baia. Arise thou only solace of mine age,
It was a night of harmless innocence,
Of peace and rest, in which kind nature laid
Thee in thy mothers womb: Right virtuous boy,
How have thou lived vnta^nted with the breath
Of that infectious vice Rebellion,

Corcut. Right noble Father, it is a faithful rule
In moral rites, that who desires a good,
And most suspects his right to it, is bold
And turbulent, and eager in pursuit,
Whereas the man to whom this good is due,
Rests happily contented; till time fit
Crown him in the possession of his wish.

Baia. Well moraliz'd: I understand thee Boy,
My grant shall melt thy prayers in full joy.

Exe^nt. Actus Quinti, Scena Tertia.
Enter Selymus and soldiers. Selym. Once more (in hope to gain, and fear to
lose
A Crown and Kingdom) we have marched thus near
The seat of a dread Emperor, to try
The chance of war, or resolutely die.
Fear no cross blow, for with this hand I mou^
The wheel of Fate: and each success shall run
Even with our pleasures, till our hopes are spun
Up to their full perfection, this days light
That looks so cheerfully, shall see as bright
As it, my crown and glory.
Makes a stand. As they march on, enter Isaac Bassa. What stranger's this? my
blessed Genius haunts me.
Isaac I take thee in with open love.
What speaks they Presence?

Isaac. Good news to Selym^s.

Selym. From whom?

Isaac. From Bajazet.

Selym. It Is strange if good.

Isaac. And full as good as strange March quickly hence.
I Will tell you as we walk; if constant Chance
Smile on our project e're this Sun go down,
We may salute you with a glorious Crown.

Selym. I follow even to death. Grand M^rs to thee
I Will build an Altar if thou prosper me.

Exeunt. Actus quinti, Scena quarta.
Enter Achomates and So^ldiers. Achom. Revenge my black impiety; each brow
Seems with a scornful laughter to deride
Those empty Menaces of (...).
And Bajazet is not our Father now,
Since he has wronged the duty of a Son,
But a scorned Enemy whose prostrate soul
Shall make a step by which I will ascend
Up to the heavenly throne of heavenly state,
If you but lend your help and free consent.

Soldiers. Lead us along the misty banks of hell
Through Seas of danger, and the house of death,
We are resolved to follow, and by one
To second each step of Achomates.

Achom. This resolution is as great as just,
Continue it brave spirits: he is a slave
That having sinned, dares not defend his sin,
The world shall know I dare: For though our cause
Be wrong, yet we will make good the breach of laws.

(...). Actus quinti, Scena quinta.
Enter Bajazet and Corcutus. Corcut. Would I had slept with Trizham, and that
hand
That strangled Mahomet, had stopped my breath,
Rather then live to see my self thus wronged.

Baia. Despair not sweet Corcutus, what I promised
I Will keep most true, and here again I vow
When I am dead, this honor to thy brow.
I have called home that rebel Selymus,
Only to tame a Traitor: And that done,
We have no other heir, no other son
Beside Corcutus, to whose free command
We do bequeath the duty of this land.
Enter Mesithes and Mustapha. Is Isaac not returned?

Mesith. My Liege he is.

Mustaph. And Sely^^s with him.

Enter Selymus and Isaac, as they enter speak. Baia. Let them approach.

Isa. Let your high spirit shrink below it self
In a diss^mbled she^ of penitence.

Selym. Tush I can bow, as if my joints were old,
And tumble at his feet.

Isaac. Practice your skill.

Selymus falls at Bajazets feet. Baiaz Less show, and more good meaning
Selymus.
Arise: these crouching feats, give slender proofs
Of inward loyalty.

Selym. Right noble Father,
Mine expedition to avenge your cause
Upon the head of proud Achomates,
Be my just trial.

Baia. Have then: May thy arm
By breathless treason raise up a full joy,
And turn that monster back unto the earth
From whence it leapt, a most prodigious birth.

Selym. We fly to the performance; who both dare
And will correct his boldness: now we tread
The path to honor, and me thinks I hear
The peoples Viua,^ Echo in mine ear.

Exit Selymus with the Bassaes. Baia. New insolence: The Bassaes slipped away,
How the obsequious villains
As if he were their Godhead.

Cherseo. I suspect
Some plotted mischief, else they durst not leave
Your person thus unguarded.

Baia. Plot and hang.
We weigh not all their treasons at a straw,
One must not rule too long, it is subjects law.
Exeunt. P^^sse over the stage Bassaes and Souldi^rs carrying Selymus aloft,
and crying out Long live S^lymus, Viuat Selymus,
Magnificent Emperor of the Turks.

Exeunt. Enter Bajazet and Cherseogles. Baia. Hell and the furies vex their
damned souls.
What people? Hah? what Nation is it we live in?
Is It our State and Monarchy? good gods
Two Emperors at once. Live Selymus?
Can slavish vassailes thus supplant their Prince?
What Is this enshrines my head? a type for fools
To fleare at a divided ornament:
Fail not my sense and courage, let me live
To find my self again. Vize-roy of Greece,
Did thou not see a Bajazet withdraw
And vanish hence? tell thou most faithful man,
What is become of that forgetful name?
Or who has stole it from me? Selymus!
Oh that damned villain with his treacherous plot,
Has robbed me of that glory. Death a sense
If to have a soul of Adamant or Steel,
Else had that hated n^ise reft it in twain:
What are thou? or whence come thou?

Enter Me^ithes. Mesith. From a Prince.

Baia. Yet I believe thee.

Mesith. From thine enemy.

Baia. Yet I believe thee.

Mesith. From the Emperor.

Baiaz. And I believe thee still; yet slave thou lie,
These parts must know no Emperor but me,
Vnle^se base usurpation has stept-vp
Unto my chair of honor. Right, it is so:
It Is so indeed. Well then, what will your Emperor?

Mesith. That by my hand you yield him up his crown!

Baiaz. Traitor his crown? so: now I am resolved.
I have forgone my self, else had this hand
Tore out thy spotted heart, and that one word
Of yielding had been cause enough to spoil
Thee and thy generation. Heartlesse slave,
Why sneak'st thou from our presence? stay, behold
Here I commend this gorgeous ornament,
These trappings to thy Emperor, as full
Bestead with curses as my heart with woes,
That it may clogge his ears, and vex his head
With daily terrors. Hence thy Prince is sped.
Exit Mesith. Vize-roy of Greece, to thee our last farewell,
Thou worthiest truest best deserving man,
That ever made us happy: if thy faith
Respect me, not my fortune, Do this charge,
Fly to Achomates, and rather aid
Him then this faithless Bastard Selymus,
The scandal of our race, the mark for heaven
To shoot revenge. But all in vain,
I strive to word away my inward pain.

Cherseo. Nor this nor that I Will favor, may I (...)
Baiaz^t shall live to see both bleed.
Exit.
Baia., Mask up thy brightness Phabus, lovely night,
Hurl thy thick mantle over all the heavens,
Let this black day for ever be forgot
In the eternal registers of time:
Which of you sacred powers are not ashamed
To see a Prince so sinfully abused
By his own issue and unrevenged.
E^ter Selymus and B^ssa^s. But stand we, who comes here? a face of brass.
Else would it blush: now thou Saturnine Jove,
Thou God of great men, thunder that the world
Drenched all in sin, may shake and fear the noise
That horrid scourge of villainies.

Selym. Father?

Baia. Slave
Auaunt: ^ feel a strong Antipathy
T'wixt thee and me, thy sight makes my dead heart
Distill fresh drops of blood, and work new smart.
Exit.
Selym. What furious Baiaz^t, and raging hot?
I hug the amorous pleasure that I feel
Creep through ^y joints: observe our Father,
Exeunt Bessaes. Else by some wilful murder he will prevent
My purposed project, I Would not loose the guilt
Of his destruction for a crown: heaven knows
I love him better then to let him dig
Himself a grave, whilst I may take the pains.
Now mount my soul, and let my soaring plumes
Brush the smooth surface of the Azure sky.
Crown in his hand. With this I charm obeyfance from the world:
Thou golden counterfeit of all the heavens:
See how the shining stars in car^l^sse ranks
Grace the composure; and the beauteous Moon
Holds her irregular motion at the height
Of the four poles; this is a complete heaven,
And thus I wear it: but me thinks it is fixed
But weakly on my brow, whilst there yet breath
Any whose envy once reflect on it,
And those are three: the angry Bajazet,
Puling Corcutus, proud Achomates:
One of these three is cared for, that is Corcutus
Who ere the blushing morn salutes the Sun,
Shall be dispatched by two most hideous slaves,
Whom I have bred a purpose to the fact:
The other rival, wise Achomates,
I Will bear aside by force of men and arms,
Which ready Mustred, but attend the stroke,
Then attend our Fathers.
Enter Hamon. Here Is one deals for him,
Shall send him quick to hell. It is decreed.
He that makes lesser greatness soon shall bleed,
Hamon draw near, most welcome my dear Hamon,
What guess of your patient Bajazet?
Is he all healthful?

Hamon. No my gracious Prince.
Neither his body nor his mind is free
From miserable anguish.

Selym. A sad case.
Hamon I love him, and would rid him from't.
Were I so skil^'d in naturalls as you.

Hamon. All that my art can work to cure his grief
Shall be applied.

Selym. Vnapprehending fool:
I must speak broader. Hamon is he ill
In mind and body both?

Hamon. Exceeding ill.

Selym. Then should I think him happier in his death,
Then in so hateful life and so weak breath.

Hamon. And that is the readier way to cure his ill.

Selym. (H'as found me now) but Hamon can thy Art
Reach to the cure?

Hamon. With easy diligence.

Selym. Then let it.

Haman. I Am yours.
Exit Hamon.
Selym. Walk, and thy pains,
Shall be rewarded highly, with the like
As thou bestowest on Bajazet: the Court
Makes it a fashion now first to bring the event
About, and then hang up the instrument.

Actus Quinti, Scena Sexta.
Enter Cherseogles above disguised like a common Soldier. Cherseog. Thus
Cherseogles have thou wound thy self,
Out of thy self to act some fearful plot,
By which the Authors of this public woe,
Shall skip into their graves, it is confirmed
A deed of lawful valor to defeat
Those of their lives, that robbed the world of peace.
On this side the false hearted Selymus
With his confederate Bassaes lie incampt
Just opposite the proud Achomates;
The Sun now sunk into the Western lap,
Bids either part, unlace their warlike helmes
Until to morrow light where both intend
The hazard of a battle: but you powers
That with propitious cares, tender the world
And us frail mortals, help me to pre^ent
A general enemy by the fall of some;
Assist my spirits in a deed of blood,
Cruel, yet honest and austeerely good.
Who? Selymus? as I expected.

Enter Selymus. Selym. What?
A soldier thus licentious in his walks,
A stranger? Ha? What art thou?

Chersee. A sworn friend, a servant to thy greatness.

Selym. Then return
Back into thy ranks and orders, no edict
From me has ratified this liberty,
To scout at random from the standing camp.

Cherseo. It Is true my honored Lord, nor have I dared
For some poor triuiall prey thus to remove
My self, but for a cause of greater weight
The ruin of our enemies.

Selym. How Is that?
The ruin of our enemies?

Cher. No less;
The quick fall of great Achomat^
Can work it.

Sely. Soldier as thou hop'st to live,
Mock not my thoughts with false and painted tales,
Of a supposed stratagem.

Cherse. I swear --

Sely. What will thou swear?

Cherse. By all the heavenly powers
I speak the truth, and if I fail in ought,
Grind mine accursed body into dust.

Sely. Enough, unfold the meaning and the way
By which this happy project must be wrought.

Cher. It Is thus; at the twelfth hour of this black night.
Achomates I have induced to walk
Forth to this valley weapon'd, but vnmand,
In expectation of your presence there,
Where being met, heel urge a single fight,
Twixt you and him: after a stroke or two,
I have engaged my self closely to start
From ambush, and against you take his part.

Selym. Then thou art a traitor?

Chers. Worse then a devil, should my heart
Have made that promise with my tongue;
But heaven bear witness that my inward thoughts
Labor his welfare only, whom you powers
Have proved most worthy, therefore only yours.
Meet but this foe, whom I have flattered thus,
To his destruction: and great Selymus
Shall see my strength employed to offend
Achomates, and stand thy faithful friend.

Sely. Oh were thou faithful --

Cherse. If I ^hrinke in ought
That I profess, death shall strike me to the grave.
So thrive all falsehood, and each perjured slave.

Sely, Thou Have won our credit, bear a noble mind
About thee, then to find me forward trust
This night when sleep triumphant has subdued
Her wakefull subjects, and the midnight clock
Sounded full twelve, in this appointed place,
Expect my presence, and till then adieu
Our next shall be a tragic enterview.

Enter Acho^^ates. Cherseo. The first is cared for -- here a second comes,
Assist me thou quick jssue of Jove's brain,
And this one night shall make their labors vain.

Achom. It shall be so, my fears are too to great,
To join all in one onset: a strong band
Shall with a circle hem the traitor round,
And intercept the passage of their flight;
How now? from whence come thou? what at thou?

Cher. A Lieg-man to Achomates.

Achom. To me?

Cher. Yet noble Prince, and one whose life is vowed
To further your desert, and therefore yours.

Achom. We thank you, and pray you leave us.

Cher. I can unfold an easy stra^agem,
Would crown the hopes of great Achomates.

Achom. What means the fellow?

Cher. To secure your state
By Selymus his fall.

Achom. What is it thou breathe?
Speak it again, for many careful thoughts
Possess my soul, that every blessed voice,
Steals in the passage twixt my ear and have,
By Selymus his fall, to secure my state?

Cherse. I can:

Achom. Delude me not, and I will rain
Such ^n unmeasured plenty in thy lap,
Heap such continual honors on thy head
That thou should snrinke, and stagger with the weight.

Cherse. Judge of the means; this night I have induced
Young Selymus to walk forth in this grove,
At the twelfe hour, in hope to meet you here*
Where having urged a combat, and both met
In ^ager conflict I have pawned my vow.
To rush from yonder thicket, and with him
Join against you.

Acho. Villain.

Cher. And devils had,
My heart made promise with my tongue,
But heaven bear witness that my soul affects
None but Achomates, try but my faith,
And meet this foe, whom I have bayted thus,
With golden hopes, and you will ^ind my deed
In your defense all promise shall succeed.

Acho. I Am resolved soldier, when day is past*
And the full fancies of mortality
Busy ^n dreams and playing visions,
At the sad melancholy hour of twelve,
I Will meet thee in this plain.

Cher. And you shall find
Me here before you.

Achom. Be so; Who denies
To strike in time, can seldom hope to rise,
Exit
Chers. These two will meet, and I must take both parts.
Now for a trick to send them both to hell,
In the full growth of expectation;
Heavens know they have deserved it then 'twould be
An happy murder: and behold the men
Enter Bass^^^ Whom ^ have decreed should do it, once again
I must betake me to my former note;
Health to the friends of our great Emperor,
The three strong pillars that uphold true worth.

Isaacke Sir, your intrusion is unseasonable.

Musta. And your salute, impardonably bold.

Cher. Perhaps the news I bring, may frame excuse
For both these faults.

Mesith. Speak out thy mind in brief.

Cher. Then thus: to night here present on this plain,
You may encounter two fierce enemies,
Achomates, and Cherseogles, both at the full stroke of twelve.

Isaac How ( Mesithes) we are blessed.

Musta. This night at twelve of the clock?

Cher. Upon my life --

Omnes What shall we do?

Chers. But meet me on this plain
At the appointed hour, and I will place
You three aside, from whence you shall oppress
Your foes at unawares.

Mesi^h. Is it a match?

Isaac. It Is done at twelve a clock.

Mustap. See thou prove faithful.

Chers. If I shrink in ought
That I profess, death strike me to the grave.
So thrive all falsehood and each perjured slave.
Exeunt Bassaes How easily base minds are drawue to strike
Their foes at least advantage -- beauteous morn,
Pale witness to a thousand deeds of sin
Veil up thy light, that darkness may help on
These black stratagems, and unhallowed hands
Strike in mistaken bodies, even the soul
Themselves adore, and cheerfully defend,
But time grows fast upon me, hit all right
Two Princes, and three Bassaes dye this night.

Actus Quinti, Scena Septima.
Enter Corcut^s with his Lute. Corcu. Heaven whither run these projects? is the
thought
Of man so senseless, void of wit, yet fraught
With threatening ambition? to what end
Does this di^tempered madness headlong bend?
Bless me my Genius from these hated toils
Of murdering warfare, and these sweating broils,
Of watchful policy; Phoebus let it be
That I may know no other god but thee.
Learned experience says, ambiguous fates
Vex eminent fortunes, and he only sta^^s
Without the beams of envy, whom the hands
Of some propitious power, has ranckt below
Those short delights that troubled thoughts do know;
A Crown's a golden mark, which being hit,
Falls not alone, but off the head with it:
Honors are smoakie, nothing, then let the Queen
Of learning, great Minerua, and the nine
Chaste sisters, that adorn the Grecian hill,
Devote me to themselves, but let me still
Within Apollos sacred Temple sit,
And spend my body to increase my wit;
Reign Selymus, for I shall never thee hate,
Thy supreme power, nor envy thy state,
Corcutus stands divorced from a life,
Engaged to vain ambition factious state,
And empty power of Kings; He Is great in fame
Not who seeks after, but neglects the same.
Since thou have grieved me Phoebus, free my wit,
That I my ease my grief by speaking it;
If thou deny'st fond god, twill be in vain,
Sorrow can sing, though thou not tune the strain.
Sings to his L^te. Then thou sweet Muse from whence there flows,
words able to express our ill,
Teach me to warble out my woes,
and with a sigh each accent fill:
Infuse my breast with doleful strains,
Whose heavy note may speak my pains,
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night deprive my woes with sleep.
The pleasing murmurers of the air,
that gently fan each moving thing,
I being heard, straight do repair,
and bear a burden whilst I sing,
An heavy burden doleful song,
The fathers grief the subjects wrong,
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
The grie^ed Flora hangs the head
Of every youthful plant and tree
And flowery pleasures are stark dead,
at my lamenting melody,
Then all you Muses he^pe my strain
To reach the depth of bitter pain.
Oh let me sigh, and ^ighing weep
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
Me thinks I hear the singing spheres,
tune their melodious strains to mine,
The deawie clouds dissolve in tears,
as if they grieved to see me pine;
Thus each thing ioynes to help my moan,
Thus seldom come true sighs alone;
Then let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguil^ my woes with sleep.
He sleeps: Then enter two murther^s
Who slaying him, ^eare him away.

Exeun^ Actus Quinti, Scena Octaua.
Enter Ch^rseogles. Chers. A dark and heavy night, as if the gods
Winckt at our projects, and had clad the heavens
In a propitious black, to bless my plot;
Revenge, to thee I dedicate this work,
And I will pamper thy wild appetite
With blood and murder, thy dull slow pac'^ feet
Shall caper to behold our fea^efull scenes
Drencht in a scarlet Ocean,
It Is full twelve --
I hear a quiet foot pace, and it beats
Directly toward. It Is Selymus,
Joy of expectation.

Enter Selymus Selym. Thou Queen of shades;
Bright Cynthia, and you starry lamps of heaven,
What sphere has told you? oh you are envious all,
And therefore hate to grace the time, in which
I ruinate my latest foe; this is the sand
On which I am to wrestle for a Crown,
And I am entered full of greedy lust,
To m^et my adverse champion; here is my god,
Whom I adore with greater confidence
Then all those beauties, Sun, or Moon, or Stars
That with malicious absence have disrobed,
This gracious hour of i'ts due respect.
Oh thou the silent darkness of the night,
Arm me with desperate courage and contempt,
Of gods -- loved men, now I applaud the guile,
Of our brave roarers which select this time,
To drink and swagger, and spurn at all the powers
Of either world, blessed mortals, had that mother
Strangled her other infant, white faced day,
And brought forth only night, my limbs are stiff,
And I must bath them in my brothers blood,
I Will steep this grass in a red purple goare,
Scatter the carcass peecemeale, and that done
I Will rear a lasting monument, I Will sign
A trophie, which inscribed, shall speak my deede^
To after ages, that is my chief intent,
He Is coldly praised that is written innocent;
Whose there? my soldier?

Cher. Soldier and slave, great Prince at your command,

Sely. I will jnoble thee place thee my second self
In all my power for thy rare faith.
Where Is our Achomates?

Cher. I heard one softly tracke full hitherwards,
And think it is he; it is needful that I meet him,
And give some proof that I continue his,
Else jealous of my faith, he will return,
And we be both deluded; when you are met,
Parley before you fight, till I prepare
My self to run upon him unawares,
Mean while I Will go to meet him.
Exit
Selymus. Go, make have,
But if this base rascal should deceive
My trust? a trifle -- my nerves are plumped up
And filled with vigor, strong enough to fright,
A million of such big backed, drowfie ^laues;
I hear them both approach.

Enter Cherseogles and Achomates. Cherse. See where he stands, I shall not be
flow
To second your encounter being met,
Parley before ye fight, till I prepare
My self, to run upon him unaware,
Mean while I Will withdraw -- now for my Bassaes,
Exit
Achom. A time of dismal blacknes, and my soul
Is dull and heavy, as if envious night,
Strived to subdue my fatal watch fulness.
But I have rushed upon my foe: whose there?

Sely. Answer thy Prince first I say, what art thou?

Acho. He that vsurp's the title of a villain.

Sely. But he that wears it is a Saint, and such am I.

Achom. Thou Art a treacherous slave.

Sely. Achomates thou lie, this night shall prove
I shrink not to unmake what I have done.

Achom. Oh heavens so jmpu^ently bad?

Selymus. Good brother we know your virtues, one that
Gayn country, gods, and men,
Slew an Ambassador which here we must revenge.

Achom. Hark in thine ear,
I Will whisper forth thy mise (...), least the heavens
Should tear and snatch them hence from my revenge,
In greediness of wrath -- they whisper.

E^ter Cherseogles, Isaacke, Mesithes, Mustapha. Cherse. See where they stand.

Isaacke Achomates and Selymus?

Cher. Both:
They are two, we four, lets run upon them,
It Is very dark, be certain in your aim,
And all strike home.

Omnes. A match.

Mes. Isa^ck, and I will take the nearest.

Must. And we the other.

Cher. Strike home, and sure, and here is at them.

Stab him, stab him. vterque meritur. Selym. I have the Crown, and I will, Oh,
oh, oh.

Achom. Oh, oo, O villain I am slain.

Cher. It is not Cherseogles we have slain.

Isa. Not Cherseogles villain, whom then? speak.

They confer. Cher. Achomates and Selymus.

Isaac. Ha.

Cher. None other.

Isaac. Have thou betrayed us so?

Cher. Be silent, hear me.
There lie the Captains of both Armies dead,
Breathless, and so stupid to neglect
The use of oportunities.

Isaac. What use?

Cher. Are you not rich, wealthy in powerful gold,
Go whilst the Soldiers lie thus destitute
Of any Leader, frankly bribe both parts
Buy their unsettled love at any rate,
And creep into their bosom, then in this
Dead want and dearth of Princes, they will
Cleave to Isaac, and at length salute

Isaac. Me Emperor?

Cher. You apprehend it right.

Isa. What blessed angel art thou?

Cher. It Is no time for id^e complement.

Isaac. Thy counsel's good.
I would not let slip this sweet occasion,
For all the precious plenty of the world.
Come let us away.

Cher. First make some quick dispatch with these now riualls.

Isa. True, they will not endure my Sovereignty.
Have no sudden wits how to remove them both?

Cher. No wile but strength; are not we two?
They are no more; we must encounter them, it is man to man:
The match no whit unequal.

Isa. I am thine:
I hate to have copartners in my state:
There shall not breath a man whose envious eye
Dares look a squint on my dread Majesty.

Mes. They that bring news first, are still most welcome.

Musta. Experience speaks it true.

Mes. Let us have, now Selymus we come to gratulate

Isaac. Stay --

Cherse^. Stand.

Mes. How?

Mustaph. What means this?

Isaacke Fate to your lives.

They fight, Isaac is slain. Musta. Sweet doings.

Isaac. It Is no less, Sir witness this,
Traitor I Am slain.

Moritur. Cherseog. Cross fortune, wicked chance:
But I must make the best of it. Is he dead?

Mes. Villain he is, and thy bad turn is next:
What devil did incite thee, to incite
Isaac against friends? Injurious slave.

Musta. Urge him to no confession, till the rack
Force from his closest thought unwilling truth,
He shall be doomed for this notorious fact
Unto continual pains,
Hunger, oppression, want and slavery.

Mes. That struck me full. -- Have at thee:
Hold thou art victor. I have met the price
Of treason death, and as I hoped to raise
By blood, I fall, so have I mist my scope;
D^lusion is the end of lawless hope.

Moritur. Cherse. Mesithes stay one moment, art thou gone,
I am not far behind, I feel the blood
By slow degrees ebb, from my fainting breast,
I am heart struck, and wounded even to death,
A Scene of slaughterthis. -- O just heavens
Still I plighted faith to each of these,
I wi^ht that if I failed in one, I vowed
Death would thus strike me, I have gained my wish,
Then you imperial Fates that intercept
The brittle courses of frail mortality,
Continue this firm justice, and enact
A constant law, that all ^alse meaning hearts
That think of oaths as of a puff of wind,
May as I do, thus sink into the grave
My dying wish: so thrive each perjured knave.

M^ritur. Enter Soldiers. Sold. 1. The ^ight ouerblowne, and five a clock,
I wonder at their absence; what are these
Our Generals murdered, our dear Selymus,
With his three Bassaes, and Achoma^es,
Whose bloody hand is guilty of this fact?

Sold. 2. A trembling shakes me, 'twas some power
That frowned at our proceedings.

Sold. 3. Bajazet is new bor^e to his Sovereignty.

Sold 4. Let Us take their bodies, bear them hence in pomp
Unto their greatness, and advise the foe
Of their slain General stern A^homates,
Sound peaceful rumors; we must resubmit
To Bajazet, so heaven has thought it fit.

Exe^^^. Actus Quinti, Scena Nona.
Enter Bajazet and Haman with a Book and Candle. Baiaz. Set down the Book
and Candle, go and pr^uide
The Potion to prevent my Feauer-fit,
Till when I mean to study: go make ha^.
Exit Haman. Fortune I thank thee, you are a gracious Whore.
Thy happy anger has immured a Prince
Within the wal^s of base security.
Farewell thou swelling sea of Government,
On whose bright crystal bosom ^l^ates along
The grauelled v^ssell of proud Majesty.
Ambition empty all thy bag of breath,
Send forth thy blast among the quiet waves,
And work huge tempests to confound the Art
Of the usurping Pila^e Selymu^s.
Treason and envy like to bickering winds,
Shake the unsettled abrick of his State,
That from my study windows I may laugh,
To see his broken fortune swallowed up
In the quick sands of danger, and the sail
Puffed with the calm breath of slattering Chance,
By furious whirle-windes rended into rags,
And peece-meale scattred through the Ocean:
But peace my chiding spirit; Come thou man
Of rare instinct, blessed Author of a book
Takes the book^. Worthy the studies of a reading God,
Thou do present before my wearied eyes,
Tiberius sweating in his policies,
Dull Claudius gaged by dull flattery,
Ner^ vnbowelling Nobility,
Galba undone by servants hardly good,
Otho o're-whelm'd in love, and drencht in blood,
Vittelli^s sleeping in the chair of State,
Vespatian called to government by Fate,
Still as thy Muse does travel over their age,
A Princes care is writ in every Page.
Thus I unfold the volume of thy wit,
The chiefest sol^ce of my moving wit,
Caedes eo fuit nobilior, quia filius
He read^^. Patrem interfecit. Tacit. Hist. lib. 20.
Auaunt thou damned wizard, did thy god
Apollo teach thee to divine my fall?
What has thy cursed Genius tract my steps
Throught the Meanders of dark Priuacie,
And will he dwell with me in these close shades
To vex my banished soul, banished from joy,
Removed from the worlds eye? I am accursed,
And hated by the Synod of the gods,
A knot of envious deceites, the day will be
When they shall smart for this indignity.

Enter solemn Music, the Ghost of Mahometes, Zemes, Trizham, Mahomet,
Achmetes, Caiubus, Asmehemides, with each a sword and burning Tapers, led in by
Nemsis, with a sword, they encompasse Bajaze^ in his bed. Nem. Triumph my
Plantiffes, Nemesis your Queen
Is Pierced quite through with your continual groans.
See, see, the prostrate body of a King,
Clad in the weeds of pining discontent,
Lies open to your wrath, and doleful hate:
But I conjure you not to touch his skin,
Nor hurt his sacred person, those three Fates
(Those srightfull sisters) told me they decree
For Bajazet another destiny:
But vex his soul with your deluding blows,
And let him dream of direful anguishments,
Each in the proper order of his Fate,
Vent the comprest con^usion of his hate.

One after another strike at Bajazet with their swords, Nemesis puts by their
blows. Exeunt in a solemn dance. Nemes. Awake, awake thou tortured Emperor,
Look with the eye of fury on the heavens,
Threaten a downfall to this mortal stage,
And let it crack with thee, thy life is run
To the last Scene, thy Tragic part is done.
Exit. Bajazet awakes in fury, arises. You meager devils, and infernal hagges,
Where are you? Ha? what vanished? am I found?
Did I not feel them tear and rack my flesh,
And foreamble it amongst them? heaven and earth
I am deluded, what thin ayrie shapes
Durst fright my soul, I Will hunt about the world,
Search the remotest angles of the earth,
Till l'ue found out the climate hold sthese fiends,
Or build a bridge by Geometrick skill,
Whom lineall extension shall reach forth
To the declining borders of the sky,
On which I Will lea^e mortality along,
And break a passage through those brazen walls,
From whence Jove triumphs over this lower world:
Then having got beyond the utmost sphere,
Besiege the concaue of this universe:
And hunger-starue the gods till they confess
What furies did my sleeping soul oppress.
Ha? did it lighten? or what ^imble flame
Has crept into my blood? me thinks it steals
Through my distempered joints, as if it feared
To urge m^ to i^n^atience.
Hamon, accursed Hamon stan^ my soul
Above the power of these inu^nom'd drugges:
Am I in hell alive? the Stygian flames
Could not produce an heat so violent
As burns within my body: Oh I feel
My heart drop into cindars, I am dust;
Jove for thine own^ sake Jove, confine my soul
Within these walls of earth: for in the sky
When I am there, none shall be Jove but I.
Still, still I boil, and the continued flames
Are aggrauated: He is done, subdued
(By the base Art of a damned Emperick)
Whose empty name sent terror through the world:
Is not the heaven bespangl'd all with stars,
And blazing Meteors, whose bright glimmering flames
Like ceremonial Tapers should adorn
My solemn Hearse? what does the golden Sun
Ride with it is wonted motion? are the waves
Bridled within their narrow Continent
No deluge? not an earthquake? Shall a Prince,
An Emperor, a Batazet decease
And make no breach in nature? fright the world
With no prodigeous birth? Are you asleep
You thundering beggards that so awe the world?
I Will hasten to revenge this strong neglect
Of my deceasing spirits, mount my soul,
Brush off this cloddy heavy element:
So Jove I come excorporate, divine,
Immortal as thy self, I must contest
With thee proud god, with thee to arm my mind,
Only my soul ascends earth stays behind.

Moritur. Enter the Ghosts as before him, and bear him out. Actus Quinti,
Scena Decima.
Enter Solomon as newly Crowned. Soldiers, Attendants, warlike Music. Solym.
Is Selym^s deceased?

Sold. He is my Lord.

Solym. Who Solymus? what Fate durst be so bold:
Oh, I could act an holy frenzy now
Selymus deceased? What did not Atlas tremble
At such a burden? Can he support the Orb
That holds up Selymus? is not yet the Pole
Cracked with his weight? do not the heavens preparr
His funeral Exequies? Jove I inuol^e thee now,
Command the heavens that the prone Chandler shops
Command that idle Phoebus, that he exhale
Matter from earth to make thy ^unerall Tapers:
Or I Will make Torches of the universe
In stead of Comets; flaming Countries, Cities
Shall be thy cer^moniall Tapers:
Or if not this; I Will ransack Christendom,
Kings Daughters I Will embowell for a Sacrifice,
Their fat with vestall fire will I refine,
And offer virg^^s ware unto thy shrine.
Start back bright Phoebus, let thy fiery Steedes
Keep Holiday for Selymus. tell thy host
Proud Neptune now expects another deluge,
That all the earth may weep for Selymus.
What do you smile you Heavens? are ye conscious,
And guilty of this execrable treason?
What dare the fields to laugh when I do mourn?
I Will dye your motly colored weeds in scarlet,
And cloth the world in black destruction.
Nemesis, I Will nail thee to my greedy sword,
Destruction shall serve under me a Prentiship.
Courage brave Sel^xie, with thy Princely boat
Through Styx even all mortality shall float;
I Will leauie Soldiers through the Universe,
With which thou shall beguirt Elizeum;
Thus barren Nature shall repent thy fall,
Grieuing that she did not the event fore-stall;
Death I will hate thee: the world shall wear
Thy sable liuerie embroydered with fear:
Thy Trophies every where the world shall gaze on:
Thy Arms in sable and in gules I blazon.

Sold. My Lord this Crown ent^eates you leave off these
Ground-creeping meditations, and to think
Of Majesty, wherefore we inuest your browe
With this rich robe of glory, and do vow
To it our due allegiance: thus you shall
Mount up aloft above your Fathers fall.

Solym. Thus our dear Father, those bright robes of state,
For which so lately thou have sweat in blood,
Thou wearest upon my shoulders in thy stead:
Thus are we crowned, and thus our labors be,
Made gainefull unto thine, though not to thee.

Sold. Live then, and reign most mighty Emperor,
Whilst that our care and watchful prou^dence,
Shall fence thy safety, and keep Sentinel
Over thy sacred person, were black treasons,
Hatched in the Center of the darkest earth,
The massy element should be prospectiue
For all our piercing eyes; should Pluto send
His black Apparator to summon thee
To appear before him, by that Mahomet
We would confront him boldly, and excuse
Thy absence unto Pluto, by our presence;
Death we will disarme thee, if thou dar'starrest
Thy fury on our Solomon, or we will bale his person
With our imprisonment.
By our death thou shall live; our City walls
May with warlike ruin be battered,
But our allegiance, that European Bull,
Shall never push from us, with his golden horns;
Nor shall his gilded showers quench our loves:
No golden Enginer shall undermine
The Castles of our faith, nor blow them up
With blasts of hoped preferment, were thy walls*
But paper, were they made of brittle glass,
Our faiths should make them marble, and as firm
As Admant: not walls, but subjects love,
Do to a Prince the strongest Castle prove.
Behold great Prince allegiance mixed with love
Locked in our breasts: thou art the living key
To shut, and to unlock them at thy pleasure:
No golden pick-lock shall e're s^rue it self
Into these faithful locks, whose only springs
Can be no other then our own heart strings,
Our greedy swords which erst imbrued in blood,
Did seem to blush at their own Masters acts,
And vpbraid us with our bloody facts
Though peace has now cond^mn'd to pleasing rust,
Yet at thy beck we will sheath them in the breast
Of daring Christians, thus in war we will fight
For thee, whilst thou do strive for victory:
Here to describe such Princely virtues, which
Should more adorn thy Crown then Orient pearls,
Were but to show a glass, and to commend
Thy self unto thy self. Be gracious,
Magnificent, courageous, or mild,
Or more compendiously, be more thy self,
Reign then, and Mahomet grant that thou may pass
Nestor in years, as much as now thou do
In wisdom and in valor; Herald proclaim
To the world his title, and let swift-winged Fame
Second thy trumpet.

Her. Long live Solymon, etc.

Solym. We thank you friendly Actors of our bliss,
Our patience has at length tired out the gods;
Our Empire has been rackt enough with treasons,
And black seditions, as if no Christians
Were left to conquer, we yield our Turkish blades
Against our selves, imbowelling the State
With bloody discord, by our strength we fall
A scorn to Christians, with our hands we shed
That blood which might have conqu^red Christendom;
Thus while we hate our selves we love our enemies,
And heal them with our sores, whilst we lie weltring
^n bloody peace: the die of the public safety
Has been already cast by the hand of war,
Treasons have made a blot, which may provoke
The enemy to enter, and bear our men
To dark Auernus, Envy might have blushed,
Though always pale at all our projects: now
This bloody deluge is quite past, return
Sweet Peace with th'Oliue branch, enough of wars,
It Is thou must power oil into our scarres.
Fly hence Hereditary hate, discords dead,
Let not succeeding omnities and hatred live.
Let none presume to cover p^iuate sores
With public ruins, nor let black discord
Make an Anatomy of our too lean
Empire, let it w^^ sat again; when peace
Has knit her knots, then shall the wanton sounds
Of Bells give place to thundering Bo^bardes,
And blood wash out the smoothing oil of Peace,
Every Soldier I Will ordain a Priest
To ring a fatal knell to Christians,
And every minute unto earths wide womb,
Shall sacrifice a Chrisitians Hecatombe:
Then shall we make a league with Aeolus,
The winds shall strive to further our proceedings,
Then will we load the Seas, and fetter Neptune
With chains that hold our Anchors; he shall quake
Lest he to Pa^ resign his watery Empire,
And three fork'd-mace unto my awful Scepter;
The Whales and Dolphins shall amazed stand,
That they shall yield their place to Bears and Lyon^,
Sylla shall howl for fear when she shall see
The Sea become a Forest, and her self
Mountanie, then let Sirens quake
For fear of Satyrs, then let the Christians think,
Not that our Navy, but the Country it self
Is come to move them from the growing earth;
Comets, fiery swords shall be my Heralds,
Threatening to the world sudden combustion:
Let our arms be steely bows, our arrows
Thunderbolts, and in stead of warlike Drumme^,
Thunder shall proclaim black destruction;
Vulcan I Will tax thee, exercise thy Forge,
Prepare to me for all the world a scourge,
The Fates to me their powers shall resig^e,
Which with this hand will rend the strongest twine
Of humane breath, first for the I Will of Rhodes
Destruction there shall keep his mo^rnf^ll Stage:
The Inhabitants shall act a bloody Tragedy,
And personate themselves; Then for Nayos I Will
Death there shall keep her Court, then I will make
Vienna all a Shambles; yea gaping Famine
Ever devouring, always wanting food,
Shall gnaw their bowels, and shall lean them nothing
Besides themselves to feed on; their dead corpse
Shall be entombed in their neighbors bellies.
There every one shall be a li^ing Sepulcher,
An unhallowed Churchyard; famine shall feed it self,
Then shall they envy beasts, and wish to be
Our Iades, our Mules, Matrons shall strive to bring
Into the hateful light abortiue Brats;
The Infants shall return, and the lean womb
Shall be unto the Babes a sudden tomb.
Then shall they hoard carcasses, and strive
Only to be rich in Funerals; I Would rejoice
To see them stand like Screech-Owles, gaping when
Their Parents should expire, and bequeath
To hell their wretched souls, to them their death.

All. Long live great Solymon our noble Emperor.

Soly. All this, and more then this I Will do, when peace
Has glutted our new greedy appetites,
When it has filled the veins of the Empire full
With vigor, then lest too much blood should cause
Armies of vices, not of men to kill us,
And strength breed weakness in our too great Empire,
Then, then, and only then we shall think good,
With war to let the body politic blood,
Mean time we will think on our Fathers Funeral:
Oh, I could be an holy Epicure,
In tears, and pleasing sighs, Oh I could now
Refresh my self with sorrow, I could emblame
Thy corpse with holy groans from putrefaction:
Oh, I could powder up thy thirsty corpse
With brinish tears, and wipe them off with kisses,
And that I might more freely speak my grief,
These eyes should be still silent Orators,
Till blindness shut them up were I a woman:
But I am Solomon, Emperor, the Turk,
Blood shall be my tears, I Will think thee slain
Amongst the Christians, and translate my grief
To fury, every member of my body
Shall execute the office of a weeping son.
Thus in my tears an Argus will I be,
My head, heart, hands, and all shall weep ^ or thee.
Oh that the cruel Fates were half so mild
As to drive streams of tears from forth the springs,
Great sorrows have no leisure to complain,
Least ills vent forth, great griefs within remain:
See Selymus, sometimes a fore-string instrument
Feeding his Soldiers with sweet Harmony,
Does now tune naught to us but Lacrymy,
Could n' Aesculapius be found to tune
His disagreeing elements treasons cracked
The string which else an headache would vntune.
Every disease is a ragged fort
To wear these strings asunder, treason did lend
Death, which both age, and sickness did intend;
What then remains, but that his Funeral rites
With our Grandfather, Uncles be solemnized,
That so black discord may be with them buried:
But noble Selymus what Tomb shall I prepare
For thy memorial? shall a heavy stone
Press thy innocent ashes? Shall I confine
Thy wandering ghost in some high marble prison?
Or shall I hither fetch the flying I ^mbe
Of proud Mausolus the rich Carian King?
No; Religion shall cloak no such injury,
No hired Rhethorick shall adorn thy coarse,
No prattling stone shall trumpet forth thy praise,
The world's thy tomb, thy Epitaph I Will ca^ue
In Funerals, destruction is the book
In which we will write thy annalls, blood's the Ink,
Our sword the Pen; A Tragedy I intend,
Which with a Plangity, no Plaudity shall end.

FINIS.

