Annals OF ENGLAND.

Containing the Reigns OF HENRY the Eighth.

EDWARD the Sixth.

Queen MARY.

Written in Latin by the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God
FRANCIS Lord Bishop of Hereford.

Thus Englished, corrected and enlarged with the Author's consent, by MORGAN
GODWYN.

Nec verbum verbo curabo reddere fidus Interpres. -- HORAT. LONDON, Printed by
A. Islip, and W. Stansby, 1630.

The Translator to the READER.
THe Author's Preface has occasioned mine. Wherein it may be expected I should
give a public account of this action. J had once otherwise resolved. But it
is the fashion. And therefore know (gentle Reader) that Evil is oftimes the
(accidental) cause of Good. Idleness invited me to the trial of my pen in
some few loose sheets, which my fancy converted to the private use of a beloved
friend. Other end had J none. Sithence the Reverend Author has been pleased
to impose that as a serious task, which I had wantonly begun. Nature commanded
duty and obedience, and so have J the glory of the time, To be in print.

Sed dic, Posthume, de tribus capellis.

How does the Authors Preface conduce to mine? Why thus. To many who perhaps
will not at first consider, that this work is but a Translation, or seek
advantages to expend their Censures, his may seem impertinent. But let them
know, that these Annals were first written, In gratiam Exterorum Res nostras
noscendi cupidorum. So much witnesses the first Latin Edition. Peruse it and
find it. J am but an Interpreter, of whom, I hope, thou will not expect a
dictionary translation. Neither quarrel the omission of some things, the
knowledge whereof is to our Natives so innate, that now to insert them, were as
bad as to farce with tautologies, and make this little volume nauseous. Yet
has it lost nothing of its bulk, whatsoever it has of its splendor, those
defalcations being here and there in the course of the history supplied with
not unnecessary additions, whereto the Authors approbation and consent was not
wanting. As for errors of the Press, blame the Printer, not me. If thou by
this reap either profit or pleasure, thank the Author, whose benefit it is
that thou have it; and that not tongue-tied, but more then single-languaged.
Good is of it self diffusive, and he participates so much of it, that he
cannot endeavor an envious confinement of it. Farewell.

The Translators Dedication.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lord SCVDAMORE, Viscount SLEGO.
My Lord,
ALthough I have ever been averse from works of this nature, as desirous to
know them in the Original, rather then in any after-taught language; yet have
I not un willingly undergone the task of this Translation. It is an English
History ofthose turbulent times, whereof no one has written either so largely
or freely as this Author, who intended it for the common good, whereof the
mere English, without these or the like pains of some other would have been
incapable. Your Lordship has known it in the Latin, which tongue you have
naturalized. Wherefore this Dedication may seem needles. But it is due to You
as the work of your servant* in which reguard it craves your Honorable
Patronage. It has hitherto walked under Royal Protection. Other would not
have befitted the Author of this ingenuous History, by the exemplified
miseries whereof the busy Spirits of these times may learn rightly to deem
of our modern happiness. But even small grievances in any Part make us
insensible of the general good estate of the whole. We will be ignorant of our
good, and unhappy. As for these Annals, they have long passed with
approbation. If they now distaste, let the fault be the Translatours, and the
Pardon Yours; to whom alone my maiden pen sueth for favor, and to whose
service dedicateth himself

Your Honors most humbly devoted, MORG. GODWYN.

The Authors Epistle Dedicatory.
TO MY MOST Gracious Sovereign CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France, and
Irland, The most inviet Defender of the FAITH.
Most Royal Sir,
THese Commentaryes containing the Acts of three Princes, began about some ten
years since under the Protection of Your most August Father to breath the
common air; and but for so Gracious an Aspect, had suffered even at the
instant of their birth. For the errors of the Press had made them such, as
might have deterred even extreme impudence from so presumptive a Dedication.
Yet such as they were, they found Acceptance and Favor at His Royal Hands.
Hence am I encouraged to consecrate this second (but corrected) Edition to Your
Majesty, Who inherit as well Your Father's Virtues, as his Kingdoms. Neither
indeed can it befit any other after King JAMES of ever Sacred Memory. Most
humbly therefore beseeches Your Majesty to daigne it the like Gracious
Acceptance, who with the same loyalty and observance dedicateth and
consecrateth to Your Majesty himself and his

Your Majesty's most humble Chaplain FR: HEREF.d

THE AUTHORS PREFACE TO the Reader.
AMong the many who have in Latin compiled the History of our Nation, Polydore
Virgill in the opinion of most excels: not that he has written either more
truly or copiously, then many others; but more politely, andlatest of any that
have taken pains in this kind. For indeed it could not be, that a Forainer,
an Italian, well gone in years even at his first arrival in England,) where
being made Archdeacon of Wells, he long survived not) should not often err in
the delivery of our Affairs, and in reguard of his mere ignorance in the
English tongue, in silence bury many worthy passages recorded by our English
Writers only. It being therefore to be wished, and is much desired, that some
one versed in our Antiqnities would (as learned Master Camden has already
done for the description of the Island) consecrate part of his learned labors
to the Eternity of Britain, not in reforming that obsolete Virgilian History,
but in composing a new one; our Antiquaries may justly be taxed of Sloth (I
had almost said slothfulness) who had rather suffer the famous Acts of their
Ancestors to die eternally in silence, and so (as much as in them lies)
defraud their Couutrey of its true and deserved Glory, then bestow any the
least pains in commenting; that so the examples of most eminent Virtues
(whereof the harvest here has ever been most plentiful) might not want the
Record of their due Monuments. This J hope some or other will in good time
perform. In the mean time, others drawing back, although I was never endued
with such eloquence, as that I should dare adventure the writing of an History
(but now especially -- vires vltra sortemque senectae,
when having passed the age of fifty, long desuetude may have dulled my faculty
of penning) yet have I thought it might prove paines-worthy, to undertake
briefly in three small Commentaries to set forth the deeds of three Princes
immediate Successors to Henry the Seventh, so far forth as I have had notice of
them. And that, partly that by touching at the fountain (as they say) J might
stir up the wits of others; partly that the desires of Forainers might in some
sort be satisfied, who not without cause complain, that these times, then
which for a thousand years we have had none more memorable in reguard of
their diverse and remarkable changes, are not described by any, otherwise then
slightly, and as if they they had not intended any such thing. As for Polydore
Virgill, he has written either nothing or very little concerning them; and
that little so false and misbeseeming the ingenuitie of an Historian, that he
seems to have aimed at no other end, then by bitter invectives against Henry
the Eighth and Cardinal Wolsey to demerit the favor of Queen Mary, already
more then befitted incensed against both for the Divorce of her Mother. J have
therefore written (friendly Reader) and so written, that although many things
(I will not deny) conducing to an Historian may be wanting in me; yet am I
confident, that this my endeavor will find acceptance with many. Other Writers
may here have as it were a storehouse, from whence they may if I be not
deceived) furnish themselves with some matter, which may help to raise an
everlasting monument. Forainers also ignorant of the English tongue may have a
taste of these times, vnvntill some one arise, who can and will compile a
History of our Nation worthy the majesty of the British name. J have in this
work been so observant of Jmpartiality, Simplicity, and Truth, that I fear
nothing so much as a Domestique anger for not being pious enough, because I
would not be over-pious. Many contend, that a good Prince should be (...). This
(I think) no man will affirm of an Historian, though some seem to opine it;
So that he shall come short of his duty either to God or his Country, who in
the delivery of an History will not be at the least (...); and who by affirming
incertainties* and known truths, shall not yield much to his affections, so
they be joined with the love of Religion and Country. But how much do they
inure Truth, who from lies and falsehood beg helps to underprop her? Avaunt. We
have no need of them, And had we, yet would it not much profit us to rely on
such weak advantages, one pious lie detected proving more hurtful, then a
thousand others, although so artificially contrived that they avoid discovery,
can prove profitable. For example whereof seek no farther then the Papists,
whose fained miracles, impostures, and Legends patched up of lies have brought
to pass, that even in those things which are true, they scarce gain belief.
Wherefore, I am well content that Truth, which maugre her enemies will at length
be every where victorious, shall prevail with me. J have done to my power.
Politely, eloquently, politiquely, I could not write: Truly, and fide Attica as
they say, I could. If I have done amiss in ought, it is not out of malice, but
error, which the gentle Reader will (I hope) pardon. This ^ernestly entreat,
withal beseeching the All-good and All-mighty God, that this my labor
directed to no other end, then to his glory and the good of his Church, may
attain its due, and by me desired success. Farewell.

Regem dedi iratus eis.
J. Cecill sculp.

portrait

ANNALS OF ENGLAND. From the Year 1508. to the Year, 1558.
The first Book.
Henry 8. 1509.
AFter the death of HENRY the Seventh, his only Son HENRY Prince of Wales
undertook the government of this Kingdom. He had then attained to the age of
eighteen years, and was richly adorned with endowments both of Body and
Mind. For of Stature he was tall, of a beautiful Aspect, and of Form through
all his age truly beseeming a King: he was witty, docile, and naturally
propense to Letters, until pleasures (to which the liberty of Sovereignty
easily prompteth) did somewhat unseasonably withdraw him from his Studies; to
these you may add^ a great Spirit aspiring to the glory both of Fo^titude and
Munificence. This towardliness was so seconded by the happy care of his
Tutors, that if the end of his Reign had been answerable to the beginning,
HENRY the Eighth might deservedly have been ranked amongst the greatest of our
Kings. For if you consider his first twenty years, you shall not easily find
any one, that either more happily managed affairs abroad* or governed more
wisely at home, or that bare greater sway among his Neighbor Princes. This I
think ought chiefly to be ascribed to the providence of his wise Father, and
his Grandmother then still alive. For they took care, that he should have wise
and virtuous Ouer-seers in his youth, by whose assistance having once passed
the hazards thereof, he happily avoided those rocks, whereon so many daily
suffer wrack. But these either dying, or being so broken with age, that they
could be no longer employed in affairs of State, and He himself being now
come to those years, that commonly cast aside modesty (Modesty, I say, the
Guardian of that great Virtue) then making use of no Counselor, but his will,
he fell into those vices, which notwithstanding the glory of his former
Reign, branded him deeply with the foul stains of Luxury and Cruelty. But
remitting those things to their proper places, those Worthies appointed his
Counsailours were,

His privy Counsel.
William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Chancelour of England.
Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester. Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Durham. Thomas
Howard Earl of Surrey, Lord Treasurer of England. George Talbot Earl of
Shrewsburie, Lord Steward of the Kings Household. Charles Somerset Lord
Chamberlain. Knights. Sir Thomas Louell, Knights. Sir Henry Wyat, Knights.
Sir Edward Poynings,

The funerals of Henry the 7.
These men, the solemnity of the dead Kings Funerals being duly and
magnificently performed, erected him a Tomb all of brass, accounted one of
the stateliest Monuments of Europe, which one would hardly conceive by the bill
of accounts. For it is reported that it cost but a thousand pound. The Monument
is to be seen at Westminster (the usual place of S. Stephens Chapel.
our Kings Interments) in that admirable Chapel dedicated to Saint Stephen,
by this King heretofore built from the ground, a testimony of his religious
piety. I have read, that this Chapel was raised to that height for the sum
of fourteen thousand pounds and no more, and that he at the same time built a
Ship of an unusual burden called from him The great Henry, which by that
time it was rigged, cost little less, then that stately Chapel. But now, O
HENRY, what is become of that Ship of thine? that other work (besides the
reward of Heaven) will perpetually proclaim thy pious munificence. Hence
learn, o Kings, that the true Trophies of Glory are not to be placed in
Armories and Arsenalls, but (and those more durable) in pious Works. Seek,
first seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and without
doubt all other things shall be added unto you.

But to go on in my proposed course, although HENRY the Eighth began his
Reign the two and The Coronation of Henry the 7.
twentieth of April 1509. his Coronation was deferred to the four and
twentieth of June. In the mean time, his Counsel thought it would prove a
profitable policy for the King to marry CATHARINE the Widow of Prince
ARTHVR, his deceased Brother, and Daughter to FERDINAND King of Castile; for
otherwise that huge mass of money assigned for her jointure must yearly be
transported out of the Kingdom. Neither was there at first any other doubt
made of this match, then whether it were approved by the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, for as much as the Scripture (said some) forbad any man to
marry his brothers wife. But this rub was easily His marriage.
removed by the omnipotence of the Popes Bull, insomuch that presently upon the
Dispensation of Pope Julius, on the third of June, under a malignant
Constellation, the Nuptials of these Princes were solemnized, and they both
crowned the four and twentieth of June next following, being Saint John
Baptists day. At these Solemnities there wanted neither pomp nor acclamations
of the Estates of the Realm. But to show that of Solomon to be true, The end
of mirth is heaviness, five had not yet run their course since the
Coronation, when MARGARET The death of Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond.
Countess of Richmond the Kings Grandmother made an exchange of this life with
death. She was a very godly and virtuous Lady, and one who for her benefits to
the Estate, deserved with all honor to be commended to the perpetual memory
of Posterity: but her everliving works will so far set forth her praise,
that the pains of any Writer will prove altogether needless. Yet
notwithstanding, omitting other things, it will savor somewhat of ingratitude,
if I should not recount what she has conferred upon our Universities: She
founded two Colleges at Cambridge, one dedicated to our Savior CHRIST, the
other to Saint JOHN the Evangelist, and endowed them both with such large
Revenues, that at this time besides Officers and Servants, there are about two
hundred Students maintained in them: she also left Lands to both Universities,
out of the rents whereof two Doctors public Professors of Divinity to this
day do receive their annual stipends. She lies interred near her Son in a
fair Tomb of Touchstone, whereon lies her Image of gilded brass.

Anno Dom. 1510. Reg. 2.
HENRY the Seventh Father to this our Eighth, some few years before his death
had caused Empson and Dudley.
an inquisition to be made throughout the Kingdom of the breach of the penal
Statutes, saying, that Laws were to no purpose, unless the fear of
punishment did force men to observe them. But the Inquisitors proceeding so
rigorously, that even the least faults were punished according to the Law,
which inflicted a pecuniarie Mulct; they that were touched (says Polydore
Virgil) cried out, that this proceeded out of Covetousness, rather then
Severiti^. But the wiser sort conceived the Kings intent to be, partly to curb
the fierce mind of the people bred up in faction, partly that by these Fines
he might not only weaken the rich, but also increase his own strength, and
fortify himself against civil Attempts (whereof he had lately seen some
sparkles fly abroad) if so be any smothered coal should happen to break out
into a flame. What ever the matter was, many there were, who by accusing others
sought the Kings favor, and enlarged their own estates, amongst whom two were
chief; the one was called RICHARD EMPSON, the other EDMUND DVDLEY, both
Lawiers, and both for having served the Kings turn, lately made Barons of the
Exchequer. It is said that EMPSON was borne at Torcester in Northampton Shire,
his Father was a Siuier. DVDLEY, though he were well descended, yet being not
befriended by fortune, long strugled with adversity But after they had some
months taken pains in these matters, both of them arise to that greatness,
that there were few of the Nobility, that would not crouch to them and be
ambitious of their favor. Therefore it is not so much to be wondered at, if
they grew exceeding wealthy: but this wealth drew with it an envy greater then
it self, which nevertheless did them little hurt during the life of HENRY the
Seventh, but afterward cast them both down as low, as envy could have wished.
The King upon his deathbed commanded in his Will and Testament, that
restitution should be made to all, who had been wronged by the Exchequer.
Whereupon infinite numbers flocking to the Court, and demanding restitution,
there could not a fitter means be thought of to stop their mouths, then by
committing of EMPSON and DVDLEY the occasioners thereof, to the people as
Sacrifices to appease their fury. They were therefore arraigned and condemned
of high Treason. And these things were done presently upon HENRY the Eighth his
coming to the Crown. So their goods being seized upon, they for a whole year
endured the miseries, that usually accompany a prison, and yet were the Commons
as eager against them as ever. Whence it should first arise I know not, but
such a report there was, that the Queen had begged the poor men's pardons. The
Nobility disdaining, that such mean fellows had been heretofore so
prevalent with their Prince, and the Commons being easily incited against them
by some as eager enemies to them as themselves, cried out, that they were
cheated oftheir just revenge, and wearied the King with continual petitions
for their death, he was in a manner forced to satisfy them. Whereupon on the
se^enteenth day of August, they were both publicly beheaded* Such was the end
of EMPSON and DVDLEY, who abounding with wealth, and flourishing under their
Princes favor, while they set light by all things else, became a sacrifice to
the g^ddie multitude. And it may serve to teach us to use our power moderately,
and to take heed how we give offense to that Beast with many heads (I mean
the People) which being angered and having once got the raines, rages like a
tumultuous Sea. DVDLEY, left behind him a son named JOHN, who, as if he had
been heir to his fathers fortune, being created Duke of Northumberland,
concluded his powerful life with the like unhappy end, leaving much Issue
behind him even to our time, but yet whereof the heirs masle have long since
failed.

Anno Dom. 1511. Reg. 3.
THis year on New years day the Queen was delivered of a Son, Heir
apparent to this Crown, but he out-liued not the three and twentieth of the
ensuing February, to the great grief of the King and Kingdom.

An expedition into Afrique.
About the same time there came Ambassadors from FERDINAND King of Arragon,
who craved of the King his Son in Law fifteen hundred auxiliary Archers. He
was then in hostility with the Moors, inhabiting Afrique. The King very
willingly granted their request, and having levied the full number, embarked
them for Spain, in four ships of the Navy Royal, under the command of THOMAS
Lord Dar^ie. They were scarce arrived there, when news was brought, that a
Peace being made, FERDINAND stood in no farther need of their aid. Yet every
one was liberally paid, the General, and those of greatest note that
accompanied him, were richly rewarded, and all being dismissed with many
thanks safely returned home.

Into Gueldres.
In their absence, MARGARET Duchess of Sauoy (who was Daughter to the Emperor
MAXIMILIAN, and Gouernesse of the Netherlands under CHARLES the Infant of
Spain) prevailed with our King for the like number of Archers, she having
then wars with the Duke of Gueldres, against whom she meant to employ them.
These men in the space of five months did many brave exploits at Brimnost,
Ask, and Venloo, under the command of Sir EDWARD PO^NINGS a brave Soldier,
and in great favor with his Prince. Of them fourteen hundred returned home
much commended and well rewarded; the fortune of war had cut off one hundred.
Four Captains in regard of their valor were Knighted by the Infant CHARLES,
afterward Emperor* viz. JOHN NORTON, JOHN FOG, JOHN SCOT, and THOMAS LYND.

The King of Scots had then war with the Portugal, Barton a Pirat taken.
under pretext whereof one ANDREW BARTON a famous Pirat took all ships that
coasted either England or Scotland, affirming them always to be Portugals of
what Nation soever they were, or at least fraught with Portugal merchandise.
The King sent EDWARD HOWARD Lord Admiral of England, and his brother the Lord
THOMAS HOWARD eldest son to the Earl of Surrey, with one JOHN HOPTON to take
this Rouer. When they had once found him out, after a long and bloody fight
they took him alive (but mortally wounded) with his two ships and all his
companions that survived the fight, and brought them to London.

Anno Dom. 1512. Reg. 4.
AS yet our HENRY had no war with any foreign Prince, neither did the wiser
sort wish that he should have any. But he a young King in the heat of one and
twenty years, was transported with a vehement desire of war, which (says
the Proverb) is sweet to them, that never tasted of it. Although he had about
a year or two before made a League with LEWIS the Twelfe of France: yet he
War with France.
was easily entreated by Pope JULIUS ^o renounce this Confederacy. This Pope
more like to that CAESAR, whose Name he bare, the PETER, from whom he would
feign derive his Succession, that like another NERO, sitting still he might
from on high be a spectator, while the whole world was on fire, had written
Letters to our King, wherein he entreated his assistance toward the
suppression of the French, who without fear of God or man (these were the
pretended causes) had not only sacrilegiously laid hold on the revenues of the
Church had caused Cardinal WILLIAM to usurp the Papacy, had vpheld ALFONSO
of Ferara, and the Bentivogli in rebellion against him, but had also farther
decreed, to make Italy the Theater of his tyranny. Wherefore he coniured him
by the Love of our Sa^ionr, by the Piety of his Ancestors, whose aides were
never wanting when the Church stood in need, and by the fast tie of Filial
Obedience, that he would enter into the Holy League of the Estates of Italy,
who had made choice of him for their General. Jealousy, and Reverence to the
Sea of Rome so prevailed with Him, that he easily condiscended to the Popes
request. Yet that he might some way color his action, he would needs
interpose himself as Vmpier between the Pope and the French, whom by his
Ambassadors he entreates to lay aside arms: withal not obscurely
threatening, that if he did not so, he intended to undertake the defense of the
Pope against him, the common disturber of the peace of Christendom. The French
set light by this. Wherefore war is proclaimed by a Herald, the French King
commanded to part with the Kingdom of France, and the Duchies of Normandy and
Aquitaine, which he without right unjustly usurped. Then entering into League
with MAXIMILIAN the Emperor, the Arragonois, and the Pope, they consult of
assaulting the French with joint forces. The Arragonois invites us into Spain,
that thence we might invade France, promising besides certain troops of
Horse, store of Artillery, Wagons for carriage, Munition, and many other
things necessary for such an Expedition. Our King relying on his Father in law
his promises, levies a great Army, whereof he ships onepart for Spain, and
employes the other by Sea. EDWARD HOWARD Lord Admiral had charge of the Sea
forces, who fought with the French Fleet in the Bay of Bretatgne. In which
fight there was no memorable thing done, besides the combat of the two great
ships (the one having seven hundred English in it under the command of Sir
THOMAS KNEVET, the other nine hundred French under PRIMAVGET a Briton.) These
ships being both fast grapled, after a long fight fell both on fire, and were
utterly consumed, not a man being saved, of whom it might be learned, whether
this fire happened by Afruitlesse Voyage into Spain.
chance, or were purposely kindled by a forced despair. Our other Army under
the command of the Lord THOMAS GRAY Marquis of Dorset, amongst ten thousand
tall English soldiers had five hundred Germans under one GVINT a Flemming.
This Army landed in Biscay, where they spent some months in expectation of
due performances from the Arragonois, who feeding them with promises only,
tempered the heat of our men, who were very eager upon the march for France. It
happened that GASTON of Foix Competitor for the Kingdom with JOHN King of
Navarre, died about the same time. The Navarro^s had promised FERD^NAND some
aides toward this war. But now fearing no Competitor; he (whether out of
inconstancy, or that he thought his affairs so required) secretly by his
Agents makes a League with the French. Upon this FERDINAND The Spaniard se^seth
on Navarr^.
turns his Arms upon the Navarrois, and strains all his strings to draw our
men to the same attempt; but the Marquis of Dorset pleaded his Commission,
beyond which he could not with safety proceed. The Navarrois was utterly
unprovided, and the Nobility so divided into the factions of the Egremonts and
the Beaumonts, that he could do nothing. It was bruited that two mighty Kings
came against him with no less forces, what should he do? to hope from France
were vain* the French were too far off and deeply engaged in other wars.
At the approach of the Spantard he quits his Kingdom, and with his Wife and
Children flying over the Pyrenean mountains makes Bea^ne his receptacle.
FERDINAND having thus gotten a new Kingdom, casts off all farther thought of
^rance, only intending the confirmation of his conquest to which end he
intreates of HENRY the help of our forces raised for France, and prevails*
but to no purpose. For the English having their bodies inflamed with the
intolerable heat of a strange climate, and the drinking of strong wines, drop^
down every where, insomuch that we lost about a thousand (some say of
eighteen hundred) men in an instant. Wherefore impatient of farther delay,
they force their Commanders to set sail homeward. The King was mightily
enraged at their return, insomuch that he once thought to have punished them
for their obstinacy: but the multitude of Delinquents proved a pardon to all.
They did set forth in May, and returned a little before Christinasse.

Anno Dom. 1513. Reg. 5.
ABout the beginning of this year the King assembled the high Court of
Parliament, wherein war against France was determined, and a mighty mass of
money granted by the Commons Whereupon in the very beginning of the spring a
Fleet is set forth consisting of two and forty men o^ war, besides The Lord
Admiral drowned.
victuallers and lesser vessels. The Lord Admiral, who had the charge of this
Fleet, too too eagerly hunting after honor, by his rashness frustrated the
designs of so goodly preparations. He attempts to land in the haven near
adjoining to Breast, where striving in person to set foot first in the Enemies
country* he with a spear borne over board and drowned, was the only man of
all that Fleet that came short home. He therein performed rather the part of a
private Soldier, then of a Commander. For his death brought back this
headlesle Fleet into England. Where the King makes the Lord THOMAS HOWARD
Admiral in the place of his deceased younger brother, exhosting him, by
employing his service for his Countries honor to revenge his brothers
inglorious death. This new Admiral with great speed brings his Navy out of
harbor, and scouring up and down the Seas struck such a terror into the
French, that not so much as a fisher boat durst peep abroad. At last he lands
in Witsand Bay* ransacks all the Country thereabout, and without resistance
returns safe to his ships.

In the mean^ time the King having raised a mighty Army, arriues at Cala^s the
last of lune, with a Fleet of four hundred sail. The one and twentieth of
July he marches with all his forces into the French Territory, and having
sent some Ensigns before to besiege Terouenne a City in Picardie, he takes
his way Terouenne besieged.
thither, intending in person to sit down before it with all the strength of
his Army. By the way he meets the French near Dernom: They at first seem
resolved to fight: but whether they distrusted their own strength, and so
purposely declined an unequal combat, or (as by our side it is reported) that
our Ordinance being conveniently placed disordred them, and that so they beto
oak themselves to flight, as if it had been all one for us to see them and
conquer them, away they went, and could not any where afterward be descried by
us. So without any let our Army came before Terouenne. This City had
(according to the relation of our Writers* four thousand defendants, whereof
six hundred were horse. The place being so well fortified, it had been^ no
hard matter to have defended it against a mighty Army, if so be they had been
accordingly provided of other necessaries: but they were wanting. Wherefore
they certified their King to what an exigent they were brought. But he had his
hands full else where. For the Opaniard had made an inroade into Aquitaine and
Navarre; and the Suisses having lately overthrown TREMOVILLE at Novarre, had
now coopt him up in Dijon in Burgoigne; insomuch that his forces being by these
occasions distracted, he^ himself had not under his Colors above twenty
thousand Foot (the moity whereof were Lansquenets under the command of the Duke
of Gueldres) and two thousand five hundred Lances. With these he comes to
Amiens, that the hope of succors, he being so near, might encourage the
defendants. For it much concerned him that the siege should be drawn out at
length. In our Army were forty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, so that
there was no likelihood of doing any good against us. Neither indeed did the
French intend (especially at that time) to hazard the fortune of a battle,
the loss whereof in the judgment of the more expert would have been
accompanied with no loss then the loss of the Kingdom, which would easily
have followed our victory. The French King therefore sitting still at Amiens,
least he might seem to neglect such a City (the danger whereof did thoroughly
grieve him) sends some troops toward Therouenne, with instructions to put into
the City eighty horsemen completely armed (but without horses, the besi^ged
desiring no other aid) if possibly it could be offected, as it easily was by
reason of the negligence of our sentinels. For indeed the desuetude of a long
peace had made our men altogether unapt for war. But the indiscretion of the
French far surpassed our negligence. For whereas with the same hazard they
might have victualled the besieged, and furnished them with other necessaries
which they wanted; desiring (but too late) to amend this error, they would
needs effect it the same way as before. But our men had by this time raised a
new Fortification to hinder their entrance, and had withal placed in ambush
store of horse with fifteen thousand foot to cut them off in their retreat.
The French came near the walls, but finding all entrance debarred, returned
without suspicion of any intended mischief. They had not gone far, when some
(as if they had been out of their Enemies reach) impatient of the heat cast
off their Helmets, some fell a drinking, most leave their horses of service,
and for their ease The battle of Spurs.
mount on little nags. Our men charge them unawares, and without any resistance
made, put them to route. The French in this encounter lost three hundred horse:
there were taken prisoners, LEWIS de LONGVEVILLE Marquis of Rotelin, BADI,
CLERMONT d' ANIOV, BVSSY d' AMBOISE, BAYARD, la FAYET, and PALISSE (who escapt
out of prison) with many others. It was then the opinion of most men, that this
victory (if we had but made due use of it) laid an easy way for us to the
conquest of France: For the French were so affrighted with the news of this
overthrow, that they thought of nothing but flying; and the King himself with
tears in his eyes bewailing his hard fortune, cast about for some place of
refuge, and determined to post into base Bretaigne. But we looking no farther
then Therouenne, brought our prisoners into the Camp, and without farther
prosecution left the Enemies to their fears. The French call this the Battle
of Spurs, because they trusted more to their heels, then their swords. The
Therouennois Terouenne yielded.
after this overthrow despairing of succor come to a parley; and by the advice
of their King, yield up the City the three and twentieth of August, upon
Condition, That the Soldiers might depart with Bag and Baggage, Colors
flying, and Drums beating: and the Citizens permittted to carry away their
goods.

Maximilian the Emperor serves under King Henry.
A few days before the City was yielded MAXIMILIAN the Emperor came to our
Camp, and (which deserves to be recorded to the eternal honor of our Nation)
taking for pay a hundred Crowns a day, besides what was disbursed among his
Soldiers, disdained not to serve under our Colors, wearing the Cross of
England, and a party colored Rose, the usual Cognizance of our English
warfare. But he rather came to be a Spectator, then a Partaker in the danger.
Wherefore when he saw into what straights our King was likely to drive the
French being weak, if he would pressehard upon him, and pierce farther into
the Kingdom; although he were a professed enemy to the French, yet was he
jealous of our prosperous proceeding; and therefore by all means persuaded
HENRY to dismantle Therouenne, and thence to proceed to the siege of Tournay:
He blamed him (not without just cause) for his late setting forth, Summer
being first wel^neere spent: Winter was now at hand, when it would not quit
cost to maintain such an Army, good desigues being not then to be put in
execution: He told him that Therovenne was so far from him, that it could
not be kept without great difficulty; therefore he should do well to
dismantle it, that it might not hereafter serve for a Bulwark to the Eenemie:
That Tournay was a French City but (like an Island with the Sea) surrounded
with Flanders and Hainault, and far divided from the rest of France: True it
was, that it was well stored with inhabitants, and not meanly fortified: but
that there was no other Garrison, then of Citizens, and these he should find
effeminate, and for provision, that they had none: He should therefore make
speed and come on them unawares, and with a few days siege force them to
yield: That the French King, if he intended to succor them, must first march
through all Henault, and pass over two or three great Rivers, amongst which
were the Escaut and the Scarpe. That the Soldiers should find good booties
there, and the King himself the triumph of a most assured conquest: That the
addition of such a City would be no mean increase of his Dominions, and so
much the less care to be taken of it, for as much as it would be as easy
for him to keep it in obedience, as it was for the French for the space of so
many years to defend it* being placed amidst so many Enemies, that still had a
greedy eye over it. King HENRY by this time had so much of War, that he
began to be weary of the toil thereof, and to cast his mind on the
pleasures of the Court. Wherefore (although he wanted not Counsailors for the
best) he followed the Emperors advice, as being the more easy. The Flemmings
(who begged it of the King) had leave to raze the walls of Therouenne, to fill
the ditches, and to burn all the buildings except the Church, and the Chanons
houses, which they (in regard of the dissensions usual to bordering Nations)
very gladly performed.

The sieg^ of Tournay.
Therouenne being thus taken and destroyed, away they march with all speed to
Tournay, indevouring by their celeritie to prevent the fame of their coming.
But the Citizens suspecting some such enterprise, had fortified themselves as
well as the shortness of time would permit them: and the Peasants thereabouts
bring all their goods into the City, as to a place of safeguard. The City was
of no great circuit, yet at the beginning of the siege it contained fourscore
thousand people. By reason whereof victuals quickly began to fail them: and
they could no way hope for relief. The French King was far off, they had no
Garrison, the Citizens bad Soldiers, two great Princes had begirt the Town
with fif^ie thousand men; but they had an Enemy within, called Famine, more
cruel and insupportable, then both. So having for some few days held out the
siege the nine and twentieth of Tournay yielded.
September their lives being granted them, they yield, and to save themselves
from spoil pay a hundred thousand Crowns. The King makes them swear Fealty
to him, and appoints Sir EDWARD POYNINGS, a Knight of the Garter, their
Governor. Next he gives order for store of warlike provision, puts in a small
Garrison, and builds a Cittadell for the confirmation of his conquest. Neither
amongst these politic affairs did he neglect those of the Church. For the
Bishop being proscribed, he Wolsey Bishop of Tourney.
conferres the Sea with all the revenues upon THOMAS WOLSEY, of whose first
rising and immoderate power we shall have much occasion to speak hereafter.

All things being thus ordered, because Winter came on apace, he began to
bethink himself of returning with his Army into England. This thought so
far pleased him, that having been absent scarce four months he took
ship, and about the end of October came home triumphing in the glory of a
double conquest.

By the way he was entertained with the news of The King of Scots slain.
another victory, the Lord HOWARD Earl of Surrey having under his Fortune
slain the King of Scots. The King of France being encumbred with many wars,
had coniured JAMES the Fourth King of Scots by the ancient Laws of Amity, and
the late League made between them, that He would not forsake him entangled in
so many difficulties. If He regarded not his friends case, yet He should at
least look to himself, for whom it would not be safe to suffer a bordering
Nation, always at enmity with Him, by such additions to arise to that height
of power. The King of England busied with a foraine war was now absent, and
with Him the flower of the English Chivalrie: He should therefore forthwith
take Arms, and try to recover Berwicke an especial town of the Scottish
Dominions, but for many years withheld by the English; He would easily be
victorious, if He would but make use of this occasion so happily offered. It
could not be, but this war would be for His Honor, and profitable to His
Friend, if not to Himself: He should thereby also make known to His Enemies,
that the Scottish Arms were not to be contemned, whose former victories a
long, and (to them) hurtful peace had obscured, and buried in oblivion among
the English. As for the charges of it, He need not be troubled, for that He
would afford Him fifty thousand Crowns toward the providing of Munition and
Ordinance.

These reasons so prevailed with the young King covetous of glory, that
notwithstanding he had lately made a League with our King, whose Sister he had
married, and her vehement dissuasions, he proclaimed war against HENRY, which
proved fatal to him, bloody to his, and the cause of many ensuing calamities.
So having raised a great Army, he breaks into our Marches, and besieges
Norham Castle belonging to the Bishop of Durham, the which having held out six
days was at last yielded unto him. Thence he removes his Camp to Berwicke,
wasting all the Country as he marched with fire and sword. The news whereof
are brought unto them, to whom the government of the Kingdom was committed in
the absence of the King: and a leuy being made through all the North parts of
the Kingdom, Alnewike is appointed the rendez-vous, where all the troops
should meet at a set day, that thence they might set forward against the
Enemy under the conduct of the Lord THOMAS HOWARD Earl of Surrey. Among the
first (to his Fathers great joy) comes the Earls Son THOMAS Lord Admiral,
leading a veterane troop of five thousand men of tried valor, and haughty in
regard of their former navall victories obtained under the command of this
young Lord. After him came the* Lords DACRES, CLIFFORD, SCROPE, LATIMER,
CONIERS, LVMLEY, and OGLE, besides Sir NICHOLAS APPLEYARD, Master of the
Ordinance, Sir W. PERCIE, Sir WILLIAM SIDNEY, Sir WILLIAM BVLMER, Sir JOHN
STANLEY, Sir WILLIAM MOLINEVX, Sir THOMAS STRANGWAYES, Sir RICHARD TEMPEST, and
many other Knights.

These sitting in Counsel thought it best to send an Herald to the King to
expostulate with him concerning these outrages committed: to complain, that
He had without all right or reason spoiled the Country of a Prince not only
Allied unto Him, but also His Confederate, and therefore to certify Him, that
they were ready by battle to revenge the breach of League, if so be He
durst awaite their coming but a few days in a ground that might be fitting
for the meeting of both Armies. The King makes answer by writing, wherein
Heeretorts the violation of the League, calling God to witness, that King
HENRY had first by his many injuries shown evident signs of an alienated
mind. For the English (He pretended) robbed all along the Marches of Scotland,
without restitution or punishment: ANDREW BARTON a stout and honest man had
been unjustly slain by the Kings command, and one HERON, who had murdered
ROBERT CAR a Scottish Nobleman vaunted himself openly in England, the King
taking no notice of so heinous a fact: Of these things He had often complained
by his Ambassadors, but without effect. There was therefore no other way for
Him, but to betake Himself to Arms for the common defense of Himself, and
his Kingdom, against the Kings injustice. As for the meeting, he signified
that he accepted of it, and appointed both Time and Place for the battle.

Flodden field.
Neither party failed the prefixed day. The Scot seeks to animate his men by
taking away all hope of safeguard by flight, commanding them (I know not how
wisely, but the event showed how unhappily for thme (to forsake their horses,
forasmuch as they were to trust to their hands, not to their horses heels, and
by his own example showing what he would have done, he alights and prepares
himself to fight on foot. The rest doing the like, the whole Army encountered
Us on foot, to whom after a long and bloody fight the fortune of the victory
inclined. The Scots had two and twenty Pieces of great Ordinance, which stood
them in no steed. For our men climing up a hill where the Enemy sat hovering
over Us the shot passed over our heads. Our chief strength were our Archers,
who so incessantly played upon four wings of Scots (for the King divided his
Army into five Battalions) that were but lightly armed, that they forced them
to fly and leave their fellows, who yet stood stoutly to it. But the maine
Battle, where the King was, consisting of choice men, and better armed
against our s^ot, was not so easily defeated. For the Scots, although they
being enclosed as it were in a toil were forced to fight in a ring, made most
desperate resistance, and that without doubt so much the rather, because they
not only heard their King encouraging them, but saw him also manfully fighting
in the foremost ranks, until having received would upon wound he^el down
dead. The say there fell with him the Archbishop of Saint ANDREWS his natural
Son, two other Bishops, two Abbots, twelve Earls seventeene Barons, and of
common Soldiers eight thousand. The number of the Captives is thought to have
been as many. They lost all their Ordinance, and almost all their Ensigns:
insomuch that the victory was to be esteemed a very great one, but that it
was somewhat bloody to Us in the loss of fifteen hundred. This field was
fought the ninth of September near Flodon hill upon a rising bank called
Piperdi, not far from Bramston.

I am not ignorant, that the Scottish Writers constantly affirm the King was
not slain in the field, but having saved himself by flight was afterward
killed by his own people: and that the body which was brought into England was
not the Kings, but of one ALEXANDER ELFINSTON, a young Gentleman resembling the
King both in visage and stature, whom the King (that he might delude those
that pursued him, and might as with his own Presence animate them that fought
elsewhere) had caused with all tokens of Royalty to be armed and apparelled
like himself. But to let pass the great number of Nobility, whose carcases
found about him sufficiently testify, that they guarded their true King, and
consequently that the counterfaite fought elsewhere: it is manifest that his
body was known by many of the Captives, who certainly affirmed, that it could
be no other then the Kings, although by the multitude of wounds it were much
defaced. For his neck was opened to the midst with a wide wound, his left hand
almost cut off in two places did scarce hang to his arm, and the Archers had
shot him in many places of his body.

Thus was JAMES the Fourth King of Scots taken away in the flower of his youth,
who truly in regard of his Princely Virtues deserved a longer life. For he had
a quick wit, and a maiesticall countenance: he was of a great spirit,
courteous, mild, liberal, and so merciful, that it was observed he was
often forced against his will to punish offenders. These virtues endeared him
to his people in his life time, and made them so much lament the loss of him
being dead, that (as all Historians report) they seemed to have lost only him
in the whole succession of their Kings, which sufficiently argues the
improbabilitie of the subjects pretended Parricide.

But he had not fallen into this misery, if he would have hearkened to the
advice of those, who persuaded him to have returned home before the fight
contented with what he had already performed in the expedition: that he
should not upon so weak forces hazard the estate o^ his Kingdom: he had
won glory enough, and abundantly fulfilled his friends request. But the
French Agent* and some of the Kings Mignons corrupted by the French urging to
the contrary, this haughty Prince, even otherwise very desirous to give
proof of his valor, was easily persuaded to awaite our great Forces already
marching. His body (if at least that were his* and not ELFINSTON'S) being
enclosed in Lead, and brought into England was by our Kings (I will not say
cruel, but certainly inhumane) command cast in some by corner or other without
due Funeral Rites, saying, that it was a due punishment for one who had
periurously broken his League, whereas if we examine the premises, we shall
find he wanted not probable pretexts for what he undertook.

Anno Dom. 1514. Reg. 6.
THe next year having begun his course, The descent and honors of the
Howards.
THOMAS HOWARD Earl of Surrey (he who had been victorious over the Scots)
was created Duke of Norfolk, the title and dignity of his Ancestors. JOHN his
Father deriving his pedigree from THOMAS de Brotherton, Son to King EDWARD
the First, the SEGRAVES and the MOWBRAYES (who had been all Dukes of Norfolk)
enjoyed this Honor by right of Inheritance. But because in Bosworth field
(where he was slain) he took part with the Usurper, both he and his
Posterity were deprived of that Honor. This THOMAS dying in the year 1524.
his Son of the same name succeeded him, who deceased in the year 1554. His
Son HENRY (a young Lord of great hopes) his Father then living was beheaded
toward the end of this Kings Reign. He left Issue THOMAS the last Duke of
Norfolk (who also lost his head the year 1572.) and HENRY (at nurse when his
Father died) a very learned and wise man, whom King JAMES (no good man repining
thereat) created Earl of Northampton. THOMAS Duke of Norfolk had three Sons
that survived him, PHILIP, THOMAS, and WILLIAM. PHILIP Earl of Surrey (and by
his Mother, of Arundell) condemned the year 1589. and after dying in prison,
left Issue THOMAS, then a little one, who by King JAMES his favor succeeded
his Father in his Honors. His Uncle THOMAS out of the same fountain of Royal
Goodness was created Earl of Suffolk, with addition of the dignity of Lord
Chamberlain Beside these, this Family has CHARLES Earl of Nottingham Lord
Admiral of England, Nephew by the Lord WILLIAM his father, to THOMAS Duke of
Norfolk, that famous Triumpher over the Scots. This is he who in emulation of
his grandfathers glory, in the year 1588. under the fortune of Queen
ELIZABETH, most happily overthrew that vainly called Invincible Armada of
Spain. THOMAS also Viscount Bindon is derived from THOMAS Duke of Norfolk, by
his son the Lord THOMAS. So this noble House lately afflicted, now gloriously
flourishing, has four Earls and a Viscount, all brave and famous men, and of
whom there will be occasion of much to be spoken hereafter: I therefore thought
it good in brief to set down their Genealogy, lest I should trouble the
Reader with too often repetition of their Race upon each mention of the Name.
At the time of this Dukes creation, others were also honored with new titles,
CHARLES BRANDON made Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk.
Duke of Suffolk, and CHARLES SOMERSET Earl of Worcester, and EDWARD STANLEY
Lord Mountegle. Sir WILLIAM BRANDON Standard bearer to HENRY the seventh in
Bosworth field, and there slain by the hand of RICHARD the Third, was father
to this new Duke of Suffolk, of whose education (he then a little one) King
HENRY having obtained the Crown was very careful, and made him rather a
companion than a servant to the young Prince of whose household he was. The
Prince so greatly favored him, partly for his fathers deserts, chiefly for his
own, that he being afterward King, created him Viscount Lisle, and intending
(at least many were so persuaded) to give him to wife the Lady MARY his
sister, who afterward was married to the King of France; thought it first good
to honor him with the Duchy of Suffolk, which this year at the feast of
Candlemas was performed. But how he was frustrated of his hopes, and afterward
beyond all hope enjoyed her, shall be declared hereafter. Charles Somerset
Earl of Worcester.
SOMERSET the natural son of HENRY of the House of Lancaster, the last Duke
of Somerset, took his surname of his fath^rs Honor, whereas he should have
been called BEAVFORT, or rather PLANTAGENET, according to the ancient name of
our English Kings. He^ being Cousen german to HENRY the Seventh (whose mother
was MARGARET Sister to the Duke of Somerset) and famous for his many virtues,
of which that King was a quick and exact Judge, and was by him made L. high
Chamberlain of England. But having behaved himself very valiantly in this last
expedition against the French (wherein GVICCIARDIN untruly reports him to
have been slain) HENRY the eighth added this new title, which his posterity
still inioyes) to his ancient honors. He was great grandfather by his son HENRY
and nephew WILLIAM, to EDWARD the now Earl, who being one of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, and Lo. Privy Seal, does by his virtues much
more ennoble his so noble Ancestors.

The French King hearing of the overthrow of the Scots, perceiving himself
deprived of such a frieud and confederat, seeing his kingdom on fire about his
ears, and none to rely upon but himself, determined (if so he might fairly
and with credit) to crave his League with us. Pope JULIUS 2. the Incendiarie of
Christendoine was lately dead, and the French king himself was now a widower
He therefore intends to try whither by marrying the lady MARY the kings sister,
he might secure himself from war on our side, and by so near alliance gain
the assured friendship of so potent a Prince. LEO 10. succeeding JULIUS 2. did
openly Peace with France.
side with the French against the Spaniard. He therefore earnestly soliciting a
reconciliation, a Peace was cluded profitable to the French, acceptable to us,
and on the 9 of October the nuptials were with great The Lady Mary the Kings
sister married to Levis 12. K. of France.
pomp solemnised. The French king was well stricken in years, his wife a
tender virgin of some 16. or 18. years of age, but wonderful beautiful.
Besides the forementioned reasons, the desire of children (for he had no masle
issue) on His part, on Her part the public weal, the authority of her
brother so willing, and (which bears chiefest sway in a woman's heart) the
supremacy of honor in the title of a Queen, were motives to match so Uneven a
Pair. But many not without cause were persuaded, that she had rather have made
choice of BRANDON for her husband (so her power had been answerable to her will)
than the greatest Monarch in the world: neither was it long before she enjoyed
her desire. For the king (as it often happens to elderly men that apply
themselves to young women, died the last of Febr. having scarce 3 months
suruiued his wedding. The queen^ might then lawfully according to the articles
of agreement return into England, which she earnestly desiring, the Duke of
Suffolk was sent to conduct her; who becoming a fresh suitor unto her, so far
easily prevailed, that before their departure from Paris, they were there
privately married. The marriage was afterward by the kings consent celebrated at
Greenwich the 13 day of May of the ensuing year.

Cardinal Wolsey.
And now we must speak something of VVOLSEY'S sudden and (for these our times)
incredible rising, who having (as we have related before) been invested in the
Bishopric of Tournay, was within the year preferred to two other
Bishoprics. That venerable Bishop of Lincoln WILLIAM * SMITH, was lately
deceased, who beside many other monuments of his piety, having begun in Oxford
a College for students, called Brazen nose College, was immaturely taken away
before he could finish so good a work. So the Sea being vacant, it is conferred
on WOLSEY, now high in the Kings favor* He was of very mean parentage (a
Butchers son) and Jpswi^h (a town in Suffolk, but of Norwich Diocese)
where he afterward laid the foundation of a stately College, was the place of
his birth. He was brought up at Oxford, in MAGDALEN College, and afterward
became Master of the free School thereto belonging. Among other scholars, the
sons of the Marquis of Dorset were committed to his trust, and for his care
over them, the Pa^sonage of Limington in Somersetshire (no very mean one) was
bestowed on him. As soon as he had set footing there, he was very
disgracefully entertained by Sir AMIAS POWLET, who clap't him in the stocks, a
punishment not usually inflicted upon any but beggars and base people. What the
matter was that so exasperated him against WOLSEY, a man not of least account,
I know not: This I know, that WOLSEY being afterward made Cardinal, and Lord
Chancellor of England, so grievously punished this injury, that Sir AMIAS
POWLET was feign to dance attendance at London some years, and by all manner
of obsequiousness to currie favor with him. There remains to this day a
sufficient testimony her of in a building over the gate of the middle Temple
in London, built by the Knight at the time of his attendance there, and decked
round about very sumptuously with the Cardinals Arms, hoping thereby somewhat
to alay the wrath of the incensed Prelate. But these things were long after
this year. WOLSEY whether that he could not brook this disgrace, or bearing a
mind that looked beyond this poor Benefice, left it, and became domestique
Chaplain to Sir JOHN NAFANT Treasurer of Calais, by whose means he was taken
notice of by FOX Bishop of Winchester, a man that knew rightly how to judge of
good wits. He finding this young man to be very ^prightfull, of learning
sufficient, and very active in dispatch of affairs, so highly commended him
to king HENRY the Seventh, (who relied much upon FOXES faith and wisdom) that
he thought it good forthwith to employ him in affairs of great moment. What
need many words? he so far pleased the King, that in short time he became a
great man, and was first preferred to the Deanrie of Lincoln, and then made the
Kings Almoner. But HENRY the Eighth a young Prince coming to the Crown, was
wholly taken with his smooth tongue and pliable behavior. For when all the
rest of his friends advised Him to sit every day in person at the Counsel
Table, that so by experience and daily practice He might reap wisdom, and to
accustom Himself to the managing of affairs of Estate: WOLSEY advised Him to
follow His pleasures; saying, That His youth would not be able to brook their
tedious Consultations: every Age of man had its Seasons, and Delights
agreeable. They did not do well, that would force the King to act an Old Man
before His time, Youth being utterly auerse from wrinckled S^ueritie. It would
come to pass hereafter, if God were so pleased, that what was now troublesome
to him, would not be disagreeable to riper Years, nay prove perhaps a great
pleasure. Until that time came, He should enjoy the present, and not by
hearkening to others needless persuasions, any way interrupt the course of
that felicity which the largeness of His Dominions would easily afford Him.
He should hawke and hunt, and as much as Him list use honest recreations. If so
be He did at any time desire suddenly to become an Old Man by intermedling
with Old Men's Cares, He should not want those (meaning himself) that would in
the evening in one or two words relate unto Him the effect of a whole days
Consultation. This speech hitting so pat with the Kings humor, made WOLSEY so
powerful, that whereas the King before favored him as much as any other; he
only was now in favor with and next the King, with whon e there was nothing
to be done but by him. For he was the man that was made choice of, who like
another MERCVRY should pass between this our JOVE, and the Senate of the
lesser Gods, offering their petitions to Him, and to them returning his
pleasure therein. Wherefore he was even at the first sworn of the Privy
Counsel, and besides the late collation of Tournay, upon the death of SMITH he
was also made Bishop of Lincoln. In the government of which Church he had not
fully spent six months, before he was translated from Lincoln to the
Archbishopricke of York then vacant by the death of Cardinal BAMBRIDGE at
Rome. Shortly after, (that I may at once show all his honors) WILLIAM WARHAM
Archbishop of Cater^urie leaving the place* he was by the King made Lord
Chancellor of England, and by the Pope Legate a latere. Yet he stayed not
there, but as if the Archb*shopricke of York, and the Chancellorship of
England had not been sufficient to maintain the port of a Cardinal, besides
many other l^uings he procured of the King the Abbey of Saint Albanes, and the
Bishopric of Bath and Wells. And not content with these, leaving Bath and
Wells, he adds the Bishopric of Durham to that of York, and then leaving
Durham ^eazeth on Winchester at that time of greatest revenue of any
Bishopric in England. You now see WOLSEY in his height, rich, his Princes
Favorite, and from the bottom raised to the top o^ Fortunes wheel. What
became of him afterward you shall know hereafter.

Anno Dom. 1515. Reg. 7.
THe League lately made with LEWIS the French King, was confirmed by FRANCIS
his Successor, and published by Proclamation in London, the ninth day of April.

Anno Dom. 1516. Reg. 8.
A breach with France.
But the French King having taken into his protection the young King of Scots,
sent JOHN STVART Duke of Albanie in Scotland to be Governor both of the kings
Person and kingdom. The first thing this Duke undertook, was, either to put to
death or banish those, whom he any way suspected to favor the English.
Insomuch, that the Queen Dowager (who by this time was matried to ARCHIBALD
DOVGLIS Earl of Aagus) forced to save herself by flight, came into England to
her Brother, with whom she stayed at London a whole year, the Earl her
husband after a month or two without leave returning into Scotland. King HENRY
being displeased at these French practices, deals underhand with the Emperor
MAXIMILIAN (with whom the French then contended for the Duchy of Milane) and
lends him a great sum of money, whereby he might hire the Suis^es to aid him
in the expelling the French out of Italy. But the Emperor, although he had
levied a sufficient Army, returned home without doing any thing. He was indeed
accounted a wise Prince, but unhappy in the managing of his affairs: whether
it were that Fortune waiwardly opposed him, or that he was naturally slow in
the execution of his well plotted designs. But shortly after he intendes a
second trial of his Fortune. Wherefore by his Ambassador the Cardinal of
Suisserland, he yet borowe^ more money of the King, which was delivered to
certain Merchants of Genua to be by a set day paid to the Emperor in
Italy. But they, whether corrupted by the French, or not of sufficient
ability to make return, deceived him; and so his second designs vanished
also into Air I do not think it was the Kings fault, although we might
justly suspect, that the great treasure left him by his Father being almost
spent, and the French secretly offering peace upon good terms, the friendship
between him and the Emperor, which he had so dearly purchased, began at
length to grow cold. Certainly (to speak nothing of the League which was
afterward concluded with France) the Treasury was now grown so bare, that
the King was driven to invent new ways for the raising of money. The care of
this business (as almost of all others) was committed to Cardinal WOLSEY, who
casting up the Exchequer accounts, found many deeply indebted to the King; and
(whither by the negligence or treachery of the Officers) never yet called to
account. Among others, the Duke of Suffolk was found to be a great debtor, who
besides his own revenues, received yearly out of France his wives ioincture
amounting to 60000 crowns. Yet notwithstanding he was fain to withdraw
himself from Court, that by living thriftily in the country, he might have
wherewith to pay his debt. The Cardinal next bethinks himself of public
misdemeanors of what sort soever: as perjury, rapes, oppression of the poor,
riots, and the like: the offenders without respect of degree or persons, he
either publicly punished in body, or set round fines on their heads. By
which means the Treasury (before empty) was replenished, and the Cardinal by
the people much applauded for his Justice. These things having thus succeeded
to his mind, he undertakes more in the same kind. He institutes a new The
Star Chamber
Court, where the Lords of the Privy Counsel, with other of the Nobility
should sit as Judges. The aforesaid crimes, which then greatly reigned in this
Kingdom, were punishable in this Court, which (as I conjecture) and
from the stars painted in the roof is called the Star Chamber. He erected
also the Court of Requests, The Court of Requests instituted by Wolsey.
where the complaints of the Poor were to be heard; and ordained many other
things in the civil government of the Kingdom, that were acceptable to the
people, and are in use at this day, wherein he alike manifested his wisdom
and love of his Country. Certainly they that lived in that age, would not
stick to say, That this Kingdom never flourished more, than when WOLSEY did,
to whose wisdom they attributed the wealth and safety that they enjoyed, and
the due administration of Justice to all without exception.

Anno Dom. 1517. Reg. 9.
THe Spring growing on, the fear of a commotion Ill May day.
in London increased with the year. The original and success whereof I will
lay open at large, forasmuch as enormities of this nature, by our wholesome
Laws severely restrained, are so rare, that I remember, when I was a child,
old men would reckon their age from this day, by the name of Jll May day* Long
peace having with us begat plenty the Mother and Nurse both of good and bad
Arts, allured the most excellent artificers of foreine Nations to partake of
our happiness, by frequenting the City of London. But the giddie multitude
not conceiving what good became of communicating their skill unto us, took it
very hainously, that Strangers should be permitted to enjoy the privileges of
the City; and our homebred Artificers did most especially complain, That
their means were every day curtalled, forasmuch as no small part was
necessarily to be defalked for the maintenance of these Strangers. This was now
grown the common discourse, and had gone so far, that one LINCOLN a ringleader
of this tumultuous rout, did not stick to persuade some Preachers, publicly
in the Pulpit to lay open these common grieuances before the Estates of the
Realm. Our Ladies Hospital in London, commonly called the Spittle, is famous
for the Easter Sermons; one of which was to be preached by Doctor HENRY
STANDISH (afterward Bishop of S. Asaph) a grave and learned man. LINCOLN had
assaied him, and had the denial, as in a matter, the very mention whereof a
good Patriot should abhor. But Doctor BELL a Divine, who was after STANDISH
to preach in the same Place, without fear or wit seconding their seditious
attempts, did publicly in his Sermon read the Bill by them exhibited to him,
taking for his text that of the Prophet in the 115 Psalm: The heavens, even
the heavens are the Lords; but he has given the earth to the sons of men:
Thence most foolishly concluding, that England was given to Englishmen only,
and that therefore it was not to be endured, that Aliens should enjoy any part
thereof. Many things by him spoken to this purpose, were accepted with great
applause and approbation of the Vulgar, who out of extreme hatred to
Strangers, breathed nothing but sedition. And to add more fuel to this fire,
it happened that many outrages were about that time committed by some of these
Strangers. This evil then thus spreading it self, foreiners were every where
ill entreated, and commonly knocked down in the streets, having not offered
injury to any man. The authors of these riots being by the L. Mayor committed
to prison, a sudden rumor ran through the City, That on May day next all
Strangers should be massacred. This without doubt proceeded from some of this
unruly crew, and was intended as a watchword to all the faction; but the
Strangers made so good use of it, that they had all withdrawn themselves
before that time, and the Magistrates very carefully attended each occasion,
endeavoring to crush all tumultuous designs in the shell. On May day Eve
therefore (the next day being the feast of the Apostles Philip and Jacob, the
solemnity thereof is usually augmented by the liberty granted to the younger
fort to sport themselves and to make merry) the Citisens in general are by
Proclamation commanded to keep fast their doors, and to restrain their
Servants from going abroad until nine of the clock the next day. But before
this had been thoroughly proclaimed, an Alderman walking in the streets, saw a
troop of young men consisting of Apprentices and such like gathered together,
and playing at cudgels. He sharply reproved them for not obeying the Kings
Edict, withal threatening to punish them, if they the sooner betook not
themselves every one to his home. Words not prevailing, he laid hold on one or
two, intending to have committed them. But what reckoning they made of
Authority, their resistance in rescue of their Companions showed; and by
outcries giving an Alarm, drew together all the rest of their Faction in that
quarter of the City. The fame of this hurly-burly increased their numbers, by
sending mariners, gentlemen's servants, beggars, and Citisens, but the greatest
part were Apprentices. Sedition like a torrent carried them headlong, and
animated them to all villainy. They break open the prisons, set those at
liberty, that were imprisoned for their outrages on strangers, fly about the
City as in a whirlwind, rob all forreiners houses, and not content with
their goods, seek after them for their lives. They found their nests, but the
birds were fled. Having thus spent the night, in the morning hearing the Kings
forces to approach, most of them slipped away, only some thr^e hundred remained
(whereof eleven were women) and being apprehended, supplied their places, whom
theybefore had freed. They were all arraigned, only thirteen designed for
death, whereof, nine suffered on diverse gibbets purposely erected in diverse
parts of the City. LINCOLN, SHERWIN, and two brethren named BETS,
Chiefetaines in this sedition, were carried to* Cheapside, where LINCOLN was
deservedly hanged. The Executioner ready to turn off another, was prevented
by the Kings gracious Pardon. The mind of man being prone to pity, we may
imagine, that others were well pleased at the news; but certainly the
condemned had cause to rejoice. The Queens of England, the two Dowagers of of
France and Scotland (both of them the Kings Sisters, and then at Court) became
incessant Petitioners to his Majesty, and that on their knees, in the behalf
of these condemned persons: and at length, WOLSEY consenting (by whom the King
was wholly swayed) their Petitions were granted to them, and to the poor men
their lives. This was the last scene of this tragical tumult, the like whereof
this well governed City had not known in many ages. For the Laws very well
provided in that case, do under a great penalty forbid Assemblies, especially
of armed men, if not warranted by public Authority.

The sweating sickness.
In August and September the sweating sickness (termed beyond Sea, Sudor
Anglicus, or the English sweat) began, a disease utterly unknown to former
ages. Of the common sort they were numberless, that perished by it. Of the
Nobility, the Lords CLINTON, and GRAY of Wilton. The symptoms and cure you
may find in Polydore Virgill (in Anno. 1. HENR. 7.) who (as confidently, as I
believe truly) maintains, That, this disease was never till then known to
be, much less to be mortal. As if there were a concatenation of evils, one
evil seldom comes alone. A Pestilence succeeded this former mortality, and
so raged the whole Winter season in most parts of the Realm, that the King for
fear of infection, attended by a few, was feign every day to remove his Court
from one place to another.

The eleventh of February was borne the Lady MARY, afterward Queen of
England.

Anno Dom. 1518. Reg. 10.
Peace with France.
THe Peace so long treated of between us and the French was now in September
at length concluded on these Conditions:

That the DAVLPHIN should marry the Lady MARIE the Kings only Ch^lde, and not
yet two years old: That Tournay should be restored to the French: That the
French should pay King HENRY four hundred thousand Crowns, viz. two hundred
thousand for his charge in building the Cittadell, for the Artillery, Powder,
and Munit on, which he should leave there and other two hundred thousand
crowns, partly for the expense of that war, wherein the City was taken, and
partly in regard of other Pensions that were due unto him. For the payment of
which sums, the French gave eight hostages; so says BELLAY. But our Writers
speak of a far different sum, viz. Six hundred thousand crowns for the
City, and four hundred thousand crowns for the Cittadell: besides three and
twenty thousand pounds Tournois, which the City of Tournay ought the King: and
an annual Pension of a thousand Marks assigned to Cardinal WOLSEY for
renouncing all claim and title to the Bishopric of Tournay. For the
confirmation of these Articles, the Earl of Worcester, and the Bishop of Ely,
with some others, were sent into France, where both by the King and Princes of
the Realm they were magnificently entertained.

Anno Dom. 1519. Reg. 11.
THis year on the twelfth of January in the The death of the Emperor
Maximilian.
three and sixty year of his age, died the Emperor MAXIMILIAN, having to
prevent a disease, to which he thought himself inclining, unseasonably taken
a Medicine of uncertain opperation. His death bred an equal desire in the
minds of two great Princes, who became Competitours for the Empire, FRANCIS
King of France, and CHARLES King of Spain. But CHARLES, although King of
Spain, yet being by birth (borne at Gand) and descent a German, at the age of
nineteen years was chosen Emperor of Germany, with the full consent and
sufferages of all the Princes Electors. This Election, how ever other slight
matters were pretended, was undoubtedly the cause of the ensuing dreadful war
between these Princes. The French King taking this repulse impatiently,
meditates nothing but revenge. And that his designs might no way be crossed by
us, he labors amain for the confirmation of the peace lately agreed upon
between HENRY and him. Therefore by the Admiral BONIVET he deals with
WOLSEY, that at an enteruiew between the two Kings, the League might be
ratified. To this end HENRY intends to come to Guisnes, FRANCIS to Ardres, and
a convenient place between both is made choice of for their enteruiew.

Anno Dom. 1520. Reg. 12.
HEreupon the King setting forward toward France, by easy iourneis comes to
Canterbury, intending there to keep his Whitsontide. The next day after being
the twenty sixth of May, the new created Emperor CHARLES the fifth in his
return The Emperor Charles the in Fifth England.
from Spain arriues at Dover, distant twelve miles from Canterbury. The King
gladly entertaines the news, and although it were midnight, takes horse, and
within little more than an hour comes by torch light to Dover Castle, where
the Emperor lay; who seaweary was then asleep. But being certified of the
Kings arrival, he suddenly apparelled himself, and met the King at the top
of the stairs. They embraced and saluted one another, they long conferred
together, and the next morning (being Whitsonday) they rode together to
Canterbury, Canterbury.
the Emperor always keeping the right hand, and the Earl of Derby bearing the
Sword before them both. Canterbury is a City more famous for antiquity, than
for modern beauty. To let pass, that it was above a thousand years since
made an Archiepiscopall Sea, our Chronicles do sufficiently testify, that both
in respect of private men's fair houses, and the magnificent structure of it is
Churches, it anciently excelled the brauest cities of England. But within these
few years it has lost so much of it is greatness and beauty, that a man
shall find little of Canterbury beside the name. Why it should so much in so
short space decay, many reasons may be alleged: As the vicinity of London,
which swelling like the spleen, suckes both blood and moisture from all the
other languishing Cities of the Kingdom. Likewise the subversion of Saint
AUGUSTINES Monastery, the loss of Calais, and the pulling down of Archbishop
BECKET his Shrine, things which occasioned a great concourse of people, and did
by their loss and overthrow much impair this Cities splendour. One only
Ornament thereof suruiues, which is the Cathedral and Metropoliticall Church,
with such a Majesty piercing the skies (says ERASMUS) that it a far off fills
the beholder with devout amazement. This Church being at first dedicated to our
Savior CHRIST, a few ages past degenerated into the nickname of S. THOMAS.
This THOMAS surnamed BECKET, having obstinatly opposed HENRY the second, was in
this Church slain by certain soldiers: and being afterward canonized for a
Saint, his sepulcher mightily increased the glory of the place. For from those
times even almost to our days, all sorts of people from all parts of Europe,
superstitiously frequented the Shrine of this vpstart Saint, with rich
oblations indeuoring to procure his favor. Hence the Monastery was so enriched,
that of it and the Church ERASMUS said, That every place was enlightened with
the luster of most precious and huge stones, and the Church throughout abounded
with more than Royal Treasure. But the Shrine especially, that contained the
relics of this Saint, was so embossed with jewels, that gold was the meanest
thing about it. Hither accompanied with King HENRY, came the Emperor CHARLES,
but whether out of devotion or curiosity, I cannot say. But this is certain,
that the Cardinal and the Clergy going in procession, to the Church they went
directly, where a great deal of time was spent in Ceremonious worship, and
ablations at BECKETS Tome, not only by the Emperor, but even by Him, who
shortly after defaced the Monument, and seized upon that infinite Treasure,
heaped up by the devout folly of many preceding ages. From the Church they
went to the Archbishops Palace, where the Queen, Aunt to the Emperor, awaited
them, and very joyfully welcomed her Nephew. Three days were spent in
banketing and pastimes, and then the Emperor went to his Navy at Sandwich, the
King and Queen to Dover, from whence they passed to Calais, that the intended
interuiew of the two Kings might work it is due effects. The seventh of June
was the appointed day. The place, between Ardres and Guisnes. There the
Enterview betwixt the Kings of England and France.
two Kings mounted on Spanish Gennets, attended by such a multitude of
Nobility, as the occasions of a hundred years before had not at once brought
together the like, incountred each other, both in the flower of their age, the
goodliest Princes of the world, and most expert in all kind of combats both
on horse and foot. It were needless to set forth the magnificence of these
Princes, when the bravery of their attendants was such, that the place was
thence named The golden camp. Having embraced each other on horseback, they
alight and betake themselves to a Pauilion there purposely pitched: HENRY
attended on by the Cardinal of York, and the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk;
FRANCIS by the Admiral BONIVET, the Chancellor du PRAT, and some other
Counselors. Having had familiar conference concerning some private matters,
they gave order for erecting a Theater, and enclosing a ground for a Tiltyard,
that so they might solace themselves, whiles their Counsel treated of grauer
matters, the conclusion whereof they might at leisure every day know by
relation. Fourteen days these Princes gave each other the meeting, with great
concourse of most famous soldiers. HENRY then entertained the French King at
Guisnes, in a house made of timber (framed partly in England, partly in
Holland, and thence brought thither) wherein there were four Mansions: The out
side was covered with cloth so painted, that it would have deceived the
beholders for squared stone: the in side was hung with most rich Arras, so that
it every way seemed a most artificial and stately Building. The form of it
was much like that of the Exchange at Calais. It being afterward taken asunder,
was transported into England, and so stood the King in little or nothing, says
BELLAY. (Whereas we know, and that by Records, that there were sent over out
of England for this Work, three hundred Masons, six hundred Carpenters, two
hundred Painters, Glasiers, and other Artificers (in all eleven hundred) which
for the space of two months labored continually on this fabric.) The day
ensuing, the French King prepares a banquet: the banqueting house was a Canopy
every way extended sixty foot, which without was covered with cloth of
Tissue, within with blew velvet pouldred with golden flowers de Lys. At each
corner was a Pauilion of the same works: the cords were of blew silk twisted
with gold of Cyprus, which was of great esteem. But a most impetuous and
tempestuous wind broke asunder the cords, and laid all this bravery in the
dirt. Patience par force. The French King suddenly makes another banqueting
house, in that place where there is now a Fort that takes it is name from this
banquet. The preparations were extraordinary, and the magnificence outstripped
the reach of humane judgment. There wanted neither houses, woods, nor fields
for disport; for many men brought them entire on their backs. But pleasures
must have their intermission, and Kings if not by their Greatness, are by
their Affairs severed. HENRY therefore returns to Calais, and FRANCIS to
Boloigne. The tenth of the ensuing month, the King gallantly attended, visited
the Emperor at Graueling. The Emperor Henry visits the Emperor at Graueling
in requital accompanied him back to Calais. Shows and banquets are Princes
usual entertainments. To this end, the King so commanding, a round building is
made in the form of an Amphiteatre, eight hundred foot in compass. The sides
were of plankes: in the middle was a pillar made of eight great masts tied
together. This pillar supported the weight not only of the roof of the whole
fabric, (whither as into a lower Heaven the Moon and Stars had descended)
but Organs also, and places for the receipt of all sorts of music in
abundance. These places were adorned with tapestrie, statues, and curious
pictures, insomuch that the most fault finding could not complain of any want
in that kind. All things were now prepared for the entertainment of such a
guest, and the banquet ready to be served in, when the same mischance that
befell the French Canopy, made our English Heaven and Earth meet together. God,
as displeased with the mad prodigality of these two Kings, sent a tempest, the
violence whereof scattered this counterfeit heaven, blew out above a thousand
wax tapers, defaced the glorious thrones prepared for these Princes, frustrated
the expectation of the people, and forced the King to the necessity of another
place. But to lec pass the tilting, maskes, and gorgeous feasts during the six
days the Emperor stayed at Calais: In these several enterviewes between all
these Princes there was no one serious thing done, but this, that a firm
Peace, a perpetual League, and faithful Friendship seemed to be concluded on
all sides. For who would have thought, that it had been possible for discord it
self to have disolued this knot, where CHARLES and FRANCIS attributed so much
to HENRY, that they made him Vmpier of all controversies that should arise
between the^? But that there is seldom any heed to be given to the Agreements
of Princes, where they are tied by no other bands (as of Religion, Affinity, or
manifest Vtility) than that weak one of their plighted Troth, those foul
dissentions, and bloody wars which afterward rent all Christendom, and opened
a way for that common enemy of our Faith, may be a sufficient example. The
Emperor after all these passages of courtesy and humanity, departs toward
Graueling, mounted on a brave horse covered with a foot cloth of cloth of gold,
richly beset with stones which the King had given him. He would often speak of
his Aunts happiness, that was matched to so magnificent a Prince. The King
stayed some few days after at Calais, from whence passing to Dover, he with all
his train arrived safe at London. I cannot but envy their happiness who in so
little time saw 3 the mightiest Monarchs in Christendom, who for their
exploits, and the great alterations happening under each of the^, will without
doubt be famous through all succeeding Ages.

Anno Dom. 1521. Reg. 13.
The Duke of Buckingham accused of treason.
EDWARD STAFFORD Duke of Buckingham was about this time arraigned of high
Treason. He was descended of a Family, which whether it was more ancient or
noble, is questionable. He derived himself by a direct line from ROBERT de
Stafford, to whom WILLIAM the Conqueror gave large revenues, which his
posterity greatly enlarged, by matching with the heirs female of many noble
Families. By the Lady ANNE daughter to THOMAS of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester,
who was Brother to EDWARD the Third, he participated of the Blood Royal. The
first honorable title of the Family was of Lord Stafford, the next of Earl of
Stafford, as was EDMUND, that married the daughter to THOMAS of Woodstocke.
HVMFREY son to EDMUND was created Duke of Buckingham by HENRY the Sixth, who
left that Honor to his son HVMFREY who was grandfather to this EDWARD by his
son HENRY the third Duke. How HENRY assisted the Usurper RICHARD the Third, in
oppressing EDWARD the Fifth, how he after conspired with the Earl of Richmond
(afterward HENRY the Seventh) against the Usurper, but was cut off by the
Tyrant before he could bring any thing to pass; the histories of those times
declare. EDWARD his son restored to Blood and Dignities by HENRY 7. for his
descent, wealth, and Honors, inferior to none but the King, not content with
this, was by N. HOPKINS a Charterhouse Monk induced to believe that Heaven had
decreed to cut off K. HENRY, after whose death he should reign, and the Crown
be for ever established on his posterity. This the Monk affirmed, God the
Governor of all things, had revealed unto him. He further advised him by
liberality and curtesy to win the minds of the people, for the time was at hand
wherein this should certainly come to pass, if it were not through his own
default. The Duke (no sot, but blinded by ambition) gave such credit to the
Monk, who was either mad, or else flattered him in hope of reward, that
although the time prefixed for these miracles were past, yet was he still in
hope, fed the Impostor with gifts, who fed him with air, secretly vilified the
King, and gave profusely to all. Nay he could not forbear, but at longth he
must brag of the Iuglers promises, as he did to a gentleman named CHARLES
KNEVET, to whom he boldly unmasked himself, and gave a reason of his actions.
Upon KNEVETS accusation he was arraigned, and condemned the thirteenth of May,
and on the seventeenth publicly beheaded. His death was lamented by many, and
the rather for that he was no way faulty, but in his vanity and pride, which
overthrew him. Being a child, I have heard ancient men say, that by his
bravery of apparel, and sumptuous feasts he exasperated the King, with whom in
these things he seemed to contend. But he could by no means bear with the
intolerable pride of the Cardinal, whose hatred not improbably proved fatal
unto him, rather than did the Kings displeasure: for many times Princes are
with less danger offended, than their Mignons. There goes a tale, That the
Duke once holding the basen to the King, the Cardinal when the King had done,
presently dipped his hands in the same water: the Duke disdaining to debase
himself to the service of a Priest, shed the water in his shoos. The Cardinal
therewith incensed, threatened him, That he would fit upon his skirts. The Duke
to show that he slighted his threats, and withal, that the King might take
notice of the Cardinals malice, came the next day to Court, richly (as he
usually was) apparelled, but without skirts to his dublet. The King and many
others demanding what he meant by that strange fashion, he answered readily,
That it was done by way of prevention, for the Cardinal should not now sit
upon his skirts. He thought he had put a jest upon the Cardinal, to whose
informations, as proceeding from envy and spleen, he hoped the King would
hereafter give the less credit. But he missed his mark: for most men were of
opinion, that the Cardinals malice crushed him rather, than did the weight of
his own offenses. It was the saying of CHARLES the Emperor, upon the report of
his death, That the Butchers Dog had killed the fairest Heart of England
Howsoever it came to pass, the king who had hitherto ruled without bloodshed,
induced by the former reasons (so the Records run) permitted his hands to be
stained with the blood of this poor Prince; many lamenting, that the
indiscreet credulity of one man, having not attempted ought against the Estate,
should be the overthrow of so noble a Family. If I might lawfully pry so far
into Gods judgments, which are indeed inscrutable, I would be bold to impute
the punishment of the Son to the Fathers treachery, who conspired with the
Usurper against his lawful Prince EDW. 5. who by his assistance was deprived
of his life and kingdom. But forasmuch as that being touched in conscience,
he manifestly repented this fact (for seeking to oppress the Tyrant, whom he
himself had raised, he perished miserably) the Diume Justice (I think) so far
regarded his repentance, that his posterity are nevertheless Peers of the
Realm, by the title of L. Stafford. The first point of wisdom is, not to run
into error; the next, quickly to amend it.

King Henry writes against Luther
The King having written a book against MARTIN LVTHER, sent it as a Present to
Pope LEO the Tenth. This LEO, not yet thirty eight years old, was by the
combination of the Junior Cardinall^ elected Pope. In which dignity he behaved
himself according to his years, profusely spending the treasures of the
Church in hawking and hunting, and other pleasures not deemed over honest. Need
began at length to pince him, and money must be had. Whereupon he resolves to
make use of his Keys, against the most subtle locks, and strongest bars,
ever yet held preualent. Indulgences of all sorts, without distinction of time
or place, must now publicly be s^t to sale. Saint Peter's Church (this was the
pretense) was out of repair, toward which a certain sum of money given,
would purchase pardon of sins, not only for the Living, but for the Dead
also, whose souls should thereby be redeemed from the pains of Purgatory.
But whatsoever was pretended, every one palpably saw, that these Pardons were
granted to get money for his own relief. And forasmuch as the Commissioners
demanded it after an impudent and shameless manner, they in most places
incurred the dislike and indignation of the people, especially in Germany,
where they saw this faculty of redeeming souls from Purgatory, was either
sold for little or nothing, or played away in their Tauernes. But what speak
I of the Commissioners? That which made the Germans most impatient, was, that
the heedlesse Pope had given to his sister MAGDALEN the profit of the exactions
of Indulgences in many parts of Germany, and that so openly, that every one
must needs know it. For all Germany spoke it, that this money was not gathered
for the Pope or the Treasury of the Church (whereby peradventure some part of
it might be employed to good uses) but was exacted to satisfy Luthers
departure from the Church Rome.
the greediness of a woman. At that time lived MARTIN LVTHER a Doctor of
Divinity, and an Augustine Monk, one who under a religious Habit, did not
consecrate himself to idleness, but to God. It is reported, how truly I know
not, that recreating himself in the fields, his companion with whom he then
discoursed, was suddenly stricken dead with thunder. He thereupon falling into
due consideration of the uncertainty of death, and of judgment, left the study
of the Civil Law, to which he then applied himself, and renouncing the world,
betook himself to a Cloister, where for his deportment he was beyond
exception, for learning (especially divine) he was scarce matchable. Upon this
horrible abuse of the authority of the Keys, being inflamed with a pious
zeal, he could not contain himself, but boldly and bitterly inueighed
against this gross impiety. Neither stayed he there, but (storm the Pope
never so much) proceeds to other enormities in the Church of Rome, some whereof
that Church has since reformed, the rest religious Princes, by LVTHER awakened
out of their dead sleep of superstition, notwithstanding the practices of
Rome, have (God be thanked) exploded. New opinions (especially in matters of
Religion) are of themselves always odious. HENRY being offended with LVTHERS
new (as the world then deemed them) Tenets, thought it would prove to his
honor, by writing against LVTHER, to manifest his learning and piety to the
world* Herupon under his name a book was set forth, better beseeming some
ancient and deep Divine, than a youthful Prince (whom although he earnestly
endeavored it, yet his affairs would not permit to bury himself among his
books) which many thought to have been compiled by Sir THO. MOORE, some by the
Bishop of Rochester, and others (not without cause) suspected to be the work
of some other great Scholar. Whosoeuerwrit it, LVTHER repli ed in such sort,
that although his holy zeal were approved by many: yet those many could have
wished him more temperate, and respective of the Majesty of Kings. This Book
was so acceptable to the Pope, that according to the example of ALEXANDER the
Sixth, who entitled the King of Spain, Catholic: and of that Pope whosoever
he were, that gave the French King the title of Most The Kings of England by
the Pope styled, Defenders of the Faith. The death of Leo the Tenth.
Christian; he decreed to grace King HENRY and his Successors with that
honorable one of Defender of the Faith. Which several titles are by these
Princes retained to this day. But LEO long surviued not his gift, about the end
of the year dying (as is suspected) by poison. In the mean time the
exulcerated minds of the Emperor and the French King (according to the nature
of ambitious hatred, that for it is own ends makes all causes just) burst out
into open wars; for the composing whereof each of them had formerly agreed to
refer themselves (if any differences should arise) to the arbitrament of HENRY.
He Cardinal Wolsey and others sent ambassadors to the Emperor and French King
therefore sends to each of them Ambassadors, the Cardinal of York, the
Earl of Worcester, and others, who should, if it were possible, reconcile
these enraged Princes. All they could do, proved but an endeavor: for when they
thought they had compassed their desires, sudden news came, That the Admiral
BONIVET had by force taken Fuentaraby a Town of the Emperors in Biscay. The
Emperor would not then ratify the Agreement, unless this town were
redeliuered; which the French denying to do, all fell to pieces again, and the
War was renewed. After their deuoir in this cause, our Ambassadors went
directly to Bruges to the Emperor, of whom for a fortnight, which was the time
of their stay there, they had royal entertainment. But he held the Cardinal
in so great esteem, that it was apparent he was not ignorant, how powerful
the Cardinal was with his Prince. And here perhaps it would not be amiss (in
reguard of those times) to let the Reader know the pomp and state of this
Cardinal, how many Gentlemen attended him apparrelled with velvet, and adorned
with gold chains, and then how many were clothed in skarlet coats, the skirts
whereof were guarded with velvet the full breadth of a hand. But let him guess
HERCULES stature by the length of his foot. Such was the bravery of his
attendants, that in CHRISTIERNE King of Denmark, and other Princes then
residing at Bruges, it bred amazement. It was also reported, that he was by
Gentlemen of the best rank served on the knee, a kind of state which Germany
had yet never known. He spent a huge mass of money in that Embassage, and
that (as it is thought) not against his will. For he by all means sought the
Emperors favor, hoping that LEO, although much younger, either cut off by
treachery, or his own intemperance, might leave the world before him: And then
were it no hard matter for him, being underpropped by the Emperor and our
King, to be advanced to the Papacy. Wherefore at the first bruit of his death
he posted away PACEY the Deane of Paul's into Italy, with Mandates to certain
Cardinals whom he thought respected him, that they should do their best in his
behalf. But before he could reach Rome, he was certainly informed, that
ADRIAN (sometimes Tutor to the Emperor, and then Viceroy of Spain) was
already elected, by the name of ADRIAN the Sixth.

Anno Dom. 1522. Reg. 12.
WOLSEY nevertheless was as full of ambitious hope as ever. For ADRIAN was a
decrepit weak old man, and therefore not likely (as indeed he did not) to
survive him. In the mean time he might make an ascent, by which his ambition
might clime. He therefore seeks to advance the Emperors designs more than
ever, and to that end he persuadeth HENRY to denounce war against the French;
for that he denied to surrender Fuentaraby, and had broken the Covenants made
between them, in not standing to the arbitrament of HENRY, as both CHARLES and
FRANCIS had compromised; at what time it was likewise decreed, that HENRY
should declare himself an enemy to the obstinate refuser. The French discerning
the storm before it came, arrests all English ships, commits the Merchants to
prison, and seizes their goods to His own use; stops all Pensions due either
to HENRY for Tournay, or to his Sister the Dowager of France, for her
Ioincture. The French ships and Merchants in England find the like
entertainment, the Hostages given by the French for the foresaid sums, are
committed to close prison, and the French Ambassador confined to his house.
Levies are made throughout England, and great preparatio^s for another
expedition into France. To which the King being wholly bent, Ambassadors
suddenly arrive from the Em^erour; whose request was, That He would join his
forces with the Imperialls and that, if it so pleased Him, CHARLES would within
few days be in England, that so they might personally confer and advise what
course they were best to run. Many reasons moved the Emperor by the way to
touch at England. His Grandfather FERDINAND being dead, his presence was
necessarily required in Spain, whither he must pass by England. He feared
lest this breach betwixt us and France, might easily be made up, he being so
far distant. He had an Aetna in his breast, which burned with extreme hatred
toward the French, and was confident, that his presence would raise our sparkle
to a flame. They might personally treat and conclude more safely and securely
than by Agents and Posts, of whom in matters of moment no wise man would make
use, unless forced by necessity. But the chief cause (as I conjecture) of this
his second coming into England, was, that he was weary of WOLSEY, with whom he
saw it was impossible long to continue friend. For the Cardinal by his
importunity, one while for the Papacy, another while for the Archbishopricke of
Toledo, did much molest him, who had determined to afford him nothing but good
words. He disdained not in his letters to a Butchers son, to use that honorable
compellation of Cousen, and whether present or absent, he afforded him all kind
of honor whatsoever. But when the Cardinal craved any ernest of his love, some
excuse or other was found out to put him by, yet so, as still to entertain him
with hopes. But WOLSEY was subtle, and of a great spirit. And these devises
were now grown so stale, that they must needs be perceived. CHARLES therefore
neglecting his wonted course by WOLSEY, studies how to be assured of the King
without him. For this no fitter means could be thought of, then this interview.
The King was naturally courteous, loved the Emperor exceedingly, and reposed
great confidence in him* CHARLES therefore hoped that by the familiarity of
some few weeks he might make the King his own. But HENRY (he thought) would
not long continue so, unless he could some way lessen his favor toward the
Cardinal. This he hoped might be effected by admonishing the King, that he was
now past the years of a child, and needed no Tutor, that it was not fit he
should suffer himself to be swaied by a Priest, one in all reason better
skilled in the mysteries of the Altar, than of State, against which in this
respect (besides the abuse of his power) he must needs be some way (though
perhaps unwillingly) faulty. The addition of some aspersions withal^ were
thought not to be amiss, which if not true, should at least carry a show of
truth. That the Emperor practiced something in this kind, the consequences
make it more than probable. HENRY being a noble Prince, and one that scorned
money as much as any one breathing, was very glad of the Emperors coming; yet
was his Treasury very bare, and so great a Guest could not be entertained
without as great expenses. CHARLES upon notice of the Kings pleasure, attended
The Emperor, Charles the second time in Enland.
by the Marquis of Dorset, the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, the Lord De
La-ware, and others of the English Nobility, comes from Graueling to Calais,
from whence he passed to Dover, where he was received by the Cardinal, who was
accompanied with two Earls, ten Bishops, ten Abbots, thirty six Knights, 100
Gentlemen, thirty Priests (all these apparelled in velvet) and at least seven
hundred servants. Two days he stayed at Dover before the King came. At length
he came, and welcomed him with all Princely entertainment, professing, that no
greater happiness could betide him on earth, then the inioying his Majesty's
most desired company, though but for so short a time. From Dover, taking
Can^erbury in the way, they came to Greenwich, where the Queen awaited the
longed for presence of her Nephew. From thence to London, where they
werereceiued by the Citisens with the solemnities usual at the Coronation of
our Kings. At Whitsontide both Princes came to Paul's, where they heard the
Cardinal say Mass. Sports agreeable to the entertainment of such a Guest,
were not wanting. But when mention was made of renewing the League, Windsore
was thought fittest for the Treaty, it being not above twenty miles from
London, and a place altogether as it were composed for pleasure. Windsore is
situated in a Windsore.
large Plain upon the banks of the river Thames. The Castle (being the
chiefest in England, for strength comparable to that of Dover, but far
exceeding it in greatness and beauty) is built on a hill. This Castle
contains besides the Kings Court, a goodly Church by EDWARD the Third
dedicated to the blessed Virgin and Saint George; adioining to which is the
College, where are the houses of the Deane, Prebendaries, and Vicars Chorall,
where also live twelve Soldiers discharged of the wars (called Knights) and
having pensions, who in their habits are bound daily to frequent the Church,
there to pray unto God for the Knights of the Illustrious Order of the Garter.
Of this Order the Castle is the Seat, where according to the first Institution,
the Knights are to be installed, on certain days are to offer and to do some
other duties. Here, upon Corpus Christi day these Princes having on the robes
of the Order, in their stalls heard Mass, and receiving the Sacrament, bound
themselves by oath inuiolably to observe the Conditions of this new League, the
chief Articles whereof were these:

The Conditions of the League concluded with the Emperor.
That they should with joint and as great forces as they could, invade France:
That the Emperor should yearly pay to the King as much as was due to Him and
his Sister, from the French, viz. 133000 crowns: That the Emperor should at
convenient years take to Wife his Cousin german the Lady MARY, the Kings only
Child (who after reigned, and at age of forty years was married to PHILIP
the Emperors son) That he by whose default it should happen, that this match
should not succeed, should pay the other five hundred thousand crowns: and for
assurance of this, the Emperor should put Saint Omers and Aires into the Kings
hands. One would have thought, it had passed the reach of human policy, to have
dissolved this band. But shortly after broken it was, and could never after be
firmly knit again. After eight days stay at Windsore, these Princes went to
Winchester, and from thence to Southampton, where was the Emperors Fleet,
consisting of a hundred and eighty ships. Here on the first of July the Emperor
took ship and made for Spain.

In the mean time the Earl of Surrey having gathered a Fleet, landed near
Morleys in Bretaigne, forced the town, and burned it. And having wasted all
the Country therabout, he went into Picardy, to join with the Imperialls. Some
Forts they took and razed They besieged Hesdin, but without success: For
Winter coming on, and our men dying apace of the Flux, they were feign to
setsaile homeward.

Rhodes taken by the Turk.
I will conclude this year with an ignominious and fatal loss to
Christendom, the Isle of Rhodes, being on Christmas day taken by the Turks,
while Christian Princes disagreeing about matters of nothing, ruin themselves,
and invite the Miscreant to propagate his long since too too formidable Empire.
God grant they may at length, considering the common danger, rowse up
themselves, and with joint resistance repel this Enemy of CHRIST'S Cross, who
although he be far enough from some, is too near to the farthest.

Anno Dom. 1523. Reg. 15.
Christierne King of Denmark.
CHRISTIERNE the Second, King of Denmark, by the rebellion of his subjects
driven out of his Kingdom, had resided some while with the Emperor, whose
Sister he had married. The fifteenth of June, acompanied with his wife niepce
to Queen KATHERINE, he landed at Dover. At London they abode some days, with
that due honor that kindred and Princes give to one another. The fifth of July
they returned toward Calais. In the mean time a Parliament was held at London,
wherein the States being certified of the necessity of war, and what a fair
occasion was offered for the recovery of France, but that the war was like to
be defective, in regard of the weakness of it is sinews; a great sum of money
was easily granted. The Kings of France exact money of their subjects at their
pleasure; the Kings of England do not usually, without a Parliament, wherein
the pretense of war with France was wont to be a great motive of the subjects
liberality. And indeed France was at this time greatly distracted, being
oppressed with so many enemies abroad, and having to do with undermining
treachery at home; insomuch that our advantages, if wisely followed, seemed to
promise us whatsoever we could hope for. FRANCIS was on the one side pressed
with the war of Milan, on the other side by the Emperor: at home CHARLES Duke
of Bourbon revolted The Duke of Bourbon reuolts.
from him, by letters inciting our King to the recovery of his hereditary (as
he acknowledged) Right in France, whereto, respectlesse of pain or peril, he
promised his faithful assistance. Neither was this offer to be slighted; for
he had conceived an implacable hatred against his Prince, and was able to make
a great party in France. His valor and experience were after manifested by the
greatness of his exploits performed in a short space, FRANCIS being taken
prisoner by him, Rome sacked by his conduct, the Pope besieged in the Castle of
Saint Angelo, and feign at last to ransom himself and his Cardinals at a
mighty rate. These notable advantages were all let slip through the never
satisfied ambition and malice of one man; but so, that it made way for that
great alteration which afterward happened in the estate of the Church. Blessed be
that Almighty Power, that conuerts the wicked designs of men to the good of
his Church, and his own glory.

The Parliament being dissolved, the Duke of Suffolk is sent into France with
thirteen thousand men, viz. six hundred Lances, two hundred Archers on
horseback, three thousand Archers on foot, five thousand Halberdiers,
seventeen hundred drawn out of the Garrison of Calais, and two thousand six
hundred Pioners. The English and Imperialls joining, invaded the French
Dominions, took Roye, Mondidier, Bohain, Bray, Chasteaubeau, and marching
within twenty two leagues of Paris, put the City in a terrible affright, until
the Lord of Brion sent by the King with the comfortable news of the coming of
the Duke of Vendosme with four hundred Lances, makes them take heart again.
After these exploits, our Forces toward the end of December were recalled.

The death of Adrian the Sixth. Clement the S^uenth, succeeds, and Wolsey
suffers the repulse.
In the mean time on the fourteenth of September, died Pope ADRIAN the Sixth:
in whole place JULIUS MEDICES was after two months elected. Here WOLSEY again
failed in his hopes* who expected by the help of the Emperor and the King, to
have succeeded ADRIAN. But the Emperor never intended this dignity for him (for
he did his best for JULIUS.) Neither indeed had he been^ willing, could he
have advanced him to the Chair* For the Cardinals were in so short a time
weary of ADRIAN, who was a stranger, and little acquainted with the Court of
Rome. And the College repined to see any other sit in Saint Peter's Chair,
then an Italian, or at least one bred up in Jtaly. Nevertheless WOLSEY was so
incensedagainst the Emperor, by whose default (he was verily persuaded) it
happened that he missed of the Papacy, that now bidding hope farewell, he was
possessed with a desire to be revenged on the Emperor for this conceived
injury. He therefore on a sudden turns French, and to hinder the Emperors
proceedings, procured our Forces to be called home, pretending the ill season
of the year, with promise that the next Spring they should be returned again.

Anno Dom. 1524. Reg 16.
But CHARLES having not given any just cause of breach, WOLSEY dared not
publicly to profess his affection toward the French, with whom
notwithstanding by the intercourse of one JOHN IOACHIM a Genouese he maintains
intelligence, and without the priuity of HENRY lays the platform of a new
League. The war was very hot between the Emperor and the French. FRANCIS had
already taken Milan, and with a mighty army sat down before Pavia, vowing not
to rise from thence until he had taken it. The Duke of Bourbon and the
Imperialls were in number little inferior, and stood in want of nothing but
money (indeed all in all) wherewith the Pope, the Venetians, and our HENRY were
to furnish him. CLEMENT, although he had obtained the Papacy chiefly by
CHARLES his means, detained the money which his predecessor ADRIAN had
promised; saying, It beseemed not his Holiness, to intermeddle with the wars
of Princes. The Venetians at first answered coldly, at length plainly denied:
for they stood in awe of the French, and were jealous of the Emperors
ambition. And the malicious Cardinal had so played his part with HENRY, that
the Imperialls disappointed of the Wolsey persuades the King to a divorce.
monthly sums due from him, were exceedingly distressed. Now WOLSEY to make
a separation between these two Princes, told the King, that he certainly found
that the Emperor did but delude him: that he had indeed promised to marry the
Kings Daughter; but a rumor was raised by the Spaniards, That this match would
be little either for his profit or his honor, forasmuch as upon the point, the
Lady MARY was but a Bastard, begotten, it is true, in wedlock, yet
incestuously, the match being by the Ecclesiastical Constitutions made
unlawful: for he could not lawfully marry Queen CATHARINE, who had been
before married to his brother Prince ARTHVR: That both the old and new
Testaments were express against such conjunctions, and that therefore it lay
not in the Pope to dispense with them. It is certain that the Emperors
Ambassadors had thus discoursed with WOLSEY upon this very point, and WOLSEY
made his use of it accordingly. He knew the King doated not on his Queen, and
buzzed these things in his ears, in hope he would bethink himself of a new
wife. This taking as he desired, and the King lamenting, that for lack of
Issue he should leave the Kingdom to a Child, to a Woman, to One, whom, in
reguard the lawfulness of her birth was questionable, he could not with
safety make his Heir; the Cardinal proposed unto him for wife MARGARET
Duchess of Alancon a beautiful Lady, and Sister to the King of France. He
knew, that upon his Divorce from CATHARINE, and Marriage with the other, HENRY
must of necessity fall foul with the Emperor, and without hope of
reconciliation, strongly adhero to the French. That this divorce was for these
reasons set on foot by WOLSEY, the Imperial Historians do all accord; neither
for ought I ever read, do Ours deny. But howsoever it came to pass, this is
certain, That HENRY in stead of furnishing the Emperor with the money he had
promised, demanded all that he had already lent.

Anno Dom. 1525. Reg. 17.
Richard Pacey Deane of Paul's falls mad.
RICHARD PACEY Deane of S. Paul's, had been not long before sent to Venice as an
Agent concerning our affairs in Italy. He was a very learned man, and worthy
(had God been so pleased) of a better Destiny. He knew not the change of the
Kings mind. But perceiving the monthly pay due from the King, according to
promise came not, of whole Honor, which now lay at stake, he was very tender,
he was much discontented. To salve all, he assaied to take up so much money of
certain Merchants, with whom it seems he in part prevailed. But the sum was
so small, that it stood the Imperialls in as small steed, and yet so great,
that it exceeded the ability of his private estate to make satisfaction. Upon
notice of the Kings alienation from the Emperor, he fell irrecouerably
distracted.

The battle of Pavy.
In the mean time the Duke of Bourbon and the Imperialls were in so great
distress and want of all things, that unless they could by some stratagem or
other draw the French to commit all to the fortune of a battle, the Army must
needs disband. They disquiet and try the French (especially in the night
preceding Saint Mathias day, which was the day of the Emperor CHARLES his
nativity) with many false alarmes. They make two squadrons of horse, and four
of foot. The first consisting of six thousand Lansquenets, Spaniards, and
Italians, under the command of the Marquis of Guasto. The second of Spanish
foot under the Marquis of Pescara. The third and fourth of Lansquenets, under
the Viceroy LAVNOY and the Duke of Bourbon. They came to a wall called the
Park-wall, and under the covert of the night cast down above sixty paces,
enter within it, the first squadron taking the way to Mirabell, the rest
marching toward the Kings Army. The King thought the Imperials went to
Mirabell, as making choice of the plain open fields to fight in. He was
vnwilliug to leave the besieged at liberty, and yet the Plains were
aduantageous for his Horse. He therefore commands his Artillery to be
discharged, which somewhat endamaged them; and though unwilling, draws his
Forces out of their trenches (then which the Imperials desired nothing more)
and opposed the whole strength of his Army against the^. But passing before the
Cannon, hinders their execution. They that took the way to Mirabell, now turn
head, and both Armies engage themselves in a cruel fight, wherein the King
more following Shadows then Substances, and the idle rumors of the vulgar,
then the means of a most certain and glorious victory, is overthrown and
taken prisoner, loosing beside the flower of the French Nobility (almost all
either taken or slain) at one blow the Duchy of Milan, the possession whereof
had made him Lord of the greatest part of Lombardy. Pope CLEMENT, who had left
the Emperor for the French (which he afterward repented) often advertised the
King, that the Imperialls were in great distress and want, that they
continually mutinied for lack of pay: that he had taken so sufficient order
with the King of England and the rest of the Confederates, that they should
continue bare enough of money. If therefore he would but hold his hand, and
forbear to fight, necessity enforcing the Imperialls to disband, he should be
victorious without bloodshed. But he was not capable of so good advice. His
Forces were great (yet short of his account, his Captains treacherously
abusing him, in not furnishing those numbers of foot for which they received
pay) and it were equally a dishonor to him, either to seem to avoid the
Enemy, or to ly still so long at a siege, to no purpose. The Diume Power having
decreed to chastise him, permitted him through impatience to run headlong into
these errors, which so deeply plunged him in those calamities, that without
Gods especial favor had proved fatal to him and his France.

When I consider this and many other the like chances happening as well in the
course of a private man's life, as in public affairs, I cannot but wonder at
the sottish valor of this age, wherein rather than endure the touch of the
least (though fal^) aspersion, we will run the hazard both of life and
fortunes. How many brave men do we daily see, wonderful ingenious in this
kind of folly? who standing upon I know not what Points of Honor, upon the
least offense challenge the field, and wilfully seek out their own
destruction. What in Gods name is become of the patience of that lingering
FABIVS, who quietly bearing the bitter taunts and mockes of his Soldiers, of
the People, and the Senate, yet brought home an easy, though late victory? We
are certainly too blame, with the Dog we catch at the shadow and loose the
substance. Of our Savior we shall learn, that it is the highest point of
fortitude, In patience to possess our souls. And according to ARISTOTLE, True
valor is regardles of ill language.

Mordear opprobrijs falsis, matemque colores?
Fassus honor iuvat, and mendax infamia terret
Quem, nisi mendosum and mendacem?
It is HORACE:
Backe-bitten, must I needs turn pale for it?
False honors please, and lying slanders fright,
Whom, but the unworthy and vainglorious wight?
In the tent of the captive King, the letters of the Pope and our King,
concerning their late league with the French, being found, the Duke of Bourbon
now knew the cause why supplies of money came in so slowly. And PRAT Lieger
here for the Emperor, upon notice of it, without leave withdrew himself from
Court, and on the ninth of April secretly departed the land. In the mean time
HENRY little suspecting that these secret compacts were known to the Emperor,
about the end of March sent Ambassadors to him CVTBERT TONSTAL Bishop of
London, and Sir RICHARD WINGfield Knight of the Garter; by whom He did
congratulate his late victorious success, admonishing him to a close pursuit
of his fortunes: That if his Jmperiall Majesty intended with greater forces to
oppress the already Vanquished* in regard of the strict ^y of friendship
between them, his necessary endeavors should in no sort be wanting. What
answer the Emperor gave I know not. It is very likely he paid the King in his
own coin, and dissembled with the Dissembler; but having courteously
entertained our Ambassadors, as courteously dismissed them.

But the King wants money, and must now dissemble with his subjects. He
pretended war with France, and with this key hopes to open his Subjects
coffers. The expectation of supplies by a Parliament would prove tedious; some
shorter course must be taken. Money Money demanded and commanded by
Proclamation.
is therefore demanded by Proclamation, and that no lesle then according to the
sixth part of every man's Movables* Diverse great personages appointed
Commissioners, use all fair means to draw the people to contribute. But
although they sat in Commission in diverse parts of the Kingdom at one and the
same time, they were so far from prevailing, that as if the people had
universally conspired, it was every where denied, and the Commissioners very
ill entreated, not without further danger of sedition and tumult. Hereupon the
King calls a Parliament to be held at London: wherein he professes himself to
be utterly ignorant of these intolerable courses by such burthenous taxations.
The King disclaiming it, every one seeks to free himself. The Cardinal was
at last feign to take all upon himself; protesting, That as a faithful
Servant, he had no further end in it, than the profit of his Lord the King; and
that he had advised not only with his Majesty's Council (which they all
acknowledged) but also with the Learned in the Laws both Divine and Humane,
whose opinion it was, that the King might lawfully take the same course that
PHARAOH did, who by the ministry of JOSEPH sequestered a certain portion of
every man's private estate for the public good. But the dislike of the people
occasioned by this (though fruitless) project, was greater than could be
removed by this excuse.

And yet this project was not altogether fruitless, the Kings apparent want
affording a sufficient pretext of deferring the war with France until another
year. Neither was it the Kings intent to make use of his advantages over the
French, who now lay open to all his blows. HENRY having put away his wife, the
Emperor must needs be netled, and then the amity of France would stand him in
some steed. Indeed CATHARINE was a noble and a virtuous Lady, but she had
lived so long, as to make her Husband weary of The King falls in Love with Anne
Bolen.
her. He affected the daughter of Sir THOMAS BOLEN Treasurer of his Household.
Her he intends to marry, and to be divorced from the other: For he did in his
soul abhor this incestuous Match, and it stood not with the public weal,
that He should live single, especially the lawfulness of his Daughters birth
being so questionable. He married not again for his pleasure, but to settle
the Kingdom on his lawful Issue. The Learned (as many as He had conferred
with) did generally pronounce the first marriage void: yet would He have it
lawfully decided, that with a safe conscience He might make choice of a second.
Thus far had WOLSEY willingly led him, hoping to have drawn him to a Match in
France. But He was of age to choose for himself, and had already else where
settled his affections.

A creation of Lords.
And the more to manifest his love, on the eighteenth of June he created his
future Father in law Sir THOMAS BOLEN, Viscont Rochfort. At the same time were
created HENRY FITZ-ROY the Kings natural fonne by ELIZABETH BLOVNT Daughter to
Sir JOHN BLOVNT Knight, Earl of Nottingham, and Duke of Richmond and Somerset*
HENRY COVRTNEY Earl of Devonshire the Kings Cousen german, Marquis of
Excester: HENRY BRANDON eldest son to the Duke of Suffolk by the Kings
Sister the Dowager of France, Earl of Lincoln: THOMAS MANNERS Lord Roos,
Earl of Rutland: Sir HENRY CLIFFORD, Earl of Cumberland: and ROBERT RATCLIF
Lord Fitzwalter, Viscont Fitzwalter.

Cardinal WOLSEY this year laid the foundation of two Colleges, one at
Ipswich the place of his birth, another at Oxford, dedicated to our Savior
Wolsey to build two Colleges.
CHRIST, by the name of Christ-Church. This later, though not half finished,
yet a magnificent and royal Work, a most fruitful Mother of Learned
Children, does furnish the Church and Commonwealth with multitudes of able men,
and amongst others, acknowledges me (such as I am) for her Foster-childe. The
other, as if the Founder had also been the foundation, fell with the Cardinal,
and being for the most part pulled down, is long since converted to private
uses. The Cardinals private estate (although it were wonderful great) being
not sufficient to endow these Colleges with revenues answerable to their
foundation, the Pope consenting, Demolisheth fou Monasteries.
he demolished forty Monasteries of meaner note, and conferred the lands
belonging to them, on these his new Colleges. It has been the observation
Sacrileoge punished.
of some, That this business, like that proverbiall gold of Toulouse, was
fatal to those that any way had a hand in it. We will hereafter show what
became of the Pope and the Cardinal. But of five, whom he made use of in the
alienation of the gifts of so many religious men, it afterward happened, that
two of them challenging the field of each other, one was slain* and the other
hanged for it: a third throwing himself headlong into a Well, perished
wilfully: a fourth, before that a wealthy man, sunk to that low ebb, that he
after begged his bread: and Doctor ALLEN the fifth, a man of especial note,
being Archbishop of Dublin, was murdered in Jreland. I could wish, that by
these and the like examples, men would learn to take heed how they lay hands
on things consecrated to God. If the Divine Justice so severely punished those
that converted the abused (yet not regarding the abuse, but following the sway
of their ambitious desires) goods of the Church to undoubtedly better uses;
what can we expect of those that take all occasions to rob and spoil the
Church, having no other end, but only the enriching of themselves.

LVTHER had notice of HENRY his intended Divorce, and that from CHRISTIERNE the
expelled King of Denmark, who eagerly solicited him to write friendly unto the
King; putting LVTHER in hope, that HENRY being a courteous Prince, might by
mild persuasions be induced to embrace the reformation which LVTHER had begun.
And indeed LVTHER foreseeing the necessary consequences of this Divorce, was
easily entreated, and did write unto the King in this submissiue manner:

Luther writes to the King.
He doubted not but he had much offended his Majesty by his late reply: but he
did it rather enforced by others, then of his own accord. He did now write,
presuming upon the Kings much bruited humanity; especially being informed, That
the King himself was not Author of the Book against him, which thing he
understood was captiously cavilled at by some Sophisters. And having occasion
to speak of the Cardinal of York, he called him the Caterpillar of England:
He understood, the King did now loath that wicked sort of men, and in his mind
to favor the Truth. Wherefore he craves pardon of his Majesty, beseeching him
to remember, that we being mortal, should not make our enmities immortal. If
the King would be pleased to impose it, he would openly acknowledge his fault,
and blazon his Royal Virtues in another Book. Then he wished him to stop his
ears against those slanderous tongues that branded him with Heresy: for this
was the sum of his Doctrine, That we must be saved through Faith in Christ,
who did bear the punishment of our sins in every part, and throughout his
whole body, who dying for us, and rising again, reigns with the Father for
ever. That he taught this to be the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: and
that out of this position he showed, what Charity was, how we ought to behave
our selves one toward another, that we are to obey Magistrates, and to spend
our whole life in the profession of the Gospel. If this Doctrine contain any
Jmpiety or Error, why do not his Adversaries demonstrate it? Why do they
condemn him without either lawful hearing, or confutation? In that he
inveigheth against the Pope and his Adherents, he does it not without good
reason, forasmuch as for their profits sake, they teach things contrary to what
Christ and the Apostles did, that so they may domineere over the Flock, and
maintain themselves in Gluttony and Idleness. That this was the mark at which
their thoughts and deeds aimed: and that it was so notorious, that they
themselves could not deny it. That if they would reform themselves by cha^ging
their idle and filthy course of life maintained by the loss and wrong of
others, the differences might easily be composed. That his Tenets were approved
by many Princes and Estates of Germany, who did reverently acknowledge this
great blessing of God, amongst whom he wonderfully desired he might rank his
Maiesly. That the Emperor and some others opposed his proceedings, he did not
at all wonder: for the Prophet DAVID had many ages since foretold, That Kings
and Nations should conspire against the Lord and against his Christ, and cast
away his yoke from them. That when he did consider this and the like places of
Scripture, he did rather wonder that any Prince did favor the doctrine of the
Gospel. And to conclude, he craved a favorable answer. The Kings answer.
The King made a sharp reply to LVTHERS letter, accusing him of base
inconstancy. He stands in defense of his Book, which (he said) was in great
esteem with many Religious and Learned men. That he reviled the Cardinal (a
Reverend Father) was to be regarded as from him from whose impiety neither God
nor man could be free. That both Himself and the whole Realm had found the
profitable and wholesome effects of the Cardinals endeavors, who should reap
this fruit of LVTHERS railing, that whereas he loved him very well before, he
would now favor him more than ever: That among other of the Cardinals good
deeds, this was one, that he took especial care, that none of LVTHERS
leprosy, contagion, and heresy, should cleave to, or take root in this
Kingdom: Then he vpbraided him with his incestuous marriage with a Nun, a
crime as heinous and abominable as any.

At this answer (which the King caused to be printed) LVTHER grieved much,
blaming his friends that had occasioned it; saying, That he writ in that humble
manner only to please his Friends, and that he now plainly saw how much he was
mistaken. That he committed the like error in writing friendly at the request
of others, to Cardinal CAIETAN, GEORGE Duke of Saxony, and ERASMUS, the fruits
whereof were, that he made them the more violent. That the showed himself a
fool, in hoping to find Piety and Zeal in Princes Courts, in seeking Christ
in the Kingdom of Satan, in searching for JOHN BAPTIST among the Clothed in
Purple. But being he could not prevail by fair means, he would take another
course.

The late mention of ERASMUS puts me in mind of a Book written by him either
this or the year passed, at the entreaty of the King and the Cardinal (as he
himself in an Epistle confesses) entitled, De Libero Arbitrio. Whereto
LVTHER made a quick reply, writing a book De Servo Arbitrio.

Anno Dom. 1526. Reg. 18.
A breach with the Emperor.
MAny reasons might move the Emperor to seek the continuation of a Peace with
England. The French (although they concealed it, their King being not yet at
liberty) intend to revenge their late overthrow: The Turk prepares for
Hungary, the King whereof (LEWIS) had married ANNE the Emperors Sister: Almost
all Italy by the Popes means combined against CHARLES, whose power is now
become formidable: And Germany it self, the Boors having lately bin up in arms,
being scarce pacified, do yet every where threaten new tumults. In this case
the enmity of HENRY must necessarily much impeach his proceedings. But many
things again urge him on the other side: his Aunts disgrace: (for of this he
long since had an inkling) The late League concluded under hand with the
French: But that which swaied above all, was, the dislike of his promised match
with the Kings Daughter. That the Queen his. Aunt might be reconciled to her
Husband, there might yet be some hope. The League with France (especially the
French Kings case being now so desperate) might be as easily broken, as it was
made: But this Match did no way sort to his mind, which he had either for
love, or for some other private respects, settled else where. ISABELLA Sister to
JOHN King of Portugal, was a brave beautiful Lady, and had a Dowry of nine
hundred thousand Ducats MARY was neither marriageable, nor beautiful; yet her
by agreement must he marry without any other Dowry then those four hundred
thousand crowns which he had borrowed of HENRY. The wars had drawn his
Treasury dry, and his Subjects in Spain being required to relieve their
Prince, do plainly (perhaps not without subornation of some principal
persons) deny it, unless he marry ISABELLA, one in a manner of the same
Lineage, of the same Language and Nation, and of years sufficient to make a
mother. By way of service (Custom growing to a Law) they are to give their
King at his marriage four hundred thousand Ducats: if he will in this be
pleased to satisfy their request, they promise to double the usual sum. For
these reasons, when HENRY sent Ambassadors to treat again (whether sincerely
or no, I cannot say) concerning the renewing of the League, the marriage of the
Lady MARY, and of war in France to be maintained at the common charge of
both; CHARLES answered but coldly, and at last even in the very nuptial
solemnities sends to excuse his marriage to the King, whereunto the undeniable
desires of his subjects had in a manner forced him. Some do farther add, that
concerning that part of the Embassage, of war against France, our demands
were such, as if they had been purposely coined by WOLSEY to force the
Emperor to the prioritie of an apparent breach. For the King demanded no
smaller share in the conquest, then Picardie, Normandy, Guien, Gascoigne, with
the title of, King of France: and that the Emperor partaking both of Peril
and Charge should himself serve in Person. But CHARLES wanting money, and
tired with continual peril, if he regard either his safety and ease, or his
profit, must not give his assent, especially considering, that the Captive King
made larger offers, and those with Peace, then these, yea although he became
victorious, with War, the event whereof being always doubtful, no man can
assure himself of wished success. Neither indeed did HENRY expect any other
issue of his Embassy, then a flat refusal. For at the same time he deals
with the The King endeavors to r^lieve the French King.
Regent (the Captive Kings Mother) to send over some trusty person, with whom
he might consult of the maine chance; which she gladly did, dispatching away
the Lord of Brion President of Rouen, and JOHN IOACHIM with a large Commission,
and Instructions by all submissive and fair Language to persuade the King to
persist in the prosecution of this new League. For indeed she much feared,
least the consideration of his advantages over the tottering Estate of France
might make him fly off again. France was already distressed: what would it
be, if the Emperor pressing hard on the one side, and the Duke of Bourbon a
homebred enemy revolting, besides many other occasions, the English should
infest it on the other side? In England these Agents found their entertainment
such, that they could not but hope well, especially making means to the
Cardinal, who yet swayed the King. WOLSEY long since disaffected the Emperor,
but now made his hate apparent. CHARLES before the ba^taile of Pauy sent no
letters to the Cardinal, but entirely written by himself, and subscribed,

Your Son and Cousen, CHARLES. After this victory he sent one or two,
subscribed barely with his Name, without the usual solemn form, or any
signification of favor or respect. These were evident tokens of an alienated
mind, and WOLSEY durst view hates with him. Neither did he deal otherwise
with HENRY, then as one beneath him, being now puffed up with the conceit of
that great victory, for the obtaining whereof HENRY did bear a part in the
charge, though in deed not so great as he promised. The Kings affairs now
stood upon those terms, that renouncing the strict alliance with the Emperor,
hitherto by so many ties kept inviolable, he must make a party with the French.

Brion therefore at the Counsel Table having Audience, deplores his Princes
calamity, and the miseries inflicted upon his Country by their late
overthrow. He calls to mind what Trophies the English erected in France,
when the Estate of it was most flourishing, withal acknowledging, that France
being now as it were in the Sunset of its Fortune, occasion was offered of
advancing the English Colors farther then ever. But it would neither beseem
so magnanimous a King, nor would it be for the good of England, at this time to
invade it. A generous mind scorneth to insult over one already dejected.
Neither would the victory, beside the fortune of war, want its dangers,
being to be communicated with one, already become so potent, that no less,
then the united Forces of all Europe would serve to stop the current of his
fortune, which must necessarily be done, unless we could be content willingly
to undergo the miseries of a Spanish servitude. He therefore craved of his
Majesty, that leaving the Emperor (who puffed up with his late success
contemned his best Friends) He would vouchsafe to make a League with the King
his Master, whom in this so great a time of need if He would be pleased to
raise as it were from the ground, He should by so great a benefit oblige him to
a faithful Friendship, which he should upon all occasions be ready to
manifest, unless for foul Jngratitude he had rather undergo the censure of
the Christian World. Having delivered thus much in Latin, Sir THOMAS MORE
(afterward Lord Chancellor) returned this answer in Latin likewise*

That the King was well pleased, that the French acknowledged He wanted not
power to revenge old injuries: that having felt his Force, they should also
taste of his Bounty: that He would do the utmost of his endeavor to set their
Captive King at liberty. Which if He effected, He hoped when He had
occasion to make use of their King, he would not be unmindful of so good a
turn freely done in so urgent a season. Jn the mean time He was content to
make a perpetual Peace with them. As for the Emperor, He would consider what
to determine of him. A League concluded with the French King.
So a most firm League is concluded with the French (the Regent undertaking
for her Son) and a separation from the Emperor so openly made, that the
first thing concluded between them was, That it should not be lawful for the
French King in lieu of his ranson to consigne any part of his Kingdom to the
Emperor. The French were glad of this League, who now began to conceive some
hope of good, being secure of England. Indeed it made so great an impression in
the heart of FRANCIS, that in his care of our affairs for many years together
he showed himself mindful of so great a benefit. These things were done in
the winter season.

The French King set at liberty.
A little after FRANCIS having been a year Prisoner in Spain was upon these
Conditions at length set at liberty.

That as soon as he came into France, he should consigne the Duchy of
Burgoigne to the Emperor: That he should quit the Soueraignette of Flanders
and Arthois: That he should renounce all his right pretended to the Duchy of
Milan and Kingdom of Naples: That he should restore to his honors the Duke of
Bourbon, and the rest that had revolted with him: That he should marry Eleonor
the Emperor's Sister Queen of Portugal: That he should pay the whole sums
of money heretofore due to the King of England, his Sister the Queen of
France, and Cardinal Wolsey, The payment whereof the Emperor had undertaken,
that we might not be endammaged by partaking with him.

For the performance of these and other things of less moment, FRANCIS not
only bound himself by Oath, but also delivered his two Sons FRANCIS the
Dolphin and HENRY Duke of Orleans, who should remain Hostages in Spain until
all things were duly performed. FRANCIS as soon as he entered into his Realm
ratified all the Articles of the Treaty, but that concerning the Duchy of
Burgoigne, which he pretended he could not alienate without the consent of his
subjects, Having therefore assembled the Estates of the Country for the
debating of this matter, upon a sudaine in the presence of the Emperors
Ambassadors is publicly proclaimed the League made between the Kings of
England and of France, the Pope, the Venetians* Florentines, and Suisses,
(called the Holy League) for the common liberty of Italy. The Ambassadors
much amazed, and seeing small hopes of the Duchy of Burgorgne (for which they
came) return into Spain, and advertise the Emperor, that if he will be
content with a pecuniarie ranson, and free the two Princes, the King was
willing to pay it* other Conditions he was like to have none.

The King of Hungary slain by the Turks.
In the mean time SOLOMON not forgetting to make his profit of these horrible
confusions, invaded Hungary with a great Army, overthrew the Hungarians, slew
King LEWIS the Emperors Brother in law, and conquered the greatest part of the
Kingdom. For the obtaining of this victory our Rashness was more availeable
to him, then his own Forces. The Hungarians in comparison of their Enemies
were but a handful: but having formerly been many times victorious over the
Turks, they persuaded the young King that he should not obscure the ancient
glory of so warlike a Nation: that not expecting the aides of Transylvania, he
should encounter the Enemy even in the open fields, where the Turks in regard
of their multitudes of horse might be thought invincible. The event showed the
goodness of this counsel* The Army consisting of the chief strength and
Nobility of the Country was overthrown, a great slaughter made, and the King
himself slain with much of the Nobility and chief Prelates of the Realm,
and among them TOMORAEVS Archbishop of Col^cza, the chief author of this ill
advised attempt.

I cannot omit an oddeiest at the same time occasioned by WOLSEY his arnbition.
It was but falsely) rumoured that Pope CLEMENT was dead. The Wolsey se^kes to
be Pope, Sede nondum vacant.
Cardinal had long been sick of the Pope, and the King lately of his Wife.
WOLSEY persuades the King, there was no speedier way to compasse^his desires,
then if He could procure him to be chosen Pope, CLEMENT being now dead.
STEPHEN GARDENER a stirring man, one very learned and that had a working
spirit, did then at Rome solicit the Kings Divorce from Queen CATHARINE.
Wherein although using all possible means, and that CLEMENT was no friend to
the Emperor, yet could he not procure the Popes favor in the King's behalf
Nay, whether he would not cut off all means of reconciliation with the
Emperor, if need were, or whether being naturally slow, he did not usually
dispatch any matter of great moment speedily; or peradventure (whereto the
event was agreeable) that he perceived it would be for his profit to spin it
out at length; or (which some allege) that he was of opinion, that this
marriage was lawfully contracted, so that he could not give sentence on either
side without either offense to his Conscience, or his Friend* the Pope could
not be drawn to determine either way in this business. These delays much
vexed the King. If matters proceed so slowly* under CLEMENT, on whom he much
presumed, what could he expect from another Pope, one perhaps wholly at the
Emperors devotion? He therefore resolved to endeavor the advancement of
WOLSEY to the Chair; from whom he promised to himself a success answerable
to his desires. HENRY therefore sends away speedy Posts to GARDENER with ample
instructions in the behalf of WOLSEY, willing him to work the Cardinals, some
with promises, others with gifts, some with threats, others with persuasions,
and to omit no means that might be any way availeable. But this was to build
Castles in the air. The messenger had scarce set forth, when report that had
made CLEMENT dead, had again revived him.

Anno Dom. 1527. Reg. 19.
THe sixth of May, Rome was taken and sacked by Rome sacked.
the Imperials under the conduct of the Duke of Bourbon, who was himself
slain in the assault marching in the head of his troops. The Pope, Cardinals,
Ambassadors of Princes, and other Nobles hardly escaping into the Castle of
Saint Angelo, were there for some days besieged. At length, despairing of
succors, and victuals failing, the Pope for fear he should fall into the
hands of the Lansquenets for the most part seasoned with LVTHERS doctrine, and
therefore passionate enemies to the Sea of Rome, agrees with the Prince of
Auranges (after the death of the Duke of Bourbon chosen General by the Army)
yiedling himself and the Cardinals to him, who kept them close Prisoners in
the Castle. Rome was now subject to all kind of cruelty, and insolences
usual to a conquered City intended for destruction. Beside Slaughter, Spoil,
Rapes, Ruin, the Pope and Cardinals were the sport and mockery of the
licentious multitude. HENRY pretended much grief at this news; but was
inwardly glad that such an occasion was offered, whereby he might oblige CLEMENT
in all likelihood (as he had just cause) offended with the Emperor for this so
insolent and harsh proceeding. Whereupon he dispatcheth WOLSEY into France,
who should intimate to the King, his perpetual Ally, what a scandale it was to
all Christendom that the Head of it should be oppressed with Captivity, a
thing which did more especially concern FRANCIS his affairs. The Cardinal
set forth from London about the beginning of July accompanied with nine hundred
Horse, among which were many Nobles, The Archbishop of Dublin, the Bishop of
London, the Earl of Derby, the Lords SANDS, MONTEGLE, and HARENDON, besides
many Knights and Gentlemen. WOLSEY found the French King at Amiens, where it is
agreed, that at the common charge of both Princes, war shall be maintained in
Italy to set the Pope at liberty, and to restore him to the possessions of the
Church, HENRY contributing for his part thirty thousand pounds sterling a
month. Upon the return of the Cardinal, FRANCIS sent into England
Montmorency Ambassador from France.
MONTMORENCY Lord Steward and Mareschall of France for the confirmation of this
League, and to invest the King with the Order of Saint MICHAEL. He arrived in
England about the middle of October accompanied with ^OHN BELLAY Bishop of
Bayeux (afterward Cardinal) the Lord of Brion, and among others MARTIN BELLAY
the Wri^er of the French History, who in this manner describes the passages of
this Embassage: MONTMORENCY arriving at Dover was honorably received by many
Bishops and Gentlemen sent by the King, who brought him to London, where he was
met by twelve hundred horse, who conducted him to his lodging in the Bishop of
Londons Palace. Two days after, he went by water to Greenwich four miles
beneath London, where the King often resideth. There he was very sumptuously
entertained by the King and the Cardinal of York. Having had Audience, the
Cardinal having often accompanied him at London and Greenwich, brought him to
a house which he had built a little before, ten miles above London, seated upon
the banks of Thames, called Hampton Court. (The Cardinal gave it afterward to
the King, and it is this day one of the King's chiefest houses) The Ambassador
with all his Attendants was there feasted by him four or five days together.
The Chambers had hangings of wonderful value, and every place did glitter with
innumerable vessels of gold and silver. There were two hundred and fourscore
Beds, the furniture to most of them being silk, and all for the entertainment
of Strangers only. Keturning to London, we were on Saint MARTINS day invited
by the King to Greenwich to a Banquet the most sumptuous that ever I beheld,
whether you consider the dishes, or the Marks and Plays, wherein the Lady
MARY the Kings Daughter acted a part. To conclude, the King and MONTMORENCY
having taken the Sacrament together, the King for himself, MONTMORENCY in the
behalf of FRANCIS swore the observation of the League. The King bestowed great
gifts on every one, and dismissed MONTMORENCY, who left the Bishop of Bayeux
Leiger for his King, to endeavor the continuance of the amity begun between
these Princes.

Shortly after were sent into France Sir THOMAS BOLEN Viscount Rochfort, and
Sir ANTHONY BROWN Knight, who together with JOHN CLERRE Bishop of Bath and
Wells Leiger in France, should take the French King's Oath, not to violate the
late League in any part, and to present him with the Order of the Garter.

We had now made France ours. Nothing remained but to let the Emperor know the
effects of the late Confederacy. To this end Sir FRANCIS POINTZ War proclaimed
against the Emperor.
and Clarentieux King at Arms are dispatched away to the Emperonr, to demand
the moitie of the booty gotten in the battle of Pavie, and the Duke of
Orleans (one of the French Kings Sons left Hostage for his Father) to be
delivered to HENRY* who had borne a share in the charges of that war, and
therefore expected to partake in the gains: To command him to draw his Army
out of Italy, and not to disturb the peace of Christendom by molesting
CHRIST'S Vicar. This if he refused to do (neither was there expectation of any
thing else) they should forthwith defy him. They execute their Commission, and
perceiving nothing to be obtained, Clarentieux and a certain French Herald
being admitted to the Emperous presence, do in the names of both Kings
proclaim war agaiust him. CHARLES accepts it chearefully. But the Ambassadors
of France, Ven^ce, and Florence craving leave to depart, are committed to safe
custody, until it be known what is become of his Ambassadors with these
Estate. The report hereof flies into England, and withal, that Sir FRANCIS
POINTZ and Clarentieux were committed with the rest. Whereupon the Emperor's
Ambassador is detained until the truth be known, as it shortly was by the
safe return of them both. But Sir FAANCIS POINTZ about the beginning of the
next Summer died fudainly in the Court, being infected with the sweating
sickness. The same happening to diverse other Courtiers, and the infection
spreading it self over London, the Term was adiourned, and the King feign to
keep a running Court. But these were the accidents of the ensuing year.

Anno Dom. 1528. Reg. 20.
POpe CLEMENT was of himself naturally The inconstancy of the Pope.
slow: but his own ends made him beyond the infirmity of his nature protract
time in this cause concerning the Kings Divorce. Bearing himself as neuter
between the Emperor and the French King, he makes them both become jealous of
him. And war being renewed in Italy, he perceives himself likely again to
become a prey to the Conqueror. Which if it should happen, he must betake
himself to the King of England, of whose help he was certain, as long as
his cause did uncertainly hang in suspense. But if he should determine in the
behalf of the King, would he in gratitude be as beneficial, as hope (or fear
of offending) had made him? That he much doubted.

These thoughts possessing the Pope, CAESAR'S affairs in Italy began to
decline, almost all the Towns throughout the Realm of Naples out of hatred to
the insolent Spaniard, and affection to the French, making offer of their
Keys, and receiving Garrisons of French. CLEMENT therefore did not now much
stand in awe of the Emperor, much against whose mind he was entreated to send
a Legate Cardinal Campegius sent into England.
into England, LAWRENCE CAMPEGIVS Cardinal and Bishop of Salisbury, who
together with the Cardinal of York should have the hearing of this Cause so
long controverted to no purpose. And the more to testify his affection to the
King, he did by a Decretall Bull (but privately drawn) pronounce the Kings
marriage with CATHARINE to be void. This Bull was committed to the Legate,
with these instractions, That having showed it to the King and the Cardinal of
York. He should withal signify to them, that he had authority to publish
it: but not to give sentence, until he received new instructions; telling
him, that he was content the King should enjoy the benefit of it (and it may be
he was then so minded) but that it stood him upon to have this business
delayed, until he had sufficiently secured himself from the Emperor. These
were the pretenses of the old Fox to the Legate. But his meaning was to make
use of all seasons, and to turn with the weather. The ninth of October to
London comes the Legate, the King having given order to the City for his
solemn entertaiment. But the old man's infirmity frustrated their
preparations: he was grievously tormented with the gout, and would be
privately brought into the City. After a few days rest, carried in a chair,
he was brought to the King's presence, to whom his Secretary made a Latin
Oration, wherein having much complained of the extreme cruelty of the
Imperials in the sacking of Rome; he used many words to signify, that the
Kings pious bounty showed in his liberally relieving them in so needful a
season was most acceptable to the Pope and the whole College of Cardinals. To
this speech EDWARD FOX (afterward Bishop of Hereford) returned an answer in
Latin, wherein he declared, That his Majesty was much grieved at his
Holiness calamity, forasmuch as man is naturally touched with a feeling of
another miseries. That He had not only performed what could be expected from
him as a man; but had also done the part of a friend for a friend, and what was
due from a Prince to CHRIST'S Vicar on earth. He did therefore hope, that in
reguard of his filial obedience to the Holy Sea, if it should happen that He
should stand in need of its assistance and authority, his Holiness would be
pleased readily to grant those things, which it might beseem a Son to crave
of the common Mother. Thus much passed in public. The King and the Legates
conferring in private, CAMPEGIVS assured the King of the Popes forwardness to
pleasure him. CAMPEGIVS was indeed no bad man, and spoke truly, what he
thought. For CLEMENT knowing how difficult a matter it was to deceive a man
that was no fool, by one conscious of the guile, and that was not deceived
himself; made the Legate believe, that in this matter of the Divorce he would
be ready to do for the King whatsoever he should demand.

After these passages, the Legates spent six whole months in consultation
only concerning their manner of proceeding in the Kings Divorce. In the mean
time the King understanding, that among his subjects, but especially the women
kind, this his action was much traduced, as if He took this course more to
satisfy his Lust, then his Conscience; to give a stop to all farther rumors,
having assembled all the Nobles of the Realm, Judges, Lawiers, and as many of
the better sort of Commonsas could conveniently attend, upon the eight of
November made an Oration to this effect:

The Kings Speech concerning his Divorce.
Twenty years have almost run their course (faithful and loving Subjects)
since We first began Our Reign among you: Jn all which tract of time We have
by Gods ^ssistance so behaved Our Self, that We hope We have neither given
you cause to complain, nor Our Enemies to glory. No foraine power has
indevoured ought against you, but to his own loss; neither have We employed
Our Arms any where, but We have triumphantly erected Our glorious trophies. So
that whether you consider the sweet fruits of plentiful Peace, or the glory of
Our warlike exploits, We dare boldly avouch, We have showed Our Self not
unworthy of Our Ancestors, whom (without offense be it spoken) We have in all
points equalled. But when we reflect upon the necessary end of Our frail
life, We are surprised with fear, least the miseries of future times should so
obscure the splendor and memory of Our present felicity, that as the Romans
did after the death of Augustus, so you may hereafter be forced to wish with
tears, either that We had never been, or might have perpetually lived to
govern you. We see many here present, who in reguard of their age might have
been parties in the late Civil wars, which for eighty years together so
miserably rended this Realm, no man knowing whom to acknowledge for his
Sovereign, until the happy Conjunction of Our Parents did not resolve, but
took away all cause of farther doubt. Consider then, whether after Our death
you can hope for better days, then when the Factions of York and Lancaster
distracted this Realm. We have a Daughter, whom We the more affectionately
tender, because she is Our sole Jssue. But We would have you know, that
having lately treated with Our dear Brother of France, concerning a match
between this Our Daughter, and Henry Duke of Orleans his younger son, both
of Us were well pleased with this alliance, until one of his Privy Counsel
made a question of Our Daughters birth; for it was much to be doubted, least
she were to be held illegitimate, being begotten of Us and that Mother, who had
before been married to Our deceased Brother: saying, it was utterly repugnant
to the Word of God, that any one should marry his Brothers Widow; wherefore he
was of opinion, that this match with Our most beloved Spouse was to be deemed
no other then incestuous. How grievously this relation afflicted Us, God the
Searcher of Our hearts knows. For these words did seem to question, not only
Our dear Consort, and Our Daughter, but even the very estate of Our soul,
which after death must necessarily undergo eternal and inevitable torments, if
being admonished of so horrible an Incest, We should not endeavor an
amendment; And for your parts, you cannot but foresee how great dangers by
reason of this doubt do threaten you and your Posterity. Being therefore
desirous (as the case indeed required) to be resolved in this point, We first
conferred with Our Friends, and then with the most learned in the Laws both
Divine and Humane; who indeed were so far from satisfying Us, that they left
Us more perplexed. We therefore had recourse to the Holy Apostolic Sea, to
the Decree whereof We think it fitting, that Our Self and all others should
be obedient. To this and no other end (We call immortal God to witness) have
we procured this Venerable Legate. As for the Queen Our most beloved Consort,
whatsoever women may tattle, or ill willers mutter in private, We do willingly
and ingenuously profess, that in nobleness of Mind she far transcends the
greatness of her Birth: so that if we were now at liberty and free for a
second choice, We take God to witness, among all the plenty of the worlds
Beauties we would not make choice of any other (if lawfully we might) then of
this Our now Queen, one in regard of her mildness, wisdom, humility,
sanctity of mind, and conversation (We are verily persuaded) not to be
paralleled. But when We consider, that We are bestowed on the world to other
ends, then the pursuit of Our own pleasures: We have thought it meet rather
to undergo the hazard of an uncertain judgment, then to commit impiety
against God the liberal Giver of all blessings, and ingratitude against Our
Country, the weal and safety whereof each one should prefer before his
private life or fortunes. Thus much have you heard from Our own mouth. And we
hope, that you will hereafter give no heed either to seditious detractions, or
idle rumors of the people. This Oration took according to the diverse
dispositions of the hearers: some lamenting the King's, but many more the
Queens case, every one doubting, and fearful of the event. Some few weary of
the present estate desired a change even to worse, rather then a continuance of
the present. And by these the course the King had taken (not approved by the
vulgar) as pious and imposed on him by his own and the public necessity,
was according to the nature of hopeful flattery most highly applauded.

Anno Dom. 1529. Reg. 21.
The suite of the Kings Divorce.
AT length about the beginning of April the King residing at Bridewell, at the
Black Friars in London began the suit concerning the King's Divorce. There was
that to be seen, the like whereof the Histories of no other Nation afford: A
most puissant Monarch, actually Sovereign and bearing rule in his Realm,
being cited by the voice of of an Apparitor, made his appearance personally
before the Judges. The ceremonies in a matter so unusual, and indeed otherwise
of great moment, require an accurate and large relation beyond the intended
shortness of this History. A Chair of State whereto was an ascent of some
steps was placed above for the King, and by the side of it another (but a
little lower) for the Queen. Before the King, at the fourth step sat the
Legates, but so, as the one seemed to sit at his right hand, the other at the
left. Next to the Legates stood the Apparitors and other Officers of the Court,
and among them GARDENER (after Bishop of Winchester) appointed Register in this
business. Before the Judges within the limits of the Court sat the Archbishop
of Canterbury with all the other Bishops of the Realm. At the farther end of
each side were the Advocates and Proctors retained for each party: for the
King, SAMPSON after Bishop of Chichester, BELL after Bishop of Worcester,
TREGONEL, and PETER'S Father to the now Lord PETER'S, all Doctors of Law: For
the Queen, FISHER Bishop of Rochester, and STANDISH Bishop of Saint Assaph,
with RIDLEY (Doctor whether of Divinity or Law I know not, but one) who had
the esteem of a very learned man. All things being thus formally ordered, the
Apparitor willed by the Register to cite the King, cried, HENRY King of England
come into the Court, who answered, Here I am. The Queen being likewise cited
(CATHARINE Queen of England come into the Court) made no answer, but rising
from her seat went directly to the King, to whom on her knees, purposely
raising her voice that every one might hear her, she is reported to have
spoken to this effect:

The Queens speech to the King before the Legates.
Sir, J humbly beseech your Majesty so to deal with me at this present, that
I may neither have cause to complain of Injustice, nor that you have debarred
me the favor of your wonted Clemency. J am here a Woman and a Stranger,
destitute of Friends and Counsel, so that plead for my self J cannot, and
whom J may else employ, J know not. My kindred and Friends are far off,
neither can J safely rely on any here in a matter of so great consequence. They
that are here retained for me, are no other, then whom you have been pleased
to appoint, and are your own Subjects, who if they would deal uprightly
(which few will believe they dare do) yet can they not here withstand your
determinate will and pleasure. But what have wretched J committed, that after
twenty years spent in peaceable wedlock, and having borne you so many
Children, you should now at length think of putting me away? I was J confess
the Widow of your Brother, if at least she may be accounted a Widow, whom her
husband never knew. For I take Almighty God to witness, and J am persuaded you
cannot be ignorant of it, that I came to your bed an unspotted Virgin; from
which time how J have behaved my self, I am content to appeal even to them,
whosoever they are, that do wish me least good. Certainly whatsoever their
Verdict may be, you have always found me a most faithful (servant I may
better say, then) wife, having never to my knowledge withstood your pleasure so
much as in show. J always loved those, whom J thought you favored, without
questioning their deserts. J so carefully farthered and procured your
pleasures, that I rather fear, I have offended God in too much endeavoring
your content, then that I have any way failed in the least performance of my
duty. By this my observance unto you, if so be you ever thought it worthy of
reguard, by our common Issue, by the memory of my Father, whom you sometimes
held dear, I do humbly beg, that you would be pleased to defer the farther
hearing of this cause, until having sent into Spain, I may thence be advised
by my Friends, in this case what course to take. If then in Justice it shall be
thought meet to rend me from you, a part of whom I have so long been (the
apprehension whereof does more terrify me, then death) I will even in this
continue my long observed course of obedience. But as often as I bethink me of
the wisdom of Our Parents, by whose indevours and consent this Match was
ratified, J cannot but hope very well of my cause. Your Father was for his
admirable wisdom accounted a second Solomon, neither can Spain throughout the
whole Successions of the Kings of so many Kingdoms produce any one, who may
parallel my Father Ferdinand: and what kind of Counsailours must we think
these Princes had, that all should as it were conspire to hurl Us into the
miseries of an incectuous Marriage? No question was then made concerning the
lawfulness of this Match, and yet those times afforded learned men, yea and
(whereof to my harm I have had experimental knowledge) in holiness of life
and love of the Truth far surpassing the Flatterers of these times. (Which
last words she therefore spoke, because she had heard, that all the Bishops
of the Realm had by a common Decree pronounced against the Marriage. And
indeed such a Decree subscribed and sealed by each of them was afterward in the
presence of the King read publicly in the Court, Fisher Bishop of Rochester
excepting against it, who denied, that he had assented to it, and objected
forgery to the Archbishop of Canterbury for putting to it in steed of Bishop
Fishers, a false Seal and a counterfeit hand.)

The Queen depart. th.
The Queen having spoken thus much, arising, after her due obeisance to the
King, when every one expected she would have returned to her seat* made have
out of the Court. Every one amazedly wonders what the Queen intends. But
before she had gone far, the King commanded the Apparitor to call her back
again: The Apparitor obeying, the Gentleman who supported her, told her she
was called; to whom she replied, I hear it very well, but go you on. I cannot
hope for justice in this Court: let them proceed against me in what manner they
will, I am resolved not to stay. So away she went, and would never after be
persuaded to make her appearance either personally or by a Protector. After she
was gone* the King commended her in those terms, that might befit a great
affection and her excellent virtues: withal protesting how desirous he was to
continue in that estate, so that neither his soul nor the Commonwealth might
be endangered by it. Here WOLSEY interrupted him, beseeching his Majesty, that
forasmuch as it was bruited, that he had persuaded Him to this Divorce; His
Majesty would vouchsafe to signify to the present Assembly how far this
report was true. The King, although that he knew that in this fame lied not,
yet to secure his Favorite from the general hate of the people, affirmed, the
Bishop of Bayeux having first made scruple of it, to have first advised him to
this course, and that the Bishop of Lincoln his Confessor, and other Bishops
with whom he had conferred, did the like. These were the Acts of the first day.

Reasons for the Divorre.
This case was for a month or two held in controversy, the Kings Advocates
alleging, that

It was not in the Popes power to ratify this Marriage, which as prohibited by
the Law of Nature the Scripture had pronounced unlawful: That Catharine had
been lawfully married to Prince Arthur the King's elder Brother, and that the
Nuptials were publicly solemnized, no man could deny: and many circumstances
did manifest the consummation of the Marriage by a carnal conjunction. Reasons
against the Divorce.
On the otherside the Queens Advocates maintained,

The Law which forbad the Jews to marry their Brothers wife, to be Judicial
and not Moral, and therefore abrogated by Christ: but so far forth as the
Church had retained it, it was by the authority of the same Church dispensable,
especially being they were confident, that the forealledged consummation could
no way be proved. Thus each side pleaded, and time passed on. The King observes
Cardinal CAMPEGIVS to go more coldly to work then he was wont, from whom He
The Popes inconstancy.
before this expected the promised decision. But fortune had since that turned
her wheel. The Emperors affairs prospered in Italy, and CLEMENT knew it was
not the way to wipe out the remembrance of an old offense by committing a new.
He found some other pretense to send one FRANCIS CAMPANA into England; but his
chief errand was to will CAMPEGIVS to burn the Bull, whereby the King's
marriage had before been pronounced void, and to return to Rome with speed.
But the news of the Popes sickness at the same time made him defer the
execution of his Mandate. For if CLEMENT should die, the Cardinal might with
safety gratify the King, who had conferred on him the Bishopric of
Sarisbury, and to whom the Cardinal had promised success answerable to his
desires: And if he should permit the King to be thus illuded, he feared he
might be accounted, not only ungrateful, but also treacherous. But he
shortly understood the Pope was well, whose Mandate he must obey, and the Bull
as if for Here^ie must be condemned to the fire.

In the mean time the King, who was deeply in love with ANNE BOLEN, according
to the nature of Lovers counting each minute by the hour, quickly resented
this change, and never rested, until he knew the whole carriage of the
matter. Then first fell his wrath like thunder on WOLSEY, whose wit Wolsey falls.
had hitherto made all his proiects feasible* And he could not believe, but
that it was in his power to effect this also* Here I cannot choose but cry out
with Comoedian, (...)
(...)
JOVE and ye Gods, how hard a thing
It is, to serve a raging King.


Full twenty years had WOLSEY served the King, behaving himself so, that he
grew powerful and wealthy beyond a private fortune, and to the rest of the
King's Titles had procured the addition of that rich one of, a good Prince. For
as often as I consider how laudably HENRY had hitherto ruled, and behold the
calamities of ensuing times, I cannot but accord with them, who ascribe the
sway which he did bear over all the Princes of Christendom to the excellency
of WOLSEY his counsels. But WOLSEY being taken away, to whom shall we impute
those effects of Lust, Tyranny, and Avarice, two Wives killed, two put away,
so many (and among them many of the greater sort) put to death for their
Religion only, extremity only differing in the manner used by Hanging against
Papists, by Fire against Heretics, (these were the terms of those days) and
the Church (or rather the Commonwealth) horribly spoiled and robbed of her
Patrimony? Certainly had WOLSEY sat at the Stern, the King had never like a
Ship destitute of a Pilot, been carried to and fro with such contrary and
uncertain motions. But inordinate greatness is always a burden to it self,
the weight whereof is augmented by the usual attendance of public enny and
hatred the misbegotten Elfes of long and powerful happiness.

WOLSEY, the King once offended, began presently to totter, and at his first
frown as at the roaring of a Lion (before any harder course was taken with
him) was so dejected, that although he after seemed a little to lift up his
head, yet was he never able to stand on his feet. Nay, the King being once
alienated from him would never after admit him to his presence. Behold power of
base Detraction (yet I will not exclude the the greatness of the Cardinals
wealth already devoured in conceit) which wipes away the remembrance of the
faithful service of so many years, and the consideration of so great glory
purchased to the King by WOLSEY'S labors. I am not ignorant what things were
objected against him. But they carry so little show of probability, that I
should much suspect his judgment, that would give any credit to them. Until
it was known that the King enraged at the slow proceedings in the cause of his
Divorce did day and night breath out against him threats and revenge, no man
ever preferred Bill against him, which considering the usual severe courses
held by our Parliaments, must needs acquit him of Abuse of Power. As for the
causes of the King's anger, we will derive them rather from his own
discontents, then WOLSEY'S faultiness.

The King by this time knew the treachery of the dissembling Pope. He had
near five years wandered in the Labyrinth of the Court of Rome, and could
find no clue to lead him out. He therefore determined to make a way where he
could not find one, and like ALEXANDER by force to undo that Gordian knot,
which by wit and labor he could not. To WOLSEY therefore he communicated his
intent of marrying another whether the Pope were willing or no, wishing him
withal to find out some course or other, whereby CAMPEGIVS his Colleague
(notwithstanding the late Mandates to the contrary) might be drawn to give
sentence on his side. Many things might be pretended to excuse the deed, but
chiefly the fear of the King's high displeasure, which peradventure he should
feel too, unless he assented to the King's just request. WOLSEY his answer
to this I cannot relate. But this is certain, that WOLSEY, whether for that he
did not approve of the King's intended course seeming (as the times were then)
full of rashness and insolence, or that he would not undertake the attempting
of his Colleague, or that (as SLEIDAN writes) the King had notice, that the
Cardinal had advised the Pope not to approve of the Divorce from CATHARINE,
forasmuch as the King was then resolved to marry another infected with
Lutheranisme: WOLSEY I say was so sharply taken up and threatened by the King,
that even then you might read in his face and gestures the symptoms of his
waining fortune. For the Cardinal at that time returning from the Court by
water, the Bishop of Carlisle being with him in the same Barge, complained of
the heat which was then extraordinary: to whom WOLSEY replied, My Lord, if you
had been but now in my place, you would have found it hot indeed. And as soon
as he came home, he put off his clothes, and went sick to bed. Before he had
reposed himself an hour and half, the Viscount Rochfort came to him, and in
the King's Name willed, that he and his Colleague should instantly repair to
the Queen, and exhort her not to contend any longer with the King, for that it
would be more for her good and the honor of them both to submit herself to
the King's pleasure, then to undergo the disgrace of a public judgment. For
it was now brought to that push, that longer deferred The Legates repair to
the Queen.
it could not be. The Cardinal advertised of the King's pleasure did arise,
and with his Colleague went to the Queen, who having notice of their coming,
went forth and met them. After mutual salutations the Cardinals desired she
would vouchsafe a few words in private, but the Queen refused to entertain
any conference with them but where she might have witnesses of what passed.
WOLSEY then began to speak in Latin, but the Queen interrupted him, willing,
that although she understood Latin, yet he should speak in English. So in the
names of both Their conference with her.
Legates he began a speech in English, wherein he professed a great deal of
observance and duty to her, and that they came to no other end, but to advise
her for her Her answer.
good. The Queen answered them much after this manner:

As for your good will, I thank you: as for your advise, I will give you the
hearing. But the matter (I believe) about which you come, is of so great
importance, that it will require a great deal of deliberation, and the help
of a brain surpassing that of feminine weakness. You see my employments
(showing them a skaine of white thread hanging about her neck) in these I spend
my time among my Maids, which indeed are none of the greatest Counsailers: yet
I have none other in England, and Spain (where they are on whom I dare rely)
God wot is far enough hence: yet I am content to hear what you have to say,
and will give you an answer when we can conveniently. So taking the Cardinal
by the hand, she brought them into a withdrawing room, where having
attentively heard out their message, she made this reply:

That now after twenty years the lawfulness of my marriage should be
questioned, I cannot sufficiently wonder, especially when I consider who were
the Authors of it: Many of them are yet alive both in England and Spain: and
what kind of men the rest were, who are now dead; the world knows: Henry and
Ferdinand our Parents the most sage Princes of their time, and their Counsel
such without doubt, who for their wisdom were approved of as fit servants for
so judicious Masters, besides the Pope, whose Dispensation J have to show, and
which was procured by my Father at no small rate. But what thing is there so
sincere and firm, which envy will not seek to blast. Of these my miseries I
can accuse none but you, my Lord of York. Because I could not away with your
monstrous pride, excessive riot, whoredom, and intolerable oppression,
therefore do I now suffer. And yet not only for this: for some part of your
hatred I am beholding to my Nephew the Emperor, whom, for that he did not
satisfy your insatiable ambition by advancing you to the Papacy, you have ever
since maligned. You threatened to be revenged on him and his Friends, and you
have performed your promise; for you have been the only incendiarie and
plotter of all the mischief and wars against him these late years. And J am
his Aunt, whom how you have persecuted, by raising this new doubt, God only
knows, to whose judgment only I commend my cause. This She spoke in French,
as it seemed very much moved, and would not endure to hear WOLSEY speak in
defense of himself, but courteously dismissed CAMPEGIVS.

It was now June, and the Harvest drawing on, the Legates thought it high time
to make an end of this suite. A day therefore being prefixed, many of the
Nobility, and a multitude of the Commonaltie repaired to the Court, verily
expecting, that judgment should have been given for the King. HENRY (having I
know not how conceived some hope of the Legates good intents) caused a seat to
be placed for himself behind the hangings, under the covert whereof he might
unseen hear whatsoever was spoken or passed in Court. The Cardinals being
seated, the King's Advocates earnestly requiring that sentence might be given
on their side, CAMPEGIVS made this Oration well beseeming the constancy of a
man not unworthy of the place he supplied.

Cardinal Campegius his Oration.
J have heard and diligently examined whatsoever has been alleged in the
King's behalf. And indeed the arguments are such, that I might and ought
pronounce for the King, if two reasons did not control and curb my desires of
doing his Matestie right: The Queen (you see) withdrawes her self from the
judgment of this Court, having before us excepted against the partiality of
the place, where (she says) nothing can be determined without the consent of
the Plaintiff. Moreover his Holiness (who is the fountain and life of our
authorit^e) has by a messenger given us to understand, that he has reserved
this cause for his own hearing: so that if we would never so feign proceed
any farther, peradventure we cannot, J am sure we may not. Wherefore (which
only remains) I do here dissolve the Court: Other then this (as the case
stands) I cannot do: and I beseech them, whom this Cause concerns, to take in
good part what I have done. Which if they will not, although it may trouble me,
yet not so much, as to reguard the threats of any one. I am a feeble old man,
and see death so near me, that in a matter of so great consequence neither
hope, nor fear, nor any other respect, but that of the Supreme Judge, before
whom I find my self ready to appear, shall sway me. How the King was pleased
at this you may easily conceive. It is reported, that the Duke of Suffolk
knowing the King to be present, and conscious of his infirmity, in a great
rage leaping out of his chair bountifully bestowed a volley of curses upon the
Legates, saying It was never well with England, since it had any thing to do
with Cardinals. To whom WOLSEY returned a few words, saying, That it was not
in his power to proceed without Authority from the Pope, and that no man ought
to accuse them for not doing that, whereto their power did not extend.

But the Kings implacable anger admitted of no excuse: WOLSEY himself must
become a sacrifice to appease it. As for CAMPEGIVS, he tasted nevertheless of
the King's bounty, and had leave to depart. But at Calais his carriages were
searched by the King's command. The pretense was, that WOLSEY intending an
escape, had by CAMPEGIVS convaied his treasures for Rome But the Bull was the
Treasure so much sought after. The King could not believe it was burned; and if
it were found, it was enough to countenance his second marriage. But found it
was not, no nor scarce so much money in all the Cardinals carriages, as had
been given him by the King.

WOLSEY his rising and his fall were alike sudden; neither of them by degrees,
but as the Lion gets his prey, by leapes. Shortly after the departure of his
Colleague, upon the eighteen of October, the Wolsey discharged of the great
Seal.
Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk in his Majesty's name commanded him to
surrender the Great Seal. But he pleaded, That the King had by Patent made him
Lord Chancellor during term of life, and by consequence committed the
custody of the great Seal to him: Nevertheless he would resign his place,
if his Majesty so commanded. But he thought it not fit, having received the
Seal from the King, to deliver it to any other, but upon especial Command.
The Lords returning to Windsore where the Court then was, the next day brought
the King's Letters, whose Mandate the Cardinal forthwith obeyed. In this
Dignity the six and twentieth Si^ Thomas Moore Lord C^ancell our*
of October Sir THOMAS MORE succeeded, whose admirably general learning is so
well known to the world, that I shall not need to speak any thing of it.

The C^rdinall accused of tre^son.
WOLSEY being removed from the Chancellorship is presently after accused of
Treason, and that (which has been seldom seen) in the Parliament, that so
without hearing he might be condemned by Act. But he perceiving the drift of
his Adversaries, procured one of his attendants THOMAS CROMWELL (he who
afterward became so potent) to be elected a Burgess of the Lower House. The
Cardinal being daily informed by him what things were laid to his charge, did
by letter instruct him what to answer. CROMWELL although no Scholar, was very
wise and eloquent. Which good parts he so faithfully employed in the defense
of his Lord, that the House acquitted him, and himself became famous; opening
withal by these means a way to those Honors, to which the current of a few
years advanced him* Even they who hated WOLSEY, honored CROMWELL, whose
wisdom, industry, but above all, fidelity in defending his dejected Lord,
was admirable.

Now the Cardinal because he would not be found a Traitor, is fallen into a
Praemunire. Whereupon he is thrust as it were naked forth his own house, his
great wealth is seized on by the King's Officers, and he feign to borrow
furniture for his house, and money for his necessary expenses. Judges are sent
into the house whereto he was confined, to take his answer to the objected
crime, which was, that without leave from the King he had dared so many years
to exercise his power Legatine. To which calumny (for can any man believe it to
be other?) He made this answer.

Wolseyes speech to the Judges.
J am now sixty years old, and have spent my days in his Majesty's service,
neither shunning pains, nor endeavoring any thing more, then (next my
Creator) to please Him. And is this that heinous offense, for which J am at
this age deprived of my estate, and forced as it were to beg my bread from
door to door? Jexpected some accusation of a higher strain, as treason, or
the like; not for that J know my self conscious of any such matter, but that
his Majesty's wisdom is such, as to know, it little beseemes the constancy and
magnanimity of a King for a slight fault to condemn, and that without hearing,
an ancient servant, for so many years next his Person, greatest in his favor,
and to inflict a punishment on him more horrid then death. What man is he, who
is so base minded, that he had not rather a thousand times perish, then see a
thousand men (so many my Family numbreth) of whose faithful service he has
bad long trial, for the most part to perish before his eyes? But finding
nothing else objected, J conceive great hope, that J shall as easily break
this machination of combined envy, as was that late one against me in the
Parliament concerning Treason. It is well known to his Majesty (of whose
justice J am confident) that I would not presume to execute my power Legatine,
before he had been pleased to ratify it by his Royal Assent given under his
Seal; which notwithstanding I cannot now produce, that and all my goods (as
you well know) being taken from me. Neither indeed if I could, would J produce
it. For to what end should I contend with the King? Go therefore, and tell his
Majesty, that I acknowledge all that J have (but alas what speak J of what I
have, Who indeed have nothing left me?) or whatsoever I had, to be derived from
his Royal Bounty, and do think it good reason, that he should revoke his
gifts, if he think me unworthy of them. Why then do I not remit my cause to
his Majesty's arbitrament, at his pleasure to be either condemned or absolved?
To him then if you will have me acknowledge my fault, behold, I will make short
work for you, I confess it. The King knows my innocence, so that neither my
own confession, nor the calumnies of my adversaries can deceive him. I am
therefore content to confess my self guilty. His Majesty from the fountain
of his natural Clemency does often derive the stremes of his mercy to the
delinquent: And I know, though I should not desire it, He will reguard my
innocence. Upon his confession the penalty of the Law was forthwith inflicted,
only he was not, as the Law requires, committed to perpetual imprisonment. The
furniture of his house of infinite value, incredible store of plate and great
treasure had bin already seized to the King's use. There remained nothing but
the Lands wherewith he intended to indow his College, the greatest part
whereof were his own purchase, the rest were the demesnes of the demolished
Monasteries. These Lands amounted to above four thousand pounds per annum, and
were all confiscated, But God would not suffer so brave a work to perish. The
King afterward bestowed on the College in Oxford called Christ Church in
Oxford.
Christ Church, revenues for the maintenance of a Deane, eight Prebendaries, a
hundred Students, twelve Chaplains and Singing men, and four and twenty Alms
men, for which this College acknowledges HENRY the Eighth for its Founder.
But the King arrogated to himself what was truly to be ascribed to the
Gardinall. Who was now in the case of the poor Mouse, whom the Cat intends to
devour. The King had marked him out for destruction, yet permitted him to
live, but so, as that he could never escape, and yet never despair of escaping
Scarce any day throughout those few months passed, wherein he endured not
something or other, that would have animated a senseless thing with anger*
neither was the Cardinal composed of patience, yet did he never despair. His
sorrows were always tempred with some mixture of joy. For he was often
visited from the King, but that very secretly, and commonly by night: often
certified of the King's affection toward him, in token whereof the Visitants
did sometimes from the King present him with a Jewel or some such thing,
willing him to be of good comfort, for that shortly, they would assure him, he
should be raised to his former degree of favo^r and power. Adversity at length
prevailing, he fell into a disease, from the extremi^ie Wols^y falls sick^.
whereof few expected his recovery. And the King demanding of one of his
Physicians (whose patient the Cardinal was) what disease WOLSEY had, the
Doctor replied, What disease soever he has, if You desire his death, You may
be secure, for I promise You he will not live to se^ the end of three days
more. The King striking the table with his hand cried out, I had rather loose
twenty thousand pounds then he should die: Make have therefore you, and as many
other Physicians as are about the Court, and by all means endeavor his
recovery. The Physician then certifying him, that he was sick, more in mind,
then body: the King dispatched away a Gentleman with a Ring, which WOLSEY had
formerly given to him* willing him withal to tell the Cardinal* that the
King's anger was now past, who was sorry that he had so long given ear to
detraction: and that he should shortly find, that the King's affection toward
him was no less, then when he flourished most in the sunshine of his favor.
The same comfortable words being again and again ingeminated by diverse others
sent for that purpose, the Cardinal in a few days recovered his former health.

At Court each one aspired to rise by WOLSEY his fall. But now jealous least
the King intended a real and sincere reconciliation, and fearing revenge from
him whom they had injured, work all their wits to supplant him. At, or about
London he was too near the Court, some trick must be had to send him farther*
Winthester (the Bishopric whereof he held in (ommendam) was not far enough
off. Why then should he not (said they) being not detained at London as Lord
Chancellor, betake himself to the government Wols^y is confined to York.
of his Archbishop^icke of York? So having a thousand pound assigned him by
the King (whose Counsel thought a thousand marks sufficient) about the end
of March in the ensuing year he set forward toward York. Of all his Livings
they leave him only the Archbishopricke of York wherewith to maintain him,
the revenues whereof might be valued at four thousand pounds per annum. The
speech of SENECA concerning APICIVS why may I not apply to the present estate
of WOLSEY? How great was his Luxury, who deemed the income of four thousand
pound poverty?

And now it were requisite that we should proceed to the year 1530. But let us
first behold the end of this great Cardinal. That Summer he spent at Cawood a
Manor house belonging to the Sea of York, where by his mildness, justice,
and liberality, he did so win the hearts of his Diocesans, that he was both
admired and loved. He seemed to be much delighted with this solitary
confinement, for that having hitherto been tossed in the Court to and fro as
in a tempest, he had now escaped, not from shipwreck to a rock, but to his
desired haven of repose. Yet notwithstanding upon any the least hope of
recovering his former power (although he professed that converted by an
Anchorite of Richmond he had bid adieu to the vanities of the world) he could
not conceal the greatness of his joy. That he failed of his hopes (which
indeed were none of the least) I cannot assent to them, who impute it to the
importunity of his potent adversaries. For to what end served so many messages
full of gracious and reconciliatorie promises, but ever intermixed with
insufferable disgraces the forerunners of a dire Catastrophe? Certainly to no
other, then that he might be wrought one way or other to approve of, and give
sentence for the King's Divorce (at least) as Archbishop CRANMER after did.

But this course not prevailing, they intend a second accusation of Treason. To
this purpose the Earl of Northumber land is sent to apprehend, and (as he was
amazed at this sudaine change) bring him to his answer The (...) ^s apprehended.
to London. But by the way he fell sick of a disease, which at Leicester Abbey
secured him from all other. Being near his end, it is reported Sir WILLIAM
KINGSTON (who lately came thither with some of the King's Guard) exhorted him
to be of good comfort, for that the King (in whose name he saluted him) had
sent for him to no other end, but that he might clear himself from those
things, which malice and detraction had forged against him: neither did he
doubt, but that shortly he should see him more potent then ever, if out of
pusillanimity he gave not too much scope to the violence of his discontented
passions. Whereto the Cardinal in these his last words replied:

His l^st words.
I am as truly glad to hear of his Majesty's health, as I truly know my death
to be at hand J have now bin eight days together troubled with a Flux
accompanied with a continual Fever, which kind of disease, if within eight
days it remit nothing of its wonted violence, by the consent of all Physicians
threatens no less then death, peradventure an evil beyond death,
distraction. But grown weak, and my diseas^ raging more and more, I do each
minute expect, when God will be pleased to free this sinful soul from this
loathsome prison of the body. But should my life be a little prolonged, do you
think J perceive not what traps are laid for me* You Sir William (if J
mistake not) are Lieutenant of the Tower, and J guess for what you come. But
God has justly rewarded me for neglecting my due service to him, and wholly
applying my self to his Majesty's pleasure. Woe is me wretch and sot that I
am, who have been ungrateful to the King of Kings, whom if I had served with
that due devout observance that befits a Christian, he would not have forsaken
me in the evening of my age. I would I might be a general example (even to the
King himself) how sliperily they stand in this world, who do not above all
things rely upon the firm support of Gods Favor and Providence. Salute his
Majesty from me, and deliver this my last petition unto him, which is, That he
live mindful of the trial he must undergo before Gods high Tribunal: so
shall he by the secret testimony of his own conscience free me from those
crimes wherewith my adversaries seek to burden me. More he would have spoken
but his speech failed He dies.
him, and death presently ensued. His body apparrelled And is buried.
in his Pontifical Robes, after it had all that day (for he expired at the
very break of day) been exposed to open view, was at midnight without any
solemnity buried in our Ladies Chapel in the Church of the Monastery. Thus
unhappily ended Cardinal WOLSEY, His greatness.
his long happy life; then whom England, no nor I believe all Europe, if you
except the Bishops of Rome, ever saw a more potent Prelate. His retinue
consisted of near about a thousand persons, among which were one Earl,
commonly nine Barons, many Knights and Gentlmen, and of Officers belonging to
his house above four hundred, besides their servants, which far exceeded the
former number* His Chapel was served by a Deane, a Subdeane, a Chanter,
thirty five Singers, whereof thirteen were Clergy, twelve Lay, and ten
Choristers, four Sextons, beside sixteen Chaplains (the most sufficient for
their learning thoroughout all England) two Crosse-bearers, and as many
Piller-bearers. But nothing does manifest his wealth and greatness so much as
do his stately and incomparable buildings. We have already spoken of his His
buildings.
Colleges Whitehall (then called York house, as belonging to the Archbishop)
the place where our Kings do most reside, was almost wholly built by him.
Hampton Court, the nearest pile of all the King's houses, he raised entirely
from the ground* and having furnished it with most rich housholdstuffe, gave it
to the King. It was a gift fitter for a King to take, then for a subject to
give. But in the opinion of the vulgar the monument which he intended for the
King far surpassed all these. It was of solid brass, but unfinished, and is to
be seen in HENRY the Eight his Chapel in the Church of Windsore. That three
of his Children reigning after him, none of them undertook by perfecting it to
cover the (as it were) unburied bones of their Father, what may we think, but
that the excessive charge of it deterred them? But upon a further ininquiry we
may more justly ascribe it to the especial judgment of the Divine Providence,
who had decreed, that he who had so horribly spoiled the Church, should alone
be debarred the honor afforded to each of his Predecessors in the Church. And
thus much concerning WOLSEY, who died the thirtieth of November 1530.

The peace of Cambray.
In the mean time in June, Anno 1529. after long debating the matter to and
fro, by the mediation of Louyse the French Kings Mother, and MARGARET Aunt to
the Emperor, these two Princes are drawn to an accord, and a Peace is
concluded between them at Cambray, thence commonly called The Peace of
Cambray, but by us The Peace of Women. The chief Conditions whereof, and that
any way concerned us were,

That the French King should give to the Emperor for the freedom of his
Children (who had been three years Hostages in Spain for their Father) two
Millions of Crowns, whereof he should pay four hundred thousand (due from the
Emperor by the League made, Anno 1522.) to Henry and his Sister Mary Dowager of
France. Beside which huge sum he should also acquit the Emperor of five
hundred thousand, which he did owe to our King for the indemnity of the
marriage between the Emperor and the Lady Mary the Kings Daughter, whom
(having been long since contracted) he left, to marry with the Daughter of
Portugal: And that he should vngage and restore to the Emperor the Flower de
Lys of gold enriched with precious stones, and a piece of our Saviors Cross,
which Philip, truly called, The Good Duke of Burgoigne the Emperors Father
being driven into England by contrary winds, had engaged to Henry the Seventh
for fifty thousand Crowns. So that the sum to be paid to HENRY amounted to
nine hundred and fifty thousand Crowns, besides sixteen hundred thousand more
to be paid to the Emperor at the very instant of the delivery of the French
King's Children. The total sum was two millions five hundred fifty thousand
Crowns, which of our money make seven hundred sixty five thousand pounds.

FRANCIS not knowing which way sudainly to raise so huge a masle, by his
Ambassadors entreated our King to be pleased to stay some time for his
moneys. But HENRY was much moved, that he had not been made acquainted with
this Treaty: notwithstanding his secret designs made him temper his choler,
nay, and with incredible liberality to grant more then was demanded. For he
absolutely forgave him the five hundred thousand Crowns due for the not
marrying his Daughter, he gave the Flower de Lys to his Godsonne HENRY Duke of
Orleans, and left the other four hundred thousand to be paid by equal
portions in five years. The Pope had lately by his Legates deluded HENRY, who
was thereupon much discontented not knowing what course to run. And this is
thought to be the cause of his so extraordinary liberality toward the French.

The first occasion of Cranmers rising.
The King being then in progress and hunting at Waltham it happened that
STEPHEN GARDENER Principal Secretary of Estate (after Bishop of Winton) and
FOX the King's Almoner (after Bishop of Hereford) were billeted in the house of
a gentleman named CRESSEY, who had sent his two sons to be brought up at
Cambridge, under the tutelage of THOMAS CRANMER Doctor in Divinity, a man both
very learned and virtuous. The plague then spreading it self in Cambridge,
CRANMER with his two Pupils betook himself to Master CRESSEY their father his
house. Where GARDENER and FOX among other table talk discoursing of the Kings
Suite concerning his Divorce, which had so many years depended in the Court of
Rome undecided, CRANMER said, that he wondered the King required not the
opinions of the most famous learned men that were any where to be found (of
whom the world had many far more learned then the Pope) and followed not their
judgments. What CRANMER had as it were let fall by chance they report to the
King, who sudainly apprehending it, said that this fellow whosoever he was, had
hit the nail on the head, and withal demanding his name, caused CRANMER to be
sent for, whom he commended for his (but too late) advise, which course if he
had taken but five years before, he should now have had an hundred thousand
pounds in his purse, which he had unprofitably in this suite cast away on the
Court of Rome: he commands CRANMER to write a Tract concerning this question
wherein having drawn together what reasons he could for the confirmation of
his advice, he should conclude with his own opinion. CRANMER did it very
readily, and is thereupon with Sir THOMAS BOLEN (lately created Earl of
Wiltshire) CARNE, STOKESLEY, and BE NET, Doctors of Law, with others sent on
an Embassy to Rome. CRANMER'S book is to be presented to his Holiness, and
they are commanded to challenge the Court of Rome to a disputation wherein the
Contents of that book should be maintained; the argument whereof was, That by
the authority of holy Scripture, ancient Fathers, and Councels, it was utterly
unlawful for any man to marry his Brothers Widow, and that no such marriage
could be licenced or authorized, by the Popes Dispensation. This being done,
the King's intent was, they should procure the opinions of all the Universities
throughout Europe, by whom if he found his former marriage condemned, then
without farther expecting the approbation of the Sea of Rome, he was resolved
to run the hazard of a second. To this the amity of the French seeming very
conducible, the King had by his former liberality sought to oblige him. The
Ambassadors came to Rome* had audience, were promised a public disputation,
whereof they were held so long in expectation, that perceiving their stay there
to be to little purpose, they all returned into England, except CRANMER, who
with the same instructions that he had formerly been sent to the Pope, was to
go to the Emperor, whose Court was then in Germany. There this good and
learned man, hitherto no friend to LVTHER, while he defends his own book and
the King's Divorce against the most learned either of Protestants or Papists,
is thought to have been seasoned with the leaven of that doctrine, for which
after he had been twenty years Archbishop of Canterbury, he was most cruelly
burned.

While CRANMER thus labored abroad, the King at home deals with LANGEY the
French Ambassador, by whose means (with the forcible Rhetoric (says one)
of some English Angels) he obtained of the Universities of Paris with the rest
throughout France, Pavia, Padua, Bononia, and others, this Conclusion, That the
Pope (who has no power over the Positive Law of God) could not by his
Dispensation ratify a marriage contracted between a Brother and a brothers
Widow, it being forbidden by the express words of Scripture.

The eight of December the King graced three noble and worthy men with new
titles of honor. THOMAS Creation of Earls.
BOLEN Viscount Rochfort the King's future Father in law, was created Earl of
Wiltshire, ROBERT RATCLIF Viscount Fitz-Walter, of the noble Family of the
FITZ-WALTERS, Earl of Sussex; in which honor his son THOMAS, his nephevves
THOMAS first, then HENRY brother to THOMAS, and now ROBERT the son of HENRY
have succeeded him: And GEORGE Lord Hastings was made Earl of Huntingdon, who
left it to his son FRANCIS Father of HENRY, who deceased without issue, and
GEORGE Grandfather to HENRY the now Earl by FRANCIS, who died before his
Father.

Anno Dom. 1530. Reg. 22.
WILLIAM TINDALL having translated The Bible translated into English.
the New Testament into English, and procured it to be printed at Antwerp had
secretly dispersed many copies thereof throughout England. Whereat the Bishops
and Clergy (especially those that were most addicted to the Doctrine of Rome)
stormed excedingly, saying that this Translation was full of errors, and that
in the prefaces and else where it contained many things contrary to the Truth.
The King being angry with the Pope, had long since determined to free himself
from his usurped power. And therefore admonished the murmuring Clergy to
correct this book, not to suppress it: for it was a most profitable work,
and very necessary for the discovery of the deceits of the Court of Rome, the
tyranny whereof was become intolerable to all the Princes of Christendom.
Whereupon he gives order to the Bishops and some other learned men to set
forth a new Translation, which his subjects might read with safety and profit.

An Embassy to the Pope.
The hope of prevailing with the Pope by the French King's means had drawn
HENRY to send on a second Embassage to the Pope, the Earl of Wiltshire,
Doctor STOKESLEY Elect of London, and EDWARD LEE WOLSEY his Successor in
York. They found the Pope at Bononia with the Emperor, but had no other
answer to their demands then, that his Holiness when he came to Rome, would
endeavor to do the King justice. Till then he could do nothing.

All commerce with the Sea of Rome forbidd^n.
Fair means not prevailing, the King runs another course. ^y public
Proclamation throughout the Kingdom he forbids all commerce between his
subjects and the Bishop of Rome: commanding that no man should receive any
thing from, or send any thing (especially money) unto him, either by exchange,
or any other means, calling him Tyrant, the Harpy of the World, the common
Incendiary, and deeming him utterly unworthy of that glorious title which he
had vaingloriously usurped, Christ's Vicar. This in September.

But the wealth of the Clergy being very great, and considering how they had in
the Reigns of his Predecessors strongly sided with the Pope, the King was some
what jealous of them. To curb them he condemns the whole Clergy throughout
the Kingdom in a Praemunire, for that without license from his Majesty they
had been obedient to the authority of the The Clergy fined.
Pope in acknowledging WOLSEY for his Legate. The Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury, being assembled in Convocation, buy their pardon at a hundred
thousand pounds, and in this Synod he is (with much ado) by the Clergy of both
Provinces declared next under Christ Supreme Head of the Church of England, The
King declared Supreme Head of the Church.
and all foraine power or authority whatsoever disclaimed. The Province of
York is moreover fined at eighteen thousand eight hundred and forty pounds.
So this one fault (if it may be so accounted it being certain that WOLSEY was
licenced to exercise his authority Legantine) cost the Clergy a hundred and
eighteen thousand, eight hundred and forty pounds.

Anno Dom. 1531. Reg. 23.
THe only public memorable occurrents of this year were, that the Laity, for
the most part as deep in a Praemunire, as the Clergy, were by Act of
Parliament pardoned. In which assembly Sir THOMAS MORE Lord Chancellor, and
other remarkable speakers related at large the Conclusions of the Universities
concerning the unlawfulness of the Kings marriage.

And yet perhaps the notorious villainy of RICHARD ROSE Cook to the Bishop of
Rochester, might crave a place in this History, who with poisoned broth killed
sixteen of the Bishops servants. The Bishop himself (who was especially aimed
at) that day contrary to his accustomed diet forbearing broth, escaped. The
poisoner according to a Law lately enacted, was thrown into a cauldron of
boiling water. But the offense deserved tortures of a most exquisite strain.

Anno Dom. 1532. Reg. 24.
ON the three and twentieth of August died The death of William Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury. Cranmer (though much against his will) succeedoth him.
WILLIAM WARHAM Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom THOMAS CRANMER at that time
in Germany about the Kings affairs, was appointed Successor. He was not so
ambitious as to aspire to such a dignity; and some reasons made him unwilling
to accept it being offered. He knew before he could be consecrated he must
swear obedience to the Pope, which with a safe conscience he could not. He
feared what would be the issue of this abrupt separation from the Sea of Rome.
He knew the King's disposition to be violent, such sudaine changes to be full
of danger, and the Court (although he had not yet purchased the acquaintance
of it) to be a mere school of fraud and dissembling. The Kings pleasure must
necessarily be obeyed, and if he slipped never so little, envy the mischievous
attendant of great felicity would help him forward to a breake-necke. CRANMER
also having long since lost his Wife whom he had married in his youth, had
taken a liking to a certain maid neipce to OSIANDERS wife, whom he intended
to make his second wife: yet he knew that the Canon Law permitted not Priests
to marry, and made them incapable of holy Orders, who had been twice married.
These considerations made him linger in Germany six whole months after the
dispatch of his businesle, hoping that his absence might afford means to some
other to work a way to the Archbi^hopricke. But the times were such, that they
to whom desert might give greatest hopes of attaining it, did abhor this
still ^ottering and slippery dignity: and even they who were already advanced
to the like, endeavored to betake themselves to the safety of meaner fortune;
As did Sir THOMAS MORE Sir Thomas More resignes the place of Lord* Chance^lour.
the Lord Chancellor, who by his continual ernest petitions obtained leave of
the King on the fifteen of May to resign his place; and Sir THOMAS AWDLEY on
the fourth of June was in his steed made Lord Keeper. CRANMER having privately
married his wife at Norimberg, at length returned into England, where the Kings
importunity prevailing beyond all scrupulous difficulties, CRANMER is (though
much against his will made Archbishop of Canterbury, the Pope also by his Bull
confirming the Election. He refusing the Arbishopricke, because he must take
an oath to the Pope, delivered the Bull to the King, protesting that he would
never accept of any Bishopric in England, but from the King, who was Supreme
Head of the Church of England; and that he would not take any oath that should
any way derogate from the King's Authority* At length the subtle heads of the
Lawiers found out a quirke whereby to salve all: He must first by a praevious
Protestation except against this Oath (which was to be taken pro formd) that it
should not hereafter be any way prejudicial to him. Thus ascended CRANMER to
the Archiepiscopall Sea, where he sat near about twenty years, until
Queen MARY the Daughter of repudiated CATHARINE not only thrust this most
innocent, grave, learned man out of his Bishopric, but with a barbarous
cruelty condemned him to the fire, as hereafter in its place we shall declare.

For the Treatise of a more strict League between the two Kings of England and
France, an interview is appointed between them. To this end on the eleventh An
enterview between the Kings of England and France.
of October the King with a mighty train passed to Calais. The tenth day
after going to Boloigne he was met half way by the French King and his Sons,
and conducted to Boloigne, where the two Kings divided the Abbey between them.
HENRY stayed there four days, and then brought FRANCIS (in whose company were
the King of Navarre, some Dukes, and Cardinals, a great number of Noblemen, and
of others at least twelve hundred) to Calais. At Saint Ioquebert the Duke of
Richmond (who was not at Boloigne with the King his Father) received them.
After much solemn entertainment, and the enterchangeable favors from each
King to the Princes of each others company, from HENRY to the King of Navarre
(or as the French write, to MONT MORENCY) and CHABOT the Admiral by the Order
of the Garter; From FRANCIS to the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk by that of
Saint MICHAEL, these great Monarchs parted.

Jealousy of the Emperors still increasing power had now united these Princes,
and their natural dispositions wonderful agreeable had made them always
prone to a mutual love, which by this interview took such deep root, that
even in their own opinions they rested assured of each other. And indeed had
they been private persons, their friendship in all likelihood had continued
inviolable. But Princes are not so much to be swayed by their own Affections,
as the consideration of the public Utility. The effect of this interview was
an agreement to repress the Turk about that time wasting Hungary, to which
end they should assemble together by their joint forces an Army of fourscore
thousand men, whereof there should be ten thousand horse with artillery
requisite for the said Camp: A specious pretext: For they both knew, that the
Turk had already retreated. But in private they treated of other matters. They
had both many causes of discontent. FRANCIS not without cause was displeased
with the Pope, and HENRY thinking it best to strike while the iron was hot,
indevoured an utter alienation between them. HENRY complains first of the
wrong the Court of Rome did him touching the matter of his Divorce, in the
suite whereof full six years were now spent: and yet at length after all their
deceits and mockeries, they seek to force him, either to go in persen to
Rome, or in a matter of so great importance to send Deputies, who should in the
Kings behalf follow the suite. An insolent proceeding, and injury without
example, which did concern the French and all other Princes of Christendom.
For in like cases happening among Sovereign Princes, especially touching the
conscience so near it, was the usual custom of other Popes to send Judges to
the place, it being reasonable that the Persons should speak personally, and
not by their Attorneyes and very vnr^asonable, that a Sovereign Prince leaving
the rule and government of his Estates should go and plead his cause at Rome.
Moreover he did complain of the intolerable exactions of the Church of Rome
over the Clergy and people of England; where by the yoke, before too heavy, was
now become insupportable: neither did he doubt, but the same courses were taken
in France. Germany had begun the way of freedom to the rest of Christendom:
why should not other Princes follow their example? To conclude he did
instantly require, that they two should send their Ambassadors jointly
together to the Pope to summon him to appear at the next general Council,
there to answer his extortions, and by the authority and judgment of the
Council to force him to a reinformation: affirming, that there was no Nation
in Christendom, which did not desire, that the in^olencies of the Romanists
should be repressed. ^o this the French answered, that he acknowledged these
things to be true, but it was not in his power to yield to the Kings request,
yet for the b^o^herly love which he did bear unto him, and the chari^able
reguard of his own Country, he professed himself ready to undergo all
difficulties. He wanted not sufficient injuries whereof to complain,
considering that he having so well deserved of the Apostolic Sea* but more
especially of this Pope, yet he certainly found, that CLEMENI, all this
notwithstanding, was not well affected toward him. CLEMENT had very lately
suffered his reputation to be violated in his presence, and by the Bishop of
Verulo had secretly endeavored to alienate the Suisses his allies from him.
France groaned under the burden of the new and undutiful exactions of the
Popes Officers, by means whereof all the treasure was carried out of the
Kingdom, to the prejudice of his subjects (the Clergy especially) who grew
poor, the Churches were vnrepaired, and the poor neither clothed nor fed: and
if he himself levied any great sum of money, the tributes are longer coming
in then usually they were wont. But he thought it best, before they proceeded
to that harsh course, to use some milder means, whereto there was a fair
occasion offered, the Pope having by the Cardinal of Grandmont made him a
promise of an interview at Nice or Avtgnon: where if he could not obtain
reason of him in the behalf of both, he would endeavor to prevail by force
where he could not by just entreaties: In the mean time he desired him to
attend the issue of their parley.

But FRANCIS concealed the true cause of this intended interview for fear
least our HENRY not approving it, should seek to dissuade him from it. The
French was implacable toward the Emperor, against whom to strengthen
himself, he means to win the Pope by the marriage of his younger Son HENRY
Duke of Orleans (who after reigned) with CATHARINE de MEDICES Duchess of Vrbin
Catharina de Medices married to the Duke of Orleans.
the Popes Niece. The Pope could not at first believe this potent Prince
intended him so much honor: but perceiving the French to be real, he most
eagerly farthered it, appointing time and place for the consummation of it,
which was after done at Marseilles by CLEMENT himself in the presence of the
French King.

Anno Dom. 1533. Reg. 25.
THe King's love brooked no delays. Wherefore The King marries Anne B^len.
on the five and twentieth of January, privately and in the presence of very
few, he marries the Lady ANNE BOLEN.

Shortly after by Act of Parliament the marriage of the King and the Lady
CATHARINE was declared void and incestuous, and a Law enacted, wherein all
Appeals to Rome were forbidden, and that none should style CATHARINE other
then Princess of Wales, and Widow or Dowager of Prince ARTHVR. By virtue and
authority of the same Law, the Archbishop of Canterbury accompanied with some
other Bishops, coming to Dunstable six miles from Ampthill, where CATHARINE
then resided, caused her to be cited before Him next under the King chief
Judge in all Ecclesiastical causes within the Province of Canterbury, to show
what reasons could be alleged why the marriage not lawfully contracted
between the King and her should not be disanulled, and pronounced impious,
incestuous, and consequently void. To these things by one of her servants she
answered; that it beseemed not the Archbishop to thrust his sickle into
another harvest: this Cause did yet depend undecided before the Pope CHRIST'S
Vicar on earth, whose Decree she would obey, and other Judge would she
acknowledge none. Being called fifteen days together and not appearing. She
is pronounced Contumax, and for her contumacie separated from the Kings bed and
company. Whereupon the Lady ANNE proclaimed Queen throughout the Kingdom, on
Easter eve showed her self publicly as Queen: and was at Whits ontide
crowned with as great pomp and solemnity as ever was Queen. The particulars
I will let pass, excepting that prophetical Disticke upon one of the
triumphant Arches purposely erected in London where she was to pass: Regina
ANNA, paris Regis de sanguine Natam,
Et paries populis aurea secla tuis.


In English, ANNE, thou a daughter bear to our King,
And to thy people golden days shall bring.
Wafers also with the same impression were thrown about says STOW. But I
rather believe, that this Disticke was made after the Queens deliverie.
Whenever it were, he that truly considers the fe^icitie of the four and
forty years reign of this Queens Daughter, will think this Oracle could
not proceed from any but a Delphian APOLLO. For the Queen at the time of her
Coronation was great with child, (whereof the seventh of September she was
delivered at Greenwich) which was that ever famous Queen ELIZABETH, who The
birth of Queen Elizabeth.
after the death of her Brother and Sister so gloriously ruled this Kingdom.

The Pope was certified of all these passages; that his authority in England
was abrogated, that the late Queen CATHARINE was put away, that ANNE BOLEN as
Queen was taken to the Kings bed, that the King styled himself Supreme Head
of the Church of England, that the Archbishop of Canterbury executed all those
offices which formerly the Pope only did, and that not as the Popes Legate, but
as Primate of England, who under the King claimed chief authority in
Ecclesiastical affairs throughout his whole Province. Wherewith being ne^ed,
he seemed to breath nothing but threats and revenge. But knowing himself to
have been the motive of it, and doubtful of the event, he was easily
persuaded by the French King, as yet not to proceed by excommunication against
HENRY, until he had made trial of some milder course. Whereupon FRANCIS by
BELLAY Bishop of Paris entreates HENRY not to withdraw himself wholly from the
obedience of Rome, for as much as it was a matter of great danger: He would
therefore advise him once more by Ambassadors to Rome, to signify that he was
not utterly averse from a r^conciliation: which if he did, he made no doubt
but all things would succeed to his mind. HENRY was certain of enjoying his
Love, and let the Pope decree what he list, was resolved to keep her. He had
been formerly abused by the Court of Rome, and was loath to make farther
trial of their dilatory proceedings. Yet had BELLAY prevailed so fa^re with
him, that He would be content once more to submit himself to the Church of
Rome, if he could be assured of the Popes intention to do him equity. The
Bishop conceiving some hopes of a peace (although it were in the winter time)
goes himself to Rome, gives the Pope an account of his actions, and certifies
him that the matter was not yet desperate. Whereupon a day is appointed by
which a Post returning from the King was to give notice of an intended
Embassy. But the Consistory gave so short a time to have an answer, that the
Post came short two days at his return. The term expired, they proceed
hastily to the confirmation of their Censures notwithstanding the Bishops
instance to obtain six days more, for as much as contrary winds or some
other chance might hinder the messenger; and six days would be no great
matter, considering the King had wauered six whole years before he fell: The
more moderate thought the Bishop demanded but reason; but the preposterous
haste of the greater sort prevailed. Two days were scarce past after the
prefixed time, but the Post arriving with ample authority, and instructions
from England, did greatly amaze those hasty Cardinals, who afterward would
feign, but could not find any means to mend what they had so rashly marred.
For the matter (to please the Emperor) was so hudled up, as that which could
not ritely be finished in three Consistories, was done in one. So the King and
the whole Realm was interdicted, the Bull whereof (the Messengers not daring
to come nearer) was brought to Dunkirk.

The report hereof coming to the King, he lays all the blame on the Lady
CATHARINE. Whereupon the Duke of Suffolk was sent to lessen her Household: They
who might be any way suspected to have been employed by her in this business,
are turned away, the rest are commanded to take their oaths to serve her as
Princess of Wales, not as Queen of England. They that refuse are ca^hiered,
and they that are content to swear, are by her cast off; so that for a time
she had few or no Attendants.

Mary Queen of France dies.
In the mean time, on the three and twentieth of June died MARY Queen of
France the Kings Sister, and was buried in the Abbey of Saint Edmundsbury.

Anno Dom. 1534. Reg. 26.
ABout this time was discovered the grand imposture of ELIZABETH BARTON, which
brought her to a deserved end. She had formerly been sick of a strange
disease, which not only afflicted her inwardly, but as often as her fit took
her, so wonderfully distorted her mouth and other parts of her body, that most
were of opinion, it could not peoceed from any natural cause. But Custom
growing to a second Nature, the continuance of the Disease had taught her to
distort her body after her recovery, in the fame manner as when she was sick.
Hoping to make a profit of this her counterfeit Convulsion, she imparted the
secret to the Curate of the Parish: by whose device after ^ong deliberation
between them, it was agreed, that she should often feign her self to be in an
ecstasie: and whereas she was wont when the fit seized her, to ly still
without motion, as if she had been dead, she should now sometimes utter some
godly sentences, inveigh against the wickedness of the times, but especially
against Heretics and broachers of new Opinions; and should relate strange
visions revealed by God to her in the time of her ecstasie. By these juggling
tricks, not only among the Vulgar (who termed the holy Maid of Kent) but among
the wiser sort, such as were Archbishop WARHAM, Bishop FISHER, and others, her
sanctity was held in admiration. The Imposture taking so generally, her
boldness increased. She prefixeth a day whereon she shall be restored to
perfect health, and the means of her recovery must be procured forsooth by a
pilgrimage to some certain Image of our Lady. The day came, and she being
brought to the place, by the like cousenage deceived a great number of people,
whom the expectation of the miracle had drawn thither: and at last, as if she
had just then shaken off her disease, she appears whole and straight unto
them all; saying, That by especial command from God she must become a Nun,
and that one Doctor BOCKING a Monk of Canterbury there present, was ordained
to be her Confessor, which office he willingly undertook: under pretext
whereof this Nun living at Canterbury, BOCKING often resorted to her, not
without suspicion of dishonesty.

The intended Divorce from CATHARINE, and marriage with ANNE BOLEN, had much
appalled most part of the Clergy: for then a necessity was imposed on the King,
of a divorce from the Papal Sea, in which the Church and all Ecclesiastical
persons were likely to suffer. The apprehension whereof wrought so with
BOCKING, that making others conscious of the intent, he persuaded ELIZABETH
BARTON by denuntiation of Gods revealed judgments to deter the King from his
purposed change. She according as she was instructed, proclaims it abroad,
That the King aduenturing to marry another, CATHARINE surviving, should, if in
the mean time he died not some infamous death, within one month after be
deprived of his Kingdom. The King hears of it, and causes the Impostrix to
be apprehended, who upon examination discovered the rest of the conspirators,
who were all committed to prison until the next Parliament should determine of
them. ELIZ. BARTON, BOCKING, MASTERS, (the before mentioned Curate of the
Parish) DEERING, and RISBEY, Monks, with GOLD a Priest, are by the Parliament
adjudged to die. The Bishop of Rochester, and ADESON his Chaplain, one ABEL a
Priest, LAVRENCE the Archdeacon of Canterbury his Register, and THOMAS GOLD
Gentleman, for having heard many things, whereby they might guess at the
intents of the Conspirators, and not acquainting the Magistrate with them, are
as accessory condemned in a Praemunire, (confiscation of their goods, and
perpetual impris^nment.) ELIZABETH BARTON and her Companions, having each of
them after a Sermon at Paul's Cross, publicly confessed the Imposture, are on
the twentieth of April hanged, and their heads set over the gates of the City.

No Canons to be constituted without the Kings assent. The King to collate
Bishoprics.
By the same Parliament, the authority of the Convocation to make Canonical
Constitutions, unless the King give this Rovall assent, is abrogated.

It is also inacted, That the Collocation of all Bishoprics, the Seas being
vacant, should henceforth be at the Kings dispose, and that no man should be
chosen by the Chapter, or consecrated by the Archbishop, but he on whom the
King by his Conge D'eslire or other his Letters had conferred that Dignity.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has Papal authority under the King.
And whereas many complained, that now all commerce with Rome was forbidden, all
means were taken away of mitigating the rigor of the Ecclesiastical Laws of
Dispensation; Papal authority is granted to the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
King reserving to himself the power of dispensing in causes of greater moment.
And that all Appeals formerly wont to be made from the Archbishop to the Pope,
should now be from the Archbishop to the King, who by Delegates should
determine all such suites and controversies.

Furthermore, the Kings marriage with the Lady CATHARINE is again pronounced
incestuous, the Succession to the Crown established on the Kings Issue
begotten on Queen ANNE. And all above the age of sixteen years throughout the
Kingdom, are to be bound by oath, to the observance of this Law: whosoever
refused to take this oath, should suffer loss of all their goods, and
perpetual imprisonment.

Fisher and More imprisoned.
Throughout all the Realm there were found but two, who durst refracto^ily
oppose this Law, viz* FISHER Bishop of Rochester, and Sir THOMAS MOORE the late
Lord Chancellor; men who were indeed very learned, but most obstinate stickers
in the behalf of the Church of Rome: who being not to be drawn by any
persuasions, ^o be conformable to the Law, were committed to prison, from
whence after a years durance they were not freed but by the loss of their
lives.

Persecution.
But the King fearing that it might be thought, That he took these courses
rather out of a contempt of Religion, than in regard of the tyranny of the
Court of Rome; to free himself from all suspicion either of favoring LVTHER,
or any authors of new Opinions, began to persecute that sort of men whom the
Vulgar called Heretics, and condemned to the cruelty of that mercilesle
Element Fire, not only certain Dutch Anabaptists, but many Professors of the
Truth: and amongst others, that learned and godly young man JOHN ^RITH, who
with one HEWET and others, on the two and twentieth of July constantly endured
the torments of their martyrdom.

Pope Clement d^^th.
The five and twentieth of September died CLEMENT the Seventh, Pope; in whose
place succeeded ALEXADER FARNESE by the name of PAVLVS the Third, who to begin
his time with some memorable Act, having called a Consistory, pronounced HENRY
to be fallen from the Title and Dignity of a King, and to be deposed,
re-iterating withal the thunder of Excommunication, with which bug-beare his
predecessor CLEMENT had sought to affright him. But this peradventure happened
in the ensuing year, after the death of FISHER and MORE.

A Parliament is again called in November, wherein (according to the Decree of
the late Synod) the King was declared Supreme Head of the Church of England,
and the punishment all crimes which formerly pertained to the Ecclesiastical
Courts, is made proper to him. So the Kingdom is vindicated from the
usurpation of the Pope, who before shared in it, and the King now first began
to reign entirely.

First fruits granted to the King. Wales united to England.
Also all Annates or first Fruits formerly paid to the Pope, are granted to the
King.

And Wales the seat of the remainder of the true ancient Britans, hitherto
differing from us (compounded of Normans and Saxons) as well in the form of
their government, as in Language, is by the authority of this Parliament (to
the great good of both, but especially that Nation) united and incorporated to
England. EDWARD the First was the first who subdued this Country, yet could
he not prevail over their minds, whom the desire of recovering their lost
liberty, animated to many rebellions. By reason whereof, and our suspicions,
being for two hundred years oppressed either with the miseries of servitude or
war, they never tasted the sweet fruits of a true and solid peace. But HENRY
the Seventh by blood (in reguard of his Father) and birth a Welchman, coming
to the Crown, (as if they had recovered their liberty, whereto they so long
aspired) they obeyed him as their lawful Prince. So the English being freed of
their former jealousies permitted them to partake of their Privileges, since
common to both Nations, the good whereof equally ^edounded to both. I could
wish the like Union with Scotland: That as we all live in one Island,
professing one Faith, and speaking for the most part one Language, under the
government of one and the same Prince; so we may become one Nation, all equally
acknowledging our selves Britans, and so recover our true Country Britain,
lost as it were so many hundreds of years, by our divisions of it into
England, Scotland, and Wales.

Anno Dom. 1535. Reg. 27.
THe Coronation of the new Queen, and other passages of entertainment, had
exhausted the Treasury. The Pope and the Emperor were both enemies of HENRY,
watchfully attending all opportunities to do him mischief. Neither in regard
that so many sided with the Pope, were all things safe at home. The King was
therefore forced to a course seemingly rash, and full of dangerous
consequences, but very necessary for the time. He resolves to demolish all the
Monasteries The King begins to subv^rt religious houses.
throughout England. He is content the Nobility should share with him in the
spoil, so enriching and strengthening himself by their necessary revolt from
the Popish faction. To this end, they that were thought more especially in
maintaining the Popes authority to withstand the Kings proceedings, were
condemned of high Treason and they that refused to acknowledge the King under
CHRIST, Supreme Head of the Church of England, are hanged. For this cause on
the third of May Certain Priors and Monks executed.
were executed JOHN HOVGHTON Prior of the Charterhouse in London, AUGUSTINE
WEBSTER Prior of Bevaley, and THOMAS LAWRENCE Prior of Exham, and with them
RICHARD REIGNALDS a Monk and Doctor of Divinity, and JOHN HALES Vicar of
Thistlehurst.

On the eighteenth of June, EXMEW, MIDDLEMORE, and NVDIGATE, all Charterhouse
The Bishop. Rochester beheaded.
Monks, suffered for the same cause. And four days after* JOHN FISHER Bishop
of Rochester, a man much reverenced by the People for his holy life and great
learning, was publicly beheaded, and his head set over London bridge. Our
Histories hardly afford a president of the execution Made Cardinal
unseasonably.
of such a man. But the Pope was the occasion of his death, who to ease the
burden of his now a years imprisonment, by the addition of a new title, had
on the one and twentieth of May created him Cardinal. The news whereof
hastened him to a scaffold.

Sir Thomas Moore beheaded.
The sixth of July, Sir THOMAS MORE for the same stiffness in opinion with
Bishop FISHER, suffered the like death. This was that MORE so famous for his
Eutopia, and many other Works both in English and Latin. As for his
conversation, the most censorious fault him in nothing, but his too too jesting
(I will not say scoffing) wit, to which he gave more liberty, then did beseem
the gravity of his person, not tempering himself in the midst of his calamity,
no not at the very instant of death. After his condemnation he denied to give
any thing to the Barber that trimmed him, affirming, That head about which he
had bestowed his pains, was the Kings: if he could prove it to be his that did
^eare it, he would well reward him. To his Keeper demanding his upper garment
as his fee, he gave his Hat. Going up the scaffold, he desired him that went
before him, to lend him his hand to help him up, as for coming down he took
no care. Laying his head upon the block, he put aside his beard (which was
then very long) saying, The Executioner was to cut off his head, not his beard.

The executions of so many men caused the Queen to be much maligned, as if
they had been done by her procurement, at least the Papist would have it
thought so, knowing that it stood her upon, and that indeed ^hee endeavored,
that the authority of the Pope of Rome should not again take footing in
England. They desired nothing more than the downfall of this virtuous Lady,
which shortly after happening, they triumphed in the overthrow of Innocence.

Religious Hous^s visited.
In the mean time they who undertook the subversion of the Monasteries,
invented an Engine to batter them more forcibly, then the former course of
torture and punishment. They send abroad subtle headed fellows, who warranted
by the Kings authority, should throughout England search into the lives and
manners of religious persons. It would amaze one to consider what villainies
were discovered among them by the means of CROMWELL and others. Few were found
so guiltless, as to dare withstand their proceedings: and the licentiousness
of the rest divulged, made them all so odious to the people, that never any
exploit so full of hazard and danger was more easily achieved, then was the
subversion of our English Monasteries.

Anno Dom. 1536. Reg. 28.
The death of Queen Catharine.
THis year began with the end of the late Queen CATHARINE, whom extremity of
grief cast into a disease, whereof on the eighth of January she deceased.

Queen Anne, the Viscont Rochford and others committed.
Queen ANNE now enjoyed the King without a Rival, whose death not
withstanding not improbably happened too soon for her. For the King upon May
day at Greenwich beholding the Viscont Rochfort the Queens brother, HENRY
NORRIS, and others, running a tilt, arising suddenly, and to the wonder of all
men departing thence to London, caused the Viscont Rochfort, NORRIS, the Queen
her self, and some others, to be apprehended and committed. The Queen being
guarded to the Tower by the Duke of Norfolk, AVDLEY Lord Keeper, CROMWELL
Secretary of Estate, and KINGSTON Lieutenant of the Tower, at the very entrance
upon her knees with dire imprecations disavowed the crime (whatsoever it were)
wherewith she was charged, beseeching God so to regard her as the justness of
her cause required.

On the fifteenth of May in the hall of the Tower she was arraigned, the Duke
of Norfolk sitting high Steward, to whom were adioined twenty six other Peers
(and among them the Queens Father) by whom she was to be tried. The Accusers
having given in their evidence, and the Witnesses produced, she sitting in a
chair (whether in regard of any infirmity, or out of honor permitted to the
Wife of their Sovereign) having an excellent quick wit, and being a ready
speaker, did so answer to all objections, that had the Peers given in their
verdict according to the expectation of the assembly, she had been acquitted.
But they (among whom the Duke of Suffolk the Kings brother in Law was chief,
one wholly applying himself to the Kings humor) pronounce Her guilty.
Whereupon the Duke of Norfolk bound to proceed according to the verdict of the
Peers, condemned Her to death, either by being The Queen condemned,
burned in the Green in the Tower, or beheaded, as his Majesty in his pleasure
should think fit. Her brother GEORGE Viscont Rochford was likewise with her
Brother,
the same day condemned, and shortly after, HENRY NORRIS, WILLIAM BRIERTON, and
Norris.
and FRANCIS WESTON Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber, and MARK SVETON a
Musician, either as Partakers or accessory, were to run the same fortune. The
King greatly favored NORRIS, and is reported to be much grieved, that he was
to die with the rest. Whereupon he offered pardon to him, conditionally that he
would confess that whereof he was accused. But he answered resolutely, and
as it became the progenitor of so many valiant Heroes, That in his conscience
he thought her guiltless of the objected crime, but whether she were or no, he
could not accuse her of any thing: and that he had rather undergo a thousand
deaths, then betray the Innocent. Upon relation whereof the King cried out,
Hang him up then, Hang him up then. Which notwithstanding was not accordingly
executed: For on the thirteenth of May, two days after his condemnation, all
of them, viz. the Viscont Rochfort, NORRIS, BRIERTON, and SVETON, were beheaded
at Tower hill. NORRIS left a son called also HENRY, whom Queen ELIZABETH in
contemplation of his Fathers deserts created Baron of Ricot. This Lord NORRIS
was father to those great Captains WILLIAM, JOHN, THOMAS, and EDWARD, in our
days so famous throughout Christendom, for their brave exploits in England,
France, Irland, and the Netherlands.

Her execution.
On the nineteenth of May the Queen was brought to the place of execution in
the green within the Tower, some of the Nobility and Companies of the City
being admitted, rather to be witnesses, than spectators of her death. To whom
the Queen having ascended the scaffold, spoke in this manner:

Friends and good Christian people, J am here in your presence to suffer death,
whereto J acknowledge my self adjudged by the Laws; how justly J will not
say, for I intend not an accusation of any one. J beseech the Almighty to
preserve his Mai^sty long to reign over you: a more gentle or mild Prince
never swayed Scepter: his bounty and clemency toward me I am sure has been
especial. If any one intend an inquisitiue survey of my actions, J entreat him
to judge favorably of me, and not rashly to admit of any hard censorious
conceit. And so I bid the world farewell, beseeching you to commend me in your
Prayers to God. To thee O Lord do J commend my Soul. Then kneeling down, she
incessantly repeated these words, CHRIST have mercy on my soul, Lord JESUS
receive my soul; until the Executioner of Ca^ais at one blow smote off her
head with a sword. Had any one three years before (at what time the King so
hot in the pursuit of his love, preferred the enjoying of this Lady beyond his
Friends, his Estate, his Health, Safeguard, and his only Daughter)
prophetically foretold the unhappy fate of this Princess, he should have been
believed with CASSANDRA. But much more incredible may all wise men think the
unheard of crime for which she was condemned: viz. That fearing least her
Daughter the Lady ELIZATETH borne while CATHARINE survived, should be
accounted illegitimate, in hope of other (especially masle) Issue, whereof she
despaired by the King, now near fifty years old, she had lasciviously used
the company of certain young Courtiers: nay not therewith content, had
committed incest with her own Brother. A strange ingratitude in one raised
from so low degree, even to the height of honor. I will not derogate from the
Authority of public Records: But an Act of Parliament against her shall not
work on my belief. Surely it carried so little show of probability with
foraine Princes, that they always deemed it an act of inhumane cruelty.
Especially the Estates of Germany Confederates for the defense of the Reformed
Religion; who having often treated with FOX Bishop of Hereford, and other
Ambassadors, had decreed to make HENRY Head of their League, and had designed
an Embassy by JOHN STVRMIVS, who should have brought with him into England
those excellent Divines PHILIP MELANCTHON and MARTIN BVCER, with one GEORGE
DRACO, who should endeavor that and the Reformation of our Church. But having
heard of the lamentable and unworthy (as they judged it) end of the Queen,
loathing the King for his inconstancy and cruelty, they cast off all farther
thought of that matter. I will not presume to discuss the truth of their
opinion: But freely to speak what I my self think; There are two reasons
which sway much with me in the behalf of the Queen. That her Daughter the
Lady ELIZABETH was seated in the Royal Throne, where she for so many years
ruled so happily and triumphantly. What shall we think, but that the Divine
Goodness was pleased to recompense the just calamity of the Mother, in the
glorious prosperity of the Daughter? And then consider but the Kings
precipitated Nuptials the very next day after the death of his former Wife,
yet scarce interred, and with whose warm blood his imbrued hands yet reaked:
consider this, I say, and you shall easily be persuaded with me, that the
insatiable Prince glutted with the satiety of one, and out of the desire of
variety seeking to enjoy another, did more willingly give ear to the
treacherous calumnies of the malicious Popelings, than either befitted an
upright Judge, or a loving husband. For it seems wonderful strange to me,
that either the fault of the one, or the pleasing conditions and fair language
of the other Wife, should so far possess the King, as that he should procure
Lady Elizabeth disinherited.
his daughter ELIZABETH to be by Act of Parliament declared illegitimate, the
matrimony contracted with both the former Queens CATHARINE and ANNE to be
pronounced invalid, and the Crown to be perpetually established on the
posterity of the third wife, or if the King had no Issue by her, that then it
should be lawful for him by Will and Testament, to transfer it on whom he
pleased. Parliaments were not then so rigid, but that they could flatter the
Prince, and condescend to his demands, though unjust, even in cases which most
nearly concerned the public Weal. But servile Fear is often times more ready
then Love, which slowly moves by apprehension of Good, as the other is quickly
forced by the apprehension of Danger.

The King marries Jane Seimour.
On the twentieth of May the King married JANE SEIMOVR Daughter of Sir JOHN
SEIMOVR, who on the nine and twentieth of May, being Whitsonday, clad in royal
habiliments, was openly showed as Queen. So that the Court of England was now
like a Stage, whereon are represented the vicissitudes of ever various Fortune.
For within one and the same month it saw Queen ANNE flourishing, accused,
condemned, executed* and another assumed into her place both of bed and honor.
The first of May (it seems) she was informed against, the second imprisoned,
the fifteenth condemned, the seventeenth deprived of her Brother and Friends
who suffered in her cause, and the nineteenth executed. On the twentieth the
King married JANE SEIMOVR, who on the nine and twentieth was publicly showed
as Queen.

Death of the Duke of Somerset the Kings natural Son.
The death of this innocent Lady God seemed to revenge in the immature end of
the Duke of Richmond the Kings only (but natural) Son, a Prince of excellent
form and endowments, wh^ deceased the two and twentieth of July, for whom the
King a long time after mourned.

Bourchier Earl of Bathe.
In the mean time on the nineteenth of July JOHN BOVRCHIER Lord Fitz-waren,
was created Earl of Bathe, whose successors in that Honor were his Son
JOHN, who begat JOHN deceased before his Father, whose Son WILLIAM is now
Earl of Bathe. At what time also THOMAS CROMWELL a poor Smiths Son, but of
a dexterous wit, whose Cromwells Honor and Dignity.
first rising was in the Family of Cardinal WOLSEY, in whose service by him
faithfully performed, he grew famous, was made Lord CROMWELL, many dignities
being also conferred on him, to the increase of his estate and honor. For
first he was Master of the Rolls, and principal Secretary of Estate: then Sir
THOMAS BOLEN Earl of Wiltshire resigning, he was made Lord Privy Seal, and
after that dignified with the unheard of Title, of The Kings Vicar general in
affairs Ecclesiastical. For the authority of the Pope being abrogated, many
businesses daily happened, which could not be disparched without the Kings
consent; who not able to undergo the burden alone, conferred this authority
granted him by Act of Parliament on CROMWELL, not for that he thought a Lay man
fitter for this dignity than a Clergy man; but because he had determined under
color and pretense thereof, to put in execution some designs, wherein the
Clergy in all probability would have moved very slowly, and against the hair.
He was therefore President in the Synod this year. Certainly a deformed
spectacle, to see an unlearned Lay man President over an assembly of sacred
Prelates, and such as for their learning England had in no preceding ages
known the like. For indeed HENRY is for that much to be commended, who would
not easily advance any one to place of government in the Church, but whom his
learning should make worthy. The beginning of Reformation.
By the authority of this Synod a book was set forth, wherein (many points of
Doctrine being proposed to be by the Curates expounded to their Parishioners)
mention was made of only theee Sacraments, Baptism, the Eucharist, and
Penance: some holy days also were abrogated, and other things pertaining to
Religion and Ecclesiastical discipline somewhat changed, wherewith many were
offended, who preferred prescript Errors before the Truth.

The same time, the Parliament assembled the fourth of January, permitted all
Monasteries, the revenues The subversion of religious houses of less note.
whereof exceeded not two hundred pounds a year, to the Kings disposal; who
causing them to be suppressed (to the number of three hundred seventy and six)
entered upon their lands, amounting to thirty two thousand pounds a year, and
selling their goods even at very low rates, (most men accompting it
sacrilegious, to set to sale the goods of the Church) raised above an hundred
thousand pounds. These things of themselves were distasteful to the vulgar
sort. Each one did as it were claim a share in the goods of the Church: for
many who being neither Monks, nor relied to Religious persons, did receive no
profit of Ecclesiastieall goods, did notwithstanding conceive, that it might
herafter come to pass, that either their children, friends, or kindred, might
obtain the places yet supplied by others, whereas of these goods once
confiscated, they could not hope that any commodity should redound unto them.
But the commiseration of so many people, to the number of at least ten
thousand, who were without any warning given, thrust out of doors, and
committed to the mercy of the world, was a more forcible cause of general
distaste. Which notwithstanding of it self sufficient; was augmented by the
malice of ill disposed and seditious persons, who in their assemblies
exaggerated these proceedings as the beginnings of greater evils; that this
was but a trial of their patience, as yet the shrubs and underwoods were but
touched, but without speedy remedy the end would be with the fall of the lofty
oaks. While these general discontents thus vented themselves in private,
CROMWELL in September sent forth certain Injunctions to the Clergy, by virtue
whereof each ^urate was to expound to his parishioners the Apostles Creed, the
Lords Prayer, the Aue Maria, and the Ten Commandments, and earnestly to
endeavor that they might learn them in the English Tongue. This drove these
Male*contents into such extremes, that the midwifry of any occasion Commotion
in Lincolneshire.
served to produce the prodigious issues of their madness. For in
Lincolneshire the Commons being assembled about the beginning of October,
concerning Subsidies to be paid to the King; as if the spirit of fury had
generally animated them, they suddenly to the number of twenty thousand took
arms, forcing certain Lords and Gentlemen to be their leaders, and to swear
to such Articles as they should propound: such as refused were either
imprisoned or put to death, as was a certain Priest Chancellor to the Bishop
of Lincoln. The King being certified of this Commotion, sent against the Rebels
with great Forces the Duke of Suffolk, and the Earls of Shrewsbury and Ken^,
either to appease or suppress them. The rumonr of an Army marching against
them, so quailed their courages, that they sent to excuse themselves unto the
King, pretending,

That their endeavors tended to no other than the safety of his Maiesly, and
good of the Realm: That ^ee having followed the advice of bad Counselors, had
lately beyond the example of any of his Ancestors, changed many things in the
estate of Commonwealth and Church: That having dispossessed the religious
Inhabitants, he had demolished many Monasteries, where the poor had daily
relief, and God was wont to be devoutly worshipped by godly men: That the
Feasts of Saints instituted many years since, were profaned by his command:
That new Tenets which the Catholic Church did abhor, were every where
preached and obtruded to the people: That now in each aged person was to be
seen the Emblem of Jgnorance, who having one foot in the grave, were feign to
betake them to their ABC Books, that they might learn new kind of Prayers
never before used by any Christians: That many unjust and pernicious Laws had
lately been enacted, and great Subsidies exacted both of the Clergy and Laity
even in the time of Peace, which were not wont to be demanded but for the
maintenance of Wars: That the Commons in general did distaste these things;
and the rather, for that they conceived them to be but trialls of their
patience, and the beginnings of more insupportable evils. Wherefore they
humbly beseeched his Majesty, whom they could not safely petition unarmed, that
the Authors of these pernicious counsels might sit no longer at the stern,
but that others who should faithfully endeavor the amendment of the aforesaid
evils, might supply their places, and that it might not be any way
prejudicial to them, that they had taken Arms, which even with the loss of
their dearest blood they were ready to employ for his Majesty's safety, and the
defense of the Realm. The King had a Spirit befitting his greatness, and
perceiving them to shrink, could not dissemble the rage he had conceived at
the presumption of this rascally rout, who durst capitulate with their
Sovereign, and seek to curb the unlimited power of Kings. Wherefore he
roughly commands them, that without delay one hundred of their company, such as
by his appointment should be made choice of, should be delivered up to his
mercy. The performance whereof if they but deferred, nothing but extremity was
to be expected. The report whereof made the Rebels disband, each one fearing
least himself might help to make up the number of this Hecatombe.

Insurrection in Yorkshire.
This blaze was yet scarce quenched, when within six days another far more
dangerous, kindled by the same accidents, bewraied it self in Yorke-shire,
where no fewer than forty thousand had gathered together, naming themselves
Fellows of the holy Pilgrimage* and that the specious pretext of Religion
might palliate their madness, they in their Ensigns on the one side portraied
the Savior of the world hanging on the Cross, on the other side the Chalice,
and the Host by them called the Body of our Lord. They surprised many of the
Nobility, as EDWARD LEE Archbishop of York, (he that writ against ERASMUS)
the Lords DARCY and HVSSEY, besides many Knights and Gentlemen, whom they
forced to be sworn to their party, whereto it is very probable some of them
were much against their wills, who notwithstanding suffered for it af^erward
upon a scaffold. Against these Rebels were sent the Dukes of Norfolk and
Su^folke, the Marquis of Excester, and the Earl of S^rewsbury, who endeavored
peaceably to compose all matters, and to bring this corrupt Body to it is former
temper without Phlebotomy* For they knew they were to deal with such a base
sort of people, to whom if they gave the overthrow, yet would their victory be
inglorious; neither could they promise themselves so happy success against the
most active and hardy bodies, and most enured to warfare of the whole Realm:
besides, despair had cast them into the extremes either of victory or death,
resolutely determining not to fly to seek an ignominious end at a gallows,
which if they escaped, they could expect no other then an accustomed miserable
life more intolerable then the most horrid torturing death. These reasons made
these Nobles unwilling to hazard a battle. But the Rebels desperate
resolution admitted no parley, wherefore by consent of both Armies the field
was appointed on the Eve of the Saints Simon and Jude. Between both Armies did
run a little Brook so shallow, that on the Eve of the battle it was in most
places passable for footmen even without danger of wetting their feet: but that
night (God abhorring the effusion of so much English blond) a rain (and that
no great one) fell, which so raised this little Brook (the like whereof never
happened there before) that it became impassable both for horse and man, which
hindered the meeting of the two Armies. This chance did so work in the
supe^stitious and giddy heads of this Rout, that they persuaded themselves, God
by this prodigy did manifestly forbid their intended battle. Wherefore pardon
being again offered (as it had formerly been) as well to the Leaders and
Gentry, as the rest who had been either authors or partakers in this tumult,
finding it confirmed by the King, with promise moreover, that he would have a
care that these things whereof they complained, should be redressed, they
laying aside their Arms, peaceably repaired each one Scarborough Castle
besieged.
to his home. They in the heat of this their fury had for six weeks
straightly besieged Scarborough Castle then kept by Sir RALPH EVERS of the
noble Family of EVERS, who without any other garrison than of his household
Servants and Tenants, and so slenderly victualled, that for twenty days
together they sustained themselves with bread and water, manfully defended it
against their furjous attempts, and kept it until the Commotion was appealed.
For which brave service the King made him leader of the Forces appointed for
the defense of the Marches toward Scotland; which he with great credit
performed, vnti^l he was in the year of our Lord 1545, unfortunately slain.

Rebellion in Irland.
Neither was the Estate of Irland more peaceable then of England. GIRALD
FITZ-GIRALD Earl of Kildare having been twelve years Lord Deputy of Irland,
was for some flight matters removed, called into England, and condemned to
death; which punishment he through the malice of WOLSEY had undergone, had not
friendship showed it is effects in the Lieutenant of the Tower, to whose custody
the Earl was committed. He having received a Mandate for the execution of the
Earl, durst hazard the displeasure of the potent Cardinal, to save his
friend. Wherefore he repaires to the King at midnight, desirous to know his
Majesty's pleasure concerning the Earl: who not only disapproved the Mandate,
but also pardoning the Earl, received him into his favor, and a few years
after restored him to his former dignity of Lord Deputy. But these garboiles
happening in England, he is for as slight suspicions as before, revoked, and
commanded to attend at the Counsel Table, where by his answers he appeared
not altogether so innocent, but that he was again committed to the Tower.
Before his departure out of Irland, the King had commanded him to substitute
some one in his place, for whose faith and diligence he would undertake. He
had a Son named THOMAS, little above twenty years old, a haughty and stout
young Lord, very ingenious, and exceedingly affecting his Father. To this
Son, as to another PHAETON he commits the guidance of his Chariot.

-- Sed quae non viribus istis
Munera convenient, nec tam puerilibus annis,
which indeed proved fatal to them both, and to almost the whole Family. For
no sooner was the Earl imprisoned, but report (raised as is coniectured by his
enemies) beheaded him, threatening the like to his offspring and brethren,
whose destruction the King had most certainly resolved. The author of this
report was uncertain, and the young Lord as rashly credulous, who taking
Arms, solicited the aid of his friends against the Kings injustice. He had
then five Uncles brethren to his Father, three of which at first dissuaded him
from these violent proceedings. But passion had excluded reason; and they at
length associate themselves with their Nephew, with whom they were involved in
the same ruin. Many others flocking unto him, he had suddenly raised a great
Army, wherewith marching up and down the Country, he robbed and killed them
who refused to obey him. And among the rest, he permitted the Archbishop of
Dublin to be murdered in his sight. The poor Earl already afflicted with a
palsy, was so stricken to the heart with the news of this tumult, that he
but a few days survived the knowledge of his unhappiness. The King leuying
great Forces, quickly curbed the unruly Youth, and after some months forced
him to yield. His Uncles were either taken, or willingly submitted themselves.
All of them were sent to London, and there brought to their answer. There goes
a Story, that those three Uncles who endeavored to restrain their headstrong
Nephew, did half presume on the Kings clemency, until in the passage
demanding of the Master the name of the Ship wherein they failed; and
understanding it was called The Cow, bethinking themselves of a certain
Prophecy, That five Sons of an Earl should in the belly of a Cow be carried
into England never to return; they forthwith despaired of pardon. The event
approved the skill of the Wizard: For some enemies to this noble Family
incensing the King, by suggesting, that he should never expect to settle
Jrland as long as any of the race of the FITZ-GIRALDS remained, easily
prevailed with the King for their execution. In reguard whereof I cannot blame
GIRALD the Brother of THOMAS, who trusting not to the weak plea of his
innocence, then sick of the Measles as he was, sought by making an escape, to
set himself out of the reach of malice. Being therefore packed up in a bundle
of clothes, he was privately conveied to one of his Friends, with whom he
lurked until he found an opportunity of escaping into France, where he was
for a time favorably received by the King. But long he could not be there
secure, the Agents of HENRY pressing hard, That by the League all Fugitives
were to be delivered: wherefore he went thence into the Netherlands; where
finding himself in no less danger then before, he fled into Italy to
REIGNALD POOLE, who maintained and used him very nobly, and at length procured
him to be restored to his Country and the Honors of his Ancestors.

Cardinal Poole.
The mention of POOLE falls fit with our time, he being this year on the two
and twentieth of December by Pope PAVL the Fourth chosen into the College of
Cardinals. He was near of blood to the King, who first bestowed learning on
him, and afterward finding his modesty and excellent disposition, conferred on
him the Deanery of Excester. But travailing afterward to foraine Universities,
he was in Jtaly quickly bewitched with the sorceries of the Circe of Rome,
insomuch that he became a deadly enemy to his Posterer, his Prince, his
Kinsman. For when he would neither allow of the divorce from the Lady
CATHARINE, nor the abrogating of the authority of the Pope, and openly
condemned other the Kings proceedings in Ecclesiastical affairs, refusing
also to obey the King who commanded him home; HENRY disposed of his Deanery, and
withdrew the large stipend which he had yearly allowed him. The Pope therefore
intending to make use of this man as an engine of battery against the King (and
being induced by the commendations of Cardinal CONTAREN) bestowed on him a
Cardinals Hat, and was thereby assured of him, who had of late been suspected
to have been seasoned with the Leaven of purer Doctrine. But of that hereafter.

Anno Dom. 1537. Reg 29.
THe accidents of this year were tragical, and England the Scene of blood and
deaths of many famous Personages. On the third of Rebels executed.
February was THOMAS FITZ-GIRALD beheaded for treason, his five Uncles hanged,
drawn, and quartered, and their members fixed over the gates of London. The
same month, NICHOLAS MVSGRAVE and THOMAS GILBY, for that stirring a new
rebellion, they had besieged Carlisle, were executed.

The tenth of March was JOHN PASLEW Bachelour of Divinity and Abbot of Whalley,
put to death at Lancaster, and with him one EASTGATE a Monk of the same place*
and three days after them another Monk called HAYDOCKE was hanged at Whalley.
The Abbots of Sauley and Woburne with two Monks make the like end at Woburne.
And a little after, one Doctor MACARELL, another Abbot, the Vicar of Louth, two
other Priests, and seven Lay men. All these, for as much as I can any way
collect, were condemned for having been especial furtherers of the late
rebellions. But the Chieftaines and nobler sort were reserved until June, at
what time the Lords Darcey and Hussy were beheaded, the one at Lincoln, the
other at London; Sir ROBERT CONSTABLE, Sir THOMAS PERCY, Sir FRANCIS BIGOT, Sir
STEPHEN HAMILTON, and Sir JOHN BVLMER were likewise put to death: MARGARET Lady
to Sir JOHN BVLMER was burned at London: WILLIAM THVRST Abbot of Fountains,
ADAM SVDBVRY Abbot of Gervaux, the Abbot of Rivers, WOULD Prior of Birlington,
GEORGE LVMLEY, NICHOLAS TEMPEST Esquires, and ROBERT ASK, with many others, as
having been partakers in the late Insurrection, did likewise partake in
punishment for the same. And for a Commotion in Somersetshire in April were
three scorecondemned, whereof only fourteen suffered.

Cardinal Poole writes against the King.
But least any one may wonder at these severe and unheard of courses taken
against the Clergy, I think it not amiss to relate what SLEIDAN writes of
Cardinal POOLE, who set forth one or two Books, which as yet lurking at Rome,
about this time were spread abroad in Germany, and came at length to the Kings
hands. Wherein directing his style to the King, he sharply rep^chendeth him
for taking upon him the title of Head of the Church, which only belonged to
the Pope, who is CHRIST'S Vicar on earth, etc. Then he proceeds to the matter
of his Divorce, alleging, That he neither out of terror of conscience, nor
fear of God, (as he pretended) but out of lust and blind love had forsaken
the Lady CATHARINE his Wife, whom his Brother Prince ARTHVR a weak young man,
and but fourteen years old, had left a Virgin: That it was not lawful for
him to marry ANNE BOLEN, whose Sister he had before used as his Concubine: And
that he himself had confessed to the Emperor and others, That he found the
Lady CATHARINE a Maid. He also eagerly reproves him for seeking the opinions
of the Universities concerning his former marriage, and triumphing in his own
wickedness, when some of them had pronounced it incestuous: and that he might
be ashamed to prefer the Daughter of a Whore, before one that was legitimate,
and a most Virtuous Princess. Then speaking of the death of the Bishop of
Rochester and Sir THOMAS MORE, he detests his cruelty. He then rips up what
tyranny he had exercised over his Subjects of all degrees, in what miseries
he had plunged this flourishing Realm, what dangers he incurred from the
Emperor, in reguard of the injury offered to his Aunt, and the overthrow of
Religion, and that he could not expect any aid either from his own or
foreign Nations, who had deserved so ill of the Christian Commonwealth. After
this, he whets on the Emperor to revenge the dishonor of his Family;
affirming that Turcisme (meaning the Protestant Religion) had found
entertainment in England and Germany. And after many bitter reproves, he
invites HENRY to repentance, persuading him, That for these evils there was no
other remedy, but to return to the bosom of the Church, in the defense
whereof (a most glorious example) he had made use not only of his Sword, but
his Pen also.

Neither did the Cardinal only by Book, but by other personal endeavors
manifest his spleen against the King, being sent Ambassador from the Pope to
the French, under color of reconciling him with the Emperor; but his chief
errant was, to combine them both against HENRY. Whereof he having
intelligence, did by his Agent earnestly solicit FRANCIS, That in reguard of
their mutual amity, he would cause POOLE to be apprehended, as guilty of
high Treason, and sent to him, where he should undergo the punishment due
therefore. But because Religion and the Law of Nations had been violated in
betraying any (especially the Popes) Ambassador, the French could not yield to
the Kings request: but to show that he would administer no cause of offense,
he refused to admit of his Embassy, and commanded him speedily to depart out
of his Dominions.

HERCULES stature might be guessed at by the proportion of his foot; and by
this one man's endeavors, HENRY was taught what, if need were, he was to
expect of his Clergy. So that he was easily induced as any of them offended,
to send him to his grave, for that a dead Lion biteth not: And this course
being taken with his professed enemies, the fear of the like punishment would
secure him of the rest.

The birth of Prince Edward.
On the twelfth of October, the Queen having long suffered the throws of a
most difficult travail, and such a one, wherein either the Mother or the
Infant must necessarily perish, out of her womb was ripped Prince EDWARD, who
after succeeded his Father in the Crown. The Queen only surviving two days,
died on the fourteenth of October, and on the twelfth of November was with
great pomp buried at Windsore in the middle of the Quire, on whose Tomb is
inscribed this Epitaph: Phoenix IANA iacet nato Phoenice; dolendum,
Secula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas.


Here a Phoenix heth, whose death
To another Phoenix gave breath:
It is to be lamented much,
The World at once never knew two such.
On the eighteenth of October the Infant was created Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Seimour Earl of Hertford.
Earl of Chester: and with him his Uncle EDWARD SEIMOVR brother to the
deceased Queen, Lord Beauchampe, and Earl of Hereford; which Honors only
(and not those afterward Fitz-William Earl of Southampton. Powlet and Russell
rise.
conferred on him) he left to his posterity. WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS Lord
Admiral, was made Earl of Southampton. Then also WILLIAM POWLET and JOHN
RVSSELL began their races in the lists of Honor; POWLET being made Treasurer,
and RVSSELL Comptroller of the Kings Household, and both sworn of the Privy
Counsel. Neither was here their non vltra, the one being afterward raised to
Lord Treasurer of England and Marquis of Winchester, the other to Earl of
Bedford, wherein he dying in the year 1554, his Son FRANCIS that pious old
man, and liberal releiuer of the Poor, succeeded him, who at the very instant
of his death lost his Son FRANCIS slain by a Scot Anno 1587. Which FRANCIS
was Father to EDWARD Earl of Bedford, and brother to WILLIAM by King JAMES
created Lord RVSSELL. POWLET living to be a very decrepit old man, had to his
Successor his Nephew by his Son WILLIAM, named also WILLIAM the sole Marquis
of England.

And to end this year with death, as it began, THOMAS HOWARD youngest son to
the Duke of Norfolk, having been fifteen months imprisoned for affiancing
himself without the Kings consent to MARGARET Daughter to ARCHIBALD DOVGLAS
Earl of Angus and Lady MARGARET the Kings Sister, on the first day of
November, to the unspeakable good of this Island deceased in the Tower. For
this MARGARET being after married to MATTHEW Earl of Lenox, had by him HENRY
the Father of King JAMES of sacred memory, the most happy Vnitor of divided
Britain.

Anno Dom. 1538. Reg. 30.
IT is at length after many ages resolved, That through the superstitious abuse
of Images, God The abuse of Images restrained.
was robbed of his due honor. The King much prone to Reformation (specially if
any thing might be gotten by it) thought it fit to remove this stumbling
block, and the rather, for that he conceived his Treasury would be thereby
supplied. There were some Images of more especial fame, and Shrines of reputed
Saints, Whereunto Pilgrimages were made from the farthest parts of the
Kingdom, nay even from foraine Countries also: the Oblations whereto were so
many and so rich, that they not only suffised for the maintenance of Priests
and Monks, but also to the heaping up of incredible wealth. The Shrine Beckets
shrine demolish*d.
of THOMAS BECKET Archbishop of Canterbury was covered with plates of gold, and
laden with gifts of inestimable value. The blind zeal of those and former
times, had decked it with gemmes, chains of gold of great weight, and Unions.
pearls of that large size, which in our Language find no proper term. This
Tomb was razed, and his bones found entire; in steed of whose head the Monks
usually obtruded the skull of some other, peradventure better deserving then
did their supposed Martyr. The spoil of this Monument, wherein nothing was
meaner then gold, filled two chests so full, that each of them required eight
strong men for the portage. Among the rest was a stone of especial luster
called the Royal of France, offered by LEWIS the Seventh, King of France, in
the year 1179, together with a great massy cup of gold, at what time he also
bestowed an annuity on the Monks of that Church, of an hundred tons of wine.
This stone was after ward highly prised by the King, who did continually wear
it on his thumb. ERASMUS speaks much of the magnificence of this Monument, as
also of the Image of The Image of our Lady of Walsingham.
our Lady of Walsingham, both which he had seen and admired. This Image was
also stripped of whatsoever worthy thing it had, the like being also done in
other the like places, and the statues and bones of the dead dug up and
burned, that they might be no further cause of superstition. Among the rest of
these condemned Images there was a Crucifex in South Wales, called of the
Inhabitants, Darvell Gatharen, concerning which there was a kind of prophecy,
That it should one day fire a whole Forest. Friar Forest makes good a Prophecy.
It chanced that at this time one Doctor FOREST a Friar Observant, who had
formerly taken the Oath of Supremacy, was upon his relapse apprehended and
condemned of Treason and Heresy: For this Friar a new Gallows was erected,
whereon he was hanged by the arm pits, and underneath him a fire made of this
Image, wherewith he was burned, and so by his death made good the Prophecy.

Great was the Treasure which the King raised of the spoils of Churches and
Religious Houses. But whether the guilt of sacrilege (adhering like a
consuming canker) made this ill gotten treasure unprofitable, or that he found
he had need of greater supplies to withstand the dangers that threatened him
from abroad, not content with what he had already corraded, he casts his eyes
on the wealth of the Abbeyes that had escaped the violence of the former
tempest: and not expecting (as he deemed it) a needless Act of Parliament,
seizes on the rest of the Abbeyes and Religious Houses of the Realm. And
first he begins with that at Canterbury, dedicated to AUGUSTINE the English
Apostle, Saint Augustines as Canterbury,
who was there interred. This being the first Fruits of Christianity among this
Nation (I mean the Saxons, for the Britans had been watered with streams
derived even from the Fountains Apostolic, far more pure then were those
later overflowes of AUGUSTINE) he invades, expells the Monks, and divides
their means between his Exchequer and Courtiers. Battle Abbey built by
WILLIAM Battle Abbey,
the Conqueror in the same place where by the overthrow of HARALD the last
Saxon King he purchased this Kingdom to himself and his posterity, did also
run the same fortune. So that it is not so much to be wondered at, if those at
Merton in Surrey, and others suppressed.
Stratford in Essex, Lewis in Sussex, the Charterhouse, Blacke-Friers,
Gray-Friers, and White-Friers in London, felt the fury of the same Whirlewinde.

At the same time among many other Reformations in this Church, that wholesome
Iniunction was one, whereby the Bible translated and printed in The Bible
translated.
English, was commanded to be kept in every parish Church, and to be
conveniently placed where any that were so desirous, might read therein.

They who were more eagerly addicted to the superstition of their Ancestors,
brooked not these proceedings, among whom were chief HENRY The Marquis of
Excester and others beheaded.
COVRTNEY Marquis of Excester, HENRY Lord Mountague brother to Cardinal POOLE,
and Sir EDWARD NEVILL brother to the Lord ABERGAVENNY, who on the fifth day of
November, upon the accusation of Sir GEOFFREY POOLE Brother to the Lord
MOVNTAGVE, were committed to the Tower, for having maintained intelligence with
the Cardinal, and conspired the Kings destruction: for which they were on the
third of the ensuing January, the Lord AVDLEY sitting high Steward for the
time, arraigned and condemned, and on the ninth of the same month beheaded.
Two Priests named CROFTS and COLINS, with one HOLLAND a Mariner, as partakers
in the same guilt, were hanged and quartered at Tiburne. This COVRTNEY was by
the Fathers side of a very noble descent, deriving himself from the blood
Royal of France, by HVGH COVRTNEY created Earl of Devonshire by EDWARD the
Third. But by his mother he far more nearly participated of the Blood Royal
of England, being Son to CATHARINE Daughter to EDWARD the Fourth, who was
Sister to Queen ELIZABETH the Mother of King HENRY. The King l^ng favored him
as his Cousen germane, but at length in regard of his near Alliance to the
Crown, became jealous of his Greatness, whereof he had lately given more
then sufficient testimony, in suddenly arming some thousands to oppose against
the Yorke-Shire Rebels. The consideration whereof made HENRY gladly entertain
any occasion to cut off this Noble Gentleman.

Lambert convented and burned.
About the same time JOHN LAMBERT a religious and learned man was also
condemned, the King himself sitting Judge. This LAMBERT being accused of
Heresy, appealed from his Ordinary to the King; who fearing least he should be
accounted a Lutheran, resolved upon this occasion to manifest to the World how
he stood affected in Religion. To this end summoning as many of the Bishops
and other Peers of the Realm as could conveniently be present, he caused
Scaffolds to be built in Westminster Hall, from whence the people might be
spectators and witnesses of the Acts of that day. On the right hand of the King
were seated the Bishops, and behind them the Judges and chief Lawyers of the
Realm: at his left hand sat the Temporal Lords, and behind them the
Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber. LAMBERT being brought to the Bar, DAY Bishop of
Chichester, by the Kings appointment made an Oration, wherein he declared the
cause of this meeting; saying,

That LAMBERT having been accused of Heresy before his Ordinary, had made his
Appeal unto the King, as if expecting from his Majesty more favor for Heresy,
then from the Bishop. So that he now found it be true, whereof he had been often
informed, That the credulous People were verily persuaded, that his Majesty
abhorring the Religion of his Ancestors, had embraced the new Tenets lately
broached in Germany. True it was, the tyranny of the Court of Rome had been
troublesome to his Predecessors, but to Him intolerable, and therefore had He
shaken it off: That Religion might no longer patronize Jdlenesse, He had
expelled Monks, who were no other then Drones in the Beehive: He had taken
away the idolatrous worship of Jmages, had permitted to his Subjects the
reading and knowledge of Gods Word, hither to prohibited by the Church of Rome,
least their wiles and cousenages should be discovered: and had made reformation
in some other things peradventure of less moment, which no man could deny,
would much redound to the good both of Church and Commonwealth. But as for
other things, He had determined there should be no change in the Church during
his Reign: Which his Resolution He now intended publicly to manifest His
Majesty's desire was, That the Delinquent renouncing his Errors, should suffer
himself to be received into the bosom of the Church: to which end partly, and
partly to show that He thirsted not after any ones blood, out of his clemency
He had procured the presence of those Grave and Learned men (meaning the
Bishops) who by Authority and force of Arguments should if it were possible,
bring back this straied Sheep into the Fold of the Church. But if he
perversely oppugned the Truth, and all persuasions notwithstanding, became
immovable, He would by this man's exemplary punishment make known, what
others should in the like Case expect, and instruct the Judges and Magistrates,
what they ought to do therein. The Bishop having ended, the King demanded of
LAMBERT, What he thought of the presence of CHRIST'S body in the Sacrament?
Whose answer being little to the Kings liking, reasons and arguments were
produced, as if a Disputation in the Schools, and not a Iusticiary Session had
been appointed. Five whole hou^es this Disputation lasted, the King being as
it were Prior Opponent, Archbishop CRANMER also, and nine other Bishops
forcibly pressing upon poor LAMBERT. But neither this course, nor the battery
of threats and terrors prevailing against his constancy, the King commanded the
Lord CROMWELL to pass sentence of condemnation upon him, by virtue whereof
within a day or two after he was burned. Neither this dreadful Sentence, nor
his torturing death did any way appale him, which he so little reguarded, that
going to his death, he merrily took his break^ast with some Gentlemen into
whose company he chanced, as if he had been going to some sportfull game,
rather then his execution.

Anno Dom. 1539. Reg. 31.
ON the third of March, Sir NICHOLAS CAREW Knight of the Garter, and Master of
the Horse, was beheaded for being of Counsel with the Marquis of Excester,
and the Lord MOVNTAGVE. And on the eight and twentieth of April a Parliament
began, wherein Margaret Countess of Salisbury condemned.
MARGARET Countess of Salisbury Mother to Cardinal POOLE and Daughter to
GEORGE Duke of Clarence who was brother to EDWARD the Fourth, was attainted of
high Treason, and condemned without hearing, and with her the Cardinal her
Son, GERTRVDE Widow to the Marquis of Excester, Sir ADRIAN FORTESCVE, and Sir
THOMAS DINGLEY. DINGLEY and FORTESCVE were beheaded on the tenth of July, and
the Countess being then aged threescore and ten years, suffered two years
after.

The subversion of Religious Houses
In the same Parliament it was inacted, That the King might erect new
Episcopal Seas in oportune places of the Realm. For the performance whereof,
and of some other things no less specious, the late dissolution of those
Abbeyes whereon the King seized, was confirmed, and all Religious Houses as yet
vnsuppressed, were granted to the King for ever. Upon notice whereof, many
either out of guilt of conscience, or desirous to purchase the Kings favor,
surrendered their charge even before they were required. And first of all the
Abbot and Convent of Saint Albans (the first Abbot of the Realm, as Saint
ALBAN was the first Martyr: which Honor was conferred on this House by Pope
ADRIAN the Fourth, whose Father had long lived a Monastical life therein)
forsake their rich Abbey seated near the ruins of Verolamium once a great and
ancient City, and leave it to the mercy of the Courtiers. Which dereliction
afforded matter of example to many other, few enjoying that security of
conscience, that they durst lay claim to their own. Only three were found,
whose innocence made them so regardlesse of threats, promises, or reward, that
they could never be induced to betray the goods of their Churches to the
merciless impiety of sacrilegious Harpyes: which three were I^OHN BECH Abbot
of Colchester in Essex, HVGH Some Abbots executed.
FARINGDON Abbot of the Abbey of Reding, built by HENRY the First for the place
of his Sepulture* and RICHARD WHITING Abbot of Glastonbury one of the
stateliest and antientest Glastonbury.
Monasteries of Europe, being first builded by JOSEPH of Arimathea, who buried
the body of our Savior CHRIST, and is himself there interred, as is also
(beside some Saxon Kings) that most renowned King ARTHVR, whose glorious Acts,
had they been undertaken by a fit Historian, would have ranked him among the
ancient Worthies without the help of a fabulous Romance. Against these men
therefore, other courses not availing, that one one was taken of administering
the Oath of Supremacy, which they refusing, are as enemies to the Estate
condemned of high Treason. BECH was hanged at Colchester, and FARINGDON with
two Priests named RVG and OGNION at Reding. WHITING a man very aged, and by
reason thereof doting, scarce perceiving that he had been condemned, returning
from the place of Judgment (which was in the Bishops Palace at Wells distant
from Glastonbury four miles) with conceit that he was restored to his Abbey,
was suddenly rapt up to the top of the Tor (a hill that surveies the country
round about) and without leave of bidding his Convent farewell, which he
earnestly begged, was presently hanged, the stain of ingratitude sticking fast
to the authors of this speedy execution, of whom the poor Abbot is reported to
have better deserved. With WHITING were two Monks also executed named ROGER
JAMES and JOHN THORN, their bodies all drawn and quartered, and set up in
diverse places of the Country. The punishment of these few so terrified the
rest, that without more ado they permitted all to the Kings disposal. The
number of those that were suppressed is not easily cast: But the names of the
chiefest, and whose Abbots had voices among the Peers in the higher House of
Parliament, are these:

S. PETER'S in Westminster, A catalogue of the Abbots who had voices among the
Peers.
Saint MARY'S in York, S. ALBANS, S. Edmundsbury, Teuksbury, S. BENETS of
Hulme. Reading, Berdney, Battle, Shrewsbury, Winchcomb, Crowland, Hide by
Winchester, Abingdon, Cirencester, Euesham, Waltham, Gloucester, Walmesbury,
Ramsey, Thorney.

Saint AUGUSTINES in Canterbury, Saint JOHN'S in Colchester, Selbey, Coventrey,
Peterborough, Tavestocke.

The King, that he might some way supply the want of the suffrages* of so many
learned and wise men in the Parliament House, as also that of so great a prey
he might consecrate (if not the tenth to HERCULES, at least) some Part to God,
according to his promise erected some new Bishoprics: whereof one New
Bishoprics erected.
was at Westminster, a place so near and contiguous to London, that it might
rather seem a part of the Suburbs thereof, than a distinct City. But a City it
is, and so ennobled with many stately monuments, that for beauty it contendeth
with most in Christendom: In it are the chief Seat of the Prince, and Palaces
of the Nobility, the chief seats of Justice in the Land, the most magnificent
Church, wherein are interred most of our Kings and Nobles, whose sumptuous
Monuments render it unparalleled even by the world. Another was at Oxford in the
College founded by Cardinal WOLSEY. The rest at Peterborough, Bristoll,
stoll, Chester, and Gloucester. Westminster was by Queen MARY again reduced to
an Abbey, and furnished with Monks of Saint BENETS Order: whom Queen
ELIZABETH again expelled, and converted the revenues of the Bishopric to the
maintenance of Scholars and other pious uses. As for the other Seas, they
remain to this day. From those ancient Cathedral Churches wherein Monks were
seated, nothing was taken away: only Cannons were placed there in steed of
Monks, as likewise in the Cathedral Churches of the new erected Bishoprics.
The Churches, wherein anciently Cannons and Prebendaries were instituted, are

Jn England,
York, Wells, London, Lichfield, Lincoln, Hereford, Sarisbury, Chichester.
Excester,

Jn Wales,
S. DAVID'S, Bangor, Landaf, S. ASAPH.

The Cathedralls founded with Monks, were
CAnterbury, Worcester, Winchester, Rochester, Ely, Duresme, Norwich, Carlisle.

The new Seas where primarily were Abbeyes, are
OXford, Chester, Bristoll, Peterborough. Gloucester,

So there are six and twenty Bishoprics within this Realm, and in every
Cathedral, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, and other Ministers, as also a Dean^ who
governes the rest, unless it be in S. David's, where the Chanter; and Landaf,
where the Archdeacon is Head of the Chapter.

These things thus ordered, the King still jealous least it should be conceived
that he had forsaken the Religion of his Fathers, began to thunder out against
the maintainers of new Tenets, and much against CRANMERS will, by Parliament
enacted the Law of the Six Articles, the sum whereof was,

1 The Law of the Six Articles.
That if any one should deny the True and Real presence of the Body of CHRIST
in the Sacrament, or should maintain, That the substance of Bread and Wine
remained after the words of Consecration pronounced by the Priest, he should be
burned as an Heretic.

2 If any should deny the Sacrament to be sufficiently administered under one
Species only:

3 Or should hold it lawful for Priests to be married, but much more he that
having entered into holy Orders, should presume to take a Wife:

4 Or that Chastity vowed upon mature deliberation was not to be kept:

5 Or that private Masses ought not be celebrated in the Church of England, or
else where:

6 Or that Auricular Confession was not expedient; he should for his errors
undergo loss of life by hanging.

Latimer and Schaxton resign their Bishoprics.
These Laws like those of Draco written in blood, were the destruction of
multitudes, and silenced those who had been hitherto furtherers of Reformation.
Among whom HVGH LATIMER and NICHOLAS SCHAXTON Bishops, the one of Worcester,
the other of Salisbury, were remarkable, who that they might quietly enjoy
themselves, the Parliament being scarce dissolved, did both on one day, viz.
the first of July, resign their Bishoprics. LATIMER (who for the freedom of
his conscience could as willingly resign his life, as he did this rich
Bishopric, being burned for it in Queen MARY'S reign) after his Resignation
taking off his Rochet, being a merry conceited man, with a little leap lifted
himself from the ground, saying, That he felt himself much more light and
quick, now he had freed himself of so great a burden.

HENRY (in reguard of his wiving disposition) had long continued a Widdower.
And that he should at length marry, the consideration of his Estate being
surrounded with Enemies passionate in the Popes cause, persuaded him. Wherein
he also gave ear to CROMWELL, who advised him to combine with those Estates,
whom the burden of the Popes tyranny had forced to the same courses and like
fears. By whose assistance he might countermine the secret practices of Rome.
A counsel without doubt good and befitting the times, but producing the
effects of Ill ones, proving (as is thought) Pernicious to the Giver. For the
The arrival of certain Princes of Germany in England, for the treatise of a
Match between the King and Lady Anne of Cleve.
treatise of such a Match, in September came into England FREDERICK Duke and
Elector of Saxony, FREDERICK Duke of Bavaria, OTHO HENRY Count Palatine of
Rhine, and the Chancellor of the Duke of Cleve, with some others, who were for
eight days royally entertained by the King at Windsore, where the marriage
with ANNE Sister to the Duke of Cleve being concluded, they returned to their
own Countries.

This year died MARGARET Queen of Scotland, Sister to King HENRY, who was
buried at the Charterhouse in the town of S. JOHN, necre the Tomb of JAMES
the First.

Anno Dom. 1540. Reg. 32.
The King marries the Lady of Cleve.
ON the Eve of the Circumcision the Lady ANNE of Cleve destinated to the Kings
bed, arrived at Dover, was on the third of January triumphantly received at
Greenwich, and on the feast of the Epiphany ritely married to the King.

Cromwell created Earl of Essex, and within three months after beheaded.
On the twelfth of March HENRY BOVRCHIER Earl of Essex, the antientest Earl
of the Realm, thrown by an unruly young horse which he sought to break,
brake his neck: by whose death the Inheritance was devolved to his daughter,
and from her deceasing without Issue, to the Family of DEVREVX, which Family in
reguard of their claim by descent, was by Queen ELIZABETH advanced to the
Earldom of Essex. But in the mean time CROMWELL (yet chief in the Kings
favor) was on the eighteenth of April created Earl of Essex.

And here behold the frailty of humane affairs. The current of few years had
from very mean beginnings brought CROMWELL to the height of honor, insomuch
that his happiness was admired by all, envied by many: But Fortune intending a
Tragedy, he is unexpectedly apprehended sitting at the Counsel Table, and
committed to the Tower, where he continued until his execution. For in this
Parliament begun the twelfth of April, he is accused of Treason and Heresy,
without being brought to his answer condemned, and on the twenty eighth of July
beheaded. This King may well be censured of cruel inconstancy, who could so
easily dispense with the death of those whom he had admitted to intimate
familiarity, and made use of their counsels and endeavors; as if he had
advanced them to no other end, but to depresse them. WOLSEY had his turn,
CROMWELL succeeds, whose sudden downfall there want not those who attribute to
Gods Justice inflicted on him for the Sacrilege (whereof he was reported to
be the Author) committed in the subversion of so many Religious Houses. And
indeed even they who confess the rowsing of so many unprofitable Epicures out
of their dens, and the abolishing of Superstition, wherewith the Divine
Worship had by them been polluted, to have been an act of singular Justice
and Piety; do notwithstanding complain of the loss of so many stately
Churches dedicated to Gods service, the goods whereof were no otherwise
employed, then for the satisfaction of private men's covetousness: and although
many have abused the Veil of Religion, yet was that Monastical life
instituted according to the pious example of ancient Fathers, that they who
found themselves unfit for the execution of worldly affairs, (as many such
there are) might in such their voluntary retirements spend their days in
Divine Writings or Meditations: and are verily persuaded, that for the taking
away of these things, God was offended both with the King and CROMWELL. But
SLEIDAN peradventure comes nearer the matter, touching the immediate cause of
his death.

Lady Anne of Cleve repudiated.
About this time (says he) the King of England beheadeth THOMAS CROMWELL,
whom he had from fortunes answerable to his low parentage, raised to great
Honors; repudiates the Lady ANNE of Cleve, and marries CATHARINE HOWARD
Daughter to the Lord EDMOND HOWARD, who was Brother to the Duke of Norfolk.
CROMWELL had been procurer of the Match with ANNE. But the King loving
CATHARINE, is thought to have been persuaded by her to make away CROMWELL,
whom she suspected to be a Remora to her advancement. The actions of Kings
are not to be sifted too nearly, for which we are charitably to presume they
have reasons, and those inscrutable.

But let us see the procesle of this divorce. Six months this conjugal band
lasted firm without scruple, the King and Queen giving daily testimonies of
their mutual love. On the twentieth of June the Queen is willed to remove
from London, (where the King stayed by reason of the Parliament) to Richmond, a
place pretended in reguard of the situation and air, to be more for her
health.

On the sixth of July reasons are proposed by certain Lords purposely sent to
the lower House of Parliament, demonstrating the invalidity of the Kings
marriage with the Lady ANNE, so that it was lawful for them both to marry
where they pleased. The same reasons are alleged in the Convocation house, and
generally approved. Whereupon the Queen also (whether forced or willing)
consenting, the Parliament pronounced the marriage void.

What the allegations were is uncertain. Some relate disability by reason of
some defects to be objected to her, which seems the more probable, for that in
her Letters wherein she submitted her self to the judgment and determination
of the Parliament, she affirmed that the King never knew her carnally. Whether
for this, or for that Nature having not over liberally endowed her wtih beauty;
but a private woman she became, and as such (not enduring to return to her
friends with dishonor) she lived upon some lands assigned her by the King,
(who always used her respectively) until the fifteenth of July Annv 15^7, at
what time she ended her discontented life, and lies buried at Westminster on
the South side of the Quire in a Tomb not yet finished.

Scarce had the resolution of the Convocation House, and the Decree concerning
it passed both Houses, when this lusty Widower with as good success as before,
marries his fifth Wife CATHARINE The King marries Catharine Howard.
HOWARD. When their nuptials were celebrated is not known, but on the eighth
of August in Royal habiliments she showed her self as Queen.

The fautors of Reformation were much dismayed at the sudden vnqueening of
ANNE: fearing (not without cause) least it proving occasion of enmity between
HENRY and the Princes of Germany, he must of necessity rely on them who
misliked our divorce from Rome. But the King proceeding still in the course he
had begun, like a torrent bearing all before him, not only caused three
Anabaptists to be burned, but also many sincere Professors of the Truth* for
not subscribing to the Six Articles. Among whom three Divines were most
eminent, viz. ROBERT BARNES Doctor of Divinity, Protestants and Papists alike
persecuted.
THOMAS GERARD, and WILLIAM IEROM Bachelors, who by Parliament (unheard) being
condemned for Heresy, were on the one and thirtieth committed to the ^orments
of the merciless fire. At the same time and place three other Doctors of
Divinity, viz. POWELL, ABIE, and FETHRSTON were hanged for denying the Kings
Supremacy* the sight whereof made a French man cry out in these words, Deus
bone, quomodo hic vivunt gentes? Suspenduntur Papistae, comburuntur,
Antipapistae; Good God, how do the People make a shift to live here, where both
Papists are hanged; and Antipapists The Prior of Dancaster and fox others
hanged.
burned? In August the Prior of Dancaster and six other for defending the
Institution of the life Monastical (a crime now become as capital as the
greatest) being also condemned by Act of Parliament, were hanged.

The Lord Hungerford hanged.
The same day with the Lord CROMWELL, the Lord HVNGERFORD was also beheaded. As
their causes were diverse, so died they alike differently. CROMWELLS conscience
quietly welcomed Death: to the other suffering for that most unnatural crime
of Sodomy, Death presented it self with that horror, that the apprehension of
it made him as impatient, as if he had been seized with a frenzy.

Anno Dom. 1541. Reg 33.
Beginnings of a Commotion in Yorke-shire.
THe late Yorke-Shire Rebellion was not so thoroughly quenched, but it again
began to show it self; but by the punishment of the chief Incendiaries it was
quickly suppressed. Fourteen of the Conspirators were put to death; LEIGH a
Gentlenan, THORNTON a Yeoman, and TATTERSHALL a Cloatheir, at London: Sir JOHN
NEVILL and ten others at York. Which Commotion whether raised in favor of
Religion, or being suspected that it had any abettors beyond the Seas, is
thought to have hastened the death of the long sithence condemned Countess of
Sarisbury, who on the seven and twentieth of May was beheaded in the Tower.

Lord Leonard Gray beheaded.
The eight and twentieth of June the Lord LEONARD GRAY Deputy of Irland, did on
the Tower hill publicly undergo the like punishment. He was Son to the
Marquis of Dorset, near allied to the King, and a brave martial man, having
often done his Country good service. But for that he had suffered his Nephew
GERARD FITZ-GERARD (brother to THOMAS lately executed) proclaimed enemy to the
Estate, to make an escape, and in revenge of some conceived private injury had
invaded the lands of the Kings friends, he was arraigned and condemned, ending
his life with a resolution befitting a brave Soldier.

The Lord Dacres hanged.
The same day THOMAS FINES Lord Dacres of the South, with some other Gentlemen,
for the death of one BVSBRIG slain by them in a fray, was hanged at Tiburne.
Many in reguard of his youth and Noble Disposition, much lamented his loss,
and the Kings inexorable rigor.

Anno Dom. 1542. Reg. 34.
BY this time HENRY began to find the convenience of his change, having
married one as fruitful in evil, as his former wives were in good: who could
not contain her self within the sacred limits of a Royal marriage bed, but
must be supplied with more vigorous and active bodies, then was that of the now
growing aged and unweildy King. Alas, what is this momentary pleasure, that for
it we dare hazard a treble life, of Fame, of Body, of Soul? Heaven may be
merciful, but Fame will censure, and the enraged Queen Catharine beheaded.
Lion is implacable: such did this Queen find him, who procured not only her
to be condemned by Act of Parliament begun the sixteenth of January, and with
her the Lady JANE Wife to the Viscount ROCHFORT, (behold the thrift of the
Divine Justice, which made her an Instrument of the punishment of her own and
others wickedness, who by her calumnies had betrayed her own Husband and his
Sister the late beheaded Queen ANNE) but two others also long since executed,
FRANCIS DERHAM and THOMAS CVLPEPPER, in their double condemnation scarce
sufficiently punished. DERHAM had been too familiar with her in her virgin
time, and having after attained to some public offices in Irland, was by her
now Queen sent for and entertained as a household servant, in which time
whether he revived his former familiarity is not manifest. But CVLPEPPER was
so plainly convict of many secret meetings with the Queen by the means of the
Lady ROCHFORT, that the adultery was questionles. For which the Queen and the
Viscontesse ROCHFORT were both beheaded within the Tower on the twelfth of
February. DIRHAM had been hanged, and CVLPEPPER beheaded at Tiburne the tenth
of the preceding December.

Irland made a Kingdoms.
Hitherto our Kings had styled themselves Lords of Irland, a Title with that
rebellious Nation not deemed so sacred and dreadful, as to force obedience:
The Estates therefore of Jrland assembled in Parliament enacted him King of
Irland; according to which Decree he was on the three and twentieth of January
publicly proclaimed.

The Viscont Lisle deceased of a surfeit of joy.
About the same time ARTHVR Viscont Lisle natural Son of EDWARD the Fourth,
out of a surfeit of sudden joy deceased. Two of his Servants had been executed
the preceding year for having conspired to betray Calais to the French, and
the Viscont as being conscious committed to the Tower. But upon manifestation
of his innocence, the King sent unto him Sir THOMAS WRIOTHSLEY Principal
Secretary of Estate, by whom he signified the great content he received in the
Visconts approved fidelity, the effects whereof he should find in his present
liberty, and that degree of favor that a faithful and beloved Uncle deserved.
The Viscont receiving such unexpected news imbelished with rich promises and
Royal tokens (the King having sent him a Diamond of great value) of assured
favor; being not sufficiently capable of so great joy, free from all symptoms
of any other disease, the ensuing night expired. After whose decease Sir JOHN
Sir John Dudley made Viscont Lisle.
DVDLEY was created Viscont LISLE, claiming that honor as hereditary in the
right of his mother Lady ELIZABETH Sister and Heir to the Lord EDWARD GRAY
Viscont LISLE Wife to the late deceased Lord ARTHVR, but formerly married to
EDMUND DVDLEY one of the Barons of the Exchequer, beheaded the first year of
this Kings reign. Which I the rather remember, for that this man afterward
memorable for his power and dignities, might have provod more happy in his
Issue, then his greatness, had not his own ambition betrayed some of these
fair sprouts to the blast of unseasonable hopes, and nature denying any (at
least lawful) issue to the rest, the name and almost remembrance of this great
Family has ceased. Of which hereafter.

Scotland had been long peaceable, yet had it often administered motives of
discontent and jealousy. JAMES the Fifth, King of Scots, Nephew to HENRY by his
Sister, having long lived a Bachelor, HENRY treated with him concerning a
marriage with his (then only) Child the Lady MARY, a Match which probably
would have united these neighbor Kingdoms. But God had reserved this Union
for a more happy time.

War with Scotland.
The ancient League between France and Scotland had always made the Scots
affected to the French, and JAMES prefer the alliance with France, before that
of England, where the Dowry was no less than the hopes of a Kingdom. So he
marries with MAGDALEN a Daughter of France; who not long surviving, he again
matcheth there with MARY of Guise, Widow to the Duke of Longueville. HENRY had
yet a desire to see his Nephew, to which end he desired an enterview at York
or some other oportune place. JAMES would not condescend to this, who could
notwithstanding undertake a long and dangerous voyage into France, without
invitation. These were the first seeds of discord, which after bladed to the
Scots destruction. There having been for two years neither certain peace, nor
a just War, yet incursions from each side; Forces are assigned to the Duke of
Norfolk to repress the insolency of the Scots, and secure the Marches. The
Scot upon news of our being in Arms, sends to expostulate with the Duke of
Norfolk, concerning the motives of this war, and withal dispatcheth the Lord
GORDON with some small Forces to defend the Frontiers. The Herald is detained
until our Army came to Berwick, that he might not give intelligence of our
strength. And in October the Duke entering Scotland, continued there ransacking
the Country without any opposition of the Enemy until the middle of November.
By which time King JAMES having levied a great Army, resolved on a battle,
the Nobility persuading the contrary, especially unwilling that he should any
way hazard his Person, the loss of his Father in the like manner being yet
fresh in memory, and Scotland too sensible of the calamities that ensued it.
The King proving obstinate, they detain him by force, desirous rather to
hazard his displeasure, than his life. This tenderness of him, in the language
of rage and indignation he terms cowardice and treachery, threatening to set
on the Enemy assisted with his Family only.

The Lord MAXWELL seeking to allay him, promised with ten thousand only to
invade England, and with far less then the English Forces to divert the war.
The King seems to consent: But offended with the rest of the Nobility, he
gives the Lord OLIVER SAINTCLARE a private Commission not to be opened until
they were ready to give the on^et, wherein he makes him General of the Army.
Having in England discovered five hundred English horse led by Sir THOMAS
WHARTON and Sir WILLIAM MVS GRAVE, the Lord SAINTCLARE commanded his Commission
publicly to be read, the recital whereof so distasted the Lord MAXWELL and
the whole Army, that all things were in a confusion, and they ready to disband.

The Scots overthrown.
The opportunity of an adioining hill gave us a full prospect into their Army,
and invited us to make use of our advantages: We charge them furiously, the
Scots amazedly fly, many are slain, many taken, more plunged in the
neighboring fens, and taken by Scottish Freebooters sold to us. Among the
Captives were the Earls of Glencarne and Cassells, the Lords SAINTCLARE,
MAXWELL Admiral of Scotland, FLEMING, SOMERWELL, OLIPHANT, and GRAY, besides
two hundred of the better sort, and eighthundred common soldiers. The
consideration of this overthrow occasioned (as he conceived) by the froward
rashness of his own Subjects; and the death of an English Herald slain in
Scotland, so surcharged him with rage and grief, that he fell sick of a
Fever, The death of James the Fifth, King of Scotland.
and died in the three and thirtieth year of his age, and two and thirtieth of
his reign, leaving his Kingdom to the vusally unhappy government of a Woman,
a Child scarce eight days old. The chief of the captives being conveied to
the Tower were two days after brought before the King's Counsel, where the
Lord Chancellor reprehended their treachery, who without due denunciation of
war* invaded and spoiled the territories of their Allies, and committed many
outrages, which might excuse any severe courses, which might in justice be
taken with them: Yet his Majesty out of his natural Clemency was pleased to
deal with them beyond their deserts, by freeing them from the irkesomenesse of
a strict imprisonment, and disposing of them among the Nobles, to beby them
entertained, until He should otherwise determine of them.

By this time King JAMES his death had possessed HENRY with new hopes of
uniting Britain under one Head. England had a Prince, and Scotland a Hopes of
a match betwe^ne `Prince Edward and the Queen of Scots.
Queen, but both so young that many accidents might dissolve a contract before
they came to sufficiency. Yet this seeming a course intended by the Divine
Providence to extirpate all causes of enmity and discord between these
neighboring Nations, a marriage between these young Princes is proposed. With
what alacrity and applaufe the proposition was on both sides entertained, we
may conceive, who have had the happiness to see that effected, which they but
intended. Which being a matter of so sweet a consequence, it is to be wondered
at, that the conspiracy of a few factious spirits should so easily hinder it.
The hope of it prevailed with the King for the liberty of the Captives,
conditionally, that they should leave hostages for their return, if peace were
not shortly concluded; which, as also the furtherance of this so wished
conjunction, they faithfully promised.

Anno Dom. 1543. Reg. 35.
AFter their short Captivity, the Scottish Lords (having been detained only
twelve days at The Scottish captives set at liberty. The Earl of Angus
returns into Scotland.
London) on New years day began their journey toward Scotland, and with them
ARCHIBALD DOVGLAS Earl of Angus, whom his Son in law King JAMES had a little
before his death intended to recall. Fifteen years had he and his brother
GEORGE lived exiles in England, HENRY out of his Royal Bounty allowing to the
Earl a pension of a thousand marks, and to his brother of five hundred. The
sudaine return of these captive Lords caused in most as sudaine a joy. Only
the Cardinal of Saint ANDREWS (who had by forgery made himself Regent) and
his faction could willingly have brooked their absence. They came not as freed
from a Captivity, but as Ambassadors for Peace by them ernestly persuaded,
which by the happy conjunction of these Princes might be concluded to
perpetuity. But the Cardinal with his factious Clergy, the Queen Dowager,
and as many as were affected to the Flower de Lys interposed themselves for the
good of France. Yet notwithstanding the Cardinals fraud being detected, he is
not only deposed from his Regency, and JAMES HAMILTON Earl of Arren
substituted, but also committed to custody, whence afterward making an escape
he was the author of more garboiles. In the mean time the marriage of the
young Queen and other conditions proposed The league and match concluded.
to the Estate of Scotland by Sir RALPH SADLER the Kings Ambassador, are fully
assented unto, and hostages promised for the performance of them. But the
adverse Faction became so prevalent, that the hostages were not delivered at
the day, neither did the Captive Nobility render themselves in England. Only
GILBERT KENNEDA Earl of Cassels, like another REGVLVS, had rather commit
himself to the mercy of his enemies, then prostitute his Honor to the foul
taint of base infidelity. His brethren had become pledges for his return: the
importunity, nay violence of his friends could not deter him from redeeming
them. So to London he ca^^e, where the bountiful King duly honoring him for
his constancy, in steed of receiving a ranson gave him one, dismissing him and
his brothers fraught with honor and rewards. The Scots falling off from their
late agreement, the King commands stay to be made of all their ships, and
confiscateth their goods: sends letters The Scottish shipping detained.
full of threats and just complaints to the Estates at Edinborough, bla^^ing
them for arrogantly re^ecting his Alliance, the want whereof must needs be
prejudicial to them; neither had they only rejected it, but unmindful of
former benefit^ had sown seeds of new war, and forced him to arms. But
letters proving in effectual, Scotland War with Scotland.
is by the frontier Garrisons invaded in three several places, forty Scots
making resistance are slain, five and fifty Villages burned, five hundred and
sixty prisoners taken, and a booty brought into England, of three thousand
five hundred head of cattle, eight hundred horses, and seven thousand sheep
beside great provision of household stuff.

But this obstinacy of the Scots proceeded not only from themselves. France
and Scotland were ever War with France.
combined against England, so that to invade one, was to draw on a war with
both. We had been often victorious in France, whereof many portions anciently
belonged to Us if we should make any claim to all or part of our Inheritance,
Scotland would serve either to distract our forces, or to transfer the seat of
the war ne^rer home. The uniting of England and Scotland would by securing us
at home facilitate our enterprises upon France. These were motives sufficient
for FRANCIS, notwithstanding the long inviolate amity between him and HENRY,
secretly to cross our designs in Scotland. Whereof HENRY could not long be
sensible, and not revenge. Wherefore he A League with the Emperor.
proclaims open hostility with France, as he had already with Scotla^^, and
reconciles himself with the Emperor (before thought irreconciliable in
reguard of his Aunts disgrace) who professed, that all causes of difference
between them were buried with her: yet is it certain that unto the Pope he
accused HENRY to have dispatched her by poison. But now they are Landrecy
besieged, but in vain.
become Confederates, and an aid of ten thousand English sent to join with
Imperialls. Landrecy (a town lately taken from the Emperor by the French) is
the first exercise of our Arms. The Emperor also coming in Person, it is
invested with forty thousand men, is furiously battered, and the soldiers
brought to the distress of half a provant loaf of bread a day, and to drink
water. FRANCIS being certified of their wants assembles his forces, drawesneere
the Emperor feeding him with hope of a Battle, entertaining him with
skirmishes relieves the besieged, and without any more ado under the covert of
the night retreats.

The people licensed to eat White Meats in Lent.
Let us now conclude the year at home. And to begin with the Church; In
February the people by Proclamation is licenced to eat White Meats in Lent,
but under a great penalty enjoined to abstain from Flesh.

The third of June, MOROGH O BRIEN a Nobleman of Irland, descended from the
Kings of Limrick submitted himself to the King, and was shortly after made
Earl of Twomond, which honor his posterity at this day enjoys, having
given ample proof of their loyalty to succeeding Princes.

The twelf of July the King married his sixth Wife the Lady CATHARINE PARR Widow
to the Lord The Kings sixth marriage. Will am Parr Earl of Essex. Another of
the same name made Lord Parr.
LATIMER, and sister of WILLIAM PARR lately created Earl of Essex in the right
of his Wife sole Daughter and heir to the late Earl HENRY BOVRCHIER. At what
time another of the same name, Uncle to the Queen and the Earl, was created
Lord Parr, and Chamberlain to the Queen.

The eight and twentieth of July for the profession of their Faith were ANTHONY
PARSONS, ROBERT TESTWOOD, and HENRY FILMER burned at London. MARBECK was also
condemned, but afterward pardoned.

Anno Dom. 1544. Reg. 36.
The Lord Chancellor dies.
THe Lord THOMAS AVDLEY Chancellor of England deceasing the last of April,
the Lord WRIOTHSLEY chief Secretary of Estate is designed his successor. And
the Earl of Hertford made Lieutenant of the North, is sent thither with an
Army to repress the incursions of the Scots.

An expedition into Scotland.
The Viscount Lisle Admiral of England, with a Navy of two hundred sail
entered the Forth of Scotland, landed ten thousand men, forced the rich town of
Leith, and then marched toward Edenburg the Metropolis of the Kingdom. The
Regent was there with the Cardinal (at whose dispose he now wholly was) and
many other Nobles, guarded with six thousand horse and a great number of foot,
who upon sight of an invading Army betook themselves to flight, and left the
City void of defendants. The Provost craving parley, offered to yield the city
upon condition of departure with Bag and Baggage, and saving the town from
fire. But the breach of League, and insolences of the inhabitants of Leith and
Edenburg had inspired us with revenge, so that no Conditions were to be
admitted, but what the Victor should impose. This drives the Provost to a
desperate resolution of defense. The English give a furious assault, enter at
the Canygate, put the inhabitants to the sword, pillage and fire it. The like
calamity felt the Country round about, fire and sword cruelly feeding upon
Villages, Castles, and Noblemens houses. Leith had hitherto been reprived from
the like misery; but at our return to the Navy, it is made its own funeral
pile, and the Peer of the haven utterly consumed.

New employments call home our Admiral. HENRY resolves once more to transport
his Arms into France, there to join with the Earls of Reux and Bares
Imperial Commanders. It was agreed between the Emperor and the King, that
the one should invade Champaigne, the other Picardy, and having united their
forces (which should amount to fourscore thousand foot, and eighteen
thousand horse) to march directly to Paris, thereby either to force the French
to fight with disadvantage, or to suffer the ruin of his Country. HENRY lands
at Calais, and finds Picardy unfurnished of men, FRANCIS having withdrawn his
forces toward Champaigne to oppose them against the Emperor. He therefore
sends the Duke of Norfolk with the Earls of Reux and Bures to beseege
Montrueil. The Marshall of Biez seeing which way we turned the point of our
Army, being commanded by his King to have an especial care of that Territory,
puts himself into Montrueil, and left the Lord of Vervein his son in law, a
man of small experience, to command in Bouloigne. This opportunity invites HENRY
to incampe before Boloigne a town near to Calais, and many ways commodious.
He causes the Duke of (now in danger to be surprised by the French Army) to
arise from before Montru^il; and omitting his intended voyage to Paris
(frustrated by the Emperors peace with the French, to enter into which HENRY
was invited by the Cardinal BELLAY, RAYMOND President of Rouen, and AVBESPINE
Secretary of Estate, sent of purpose) he investeth Boloigne. The Duke of
Suffolk had first encamped upon a hill on the East of Boloigne, from whence
he after made his approches into the valley: And the King encamping on the
North, shutvp the town on all sides. The first assault is given on the Suburbs
or Base Town, which the French under the covert of a made smoke had forsaken.
They pretend it to have been purposely fired as unprofitable, and the fire
quenched by our industry. Next the Tower of the Order (called by us the Old
man) defended by twenty Soldiers is yielded, and the Town continually
battered in four places, whereof the most forcible was the battery from the
hill on the East side, which beat down the steeple of our Ladies Church, rent
the houses, and scowred the streets of the Town. The breach made by the Canon
being not sufficient, they fall to mining, which happily succeeding, they blow
up a great part of the wall. We give a furious assault, and are repulsed with
loss, yet did this assault carry the Town, that brave Captain PHILIP CORSE
being slain in it, whose valor alone had hitherto preserved it. VERVEIN upon
the loss of this man, at his wits end, sounds the intention of the King, and
yields him the Town upon composition: That the Soldiers and Citizens might
depart with their Baggage; and that all the Artillery, Munition, and Victuals
(whereof there was great store) should remain to the King. The inhabitants
refuse this bad composition, and the Mayor with the Townsmen offer to keep
the Town: which had they accordingly undertaken, Boloigne in all probability
had continued French. For the Capitulation was no fooner concluded (hostages
not yet given) but a horrible tempest of wind and rain overthrowes our Tents,
and the soil being fat and slippery, we should not have had any means to
mount to an assault. Moreover the Daulphin was on march with great forces for
their succor, whose approach would have forced HENRY to have changed his
design. But VERVEIN professing that he would keep touch even with his Enemy,
continued constant in his promise, for which he soon lost his head on a
scaffold at Paris. The four and twentieth of September, the City was delivered
to the Duke of Suffolk, and the French departed to the number of threescore
and seven horse, a thousand five hundred threescore and three able foot, and a
thousand nine hundred, twenty and seven women and children, many of the
infirmer sort not able to depart, staying behind. The next day the King entered
triumphantly, and caused our Ladies Church to be demolished, and in place
thereof a Fortification to be raised, and having ordered his affairs to his
mind, making the Viscount Lisle Governor, set sail for Dover, where he
arrived on the first of October.

But the King's hasty departure permitted not all things to be sufficiently
settled. Part of the Artillery, Victuals and Munition by the Capitulation left
in Boloigne, were not removed from the Base Town, which was fortified only
with some small trenches: for the surprisall whereof, the Daulphin in the night
sends some troops, who before morning enter the place, cut all in pieces they
meet, win the Artillery and Munition* and think to have gotten an absolute
victory: but being intent to pillage, some Ensigns issue from the higher
Town, find them in disorder, set upon them and rout them. Many of the Enemies
were slain, among whom was FOVQYESSOLLES, another son in law of BIEZ, the
victory not being without blood on our side.

Neither was our Fleet idle in the mean, which scowring the seas brought
three hundred Prises so fraught with Merchandise, that the three spacious
Churches of the Augustine, the Gray, and the Black Friars in London, whose
Monasteries had lately been suppressed, were stored withnothing but hogsheads
of wine.

The Earl of Lenox lately dispatched out of France for the managing of the
affairs of Scotland, to the behoof of the French found not entertainment
there according to his expectation. The Queen Mother and Cardinal, as long as
they had need of him, deluded him with hopes of marrying the Queen Mother, and
by their secret calumnies rendered him suspected to the French. At length
finding his safety questionable, he flies for refuge into England, accompanied
with ALEXANDER son and heir to the Earl of Glencarne, WALTER GRAHAM brother
to the Earl of Montrosse, and Sir JOHN BORTHWICKE with others, and were
honorably received by HENRY, who most happily repaired the Earls losses of
revenues in France fallen by the death of ROBERT STVART of Aubigny, and of his
marriage in Scotland, with that most successful Match with that beautiful
Lady MARGARET Neipce to the King, and Daughter to the Earl of Angus, and an
annual pension of seven hundred marks. And once more he resolved to try his
fortune in Scotland attended by Sir RICE MANSELL, and Sir PETER NEWTAS, WINTOR,
AVDLEY, and BROOKS with others, who with eight ships set sai^e from Bristoll,
and hanging over the coast of Scotland like a cloud uncertain whereto
disburthen it self, deterred the Scots from enterprising any thing upon
England in the absence of the King.

The Church of late had daily felt some change or other. And this year in June
the Letany set forth in English was commanded to be used in all Churches.

Anno Dom. 1545. Reg. 37.
Our late Expeditions had without doubt been v^^y chargeable. So that I should
not wonder that the King began to want supplies, if I did not consider the
incredible sums raised of the spoils of the late suppressed Religious
Houses. All which notwithstanding, whether it were that God not pleased with
this authorized sacrilege did not enlarge them with his blessing, which only
(says SOLOMON) makes rich: or that a great part thereof was otherwise divided
either among his Courtiers, or for the maintenance of the ^iected religious
persons; the Treasury was certainly very bare. To which former reasons we may
add the six new erected Bishoprics, and the like number of Cathedral
Churches, as also the stipend^ conferred on both Universities for the public
Professors of the H^^rem and Greek tongues, Divinity, Law, and Physic, to
each whereof he allotted an annuity of forty pounds. Howsoever it were,
certain it is, that levies being made in Germany for the King, the soldiers
disbanded for want of pay. The Parliament had already granted him great
Subsidi^^, so that thence he could expect no more. Yet moneys must be had.
HENRY therefore resolves on an hones^ kind of rapine. The Entreaties of Princes
little differ from Commands, unless perhaps in this, that they work more
subtly, and render them pliable with whom Commands would not have prevailed:
Which manifestly appeared in the execution of this project. He had twenty
years since commanded money by Proclamation, a course so far from taking as
w^^ desired, that it had like to have been the cause of much mischief: but
now by some fit Commissioners informing his subjects of his necessities, and
desiring the richer sort one by one to contribute toward his support, he
quickly replenished the Exchequer. The Commissioners begin first with the
Citizens of London, among whom two were more straight laced then the rest, viz.
RICHARD READ and WILLIAM ROCH: but their parsimony shall cost them dear. For
READ being an old man and utterly inexpert of Martial Discipline is commanded
to serve in person in the wars of Scotland, is taken by the Scots, and forced
to ranson himself at a high rate. ROCH, as having used some uncivil language
before those of his Majesty's Counsel who sat Commissioners, was for some
months punished with straight imprisonment, and at length (not improbably)
bought his liberty.

In the mean time Boloigne was a great eyesore to the French. They try to
regaine it by stratagems and surprisals, but in vain. They betake themselves
to force with the like success. The Marshall of Biez Governor of Boloignois
comes with a great Army to the Port, a Town two miles from Boloigne, and
begins to build a Fort on this side the river upon the point of the Tower of
Order, but is by the Earl of Hertford forced away, and leaves his Castle in
the Air. His intent was by this Fort to have kept the garrison of Boloigne
within their walls, to have commanded the haven, so to cut off all succors by
sea, and from Calais by land. Which being done, FRANCIS resolved in Person to
besiege Guisnes, and there to fortify, thereby to famish Boloigne, and to
keep Calais and the land of Oye in subjection. But these designs proving
fruitless, he prepares his navall forces, giving forth, that he intended to
invade England, hoping that this alarm would have made us have a care of the
maine, and neglect those pieces abroad, so that Boloigne for lack of aid
should easily be reduced. The noise of an invasion made HENRY arm, who having
gathered together a sufficient Fleet, awaited the Enemy at Portsmouth, intent
to all occasions. Neither did the French only intend an alarm, landing in
three several places in England, but were every where with loss driven aboard
their ships. Two days after they fall down to the Channel that divides the
Isle of Wight from the rest of Britain; they seem to threaten Portsmouth,
where the King then was, and seek to draw our Fleet to fight. The French,
beside a sufficient Fleet of other ships had twenty five Galleys, no way
probably useful in these ^empestuous and rough seas not brooking this flat
kind of shipping, but by their bulk and number to terrify us: yet at this
time an unusual calmnesse of the sea without wind or current, put them in
hope of effecting wonders by their Galleyes. But our Fleet was not to be drawn
to fight, much less to be forced without apparent danger to the Enemy, who
must sl^p down a narrow Channel, where but few ships could go in front, and
the like number opposed might easily defend it: where they could not enter, but
with the tide and wind, and the first ships repulsed, in their falling back
would have disordered the rest of the Fleet: where of necessity they must
fight under the favor of our Forts and Cannon, which would easily have hindered
their approach. The Enemy being put off here, consult of fortifying the Isle
of Wight, where at Saint Helens point they land two thousand men, resolve
forsooth to make that the seat of the war, and there to build three Forts,
but the valor of the inhabitants made them change their design, and forced
them again to their ships. Thus every where affronted to their loss, without
any memorable act they set sail for Normandy. The French Fleet consisted of a
hundred and three sail of all sorts, ours of only sixty, so that it was no
way sae for us to encounter them. Some light proffers were made on both sides,
wherein we always came of with the better. As for the Mary Rose, a ship which
with her loss buried Sir GEORGE CAROW the Captain, and seven hundred men; the
French do well to make use of casualties to their own glory: But it was not
the valor of the French or fury of their Cannons that sunk her, but the
supine negligence of the Marinets, being wracked in the very haven in the
presence of the King.

Boloigne was not idle the while. Upon hope of a Fort to be built by the
Marshall of Biez, FRANCIS had made great preparations for an enterprise upon
Guisnes. but was diverted by the death of the Duke of Orleans his younger
Son, and the lost hopes of his intended Fort near Boloigne, and having for a
while encamped at Alias Bonlamberg.
Mont-Lambert, retired at last toward Amiens. The neernesse of the Kings Camp
at Mont-Lambert did daily invite both Nations to make trial of their valor,
the English sometimes, sometimes the French having the better. One day among
the rest the English hotly charging the French, the Duke of Aumale comes to
relieve them, who being strooken with a Lance under his right eye, it breaks
in pieces and leaves the tronchion halse a foot within his head. It was a token
of an excellent spirit in this young Nobleman, that for so rough a charge he
lost not his stirrups, and endured the torture whereto they put him in drawing
out the three square head, with such an invincible constancy, as if they had
picked a thorn from out his finger, and beyond all expectation of the
Chirurgians recovered. The victory remained to the English. Who could not long
brag of it, afterward seeking to cut off a Convoy of the Enemies defeated by
the Ringrave with the loss of sixteen Captains, and seven or eight hundred
men. The Earl of Surrey, who led them, saved himself by flight. And were it
not discourtesie in us not to requite the late visit of the French? The Lord
Admiral therefore landed six thousand men at Treport in Normandy, burned the
Town and Abbey with thirty Ships and a Bark in in the Haven, and returned
with the loss of only fourteen men.

Neither were our employments less or fewer in Scotland, then among the
French. Scotland had so many enemies at home, that it needed not any abroad.
But their homebred dissentions had caused war from us, and the way to set them
at peace was, to invade them. In the beginning of March Sir RALPH EVERS, by the
death of his Father Lord Evers, with an Army entered Scotland, making all the
Country desert about Iedbury and Kelson. Thence marching to Coldingham
fortified the Church and Tower, and leaving a Garrison there, departed. The
Garrison partly out of covetousness, partly to distress the Enemy if he
should lay siege to them, pillaged and wasted all the neighboring Country.
The Regent according to their expectation besieges the Church with eight
thousand men, and batters it a whole day and a night. But sudainly, making none
of the Nobles partakers of his determinations, whether out of fear to be
betrayed by his Army, or some other cause, took horse and passed away to
Dunbar, which occasioned the disbanding of the Army, and the freedom of the
besieged. Our often success having emboldened us, we adventure upon another
impression, the fury whereof disburdened it self in Merch, T^ifidale, and
Lauden, the Inhabitants being either forced to yield, or fly, and leave their
goods to be seized on by Bellonas Ha^bingers. The Scots at length make head and
although of more then equal number, they betake themselves to stratagems. They
understand by their Scouts of our approach: and to deceive us, by the advice of
WALTER SCOT send their horses to the adjoining hills. Neither indeed was the
place so advantageous for Horse as for Foot. The horses backed by the Grooms
that kept them, did from the hills make show of an Army, and that flying. We
advance, as loath to let our enemies escape, in the pursuit of whom we unawares
fall among the whole Army not disorderly flying, but prepared to receive us. It
is not unusual to encounter men: but if Heaven and the Elements oppose us, how
can we hope for victory? We find the number of our adverse Army great beyond
our expectation, the Sun far declining to the West darted his rays in our
faces, and a violent wind drives the smoke of the shot into our mouths, which
not only made the most necessary sense unuseful, but with a foul stench
corrupted the air, and hindered the breathing of the already panting Soldiers.
The many advantages give them the victory. We leave two hundred in the place,
and among them the Lord EVERS; a thousand are taken, whereof Alderman READ was
one.

A little after this victory, FRANCIS sent into Scotland a supply of five
hundred French Horse and three thousand Footmen under the command of the Lord
of Lorges Earl of Montgomery, not so much to cross our attempts against the
Scots, as to distract our forces, that the violence of them united might not at
once fall on France.

This year among other accidents is al^o memorable through the death of the
King's Brother in law CHARLES BRANDON Duke of Suffolk, a man of a mighty
spirit, yet so tempering it with mildness and fair demeanor, that he was
generally beloved both of Prince and people: Who in that height of favor
carried him so evenly as to die quietly in his bed. A happiness under this
Prince rare even to Fortunes and His Favorites.

A Parliament assembled in November granted the King the Disposal of all
Colleges, Chantries, and Hospitals, the demeasnes, salaries and stipends
thereto belonging, or given to Priests to say Mass for the souls of the
departed. The King personally gave thanks to both Houses, promising to have a
care that they should be employed to the honor of God and the public good.
But we find not the effect of his promises.

Anno Dom. 1546. Reg. 38. and vltimo.
WE are now come to the last year of HENRY his Reign. Who having tired
himself with the French wars, began at length seriously to bethink himself
of peace. Neither was FRANCIS less desirous of his friendship. To this end
Deputies from both sides meet often between Guisnes and Ardres: For HENRY, the
Earl of Hertford, GARDENER Bishop of Winchester, the Viscount Lisle Lord
Admiral, Sir WILLIAM PAGET Secretary of Estate, and Doctor WOTTON the first
Deane of Canterbury: For FRANCIS, the Admiral ANNEBAVLT, RAYMOND first
President of Rouan, and BOVCHEREL Secretary. After many consultations a Peace
was concluded on these Conditions:

That Francis within eight years should pay fourscore hundred thousand
Crowns to the King, as well for the arrerage of his Pension, as for many other
expenses made by him in war, in the fortification of Boloigne and of the
Country: and upon receipt of the said sum, Henry should deliver unto the
King of France Boloigne and all the Country belonging to it, with the ancient
places or newly edified by him, Mont-Lambert, the Tower of Order, Ambleteul and
others, with all the Artillery and Munition in them. For the confirmation
whereof, the Viscount Lisle was sent Ambassador into France, and from thence
came the Admiral ANNEBAVLT to receive the oaths of each King, and the Peace
was proclaimed in London.

On the sixteenth of July were burnt at London for their Religion JOHN LASSELS,
NICHOLAS OTTERDEN, JOHN ADLAM, and ANNE ASSKEW, a young Gentlewoman aged
twenty five, of an ancient Descent, excellent beauty, and acute wit, whose
examinations, writings, tortures, and patient suffering are at large set down
by Master FOX, being before their execution by Doctor SCHAXTON exhorted to
recant, as he then was forced, who some years passed had resigned his
Bishopric to enjoy his Conscience.

And here I may not omit an addition to the septenary number of Sleepers
WILLIAM FOXLEY a Potmaker in London, who without any touch of any preceding
infirmity was seized with such a dead sleep, that for fourteen days and
fifteen nights no force nor invention could awake him; on the fifteenth day
this miraculous sleep forsaking him, he was as it were restored to life, and
found as sound and entire as if he had taken no more then an ordinary repose:
Neither would he believe that he had taken other, but that the building of a
certain wall made it apparent to him how much time he had slept away. He
lived above forty years after, viz. to the year 1587.

Let us conclude this year with the death of MARTIN LVTHER that famous
impugner of the Church of Rome, who being sent for by the Counts of MANSFEILD
to compose some differences between them concerning their inheritance, died
among them in his Climactericall year, and after much contention for his body,
lies buried at Wirtenberg.

Anno Dom. 1547.
HENRY long since grown corpulent was become a burden to himself, and of
late lame by reason of a violent vleer in his leg, the inflammation whereof
cast him into a lingering fever, which by little and little decaying his
spirits, he at length began to feel the inevitable necessity of death. The
cogitation of many things (as in the like exigents usually happens) oppressed
him, and chiefly of his Sons nonage, but now entering into his tenth year, an
age infirm and oportune to treacheries, against which he found small provision
in his friends, having none amongst those on whose loyalty he chiefly relied,
of so sufficient eminency, as to underprop his weak Estate with those
supporters of Royalty, Power and Authority. His Brother in law the Duke of
Suffolk was lately deceased: SEIMOVR the young Princes Uncle was a man whose
Goodness was not tempered with Severity, and being descended of a Family more
ancient then noble (as having until now never transcended Knighthood) would be
subject to contempt. They who more nearly participated of the Blood Royal, as
they any way excelled in Power or Virtue, were the more suspected and hated by
him. The Family of the HOWARDS was then most flourishing, the chief whereof
was THOMAS Duke of Norfolk, a man famous for his exploits in France, Scotland,
and elsewhere, long exercised in the school of Experience, many ways deriving
himself from the Crown, popular, of great command and revenues. But the edge
of the old man's disposition made mild and blunted with age, administered the
less cause of suspicion. Of his eldest Son HENRY Earl of Surrey, the King
was certainly jealous, and resolved to cut him off. He had lately in the wars
of France manifested himself heir to the glory of his Ancestors, was of a
ripe wit, and endued with great learning, so that Elogy afterward given to his
son HENRY, that he was the Learned among the Nobility, and the Noblest
among the Learned, might have as fitly been applied to him, was very gracious
with the people, expert in the Art Military, and esteemed fit for public
Government. These great Virtues were too great Faults, and for them he must
suffer. Treason is objected to him, and upon the surmise he and his Father
sent to the Tower. On the thirteenth of January he is arraigned, the chief
point of his accusation whereon they insisted being, for bearing certain
Arms, which only belonged to the King, and consequently aspiring to the
Crown. Of other things he easily acquitted himself, and as for those Arms,
he constantly affirmed that they hereditarily pertained unto him: yet
notwithstanding he would not have presumed to have borne them, but being
warranted by the opinion of the Heralds, who only were to give judgment in
these cases. The Judges not approving of his answer condemn him, and so the
Flower of the English Nobility is on the nineteenth of January beheaded, the
King lying in extremity, and breathing his last in Blood. The Duke was adjudged
to perpetual imprisonment, where he continued until he was by Queen MARY set
at liberty.

The King, his disease growing on him, at last makes his Will, wherein (by
virtue of a Law lately enacted) he ordaines Prince EDWARD his Sucessour in the
first place, and in the second (Prince EDWARD dying iss^lesse) substitutes the
Lady MARY begotten of CATHARINE of Arragon, and upon the like defect of issue
in MARY in the third place substitutes the Lady ELIZABETH. These three reigned
successively, and accomplished the number of fifty six years, at the
expiration where of Queen ELIZABETH ended her long glorious Rain, and left
the Diadem to King JAMES, in the many reguards of his Learning, Religion,
Goodness, peaceable and happy Reign the Mirror of late ages. The next care
was of his Executors, whom he also appointed (Tutors shall I say or)
Counsailours to his Son, and were in number sixteen, viz.

Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. Thomas Wriothsley Lord Chancellor. William
Pawlet Lord Saint-Iohn. John Russel Lord Privy Seal. Edward Seimour Earl of
Hertford. John Dudley, Viscount Lisle Lord Ad-Admirall. Cuthbert Tonstall
Bishop of Duresme. Sir Anthony Brown Master of the Horse. Sir Edward Mountague
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Sir William Paget. Sir William Harbert. Sir
Thomas Bromley. Sir Anthony Denny. Sir Edward North. Sir Edward Wotton. Doctor
Wotton Deane of Canterbury and York.
To whom he added as Assistants especially in matters of great consequence.

Henry. Earl of Arundell. William Earl of Essex. Sir Thomas Cheny Steward of
the Kings Household. Sir John Gage Comptroller. Sir Anthony Wingfield
Vice-chamberlaine. Sir William Peter Secretary. Sir Richard Rich. Sir John
Baker. Sir Ralph Sadler. Sir Thomas Seimour. Sir Richard Southwell. Sir Edmond
Pecham.
He ordained his body should be interred at Windsore in a Monument (yet
imperfect) erected by Cardinal WOLSEY, not for himself (as many falsely
surmise) but for the King, as by the Inscription is manifest, which cannot be
of later date. For therein HENRY is styled Lord of Irland without any mention
of Supreme Head of the Church, which two particles it is manifest were changed
in the Title after WOLSEY his death. In the same his last Will he commanded
that the Monuments of HENRY the Sixth, and EDWARD the Fourth (both interred in
Windsore) should be made more magnificent and stately, and other things of
le^s^ moment, most of which were neglected. This last Will and Testament he
confirmed, subscribed, and sealed the last of December, and survived a month
after, dying at Westminster the eight and twentieth of January, and that in
this manner: The King having long languished, the Physicians finding apparent
symptoms of approaching death, wished some of his friends to admonish him of
his estate, which at last Sir ANTHONY DENNY undertook, who going directly to
the fainting King, told in few (but those plain) words, That the hope of
humane help was vain, wherefore he beseeched his Majesty to erect his
thoughts to Heaven, and bethinking him of his forepassed life, through Christ
to implore Gods Mercy. An advise not very acceptable to him. But finding it
grounded upon the judgment of the Physicians, he submitted himself to the
hard law of necessity, and reflecting upon the course of his Life (which he
much condemned) he professed himself confident, that through Christ his
infinite Goodness all his sins, although they had been more in number and
weight, might be pardoned. Being then demanded whether he desired to confer
with any Divines; With no other (says he) but the Archbishop CRANMER, and not
with him as yet; I will first repose my self a little, and as I then find my
self will determine accordingly. After the sleep of an hour or two finding
himself fainting, he commanded the Archbishop (then at Croydon) should be
sent for in all have. Who using all possible speed came not until the King was
speechless. As soon as he came, the King took him by the hand, the
Archbishop exhorting him to place all his hope in Gods Mercies through Christ,
and beseeching him, that if he could not in words, he would by some sign or
other testify this his Hope: Who then wringed the Archbishops hand as hard as
he could, and shortly after expired, having lived fifty five years and seven
months, and thereof reigned thirty seven years nine months and six days.

Thus ended HENRY the Eighth his Life and Reign, which for the first years of
his Government was like NERO'S Five years, Admirable: for often Victories and
happy Success in war, Glorious: for the many Changes under it, Memorable: For
the Foundation of the Churches Reformation, Laudable: to Queens, most unhappy:
for the Death of so many (for the most) great Personages, Bloody: and for the
frequent Exactions and Subsidies, and Sacrilegious Spoil of the Church, much
Prejudicial to the Estate, Grievous and Burdensome to the Subject.

FINIS.
ANNALS OF ENGLAND.

EDWARD THE SIXTH.

The Second Book.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip, and William Stansby, 1630.

Vae tibi Jerra cuius Rex Puer est
portrait

ANNALS OF ENGLAND.
The second Book.
EDWARD the Sixth.
Anno Dom. 1547. Reg. 1.
ROyalty like a Pythagorean Soul transmigrates. Although HENRY were dead, the
King was still alive, and survived in the person of young EDWARD, who began his
Reign the eight and twentieth of January, then in the tenth year of his age;
and having been on the last of the same month proclaimed King, came the same
day from Enfield (where the Court had then been) to the Tower, there according
to the ancient custom of our Kings to abide The Earl of Hertford Protector.
until his Inauguration at Westminster. The next day the Counsel assembled
for the managing of the Estate, conferred on the Kings Uncle, EDWARD SEIMOVR
Earl of Hertford the honor and power of Protector of the King's Person and
Kingdom. Who to season his new Dignity with some memorable act, on the sixth
of February, dubbed the King Knight, the King presently imparting the same
Honor to RICHARD HOBLETHORNE Lord Mayor of London.

King Henry's Funerals.
On the fifteenth of February King HENRY his Funerals were solemnized, and his
Body Royally interred in the middle of the Quire in the Church at Windsore.

Two days after were some of the Nobility dignified with greater Honors,
some new created. The Lord Protector Earl of Hertford, was made Duke of
Somerset: WILLIAM PARR Earl of Essex, Marquis of Northampton: JOHN DVDLEY
Viscount Lisle, Earl of Warmicke: and the Lord Chancellor WRIOTHSLEY, Earl
of Southampton. Sir THOMAS SEIMOVR brother to the Protector and Lord Admiral,
Sir THOMAS RICH, Sir WILLIAM The Coronation.
WILLOUGHBY, and Sir EDMOND SHEFFEILD were enrolled among the Barons. Other two
days being fled after their Predecessors, the King passed triumphantly from
the Tower through London to Westminster, where he was solemnly crowned,
anointed, and inaugurated by CRANMER Archbishop of Canterbury. At what time
also with incredible indulgence pardon of all crimes whatsoever was publicly
proclaimed and granted to all persons throughout the Realm, six only being
exempted from the benefit thereof, namely, the Duke of Norfolk, Cardinal
POOLE, the lately beheaded Marquis of Excester his eldest Son, one
THROCMORTON, FORTESCVE, and RICHARD PATE late Bishop of Worcester, who least
he should be constrained to acknowledge the King Head of the Church, had some
years passed fled to Rome.

The death of Francis King of France.
On the nineteenth of June in the Cathedral Church of Saint PAVL in London
were celebrated the Exequies of FRANCIS King of France. He deceased the two and
twentieth of the precedent March, having been after the death of our HENRY
much disposed to melancholy, whether for that he failed in the hope of
strengthening their late contracted amity with some stricter tie: or that being
some few years the younger, he was by his death admonished of the like
approaching fate. They were also of so conspiring a similitude of disposition
and nature, that you shall hardly find the like between any two Princes of
what ever different times. This bred a mutual affection in them, and as it
were forcibly nourished the secret fire thereof between them, unless
peradventure when emulation or the respect of public utility swaied them the
contrary way, so that the death of the one could not but much grieve the
surviver. He therefore in the Cathedral at Paris celebrated the Funerals of
HENRY, though excommunicated by the Pope. He also left one only Son named
HENRY inheritor of his Crown, whose Reign lasted but to the beginning of
Queen ELIZABETH.

And now the affairs of Scotland, which have without doubt been great and
memorable, crave a part in our History. We have before made mention of our
League with Scotland, wherein it was determined concerning the marriage
between the now King EDWARD and the Queen of Scots. The times since then were
full of continual iarres. We at length resolved not to dally with them, but
to undertake the war with forces agreeable to the cause. The Duke of Somerset
by consent of the Privy Counsel is sent into Scotland with ten thousand Foot
and six thousand Horse (beside pioners and artificers thirteen hundred) and
fifteen pieces of brass Ordnance. To the Lord CLINTON is assigned a Navy
consisting of four and twenty men of war, one Galley, and thirty Ships of
burden, wherewith he was to scowre the Seas, and infest the maritime parts of
Scotland. On the third of September the Duke of Somerset made an hostile
entrance upon the Enemies Country, and forthwith dispatched letters to the
Earl of Arren, Regent of Scotland, much to this effect: That he wished the
Scots would consider, that this war was waged among Christians, and that our
ends were no other then a just Peace, whereto the endeavors of all good men
should tend. An occasion not only of a League, but of a perpetual Peace was
now happily offered, if they would suffer the two differing and emulous Nations
by uniting the Head to grow together. This as it had been formerly sought by
us, so had it been generally assented to by the Estates of Scotland. Therefore
he could not but wonder why they should rather treacherously recurre to Arms
(the events of war being usually even to the Victor sufficiently unfortunate)
then maintain in violate their troth plighted to the good of both Nations.
They could not in reason expect that their Queen should perpetually live a
Virgin life. And if she married, where could she bestow her self better,
then on a puissant Monarch inhabiting the same Island, and parlying the same
language? They saw what inconveniences were the consequents of foraine matches,
whereof they should rather make trial by the examples of others, then at their
own peril. He demanded nothing but equity; yet he so much abhorred the
effusion of Christian blood, that if he found the Scots not utterly averse
from an accord, he would endeavor that some of the Conventions should be
remitted: he would also permit that the Queen should abide and be brought up
among them until her age made her marriageable, at what time she should by
consent of the Estates her self make choice of a Husband. In the mean time
there should be a Cessation of Arms, neither should the Queen be transported
out of her Realm, nor entertain treatise of marriage with the French or any
other forainer. This if they would faithfully promise, he would forthwith
peaceably depart out of Scotland; and whatsoever damages the Country had
suffered by this invasion, he would according to the esteem of indifferent
Arbitrators make ample satisfaction. The Scottish Army consisted of thirty
thousand Foot, some speak a greater number. The chief Commanders whereof
puffed up with confidence of their strength (although they had lately lost
eight hundred in a tumultuary skirmish) and misconceiving our offers to proceed
out of fear, reject all Conditions of Accord: and least upon knowledge of the
equity of our demands, the Counsel should incline to resolutions of peace,
they conceal our letters* And not only so, but upon assurance of victory spread
a rumor, that nothing would content the insolent English, but the delivery of
the Queen, which if they could not otherwise, they would by force obtain, and
proceed to the absolute conquest of the Kingdom. This report enraged the
Soldiers, whom no motives could disuade from present engaging themselves in
battle. The wiser sort were not ignorant of the necessities that long since
began to press us, who were brought to that pass, that by reason of the
difficulties of passages we could not make a safe retreat, nor force the Enemy
to fight in reguard of the strength of the place where he was encamped. But the
vain hope of victory had possessed the minds of the greater part, and
excluded reason. Necessity forced us to a resolution brave Musselburgh Field
and expedient, which was, to seek the Enemy in his lodging, and endeavor to
draw him to combat. But the hot-spurre Scots issuing from out their fastnesses,
seemed willing to prevent us. So both Armies entertain a mutual resolution. A
little before the joining of the Armies an accident happened, which did not a
little make way to our victory. The Enemy marching along near the sea shore, a
piece of Ordnance discharged from out Gally took away five and twenty of
their men, whereof the eldest son of the Lord GRIMES was one. Four thousand
Archers terrified with so unexpected a slaughter made astand* and could never
after be brought on. The two armies approaching each other, the Duke of Somerset
commanded the Lord GRAY with the Cavallery to charge the Scots* and find them
employment until the Infantery had seized on an adjoining hill, and if he^
could without much hazard, to disorder the Enemy. But they were gallantly
received by a strong Squadron of Pikes, whereon some of the foremost having too
far engaged themselves were cast away, the rest retreated affirming, that it
was as casie to force a wall, as through the Scottish ranks. The Duke makes a
second trial by the light Horse seconding them with the Ordnance and the
Archers. The Enemy either not able to stand so violent a charge, or (as some
relate) to draw us from the favor of our Canon, begins to give ground, which
we perceiving give a shout, crying out withal, They fly, they fly; which so
amazed them, that some began to fly indeed, and at length the whole Army was
routed. The Scots complain, that we tyrannized over the Captives, especially
the Priests and Friars (whereof many served in this Field) because by their
instigation chiefly our Conditions were so arrogantly rejected. Of the Enemies
were slain thirteen thousand, and among them (beside the Earl of Lohemor and
the Lord FLEMING, the chief of the Scottish Gentry, with their Tenants, who
thought it a disgrace to survive their Lords. In the chase were taken fifteen
hundred, among whom were the Earl HVNTLEY Chancellor of Scotland, the Lords
HESTER, HOBBEY, and HAMILTON, beside many other persons of Quality. This
lamentable overthrow was given the tenth of September.

The English become Victors beyond their expectation, ransacked the Country
five miles about, fortified in the Forth the forsaken Islands Keth and Haymon,
took Brocth Castle, by their terror forced the Garrisons of Humes and
Fastcastle to yield, and having built a Fort at Lauder, and repaired the ruins
of Roxburgh, by their departure recreated the dejected minds of the distressed
Scots.

Reformation in the Church.
Our affairs thus succeeding abroad, the Church at home had her changes. Many
of the Counsel, but especially the Protector, much endeavored Reformation in
point of Religion. The rest, who were addicted to the Doctrine of Rome, could
for private respects temporize, fearing indeed restitution of Church goods
(wherein each of them shared) unless an irreconcilable breach were made with
that Sea. So that whiles some eagerly oppose Popery, and others coldly defend
it, not only what had been enacted by HENRY the Eighth concerning the
abrogation of the Popes authority is confirmed, but many other things are
added, whereby our Church was so purged from the dregs of Superstition, that
for Purity of Doctrine, and Institution of select Ecclesiastical Rites, it
excelled the most Reformed Churches of Germany. All Images are pulled down,
Priests are permitted to marry, the Liturgy set forth in the English Tongue,
the Eucharist administered, under both kinds, Auricular-Confession forbidden,
no man prohibited the reading of the Scriptures, no Masses to be said for the
Souls of the departed, and many other things ordained, so far differing from
the Institution of our Forefathers, that it administered matter to the common
people (who are won^ to judge not according to Reason, but Custom) of breaking
out into Rebellion. And it is somewhat remarkable, that the same day wherein the
Images, whereof the Churches were dispossessed, were publicly burned at
London, we obtained that memorable victory over the Scots at Musselburgh.

This year at Archbishop CRANMER his invitation came into England PETER MARTYR
a Florentine, MARTIN BVCER of Selestadt, and PAVLVS PHAGIVS borne in the
Palatinate: who being very courteously received by the King and Nobles, having
reposed themselves some while at Canterbury, were sent, MARTYR to Oxford, BVCER
and PHAGIVS to Cambridge, there publicly to read Divinity: but PHAGIVS having
scarce saluted the University, deceased of a Quartane Ague the twelfe of
November in the five and fortieth year of his age. Neither did BVCER long
survive him, who died at Cambridge the last of February 1551, being then
threescore years old. MARTYR shortly after his coming to Oxford, maintained
publicly in the Schools, and that with solid arguments, against TRESHAM and
CHEDSEY Opponents, that the Popish Transubstantiation was but a mere fiction;
which Disputation he after published and enlarged.

Anno Dom. 1548. Reg. 2.
THe English having this year fortified and put a strong Garrison into
Hadinton a Town seated in the most fertile soil of all Scotland, did from
thence and Lauder make often inrodes upon the bordering Country, burning and
spoiling whatsoever might be useful to the Enemy, from whom they expected a
siege. In the mean time had the French sent six thousand (ten thousand say we)
men into Scotland, whereof three thousand were Lansquenets led by the Reingrave.
The Lord of Esse a man of tried valor, famous in the siege of Landrecy and
other expeditions was chief of the Army. These The Scots and French besiege
Hadinton.
adve^turers la^ding at Dunbar, march speedily for Hadinton, and ioining with
the Scottish Forces consisting of eight thousand men, straightly besiege it. At
the Abbey near the Town they call a Counsel, treat of transporting the
Queen into France, and marrying her to the Daulphin. They whom the respect of
private ends had not corrupted and withdrawn from the care of the public
weal, objected, That they should so draw on them a perpetual war from
England, and betray themselves to the slavery of the French: That the
propositions made by the English were reasonable, who offered a ten years
Truce, and sought not to entrap the Scot in any bands or prejudicial compacts,
their demands being none other then this, That if within the ten years either
the King of England, or the Queen of Scots should decease, all things should
on each side remain entire and in their former estate: Delay had often in the
like cases proved advantageous, whereas speedy repentance commonly follows
precipitated haste. The Popish Faction (especially the Clergy, to whom the
amity of England was little pleasing, in reguard of the differences in
Religion) and some others obliged to the French either in respect of received
benefits or future profit, with might and maine interposed to the contrary, and
chiefly the Regent, bought with a pension of four thousand crowns and the
Command of one hundred Lances. The French Faction prevailed for her
transportation. The Fleet from Leith, where it harbored, setting sail as if
for France, fetching a compass round about Scotland, put in at D^nbritton,
where they embarked The Queen of Scots transported into France.
the six year old Queen, attended by JAMES her base Brother, JOHN ARESKIN,
and WILLIAM LEVISTON, who being put back by contrary winds, and much
distressed by tempest, arrived at length in Little Bretaigne, and from thence
set forward to the Court of France, so escaping our Fleet which hovered about
Calais to intercept them, if (as we were persuaded they needs must) they
crossed those neighboring Straights. Hadinton in the mean time being
straightly beleaguered, Sir ROBERT BOWS and Sir THOMAS PALMER are with seven
hundred Lances and six hundred light Horse sent to relieve it. BVCHANAN says
there were but three hundred Horse, the rest Foot. Of what sort soever they
were, it is certain that before they could reach Hadington, they were
circumvented and slain almost to a man. Yet did not the besieged let fall
their courages, but bravely defended themselves, until FRANCIS Earl of
Shrewsbury with an Army of twelve thousand English and four thousand
Lansquenets disassieged them, and forced the French to retreat. The Earl
having supplied the Town with necessaries, and reinforced the Garrison,
returned to Berwicke. What they could not by force, the Enemy hopes more easily
to effect by a surprisall. To this end D' Esse with some select Bands arrives
at Hadinton about the break of day, where having killed the Centinells and
taken an half moon before the Port, some seek to force the gates, some
invade our adioining Granaries. The noise and shouts of the assailants gives an
alarm to the Garrison, who give fire to a Canon planted before the Port, the
bullet whereof penetrating the gate, makes way through the close ranks of the
Enemies, and so affrights them, that they seek to save themselves by flight.

Humes Castle
Fortune was not so favorable to the garrisons of Humes and Fastcastle, where
by the negligence of the Centinells, the designs of the Enemy were crowned
with succes. At Humes, being conducted by some that knew all the secret
passages, they clime and
up a steep rock, enter, massacre the secure Garrison, and enjoy the place. At
Fastcastle the Governor had Fasteastle gained by the Enemy.
commanded the neighboring Husbandmen at a prefixed day to bring in their
contribution of corn and other necessary provision. The Enemy makes use of
this opportunity. Soldiers habited like Peasants at the day come fraught with
their burdens, whereof easing their horses, they carry them on their shoulders
over the bridge, which joined two rocks together, and so gain entrance: the
watchword being given, they cast down their burdens, kill the Centinells,
open the gates to their fellows, and become masters of the place. Neither were
our navall enterprises fortunate, being at Saint Minian and Merne repelled with
loss.

In Autumn the Earl of Rutland with three thousand Lansquenets and some bands
drawn out of the frontier Garrisons arrives at Hadington. Who duly considering
that this Town could not be kept any longer without the excessive charges of
just Army, forasmuch as the Country about being miserably fo^raged, it could
not be victualled without great difficulty and danger; rased the walls, fired
the houses, brought away the Artillery, and finding no resistance, returned in
safety to Berwick. BVCHANAN refers it to the ensuing year, but I follow the
record of our own Historians.

Gardener Bishop of Winchester committed to the Tower.
And having thus far spent the year abroad, I at length return home, where I
find STEPHEN GARDENER Bishop of Winchester in the Tower. He was a man very
learned, and no less subtle, adhering to the Popish Faction, yet so, as that
he would be content to accommodate himself to the current of the times. King
HENRY had employed him in many Embassages, and that with ample authority, under
whom he durst not oppose the proceedings confirmed by enacted Laws. And under
EDWARD he repressed himself for a time, seemingly consenting to the commenced
Reformation. But his dissimulation was at length manifestly discovered to the
Privy Counsel, who had commanded him in a Sermon at Pauls-Crosse to signify
his approbation of the present estate of the Church: which he accordingly did
on the nine and twentieth of June, but so ambiguously and obscurely, that he
satisfied them not. And being expressly forbidden to speak any thing
concerning the Eucharist, he knowing that by the Laws nothing was definitively
determined in that point, did so eagerly assert that Papisticall (I will not
say Capernaiticall) Corporal and Real Presence of CHRIST in the Sacrament,
that he wonderfully offended the minds of many, but especially of the Lords of
the Counsel. Wherefore he was on the thirtieth of June committed, and
obstinately refusing to acknowledge his error, was two years after deprived
of his Bishopric, and anddeprived.
(as he was of a turbulent spirit) least he should practice any thing against
the Estate, detained nevertheless in prison until the death of EDWARD. In the
mean time Archbishop CRANMER by writing oppugned that gross and carnal
assertion of the Church of Rome concerning CHRIST'S Presence in the Sacrament:
whom GARDENER secretly answered under the fictious name of M. Constantius.

Boner Bishop of London committed also.
Neither did that Bloud-sucker BONER Bishop of London (who in Queen MARYES
reign so heated the Kingdom with the funeral piles of so many Saints) speed
any better then Winchester. For being likewise enioined to preach at the
Cross, he did it so coldly, omitting many of those points whereof he was
commanded to speak, that he was likewise committed, deprived of his
Bishopric, and so lived until Queen MARY set them both at liberty. What the
objections were against CVTBERT TONSTALL Bishop of Duresme, and GEORGE DAY
Bishop of Chichester, I do not find, but that they ran the same fortune is
manifest* They were both very learned Prelates, but especially* TONSTALL, a
mild man, and of most sweet conditions, in reguard whereof I do not a little
wonder that he was so hardly dealt with. But the drift of the punishments of
such men, who in HENRY'S time were accounted the chief Lights of our Church, I
conceive to have been, that the rest of that Order might by their example be
admonished, without dissimulation either to resign their Bishoprics to
others that were thought more worthy, or be induced to conform themselves to
the present Reformation of the Church, according to the prescript of the Laws
in that behalf lately enacted. And yet I would there were not sufficient cause
to suspect, that this was but a made opportunity, the removal of these
obstacles making way for the invasion of these widow Seas. For as soon as
TONSTALL was exautorated, that rich Bishopric of Duresme by Act of Parliament
was wracked, the chief revenues and customs of it being incorporated to the
Crown, and and the rest in despite of the Tenants so guelded, that at this
day it scarce possesleth the third part of it is ancient revenues. Yet did
Queen MARY seriously endeavor the restitution of those religious portions:
Queen ELIZABETH would hardly consent that it should lose any of it is plumes,
(yet some it did) and King JAMES has lately enacted against the Alienation of
Church lands, yea even to the Crown, otherwise then upon reservation of a
reasonable Rent, and the return of them to the Church after the expiration of
three lives or one and twenty years. The hungry Courtier finding how good a
thing the Church was, had now for some years become acquainted with it out of
a zealous intent to Prey: neither could the horridness of her sacred skeleton
as yet so work on him, as to divert his resolutions, and compassionately to
leave the Church to her religious poverty. Beside, the infancy of the King in
this incertaine ebb and flow of Religion, made her oportune to all kind of
sacrilege. So that we are deservedly to thank the Almighty Guardian of the
Church, that these Locusts have not quite devoured the maintenance of the
Laborers in this English Vineyard. For we yet retain that ancient form of
government in the Primitive Church by Bishops, who have for the most part
wherewith to support their honorable Function, as likewise have other those
subordinate Prelates, Deans, Archdeacons, and Canons of Cathedral Churches: and
as for our Preachers of the more polite and learned sort, we think him little
befriended by Fortune, who long lives in expectation of a competent
preferment. I would the residue of the Reformed Churches of Christen dome had
not been pared so near the quick by precise hands, that but some few of them
might in this kind be paralelled with ours.

Discord between the Duke of Somerset and his Brother the Lord Admiral.
And now behold two Brothers acting their several Tragedies. Iealousy, Envy,
and Ambition infernal Furies, had armed them against each other, and the Pride
of the Feminine Sex prepared them for the Lists. A lamentable exigent, wherein
the loss of his Adversary must be the destruction of each; wherein the
Kingdom must groan at the loss of one, both being in the Estate
incompatible: wherein the King himself must (as most suspect he did) suffer,
that he might not suffer. THOMAS SEIMOVR Lord Admiral had married CATHARINE
PARR the Widow of the deceased King. What correspondence there might be
between Her (who had been the Wife of the late Sovereign) and the Duchess
of Somerset, whose Husband being Protector of the Realm, in point of command
little differed from a Sovereign, and had over his Brother the Admiral the
advantages of Age, Dignity, and general Esteem, if any man cannot without
difficulty conjecture, I refer him to the first book of HERODIAN, where let
him observe the contentions arising between CRISPINA the Wife of COMMODVS, and
LVCILLA, who had been formerly married to L. VERVS the Emperor. But in this
the diverse dispositions of the Brothers set on edge on the emulous humors of
their Wives. The Duke was mild, affable, free, open, and no way malicious: the
Admiral was naturally turbulent, fierce, ambitious, and conceived himself to
be of the two the fitter for public government. Presently after the death of
HENRY, the Admiral thrust on by the flattery of his overweening conceits,
resolved to ad a luster to his good parts, by marrying the Lady ELIZABETH, as
yet indeed scarce marriageable. But the Protector wisely considering how rash
and perilous this project was, frustrated that design. By his after marriage
with CATHARINE a most beautiful and noble Lady, and aboundiug with wealth
befitting her dignity, most men were confident, that the gulf of his vast
desires would have been satisfied; but the Law whereby he was condemned (though
peradventure enacted by strength of Faction) will manifest the contrary. What
notice I have received, and what the public Records testify concerning this,
being persuaded, that they swarve not much from the truth, I think I may
without blame relate. The Admiral having now fortified himself with money and
friends, and deeming his Brothers Lenity, Sluggishnesse; began to behold him
with the eye of contempt, and to cast about how to dispossess him of the
saddle, and (being of like degree of consanguinity to the King) to enjoy the
seat himself. To the furtherance of this project it would be conducible,
secretly to vi^ify and traduce the Protectors actions, to corrupt the Kings
Servants, especially if in any degree of favor, by fair words and large
promises by degrees to assure himself of the Nobility, to secure his Castle of
Holt with a Magazine of warlike provision, but above all to take care for money
the nerves of War and assurance of Peace. These things having been ordered
with exact diligence, and for supply of coigne the Exchequer mightily pilled,
he vnmaskes himself to some of the Nobility, signifying his intent of settling
himself at the Stern, of forcibly ceasing on the Kings person. Nay his
madness so far transported him, that to one of them, conditionally that his
assistance were not wanting to the advancement of his designs, he promised
that the King should marry his daughter. In the mean time the Queen his Wife
being in September delivered of a Daughter, died in childebed, and that not
without suspicion of poison. For after her death he more importunately sought
the Lady ELIZABETH then ever, eagerly endeavoring to procure her consent to a
clandestine marriage (as was that with the deceased Queen) and not until
after the Nuptials, to crave the assent of the King or the Lords of the
Counsel.

Anno Dom. 1549. Reg. 3.
But the Admiralls proiects being oportunely discovered, and a Parliament
lately assembled, he is by the authority thereof committed to the Tower, and
without trial condemned. The Parliament being on the fourteenth of March
dissolved, he is on the sixth day after publicly beheaded, The Lord Admiral
beheaded.
having first vehemently protested, that he never willingly did either
actually endeavor, or seriously intend any thing against the Person of the
King, or the Estate. Concerning his death the opinions of men were diverse,
their censures diverse. Among some the Protector heard ill, for suffering his
Brother to be executed without ordinary course of trial: as for these faults
proceeding from the violence of youthful heat, they might better have been
pardoned, then the King be left destitute of an Uncles help, or himself of a
Brothers. Nay (they say) there wanted not those that before this severe course
taken with the Admiral, admonished the Protector to have a heedy reguard to
this action: Some peradventure might be content to let a Brother shed tears;
to shed his blood, when they might prevent it, scarce any: it was much to be
feared least his Brothers death would be his ruin, and the loss of such
Friends, a hazard to the King. Others highly extolled his impartial proceeding,
whom fraternal affection could not divert from righting his Country: for if
Consanguinity or Alliance to the King should be a sufficient cause to exempt
them from punishment, who should plot and contrive the change of government in
the Estate; upon what tickl^sh terms should we all stand, whiles nothing could
be c^rtaine and sure in the public government? Others maintained the
necessity of cutting off the Admiral, and that it stood the Protector upon so
to do, if he either reguarded his own or the Kings safeguard. For at what
other mark did the Admiral aim, but that having seized on the Kings Person,
removed his Brother from the Protectorship, and married the Lady ELIZABETH, he
might by poison or some other means make away the young King already deprived
of his Friends, and as in the right of his Wife invest himself in the Regal
Throne, whereto the Lady MARY (although the elder Sister) as incestuously
begotten, could make no claim? And thus much was in a Sermon delivered before
the King by HVGH LATIMER, who having ten years since resigned his Bishopric,
had also hitherto abstained from preaching, until after the death of King
HENRY this Light was again restored, that by his rays he might illustrate
Gods Church. But how true his conjectures were concerning the Lord SEIMOVR, I
will not undertake to determine. Whether faulty in his ambition, or overborne
by his envious adversaries, thus ended the Admiral his life, who was indeed a
valiant Commander, and not unfit for a Consultation, in whose ruin the
Protector was likewise involved.

An Insurrection
Not long after this great man's fall, the People throughout almost the whole
Realm brake out into a Rebellion, whereto the frequent usurpations and avarice
of the Gentry, who in many places enclosed the common and waste grounds for
their own pleasure and private profit, had incited them. The Lords of the
Counsel upon notice of the Peoples discontents, and the probability of an
Insurrection unless speedy course were taken to appease them, dispatched some
into Kent (the Fountain of this general Uproar) who should upon due
examination of the causes of the Peoples grievances, admonish those that were
in that kind faulty, by throwing open the Enclosures to restore to the People
what had been unjustly taken from them; otherwise they should be Authority
Royal be forced thereunto, and by their punishments serve to deter others
from the like insolences and oppressions. The most part obey, and (a most
grateful spectacle to the People) cause their new made Enclosures to be again
laid open. Wherewith Report acquainting the neighboring Shires, the unruly
multitude enraged, that like restitution had not as yet been made to them, not
expecting the necessary direction of the Magistrate, but as if each one were
authorized in his own cause, both to judge of and revenge received injuries,
taking arms level the Dikes, assert the enclosed Lands, and give hope that
there their fury would be at a stand. But as the Sea having once transgressed
the just limits of it is shore, by little and little eats it is way to an
Inundation, and is not but with excessive toil to be forced within it is usual
bounds: So these having once transcended the prescripts of the Laws, let
themselves loose to all kind of licentiousness, overrun and spoil the
Country, murder those that favor not their proceedings, and at length by the
conflux of the baser sort and malcontents so increase their numbers, that it
was not to make head against them with small Forces. And although this plague
in Norfolk.
raged more in Norfolke-Shire then any where else, yet had it so spread it is
contagion over the most part of the Kingdom, that it was scarce any where
sincere and free from infection. For the Counties of Kent, Oxford, Surrey,
Buckingham, Essex, Cambridge, York, Lincoln, but especially Devon and
Somerset were imbroiled in these tumults. In Norfolk only had twenty thousand
assembled, who now confident of their strength, did no more talk of
Enclosures, but stretched their complaints to a higher strain; as that, The
freeborn Commonalty was oppressed by a small number of Gentry, who glut
themselves with pleasure, whiles the poor Commons wasted with daily labor do
like pack-horses live in extreme slavery. But howsoever the calamities incident
to this present life may with a constant patience be endured, the Soul is to
be redeemed even with a thousand deaths. Holy Rites established by antiquity,
are abolished, new ones are autorized, and a new form of Religion obtruded. To
other evils death gives an end: but if they suffer their souls to be
contaminated and polluted by this kind of impiety, what thing is there that
can equal them in miseries, to whom the end of these present ones is but the
beginning of some more horrid, namely of the pains infernal, which no death
can ever terminate. Why then should they not go to the Court, and appoint the
King yet in his minority new Counsailours, removing those who now ruling as
they list, confound things sacred and profane, reguarding nothing else but the
enriching of themselves with the public Treasure, that they may riot it amid
the public calamities?

This was the common complaint and resolution, especially of the Devonshire
Rebels, who having among them made choice of their Chieftaines, did endeavor
to unite themselves with the rest of their fellow Rebels. But to keep them
from joining, Forces are dispatched, some into Norfolk, some into Devonshire.
For Norfolk are designed only fifteen hundred under the conduct of the
Marquis of Northampton, who for a time bravely defended that spacious but weak
City Norwich against the insolent Clownes. But his small troops being much
diminished by the loss of the Lord Sheffeild and some others, he was at last
feign to quit the City to the Enemy, who after spoil barbarously set it on
fire, and consumed a great part of the edifices. This ill success drove the
Lords of the Counsel to a more serious apprehension of the danger, who
thereupon sent the Earl of Warwick wi h more competent Forces, who (as he was
an excellent Commander) not only forced the Rebels to relinquish the City, but
also pressed them so hard in their retreat, that he compelled them to fight.
They seeing a necessity of battle imposed, placed all their Captives (for the
most part Gentlemen) manacled and chained together, in front, that they alone
might bear the fury of the onset, and dull both the swords and courages of the
Royallists. But their loyalty was not so ill recompensed, as to suffer for it,
scarce any of them falling by the sword. The Rebels were nevertheless
overthrown, and all either taken or slain except a very few, who rallying
themselves, seemed desperately resolved to renew the fight. But the proposal
of a Pardon made them cast away iheir arms, and peaceably to depart. The
number of the chief authors of this Commotion, who were hanged, was great. But
ROBERT KET a Tanner, who in those times, and by that trade had gathered a
fortune of a brace of thousands, was above all as in Fault, so in Execution
remarkable. He had been the Chieftaine in this Rebellion, and was not in
reason to be obscured among the common sort: wherefore it being thought fit that
he should surmount them in the glory of a more notorious punishment, he was
fairly hanged in chains on the verv top of Norwich Castle.

and in Devonshire.
While the Eastern parts of the Kingdom were thus possessed, the Western
parts were not less tormented with the same Furies. Devonshire and Cornwall
with some additions out of Somersetshire, had on the same pretenses armed
fifteen thousand men, who after they had licentiously ransacked the Country,
at length sat down before the famous City of Excester. Forty days they
besieged it, and were repulsed by the Inhabitants, though utterly destitute of
warlike provision. On the sixth of August, JOHN Lord Russell (after Earl of
Bedford) entering the City with forces and munition, disassieged it, pursued the
Rebels, slew some, took others, to the number of four thousand, whereof many
were after executed; but especially HVMFREY ARVNDELL Captain of S. Michaels
Mount in Cornwall, a man of ancient descent and sufficiently ample revenues: so
that I cannot sufficiently wonder, what madness drove him to associate
himself with this desperate and unruly rabble. With him were hanged ROBERT
BOCHIN, IO. TOMSON, ROGER BARRET, IO. VLCOCKE, WILL. ASA, JAMES NORTON, IO.
BARON, and RICHARD BENET Priests, and besides them, JOHN and JAMES ROSOGAN, IO.
PAIN, THO. UNDERHILL, and IO. SOLMAN, all prime incendiaries and chief
authors of this tumult. The City of Excester in memory of this their delivery
has ever sithence with an anniversary solemnity kept the sixth of August holy.
As for the other Counties infested with the relics of this rebellion, the
evil being tempestively suppressed before it spread it self, and the ringleaders
punished, they were quickly reduced to their former temper.

Some Forts lost in Boloignois.
Neither were our affairs more peaceable abroad then at home. For HENRY King
of France taking advantage of our domestique sedition, not reguarding the
League concluded between us and his Father, invaded Boloignois, where his
success was such, that he was animated to greater attempts. He sets forth a
Fleet for the taking in of the Isles of Iersey and Guarnesey the sole portions
remaining to the English of the Duchy of Normandy. At these Isles the French
are with great loss driven abord their ships. At the landing they lost a
thousand men, and we very few. About Bouloigne, Corruptly Bonlamberg.
, Mont Lambert, Sellaque, and Ambleteul were lost. Sellaque was defended by two
Ensigns: But having been battered by the Enemy, while we unwarily parley with
MONTMORENCY, was on the five and twentieth of August forced by them. At
Ambleteul were six Ensigns of Foot, who for some days made good the place:
But finding themselves unable long to hold out against so great forces, upon no
other terms then grant of lives, yielded the Fort to the French. The loss of
these places so daunted the Garrison at Blanconet, that having been scarce
saluted by the Enemies Cannon, upon condition of life and goods they quitted
the place. Neither was this the last important effect of our conceived terror:
for the English at Mont-Lambert not so much as attending the coming of the
Enemy, fired their lodgings, made their provision unuseful, and retreated to
Guisnes, The Fort at the Tower of Order fortified both by nature and art, gave
a period to this years success; standing resolutely upon defense until the
extremity of Winter forced the French to raise their siege.

Enmity between the Protector and the Earl of Warwick.
The loss of these small pieces set the Protector in the wane of the vulgar
opinion, and afforded sufficient matter for Envy to work on. Among the Lords
of the Privy Counsel the most eminent was the Earl of Warwick^, a man of a
vast spirit, which was the more enlarged by the contemplation of his great Acts
performed both abroad and at home. He had long looked asquint upon Somersets
greatness, whom in a favorable esteem of himself he deemed far beneath him;
and was withal persuaded, that could he but remove the Duke, due reguards
would cast the Protectorship on him. The consideration also of the Dukes
nakedness (disarmed of that metalsome piece the Admiral) -- (En quo discordia
Fratres
Perduxit miseros) --
made his hopes present themselves in the more lively shapes. He seeks about
for sufficient matter wherewith to charge the Duke, who could not be long
ignorant of these practices against him. The Duke finding himself aimed at,
but not well discerning whether the Earl intended a legal or military
process against him, on the sixth of October, from Hampton Court where the King
then resided, sent letters to the City of London, requiring from thence an aid
of a thousand men, who should guard the King and him from the treacherous
attempts of some ill-affected Subjects. And in the mean time presses in the
adjacent Country; where having raised a reasonable company, he the same night
carried away the King, attended by some of the Nobility and some of the
Counsel, from thence to Windsore, a place, because fortified, more safe, and
convenient for resistance. But the Earl had made a greater part of the
Counsel, who accompanied him at London. To them he makes a formal complaint
against the Protector, beseeching them, by their assistance to secure him from
the Protectors malice, who sought to entrap him for his life. These Lords send
a contre-letter to the Londoners, demanding aids of them for the delivery of
the King out of the hands of his Enemy (for so they were pleased to term the
Duke.) Then they send abroad Proclamations, wherein they insert the chief
heads of their accusation; as that By sowing seeds of discord, the Duke had
troubled that settled and peaceable estate wherein King HENRY had left this
Kingdom; and had been the chief cause that it had lately been engaged in
Civil wars to the loss of many thousand lives: That many Forts conquered by
HENRY with hazard of his Person, were by the Dukes either cowardice or
treachery regained by the Enemy: That he reguarded not the advice of the rest
of the Lords of the Counsel, and had plainly neglected King HENRY'S
instructions concerning the government of the Kingdoms of England and Irland:
That his chief studies, and wherein he was most seen, were to rake up wealth,
to maintain a Faction among the Nobility, and yet comply with both parties for
his own advantages, to build stately Palaces far exceeding the proportion of a
Subject, and that even in the very instan that the Estate did shrink under the
burden both of intestine and foraine wars.

The Duke certified of their proceedings, and seeing himself forsaken (for the
Londoners being prepossessed, were so far from supplying him, that they at the
same time afforded his Adversary five hundred, and the greatest part of the
Nobility had by ioining with the Earl made their cause one) at last forsook
himself also; and craving of the adverse party, that they would abstain from
violence toward him, and proceed only according to the usual courses of Legal
trial; delivered the King to their Tuition, and remitted himself to their
disposal; The Protector committed.
by whom on the fourteenth of October he was committed to the Tower, together
with Sir MICHAEL STANHOP, Sir THOMAS SMITH, Sir JOHN THIN, and some others.

The death of Paul the Third, Pope.
On the tenth of November died PAVL the Third, having sat Pope near about
fifteen years. The Conclave of Cardinals consulting about the election of a
new Pope, began to have reguard of Cardinal POOLE, in whom the greatness of
his Extract, his Virtuous Life, Gravity, and admirable Learning, were very
considerable motives. The Conclave was at that time divided, some were
Imperialists, some French, and a third Part (whereof the Cardinal FARNESE was
principal) stood Neuter. Cardinal Poole elected Pope.
These lator at length ioining with the Imperialists cast their unanimous Votes
upon POOLE. Who upon notice of his Election, blamed them for their rashness,
advising them again and again, that they should not in their Consultations be
misled by perturbation of mind, or do any thing for friendship or favor, but
totally to direct their cogitations to the honor of God and the profit of his
Church.

POOLE himself having thus put off the matter, the French Cardinals began to
allege, That in reguard of the difficulties of ways and distance of places,
many of the College were yet absent, and that there was no reason why they
should with such precipitation proceed to a partial Election before the
Conclave were full. The Cardinal CARAFFA (who some years after was Pope, by
the name of PAVL the Fourth) a waiward old man, whose cold spirits were set on
fire by Envy and Ambition, sought to make use of POOLE'S modesty to his own
advantage, hoping himself as eminent and in as fair a way as any of the
College (POOLE excepted) might be advanced to the Chair. And to lessen the
favor of the Conclave toward POOLE, he betook himself to calumnies,
accusing POOLE of suspicion of Heresy and Incontinency, that In Germany and his
Legacy at Trent, he had too much favored the Lutheraus, had often entertained
IMMANVEL TREMELLIVS, had enrolled ANTONIO FLAMINIO suspested of Lutheranisme,
in his Family, and promoted him to many Ecclesiastical Dignities; and in his
Legacy at Viterbo used not that severity against that sort of men, that was
requisite. Neither could that composed gravity so free him from the taint of
looseness, but that many were of opinion he had cloistered a Virgin of his
own begetting: That he wondered what the Conclave meant, with so impetuous a
current to proceed to the election of this one man, and he a forainer: as if
Italy it self were so barren of deserving men, that we must be feign to send
for this man out of Britain, almost the farthest part of the known World, to
invest him in the Papacy: whereof what would be the effect, but that the
Emperor, at whose devotion this man wholly was, might once again make
himself Master of Rome, now by indulgence, as before by force.

To these allegations POOLE'S reply was such, that he not only cleared
himself, but also quickened the almost extinguished desires of the Conclave to
elect him. The major part whereof assembling at his chamber by night, wished
LVDOVICO PRIVLO the Cardinals bosom friend (between whom the correspondence
of their dispositions had bred a mutual affection) to awake him, for that
having elected him, they were purposely come (an accustomed ceremony) to Adore
him, and dissolve the Conclave. PRIVLO having signified to him with testimonies
of excessive joy, the intent of these Cardinals, was greatly blamed by him,
and they dismissed with this answer, That a matter of so great consequence
(carrying with it so great a burden, that it would deter an ingenuous man
from the acceptance of it) was not to be tumultuously, but upon mature
deliberation orderly to be transacted: as for the season it was utterly unfit,
for as much as God was the God of Light, and not of Darkness: they should
therefore do well to defer it until the next day, and if then their resolutions
proved the same, he would submit himself to their pleasures. The Italian
Cardinals conceiving these delays to proceed out of stupidity, began to
contemn him; and changing their determinations, a little after pitched upon
Cardinal MONTANVS, whom they created Pope, by the name of JULIUS the Third.

Anno Dom. 1550 Reg. 4.
THe Duke of Somerset having now for three months continued a prisoner, and
not convicted of any crime which might touch his life; it being not thought
fitting that so great a man, lately Protector of the King's Person and Realm,
should for a small offense be condemned to perpetual imprisonment; is
underhand dealt with to submit himself, with acknowledgement that he had
deserved this or whatsoever greater punishment the King should be pleased to
inflict on him, and withal to implore the favor of his Majesty's Royal
Clemency. To this he easily condiscended, and was on the sixth of February set
at liberty, but not restored The Duke of Somerset set at liberty.
to the dignity of Protector, only contenting himself with the rank of a
Privy Counsailor. But it being conceived, that revenge might draw the Duke to
new practices, by mediation of Friends he is reconciled to the Earl of
Warwick, and that this atonement might be the more firm and sincere, the
Dukes Daughter is on the third of June married to the Viscont Lisle the Earl
of Warwicks Son, the King gracing the Nuptials with his presence. THVANVS (I
know not upon what grounds) writes, That the Earl by a kind of counterfeit
show that he was desirous of the restitution of the Romish Religion, had settled
himself in the good opinion of the vulgar, who had not yet learned to renew
themselves by casting off the old skin, but reverenced Superstition for it is
reputed Antiquity: and that his dissimulation being discovered, fearing least
he should be forsaken of them whom he had with false hopes deluded, the
consideration thereof, and of the Dukes mild and free disposition, would
indeere his Adversary to them: to prevent this danger he contrived this
alliance with the Duke, and procured his liberty.

In the mean of these passages, on the nineteenth of January the Lord Russell
Lord Privy Seal, was created Earl of Bedford, WILLIAM Lord Saint-John Earl
of Wiltshire, and Sir WILLIAM PAGET Lord Paget.

Peace with the Scots and French.
The Earl of Bedford and the Lord Paget were within three days after with Sir
WILLIAM PETER'S and Sir JOHN MASON dispatched into France for the Treaty of a
Peace with the Deputies appointed by the French, who were MONTMORECY Governor
of Picardy, GASPER COLIGNY Lord of Chastillon afterward Admiral of France,
ANDREW GILLAR MORTAIR and WILLIAM BOVCHERELLE. The Lord Paget not long before
had been sent to the Emperor to signify how we were distressed on the one
side by the Scots, and on the other by the French, and miserably rent at home
by intestine dissensions, that our necessities required speedy succors, or
would force us to condescend to an inconvenient Peace with France. But
perceiving nothing was to be obtained of him, we stroke hands with the French
upon these conditions.

That Boloigne and all the Forts in Boloignois should be surrendered to the
French, together with the Artillery and other military provision:

That in lieu thereof the King of France should pay unto EDWARD four hundred
thousand crowns by equal portions at two payments:

That the English should restore to the Scots, Lauder and Douglas: and (if the
Queen of Scots should desire it) should raze their Fortifications in Haymon
and at Roxburgh.

The Emperor was on both sides comprehended in the League, and the Queen of
Scots by the French. The two Kings presented each other with their military
Orders; and (as one writes) it was on both parts agreed on, that EDWARD should
marry one of the Daughters of France. For the ratification of the Articles, on
the eight of April Hostages were given:

By Us,
The Duke of Suffolk, The Earl of Hertford Son to the Duke of Somerset, The
Earl of Arundell, The Earl of Derby, The Earl of Bath.
By the French,
JOHN of Bourbon Duke of Anguien, CLAVD of Loraine Marquis of Mayenne, FRANCIS
Son to the Constable MONTMORENCY, LEWIS of Tremoville, FRANCIS of Vendosme
Vidame of Chartres, CLAVD d' Annebalt.
This Peace between us and France was on the third of March solemnly
proclaimed in London, and on the five and twentieth of April, Bouloigne being
accordingly surrendered to the French, our Hostages were returned.

On the thirtieth of July died the Lord WRIOTHSLEY Knight of the Garter, late
Lord Chancellor of England and Earl of Southampton. He had about the
beginning of this Kings Reign delivered up the Seal, the Custody whereof was
committed to the Lord Rich. But having been about half a year past removed
(as was also the Earl of Arundell, but for what cause is uncertain) from the
Counsel Table, he at length (whether out of grief or some other cause, fell
sick and died. He was father to HENRY the second Earl, and Grandfather to
HENRY the third Earl of Southampton not long since deceased, who having tasted
of both fortunes, did hertofore as generously behave himself in adversity, as
he did since moderately in prosperity, whereto by the Clemency of our late
Sovereign he was restored.

Anno Dom. 1551. Reg. 5.
The Sweating Sickness.
MEntion has formerly been made concerning the Sweating Sickness, a disease
to which England has given a name, as well in reguard of it is original, as of
the known disposition of our bodies to admit of this virulent contagion.
England had been formerly afflicted with it, but never so mortally as this
present year. Shrewsbury was now the first place acquainted with this
Pestilence, there it began in April, and thence diffusing it self over the
most part of the Kingdom, at length it vanished away in the North about the
beginning of October. The fury of it was such, as if it would never end but by
it is proper cruelty, when it should not have left subjects whereon to feed. The
dead whom it swept away were numberless. In London only eight hundred was
scarce a seven nights stint. It made it is first entry into this Island in the
Reign of HENRY the Seventh Anno 1486. and from hence it took it is progress
to other Nations. The Infected flowed away, and within the space of twenty
four hours when this malignant disease was most merciful in it is execution,
peradventure within twelve, did sweat out their souls. Women, children, and
old men it for the most part overpassed, and wreaked it self on the robustious
youth and well compact middle age, who, if in the beginning of their sickness
did but slumber, perished instantly. If it seized on any that were full gorged,
the recovery was in a manner desperate. Nay and of others whatsoever they were,
scarce one of a hundred escaped, until time had found out a remedy: the manner
whereof was thus: If any be taken in the day time, he must without shifting of
his apparel betake himself to bed: If by night and in bed, let him not stir
thence, until twenty four hours be run* In the mean let the coverture be
such, that it provoke not sweat, but that it may gently distill of it self: if
it be possible for him so long to forbear, let him not eat nor drink more
then may moderately serve to extinguish thirst: But above all, let him so
patiently endure heat, that he uncover not any part of his body, no not so
much as a hand or a foot. The strangeness of this disease I do not so much
admire; for that PLINY in his twenty sixth Book the first Chapter witnesses,
and daily experience teaches us, that every age produces new and Epidemicall
diseases. But that which surpasses the search of humane reason is this, that
this Pestilence afflicted the English in what part of the world soever, without
touching the Natives, but in England alone. This dire contagion promiscuously
impoverisht the Land of people of all sorts: among The death of the Duke of
Suffolk.
those of especial note were HENRY Duke of Suffolk, and his Brother, who were
the Sons of CHARLES BRANDON, and the Kings Couzins germane, young Noblemen of
great and lively hopes: by the death of HENRY, the Duchy was for some few
hours devolved to the younger Brother, who had the unhappy honor but to be A
creation of Dukes and Earls.
seized of the Title and die. The Lord Gray Marquis of Dorset having married
FRANCIS the eldest Daughter of CHARLES BRANDON, in the right of his Wife made
claim to the Duchy, and was on the eleventh of October invested in it. At*
what time also JOHN DVDLEY Earl of Warwick was created Duke of
Northumberland: WILLIAM POWLET Earl of Wiltshire, Marquis of Winchester: and
Sir WILLIAM HERBERT Lord Cardif Master of the Horse, Earl of Pembroke. The
masculine Line of DVDLEY and GRAY has been long since extinct: Of the Family
of the POWLETS we have spoken already* the Lord HERBERT Brother in law to The
descent of the Earls of Pembroke
Queen CATHARINE PARR, derived himself from WILLIAM HERBERT in the time of
EDWARD the Fourth Earl of Pembroke, and was succeeded in the Earldom by his
Son HENRY Father to WILLIAM the modern Earl (whose mature wisdom and
gravity even in his greener years, long since ranked him in the sage Senate of
the Privy Counsel to two successive Kings) and to PHILIP by King JAMES
created Earl of Montgomery. Then also were knighted Sir JOHN CHEEK the King's
Schoolmaster, Sir HENRY DVDLEY, Sir HENRY NEVILL, and (whom I cannot mention
but with due honor) Sir WILLIAM CECILL. CECILL I say, who then Secretary of
Estate, was afterward by all Europe held in admiration for his wisdom; whom
Queen ELIZABETH made Lord Treasurer of England and Baron of Burleigh, and was
whilst he lived a second prop of this Estate; who on the fourth of August
1598. piously ended his long, but for the public weals sake ever restless
life, leaving two Sons, THOMAS by King JAMES created Earl of Excester, and
ROBERT out of the same Fountain of Royal Goodness Earl of Sarisbury and
Lord Treasurer of England.

And now the ill cemented affections of the Enmity between the Dukes of
Somerset and Northumberland revived.
Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland dissolved into open enmity. In the
prosecution whereof, Somerset, otherwise of a most mild disposition (but
Patience abused, often runs into the extreme of Fury) provoked by continual
injuries, resolved (as some write) to murder Northumberland. To this end, but
under color of a visit, privily armed, and well attended by Seconds who
awaited him in an utter chamber, he comes to his Adversary at that time by
reason of some indisposition of body keeping his Chamber, has access unto him
naked as he was in his bed, but is so courteously entertained, and with such
smooth language, that the Duke of Somerset good man repenting himself of his
bloody resolutions, would not execute what he purposely came for. At his
departure one of his conspirators is reported to have asked him, Whether he had
done the feat? and upon his denial to have added, Then you are undone. This his
intent being by his own Party bewraied, a second accusation is engrossed
against him. The matter is referred to the Counsel Table, and he on the
sixteenth of October again committed to the Tower together with the Duchess
his Wife, the Lord Gray of Wilton, Sir RALPH VANE, Sir THOMAS PALMER, Sir MILES
PARTRIDGE, Sir MICHAEL STANHOP, Sir THOMAS ARVNDELL, and many other of his
Friends.

On the first of December the Marquis of Winchester being for that day high
Steward, he is arraigned for Treason against the Estate, which he had not
only ill but treacherously managed; and for conspiracy against the Duke of
Northumberland. Of Treason he cleared himself, and his Peers acquitted him.
For the Conspiracy he was by his own confession condemned, and that by virtue
of a Law enacted 3. HENR. 7. which made the very intent, nay imagination of
killing a Privy Counsailor, punishable by death. But howsoever the Law (enacted
as some conceive upon somewhat differing intents and meaning) were extended to
the highest of it is rigor, yet can I not but wonder, how a man so great in the
reguards of his Reigning Nephew, of his Honors, of the popular Favor, should
be so destitute of Learned Advice, as not to exempt himself from a felonious
death by his Clergy. But such were the times, such his misfortunes in the
minority of his Prince; from whose revengefull hand how could the adverse
Faction presume themselves secure in the future? Neither could they choose but
be somewhat terrified with that ecchoing testimony of the peoples joy, who
seeing that fatal Virge the Axe (usually marshalling Traitors to the Bar)
laid aside upon his freedom from the guilt of Treason; from Westminster Hall
certified that part of the City by their loud festival acclamations, of the
gladsome tidings of their Favorite's conceived Absolution. And these
peradventure might be causes that his execution was deferred.

Certain Bishops deprived.
Hitherto had the Estate patiently endured the obstinate opposition of some
Bishops in point of Reformation, who for their nonconformity are at length
deprived and others substituted in their Bishoprics. Of some of them we have
occasionally already spoken, whose censures notwithstanding fall in with this
year. GARDENER Bishop of Winchester was deprived the fourteenth of February;
DAY of Chichester, and HEATH of Worcester on the tenth of October: TONSTALL of
Duresme on the twentieth of December committed to the Tower; and BONER of
London on the first of October 1549. had been already exautorated. All of them
for fear of practicing against the Estate were detained in Prison.

Some of the Servants of the Lady Mary committed.
And on the last of October FRANCIS INGLEFIELD, WALGRAVE, and ROCHESTER
Servants to the Lady MARY, as also FRANCIS MALLET Doctor of Divinity her
Chaplain, were committed. I cannot speak any thing certain of the causes of
any of their imprisonments, excepting Doctor MALLET'S only. At the Emperors
request he was permitted to celebrate Mass, but with this limitation, In the
presence of the Lady MARY, not otherwise: for adventuring to celebrate in her
absence, it was thought fit he should be punished for his presumptuous
transgression. With the Lady her self all means had been used to conform
her to the Times: the King himself had taken much pains with her by often
suasory Letters, the Counsel had done the like, and personally to satisfy
her with reason, diverse learned men had been employed. But their labors were
vain; for hatred to our Religion for her Mothers, for her own sake, and some
politic respects (for by the Decrees of our Religion she was made
illegitimate, and consequently cut off from the Succession to the Crown, if
her brother should die issulesse) confirmed her in that Superstition which she
had sucked from her Mother.

An Arrian burned.
On the fourteenth of April one GEORGE PARIS a Gormane was at London burned
for Arrianisme.

An Earthquake.
On the five and twentieth of May, Croydon and seven or eight other Villages in
Surrey were terribly shaken with an Earthquake.

The Queen of Scots in- England.
Toward the beginning of November, MARY Dowager of Scotland arriving at
Portsmouth, sent to the King and craved leave to pass through England into
Scotland. Which being granted, and she invited to London, entered the City on
the second of November, where her entertainment was general and Royal. On the
sixth of November she departed for Scotland, and had the charges of her whole
Retinue borne until she arrived there in safety.

The Earl of Arundell and the Lord Paget committed.
About the same time also the Earl of Arundell and the Lord Paget were (but
for what causes is uncertain) committed to the Tower. In the ensuing April
the Garter was taken from the Lord Paget, and conferred on the Earl of Warwick
the Duke of Northumberlands eldest Son. As for the Earl o^ Arundell he was
on the third of December in the next year set at liberty.

The Bishop of Ely Lord Chancellor.
On the one and twentieth of December was the Lord Rich removed from the
Chancellorship, and THOMAS GOODRICH Bishop of Ely made Lord Chancellor.

Anno Dom. 1552. Reg. 6.
The Duke of Somerset beheaded.
THe Duke of Somerset had now continued two months in prison since his
condemnation. At length the violence of his enemies (notwithstanding the Kings
desire to save his Uncle, under whose tuitio^ he had passed his childehood)
drew him to the Scaffold. Being on the twenty four of January brought to the
place of execution, he in this manner bespake the Assembly:

Being by the Law condemned, I here willingly submit my self, by exemplary
punishment to satisfy it is Rigor. That God has been pleased to grant me so
long a preparative to my end, I humbly thank his eternal Goodness: But in
that he has been farther pleased to inspire me with the knowledge of his
Truth, and to make me an instrument for the propagation of the same, J can
never sufficiently magnify his Mercies. Jn this do J rejoice, in this only do J
triumph: beseeching him, that his Church in this Realm being now reformed
according to the Jnstitution of the ancient Primitive, the Members thereof may
conform their lives to the purity of it*s received Doctrine. More he would
have said, but a strange tumult and sudden consternation of the Assembly
interrupted him. The People possessed with a Panique terror, as it were with an
unanimous consent cried out, Fly quickly, fly: insomuch that of that infinite
multitude which the expectation of the Dukes death had drawn together, as many
as well could seeking to shift for themselves, many are trodden to death, and
others in the throng as unfortunately pressed, the rest amazedly expect their
own destruction, when their own fears were the greatest danger. The cause of
their fears no man could certainly speak: one said he heard a terrible crack
of thunder; ano^^er the noise of a troup of horse. and some over credulous,
according to the sway of their affections, joyfully affirmed that messengers
were come with a pardon for the Duke. But certain halberdiers appointed to
guard the Duke to the scaffold; but coming tardy, and crying to their fellows,
Away, away, were more probably the occasion of this tumult. The true meaning of
this amphibologicall word, which commands haste to and from, being mistaken,
and withal a company of armed men bending themselves (as was supposed) against
the multitude, filled all with terror and confusion. The affrighted people
being at length with much ado pacified; the Duke entreating them for a while to
contain themselves, that he might with a more settled mind depart out of this
world; by prayer commended his soul to God, and then suffered with admirable
constancy, neither by voice, gesture, nor countenance showing himself any way
dejected or moved at the apprehension of death, unless peradventure you might
take this for a token of fear, that when he covered his eyes with his
handkerchiefe, his cheeks had a little more tincture of red then usual.

That his death was generally lamented, is manifest. Many there were who kept
handkerchiefes dipped in his blood, as so many sacred Relics. Among the rest
a sprightfull Dame two years after, when the Duke of Northumberland was led
captive through the City for his opposition against Queen MARY, ran to him in
the streets, and shaking out her bloody handkerchief before him, Behold (said
she) the blood of that worthy man, that good Uncle of that excellent King,
which shed by thy treacherous machination, now at this instant begins to
revenge it self upon thee. And Sir RALPH VANE, who on the twenty sixth of
February was with Sir MILES PARTRIDGE hanged at the same place where the Duke
had suffered, at what time also Sir MICHAEL STANHOP and Sir THOMAS ARVNDELL
were there beheaded, going to his execution said, that His blood would make
Northumberland's pillow uneasy to him. These four Knights being to be
executed, did each of them take God to witness, that they never practiced any
thing against the King nor any of his Counsel.

To return to the Duke, such was his end. As for his life, he was a pious just
man, very zealous in point of Reformation, very sollicitous of the King's
safety, every way good, and careful of the Weal public, only a little
tainted with the Epidemique of those times, who thought it Religion to reform
the Church, as well in it is exuberancy of means, as of superstitious
Ceremonies, whereof not a few of our Cathedralls to this day complain.

Many prodigies ensued his death, whereby many did presage the calamities of
succeeding times. In August six Dolphins (a fish seldom seen in our seas)
were taken in the Thames, three near Quinborough, and three a little above
Greenwich, where the water is scarce tainted with the Seas brackishnesse. On
the seventh day of October were three Whales cast up at Gravesend. And on the
third of August A Monster.
at Middleton in Oxfordshire was borne a Monster, such, as few either
Naturalists or Historians write of the like. It had two heads and two bodies as
far as the navill distinct, where they were so conioined that they both had but
one way of egestion, and their heads looking always contrary ways. The legs
and thighs of the one did always ly at the trunk of the other. This (female)
Monster lived eighteen days, and might have longer peradventure, if it had
not been so often opened to satisfy curiosity, that it took cold and died.

This year the Monastery of the Franciscan Friars in London was converted into
a brave Hospital, wherein four hundred poor boys are maintained, and have
education befirting free borne men. It is at this day called Christ-Church.

In South warke also was another like place provided for the relief of poor
sick persons, and is dedicated to the memory of Saint Thomas.

Anno Dom. 1553. Reg. 7.
The King sickeneth.
THis year sets a period to young EDWARDS Reign, who by the defluxion of a
sharp rheum upon the lungs shortly after became hecticall, and died of a
consumption. Some attribute the cause of his sickness to grief for the death
of his Uncles; some to poison, and that by a nosegay of sweet flowers presented
him as a great dainty on New years day. But what hopeful Prince was there
ever (almost) immaturely taken away, but poison or some other treachery was
imputed? Our deluded hopes being converted into grief, out of passion we belly
Fate. Had there been the least suspicion of any such inhumane practice, Queen
MARY would never have suffered it to have passed as an act of indifferency
without an inquest. It was doubtless a posthumous rumor purposely raised to
make the Great Ones of that Reign distatefull to the succeeding times.
Howsoever it were, the Nobility understanding by the Physicians, that the
King's estate was desperate, began every one to project his own ends. The Duke
of Northumberland as he was more potent than the rest, so did his ambition fly
higher. It was somewhat strange, that being not any way able to pretend but a
shadow of Right to the Crown, he should dream of confirming the Succession of
it in his Family. But he shall sore so high, that he shall singe his wings, and
fall no less dangerously than he whom the Poets feign to have aspired to a
like unlawful government. As for the Ladies MARY and ELIZABETH, two obstacles
to be removed, he doubted not by reasons drawn from their questionable Births
to exclude them. The next reguard must be of the Daughters of HENRY the
Seventh. But of the Queen of Scots (who was Niepce to MARGARET the eldest
Daughter of HENRY the Seventh) he was little sollicitous. For by reason of our
continual enmity with the Scots, and thence inveterate hatred, he imagined
that any show of reason would put her by, especially she being contracted to
the French, whose insolent government he was confident the English would never
brook. In the next place consideration is to be had of Lady FRANCIS Daughter
to CHARLES BRANDON Duke of Suffolk by MARY Dowager of France the second
Daughter of HENRY the Seventh, who, her two Brothers then alive, had been
married to HENRY GRAY Marquis of Dorset. The two Brothers (as before) dying of
the late mortality, the Marquis is in the right of his Wife created Duke of
Suffolk; and this was another stop to his Ambition. For the removal whereof
he intends this course: He imparts his designs to the Duke of Suffolk, and
desires that a Match may be concluded between the Lord GVILFORD DVDLEY his
fourth Son, and Lady JANE GRAY the Duke of Suffolke's eldest Daughter. And
because, if only right of inheritance should be pretended, the Duchess of
Suffolk were in reason to be preferred before her Daughter; he undertakes to
persuade the King not only to disherit his Sisters by Will and Testament, but
also by the same to declare the Lady JANE his next and immediate Successor.
Suffolk biting at this bait, they complot by drawing the chiefest of the
Nobility, to contract Affinity either with the one or the other to procure the
general assent of them all. So on the same day that Lady JANE under anvnhappy
Planet was married to Lord GVILFORD, the Duke of Suffolk's two youngest
Daughters are married, CATHARINE to Lord HENRY eldest son to the Earl of
Pembrooke, and crouch backed MARY to MARTIN KEYS Groom Porter.
Northumberlands eldest Daughter also named CATHARINE was married to the Lord
HASTINGS eldest son to the Earl of Huntington. These marriages were in June
solemnized at London, the King at that time extremely languishing.

Having thus brought these things to a desired pass, nothing now remained but
to act his part with the weak King. To Him he inculcates, In what danger the
estate of the Church would be, if He dying, provision were not first made of a
pious Successor, and such a one as should maintain the now established
Religion. How the Lady MARY stood affected was well known. Of the Lady
ELIZABETH there might be peradventure better hopes. But their causes were so
strongly connexed, that either both must be excluded, or the Lady MARY be
admitted. That it was the part of a religious and good Prince to set apart all
respects of Blood, where God's Glory and the Subjects weal might be
endangered. They that should do otherwise, were after this life (which is
short) to exspect revenge at God's dreadful Tribunal, where they are to
undergo the trial either of eternal life or eternal death. That the Duke of
Suffolk, had three Daughters nearest to him in degrees of Blood: they were
such as their Virtues and Birth did commend, and from whom the violation of
Religion, or the danger of a foreign yoke by any match was not to be feared,
for asnuch as their education had been Religious, they had as it were with
their milk sucked in the spiritual food of true Christian Doctrine, and were
also matched to Husbands as zealous of the Truth as themselves; He could wish
and would advise, that these might be successively called to the Crown, but
with this caution, That they should maintain the now established Religion. And
although Lady JANE the eldest of the three were married to his Son; he would
be content that they should be bound by oath to perform whatsoever his Majesty
should decree: for he had not so much reguard to his own as the general good.

His Will, wherein he disinheriteth his Sisters.
These reasons so prevailed with the young King, that he made his Will, and
therein as much as in him lay, excluded both his Sisters from the Succession to
the Crown, and all others whosoever, beside the Duke of Suffolke's Daughters.
This Will was read in presence of the Counsel and the chief Judges of the
Realm, and by each of them confirmed, with a strict command that no man should
publish the contents of it, least it might prove an occasion of sedition and
civil tumults. The Archbishop CRANMER did for a while refuse to subscribe to
it, not deeming it any way agreeable to equity, that the right of lawful
Succession should upon any pretenses be violated: But the King urging him, and
making Religion a motive, which was otherwise likely to suffer, after a long
deceptation he was at length drawn to assent. But these delays of his were so
little reguarded by Queen MARY, that under her scarce any man was sooner
marked out for destruction. Some few days after these passages, He dies.
on the fixed of July in the sixteenth year of his age King EDWARD at Greenwich
surrendered his soul to God, having under his Tutors reigned six years, five
months, and nineteen days, and even in that tender age given great proof of
his virtue; a Prince of great devotion, constancy of mind, love of the Truth,
and incredibly studious; virtues which with Royal Greatness seldom concur.
Some three hours before his death, not thinking any one had been present to
over-heare him, he thus commended himself to God:

His Prayer.
O Lord God, free me Ibeseech thee out of this miserable and calamitous life,
and receive me among the number of thine Elect, if so be it be thy pleasure:
although not mine but thy will he done. To thee O Lord do J commend my Spirit.
Thou know O Lord how happy J shall be, may I live with thee in Heaven: yet
would I might live and be well for thine Elects sake, that I might faithfully
serve thee. O Lord God, bless thy People, and save thine Jnheritance. O Lord
God, save thy people of England, defend this Kingdom from Popery, and
preserve thy true Religion in it, that Iand my People may bless thy most Holy
Name for thy Son JESUS CHRIST. Then opening his eyes, which he had hitherto
closed, and seeing Doctor OWEN the Physician, (from whose report we have this
Prayer) sitting by, Are you there? (quoth he) J had not thought you had been so
near: who answered, I heard you speak, but could not collect your words:
Jndeed (replied the King) J was making my prayer to God. A little after, he
suddenly cried out, I faint, Lord have mercy upon me, and receive my Soul:
which words he had scarce spoken ere he departed. Much might be spoken in
praise of this Prince, but reguardfull of my intended brevity, I will Cardanus
Lib. de Genituris.
only give you a taste of him out of CARDAN, who about a year before
travailing through England toward Scotland, was admitted to his presence. The
conference between them he thus describes. Aderant illi (speaking of the
King) Gratiae: Linguas enim multas callebat puer, etc. He was stored with
Graces: for being yet a Child he spoke many Languages, his native English,
Latin, French, and as I hear, was also skilled in the Greek, Italian,
Spanish, and peradventure some others. He wanted neither the rudiments of
Logic, the principles of Philosophy, nor Music: He was full of Humanity the
relish of Morality, of Gravity befitting Royalty, of hopes great as himself: A
Child of so great wit, and such expectation could not be borne, without a
kind of miracle in nature. I write not this Rhetorically with the excess of
an Hyperbole; for to speak all the truth were to spoke far more. Being yet but
in his fifteenth year, he spoke Latin as readily and politely as I could.
What (says he) is the subject of your Books De Rerum Varietate? (I had
dedicated them to his Majesty) CARD. In the first Chapter I show the long
hidden and vainly sought after causes of Comets. KING. And what is the cause?
CARD. The concourse and meeting of the lights of the erratique Stars. KING. But
being the Planets are moved with several motions, how comes it to pass, that
the Comet does not either presently dissolve and scatter, or move with their
motion? CARD. It moves indeed, but with a far swifter motion then the Planets,
by reason of the diversity of the aspect, as we see in Crystal and the Sun
when a Rainebow rebound upon a wall, for a little change makes a great
difference of the place. KING. But how can that be done without a subject? for
the wall is the subject to the Rainbow. CARD. As in the Galaxia or Milky way,
and in the reflection of lights when many candles lighted are set near one
another, they do produce a certain lucid and bright mean. You may know the
Lion by his paw, as they say. For his ingenuous nature and sweet conditions he
was great in the expectation of all either good or learned men. He began to
favor learning before he could know it, and knew it before he knew what use to
make of it. O how true is that saying, Jmmodicis brevis est etas, and rara
senectus:


Immoderate growths short lived are, aged seld.

He could give you only a taste of his Virtue, not an example. When occasion
required a Maiestique gravity, you should see him act an old man: in his
affability and mildness he showed his age. He played on the Lute, accustomed
himself to public affairs, was liberally disposed, etc. So much CARDAN. His
Corpse was on the ninth of August with no very great pomp interred at
Westminister near to his Grandfather HENRY the Seventh.

And here had I with this King's death concluded this second Part, had not the
consideration of a memorable enterprise of this Kings occurred. To SEBASTIAN
CABOTA a Portugal, for his admirable skill in Cosmography and the art of
Navigation, he allowed an annuity of an hundred sixty six pounds. EDWARD by
this CABOTA'S persuasion on the twelfth of May set forth three ships under Sir
HVGH WILLOVGHBEY for the discovery of unknown Regions in the North parts of
the world. The maine hope of this voyage was, that way to open a shorter
passage to those vast Countries of the East, Catay and China. Near upon the
coast of Norway these Ships were so severed by tempest, that they never met
again. One of these great Ships ter^ified with the greatness of irresistible
dangers, quickly returned home. Sir HVGH WILLOUGHBY arrived at last at a
Country under the Latitude of seventy four degrees, not inhabited, hitherto
to us Sir Hugh Willoughby frozen to death.
unknown, and was forced to winter there, where he and all his company were
frozen to death. The Ship was afterward found by some the like English
Adventures, and in his Deske a writing relating the adventures of each day, his
Will also, by which it appeared that he lived until January. RICHARD
CHANCELLER with the third Ship making a more prosperous voyage, after many
dangers and incer^ainties arrived at last among the Russes and Muscovites. To
these parts some few years after he made a second voyage: but in his return
suffered wrack on the Commerce with the Muscovite.
Scottish coast, where seeking to save the Muscovite Ambassador, he himself
was drowned. Howsoever he were unfortunate, he opened a rich vein of traffic
to succeeding times, whereby we have an exact discovery of that Country, and of
the Manners of those Heathen Christians.

FINIS.
ANNALS OF ENGLAND.

QVEENE MARY.

The Third Book.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip, and William Stansby, 1630.

Fortissimi quique interfecti sunt (...).
portrait

ANNALS OF ENGLAND.
The third Book.
Queen MARY.
Anno Dom. 1553. Reg. 1.
WHen the Lady MARY, long since acquainted with Northumberland's secret
practices, was also certified of her Brother's decease; not thinking it safe to
abide near London, where her Enemies were in their full strength; pretending a
fear of the Plague by reason of the suspicious death of one of her household,
she sudainly departed from Saint Edmundsbury, Lady Mary flies into Suffolk.
and came in one day to Framingham Castle in Suffolk, distant from London
fourscore miles, and seated near the Sea, from whence if Fortune frowned on
her, she might make an easy escape into France. Here she took upon her the
Title of Queen, and by letters to her Friends, and the Nobles, wished their
speedy repair unto Her.

In the mean time Northumberland having for two days together consulted with
his friends concerning the managing of this great business, the King's death
being not yet published, sent command to the Lord Mayor of London, to repair
forthwith to Greenwich with six Aldermen, and twelve other Citizens of chiefest
account. To them he declares the King's departure, and the seating of Lady JANE
in the Throne of Soveraignety, showing withal the King's Testament under
Seal, which did import no less then the settling the Succession on her and
that Family: He causes them either by terror or promises to swear Allegiance
to Lady JANE, with command, and that under a great penalty, that they should
not as yet divulge these secret passages. What a furtherance it might be to his
affairs if he could assure himself of this City, he was too wife to be
ignorant of: and as for suppressing the report of the King's death; he thought
it might prove a means to facilitate the surprisall of the Lady MARY, as yet
probably secure for lack of notice of her Brother's decease. But understanding
that she had made an escape into Suffolk; Lady Jane proclaimed Queen.
Lady JANE was by almost all the Peers of the Realm pompously conducted to
the Tower, and with great solemnity publicly proclaimed Queen. She was of
age about sixteen, of feature not admirable but handsome, incredibly learned,
very quickwitted, and wise both beyond her Sex and above her Age, wonderfully
devoted to purity of Doctrine, and so far from desire of this advancement, that
she began not to act her part of Royalty without tears, manifesting it to the
world, that she was sorced by her parents and friends ambition to this high but
dangerous ascent. At her going through the City toward the Tower, the
concourse of the People was great, their acclamations few, as if the
strangeness of some new spectacle had drawn them together, rather then any
intent of gratulation. Which Queen MARYES (for so we must henceforth call her)
friends hitherto distrustful more of success then the cause, accepted of as
an happy omen, and were encouraged to assist her as occasion should invite
them. But the presence of Northumberland a man quick, watchful, and very
politic, was yet a remora to their proceedings: Him they must send farther
of, or be content to si^ still.

The same day that Lady JANE entered the Tower letters sent from Queen MARY are
read openly at Counsel Table, wherein she commands the Lords to repair to
her, as being the next in Succession to the Crown, and that they at last
should take example from the general votes of the Kingdom, she being now
every where acknowledged the lawful Sovereign. And indeed the Norfolk and
Suffolk men were become hers; and the wiser sort did easily discern, that the
affections of the people were hers. Wherefore it was thought at first expedient
speedily to levy an Army, and that* while yet the hearts of the people were
free from any impression, and their minds yet equally poised in the balance of
irresolution, were either way to be swayed: By this course they might be
peradventure too strong for the Queen, and preventing her plea by Arms, force
her to plead more necessarily for her li^e. And an Army was raised, whereof the
Duke of Suffolk was appointed General.

But the fau^ors of MARYES cause, whose maine project was to remove that grand
obstacle the Duke of Northumberland, slily insinuating themselves with Lady
JANE, persuaded her not to part with her Father, but to dispatch Northumberland
for this employment, the very terror of whose name (his late victory over the
Norfolk Rebels being yet fresh in memory) would effect more, then the other
could either by policy or arms: And indeed to whose trust could a daughter be
better committed then to her Fathers? As for the City, the Faith and wonted
Wisdom of the Counsel now with her, would contain it in obedience, and
work it to her best advantages. She poor Lady swaied with these reasons,
ernestly beseeched Northumberland forced to be General.
Northumberland himself to undergo this burden, who at length though
unwillingly consented. His chief fear was, least the advantage of his absence
might encourage opposite practisers to raise some tumults: But finding either
excuses or absolute denials no way available, he prepares himself for this
expedition, and on the thirteenth of July sets forth from London, with an Army
of six thousand. At hi^ departure it is reported he should say to the Lord
GRAY of Wilton who then accompanied him, Do you see (my Lord) what a conflux of
people here is drawn together to see us march? And yet of all this multitude,
you hear not so much as one that wishes us success. The Londoners stood very
well affected in point of Religion, so did also for the most part the Suffolk
and the Norfolk men, and they knew MARY to be absolute for Popery. But the
English are in their due respects to their Prince so loyally constant, that no
reguards, no not pretext of Religion, can alienate their affections from their
lawful Sovereign, whereof the miserable ca^e of Lady JANE will anon give a
memorable example. For although her Faction had laid a strong foundation, and
as may appear by the premises, had most artificially raised their
superstructure; yet as soon as the true and undoubted Heir did but manifest
her resolution to vindicate her Right, this accurate pile presently fell, and
dissolved as it were in the twinkling of an eye, and that chiefly by their
ind^vour, of whom for their Religions sake Lady JANE might have presumed her
self assured. Neither were the people made any thing the more inclinable by
publicly impugning Queen MARYES Right in the Pulpit, a course wherein
Northmmberland engaged many a Preacher. Nay, even in the City of London, that
learned and godly Prelate NICHOLAS RIDLEY upon the deprivation of BONER
consecrated Bishop of London (who I wish had not erred in this matter) was
scarce heard out with patience. As for Queen MARY, if that Rule of the
Civilians be not true, that L. qui^^e provinci^ Divus ff. de Rit. Nupt. L. ^.
C. d. Jncest. Nupt. and Glo^ ibid.^*^um in^er. etc. ex t^nore* Extr. qui sil.
sint legit.
Matrimony contracted without any conceived impediment, although it after
chance to be dissolved as v^l^wfull, is of such force, that the Children
begotten in such wedlock are to be accounted lawful: yet why they should
seek to exclude the Lady ELIZABETH, I cannot but wonder, neither can I think
that any probable reason therefore could be yielded by them, who deemed Queen
MARY illegitimate. To let pass also in the mean time MARY Queen of Scots, to
whom without doubt, the Issue of HENRY the Fighth being extinct, the Crown
properly belonged. Whatsoever the reasons urged by these Preachers were, they
were so far from making any impression in the minds of the People, that they
every where flocked abundantly to Queen MARY: and this not out of a vulgar
levity, many of the Nobility and other prime men having followed her party
even from the beginning; such were the Earls of Bathe and Sussex, the Heirs
of the Lords WHARTON and MORDANT, Sir WILLIAM DRVRY, Sir JOHN SHELTON, Sir
HENRY BEDINGFEILD, Sir HENRY IERNEGAM, SVLIERD, FRESTON, and others. But above
all Sir EDWARD HASTINGS brother to the Earl of Huntingdon was most famous, who
having Commission from the Duke of Northumberland to raise four thousand Foot,
after he had levied them, revolted to Queen MARY: For which act she afterward
created him Baron of Lowborough, honoring also Sir JOHN WILLIAMS with another
Baronie, as a reward of his faithful service. And Serieant MORGAN not coming
short of these in his devoir, became afterward one of the chief Judges of the
Realm.

But an unexpected accident did most advantage Queen MARYES affairs. Six
ships had Northumberland set forth on that part of the Kingdom, where it is
confined with the German Ocean, that he might intercept the Queen, if she
sought to make an escape, and to have them ready for all occasions. These
ships were then by tempest driven in at Yarmouth, when in the Town there was a
press of soldiers for the Queen. The mariners and soldiers induced partly
by threats, partly by entreaty, yield the ships to Sir HENRY IERNEGAM for
Queen MARYES use, and associate themselves with the new raised companies. This
was to her a matter of great consequence, and that such she deemed it, her joy
well testified. And now encouraged with these accessions of men, ordnance, and
munition, she feared not Northumberland, and resolved not so much her own
defense, as the speedy suppression of her Competit^ix.

The Lords who had hitherto adhered to Lady JANE were somewhat terrified with
this adverse accident. And the Queens friends living at Court who had reserved
themselves for opportunity and were as yet concealed, were now so imboldened as
to reveal themselves to each other, desiring nothing more then that being set
at liberty (for yet the Tower was the Court) they might but gain entrance into
the City, that they might more freely discover themselves. But they must
either make the way, or be content to pray only for her, whom they could not
otherwise advantage. It happened that Northumberland had written for more
aides. At his setting forth he was, besides his four sons* accompanied with
the Marquis of Northampton, the Earl of Huntingdon, the Lord GRAY, and many
other persons of note: and had when he came to Cambridge an Army consisting of
eight thousand Foot and two thousand Horse. Removing thence toward Saint
Edmonsbury, he found that many of his soldiers had forsaken their Colors,
and was wonderfully jealous least of the remainder many would do the like.
Wherefore returning to Cambridge, he plied the Lords of Northumberland
forsaken by his soldiers.
the Counsel with continual demands of supplies to fill his companies grown
thin by the departure of so many fugitives. The Lords that favored MARY'S
cause laying hold on this occasion, obsequiously tendering their services for
the furtherance of the Dukes designs, decree speedy aides for him; but
pretend, that it were dangerous to employ any other in these levies, then such
of whose loyalty they might rest assured, least the like treachery might be
committed as had been already by Sir EDWARD HASTINGS; and profer themselves
for the execution of this affair. So by the Duke of Suffolk his permission
they all let loose as it were out of prison, disperse themselves over the
City. The chiefest of them that were resolved for the Queen, were the Marquis
of Winchester Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Arundell
(whom after a years imprisonment with the Lord PAGET, the Duke of
Northumberland had lately set at liberty) and Sir THOMAS CHEYNEY Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports. By the industry of these, as many of the Lords of the
Counsel as were within call (excepting the Duke of Suffolk) and as many
other of the Nobility as were known to be at least not enemies to Queen
MARYES cause, had a meeting at Bainards Castle, under pretense of conference
with the French Ambassador LAVALL, about I know not what important business:
But indeed to consult of a mean how to reduce Lady JANE to her first
original of a private fortune. There HENRY Earl of Arundell bitterly
inveighing against the Duke of Northumberland, after he had ripped up the acts
of former times, and burdened him with all that had been done unjustly,
cruelly, or amiss in the Reign of King EDWARD; he at last comes to that
treacherous act of the disherison of the Children of HENRY the Eighth,
professing that he wondered how he had so inthralled such personages
(intimating those Nobles present) as to make them instruments of his
wickedness: For by their consent and suffrages it came to pass, that the Duke
of Suffolkes Daughter, the same Northumberland's Daughter in Law, did now
personate a Queen, the gross and power of Soveraignetie remaining indeed with
Northumberland, that he might freely wreake his tyranny on their lives and
fortunes. Religion is indeed the thing pretended: But suppose we have no
reguard to these Apostolical Rules, Evil must not be done that good may come
thereof, and we must obey even evil Princes not for fear, but for conscience
sake, yet how does it appear, that MARY intends any alteration in Religion?
Certainly having been lately petitioned unto in this point by the Suffolk
men, She gave them (and that was true) a very hopeful answer. And what a mad
blindness it is, for the avoidance of an uncertain danger, to precipitate our
selves into most certain destruction? I would we had not erred in this kind.
But errors past cannot be recalled, some may peradventure be amended, wherein
speedy execution oftimes happily supplieth former defects. Recollect your
selves then, and so make use of your authority, that MARY the undoubtedly
lawful Heir The Lords resolve for Queen Mary,
may be publicly proclaimed. After he had spoken to this purpose, the Earl
of Pembroke readily and generously professed that he subscribed to the Earl
of Arundel's motion, and grasping his sword, signified his resolution to
maintain the right of MARY against all opposers. The rest take after them, and
decree the same. So commanding the repair of the Lord Mayor and the rest of
the Aldermen, they in Cheapside proclaim Lady MARY Queen, with addition also
of the title of Supreme Head of the Church. And to add more majesty to their
act by some devout solemnity, they go in Procession to Paul's singing that
admirable hymn of those holy Fathers Saint AMBROSE and Saint AUGUSTINE,
commonly known by its first words, Te Deum. Then they dispatched away some
companies to seize on the And to suppr^sse Lady Jane.
Tower, and command the Duke of Suffolk to render himself. The Duke as easily
dejected at the news, as he had formerly been elevated by vain hope, entering
his Daughters chamber, forbad the farther use of Royal ceremonies, wishing her
to be content with her return to a private fortune. Whereto she answered with
a settled countenance: Sir, I better brook this message, then my forced
advancement to Royalty; out of obedience to you and my mother I have grievously
sinned, and offered violence to my self: now I do willingly, and as obeying the
motions of my soul, relinquish the Crown, and endeavor to salve those faults
committed by others, if at least so great an error may be salved by a willing
relinquishment and ingenuous acknowledgement. Having spoken thus much, she
retired into a withdrawing room, more troubled at the danger she had incurred,
then the defeasance of so great hopes. The Duke himself presently repaired to
the rest of the Counsel, and subscribed to their Decree. This Proclamation
was on the nineteenth of July published, and entertained with such
acclamations, that no part of it could be heard, after the first mention of
Queen MARYES name. The Earl of Arundell and the Lord PAGET having thus
ordered this weighty affair, accompanied with thirty horse, rid post that
night unto the Queen, to certify her of the gladsome tidings of her subjects
loyal intentions.

Northumberland proclaims Mary Queen at Cambridge.
In the mean time the Lords of the Counsel certify Northumberland of these
passages, commanmanding him withal to subscribe to the Decree, and dismiss
his Army. But he out of the presage of his own fortune had before the receipt
of their letters proclaimed her Queen at Cambridge, where in a counterfeit joy
he threw up his Cap with the sincerer multitude. Then he cashiered the rest of
his wavering companies, and almost all the Lords, who had hitherto followed
him, with a legal revolt passing over to the Queen, and making Northumberland
the sole author and cause of these disloyal distractions, were upon their
submission pardoned.

Lady JANE, having as on a Stage for ten days only personated a Queen, was
committed to safe custody and the Ladies who had hitherto attended her, were
commanded each to their homes. The Duke of Northumberland was by the Queens
command apprehended by the Earl of Arundell, and committed to the Tower. The
manner of his taking is reported to have been thus: After so many checkes
uncertain what course to take, resolved to fly, but not knowing whether, the
Pensioners (who with their Captain Sir JOHN GATES had followed him in this
expedition) while he was pulling on his boots seized on him, saying, that it
was sit they should excuse themselves from the imputation of treason by his
testimony. The Duke withstanding them, and the matter being likely to grow to
blows, at the very instant came those letters from the Counsel, which
commanded them all ^o lay aside their arms, and peaceably to repair to their
homes. These letters took up the matter, and set the Duke at liberty, which
notwithstanding lasted not long. For the next morning, as he was ready to take
Northumberlaud, and some other Lords taken.
horse, the Earl of Arundell intercepted him, and with him apprehended the
Earl of Huntingdon, the Earl of Warwick Northumberland's eldest son, and
two others younger Lord AMBROSE and Lord HENRY DVDLEY, Sir ANDREW DVDLEY the
Duke's brother, Sir THOMAS PALMER, Sir JOHN GATES, his brother HENRY GATES and
Doctor EDWIN SANDS, who on the five and twentieth of July were brought to
London, and presently committed to the Tower. The Earl of Huntingdon was, not
long after, set at liberty, but his son was presently. Sir JOHN GATES, whom
Northumberland accused to have been the contriver of all this mischief, and
Sir THOMAS PALMER were after executed. The Earl of Warwick died in prison.
The Lords AMBROSE and HENRY DVDLEY were pardoned. HENRY was afterward slain
with a shot at the siege of S. Quintin; but AMBROSE finding fortune more
propitious, outlived MARY, and by Queen ELIZABETH created Earl of Warwick,
long flourished in the happiness of her favor. Sir ANDREW DVDLEY after his
condemnation was also pardoned. Doctor SANDS being then ce-chancellour of the
University of Cambridge had by Northumberland's command in the Pulpit
publicly impugned Queen MARYES cause, and defended that of Lady JANE; but
with that wisdom and moderation, although upon the short warning of some few
hours, that he abundantly satisfied the Duke, and yet did not so deeply
incur the displeasure of the adverse part, but that his friends prevailed
with the Queen for his pardon. So that after a years imprisonment he was set
at liberty, and presently fled over into Germany: after the death of Queen
MARY returning from his voluntary exile, he was consecrated Bishop of
Worcester, from which Sea he was translated to London, and thence again to the
Archbishopric of York: a man for his learning, virtue, wisdom, and extract
very famous, but most especially happy in his Issue, whereof many were
admirable for their indowments both internal and external, and of whom we
have in our age seen three honored with Knighthood.

On the six and twentieth of July, the Marquis of Northampton (afterward
condemned, and pardoned) Doctor RIDLEY Bishop of London, (who two years after
was burned at Oxford) and beside many others, Lord ROBERT DVDLEY that great
Earl of Leicester under Queen ELIZABETH, were brought to the Tower. On the
seven and twentieth, the Duke of Suffolk (to whom the Queen with admirable
clemency within four days restored his liberty) Sir JOHN CHEEK King
EDWARD'S Schoolmaster, Sir ROGER CHOLMELEY chief Justice of the King's Bench,
and Sir EDMOND MOVNTAGVE chief Justice of the Common Pleas, were committed to
the same place, who were all on the third of September set at liberty.

On the thirtieth of July the Lady ELIZABETH accompanied by a great train of
Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen and Ladies (to the number of five hundred, some say
a thousand) set forward from the Strand through London, and so to Wansted,
toward the Queen to congratulate her happy success in vindicating her right
to the Crown. Who on the third of August having dismissed her Army (which had
not yet Queen Mary comes to London.
exceeded the number of 13000.) attended by all the Nobility made a triumphant
entrance through London to the Tower, where the Duke of Norfolk, EDWARD
COVRTNEY son to the Marquis of Excester beheaded in the year 1538. GARDENER
late Bishop of Winchester, and ANNE Duchess of Somerset presented themselves
on their knees, and GARDENER in the name of them all spoke a congratulatory
Oration; which ended, the Queen courteously raised them, and kissing each of
them said, These are all my own prisoners, and gave order for their present
discharge* EDWARD COVRTNEY she restored to his Fathers honors, making him
Marquis of Excester. As for GARDENER, she not only reseated him in the
Bishopric of Winchester, but also on the thre^ and twentieth of August made
him Lord Chancellor of England, notwithstanding that he had not Gardener made
Lord Chancellor.
only subscribed to the Divorce from CATHARINE the Queens Mother, but had
published books, wherein he had defended King HENRY'S proceedings.

Deprived Bishops restored.
On the fifth of August, BONER and TONSTALL who had been formerly deprived of
their Bishoprics, the one of London, the other of Duresme, and shortly after
DAY of Chichester, and HEATH of Worcester were enlarged and restored to their
Bishoprics, the present Incumbents being without due process of Law eiected.

King Edward's Funeral.
On the tenth of August, were celebrated the Exequies of King EDWARD, DAY
Bishop of Chichester preaching, executing in English, and administering the
Sacrament according to the manner and form received in the Reign of EDWARD.
For as yet nothing had been determined concerning any change in point of
Religion. So that when BOWRNE a Chanoin of Paul's (afterward Bishop of Bath and
Wells) preaching at the Cross, did inveigh against the Reformation in King
EDWARD'S time, and did in vpbrading manner argue the injustice of those times,
which condemned BONER to perpetual imprisonment for matter delivered by him in
that place that time four year, who was now by a more just clemency restored
to his liberty and dignity: the people inured to the Protestant Religion, and
could abstain from stoning him, and one of them aiming a poniard at him,
missed him very narrowly: the affections of the Assembly may by this be
conceived, that during the Reign of Queen MARY, the Author of this bold
attempt, notwithstanding the diligence of ernest inquisitors, could never be
discovered. The vproare increasing, and diverse pressing toward the Pulpit,
BOVRNE protected by two Protestant Preachers (BRADFORD and ROGERS, who were
greatly reverenced by the people, and afterward burned for their Religion) was
with great difficulty conveied to the School at Paul's.

The Duke of Northumberland the Earl of Warwick, and the Marquis of
Northampton condemned.
And now at length on the eighteenth of August, the Duke of Norfolk sitting as
high Steward of England, were the Duke of Northumberland,) his son the Earl
of Warwick, and the Marquis of Northampton arraigned at Westminster: where the
Duke of Northumberland pleading, that he had done nothing but by authority of
the Counsel, his plea being not admitted for sufficient, he was condemned of
high Treason. The sentence being pronounced, he craved the favor of such a
death as was usually executed on Noblemen, and not the other: He beseeched
also, that a favorable reguard might be had of his children, in respect of
their age: Thirdly, that he might be permitted to confer with some learned
Divine for the settling of his conscience: And lastly, that her Majesty would be
pleased to send unto him four of her Counsel for the discovery of some
things, which might concern the Estate. The Marquis of Northampton pleaded to
his indictment, that after the beginning of these tumults he had forborne the
execution of any public office; and that all that while, intent to hunting
and other sports, he did not partake in the conspiracy: But it being manifest,
that he was party with the Duke of Northumberland, sentence passed on him like
wise. The Earl of Warwick finding that the Judges in so great a cause
admitted not excuse of age, with great resolution heard his condemnation
pronounced, craving only this favor, that, whereas the goods of those who are
condemned for treason, are totally confiscated, yet her Majesty would be
pleased, that out of them his debts might be discharged. After this, they were
all again returned to the Tower. The next day Sir ANDREW DVDLEY, Sir JOHN
GATES (who was thought in Northumberland's favor to have proiected the
adoption of Lady JANE) Sir HENRY GATES, and Sir THOMAS PALMER were likewise
condemned. On the two and twentieth of the same month, the Duke with the The
Duke of Northumberland beheaded.
rest (having two days before received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) were
conducted to the place of execution: where Northumberland (says that excellent
Historiographer, THVANVS) by the persuasion of NICHOLAS HEATH (afterward Bishop
of York) making his own funeral Oration to the people, acknowledged himself
guilty* and craving pardon for his unseasonable ambition, admonished the
Assembly, That they should embrace the Religion of their forefathers rejecting
that of later date, which had occasioned all the miseries of the forepassed
thirty years: and for prevention for the future, if they desired to present
their souls unspotted to God, and were truly affected to their Country, they
should expel those trumpets of sedition, the Preachers of the Reformed
Religion: As for himself, whatsoever he might pretend, his conscience was
fraught with the Religion of his Fathers, and for testimony hereof he appealed
to his great friend the Bishop of Winchester: but being blinded with ambition,
he had been contented to make wracks of his conscience by temporizing, for
which he professed himself sincerely repentant, and acknowledged the desert
of his death. Having spoken thus much, he craved the charitable devotions of
the Assembly, and commending his soul to God, prepared his body for the
stroke of the axe. This recantation did variously affect the minds of the
multitude, who wondered that he should at last apostatize from that Religion
which he had for sixteen years professed, and in favor whereof chiefly, he
persuaded King EDWARD to endeavor the exclusion of his Sisters from their
lawful Succession. Some write, that being desirous of life, he did it
craftily out of hope of impunity: but that hope being frustrated, to have
repented it afterward. He was suspected (neither were the presumptions small)
to have administered a poisonous potion to King EDWARD: but in his Indictment
there was no mention of it, and that the rather, for that the Judges had
authority only to inflict punishment on him for his conspiracy against the
Queen. At the same time and place were also executed Sir JOHN GATES and Sir
THOMAS PALMER.

Bishops imprisoned.
Many Bishops also, who were thought to have been too too opinionate in point
of Religion, were sent for to London, and there imprisoned, viz. HOOPER of
Gloucester, FARRAR of Saint Davies (who were both crowned with martyrdom) and
COVERDALE of Excester, who at the request of CHRISTIERNE the third King of
Denmark was pardoned. But the Clergy of what rank soever, who would not
forsake their wives, or were invested in Livings, whereof any one had been for
defense of Popery deprived, or that would not by oath promise the defense of
the Romish Religion, were generally forced to relinquish their Benefices.

Peter Marty^*
PETER MARTYR was then Professor at Oxford, who presently upon the death of
King EDWARD, was confined to his house. But after some time his friends so far
prevailed, that he might come to London, where he betook himself to his
Patron the Archbishop of Canterbury. But he could not prove a Sanctuary to
him. The Archbishop himself began now to totter. The Queen, beside that she
was wholly swayed by GARDENER, who extremely hated him, had resolved to wreake
her self on him for the Divorce of her Mother.

-- Manet altamente repostum
Iudicium latum, spretaeque iniuria Matris.
It is reported, that King HENRY having determined to punish his Daughter the
Lady MARY with imprisonment for her contumacy, was by the sole intercession of
CRANMER diverted from his resolutions: And when she was by her Brother King
EDWARD to be disinherited, the Archbishop made a long suasory Oration to the
contrary; neither could he be induced to subscribe to the Decree, until the
Judges of the Realm generally affirming, that it might lawfully be done, the
dying King with much importunity prevailed with him. In ungrateful persons
the conceit (I will not say the feeling) of one injury makes deeper
impression, then can the remembrance of a thousand real benefits. It was now
bruited, that with his fortune CRANMER had also changed his Religion, insomuch
that to gratify the Queen, he had promised to celebrate the Exequies of the
deceased King after the Romish manner. To clear himself of this imputation,
he by writing declares himself ready to maintain the Articles of Religion
set forth by his means under King EDWARD his Reign, to be consonant to the
Word of God and the Doctrine of the Apostles: in which resolution he being
confirmed by PETER MARTYR, required him for his Second in this religious Duel.
But words are not regarded where violence is intended. His death was absolutely
determined; but how it might be fairly contrived, was not yet resolved. First
therefore they deal with him as a Traitor. And having for some while continued
prisoner in the Tower, to alienate the minds of the people who held him in high
esteem, he is on the thirteenth The Archbishop Cranmer, Lady Jane, Lord
Guilford and Lord Ambrose Dudley condemned.
of November together with the Lords AMBROSE and GVILFORD DVDLEY, and Lady
JANE, condemned for treason. But the machinators of this mischief against
CRANMER were so ashamed of their shadowlesse endeavor, that they themselves
became intercessors for his pardon and yet afterward most irreligiously
procured him to be burned for pretended heresy. Before he was committed to
custody, his friends persuaded him, after the example of some other of his
religious Brethren, who had long since escaped into Germany, by flight to
withdraw himself from assured destruction: to whom he answered; Were I
accused of theft, parricide, or some other crime, although I were innocent, I
might peradventure be induced to shift for my self: But being questioned for
my allegiance not to men, but to God, the truth of whose holy Word is to be
asserted against the errors of Popery; I have at this time, with a constancy
befitting a Christian Prelate, resolved rather to leave my life, then the
Kingdom. But* we will now leave CRANMER in Prison, whose farther troubles and
martyrdom we will in their due places relate. Concerning PETER MARTYR, it was
long controverted at the Counsel Table whether, having so much prejudiced the
Catholic Religion, it were ^it he should be proceeded against as an
heretic. But it was at length determined, that because he came into England
upon public assurance, he should have liberty to depart with his Family. So
having letters of pass signed by the Queen, he was transported with his
friend BERNARDINE OCHINVS, and came to Antwerp, from thence to Colen, at last
to Strasburg, from whence he first set forth for England.

In the mean time on the first of October, the Queen was with great pomp
crowned at Westminster The Coronation.
by STEPHEN GARDENER Bishop of Winchester, and that after the manner of her
Ancestors.

On the fifth of the same month a Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein
all the Laws enacted against the Pope and his adherents by HENRY and EDWARD,
were repealed. And in the Convocation A Disputation in the Convocation house.
house at the same time was a long and eager disputation concerning the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Prolocutor Doctor WESTON with many others
maintaining CHRIST'S Corporal real presence in the Sacrament: Among those few
who sided with the Truth, were JOHN AILMER and RICHARD CHEYNEY (both by Queen
ELIZABETH made Bishops, the one of London, the other of Gloucester) JOHN PHILPOT
Archdeacon of Winchester, who confirmed this doctrrine with the testimony of
his blood, JAMES HADDON Deane of Excester, and WALTER PHILIPS Deane of
Rochester. At length the Truth was oppressed by Multitude not Reason. Whereupon
the restitution of Romish rites is again concluded, and on the one and
twentieth of Popery restored.
December, Mass began again to be celebrated throughout England.

The same day also the Marquis of Northampton and Sir HENRY GATES not long
since condemned, were set at liberty and pardoned: And the Lords AMBROSE and
GVILFORD DVDLEY with Lady JANE had their imprisonment more at large, with hope
of pardon also.

Anno Dom. 1554. Reg. 1. and 2.
THe Queen, who was now thirty seven years The Queen inclines to marry.
old, and hitherto thought averse from marriage, either in regard of her own
natural inclination, or conscious to her self of the want of such beauty as
might indeare a husband to her; her affairs so requiring, began at length to
bethink her of an husband. She feared, least the consideration of her sexes
imbecility might bring her into contempt with her people, she being yet scarce
settled in her throne, and the Kingdom still distracted in their affections to
several Competitors. Fame had destined three for her bed, PHILIP Infant of
Spain the Emperou'rs Son, Cardinal POOLE, and the Marquis of Excester. The
two last were proposed for their Royal descent, and the opinion of the love of
their Country, there being hope, that under them the freedom, and the
privileges of the Kingdom might be preserved inviolate. But besides proximity
of Blood in each of the three, Cardinal POOLE was much affected by the Queen,
for his gravity, sanctimony, meekness, and wisdom, COVRTNEY for his
flourishing youth, his courteous and pleasant disposition. But he I knew not
how, was somewhat suspected, not to think sincerely of the late established
Religion, but to have favored the Reformed. And the Cardinal being now in his
fiftieth and third year, was deemed a little too old to be a father of
childen. But their opinion prevailed, as more necessary, who thought this
unsettled Kingdom would require a puissant King, who should be able to curb
the factious subject, and by Sea and Land oppose the French by the accrue of
Scotland become too near neighbors and enemies to us. Upon these motives the
ambitious Lady was easily induced to consent to a match with PHILIP. For the
Treaty whereof the Emperor had about the end of the last year, sent on a
grand Embassage LAMORALLE Count Egmond, with whom CHARLES Count Lalaine, and
JOHN MONTMORENCY were joined in Commission. In January the Ambassadors arrived
at London, and in a few days conclude the marriage, the Conditions whereofwere
these,

The Articles of the Queens marriage with Philip of Spain.
That matrimony being contracted between Philip and Mary, it should be lawful
for Philip to usurp the Titles of all the Kingdoms and Provinces belonging to
his Wife, and should be ioint-Governour with her over those Kingdoms, the
Privileges and Customs thereof always preserved inviolate, and the full and
free distribution of Bishoprics, Benefices, Favors, Offices always remaining
entire to the Queen. That the Queen likewise should be assumed into the
society of all the Realms, wherein Philip either then was, or should be
afterward invested. That if She survived Philip, sixty thousand pounds per
annum, should be assigned for her iointure, as had been formerly assigned to
Lady Margaret Sister to Edward the Fourth and Widow to Charles Duke of
Burgoigne, whereof forty thousand should be raised out of Spain and Arragon,
twenty thousand out of the Netherlands and the Provinces thereto belonging. And
to prevent all future iars and contentions about the division of the
inheritance of the Kingdoms and Provinces which either then were or afterward
should be belonging to either, it is agreed, That the Issue begotten by this
marriage should succeed in all the Queens Kingdoms and Dominions, and in all
the Principalities of the Netherlands and Burgoigne, whereof the Emperor did
stand possessed: That Charles the eldest Son to Philip by a former marriage
should likewise succeed in all the Kingdoms as well of his Father, as of his
Grandmother, and his Grandfather the Emperor, both in Italy and Spain, and by
reason thereof should stand obliged for the payment of the forementioned forty
thousand pounds. If by this matrimony no other Issue shall be begotten then
Female, the Eldest shall succeed in all the Provinces of the Netherlands, but
with this caution, that by the Counsel and consent of her Brother Charles,
she shall make choice of an Husband either ou^ of England or the Netherlands;
if she marry from elsewhere without his consent, she shall be deprived of her
right of Succession, and Charles be invested therein. But to her and her Sisters
a convenient Dowry shall be assigned according to the Laws and Customs of the
places. Jf it happen that Charles, or his Successors shall die without issue;
in that case the first borne by this marriage, although it be a Female, shall
succeed in all the Kingdoms belonging to both these Princes, as well of the
Netherlands, as of Spain, and in all the Principalities of Italy; and shall be
bound to preserve inviolate all the Laws, Privileges, Jmmunities and Customs
of each Kingdom. Between the Emperor, Philip, and his Heirs, between the
Queen, and her Children and Heirs, and between both their Realms and
Dominions, constant Amity, Concord, a perpetual and inviolable League shall be
continued. This League, Agreement, and Articles shall be renewed and confirmed
at Westminster the two and fortieth year of this Which, as I conceive, would
have fallen in the year 1588.
Seculum, and four years after on the sixteenth of January at Vtrecht. As
soon as the Decree concerning these Nuptial Compacts was divulged, many out
of a restles disposition misliking the present times, but especially traducing
the intent of this Accord, as if by it the Spaniard were to become absolute
Lord of all, who should have the free managing of all affairs, and abolishing
our ancient Laws and Customs, would impose an intolerable yoke, as on a
conquered Nation. This was the general conceit of this Action. But in private,
every one according to their diverse humors did mutter diversely: some censuring
the Queens actions, others complaining of the change of Religion contrary to
her promise made to the Suffolk men: some lamented the case of Lady JANE, who
had been forcibly deposed, and cruelly condemned to an ill-deserved death.
Some were swaied by pity, some by the reguard of Religion, but most by the
fear of a Spanish servitude: and others were by their own hopes and the
desire of change animated to a rebellion. A Chieftaine only was wanting, which
defect was Sir Thomas Wyats rebellion.
quickly supplied by Sir THOMAS WYATA Knight of Kent. Who having communicated
the matter with the Duke of Suffolk, Sir PETER CAROW of Devonshire, and some
others, concluded that it would not be expedient to attempt any thing until
the arrival of PHILIP, that so they might not seem to have taken Arms to any
other end, then to secure their Country from the usurpation of a foraine
Prince. So reserving themselves for opportunity, they disperse themselves into
several places: WYAT into Kent a country adjoining to London, and disioyned
from Calais by a little fret of Sea; Sir PETER CAROW into Devonshire, a part of
England in the West opposite to the maine of France; and the Duke of Suffolk
withdrew himself to his place in Warwick shire situated in the very heart of
the Realm. In these several places, they secre^ly furnish themselves with
arms, money, and all sorts of munition, and seek to draw others to partake in
the Conspiracy. Sir PETER CAROW, whether thrust on by his fate, or thinking
delaywould prove dangerous, began secretly to levy some forces in Cornwall,
but the ma^ter being sooner detected then was hoped, and he quickly oppressed,
he presently took ship, and fled into France, where he lurked some time,
until at length being seemingly reconciled to the King, he was taken at
Brussells, and brought captive into England. By what means he afterward made
an escape I know not. But he flourished many years under Queen ELIZABETH, and
died at Rosse in Leinster a Province of Irland in the year 1577. as appears
by his monument in the Cothedrall Church at Excester erected at the costs of
his nephew PETER, who was brother to GEORGE, whom King JAMES for his many
virtues not long since created a Baron.

Sir John Cheek is taken and di^th.
With Sir PETER at the same time Sir JOHN CHEEK, who had been King EDWARD'S
Tutour, was also taken, who came from Strasburg toward Brussells, and that not
without public license, upon no other business, but to visit (as says FOX
the Queens Agents there, or rather according to THVANVS, to marry a wife.
Whatsoever were the cause of his journey, certain it is that he was
intercepted, on the way from Antwerp to Brussells unhorsed by some of the
Queens servants, and tied with cords to a cart, at last muffled, carried on
shipboard, and conveied to the Tower at London, not knowing all the way for
what part of the world he was bound. There, having always in conscience
abhorred the errors of Popery, he was forced to abjure his Religion, for which
he afterward became so repentant, that out of extremity of grief he
languished, and shortly died. These passages I do the more exactly describe,
because there want not some, who relate, that both Sir PETER CAROW, and Sir
JOHN CHEEK for their Religion suffered at a stake on the thirteenth of June
this present year.

But to return to WIAT; he perceiving that his intents were divulged, and that
he had nothing to trust to, no refuge but valor; incited the people in Kent
to a Rebellion, and (as Rebels never want common pretexts to color their
actions) that,

Because the Queen relying too much upon the advice of bad Counsailers, had
lately done, and did daily endeavor many things prejudicial to the Estate of
the Realm: That therefore to prevent farther inconveniences, those Counsailers
must be removed, and others substituted, who should so manage the Estate, as
should answer the trust reposed in such men, whose loyalty should render them
more careful of the public, then their private profit* But above all they
must endeavor, that some means must be used to impeach this determined Match,
by which he plainly foresaw this free Realm would be oppressed with the
mise^ies of a most lamentable servitude: and a floud-gate would be opened to
let in a perpetual current of Superstition: That the effects of their Arms
would prove very profitable to the Queen (for whose happiness he should ever
pray) and to the general good of the Kingdom. But howsoever heefed the giddie
multitude with specious words, the Duke of Suffolk at that time running the
same courses in Warwickshire, it was palpable, that their drift was to depose
MARY, and once more to inthrone captive JANE.

By the five and twentieth of January, fame had filled London with the news of
this Kentish Rebellion. For the repression whereof, the Duke of Norfolk was
the same day dispatched with some small forces, consisting for the most part of
the Queens Guard, which were a little increased by the accession of five
hundred Londoners, who were the next day sent down by water to Gravesend,
where the Duke expected them. With these he resolves to encounter WIAT, whom
his madness had not yet carried beyond Rochester, which (notwithstanding its
weakness being no way fortified he intended to make good against the Duke, and
had encamped within the ruins of the Castle.

Rochester is a City seated upon the River Medway, where falling into the
Thames it is most violent, ebbing and flowing like a straight, and is made
passable by an arched stone bridge of excellent artifice. This bridge had the
Rebels seized, and planted on it some brass double Canons, that they might
debar the Duke (whom they understood by their Scouts to be upon march) of
passage. But he nothing daunted with their proceedings sent a Herald to
proclaim pardon to such as forsaking WIAT, should return to their obedience,
resolving withal to force the bridge and gain entrance into the City. The
Herald executed his office, but with so submisse a voice, that he was heard by
few (for indeed a Pistol held at his breast so terrified him, that he was
content for his own safety to yield to the Rebels so commanding) and was
returned with this answer, that they knew not themselves to be so far
delinquent, as that they should need any such pardon. Only Sir GEORGE HARPER
faining a revolt, made over toward the Duke of Norfolk, but indeed with intent
to persuade ALEXANDER BRET Captain of those five hundred Londoners, to partake
in this action of common disloyalty. Bret with 500. Londoners revolts to Wyat.
Which he performed so effectually, that BRET, whose Company made the
Vauntguard, before he came so near the bridge as to give an assault, sudainly
drawing his sword turned about to his soldiers, and thus bespake them:

Valiant Countrymen, we now engage our selves in a cause, which before we
farther proceed, would require mature deliberation. We march, but against whom?
Are they not our friends, our fellow-natives, with whom we seek to make a
deeper mixture of our bloods? Have they not taken arms for the preservation of
the ancient glory of the English name, and to vindicate our common liberties
against the insolences of the cruel Spaniard? You whose degenerous spirits
can brook the indignities of servitude, continue in God's name with your brave
General, who without doubt will deserve the service of such Worthies: As for
me (who had rather undergo many the most torturing deaths, then betray my
liberty to the Spaniard) I here (happy and prosperous may it prove) inroll my
self under VVyat's Colors, and am confident that some of you out of affection
to your Country will follow my example. He had scarce spoken thus much, when
they all crying out a WYAT, a WYAT, turned their Canon against their fellows,
who followed in the Rere. Which unexpected revolt so terrified the Duke of
Norfolk, the Earl of Arundell, and Sir HENRY IERNE^AM Captain of the Guard,
who followed the Duke in this expedition, that they instantly betook
themselves to flight. The remaindes of that small Army prepared themselves
according to the example of their Commanders, when WYAT with some horse
intercepted their flight, and seized on eight brass pieces withal the Dukes
munition: then used he some persuasions to pervert their loyalty, professing
withal, that if any one would be an instrument of his own misery by
assisting the Queen, he should have free license to depart, desiring all
such, that they would certify all men, but especially her Majesty, that WYAT
calling God and men to witness did protest, that he took not Arms any way
to prejudice her, but to maintain the liberties of his Countr^y inviolate
against foraine machinations. The five hundred Londoners, many of the Guard,
and the greatest part of the headless Army forthwith join with WYAT, who now
upon confidence of his forces resolves to make speedily for London.

The Duke of Suffolk persuades the people to Arms in vain.
Whiles WYAT thus acts his part in Kent, the Duke of Suffolk, who with his
brothers Lord JOHN and Lord LEONARD GRAY departed from London on the five and
twentieth of January, did every where incite the people to take arms against
the Spaniard. But finding, that this alarm took not, and knowing he had waded
too far to hope for a second pardon, he determined to endeavor an escape by
flight. But the Earl of Huntingdon sent by the Queen with three hundred Horse
to take him, made him alter his resolution. The Duke's company consisted not of
above fifty, with which small number in a Country that no way favored his
proceedings, to oppose the Earl were desperate mad^esse. Therefore
distributing his money amongst them, faines a flight, advises his brothers and
the rest to disperse themselves, and having thus freed himself from the danger
of obsequious eyes, committed himself to the trust of one UNDERWOOD, whom he
had formerly made his Ranger at Astley* But benefits oblige not ignoble minds,
which either mercenary or timid, treacherously fail in their reposed trust.
Such did this man prove, who having promised for a while to shelter his Lord,
until he should bethink himfelfe of some other expedient course, either out
of fear or hope of reward, betrayed him to the Earl of Huntingdon, by whom
guarded with three hundred Horse, he was brought to London, and on the
eleventh of February committed to the Tower.

In the mean time the Queen jealous of the Londoners, especially since BRET'S
revolt, on the first of February attended by most of the Nobility, came to
Guild hall, where the Commons of the City were assembled in their Liveries, to
whom she spoke after this manner:

The Queens oration to the Londoners.
Although We doubt not of your loyalty, and so need not give an account of
Our actions; yet having intelligence that many seduced by this Arch-traitours
gay pretexts, do secretly favor his designs; We have, to give satisfaction
to all, condiscended to this days meeting with the Infant of Spain is that
forsooth, that must color all his villainies. But his actions discover his
deeper practices. For having now somewhat increased his members, his madness
has so transported him beyond the distaste of Our Match, that he now resolves
on the custody of Our Person, and absolute power of removing, retaining,
punishing of Our Counsel whom he list* Jn this great affair of Our
Marriage, We have done nothing but by the advice of Our Peers. We have lived
the greatest part of Our age, single. Neither do We now so long for a Husband,
but that, if the Estates of Our Realm judge it convenieut, We will continue
Our Virgin estate. For, that J should seek to endanger England, and to
confound all things by an unfortunate Match, the love of Our native soil, the
long knowledge of Our peaceable disposition, Our indevours for your good, will
persuade you to the contrary. Persist therefore in your loyal resolutions,
and assist us in executing Our due revenge on these Monsters of men, who
conspire to take away the Head which was ordained to guide them, and to suffer
with them: Neither are Our demands other then We may in reason expect from you,
who so maturely, so unanimously admitted of Our Government, as deeming Us the
undoubted Successor to Our Royal Father and Brother. Having thus confirmed
the minds of the Citizens, she arms five hundred men (the greater part
strangers) to the choicest whereof she commits the defense of London Bridge,
and disposes of the rest throughout the City. Two days after to London comes
WYAT with an Army of three (or four) thousand, full of hope, that having
present admittance into the City, success should crown his actions, and that
without either peril or pains. But things answered not his expectation. For
coming to the Bridge, he found it cut down, the Gates shut and made good
against him by armed troops, who disdainfully bid the Traitor avaunt.
Nevertheless he continued two days in Southwerke, hoping, that time and
industry of secret practicers might work some alteration.

But his hopes being here also frustrated, he turns his march for Kingston,
there to gain passage over the Thames. But the wooden Bridge there was also
brokeu, and the opposite bank defended by two hundred men, whom the sight of
two Pieces of Ordnance ready to be planted against them so terrified, that
they left their station, and gave WYAT liberty to find out means to waft his
Army. Having surmounted this difficulty, he once more resolves for that Queen
of Cities, and reposing all the success of this adventure in celerity, without
suffering his soldiers to repose themselves, makes with a round march for
London, where he hoped to arrive before day, and to surprise the secure Queen.
But God is the Protector of Princes, who more especially are his Images and
Lieutenants; so that the practices of Rebels and Traitors against their lawful
Sovereigns seldom prove successful. WIAT had (not improbably) been master
of his desires, had not God by an unexpected accident retarded him, or rather
so blinded him, that by unnecessary delays he overslipped his opportunity. He
was now within six miles of London, when the carriages of one of his brass
pieces being broken, the piece became for the present unserviceable, because
immovable. In remounting this piece some hours were lost, notwithstanding
their persuasions who advised him not to neglect more real advantages, as
indeed he did: for by this means he came short of the time prefixed by those
Citizens who were fautors of his cause. The consideration whereof made many
despair of success and relinquish him, so that his army was quickly
contracted to a smaller gross. Among the rest Sir GEORGE HARPER partaker of
all WIATS stratagems, that he might wipe away the stains of Rebellion and his
dissembled revolt by a loyal treachery, posted away to the Queen, and
revealed the whole series of WIATS proiects. The Queen amazed at the
apprehension of this imminent danger, gives Commission to the Earl of Pembroke
for the speedy raising of some Forces, and makes him General of the field.
WIAT hearing that the Earl of Pembroke was in arms, betook himself to a
flower march, least he should be forced against these fresh soldiers to oppose
his panting weary ones. So by noone he approached the suburbs, and planting his
ordnance upon a hill beyond Saint James, left there the greatest part of his
small Army to guard them. He himself with five Ensigns made toward Ludgate,
and CVTBERT VAVGHAN with two other Ensigns toward Westminster, leaving S.
James on the left hand: wherein I believe his chief end was, that by terrifying
that part of the City, and consequently distracting the Queens forces, WIAT
might gain passage with less difficulty. At Charing-Crosse Sir JOHN GAGE Lord
Chamberlain, with part of the Guard and some other soldiers made head against
WIAT. But at length, either the Queen for fea^e of VAVGHAN so commanding, or
not able to withstand the shocke, wi^h more then an orderly march he made
toward the Court, and filled it with terror and amazement. The Earl of
Pembroke followed WIAT, still cutting him off behind: by which kind of fight
WIAT, not turning head, lost many of his soldiers. The rest of the Rebels
courageously marching up Fleetstreet, with joyful acclamations cried out,
Queen MARY, Queen MARY, God save Queen MARY, who has granted* us our
petitions, and pardon. At length they came to Ludgate and desired entrance: But
by their fained acclamations they gained nothing but reproachful language.
Whereupon they intend to return the same way, but are circumvented by the Earl
of Pembrokes Horse. Then CLARENTIEVX persuaded him to yield, and not beyond all
his former madness, to surcharge himself with the blood of so many valiant
men. WIAT'S soldiers seemed desperately bent to make their way, but his courage
was quailed* So Wiat is taken.
he yielded to Sir MAVRICE BARKLEY, who mounting him behind him, carried him
presently to the Court. Their Captain taken, the soldiers make no resistance;
some few of them escape by flight, but the greater part fill the prisons of the
City. These were the accidents of the sixth of February.

The Lady Jane beheaded.
Having thus suppressed the Faction, the punishment of the Conspirators is next
in execution. The first that was reflected on (as for whose sake this Rebellion
had been set on foot) was Lady JANE; who having been condemned on the
thirteenth of November, had her execution hitherto deferred, not without hope
of pardon. But to take away all farther cause of sedition, her death is now
absolutely determined. Whereupon FECKNAM Deane of Paul's, afterward Abbot of
Westminster, was sent unto her to admonish her to prepare for death, and
withal to persuade her to entertain the Romish Religion. This sad message so
little moved her, that she professed her self bound in this to acknowledge
Gods infinite goodness: as for discussing matters of controversy in Religion,
her time was so short, that she could not dispense with the least loss of it:
that little that was allotted her, she knew she might better spend in her
devotions to Heaven. FECNAM conceiving this answer to proceed from a desire of
longer date of life, prevails with the Queen for three days more; and
returning to Lady JANE, certifies her what he had done; beseeching her to
hearken unto him, and to reform her opinion in point of Religion. To whom she
answered with a smiling countenance; Alas Sir, it was not my desire that her
Majesty should be troubled with the report of my words: For think not that I
am touched with any desire of prolonging my days: No, I am so far from it,
that ever since your departure life has afflicted me with its tedious^esse;
and as for death, being wholly intent to the attaining of life eternal, J
utterly despise it, and her Majesty's pleasure being such, I willingly undergo
it. FECKNAM again reiterated his persuasions, that she would embrace the
Religion of the Church of Rome: to whom her replies were such, that whosoever
shall read the conference between them, (for it was after published) cannot
without amasement wonder, how so tender an age, especially the Sex considered,
should be capable of such constancy, learning, wisdom, wit. Her Husband Lord
GVILFORD being first to suffer, desired leave to see her, converse with her,
and take his last farewell: whereto she would by no means consent, desiring
him to omit this foment of grief, rather then comfort, in death; for they
should shortly behold each other more really united in a better place and more
happy estate. Yet she unappalled saw him conducted to Tower Hill, and with the
same settled spirit beheld his headless trunk when it was returned to be
interred in the Chapel of the Tower. The death of this innocent Lady, it was
conceived, would not be without almost a general distaste. But to decline it
as much as might be, it was thought good that she should not be publicly
beheaded; wherefore there was a scaffold erected within the Tower, whereon about
an hour or two after her husband, on the twelfe of February she submitted her
neck to the axe. When she was conducted from the place of her imprisonment to
the place of her suffering, the Lieutenant of the Tower desired her to
vouchsafe him something or other which might serve as a monument to him, whereby
to remember her; whereupon she demanded writing tables, and therein writ three
short sentences in Greek, Latin, (in which languages she was admirably
skilled) and English, wherein she signified her innocence; and although she
confessed she had committed an error, which deserved death, yet ignorance
might among men without prejudice to the Laws sufficiently excuse it. At last
saluting the people as she went, with a countenance settled and void of fear,
and commending her self to their prayers, she came to the place of execution,
leading FECNAM by the hand, whom she kindly embraced, saying, God I beseech
him abundantly reward you for your kindness toward me, although I must needs
say it was more unwelcome to me, then my instant death is terrible. Then having
to the Assembly in very modest language discoursed of her action, she said,

J am condemned, not for having aspired to the Crown, but because J refused it
not being offered: and shall serve for a memorable example to posterity, that
Innocence excuses not great misdeeds, if they any way tend to the destruction
of the Weal public; for he has abundantly plunged himself in ill,
whosoever even perforce has become the Jnstrument of another ambition. Having
spoken thus much, and implored God's mercy, by the help of her Gentlewoman she
first disrobed her self of her gown, then her attire, and vailing her eyes
with her handkerchief, laid her head on the block, and exhorted the lingering
Executioner to the performance of his office, which he at length did, his
action drawing tears from the eyes of the spectators, yea even of those, who
from the very beginning were affected to Queen MARIE'S Cause. This was the end
of JANE, a Lady renouned for the greatness of her birth, but far more for her
virtues and excellency of wit, who swayed by the ambition of her Father-in-law
and imperious Mother, took on her that fatal title of a Queen; and being
presently hurried from a Kingdom to a Scaffold, suffered for the faults of
others, having overcome all the frowns of adverse fortune by constancy and
innocence.

Much more just was that execution which within three days after insued.
Twenty gibbets as well for terror of others as for present punishment, being
erected in diverse parts of the City, on the fourteenth and fifteenth of
February fifty of the Kentish Rebels were hanged on them. On the eighteenth of
the same month, ALEXANDER BRET who drew those five hundred Londoners into a
revolt from the Duke of Norfolk, was with a multitude of others (whereof many
were of the Gentry) sent into Kent, there to undergo exemplary punishment. On
the twentieth of February, four hundred of the same crew with halters about
their necks, were presented before the Queen, all humble suppliants on their
knees, whom the Queen pardoned, and commanded their present liberty.

The Duke of Suffolk beheaded.
On the three and twentieth of February, HENRY GRAY Duke of Suffolk Father to
Lady JANE, having been condemned on the seventeenth of the same month, was
publicly beheaded: a man whose facility to by-practises had occasioned all
the troubles wherewith this Reign had hitherto been distracted; whose rash
ingratitude (the Queen having once pardoned him beyond expectation) diverted
the current of the Queens clemency toward his Daughter, and brought him to a
deserved end.

Wiat executed.
The next turn was WIAT'S, and that on the eleventh of April. Who upon a
kind of promise of pardon, if he would detect the rest of the Conspirators,
suborned (as is conceived) by some malevolent persons, among the rest traduced
young COVRTNEY, as that having been refused by Queen MARY, he aspired to marry
the Lady ELIZABETH, to depose the Queen, and so to reign as it were in the
right of his wife. This accusation had procured their commitment, the Lady
ELIZABETH'S on the eighteenth of March, COVRTEY'S on the twelfe of February.
But WIAT finding himself deluded, and being touched with the horridnes of so
treacherous an accusation, going to the place of his execution, desired the
favor of a few words with the Marquis of Excester, which was granted him. Of
the Marquis he on his knees craved pardon for that irreparable injury which he
had done him, not out of malice, but desire of life. The Sherives of the City,
with many others were then present, and after testified the certainty of this
acknowledgement. But the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor (who out of fear
of change of Religion if Queen MARY dying, ELIZABETH should come to the
Crown, was content to lay hold on any occasion to cut her off) affirmed in the
Star Chamber, and thereto cited the testimony of the Lord Chandois, that WIAT a
little before his death exhorted the Marquis to acknowledge his crime, and to
submit himself to the Queens mercy. But what appearance of truth can there be
in this, it being certain, that WIAT having ascended the fatal scaffold,
seeing the instruments of death before his eyes, and having composed himself
for another world, did with sincere protestations and religious asseverations
acquit the Lady ELIZABETH and the Lord COVRTNEY from being any the least way
conscious to his practices?

On the seven and twentieth of April, Lord THOMAS GRAY and Lord Thomas Gray.
was beheaded for having by persuasions as it were thrust on his irresolute
brother the Duke of Suffolk to partake with WIAT in his seditious attempts.

On the sixteenth of May the Lady ELIZABETH was removed from the Tower to
Woodstock, and the Marquis of Excester to Foderingay, the place only being
altered, and nothing remitted of the strictness of their imprisonment.

A Disputation at Oxford,
About the same time that reverend CRANMER yet Archbishop of Canterbury,
NICHOLAS RIDLEY lately deprived of the Bishopric of London, and HVGH LATIMER
who so long ago resigned his Bishopric of Worcester, were removed from the
Tower to Windsore, and thence to Oxford, there solemnly to dispute with the
Divines of both Universities concerning the Eucharist. Their usage was extreme
almost beyond belief. Two days only were allotted them for their preparation;
and those two days were they in straight custody in several either dungeons
or places little differing, debarred both the conference of any but their
Jailer, and the use of their own papers and books. In the Schools the
behavior toward them was as barbarous as their usage had been tyrannical:
Shouts and outcries were the chiefest Arguments, many opposing one, without
order, without manners, without modesty. On the fourteenth of April from the
Prison they were brought to S. Mary's, and commanded to abjure; upon their
refusal, a day is prefixed for public dispute: CRANMER'S day was the
sixteenth, RIDLEY'S the seventeenth, LATIMER'S the eighteenth of April, each
in their course to answer all Opponents; which each of them performed, and that
so, that notwithstanding they were amassed with rude clamours, and distracted
with variety of Opponents, all urging and craving answer at the same time,
although they were scoffed at, reviled, and overborne with multitude, yet did
they force their Adversaries to admire them. CRANMER did learnedly, and
according to the dignity wherein he so many years flourished, gravely: RIDLEY
acutely and readily: LATIMER with a pleasant tartness, and more solidly then
could be expected of a man so near the age of fourscore. The Disputation
ended, they are again on the twentieth of April brought to S. Mary's, and
demanded whether they would persist in their opinions; upon their reply, that
they would, they were declared Heretics, and condemned Cranmer, Ridley, and
Latimer condemned.
to the fire. Their constancy was the more manifested by their contempt of
death. LATIMER was scarce capable of the joy he conceived, that God was pleased
he should end his long life (whereto Nature would shortly set a period) with so
happy a clause. As for their martyrdom, it falls in with the next year, and
thither we remit it.

Presently after those forepassed tumults, the Queen sends forth summons for a
Parliament to begin the second of April. In this Parliament she proposes two
things, her Marriage and Subjection to Rome in matters Ecclesiastical; this
last she could not for a while obtain, the other was assented unto upon
conditions, That

Additions to the former Nuptial Compacts.
PHILIP should not advance any to any public Office or Dignity in England,
but such as were Natives of England, and the Queens Subjects: He should admit
of a set number of English in household, whom he should use respectively, and
not suffer them to be in^^red by Forainers: He should not transport the Queen
out of England but at her entreaty, nor any of the Jssue begotten by her, who
should have their education in the Realm, and should not be suffered but upon
necessity or some good reasons, to go out of the Realm, nor then neither but
with the consent of the English: The Queen deceasing without Children, PHILIP
should not make any claim to the Kingdom, but should leave it freely to him,
to whom of right it should belong: He should not change any thing in the
Laws either public or private, the Jmmunities and Customs of the Realm,
but should be bound to confirm and keep them: He should not transport any
Jewels, or any part of the Wardrobe, nor alienate any of the Revenues of the
Crown: He should preserve our Shipping, Ordnance, and Munition, and keep the
Castles, Forts, and Blocke-houses in good repair, and well manned: Lastly,
that this Match should not any way derogate from the League lately concluded
between the Queen and the King of France, but that the Peace between the
English and the French should remain firm and inviolate: only it should be
lawful for PHILIP out of other Kingdoms and Dominions belonging to his Father
the Emperor, to send aides unto him either for propelling injuries, or taking
revenge for any already received. Philip arriveth in England,
All things being thus transacted, and no further impediment interposing
between these Princes; PHILIP setting sail from the Groine on the sixteenth
of July, with a good Southern gale within three days arrived at Southampton
with a Fleet of one hundred and sixty sail, whereof twenty were English, and
other twenty Flemings. Having rested himself there the space of three days
attended by a great company of the English and Spanish Nobility, on the four
and twentieth of July being a very wet day he came to the Queen at Winchester.
The feast day of S. James (the tutelary Saint of Spain) was destined for the
Nuptials, which were celebrated and is marr^ed to the Queen.
at Winchester with great pomp^. There Don IVAN FIGVEROA for the Emperor
resigned the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and conferred all his right
thereto on PHILIP: and the Heralds proclaimed their titles in Latin, French,
and English. About the beginning of August these two Princes came to Basing,
and thence to Windsore, where the King was installed Knight of the Garter. On
the eleventh of August they came to London, where the Citizens received them
with most magnificent solemnity.

Cardinal Poole comes into England.
O^ the eleventh of November another Parliament began at Westminster: about the
beginning whereof Cardinal POOLE (who by King HENRY had been proclaimed enemy
to the Estate, was created Cardinal by PAVL the Third, had himself been Pope
if he had but consented in time, and in the opinion of many was thought a fit
Husband for the Queen) arrived in England. Having been put beside the Papacy
by others default more then his own, craving leave of the new Pope JULIUS, he
withdrew himself to a Monastery in the territory of Verona called Maguzano, the
Religious whereof were Benedictine Monks, of which Order he himself while
he continued at Rome had been Patron. Having decreed there to hide himself
and spend the remainder of his days, the fame of King EDWARD'S death and
Queen MARY'S advancement to the Crown, drew him again out of the Cloister to
Rome. He was not ignorant how MARY stood affected to the Sea of Rome, and
therefore hoped (not without good cause) that JULIUS, who much favored him
having by his delays attained the Papacy, would send him into his Country
with the honorable title and authority of a Legate. And now he fained to
himself a double hope of a Kingdom, if not secular, at least Ecclesiastical,
by virtue of his authority Legatine and the dignity of Archbishop of
Canterbury. Queen MARY had her education for some years under MARGARET
Countess of Salisbury the Mother of POOLE (who was then a child) and that by
Queen CATHARINES means, who intended (as it was thought) to marry her
Daughter the Lady MARY to one of the Countesses Sons, thereby to strengthen
her Daughters claim to the Crown, if it should happen that HENRY should
decease without other lawful issue, the Countess being Daughter to GEORGE
Duke of Clarence, who was brother to EDWARD the Fourth. The Cardinal, whether
for this or some other reasons, knowing himself to be in dear esteem with
the Queen, was confident if not of the Crown by marriage, yet at least of all
advantages of her favor. Neither was he therein deceived; for MARY having
obtained the Crown, earnestly sued unto him to restore himself to his
Country; and the Pope, not ignorant how much he would advantage the
Apostolic Sea, at the Queens request dispatched him with most ample
authority. But the Emperor having a project on foot for his Son, was
somewhat jealous of the Cardinal: and therefore began seriously to treat with
Cardinal DANDINO the Popes Legate with him, for the conclusion of a Peace
between him and the French, that so he might give a stop to POOLE, whose
coming into England, the Emperors affairs being not yet settled, might
peradventure make all fly asunder. DANDINO to gratify CHARLES, by FRANCISCO
COMMENDONO sends Letters to POOLE, advising him not to set forth as yet,
forasmuch as this Legacy undertaken without the Emperors consent, was
displeasing; and the English Nation for the most part, especially the
Londoners, did so hate the name of the Pope of Rome, that his Legacy would be
held in contempt among them: a Legate therefore was not to be employed unto
them, until persuasions had brought them to a better temper. POOLE having
received these letters in his Cloister, thought it fitting to expect his
Holiness pleasure. The Pope not brooking the increase of the Emperors greatness
by the addition of such Estates, and fretting that DANDINO had presumed to stay
the Cardinal, recalled DANDINO, and conferred on POOLE alone the Legacy both
into England for the one affair, and to the Emperor and the French for the
treaty of a Peace. He willingly undertaking it, presently set forward from
Trent, certifying the Emperor and the French of his large Commission. The
Emperor perceiving that these devises would be no longer availeable, sent Don
IVAN de Mendoza unto him with letters, wherein he plainly discovered his fear,
that the Cardinals premature arrival in England might prove an obstacle to
his proceedings there, which were great and hopeful: wherefore it was his
desire, that he should either there attend his pleasure, or if he would needs
go further he might come to Liege, and there expect the event of his designs.
The Cardinal upon receipt of these letters returns to Dilling, (not far from
Trent) certifies his Holiness of the whole carriage of the business, and
sends expostulatory letters to the Emperor, showing therein what an indignity it
was to the Apostolic Sea, that his Holiness Legate sent upon a treaty of
Peace, and to reduce a Kingdom to the obedience of the Church, should so
disgracefully, with contempt to his Holiness, and that by the Emperors
command, be detained in the midst of Germany in the sight of the enemies of
the Church. That great Divine DOMINGO SOTO Ordinary Preacher to the Emperor
was then at Dilling. By him he persuades the Emperor not to hinder this
Legation, being it would so much hazard the estate of the Church, but
especially of the Kingdom of England. At length with much ado, and that not
until the Emperor had intelligence, that the Articles concerning his Sons
marriage were agreed on, he obtained leave to come to Brussells, but on this
condition, that he should there reside until the Emperor were assured, that
the marriage between PHILIP aad MARY were solemnised. So to Brussells he came,
where having saluted the Emperor, who received him very courteously, and that
time might not pass unprofitably, with him he begins to put in execution one
part of his Legation, which was, to draw the Emperor and the King of France to
some indifferent terms of peace. The Emperor professing, that he would not
reject peace upon any reasonable conditions, the Cardinal goes into France, to
treat with HENRY concerning the same thing: who made as fair shows as did the
Emperor; but their minds exulcerated with inveterate hate, made all his
pains fruitless. HENRY at his departure embracing him, signified the sorrow
he had conceived, that he had not sooner occasion to be acquainted with his
worth: for had he truly known him, his endeavors should have been totally
for his advancement to the Papacy.

A little after his return to Brussells, came the Lords Paget and Hastings
Ambassadors to the Emperor from their Majesty's of England, who signified
their joint longing to see the Cardinal, and therefore desired he might be
forthwith dismissed, that by virtue of his authority he might rectify the
Church of England wonderfully out of tune by reason of the Schism wherewith it
had been afflicted. So in September he had leave to go for England, but was
by contrary winds detained at Calais until November, in which month he at
length arrived at Dover. His entertainment was most honorable, the Kings and
Nobles alike striving to manifest their joy. And because being in the year
1539. by Parliament declared Enemy to the Estate, and by the same Law condemned
to die; the Estates then assembled in Parliament repealed that Act, and restored
him to his Blood, the Kings themselves coming to the House extraordinarily for
the confirmation of the Act before his arrival at London. A little after his
coming, both Houses were sent for to the Court, where the Bishop of Winchester
lord Chancellor having in the presence of the Kings and the assembly spoken
something concerning the Cardinals grateful arrival, the Cardinal Cardinal
Pooles Oration to the Farliament.
himself began a long oration in English, wherein He acknowledged how much he
was bound to the Kings and the Estates of the Realm, by whose favor those
Laws for his exile and proscription were repealed, and he once more made a
Native of the land: he was bound by the Laws of gratitude to endeavor the
requital of this benefit, whereto an occasion happily offered it self: The
late Schism had separated them from the union of the Church, and made them
exiles from heaven; By the authority conferred on him by the Pope Saint PETER'S
Successor CHRIST'S Vicar, he would bring them back into the Fold of the
Church, the sole means of attaining their celestial Heritage. Wherefore he
exhorted them ingenuously to acknowledge the errors of these later years, and
to detest them, with sincere alacrity of mind to accept of, and retain this
benefit, which God by his Vicar's Legate did proffer them. For now nothing else
remained, but that he being present with those Keys which should open the
gates of the Church, they should also abrogate those Laws, which lately
enacted to the prejudice of the Church, had rended them from the rest of it is
Body.

Having spoken a great deal to this purpose, and ransacked Antiquity for
examples of our forefathers devotion to the Sea of Rome; his grave delivery,
excellent language, and methodicall contexture of his speech wrote so
effectually in the minds of those who were addicted to Popery, that they
thought not themselves until this day capable of Salvation. But many of the
lower House, who deemed it a rare felicity to have shaken off the yoke of Rome,
eagerly withstood the re-admittance of it. But by the endeavors of the King
and Queen all things were at last composed to the Cardinals liking. The
authority The Realm freed from Interdiction.
which the Popes heretofore usurped in this Realm is restored, the title of
Supreme Head of the Church is abrogated, and a Petition drawn by the whole
Court of Parliament, for the Absolution of the People and Clergy of England
from Schism and Heresy is by the Bishop of Winchester presented to the Legate,
who (they all kneeling) by the authority committed unto him absolved them. This
being done, they went to the Chapel in Procession singing Te Deum, and the
next Sunday the Bishop of Winchester in his Sermon at Pauls-Crosse made a large
relation of what had passed.

These things being thus settled, the Queen intends an honorable Embassy to
Rome, whereof she had at her first coming to the Crown made promise. For
having resolved to replant the Religion of Rome, she had privily written to
POOLE, requiring his advice therein. The Pope was therefore pleased to send into
England GIOVANNI FRANCISCO COMMENDONO his Chamberlain (afterward Cardinal)
for the more perfect notice of the estate of the Realm. To him the Queen
after much private conference did under her hand promise obedience to the Sea of
Rome, desiring withal, that the Kingdom might be absolved from the Interdict,
for the obtaining whereof she would by a solemn Embassy petition his Holiness
as soon as the Estate was settled. So now about the end of this year the
Bishop of Ely, Sir ANTHONY BROWN, and EDWARD CARNE Doctor of Law, are by the
Kings sent to proffer their obedience to the Sea of Rome. But these costs and
pains were fruitless. For before they came to Rome the Pope was dead. In the
mean time the Queen considering all her actions hitherto to have passed with
full applause, began to treat with the Nobility, to condescend, that if not the
Royal, at least the matrimonial Crown of our Queens might be imposed on
PHILIP. But it being a matter without precedent, and that might perchance to an
ambitious Prince give some color for claim to the Kingdom, they proved
averse, and she content to surcease.

The next care was of restitution of Church lands. But HENRY had so divided
them, and that among the Nobility, that nothing could be done therein. Only it
was decreed, that the First Fruits and Tenths granted to the King by the Clergy
Anno 1534, should be remitted: which Decree upon consideration of the
Treasuries poverty, and of the many Pensions granted by HENRY to the eiected
Religious Persons, was quickly revoked.

The Queen thought to be with child.
About the same time an absurd (I might say ridiculous) accident happened by
the Queens own credulity and the flattery of fawning Courtiers. By reason of a
disease, which Physicians term a Mole, her belly began to swell: and some
other reasons giving her cause to conjecture that she was with child, she not
entertaining the advice of any Physicians, but of Mid*wives and old women,
believing what she desired should be, affirmed that she felt the stirring of
the Embryo in her womb. To those that are affected with this malady, that
fleshy and inform substance which is termed Mola, does seem sometimes to
move, but that slowly, and with the general motion of the whole belly. By this
and other symptoms Physicians would quickly have discovered her disease, which
unless very maturely prevented* is commonly incurable: so that in process of
time her Liver being over-cooled, she fell into a Dropsy, which as FVCHSIVS and
other Physicians write, does usually happen. But these flattering hopes
betrayed her to the laughter of the world, and to her grave. For on the seven
and twentieth of November the Lords of the Counsel sent some Mandates to the
Bishop of London, to disperse certain forms of Prayers, wherein after thanks
given to God for his Mercies to this Kingdom, by giving hopes of an Heir to
the Crown, and infusing life into the Embryo, they should pray for the
preservation of the Queen and the Infant, and her happy delivery, and cause Te
Deum to be sung every where. Then by Parliament many things were enacted
concerning the education of the Babe; and much clutter was otherwise kept about
preparatious for the Childs swaddling clouts, cradle, and other things
requisite at the Delivery; until in June in the ensuing year it was
manifested, that all was little better then a dream.

Lords created.
This year were many Barons created. On the eleventh of March, WILLIAM HOWARD
was created Lord Howard of Effingam, he was Father to CHARLES Lord Admiral and
late Earl of Notingham: on the fifth of April, JOHN WILLIAMS Lord Williams of
Tame: on the seventh of April, EDWARD NORTH Baron of Chartlege: on the eighth
of April, JOHN BRVGES Lord Chandois: on the fourteenth of May, GERARD
FITZ-GERARD (of whom before) Earl of Kildare: and on the second of September,
ANTHONY BROWN Viscount Mountague: And in September deceased THOMAS Duke of
Norfolk.

Anno Dom. 1555. Reg. MARIAE 2. and 3. PHILIPPI 1. and 2.
ON the eighteenth of January the Lord Chancellor coming to the Tower with six
other Lords of the Counsel set many brave prisoners at liberty, viz. the
Archbishop of York, Sir JOHN ROGERS, Sir JAMES CROFT, Sir NICHOLAS
THROCKMORTON, Sir NICHOLAS ARNOLD, Sir GEORGE HARPER, Sir WILLIAM SENTLOW, Sir
GAWIN CAREW, Sir ANDREW DVDLEY the Duke of Northumberland's Brother, WILLIAM
GIBS, CVTBERT VAVGHAN, HARINGTON, TREMAINE, and others. The Archbishop having
married a Wife, was deprived, and NICHOLAS HEATH sometimes Bishop of Worcester,
but deprived by King EDWARD, and (HOOPER being eiected and condemned to the
fire) lately restored by Queen MARY, was substituted in his place. ROGERS and
CROFT were afterward Privy Counsailers to Queen ELIZABETH, under whom they
many years flourished in great authority. THROCKMORTON (a* subtle man) was
thought to have been the plotter of WIAT'S Rebellion: his head was therefore
especially aimed at. But being indicted, and ten whole hours spent in sifting
him, he by such witty answers voided the accusation of his Adversary, that the
Jurors found him not guilty; for which they were afterward soundly fined.

Lady Elizabeth and Marquis of Excester set at liberty.
About the beginning of April, the Marquis of of Excester, and a little after,
the Lady ELIZABETH were set at liberty. Concerning Lady ELIZABETH, it was long
consulted what course to take with her, wherein the resolutions of the Papists
were bloudily bent to make her away when any colorable occasion should present
it self. The Bishop of Winchester upon any speech concerning the punishment of
Heretics, is repo^ted to have said, We strip off the leaves, or lop off the
branches; but unless we strike at the Root that hope of Heretics, (meaning
Lady ELIZABETH) we do nothing. But after long search into her actions, no
sufficient matter of accusation being found, although there wanted not those
who sought to persuade the Queen, that her liberty would endanger the Queen;
yet PHILIP aspiring to the opinion of clemency, by his intercession toward the
end of April she had her liberty, but so, that she was bound to admit of into
her Family Sir THOMAS POPE a Privy Counsailer, GAGE, and some others, who
should always keep watch over her actions.

This small sparkle of clemency was obscured by a g^eater flame of cruelty, a
multitude of godly men su^fering this year for their conscience only. On John
Rogers burned.
the fourth of February, JOHN ROGERS the Protomartyr of those times was burned
at London. He was TINDALL'S companion, after whose death fearing persecution,
he would not return into his Country, but went with his Wife to Wirtenberg,
where having attained to the Germane Tongue, he undertook the Cure of a
certain Church there, which he faithfully discharged, until under King EDWARD
he was recalled from exile, by RIDLEY Bishop of London made a Prebend of Paul's,
and Lecturer there. Queen MARY having attained the Crown, the Papists
endeavored to affright him, and so to have once more forced him to a voluntary
exile, commanding him not so much as to peep into the streets: and in this
manner lived he a year, until at last refusing to fly, he was imprisoned, and
condemned to the fire; which cruel death (notwithstanding that he was to leave
a wife and ten children) he did most constantly undergo.

and Bishop Hooper.
The like end on the ninth of February made JOHN HOOPER Bishop first of
Gloucester, and then of Worcester too, holding both Seas in Commendam, who took
much pains about BONER'S deprivation, which thing now hastened him to a stake.
For as soon as Queen MARY was inthroned, he was sent for to London, committed
to the Tower, and condemned for an Heretic. HENRY reigning, he spent part of
his life in Germany, where he took to wife a Burguignon, and among other
devout learned men, had intimate familiarity with HENRY BVLLINGER, by whom for
his learning, godly and sweet conversation he was held in d^ere esteem. After
his condemnation he was sent to Gloucester, there to suffer, where he was
thought most to have sinned in sowing seeds of error: He himself not a little
rejoicing that he should by the testimony of his blood confirm that Doctrine
before their eyes, into whose ears he had so often inculcated it.

Bishop Farrar.
The same course was taken with FERRAR Bishop of S. David's, who was brought
down from London to his own Dioces, there to be judged by the new Bishop
MORGAN, by whom he was condemned, and burned at Carmarden the third of March.
He was a man rigid and of a rough behavior, which procured him much trouble
under King EDWARD, and now I believe proved his bane. For having been by the
Duke of Somerset advanced to that Dignity, after his death this good and
learned man by his sower behavior drawing near to arrogance (which with that
Nation is a great indignity) raised against himself many accusers, two whereof
under Queen ELIZABETH became Bishops, who after the death of the Duke of
Somerset easily prevailed with the adverse Faction for his imprisonment. Being
found in prison when MARY came to the Crown, and brought before the Bishop of
Winchester, he might (I believe) by pleasing answers and a little yielding to
the season, have honestly escaped their bloody hands, as did many others, who
having not waded too far in Lady IANE'S cause, nor otherwise given any grand
affront to any of the Popish Prelates, by this means without impediment going
into voluntary exile, or being taken, had their liberty easily procured at the
intercession of Friends. But FERRAR according to his innate tartness,
answering freely (I will not say waiwardly) to his interrogatories, did so
inrage the Bishop of Winchester, that I do not much wonder at the hard
proceedings against him.

many others,
Beside these, ROLAND TAILOR Doctor of Divinity suffered at Hadley the ninth of
February, LAVRENCE SANDERS an excellent Preacher, on the eighth at Coventrey,
JOHN CARDMAKER Chancellor of the Church of Wells on the last of May at London,
where also on the first of July that godly and learned man JOHN BRADFORD
underwent the tortures of his martyrdom.

and Bishop Ridley, and Latimer.
But not to go to a particular enumeration of all that suffered for their
Faith, the number of them was almost incredible, the greater part whereof were
executed out of BONER'S butchery. But among others we cannot omit those
Worthies RIDLEY and LATIMER, who having been condemned the year before, were
now on the sixteenth of October conducted to execution, and at Oxford in the
aspect of the Academiques were in the Town ditch near Balioll College tied
to a stake and burned. CRANMER is reported from the higher part of his prison
to have beheld this doleful spectacle, and with bended knees and elevated
hands to have prayed for their constancy of Hope and Faith, as also for
himself who was shortly he knew to tread their path. But his execution was
for a time deferred by the Bishop of Winchesters means* and that not out of
pity, but ambition, and reguard of his own profit.

The death of Pope Julius the Third.
On the four and twentieth of March died JULIUS the Third, after whose death
the Conclave elected MARCELLO CERVINO, a man of excellent learning, wisdom,
and ^anctity of life, and under whom there was great hope of the reformation of
that Church: whose that memorable saying was, That he did not see how it was
possible for a Pope to be saved; who having sat two and twenty days only,
died, and left the Chair to Cardinal CARAFFA, of whose contention with POOLE
we have spoken already, who Paul the Fourth succeeds. Gardener su^th to be
Cardinal.
succeeded him by the name of PAVL the Fourth. GARDENER being not ignorant of
this contention, and the differences between them, deals underhand with this
new Pope to honor him with a Cardinals Hat, and to transfer on him the
authority Legatine by JULIUS conferred on POOLE. The Pope in reguard of his
hatred to POOLE, easily condiscended thereto, determining also to cite him to
Rome, there to force him to acquit himself of Heresy, and to suffer as did
Cardinal MORONO POOLE'S great Friend, whom this Pope detained in prison as
long as himself lived. Hereby GARDENER well hoped to attain to be Archbishop
of Canterbury, the revenues of which Bishopric POOLE received as a
Sequestratour, and would no otherwise as long as CRANMER lived. This was the
reason that CRANMER'S execution was deferred, to work means that POOLE might
not be invested in the Archbishopricke, which he himself for the former
reasons hoped to attain. But while GARDENER was wholly intent to this project,
Gardener dies.
death had a project on him, and cut him of by the extremity of a Dropsy,
which swelling from his feet and legs up to his belly dispatched him on the
twelfth of November, who was with great solemnity interred in his Cathedral at
Win^hester.

Charles the Emperor resignes his Crown^s.
The Emperor CHARLES the Fi^t having determined to resign the Empire and his
Kingdom, on the five and twentieth of October at Brussels, where all the
Estates of his Realms were assembled, transferred all his Kingdoms and
Dominions on his Son PHILIP, whom he had formerly made King of Naples and
Sicily, and betook himself to the rest of a private life.

Anno Dom. 1556. Reg. Mariae 3. and 4. Philippi 2. and 3.
TO begin the year with its first day, on the first of January, NICHOLAS HEATH
Archbishop The Archbishop of York Lord Chancellor. A Comet.
of York was made Lord Chancellor. In March, a Comet in the twentieth degree
of Libra was seen from the fifth to the seventeenth of the same month.

A counterf^it Edward*
On the thirteenth of March, a counterfeit EDWARD, whose true name was WILLIAM
FETHERSTON^ was executed for a Traitor: he being a Millers son, in stature
and lineaments of body not much unlike the deceased King EDWARD, and his age
also agreeable, had been the last year publicly whipped through London, for
affirming himself to be the King. But not sufficiently terrified by the smart
of this punishment, he again betakes him to the same imposture, privately
affirms himself to be King EDWARD, and causes letters to be cast abroad, that
King EDWARD was alive, for which he was at length deservedly hanged.

Archbishop Cranmer burned.
And now we are at length come to the narration of the memorable Martyrdom of
the Archbishop CRANMER. STEPHEN GARDENER Bishop of Winche^ter being dead,
Cardinal POOLE as yet the Pope's Legate appointed JAMES BROOK Bishop of
Gloueester for CRANMER'S trial, forasmuch as they judged it unlawful to
punish an Archbishop but by leave from his Holiness. JOHN STORY, and THOMAS
MARTIN Doctors of Law Commissioners for the Queen, accompanied the Bishop to
Oxford, that the Authority Royal might countenance the Delegates proceeding.
In Saint Mary's Church, they had high seats purposely erected for them, BROOK
sitting under the place, where the consecrated Host did usually hang in a Pixe,
beside him sat MARTIN and STORY, but a little lower, and CRANMER habited like
a Doctor of Divinite, not like a Bishop, was brought before them. Being told
that there were those who represented not only her Majesty's person, but also
of the most holy Father the Pope, he with due reverence saluted STORY and
MARTIN, but would not so much as vouchsafe to cast his eyes toward BROOK, and
that not (as he afterward confessed) of contempt of the man, whom he formerly
loved, but that he might not seem to acknowledge the Popes authority, he
having by oath to King HENRY obliged himself to the contrary, especially in
England, where he could make no pretense of right. Then each of them exhorted
him to change his opinion, and return to the unity of the Church: but he not
reguarding their admonition, they cite him to appear within fourscore days
before his Holiness, which with her Majesty's consent, he promised he would.
But the Pope not expecting his coming, within twenty days after by letters to
the King and Queen commanded him to be condemned, and committed to the Secular
power. After the intercourse of a few days, new authority is by the Pope
granted to BONER Bishop of London, and THIRLBY Bishop of Ely for CRANMERS
degradation from Orders both Presbyteriall and Archiepiscopall and he then to
be delivered over to the secular Magistrate to suffer for heresy, which was
accordingly performed on the fourteenth of February. Those saintlike men,
CRANMER, RIDLEY, and LATIMER, as long as they lived did by letters exhort each
other to a generous constancy for the maintenance of the truth of the
Christian faith. But the other two Champions having made their way to heaven,
and left him alone not plied with such firm exhortations, out of desire of
longer life his constancy began at length to be shaken, and that by the
subtilty and daily persuasions of a Spanish Friar. So being seduced with hope
of pardon, he retracts what ever he had before written in defense of his
Religion, which retractation was after printed and published. But that little
availed him. For whether that POOLE would not be longer excluded from the
possession of the Archbishopricke, or that (which seems more probable) the
Queens inveterate hate and desire of revenge for her Mothers Divorce, which
could not be otherwise satiated then with the blood of this grave man, were
the cause: he being now confident of life is presently rapt to the place of
execution, and there cruelly burned, where RIDLEY and LATIMER had five months
before been crowned with Martyrdom. On the day appointed for his execution, a
Sermon by the appointment of the Cardinal was preached by Doctor COLE. Thither
was CRANMER brought, and placed conveniently near the Pulpit, where COLE
exhorted him to a constancy in that faith, which he was now content to
acknowledge, and that even unto death, which was now by the appointment of the
Magistrate to be inflicted on him this very day. Gods wrath for the death of
FISHER and MORE could not otherwise be appeased but by his blood. But before
his death, would he by a public confession testify his sincere conversion to
the unity of the Church, he should do an act most acceptable to God and men.
If with this unexpected news CRANMER were amazed, I do not at all wonder. But
he recollecting himself stood up, and without any sign of fear, made a
quick Oration to the assembly, wherein having premised many things concerning
morality and amendment of life, he repeates the principal points of his
doctrine, briefly explaines his Faith, affirms, that under the authority
Papal the Kingdom of Antichrist was contained and established, and lastly
demonstrates how much he had offended God by the abnegation of the Truth: He
professes therefore, that he had resolved, that his right hand, wherewith he
had so horribly sinned by subscribing to the doctrine proposed by the enemies
of Truth, should first feel the smart of punishment; when he would have
proceeded to speak more, the multitude of Romanists whose expectation he had
so finely deluded, with clamors and scofs interrupted him, and hurried him away
presently to the place of execution. There was then to be seen a sad
spectacle, and such as would, I will not say, have extorted pity from his
very enemies, but have expressed tears from a flint: the chief Prelate of the
Realm lately flourishing by reason of his power and favor of Princes, a man
of most holy conversation, for his age, aspect, feature, learning, gravitie and
rare gifts of mind deservedly most Reverend, clad out of intent to expose him
to mockery in an obsolete garment (for so had the Papists purposely arraied
him) and bitterly taunted at to be dragged to death, and that death by the
horrid tortures of fire. Being now fastened to the stake, as soon as ever the
flame began to ascend, lifting up his left hand to heaven, he thrust forth his
right hand into the flame, and there with admirable constancy continued it
until it were consumed, only once drawing it in, and with it stroaking his
beard. At length the raging flame spreding it self, lifting up his eyes toward
heaven, he cried out, Lord receive my spirit, and his body abiding as
immovable as the stake whereto he was fastened, he patiently endured the
fines violence, until he at last expired. His body being consumed to ashes,
his heart was found entire and untouched. Had any of the Romanists found the
like in any one of their faction, it should have been recorded for a miracle,
and that miracle sufficed to have Sainted him. Give me leave, though it be
contrary to the method of History, to insert a few verses written by RALPH
SKINNER concerning this great man's Martyrdom:

Succubuit sanctus Praesul CRANMERVS, iniqud
Pontificum rabie, fraud doloque perit.
Quod Verbi in victo deiecer at Ense Papatum,
Quod docn^t pura quaerere mente Deum;
Quodque Antichristi subverter at impia regna,
Regna pijs Auglis heu tolerata diu;
Hinc pius and clemens ^rudeli addicitur igni,
Dantur and innocui membra ^remanda viri.
Huc vbi iam ventum est, Dextram proiecit in ignem,
Proiectamque tenens talia dicta dedit:
Primum peccasti, primum and sentire dolorem
Debes, ah Christo dextra inimica meo.
Immotamque tenet dum deflagaverat omnis,
In ^ineres totam dum cecidisse videt.
Caetera cum pereant flamma (mirabile dictu)
Cor manet illaesum post vbi flamma perit.
Ecce, invicta fides cor inviolabile servat,
Nec medijs flammis cor da perire sinit.
Which Verses may thus be rendered in English:

Through Papists rage and fraud good CRANMER di'd,
Because he put their doctrine to the Sword,
The two-edged Sword of Scripture, and descri'd
CHRIST'S Foe, instructing England with the Word:
For this, meek man, he had a Martyrs hire,
His Soul was burnt with Zeal, his Corpse with Fire.
But when he came unto the stake, he thrust
His right hand in the flames: Thou first (he said)
Because thou first did sin* here suffer must,
Thou first thy Lord and Master have betrayed:
There held he it; his eyes did see it fall,
Soon afterward he sent those eyes withal.
But lo, a wonder! Heavens sacred Oracle
Had sure decreed, that so admired a creature
Should not be put to death Sans Miracle:
His Body burnt, his Heart in perfect feature
Was found vnsing'd: See, See, the Faith he cherisht,
Once in that Heart, preferv'd it still vnperisht.
This year eighty four burned.
Beside CRANMER, the cruelty of those times did the same year devour many
professors of the same Religion. Of both sexes no fewer then eighty four were
this year (...) by fire. Neither did their cruelty exercise it self on the
living only: the bones of MARTYN BVCER and PAVL PHAGIVS The exhumation of Bucer
and Phagius.
long since dead, were dug up, formally accused of heresy, and no man
undertaking their cause (as who durst?) condemned, and publicly burned in the
market place at Cambridge. And PETER MARTYR'S wife, who died at Oxford, was
disinterred, and with barbarous and inhumane cruelty buried in a dunghill. To
BVCER and PHAGIVS Queen ELIZABETH did afterward with great solemnity restore
their memory and honor: And as for PETER MARTYR'S wife, she caused her bones
to be translated from that unclean place, to be reinterred in the Church, and
commixed with the relics of FRIDESWID (by Papists reputed a Saint) that the
like occasion of mockage might not again be offered.

Cardinal Poole consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.
On the same day, whereon CRANMER thus ended his life, Cardinal POOLE was
ordered Priest at Greenwich, and the next day, NABOTH being dead, took
possession of his Vineyard, being consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury. Three
days after, being the Feast of the Annunciation, accompanied by many Nobles,
POOLE with great solemnity received the Pall at Bow-Church.

About the same time a notable conspiracy was detected, some having proiected
to rob the Exchequer* at that time full of Spanish coin to the value of fifty
thousand pounds. The names of the conspirators were VDALL, THROCKMORTON,
PECHAM, DANIEL, STANTON, and (besides others that fled for it) WHITE, who
discovered his fellows. The rest were all taken and suffered as Traitors. Sir
ANTHONY KINGSTON as partaker in their intentions was also apprehended, but died
before he could reach London.

In July, new tumults begun to be set on foot in Norfolk were maturely
suppressed, CLEBER and three brothers called LINCOLN the authors of it
suffering for their seditious attempt.

On the one and twentieth of November, JOHN FECKNAM Deane of Paul's was
installed Abbot at Westminster, which HENRY the Eighth had erected to an
Archiepiscopall Sea. There being at that time no Monks in England, fourteen
were found who were content with FECKNAM to take the Religious habit of
Benedictines.

Anno Dom. 1557. Reg. Mariae 4. and 5. Philipi 3. and 4.
NOw after four or five years we found the effect of our Northern Navigation
set on foot An Embassage to Muscovia.
by CABOTA. About the beginning of this year, arrived in England OSEP NAPEA
Ambassador from BASILIWITZ Emperor of Russia, for the Treaty of a perpetual
League between our Kings and his Prince. On the Scottsh coast he had suffered
wrack, and beside merchandise of infinite value, he lost those Presents,
which were from the Emperor destinated to their Majesty's. But the loss of
RICHARD CHANCELLER was beyond all these inestimable, who being a most expert
Pilot, first discovered the passage into those Northern Regions, and now more
sollicitous of the Ambassadors safeguard then of his own, this man most
worthy of immortal memory was swallowed up in the Seas insatiate gulf. I
think the intertainment of any Ambassador with us was never more royal. On
the five and twentieth of May, PHILIP having about seven days before returned
out of Flanders, he was admitted into the presence of the Kings, declared the
purport of his Embassy, and continued in London, until the third of May: and
having then got a convenient season, laden with gifts he set sail for his
Country.

The Lord Stourton hanged.
On the sixth of March, CHARLES Lord STOVRTON for having in his house cruelly
murdered one HARGILL and his son, with whom he had long been at variance,
was by a wholesome example to posterity hanged at Sarisbury with four other of
his servants, who were not only conscious, but actors in the cruelty. After he
had beaten them down with clubs, and cut their throats, he buried their
carcases fi^teene foot deep in the ground, hoping by such sure work to stop
the voice of blood crying for revenge; or if perad venture it were discovered,
the reguard of his zealous persistance in the Religion of Rome would (he hoped)
procure the Queens pardon. But murder is a sin that God has by many
memorable examples manifested, that i^ shall not remain vndetected: and the
Queen although blindly misled in matter of Religion, was so exact a fautrix of
justice, that she was utterly averse from all mention of pardon. So this
Nobleman had the punishment due to his offense, only in this preferred before
other murderers and parricides, that he was not strangled with an halter of
hemp, but of silk.

Thomas Stafford indevouring an insurrection is taken and beheaded.
The seven and twentieth of April, THOMAS STAFFORD landing in the Northern
parts of the Realm, having raked together a small company of exiles and some
forainers, surprised Scarborough castle then, as in time of peace* utterly
destitute of provision for resistance: having thus seized on a place of
defense, he makes Proclamation, that Queen MARY having her self no right to
the Crown had betrayed it to the Spaniard, exhorting the people with him to
take arms for the recovery of their lost liberty. But by the diligence of
NICHOLAS WOTTON Deane of Canterbury then Ambassador for their Majesty's with
the French, all his designs were revealed to the Counsel before his arrival
in England. So by the industry of the Earl of Westmerland he was within six
days taken, brought to London, and on the eight and twentieth of May beheaded,
STRECHLEY, PROCTOR, and BRADFORD the next day following him but in a more due
punishment (being drawn, hanged and quartered) whom they had followed in their
treacherous attempts.

The Emperor CHARLES having bequeathed War against France proclaimed.
the inheritance of his hate to France with his Crown, MARY could not long
distinguish her cause from her Husband's. Wherefore on the seventh of June, the
Queen set forth a Proclamation to this effect, that

Whereas the King of France had many ways injured her by supporting the Duke
of Northumberland and Wyat in their Rebellions against her; and that his Realm
had been a receptacle for Dudley and Ashton, who with the privity of his
Ambassador had in his house contrived their treacherous designs, and after
their escape into France had been relieby Pensions from the King; as also for
having lately aided Stafford with shipping, men, money, and munition, thereby
if it were possible to dispossess her of the Crown: She gave her subjects to
understand, that they should not entertain traffic with that Nation, whose
Prince she accounted her Enemy, and against whom upon farther grievances she
determined to denounce war. Although these things were true, yet had she
abstained from denunciation of war, had not the five years Truce between
PHILIP and HENRY by the Popes instigation been lately broken by the French,
and so war arising between them, she would not make her self and her
Husband two. For the Pope having long since maligned the Emperor (knowing that
he after the resignation of his Estates to his Son PHILIP had withdrawn
himself into Spain) by the Cardinal of Loraine still solicited the French
King to arms against the Spaniard, promising to invest him in the Kingdom of
Naples. HENRY upon these fair hopes undertakes it, and MARY resolves to assist
her Husband.

P Ole's (...) Legantine abrogated,
That MARY took arms in the behalf of her Husband, Pope PAVL was much
displeased. And being he could not be revenged on her (who indeed was the sole
cause of our breach with France) he determined to power out his wra hon POOLE,
whom he ever hated; but now he thought he had more cause to manifest it,
because POOLE knowing that this war was set on foot by the Pope; had by letters
and Ambassadors sought to appease him, and that (though with most humble
reverence) yet roundly and according to his conscience. Having abrogated
POOLE'S Legation, he repeales him to Rome; and for supply of his place he
creates one FRANCIS PETOW (a Franciscan Friar) Cardinal and Legate, and a
little after designed him Bishop of Sarisbury. The Queen having intelligence
of these proceedings, took especial care, that POOLE might have no notice of
them, prohibiting not only this new Cardinal to enter the Realm, but all
others whom she suspected to bring any Mandates to that purpose, and with
exact diligence causing his letters to be intercepted* by her Orators at Rome
certified his Holiness what a hazard the Catholic Religion not yet fully
established would incur, if he should endeavor the disgrace of so great a
man, whose authority had been much available for the conversion of the Nation.
But while there is this intercourse between the Pope and the Queen concerning
this matter, POOLE having some way or other had an inkling of it, abstained
from having the silv r Cross the Ensign of his Legation borne before him,
neither would he afterward exercise his authority Legantine, until by the
intercession of ORMANETO and restored.
the Popes Datary in England, he was restored to his dignity.

By this time the war was very hot on both sides, PHILIP besieging Saint
Quint in in Picardie with thirty five thousand Foot, and twelve thousand
Horse, which number was after increased by a thousand Horse, four thousand
Foot, and two thousand Pioners out of England* under the Command The French
overthrown at S. Qu^ntin.
of the Earl of Pembrooke. For the managing of this war PHILIP set sail out
of England on the seventh of July. On the tenth of August, the French
indevouring to put succors into the Town are overthrown. The Spaniard charge
the Constable MONTMORENCY in his retreat, routs the French, and kills two
thousand five hundred: a victory not so great in the execution, as in the death
and captivity of many brave men. The Constable was wounded and taken prisoner
with his son, as also the Dukes of Montpensier and Longueville, LVDOVICO
GONZAGA brother to the Duke of Mantua, the Marshal of Saint Andrew, the
Ringraue, ROCHE-DV-MAINE, the Count Rochfoucault, the Baron of Curton, with
many other men of mark. The chief of them that were slain were JOHN of
Burbon Duke of Anguien, the Viscount of Turen, N. TIFRCELLIN son to
ROCHE-DV-MAINE, the Lords o^ (handenier, Pontdormy and many others, and in a
manner all the foot Captains. PHILIP lost only fifty men.

S. Quintin taken.
The eight day after this victory an assault is given, and the Town carried
by force, wherein were taken the Admiral COLIGNY with his brother D'ANDELOT who
(shortly after made an escape) IARNAC, S. REMY HVMES, and many other persons of
quality: the son of the Lord of Fayette, SALEVERT, OGIER, VIC^YES, LABARRE,
ESTANG and GOVRDES were slain. Of the English in this assault few of note were
lost, beside Lord HENRY DVDLEY youngest son to the Duke of Northumberland, and
Sir EDWARD WINDSORE, who were the first that advanced Ensign on the walls.

This year is alike memorable for the extreme dearth and contemptible
cheapnes^e of corn. A little before harvest wheat was sold at four marks the
quarter: within the current of a month it fell to the low rate of live
shillings. Wherein I rather admire the ensuing cheapnesse then the dearth,
having my self in the year 1597. paid double the former dear price.

A (...) Rainbow.
But that which I shall now relate, I should deem far more memorable, had I
not in later times my self seen the like. On the night which insued the
seventh day of September, almost two hours after Sunset, the Moon having
risen an hour before, a Rainbow was seen in the West. That I may relate the
like accident though of differing time, the like apparition was seen by me on
the four and twentieth of November 1^04. when (the Sun having two hours
before declined to its lowest) travailing toward Colebrooke, the form of a
white cloud shaped into a fragment of a Circle, and just opposite to the Moon
then newly risen appeared, which did every way resemble a true Rainbow, but
that it was not diversified with colors, and in steed of the Sun had the
Moon its opposite.

Anno Dom. 1558. Reg. vltimo.
Calais besi^ged by the French.
HENRY some way to repair his losses at Saint Quintin, resolves an enterprise
upon Calais, which SENARPONT Governor of Bouloigne persuaded him was not so
fortified according to report, but that it might easily be taken. The Marshall
STROSSY having under the favor of a disguise viewed the place, confirmed
SENARPONT'S assurance of taking it. PHILIP whether having intelligence of
HENRY'S designs, or else presaging so much, had often admonished the Queen to
have an especial reguard to that Town, voluntary offering his assistance for
the security of it. But we overwisely ielous, least PHILIP had a practice on
it, it lying commodiously for his adjoining Netherlands, neglected both his
advice and proffer. But the reality of his advice was manifested by the event.
The Duke of Guise having by the King been declared Lieutenant General in all
his Dominions, leuying a great Army flies sudainly to the siege of Calais,
before which he sat down on Newyeares day, and entrenched at Sandgate. Then
dividing his Army into two parts he at the same time assaults Newnambridge and
the Risbanke, two Forts wherein the chief strength of that Town consisted,
the taking whereof would have cut of all possibility of relieving the besieged
either by land or sea. The garrisons of each place terrified with so unexpected
a danger, he at his first arrival gains Newnambridge, and the next day the
Risbanke. The French then batter the wall between the watergate and the
prison, not so much out of hope to gain entrance that way, as to divert us
from garding that part of the Town, where they really intended to give an
assault. Having for a while battered that part, and we little suspecting an
enterprise upon the Castle, they sudainly with fifteen pieces make a battery
upon the Castle, and continue it with such fury, that the thunder of the Canon
was all that day heard at Antwerp, which is distant from thence more then one
hundred English miles. Having by that time night drew on made a sufficient
breach, and yet in reguard of the deep dikes filled with water (wherein
consisted the maine hopes of the defendants) not able to come to an assault,
the Enemy with great toil and labor by a cut from thence to the sea draw the
dikes so low, that by that time the tide was gone out, they march not above
navell high through the dikes to the wall (which we little feared could be
done) without resistance: finding the place void of defendants they easily make
themselves masters of the Castle, and had as easily taken the Town, if Sir
ANTHONY AGER Marshall of the Town had not with some few others made head
against them, and forced them to retreat to the Castle, in which conflict that
valiant Knight was slain. The Lord WENTWORTH Governor of the Town seeing
little hopes of keeping the Town, craved parley, which was granted; and at
length yielded the Town upon these Conditions: That the common soldiers and
inhabitants should depart without transporting or carrying away any thing with
them, and that the Lord WENTWORTH with fifty others such as the Duke of Guise
should appoint, should remain captives to be put to ranson. So was Calais
lost, which had continued English above two hundred years: Calais yielded.
neither was the siege long, the Enemy sitting down before i^ on Newyeares
day, and having it yielded up on Twelfe day.

Seven days after, the Duke marches toward Guisnes, which Town he took
without any difficulty, but the Castle, which the Lord GRAY commanded, not so
easily. But that and Hames Castle were at length taken also and dismantled; so
that of all the Kingdom of France, the greatest part whereof was for a long
time held by our Kings, and whereof HENRY the Sixth had been crowned King at
Paris, Anno 1431. nor in the Duchies of Normandy and Aquitaine, the ancient
inheritance of the Kings of England, our Kings possess nothing, but the Isles
of Iersey and Guarnesey, which have proved loyal to us ever since the
Conquest. While the French proceeded thus in Picardie, the Queen certified
thereof with great diligence prepares her Fleet to transport succors for
Calais: but contrary winds kept them back so long, until Calais was
irrecoverably lost.

You shall not easily read of any action, wherein God has by more manifest
signs declared, how displeasing those wars are to him, which undertaken for
ambition or profit do dissolve the public peace: PHILIP (to begin with him)
against whom HENRY and the Pope did most unjustly conspire, enlarged himself
with a double victory, each whereof were great and memorable. The Cardinal
CARAFFA and the Duke of Paliane, who for their own ends had persuaded the
doting Pope to throw the ball of discord between these Princes, were after for
this very thing beheaded by PIUS the Fourth, who immediately succeeded PAVL.
PAVL himself in the mean time, the French being overthrown at Saint Quintin
was exposed to the mercy of the Spaniard, whom he had irritated, the French
being forced to withdraw his Army out of Italy. The rash violation of the
League by MARY, was punished with the loss of Calais, and through grief
thereof (according to common belief) of life also* What happened to the
French, who by the Pope's instigation first brake the five years Truce, we
have already declared. And least it might be conceived, that his losses at and
of Saint QVINTIN were repaired by the taking of Calais, another overthrow given
him within few months after, will take away much from the content of that
victory.

The battle of Graueling.
In June the Marshall De Terms (who succeeded STROSSY lately slain) Governor
of Calais, breaks into Arthois and Flanders, with an Army consisting of near
about eleven thousand men, leaving Graveling and Burburg at his back, attempts
Berghes, takes it, sackes it, and so opens a way to Dunkirk, which he also
takes and spoils; and the Country all about (for they feared not the French
there, and the Towns which the Spaniard held thoroughout that Tract, were ill
furnished) lying open to their mercy, they ransacke it most miserably, and
march as far as Newport.

PHILIP was affrighted with this Tempest, fearing especially, least the Duke of
Guise then in Arms, should join with TERMS: but having intelligence that the
Duke spent his time about Arlon and Vireton, he resolves to intercept the
French in their return. In this enterprise he employes Count EGMOND, (his
Lieuetenant general in the Netherlands) who having speedily out of the
neighbor Garrisons of Betune, Saint Omer, Aires, Burburg, and others,
assembled an Army of fifteen thousand, puts himself between Dunkirk and
Calais. TERMS had hitherto expected the Duke of Guise, but upon notice that
the Country was up in Arms, he somewhat too late bethought himself of a
retreat. He was now every way enclosed, and passage not to be gained but by
dint of sword. The French therefore valiantly charge their Enemies, and
overthrow some Squadrons of Horse; indeed despair animated them to do wonders,
and the Flemings were set on fire by the desire of revenging late injuries. The
Spanish Troops renew the fight, which was with equal order long maintained on
both sides: in the heat whereof ten English Men of War fortunately sailing by
(for De TERMS had for his security betaken him to the shore, hoping that way
with much less hazard to have gained passage) upon discovery of the French
Colors, let The French* overthrown.
fly their Ordnance furiously among the French, making such a slaughter, that
they began to give ground, were at last routed and overthrown.

The French in this battle lost five thousand. Their chief Commanders were
almost all taken: the Marshall himself was hurt and taken, with D'ANNEBALT the
Son of CLAVD the late Admiral, the Earl of Chaune, SENARPONT, VILLEBON
Governor of Picardy, MORVILLIERS, and many others. Two hundred escaped to our
Ships, whom they might have drowned, but giving them Quarter, they were
brought Captives into England. This battle was fought on the thirteenth of
July.

The Queen desirous by some action or other to wipe out the stain of the
ignominious loss of Calais, about the same time set forth a fleet of one
hundred and forty Sail (whereof thirty were Flemings) the maine of the
expedition being from Breast in Bretaigne. But the Lord Clinton Lord high
Admiral of England finding no good to be done there, set sail Conquet taken
and burned by the English.
for Conquet, where he landed, took the Town, sacked it and set it on fire,
together with the Abbey and the adjacent villages, and returned to his ships.
But the Flemings somewhat more greedy after prey, disorderly piercing farther
into the Country, and reguardlesse of martial discipline, which commands
obedience to their General, being incountred by the Lord of Ker^imon, came
fewer home by five hundred.

PHILIP about the same time lodging near Amiens with a great Army, HENRY with
a far greater attended each motion of his. They incampe at last, HENRY on the
North of the river. Sum, PHILIP on the South of the river Anthy, so near to
one another, that it might be thought impossible for two such spirited Princes
commanding so great Armies, to depart without a battle. But diverse
considerations had tempered their heat. PHILIP being the weaker of the two, saw
no reason why to engage himself. HENRY had an Army which had twice felt the
other victorious, and was therefore loath on them to adventure his already
shaken estate. Wherefore they so entrenched themselves, and fortified their
Camps with Artillery, as if they expected a siege from each other. Some
months thus passed without any other exploits then inrodes and light
skirmishes. At length they mutually entertain a motion of peace, both of them
considering, that their Armies consisting of strangers, the fruits of the
victory would be to the Aliens only, but the calamity and burden of the defeat
would light on the shoulders of the vanquished, or (which comes all to one
pass) of the subjects. These motives drew together for a treaty on HENRY'S
side, the Constable, the Marshall of S. Andrew, the Cardinal of Loraine,
MORVILLIERS Bishop of Orleans, and AVBESPINE Secretary of Estate: for PHILIP
the Duke of Alva, the Prince of Orange, RVYZ GOMES de Silva, GRANVELL Bishop of
Arras and others. Much altercation was had about the restoring of Calais, which
the French were resolved to hold, and PHILIP would have no peace unless it
were restored to MARY, whom in point of honor he could not so forsake. But
this difference was ended by the death of MARY, a little before whom on the
one and twentieth of September died also the Emperor CHARLES the Fifth, which
occasioned both the change of place and time for another Treaty.

The Daulphin married to the Queen of Scots.
And if the continual connection of other memorable affairs had not
transported me, I should ere this have mentioned the marriage celebrated at
Paris with great pomp on the eight and twentieth of April, between the
Daulphin FRANCIS and MARY Queen of Scots. But the fruits thereof were not
lasting: For two years after died FRANCIS (the Crown by the death of his
Father HENRY having been first devolved to him) and left his bed to a more
auspicious husband HENRY the eldest Son to the Earl of Lenox. Of these
Parents was borne our late Sovereign of ever sacred memory, who was Nephew by
his Mother to JAMES the Fifth, by MARGARET the eldest Daughter Nephew to that
wise King HENRY the Seventh, who, the Issue of HENRY the Eight being extinct,
as the next undoubted Heir, most happily united the Crowns of England,
Scotland, and Irland.

But now at length to draw nearer home, this Autumn was very full of diseases,
Fevers (especially quartane) reigning extraordinarily in England, whereby many,
chiefly aged persons, and among them a great number of the Clergy perished. Of
the sole Episcopal rank thirteen died either a little before the Queen, or
some few months after her. Among the rest Cardinal POOLE scarce survived her
a day, The death of Cardinal Poole.
who having been for some weeks afflicted by this kind of disease, and
brought to extreme weakness of body, as if he had at the news of the Queens
death received his deaths wound, expired at three a clock the next morning.
His corpse enclosed in lead, was buried in his Cathedral at Canterbury, with
this brief Elogy on his Tomb, in steed of an Epitaph: Depositum Cardinalis
POLI.
He was a man admirably learned, modest, mild, of a most sweet disposition,
wise, and of excellent dexterity in the managing of any affairs, so that he
had been incomparable, if corrupted with the Religion of the Church of Rome he
had not forced his nature to admit of those cruelties exercised upon the
Protestants.

The Queen dies.
The Queen died at S. James on the seventeenth of November some few hours
before day. She was a Lady very godly, merciful, chaste, and every way
praiseworthy, if you reguard not the errors of her Religion. But her Religion
being the cause of the effusion of so much innocent blood, that of the Prophet
was necessarily to be fulfilled in her, Bloodthirsty men etc. shall not finish
half their days. For she was cut off in the two and fortieth year of her
age, having reigned only five years four months and eleven days; whereas
her Sister, who succeeded her, most happily in a more mild government ruled
nine timesas long, and almost doubled her age. Concerning the cause of Queen
MARIE'S death there are diverse conjectures. To relate what I find in approoved
Authors, it is reported, that in the beginning of her sickness her friends
supposing that she grieved at the absence of her husband, whom she saw so
engaged in wars abroad, that she could not hope for his speedy return, used
consolatory means, and indevored to remove from her that fixed sadness
wherewith she seemed to be oppresled. But she utterly averse from all comfort,
and giving her self over to melancholy, told them, That she died, but that of
the true cause of her death they were ignorant, which if they were desirous to
know, they should after her death dissect her heart, and there they should
find Calais: Intimating thereby, that the loss of Calais had occasioned this
fatal grief, which was thought to have been increased by the death of the
Emperor her Father-in-law. But the truth is, her liver being over-cooled by a
Mole, these things peradventure might hasten her end, which could not otherwise
be far from her, and cast her by degrees into that kind of Dropsy, which
Physicians term Ascites. This Dropsy being not discovered in time, deceived
her Physicians, who believed that she had conceived by King PHILIP, whereas she
alas did breed nothing but her own death. So mature remedies being not
applied, and she not observing a fit diet, she fell into a Fever, which
increasing by little and little, at last ended in her death. She lies interred
at Westminster in the midst of that Chapel which is on the North side of her
Grandfather HENRY the Seventh his Monument, where her sister Queen ELIZABETH
was after buried with her, and over both by the pious liberality of that most
munificent Prince King JAMES has since been erected a most stately Monument,
well befitting the Majesty of such great Monarchs.

Queen ELIZABETH, Anno 1558.
HAving thus briefly run over the Reigns of these three Princes, Queen
ELIZABETH'S times in the next place offer themselves; which deservedly
requiring a more accurate style, I will here set a period to this work, not so
much with intent to pretermit them, as reserving them for a more exact labor.
In the mean time, to give some satisfaction to the Reader, I will make this
short addition.

Some few hours after the decease of Queen MARY, the Estates then assembled
in Parliament, on the seventeenth of November declared her Sister the Lady
ELIZABETH Queen, who was Daughter to HENRY the Eighth and ANNE BOLEN. Having
most gloriously reigned forty four years four months and seven days, she
ended her life and Reign on the four and twentieth of March Anno 1603, the
Crown being by her death devolved to the renouned King of Scots JAMES the Sixth,
to whom it was so far from feeling it a burden to have succeeded so good a
Princess, that never was any Prince received with greater applause and
gratulation of his People. Many think their condition happy, if they exchange
a CALIGVLA for a CLAUDIUS, or a NERO for a VITELLIVS or an OTHO. But that any
Mortal should please after ELIZABETH, may seem a miracle: and is a great
argument both of rare virtue in the succeeding King, and of a right judgment
in the subject. For this great Lady was so far beyond example, that even the
best Princes come short of her; and they who most inveigh against that Sex,
contend, that Woman is incapable of those virtues (in her most eminent)
Wisdom, Clemency, Learning, variety of Languages, and Magnanimity equal to
that of Men, to which I add fervent Zeal of Piety and true Religion. But in
these things peradventure some one or other may equal her. What I shall beyond
all this speak of her (and let me speak it without offense to my most
excellent Sovereign JAMES, the Pattern of Princes, the Mirror of our Age, the
Delight of Britain) no age has hitherto paraleld, nor (if my Augury fail
not) none ever shall: That a Woman (and if that be not enough) a Virgin,
destitute of the help of Parents, Brothers, Husband, being surrounded with
enemies, the Pope thundering, the Spaniard threatening, the French scarce
dissembling his secret hate, as many of the neighboring Princes as were devoted
to Rome, clashing about her, should contain this warlike Nation not only in
obedience, but in peace also, and (beyond all this) Popery being profligated,
in the true Divine worship. Hence it comes to pass, that England (which is
among the rest of it self a Miracle) has not these many years heard the
noise of war; and that our Church (which she found much distracted) transcends
all others of the Christian world. For you shall at this day scarce find any
Church, which either defiled with Popish superstitions, or despoiled of those
Revenues which should maintain Professors of the Truth, has not laid open a
way to all kind of Errors, gross Ignorance in learning (especially Divine)
and at length to Ethnique Barbarousnesse. But to what end do I insist on these
or the like, they being sufficiently known even to the Barbarians themselves,
and Fame having trumpetted them throughout the world. Which things when and how
they were done, how bountifully she aided and relieved her Allies, how bravely
she resisted, brake, vanquished her Enemies, I have a desire in a continued
History to declare, and will (God willing) declare, if I can attain to the
true intelligence of the passages of those times, have leisure for the
compiling it, and that no other more able then my self (which I wish may
happen) in the mean time engage themselves therein.

LAVS DEO.
Errata.
Page 4. Lin. 20. read five days. p. 6. l. 36. wearying. p. 11. l. 36. dele
of. p. 26. l. 27. for crave read renew* p. 27. l. 7. after, her part, read, the
good of the. p. 31. l. 9. into Scotland. p. 32. l. 31. this debt. p. 38. l. 13.
Tournay. lin. 24. sixtieth. p. 41. l. 13. oblations at Beckets tomb. p. 51. l.
1. these. p. 64. l. 6. mutemque. l. 7. Falsus. p. 72. l. 12. does. p. 95. l. 2.
for Protector, read Proctor. page 97. lin. 8. Zi^. p. 133. l. 12. sticklers. p.
139. l. 14 and 31. SMETON. p. 142. l. 12. for just, read unjust. p. 193. l. 33.
MEVTAS. p 198. l. 34. for passed, r. posted. p. 214 l. 20. Heads. p. 223. l.
13. sictitious. p. 227. l. 3. for, of, r. by. p. 238. l. 21. for, greatly, r.
gently. p. 2^6. l. 28. disceptation. p. 2^8. l. 14. dele, and. ibid. read*
could hardly. p. 318. l. 30. read out of contempt. p. 319. l* 1* for unity,
read union. p. 3^0. l. 13. read union.


