DELIVERANCE FROM THE GRAVE.

A Sermon preached at Saint Mary's Spittle in London, on Wednesday in Easter
week last, March 28. 1627.

BY THO. GOFFE, Bachelor of Divinity, lately Student of Christ-Church in
Oxford.

LONDON: Printed for Ralph Mab. 1627.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, the maine word in the Text of this following Sermon, is the
Grave: and in a Grave of silence, after that once speaking, it had for ever
been laid, but that I was loath to leave it in a deeper Grave then any
Ezechiels Valley afforded, the throat of Detraction; which David justly calls an
open sepulcher. Psalm. 5*
I do with all humility thank the Bestower of all gifts, who enabled me to
conceive these unworthy Meditations, who strengthened me to utter them, and for
whose sake I had an honorable, learned, and religious Audience, whose devout
Attention did much encourage me in that holy Task. But it seems my weak
labors were not of the nature of those things, which decies repetita
placebunt: for the Rehearser could not taste them once, who rather hunted after
a prey for his envy, then to perform the great and pious business he
undertook. Pity it is, that a Christian, a Scholar, a Preacher, could not
think me a fellow-Minister with him in all, both of the same Church and
Gospel! for so the courteous imparting of my Notes to him many days before,
proves that I reputed him a fellow laborer with me. It may therefore justly be
expected by all that know how sensible I must needs be of so public and so
undeserved a provocation, that I should pay him again in his own coin: and
how easily could I whet my Pen, and give the reins to an unbridled, but just
anger? But non sic didici Christum, I have learned of Him to be ready to
forgive, who teaches us to bear with wrongs; not because out of baseness we
cannot revenge, but out of Religion we will not. Therefore I will not smite an
Hebrew, one that should be of my Brethren; whose memory I never intended to
burden with more of my Sermon then he pleased, nor speak I, because he left
out the most part; nay, in effect the whole Sermon in rehearsing: it neither
deserved, nor did I ever desire an exact rendering; but what was wanting on his
part in memory, or as himself professed in understanding, to make up with
malice, showed his zeal to be void of discretion, and his emulation of
Religion. For my expressions, (upon which he bestowed some unbeseeming terms
of derision) I know no reason, why I should ever change one particle of that
poor language which God has lent me, to honor him withal, in hope to be
upon all occasions supplied, out of the empty store of Rheumatick and extempory
Barbarism: yet who-euer shall truly weigh the whole body of my discourse,
shall find it, for the most part, squared by the comely Phrase of the
Scripture, which I shall ever esteem the Wellspring of Divinity: If
otherwise, this small work of mine own will disapproue me: For I am forced to
that which I never affected, to put my self upon the judgment of diverse
Readers, whether this Sermon deserved the Censure of that one Rehearser. From
whose lame Repetition I appeal: and let this Sermon speak for it self, as it
was then spoke by my self, who in the Pulpit never uttered any thought, but
with an unfeigned intent to honor God, and none but God; and to benefit my
Audients souls not ears; Hooker Eccle. pol. lib. 5. par. 30.
To their surmises, who think I gave any cause to be tax't, I say no: to other
whisperers, nothing. So I commit my Sermon to thy reading, and thy self to the
Almighty.

From my Study in East-Clanden in Surrey, April. 17. 1627. Thine in Christ
Jesus, THO. GOFFE.

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, if the conceit of mine own labors, or the requests of some
friends (whose entreaties in other things shall ever be commands to me) could
have made me ambitious of the Press, I might have troubled it heretofore: But
I am now forced to that which I never affected, to put my self upon the
judgment of diverse Readers, whether this Sermon deserved the Censure of that
one Rehearser. For my language, who-euer esteems my style too high, (for that
was intimated) shall find my heart low in any Service I can do to GOD: And
yet who-euer shall truly weigh my words, shall find them for the most part
squared by the comely Phrase of the Scripture, which I ever esteem the
Wellspring of Divinity: and in that, though there be still the same Spirit,
yet Esaias and Amos do not prophecy in the same words: and for my part, I shall
never wish to change one particle of that poor discourse, which God has lent
me to honor him withal, unless I were guilty of affecting rather mine own
praise than Gods glory; and that well deserved a sharp reprehension. I do
with all humility thank the bestower of all gifts, who enabled me to
conceive these unworthy Meditations, who strengthened me to utter them, and for
whose sake I had an honorable, learned, and religious (...) whose devout
Attention did much encourage (...) in that holy Task. To such Readers as they
(...) I appeal, from the Rehearsers (...) Repetition; for which, how easily
could I whet my Pen, and give the reins to an unbridled but just passion? But
non sic didici Christum, Christ teaches me otherwise: and I will not smite an
Hebrew; but leave that to be read, which he could not speak: hoping that thou
(good Reader) wilt rather find here something that may profit thee, then hunt
after a prey for undeserved malice to work upon. So I commit my Sermon to thy
reading, and thy self to the Almighty.

From my Study in East-Clandon in Surrey, April. 17. 1627. Thine in Christ
Jesus THO. GOFFE.

DELIVERANCE FROM THE GRAVE.
EZECHIEL 37.13. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your
graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves.


IT was yet Good Friday both with this Prophet and the people, when he
undertook for them a Text fit for Easter, I am sure for the resurrection, when
the Israelites were stretched upon the Rack of misery, as He (of whom they
were then Types, but afterward persecutors) upon the Cross, when they were to
be locked up in the grave of captivity, as He was for a time in the bars of
the earth: quando stillauit ira Dei super Jerusalem, Sixtus Senens. Bib. sanc.
lib. prim.
(says Senensis:) from these oppressions, weighty though they were to him,
this Robur vel imperium Domini, this strength of the Lord (for so the Prophets
name imports) breaks forth; his soul being full of diuinations, as the River
Chobar, by which he sat, of drops; and through the vision of dead bones, sees
Isreal's restoration to its former liberty, and man's resurrection to his
eternity.

The words of the Prophet will best set themselves together in your memories,
if they be taken asunder into their parts: The division.
for they have Three: And you shall know that I am the Lord. O my people. when
I have opened your graves, and brought you up out of your graves.


Prima pars. [And you shall know.] Lib. 3. de falls. sap. cap. 11.
Gods care to be known, first presents it self; And you shall know that I am
the Lord.

Two things, says Lactantius, GOD has made man only to be most desirous of;
Religionis and sapientia, Religion and wisdom, the two only Keys to open
that Well sealed up, The knowledge of the Lord. But the Author goes on, sed
homines ideo falluntur, quod aut Religionem suscipiunt omissa sapientia, aut
sapientiae soli student omissa Religione: either men, in the fury of Religion,
will break up the seals of Gods secrets, and so rather discover him then know
him; or else they will find him in the Labyrinths of their subtle brains,
omitting the best Clue to guide them through, Religion. We may observe how
unhappy the first intent to know GOD too near was, when He that was the
subject of the knowledge, was not the Instructor. Genesis 3.
She that was first caught by that golden hook of knowledge, would know God,
but it should be most ambitiously; for she would know her self to be like
Him, in the knowledge of good and evil. That wretched knowledge she quickly
gained; good she knew, by its irrecouerable loss; and evil she knew, not
only by knowing, Perer. in Genesis lib. 1.
but being so her self: and all because when she first set her self to
School, the Devil was her Tutor. Glorious apparition of knowledge! which
fier'd even innocence it self with a proud affection to it: nor could ever
since any Age avoid the spices of that first disease of knowing. But, like
ouer-fleet Hounds, we often out-runne the prey in the pursuit; or else,
tyer'd and hungry, fall upon some dead carrion in the way, and omit the Game.
Else how were it possible that Man, who only has that essential consequence
of his Reason, Capacity of Learning, should all his time be brought up in a
School of knowledge, and yet too often let the glass of his days be run
out, before he knows the Author he should study? Have not the greatest
Epicures of knowledge, like children new set to School, turned from their
lessons to look on pictures in their books; gazing upon some hard trifle,
some unnecessary subtilty, and forgot so much as once to spell the Lord? How
great a part of this spanlength of his days does the Grammatical Critic
spend, in finding out the construction of an obsolete word, or the principal
verb in a worne-out Epitaph, still ready to set out a new book upon an old
Criticisme? How will an Antiquarie search whole Libraries, to light upon an
ancient Monument, whilst the Chronicle of this LORD, who is the Ancient of
days, shall seldom be looked into? We do so weary the faculties of our
understanding beforehand by ouer-practising, that when we come at the Race
indeed, where our knowledge should so run that it might obtain, it gives
over the course, as out of breath, before it have begun.

I speak not but to honor learning and knowledge, even the first elements of
the Arts; they are like the Crier in the Wilderness before our Savior to
prepare his way: Nor I think ought any to be transported with the pangs of so
indiscreet a zeal, as to extinguish those first Lamps of knowledge, polite
and humane studies: for though they do not directly teach us to know the Lord,
yet are they the fittest spectacles for unripe years and tender sights to put
on, who are not able to endure at the first vehemens sensibile, so excelling an
object as the Lord is. God does not use now-a-dayes to ravish men extra corpus,
as Saint Hierome says he did this Prophet: or as Saint Paul says, he does
not know whether it were (...) or (...), 2 Cor. 12.
whether within or without the body, when he was taken into the third Heaven:
God leads us with a more apprehensiue and ordinary hand, then either by taking
us up, or sending down lights and visions from himself, to make his Spirit to
be at command to every obstreperous vnletter'd Extemporist, Hieron. ad Paulin.
vt doceat antequam didicit, who will undertake to teach before himself has
learned; and so it often falls out, that whilst such are about to make known
this knowledge of the Lord, though their bodies be confined within the
compass of the Pulpit, yet is their straggling invention feign to wander for
matter, as Saul did over Mount Gilboa, 1 Samuel 9.
and many other Mountains, to seek his Fathers Asses, and yet never found
them. It is the comparison of that Kingly Priest, B. King Lect. upon Jonas 24.
who was the late Reverend Prelate of this Sea. All Miracles, we know, are
ceas't; and yet the greatest Miracle that ever God wrought upon earth, ( the
Incarnation of his blessed Son excepted) the effusion of his Spirit, must
still be so familiar with us, that the assiduity of having it, has brought it
amongst too many into a cheap contempt.

I would not be mistaken; (for I speak with a reverend estimation of mine own
and all Christian souls) Preaching is an inestimable Jewel; and if the
Physician of the body is to be honored, then much more they that minister
(...), Basil.
restoring Balsame to wounded souls. That Angel of our Church, reverend
Hooker, (et tanto nomini semper assurgo, his name ought ever to be mentioned
with honor) calls Sermons the Keys to the Kingdom of Heaven; Eccles. pol.
lib. 5. part. 22.
Wings, by which our souls soar to the heavenly Jerusalem. O what a blessing
is it from heaven? nay, what proportion does it hold with heaven, to hear a
Preachers tongue, touched by a Seraphim, utter in the Pulpit, labored and
mature thoghts, clothing his sublime Theames in fit Apparel to be presented
before that Person whom he represents; yet non tam loquitur fortia quam viuit,
Cyprian.
his life should be stronger, and speak more powerfully then his lines; and
even then, when his words reach as high as the Throne of God, his heart should
be as low as the humble Publicans. All Gods Prophets ought to be of David's
mind, to esteem themselves Worms and no men, whilst their Audience are
sweetly forced to repute them little less then Cherubims. What a blessed
Martyrdom it were, for any employed in Gods Service, to breathe forth his
soul in saving others souls? Such a Preacher were like the good servant in
the Gospel, Mat. 24.46.
who when the Lord comes, he shall find so doing. That word [ so] qualifies
any extremity that might have been in his actions; like Saint Paul's (...), so
run; running he observed many (perchance) too fast, therefore he assigns
the modum debitum, the true path in which we should run. Men that will be
either like him, or like the good servant so doing, must not fall into any
excess, and be found ouer-doing; which, even in this great business of
knowing the Lord, too many do. It was St. Hieroms complaint in his time, Sola
Ars Scripturarum, Ars est omnium: In no other Profession can any man set up,
before he have served a set number of years; but in the knowing of the Lord,
every man will be a Doctor of the Chair, before ever he saw the
Diuinity-Schoole. We ought, Numb. 11.29.
I confess, all to wish as Moses did, Would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them; but let them be
enricht with Moses gifts too, who was skillful in all the learning of the
Egyptians: Act. 7.
for otherwise, although it were Moses charity to wish such a general
blessing, 'twas Gods wisdom not to grant it.

It is indeed true, That to know the Lord and his salvation the Scripture
affords light enough, and Divinity needs not to add to her immortal beauty by
any borrowed painting: yet you shall see, that when Saint Paul undertook to
make the Corinthians know who was the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.
he professed a wealthy variety of much other knowledge besides the Scripture;
and thanks God for it, that he spoke with Tongues (...), more then all they
did: and able he was to cite their own Poets among the then learned Athenians,
and to apply a Satyricall Verse out of Epimenides, to reprehend the lying,
gluttonous and bestiall manners of the Cretians. 1. Tit.
His powerful language so rauish't the Lystrians, in the 14. of the Acts, Act.
14.
that he gained the repute of Mercury amongst them: and questionless, the
sitting so long at the feet of Gamaliel, made him vas electionis, a vessel fit
to hold that divine Treasure which the Holy Ghost powered into him: not that he,
or any other Messenger of God, did ever use to thrust themselves into a
Wilderness of Divinity, amongst Thorns and Bushes, suffering every Bramble to
tear off part of that Golden Fleece, which can never safely be carried out of
such Thickets. Therefore the Psalmist took a direct Method in learning to know
this Lord; he looks upon the book of Experience, which was the only volume
God himself opened in Paradise, written like the Book in the Revelation,
Apoc. 5.
within, and on the backside, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, Psalm. 19.
and the Firmament shows his handy works; and so out of every Star could he
take notes, by which he might learn who was this Lord. Opus fecit quod
opificem visibilitate sui manefestauit, Lomb. lib. 1. distinct. 3.
says the Master out of St. Ambrose; The invisible workman may be known by his
visible work, The beauty of Heaven, The Glory of the Stars, an Ornament
giving light in the highest places of the Lord, at the commandment of the Holy
one; they will stand in their order, and never faint in their watches. Eccles.
43.
Thus the Son of Sirach would make the Universe our University, where we
might perfect our souls in experimental knowledge sufficient to understand
the power of Him that made all this All, first of nothing. Accedat quaecunque
vis creatura, Lomb. loc. super.
et faciat tale Coelum et Terram, and dicam quia Deus est: if these helps will
not make up our observation full, Job will direct us to plainer Masters,
Interroga iumenta, and docebunt te: Ask now the Beasts; Job 12.
and they shall teach thee, and the Fowls of the air, and they shall tell
thee; or speak to the Earth, and it shall teach thee, and the Fishes of the
Sea shall declare unto thee. Who knows not all these things, that the hand of
the Lord has wrought this? By the perpetuity of these creatures, we may know
the eternity of their Creator; by their immensity, his omnipotency; by the
ordering of them, the wisdom of him. Yet has the Devil so fascinated the
eyes of many, that in stead of knowing GOD by these his works, they have
mistaken many of his works for their gods: How commonly have some esteemed the
strong man in the Firmament, the Sun, for the Suns Creator? who, could he
have spoken, would have answered them like the Angel in the Revelation, Apoc.
19.
(...), see thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-seruant, and of thy Brethren.
Thus the willing, yet impiously-deuout Heathen, made their unhappy Piety rather
to be a crime, then such blinded adoration to be esteemed knowledge of this
Lord. Where was that immortal Soul, that Image of the sacred Trinity? Where
all the Faculties of that Soul? Apprehension, Judgment, and Discourse? Nay,
where are they yet, in the greatest and most parts of the world? I desire not
to dwell upon so unnecessary a point, as many may think the knowledge of God
to be, in this Sunshine of the Gospel: yet some, I am sure, that this day
hear me, have been in parts, and amongst people, who can no more see this
Lord, then a blind man is able to discern the Sun at noone: where amongst
observing many Monsters in their Travels, the greatest Monster Sea or Earth
affords, is the ignorance of this Lord, not yet known to the mightiest
Monarkes upon earth. Let me beseech you, who-euer you are, that dedicate your
selves to tread the vntrackt paths of the Sea, and negotiate with remote
Kingdoms, either for the Gold of Ophir, or the Spices of Arabia, to carry with
you along for Exchange, if it be possible, (but not to forgo it your selves)
this Merchandise, sold at so low a rate now with us; The knowledge of this
Lord. Let every one of your lives be a Taper to the darkened understandings of
the Heathen, by which they may at least see that you know the Lord: for to you,
to you only does he bear this love, of you only he has this fatherly care,
that he would be known to be the Lord of you his people: for you shall know
that I am the Lord, O my people: you are the persons to whom he would be
known: his people.

Did ever Father in more fair terms entertain the dearest Treasures of his
blood, The second (...) [ ^ my people.]
then God does here his people? Ez. ca. 35.1^^
A people, who in the Chapter (...) had awakened his unwilling wrath, himself
says of them, When the house of Israel dwelt in their own Land, they defiled
it by their own ways, and by their doings, wherefore I powered forth my fury
upon them. And who would not have still looked for burning from his lips, and
Coals of fire from his nostrils? yet he presently forgets to be angry:
scattered they were, but they shall not straggle long as sheep without a
Shepherd; for he will again be their Lord, and they shall be his people.

His people by order of Creation all people are: many blessings and benefits
do all Nations, Kingdoms, and people receive from him: But, says Bernard,
Bern.
tanquam proprium eum habent singuli Electorum, where he bears a selected and
near affection, there he styles himself and them by a more dear and peculiar
Title, O my people: He spoke to them before in terms of strangeness; They
defiled their own way, effudi eos in Gentes, I have scattered them among the
Nations: still in the third person, as if they were Branches to be cut from the
Stock wherein they were ingrafted, and henceforth to remain Aliens to his
favor, never to be acquainted with him, or any thing of his, but his Anger and
punishments.

But his Anger endures but a while: In his favor is life: so gracious a LORD
he had ever been to them, that he could never forget that they were his
people. How like his own people did he truly use them, when they were under
Pharaohs bondage, where every lash that was given them, seemed to strike him;
and how did he double all those Stripes upon Pharaohs back? How did he
afterward load them with Courtesies, because they were his people? How did he
feed them with food from his Table, such as they knew not, neither did their
Fathers know? How did he bring them through the waters of the great Deep, and
through the Red Sea, as through a Wilderness? Yet was not Gratitude for all
these favors so truly planted in their deprau'd hearts, but they made a Molten
Calfe, an Idolattrous Sharer in his honor: If ever they were not to be
accounted his people, and their names never to be registered more in his
thoughts, now was the time they should have been blotted out, when such worms,
not worthy to crawle before his Throne, should dare to urge God himself, with
their vpbraiding murmurs: Exodus 16.
yet, even then, a word from his Servant Moses mouth, to put him in mind that
they were his people, easily reconciles him; and he shows that he had wrote
them upon the palms of his hands, and not forgot them, when the Mother has
forgot her sucking Child. He was ever wont to rejoice in the Title of being a
Lord to his people: for, as if his Love had shut up all his Care for one
Family alone, and only they should partake of it, he calls himself the God
of Abraham, Exodus 3.
the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob; as if he meant only to be their
Lord, and they should only be his people.

Some of his servants have desired to belong to him, with the same singularity
of duty, as he has owned them with a singular affection. Psalm. 30.
The man after his own heart, expresses him in Attributes most pleasing to
him, Ioh. 20. Dubitatum est ab illo, nea nobis dubitaretur. Leo.
Domine Deus meus, O Lord, my God. The Disciple, whose doubting faith has made
ours so strong that it ought not to doubt; when the wounds in his side had
assured him who he was, he cries out, (...), My Lord and my God.

Ioh. 20.11.
At the same time, that happy sinner seeks this Lord with the same
appropriating terms; They have taken away Dominum meum, my Lord: neither shame
for his late reproachful Death, nor fear to belong to so contemned a Man as
he was, made her to let fall her Relation, but still My Lord. Some of his then
have been willing to dwell under the shadow of his wings, as he was to
entertain them into his service; and ready to acknowledge him for their Lord,
as he to call them his people.

His people we are all content to go for, whilst he conferr's favors upon
us, whilst he opens unto us the windows of Heaven, and powers forth
blessings, that there is not room enough to hold them: But, Mal. 3.
like peremptory Minions, who having long enjoyed the favor of their Prince,
and finding themselves crossed but in some one Suit, they forget all the good
turns that were heap't upon them before: Antiquiora beneficia subuertit, qui
eadem posterioribus non cumulat; Plin. sec. iun. ep.
none will any longer be his people, then his hand of bounty is open to them.
Not only his people in general, but his chiefest Servants have used him so;
his Psalmist, his King, whom he took from the Sheepfold, and preventing him
with all good things, set upon his head a Crown of gold; Then he would be his
servant; Then he awakes his Psaltery and Harp, and himself would awake right
early; Then he summons the Heavens, Psalm. 118. Psalm. 148.
and the Heights, the Angels and Hosts, Dragons and Deep, all must help him
to praise the Name of the Lord; for himself was resolved to do it for ever
and ever. Yet in another place, he sees but the wicked flourish, he sees GOD
(as he thinks) show a little favor to them that were not his own people;
Psalm. 73.
sees that they are not in trouble like other men, nor plagued like other men;
forthwith all that God had done for him, Psalm. 3.
That he had so often heard him out of his Holy Hill, that he had been his
glory, and the lifter up of his head; yet he took ill counsel in his soul
daily, and accuses his careful Lord, of such perverse forgetfulness, as to
be a continued Patron of Strangers, who never acknowledged themselves his, and
to take no notice of his best and most obsequious servants. Apul. de D^g. Plat.
(...), Though we may every where find this Lord, yet if we look upon him
with carnal eyes, we shall hardly discern him to be the Lord of his people,
but rather of the ungodly, who oftentimes in far more plenty enjoy his
outward bounties, then his own people. His people must not look to spread
themselves and flourish like a green Bay tree, to swim always upon smooth
streams. When Christ himself had once in his company his Apostles, Mark. 4.
all the poor Family that he had, all his people, the Winds and the Waters
set upon the Ship where he and his people were; for had there been a
continual calm, they could not so certainly have known him for their Lord,
who both then and since reads to all his people many Lectures of himself, his
Glory, his Omnipotency: But alas, they rather pose us then instruct us: by all
them we only know, that we can never sufficiently know him, not the least
handy-worke of his. One School only GOD has, where most perfectly we shall
learn what he is: That School is the Grave, to which here he sets his
people, where they shall truly know him to be the Lord, by those acts of his
power, by opening Graves, and bringing up out of Graves.

The last part, [ When I have opened your Graves.]
This is one of the unlikeliest places that ever man went to learn any
knowledge in, especially the knowledge of the Lord. The Psalmist tells GOD, That
was no place for him to be known in, quoniam non est in morte qui memor sit
tui; Psalm. 6.
In death there is no remembrance of thee, and in the Grave who shall give thee
thanks? He seconds it in the 30. Psalm, verse 9. Quae vtilitas in sanguine
meo? What profit is there in my blood, O Lord? When I go down into the Pit,
shall the Dust praise thee? shall it declare thy Truth? Yes sure; A blessed
Apostle could well think of no other Library to study for his chief Lesson
in, to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified, but the Grave* His Books must be
meditations of the Carkases laid in their Graves; his fellow-students. Worms;
his writing-tables, nasty Sculs; his maine Author, Christ Jesus, locked up a
while after his crucifying, in the Archiuis, in the closest and most secret
room of the Grave, out of whom he meant to exscribe those Prophecies foretold,
those Types prefigur'd, those Amazements of Heaven, those Terrors of Earth;
and above all, one Note that transcends all the rest, without which his
Preaching had been vain, his Epistles nothing worth; That only makes all his
Epistles now to be Gospel, 1. Cor. 15.
That Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
sleep: That as by a Man came Death, so by a Man came also the Resurrection of
the Dead. And that alone makes us his people know that he is the Lord, now he
has opened our Graves, etc.

Our Savior himself, whilst he was upon Earth, was a frequent Guest to the
House next adjoining in sad neighborhood to the Grave, the Bed of sickness;
from which he scarce ever departed, till he had made them with their Beds able
to walk and depart from him: so in that Bed, he made the first way to show
what power he would afterward have over the Bed of Dust, the Grave. From
sickness and languishing, Mat. 8.9.
he raised the diseased, Creante, non medicante manu, not with the hand of a
Physician, but of a Creator; Quam posuit cum formaret ex nihilo, imposuit
iterum vt reformaret ex perdito: That hand which first framed us of less then
Earth, is ever ready to preserve us when we are going to the Earth: Chrysol.
Psalm. 90.
He turns Man to destruction, and again he says, Come again, ye children
of men. But if we roue into the wonders of ancient days, or look into the
Gospel, to see what Graves Christ opened, these Miracles seem a far off,
and so they less affect us. These days of ours will change us from Auditors
into Spectators, and when we talk of Graves, Ipsa lectio quaedam facta erit
visio, Leo ser. de Pass. 19.
The discourse will no longer become the object of our ears, but of our eyes.
The Doors of this House of Death, you all know when they were first opened:
when you shall not see GOD more busy in one Chapter to take Man out of the
ground, Genesis 2.
then in the next Chapter he was resolved to open the ground, that it might
take Man in again: Genesis 3.
In puluerem reuerteris, To dust thou shall return. An heavy doom from the
mouth of the Almighty, and all unlooked for yet by our unhappy Father; who
though he only had deserved it in Act, yet the force of that Edict stayed not
alone at him; but, as in crowds, if the foremost fall, the whole pressing
multitude commonly follows; the posse non mori, Lom. lib. 2. did. 19.
Innocence that might have kept us from the Grave, we had lost; and a non
posse non mori, the inevitable Arrest of Death has seized upon us, from which
we can never be so totally bayl'd, but we must appear at his Summons, and
present our Bodies to his Prison, the Grave. We are all but like so many
wearied and breathless Hares before the Hounds, which every step looks to be
a prey to their sporting cruelty. May we not All come to Saint Paul's
mournful Quaere, Romans 7.
(...), O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from the Body of this
Death? or from the Death of this Body?

The words of this Text I never meant to understand as directly to prove the
opening of Graves at the Resurrection: Hieron. in hunc locum.
Saint Hierome tells us, Scimus multa robustiora Testimonia in Scripturis
sanctis reperiri; The Scripture is not so barren, as to stand in need of an
Allegory to demonstrate such confirmed Divinity: Every Chapter in some
Prophets, every Period of some Chapters of the Evangelists, are literal
witnesses of opening those Graves at the latter Day; And to them may these
words be added, as holding proportion with that universal Deliverance; for
nunquam poneretur similitudo, God would never have taken a similitude from the
Grave, to illustrate Isreal's redemption from Captivity, Id. ibid.
nisi staret ipsa resurrectio, but that he who meant immediately to do the
one, was resolved afterward in his good time to perform the other. Pined. in
Job. 19.
And Fidei cognitio sola visione beata, inferior est claritate, aequalis
certitudine; Faith does as certainly apprehend things that are to be done, as
God himself knows that he will do them, says Pineda.

No Captivity beyond the Grave; and no word in this Chapter to set out this
Captivity, but is translated from a Grave: Show me, O son of Man, the value
of dead and dry Bones, Sinews, and Flesh brought upon these Bones; Breath
fetched from the four Winds to animate these Bones: Ossa haec vniuersa domus
Israel est, These Bones are the whole House of Israel; nay, the whole House of
the whole world must become as these Bones, Dry and Marrowlesse, diuested of
Flesh and Sinews, and laid for a time in such a lasting Sleep, where they
shall not so much as dream of this their Lord. But, even then, that Eye of
his, which neither slumbers nor sleeps, will keep a watch over them: And
those that upon the heavy wings of Death, go to the uttermost parts of the
Earth, shall there find him and his power in opening of Graves.

God speaks in this Prophet hypothetically, if, or when; But this is to us a
Truth already past; And the wide mouth of the Grave has sufficiently been its
own Commentary, to make the Text most plainly understood. Would you willingly
forget, O you his people, how lately he showed you that outstretched Arm of
his, in opening your Graves?

The Grave never brought forth any thing but confusion: and therefore if you
find it in my words, it may more fairly be interpreted; yet esteem it not for
penury of matter, or that we could not hold out with the Glass, unless we
inch't out our Periods, by ripping up of dangers long since past. Past indeed
is that sad time; and past (O Lord) let it be, like the word that is spoken,
and can never be recal'd: past let the Infection of the Disease be, But never
let Salus Iehouae, never let the Salvation of the Lord pass from your
memories: let the right hand of Gods Messengers forget their cunning, and their
tongues cleave for ever to the roof of their mouths, who will not remember
those cries, that then his people made to him, and the speedy haste he made to
help them. Open your hearts deep as the Grave, and waken your eyes, that they
sleep not the sleep of Death: those eyes to which we present a thousand
alluring spectacles, turn them from vanity, to look into the house of
mourning; turn them upon those affrighting Glasses, and see the Lord, the Lord
himself, first opening the Grave to the Head, afterward to the body; first to
the King, afterward to the Kingdom; thousands following to attend his
Funeral, with a mournful Pomp. Did not Fathers and Sons then go to this
Grave together? Was it not opened for the Infant, as soon almost as the womb
was opened to let it into the world? And That which a little before was the
hopeful Burden of the Mother, presently became a small, but heavy load to
the Messenger of the Grave.

Cadunt Medentes Mordus auxilium trahit. Sen. Oed.

The Patient wounded the Physician, and recompensed him with Infection for his
Antidote: They who one day carried Corpses to the Grave, were themselves the
next day Coarses carried thither: All trades failing in your City, but the
Sextons, you had leisure to walk out to see the Mansions of Death: where if
any wondering at their unwonted vastness, asked themselves where the bodies were
that should fill them; e're they had past many Streets homeward, they met
Beeres enough to make them queston where the Graves were that should entertain
them: In stead of Triumphs that were then begun to be thought upon, Death only
rid in woeful Triumph through your Streets: The neighbors that were wont to
embrace each other at their meetings, now appear one to the other as fearful
as a Ghost at midnight: Some preserved to read the Bill of one week, and
their own selves helped to fill it up the next: And who did not look upon
those doleful Registers with wet eyes, as if it had been the Chronicle of a
City, that sometimes was, and without Gods speedy mercy never like to have
been again? Did not the Grave open so wide at the length; That the Cormorant
and Bittyrne were like to possess your habitations? The Owl also and the
Raven to dwell amongst you, the lines of Confusion to be stretched upon you?
And the stones of emptiness? Esai. 34.
They are Esayes words to as flourishing a City, and a people once as dear to
God as ever we were: Thorns and Thistles might have came in our Palaces,
Nettles, and Brambles in our Fortresses, the Satyr like to cry here to his
fellow, and the Screech-Owle like to find here a place to dwell in. Then were
your delicate and tender Dames (whom the Sun in his pride must not look
upon; and he in all that pride, not so proud as one of them) scorning at
another time to grace a Country Village with their presence; but then glad to
shelter themselves under an humble Thatch. Come now you pampred Truncks, and
see these Bodies a Feast to their own corruption, for whom here no foul was
dear enough, no fish rare enough, to content their wittily-luxurious palats;
The Foul in his live proportion must come flying to our Feasts; And the fish
swim again in the platter in a new Sea of Sauce: These bodies which to
paint, to cloathe, to adorn, Countries must be searched for Silks and Sables,
and the wool of Ermines, the Silk-worme must be robbed of the labor of her
bowels; The Tailor must tire his wits to attire our Bodies; The Devil himself
must renew his invention to revive a fashion: Satanae ingenia, Tertul.
could Tertullian call them in his days; Days of Sackcloth and Ashes, in
respect of ours: And all this Cost, Pains, Wit, Curiosity, to feed and
cloathe Bodies, that must come to the Grave. Whither if one Engine will not
serve to bring us, he has many; and although he struck us but with one rod,
yet he threatened us with more.

Solomon with a preventing Devotion, foresaw all his Whips and Scourges which
drive us to our Graves, 1 Kings 8.
Famine, Pestilence, Blasting, Mildew, Caterpiller, and Enemy. Must our Sermons
pass them over? I pray God the destroying Angel, whose fingers were armed
with them, may so pass over us too: But Famine has ever been a Brand kindled
in the fire of Gods wrath; witness the Elegies which made Sion weep forth,
when the Lord accomplished his fury, Lam. 4.11.
When he had devoured the foundations thereof. Other punishments prevent their
cruelty by a speedy destruction. But famine strikes with deliberate blows, and
makes us wretchedly sensible of lasting miserieit; cooles the preserving heat,
drinks up the nourishing moisture, wears out the vegetable habitude, suckes
up the flowing Marrow, eneruates the Sinews, vntyes the joints, cobwebs the
flesh, discolours the face, dambes up the voice; They that be slain with the
Sword, Ibid.
says the Lord, are better then they that be slain with Hunger. If any think
this passage unnecessary, because they never felt it, let them learn by this
description of it, to pity them that do.

Those are the lesser Conducts to the Grave, Blasting, Mildew, Locust,
Caterpiller. Would not the mighty men amongst us neglect them, 1 Samuel 17.
as Goliath scorned David the Youth? Yet Solomon, knew that this Army was able
to bid Battle to the greatest power upon earth. So disdainfully did God
overcome Pharaoh by an Army of Flies and Frogs; And brought Herod to his
Grave with a few worms; Acts 12.
manifesting upon him at once both his strength and scorn.

One maine Instrument he has more to open our Graves; that is, the Enemy, but
since the affrighting Drum has not a long time struck up his Panicke sounds
in our land, nor the watchful Beacon lent us the fearful light to see an
Enemy, the name of an Enemy may be thought, as needless a thing as a Soldier.
Transport then your thoughts a while, but where the Enemy has been, see how
the Enemy has opened a Grave, not for people, but for Provinces. What is
become of the stately Towers? of the walled Cities? of the fruitful Vines? of
a Country dear to us? But I question not the letting out of the blood of the
Vine; since the Blood of the men was shed forth in fuller Cataracs.

Sen. Not. Quaest.
Vrbes constituit Aetas, Hora dissoluit. We may now seek that Country in the
Country, and not find it so much as in the Ruins. We and our Sins had almost
caused God to employ all these Arrows of wrath against us. What Country? What
Nation under heaven do we Trade withal; from who^ the Sins of that Nation is
not brought hither? and those are Mercha^dises that might welbe spared: we al
use our Lord like forgetful Mariners, promise much in a Storm, and never
think of it in a Calm. God himself could tell his people in the 5 of Hosa, I
will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their offense, Hos. 5.15.
and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early. Optimi sumus,
Plin. Ep.
dum infirmi sumus. Never do we truly kneel to him, but when we are under
his strokes, upon which strokes, we must not look through the false Glasses of
our deserts, but of his Mercies. Cain and Judas looked upon him through the
Perspectiue of their sins: and so in stead of reading the Prophets Text, That
his Mercy was above all his works, they mistook, and thought their own foul
works above his Mercy: so though he would have forgiven them; they could not
forgive themselves; whereas the goodness of God endures for ever: and
although he chastens every Son that he loves, yet his Stripes are not to
drive us from him, with a desperate fear, but to call us to him with a
Religious hope; Austin.
Flagellat omnem filium quem amat, says Saint Austin, he chastens all the
sons whom he loves; yes, we may truly say All, for he had one Son, Idem.
fine peccato, non tamen sine flagello; who never deserved a stripe, and yet he
felt many.

How was he feign to drive us All to his Temple not long since? How did a few
strokes sink us upon our knees? Lift up our wearied hands? Exalt our tired
voices? Turn our heads into Fountains? our eyes into Streams? And all our
selves, for a time into so many Saints? How did we come to him with hearty
groans, Devout thoughts, Sobbing Breasts, Humble Knees, Serious Cries,
Charming Tongues, Emphaticke Prayers, and above all, a full Resolution of
Amendment? All which he listened to with such a pleased Attention, that he
caused the Minister of his Justice to put up the Sword of vengeance, and with a
hand of Mercy shuts those Graves that he found open, and so all we that stand
here this day, and many thousands more, are as men brought up out of our
Graves, and may know that he is the Lord, and that we his people ought for
ever to praise him in the great Congregation, who thus has brought us out of
our Graves.

And brought you up out of your Graves.]
Never did the pen of the Almighty, either from his own mouth so truly
speak himself, when he sealed Moses Commission with his name Jehovah, I am
that I am, Exodus 3.14.
Nor by any powerful Act so prove himself, nor by any Hieroglyphicke so
deliniate himself, as by this last Particle by bringing up out of our Graves.
The Son of Sirach imployes all the Rhetoric he has, to set out the
Omnipotency of this Lord; from the Rainbow first which he bids us look upon
and praise him that made it: Eccles. 43.
very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof, it compasses the heavens
about with a Glorious Circle; ver. 11.
And the hands of the Most high has bended it. verse. 12.
Then he directs us to the Meteors, Lightning and Thunder: then to his
Treasures from whence the Clouds fly forth as Fowls, ver. 20.
and the hoare Frost is powered as Salt upon the earth, which the North wind
congealeth into ye, and cloatheth the waters as with a Brestplate. Can
Divinity assume more then that pen gives it? Yes, the Holy Ghost tells us of a
Creature in the Sea, whom he calls Regem super omnes filios superbiae, Job. 41.
The King of all the children of pride: The Leuiathan, Lay thy hand upon him
remember the Battle, do no more, who can discover the face of his Garment? Or
who can can come to him with his double bridle? Who can open the doors of his
face? his Teeth are terrible round about. You shall never find Gods own pen
dropping upon this Creature, but even the Creator as pleased with his own
work; is again ready to cry out as at the first, Valde bonum; letting it
breathe forth his praise, as it does the Ocean out of his Nostrils. Yet this
(...) this wonder, at which all other wonders may justly wonder, must not,
cannot, show him so marvelous in our eyes, as by the promise that he here
means to make himself known by to his people, by bringing of them up out of
their Graves.

Down with your Scepters, all Monarkes upon earth, fall at his feet, you
heavenly powers that attend his Throne, for you may all here use David's words:
Psalm. 115.
Non nobis, Domine, non nobis; Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thee
only belongs the power to bring up out of the Grave.

This Prerogative, vnshar'd to any, does God ever keep to himself, I wound,
and I heal; I kill, and I make alive: for Quis Deus nisi Dominus, who can bring
from the Grave, but our God? He never delegated his dearest servant in this
Ability, Number. 12.
his servant Moses, so often styled his servant, imploid to deliver his people
from Pharoahs Bondage, and therefore was armed for a time with many miracles;
made able to turn his Rod into a Serpent, Exodus 7.
and his Serpent again into a Rod; could at his pleasure call for Flies, Lice,
Frogs, Darkness, yet he never brought any from the Grave. Christ Jesus
himself, amongst all his world of Miracles which he did whilst he was in
the world, did not make this power of his too familiar: he brought one from the
Bed, another from the Beer, Ioh. 11.
but never, save only one, from the Grave; and that was he whom he loved. He
would not put the strength of his Godhead to deal with so weak an adversary
as a Disease; Chrysostom.
but Cui plus est mortem vincere, quam remouere languorem, he provided not to
cure Lazarus in his sickness, but to honor himself in his raising; and even by
that temporal Resurrection of him, to prove the eternal Resurrection one day
of us* he does but speak to him, Lazarus, come forth, and he came forth, not
to bring amazement, but faith to the beholders; who might then have shouted
with that voice of triumph; Death, 1 Cor. 15.
where is thy sting? Grave, where is thy victory?

But if we go to no other Grave but this, and only look upon the deliverance
of Lazarus from it, we may sound a Conquest before the Field be won, and so
our Enemy which lies in Ambush may invade us with an vn-lookt for assault.
Lazarus rose indeed, and for a time enjoyed some benefit of longer life: Cypr.
de Resur.
Res quidem honorabilis, and dominatio potestatiua fuit, says Cyprian: The
power that our Savior showed over the Grave even there, ought ever to be
honored in our memories; but he was to go to the Grave again. Heb. 9.
The (...) the Statute in Saint Paul, that all men must dye, will ever stand in
full force, strength and virtue: and therefore the Psalmist makes it an angry
question to any that shall doubt it; Psalm. 88.
Quis viuit? Who is he that lives, and shall not see Death? All the comfort one
of the best Heathen could ever give in this case, Sen. ad Polib.
was, Cogitare id sibi accidisse, quod ante se passi sunt omnes, omnesque
passuros: The community of all suffering alike, may somewhat ease the severity
of the punishment: for when we go to our Graves, they are the most sure
Possessions that ever our Fathers could leave us, inherited by them that went
before us, and shall successively be taken up by all generations that shall
come after us. Job 17.
We must all say to Corruption, Thou art my Father; and to the Worms, You are
my Mother and my Sisters. And yet now, even this comfortless place, the Grave,
can yield us comfort; the walls of that Prison being in a manner broken down,
since Christ Jesus, who was the Surety for our first Fathers Debt, was laid
for a time in it, to redeem us from it. The Devil knew that he had given his
word for the payment, but did not understand that the Principal did not at all
belong to him: Leo sermon. de Pass. 10.
Non autem errabat in genere, sed fallebatur in crimine; 'Twas we had forfeited
the Bond, and he must be arrested: so a Heard of Tigers came to seize upon the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; for whom, he (being God) became
Man; they (being men) to him became Devils; they apprehend him with their
bloody hands, whom their hearts could never apprehend; all wickedly intending
to confound him, who only intended to preserve them, and thinking one death
too little for him, who esteemed his own life, and eternity it self a
blessing too small for them. The Element of Sin, which in one of our hearts
weighes not at all, because it is in its proper place, (and Elementum non
ponderat in loco suo) upon him lay so heavy, because he was no Center for it,
that it made him who was wont to bow the heavens, bow himself upon the earth,
in the Garden of Gethsemane, knocking there at the door of his Grave to be let
in: from thence he was carried to the Theater of Death, strewn with Bones and
dead Bodies; where the unwholesome sauors might have brought him to his death
without a Cross. Thus both the living and the dead were equally prepared to
bring him to his Grave, who came to bring both the living and the dead up out
of their Graves. How like a Coarse, and nothing but a Coarse fit for a Grave,
must he needs look, when that Face, at which the Angels so often wondered, was
scarrifi'de and cauteriz'd with Thorns? those eyes, from which the Lamps of
Heaven, the Sun that wardeth by day, and the Moon which watches by night,
might borrow a better cleerenes, suncke into their Caves; those ears, wont to
hear nothing but Anthem'd Alleluiahs, deafn'ed with the scorns of insulting
Sinners; that mouth, the Torrent from whence flowed Eloquia Domini, Psalm. 19.
Eloquia munda, words sweeter then Honey and the Honey Comb, then stopped with
Gall and Vinegar: he that had given them Wine, to cheer and make glad the
heart of Man; what a Potion did they give him, to comfort his dying heart? Thus
for his sufferings they would be sure to take what impious care they could; and
their busy malice was so wholly taken up with them, that they forgot when they
had done to provide him a Grave. He that in his life time was worse provided
for then the wild inhabitants of the Field or Air, Mat. 8.
(for himself complains, that the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air
have nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head,) lived and
died in the same case; lived without a bed, and died without a Grave: Because
the living would not, the dead came from their Graves to make him room; the
Earth opened her obedient arms to entertain him; the stones of the Temple
leapt from their foundations, disdaining the place where the hand of any
Architect had laid them, Psalm. 118.22.
when those profane builders refused Lapidem angularem, him that was ever the
head Stone of the corner. He died for the sins of strangers, and therefore a
stranger, Joseph of Arimathea, must provide him a Grave: he begged him of
Pilate, and had so often laid him in his heart before, that he now esteems
himself happy, if he may lay him in his Grave.

Would you now think this Man that could not save himself, (as they
blasphemed) could save us? That he that could not procure himself a Grave,
should bring us all up out of our Graves?

Nullas habet spes Troja, si tales habet.
How do they yet deride our hopes in him, who do not yet believe in him? Durst
he ever challenge Death upon his own Dunghill, the Grave, with such daring
terms, Hos. 13.
Ero mors tua, o mors, O Death, I will be thy death, O Grave, I will be thy
destruction? Will the Lord ever say to him, Sit thou on my right hand, until I
have made thine enemies thy footstool? Can he ever ascend on high, and take
captivity captive, who was taken by two old men, Joseph and Nicodemus, to be
laid in a new Monument in Joseph's Garden? Ioh. 19.
In horto erat Monumentum nonum, A new Sepulcher, wherein never man was yet
laid; A Stone hewne out of a Rock, and therefore most fit to lay the Rock of
our salvation in; and into a Rock his Disciples could hardly dig, to get him
out: Therefore against that Rock must they needs dash, Mat. 28.
which would have it said, His Disciples came by night, and stole him away.

Mat. 27.
They could say to Pilate, Sir, we have heard the Deceiuer say, (and how
wretchedly did they deceive themselves by not believing what he said?) His
dixit ever was his fiat, Genesis 1.
from the first saying, Let there be light; though afterward when he had made
that light come to shine in the darkness, (...), Ioh. 1.
the darkness comprehended it not: They had seen him whom they so falsely
termed Deceiuer, oftentimes making his word good without all deceit: The
Centurion asked no more at his hands, but (...), Mat. 8.13.
Say but the word only, and my servant shall be whole: and his servant was
made whole the same hour. He that was himself the Word, needs never do any
thing but say the word, he said he would rise again the third day; and as
he was Filius fortitudinis to the Lord himself, the Son of his strength, or
the strength of his Son, he could find or make a way to bring himself up
out of the Grave. Let their laborious envy heap hills of Earth upon his
Grave; let their Grand Patron the Devil himself, send Legions from Hell to
guard his Sepulcher, as Pilate did a band of armed Soldiers, they could not
have kept him in: His very sleep, which they thought the sleep of death, was
busy in a triumphant Conquest over Hell it self; he was then gone to the
house of the strong man, which himself speaks of in the Gospel, binding the
strong man, Mark. 3.
and spoiling him of his goods; he entered as Conqueror, bound him as the
stronger, B. Bilson. in his tract of Christ's descent, page 15^.
spoild him, as the right owner of that estate in us, which he by theft and
violence had once carried away. The drowsy weight of sleep sat far more
heavy upon the Soldiers eyes, and bound them faster, then the High Priests
Seal, then the Massy Stone; then the walls of the Grave, then Death with all
his Cords were able to fetter him.

Were the Fogs called from the Lakes and Fennes for your sakes, O you, once his
people? Was darkness called from the Center of the Earth, to spread it self
upon the face of Egypt three days? Exodus 10.
or rather three prodigious nights? Did thou, O Sun, Iosu. 10.12.
more then stand still in Gibeon, and thou Moon, in the valley of Aijalon,
that you his people should for ever since obtenerate your own eyes with a
darkness more palpable then that of Egypt, and would neither then nor yet see
this Sun of righteousness, coming from the Chamber of his Grave, fresh as a
Bridegroom, and rejoicing as a Giant to run his race? Would his Disciples, a
poor, disconsolate, wretched, forsaken company, Doves under the tallons of
Vultures and Ravens, would they venture upon a guarded Sepulcher? Would they
offer violence to an armed Band? Indeed, habet pietas impetum suum: Religious
valor will do much; and it is well they will accuse his Disciples of so good
a crime, as to be more watchful then their Hirelings were. Innocence is ever
most commonly apt for rest: when he took along with him three chosen witnesses
of his sorrow in the Garden, Mat. 2^.
when he felt the soul of affliction in the affliction of his soul, and many
a groan was fetched from the bowels of his humanity, able to awaken a sullen
Rock; they three not then able to watch with him one hour, and now all of
them to watch a whole night when he was dead, and steal him away? This saying
is commonly reported among the Jews to this day. Mat. 28.
Credat Iudaeus Apella, non ego: A sottish, Horat.
stupid, unbelieving Jew may credit such a lying vanity. And mark, I beseech
you, even in that one thing, the provident Justice of the Almighty, to punish
them ever since with a general lightness of belief, to apprehend any thing
but what they should have faith in; Dreams and Fables are Histories to them;
and, which is their just curse, they have yet no other Gospel.

Shall so supernatural an Earthquake be at his Passion, when he breathed out
his Spirit into the hands of his Father? And shall neither Earth nor the Stone
upon his Grave stir, to give way to him to reassume that Spirit to himself
again? If Earth nor Stones will not move, Heaven will, and from thence will
come an Angel to roll away the stone. Psalm. 93.11.
Angels ever have had a charge of him, and as they did not refuse to attend him
when he took up his first lodging upon Earth in a Manger, Luke 2.
so did they wait upon him in the last bed that ever he lay in here, Austin.
the Grave. Qui fuit vermiculorum locus, est and Angelorum, Angels scorn not
to keep worms company in any place where Christ was: for as Princes
denominate Courts, so does he Heaven, even in the Grave, and the Grave was
Heaven whilst he was there: Lucan.
so Coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam. But speak, thou Angel of the Lord,
was not he thy Angel, and abler to help thee, then thou were him? The Angel
may still keep the praise of his duty, but Christ must have the honor of his
Omnipotency; All that was done for him, was done by him, nor did the Angel
roll away the stone, to make way for Christ to come out of the Grave, but to
prepare our hearts for Christ to come into them, vt conseruis ad credendum
daret fidem, Chrysostom. Ser. 75.
non vt ad resurgendum Domino praestaret auxilium; Not to help our Savior,
but our faith, to which the Angel would ever remain an happy both Messenger
and witness; A witness joined to holy Job, who knew certainly that his
Redeemer lived; Job 19.
A witness with David, Psalm. 16.
that his holy One should not see corruption. A witness with Esaias, Esaias. 26.
who called all that dwelt in the dust, to awake and sing. A witness with
Ezekiel to this place, That he has opened our Graves, and brought us up out of
our Graves.

Vteri noua forma, says a Father, for the Tomb to become a womb to take in a
dead man, and bring him forth alive; for the Grave to swallow up, not a dead
Corpse, but Death it self; never did any thing deserve the lasting Characters
which Job meant to write with the Pen of a Diamond like this; never did Spring
bring forth such a flower as the flower of Iesse before; Esaias 11.
But if he be but a flower, he may fade again as flowers do, and so our flesh
will last as long as his: for the Psalmist tells us, that as for Man, he
flourishes as the flower of the field; Psalm. 103.
But the wind passes over it, and it is gone, the place thereof shall know it
no more; so man has ever remained since Adams fall, Genesis 2:
he was first made a Gardner, till that Gardner proved the worst weed in the
Garden: and so as a weed was plucked up and throne away; but the second Adam
the Jews esteemed indeed a weed, but contrary to expectation he sprung up a
Gardner: Mark 16.
for Mary took him for the Gardner, and by the power of that Gardner, Minut.
Fael. in Oct.
Expectandum etiam nobis corporis ver est. These Bodies of ours shall at that
general Springtime of the Resurrection grow up again a fresh in the Eden of
Eternity.

Tertul. de Resur. carnis, cap. 4.
This flesh of ours, post totum ignobilitatis Elogium, this ignoble flesh
subject to an Army of Diseases, to Corruption, Death, Worms, Rottenness, and
Dissolution, with all the deprauing Adjuncts, that Sadduce, Heathen, or Athiest
can disgrace it with, yet because it is the diligent Attendant of the Soul
here, by whose Organs she discourses, contemplates, and conueyes her thoughts
as high as the Seat of God; this flesh, in which Saint Paul carried Stigmata
Christi, Ad Gal. 6.
the marks of his Savior, shall with its own eyes one day see that Savior.
For, shall darkness follow light, and light darkness? shall Autumn succeed
Spring, and Spring Autumn? shall the Moon put off and renew her self by a
monthly change? shall trees unclothe themselves of their leafie garments? and
duly at their time re-inuest themselves with those green Ornaments? shall
Suns each night set, and each morning rise? and must man take up a
lethargicke rest in a night long as eternity? Tertul. de Resur. carnis, cap. 12
No: Operibus praescripsit Deus antequam literis; his works are our books, in
which we may read the plain and understood Stories of our being brought up
out of our Graves.

It is now, and ever was, since that first Easter, a continued Feast of joy,
solemnized with celestial Iubiles by the Angels in Heaven, because he brought
himself up out of the Grave; Cyp.
Sed in hoc multiplicata sunt gaudia, says a Father: This extends the degrees
of their accidental joy to the height, that we, for whom he became so humble
on earth, shall by him be made so high in heaven: That these bodies shall
again be made the glorified Tabernacles to their souls, from which that
Divine part shall never again be frighted with diseases, never loaded with
discontents, never rackt by pashions, never tortured by affections, never vexed
by griefs, nor expelled by rebellious frailty; but every Christian shall be
in a heaven of peace, and the peace of heaven in every Christian, that is
brought up out of his Grave.

O God, A meditation of the last day.
when at that unknown day, thou shall go forth about this universal
business, to bring us All up out of our Graves, and meanest to clothe this
mortal with immortality, Psalm. 68.
how will the earth shake, and the heavens drop at thy presence? How will Kings
of Armies fly apace? and how will thou scatter Kings; when the chariots of the
Lord shall be twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels? In what furrow then
will the Purchaser hide his covetous head? In what dunghill will the Adulterer
shrowed his unclean and rotten body? Into what Ditch then will the Drunkard
reele? or in what Parchment will the Lawyer write his Evidences? or with what
wax will he seal them, when the Heavens shall be contracted like Parchment,
and the Hills shall melt away like Wax; and no Mountain left to give the
Infidel so much hope of mercy, as to call upon the Mountains to cover him?

Then will thou command the Sea, not only to stay her proud waves, but to make
one depth still call upon another, till they bring up from the lowest bottom,
all that have shipwrack't in her waters, or dash't against her Rocks.

And upon earth every Angle, Nooke, and Chasme, every place, though more desert
then the ransackt Temple of Jerusalem now is, shall be inquired into, and not
be able to keep any garment of flesh that ever was worn by any whom Christ
dyed for. If dissected limbs lie torn assunder, in places as distant as one
end of the Pole is from the other, yet will he soader them together, and make
them in every several indiuiduum, a perfect, entire, numericall body again.

Not the Beakes of Eagles, nor the throats of Ravens, not the Entrails of the
most devouring Monsters of the Forest, not the Jaws of Tigers, nor the teeth
of Crocodiles, Serpents or Hiena's (for to these, and worse then these, does
sometimes this cocker'd flesh of ours become a prey,) not resolution to the
first indeterminate matter; not the dissolution, if that could be, to nothing,
can keep, can hide these bodies of ours, from him that first made them out of
nothing. But whether they crumble into Atoms of dust, or be distilled into
water, or with ashed from a Funeral Pile fill an vrne, or be attenua(...) to
Air, every one of these, Ravens, Eagles (...)sters, Beasts, Tigers, Sea, Fire,
Earth, Air (...) their private closets to be vnlock't, and restore every
integrating part, Artery, Sinew, Muscle, Vein, Joint, Limb: Nay, those parts
which Philosophy esteems but Excrements, Divinity will then make Ornaments;
and therefore God has a care that a hair of man's head shall not fall to
ground without his providence. Thus much Rubbish He will have to work upon at
the Resurrection, who at the Creation did all ex nihilo of nothing; and that
was the greater task. What change soever these bodies suffer, subducuntur
nobis, Minut. Fael. in Oct.
sed Deo Elementorum custodi reseruantur: in no Element can they be lost, which
are committed to his keeping, who keeps the Elements themselves.

But all these Graves which I have yet named, are but like Peter's chains, Act.
12.
which fell easily from his hands; there is a Grave yet more deep, more
loathsome, that is, Matthew. 22.13.
(...), utter darkness, darkness of body, darkness of soul; not Egypt in
all its darkness, like to the darkness of that Grave. There is (...), Luke
16.26.
an impassable Gulf betwixt life and death, for ever fixed, no Music, but
where their Instruments are gnashing teeth, and their Hymns howling: All the
sensible faculties of the soul, taken up with no thought, but neuer-ending
sense of neuer-ending misery. No mention of joy, but Poena damni, the
unrecoverable loss of joy, when they shall see others enjoy the abundance of
that Joy which they shall never have. When all other Graves shall have their
Grave, and the last Moyty of sand be run out of the glass of Time it self,
in this Grave shall they lie, that are gone to it as dead to any thing but
torment which shall never die to them, nor they to it. No Gregory, no
Falconella, no Mass, no Trentals, No Beads, no Penance, no Pope, no Jesuit,
no Devil, (for those whom their own pride has joined together, let no man
put asunder,) I say, none of these could ever redeem from that Grave of
mortal immortality.

Yet out of that Grave in one true and most Orthodoxe sense are we brought, not
by getting out, if we ever had been actually in, but because that we know he
is the Lord, whose merciful prevention has barred up the everlasting doors of
that Grave to us that are out: and to that purpose he sent the Angel in the
Revelation from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless Pit, Apoc. 20.
and a great chain in his hand, and he took the Dragon that old Serpent which
is the Devil, and bound him a thousand years, shut him up, and sealed upon
him, that he should deceive the Nations no more.

If a Messenger, one of our fellow servants, (for so the Angel calls himself
in the foregoing Chapter) could do this, Apoc. 19.
bind the Graue-maker, and shut him up in his own Grave, how may we that are
his people, know that the Lord himself has all the power of Hell chayn'd at
his will: all the Gates thereof shut, to all but those that will needs enter
by the Posternes of Heathenish Infidelity, or Romish superstition? the Keys of
every Gate else are kept, saving those of our Saviors wounds; the infectious
sting of Death being plucked out of the mouth of the Serpent the Grave and Hell
it self.

And by this you know (I hope) all you his people, that he is the Lord: Now he
has opened your Graves, and brought you up out of your Graves.

God for his part has, you see, made every word of the Text good: let him not
in such a general Harvest of Heaven and Earth, have occasion to say to any of
you, as the Master of the Vineyard said to the Laborers, Matthew. 20.6.
Why stand ye here all the day idle? why do not your selves do your parts
too, and set your hands to bring your selves up out of your Graves?

But the early charity, the vnconsum'd Bounty of this City, preuents an
Exhortation: you bring and keep from the Grave many a weak aged Christian,
who have no other props but you and their staves; their own limbs sooner
forsaking them, then your bounty. Infants brought into the world, and left
there as in a wilderness, hang upon your paps, and are fed from your Tables:
You deliver the poor that cry, and have none to help them: In your Hospital
lies many a wounded Christian; and in every wound is placed a tongue, to speak
and cry to God himself for mercy, continued mercy and honor to this City.
Your Bethlem shows, how he that was borne at Bethlem, is borne anew in your
hearts, and you again regenerate and borne in him; for whose sake if a Cup of
cold water given shall never go unrewarded, then surely, Copiosa erit Merces
vestra in Coelis, Matthew. 5.
great will your reward be in Heaven, when you are brought up out of your
Graves.

Thus far do the arms of the Poor lift you their Benefactors and Patrons
from your Graves: Thus far are these Liuories which attend you, Angels, and
Messengers to report your Resurrection: Thus high you may stand upon your own
Foundations, those foundations which you have raised for them, who are wet with
the showers of the Mountains, and might have embraced the Rocks for want of a
shelter. Job 24.
I dare make the Orators challenge, Plin. Paneg. ad Traian.
Eat nunc sui vetustas ostentatrix, and illa innumeris vulgata monumentis,
iactet Exempla: Let Superstition and Idolatry, whose heretical doctrine of
meritorious works raise walls for Hornets to inhabit, out of blind devotion:
let them open their eyes, and see what Houses of Charity the true and clear
knowledge that he is the Lord, has built in this Kingdom, which shall ever
remain honorable Monuments, in the memory of all that live, and attend their
Founders, as glorious Trophies, when their easy dust shall give way to them,
that they may come up out of their Graves. How will every garment that Charity
has put upon the back of the Infant, distressed Widow, Orphan, and
fatherless, be one day requited, when your souls shall be arrayed like the
two Angels at the Sepulcher of Christ, Ioh. 20.
in white? O keep your selves still in albis, in those white colors, that
they may be known to be (...), Matthew. 22.
Wedding Garments, at the Marriage of the Kings Son. Let not purple Ambition,
bloody Cruelty, durtie Avarice, ever stain such pure vestures; Nor above all,
one spot that will appear fouler then all, profane Sacrilege, which keeps
back the Tenth from Him who who gave you all. Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 2.
(...), That which God has ever appropriated to himself, can no way belong to
Man. Let no false suggestions whisper into your ears, that when-euer we fall
upon this Argument, we are our own Advocates, and plead our own Cases; but
remember that you are to bear part in that great solemnity, in that last and
everlasting Easter: Let not Gods Prophets be able to say to you there, as
Samuel said to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.
when he thought himself free from any breach of GODS charge, What means
then the bleating of the Sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which
I hear? How will the bleating of such Sheep, and the lowing of such Oxen, (I
mean) the profane keeping back of the portion of GODS Priests, and the
honorable maintenance of his Temple, though it be hushed and silent in your
Chests and Bags, yet how will it one day make such a confused noise in your
own consciences, that it will hinder your attentions from the harmony even of
Heaven it self?

Quod festo honoratur, Leo
moribus celebretur. Never again look down upon these Graves, from which you
are brought up; set your affections on things above; and let us with that
devotion celebrate the Feast of Easter here, where it is annual; that we may
partake of it there, where it will be eternal. The joys whereof, 1 Cor. 15.
since the Apostle tells us, they cannot descend into the heart of man, Austin.
Illuc cor hominis ascendat, let the heart of man ascend up to them, where he
is that has thus far opened our Graves, that we are sharers in the first
Resurrection of Grace; and will one day bring us so quite up out of our Graves,
that we shall have our parts in the last Resurrection of Glory: Which God of
his infinite mercy grant, for his dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ: To whom,
together with the Father and the blessed Spirit, be all honor, praise, glory
and dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

