THE SAINTS INTEREST IN GOD: Opened IN SEVERAL Sermons, Preached Anniversarily
upon the fifth of NOVEMBER.

BY JOHN GOODWIN Pastor of S. Stephens Coleman-street.

JOHN 20.17. I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and to
your God.

Ligaeum halent Sancti Deum. Bernard.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the entering into Popes Head Alley, out of Lumbard Street. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Mr. Isaac Pennington, Alderman of the City of London,
with the rest of my loving Parishioners, and dear friends, the Inhabitants of
Saint Stephens Colemanstreete London, part and fellowship in the great
business of Jesus Christ, with all Saints, etc.
RIght Worshipful, and dear in the Lord; right dear and precious are the
bands of that relation, wherein a People and Pastor meeting together, are made
one; especially when the laws and terms of this relation are with all good
conscience, and soundness, and entireness of affection, managed and observed
on both sides. If it were put upon the file, (I conceive) it would be none of
the easiest questions now on foot, and under dispute in the world, to
determine, whether it be matter of greater satisfaction, to men of spiritual
consideration, and advisement, either to lead, or to be led, to that perfect
happiness which stands in the full fruition of God in Christ. That both the
one and the other, are of very high and excellent contentment to the minds of
men so composed, is a Position, which needs cost a man little in study or
thoughts, to believe. Doubtless there is no such combination of actives and
passives under Heaven, between which the mutual penetration is mutually more
grateful and acceptable, or wherein there is more satisfaction given and
received on both sides, then between them. He that is not himself called to
the place or office of a Minister in the Church of Christ, cannot (with
wisdom) but put it in head or front of his desires, to eat of the labors, and
march toward Heaven under the conduct of such a Minister, of whom he has this
precious assurance, that his heart is with his soul, and that he travailes in
birth which him, till Christ be framed in him, that is willing to do and
suffer all things, to make him partaker of the Gospel with himself. And for
him whom God has separated to serve him in the Gospel of his dear Son, and
for the work of the Ministry, if he be capable of his own greatest comfort
and glory, the greatest joy and strength of his desire must needs be, to help
to replenish and fill those many Mansions in Heaven with a generation of his
own; to go before such a people that is willing to follow him, roundly, and
close up, in all the ways of life, whose resolutions and engagements for that
great piece of immortality, laugh all the glory, pleasures, and contentments of
the world, in the face to scorn; and are too great, and deep to suffer them to
be cast behind hand in the things of their peace, with running out of the way
for the Eastwinde. What has been said concerning the sheep, is too innocent a
saying, to find enmity or contradiction from any man. To desire the greatest
faithfulness, and the dearest tenderness of affection in him, to whom, under
God, a man chooses to commit that invaluable treasure of his soul, is no such
profound, or masterpiece of wisdom: but that it may well be conceived to be
incident to men that have but the first fruits of the first fruits of the
Spirit, or that have but begun to be a little jealous and thoughtfull, that
they have souls indeed, which will not do well in hell. Wherefore (to leave
this assertion to shift for it self, without taking any further care of plea,
or proof for it) what has been said concerning the Shepherd, seems to admit
more question or dispute. If Timothy may save his own soul, is he not well
for one, whether he saves others or no? or what great addition can it be to a
Minister, who otherwise approves himself unto God, and makes for the great
Port of Heaven with a straight course, both in Life and Doctrine, to carry a
train or retinue of his people with him? will it make any breach in his glory
in heaven, that he comes thither alone? Will not his Crown of righteousness
flourish upon his head, except it be watered with the salvation of others?
Whether it be of any concernment, or resentment or no, to a faithful Minister,
being once entered into his Masters joy, and fully possessed of that condition,
wherein mortality shall be swallowed up of life, whether he has stretched
forth the hand of his Ministry, either to a gainsaying, or to an obedient or
willing people, whether he has saved many or few, or none at all; certain it
is, that whilst he is upon his Pilgrimage, and clothed with flesh; yea, and as
it seems, Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 2.19. somewhat further, even to the very gates
and entering in to that complete immortality (whereinto there is no entrance
till after the resurrection from the dead, and the sentence of Absolution
passed from the mouth of the great Judge) it is a matter of great thoughts, and
workings of heart, either on the right hand or on the left hand unto him. Obey
them (says the Apostle in the former Scripture) that have the rule over you,
and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account, that they may do it with Joy, and not with Grief, etc. And in the
latter, thus: For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even
ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our
glory and joy. So that a teachable, wise, and tractable people, that know what
to do with the words of eternal life, besides giving them the hearing, are
not only choice matter of hope (for the future) and of joy, yea, and of a
Crown of rejoicing, i. e. matter of the most weighty and solemn rejoicing,
unto their faithful Minister for the present, whilst his dwelling is with
flesh, but even after he has laid aside this earthly Tabernacle, and resumed
it again in the Resurrection, at the coming, and in the presence of Jesus
Christ, they will be a glory and crown of rejoicing, an anointing with the
Oil of joy and gladness unto him, above his fellows. As on the contrary, a
froward, foolish, careless, stubborn flock, as they are a great abasement,
and sorrow of heart to a good Shepherd for the present, 2 Cor. 2.1, 3,
7.12.21. So will they be an occasion of the last grief, and heaviness unto
him; yea, of such a grief and heaviness, that cannot (it seems by the
expression of the holy Ghost) be cured, neither by the richest, and most
fearlesse, and unquestionable assurance, nor by the nearest and most immediate
approach, but only by the actual complete enjoyment of the joy and glory of
immortality it self.

Though I have no ground of confidence to put any such great question unto you,
as Paul did (and well might) unto the Galatians, to ask you, What has your
felicity been since my coming and preaching the Gospel unto you? yet this I
cannot but profess and testify to the world, to the exaltation and praise of
the grace of God that has been given you by my dispensation of the Gospel
toward you (let the tree of interpretation fall which way it will, whether to
the North, or to the South, it shall neither hurt me nor you by the fall) that
you have rejoiced in my light, and have been ready (many of you) if not to
pluck out, and give your eyes unto me, yet in the best and readiest way of
Christian expression, to signify and seal the truth, life and power which you
have seen, tasted, and felt in my Ministry. And that which I know not how to
draw aside to any other construction, but only to make a demo^stration and
proof of the naturalnesse of your affection toward me, and toward the truth
it self, delivered by me; though the iniquity of many has abounded against
both, yet your love to neither has waxed cold: which crown of praise, I could
willingly enrich yet seven times more, and set it upon your heads; when I had
done, if I knew how to work upon it, without seeming (at least) to soil
others by way of complaint, and to make men offenders for personal wrongs:
which is a strain of too much effeminatenesse in a Christian, and little less
then either an acknowledgement of the strength of other men's weakness, or of
the weakness of a man's own strength. Howsoever, my silence (whether upon
this, or other consideration) will be found no treason either against the life,
or dignity of your Christian and worthy deportment therein: there is one
greater then all the world besides, that will see that righteousness of yours
fully rendered unto you in due time. Truth is honest in her deepest poverty and
distress, and whatsoever she borrows or takes of any man for her support or
relief in prison, she will pay double and treble when she recovers her
liberty, and enters again into her glory. And fear not, he that would not
leave the soul of his Son in hell, nor suffer his holy One to see
corruption, will be as mindful of, and tender over his daughter Truth; and
will give her beauty for ashes in due season.

You (I confess) have the advantage of me in opportunities many ways, for
expressing your selves in point of affection. The giving of carnal and outward
things, is both easier of interpretation, and less liable to sinister
construction, then the dispensing of spiritual things is. Ministers are
oftentimes suspected to preach the Gospel out of envy, or other pretenses that
are not good; but no man gives either silver or gold, but is presumed to do it
of good will. Besides, the work and labor of a Minister, is looked upon (by
the most) but as of a matter of course, and that which he is bound to do; and
no great thank conceived to belong to it; but the bestowing of a small matter,
where men are conceived to be free, (the rule of which freedom, is generally
made the silence of the Laws of Land and State) is no less then matter of
admiration unto many: and two mites cast into a Ministers treasury, of free
gift, signifies, in the vulgar Dialect of men, twenty thousands in affection.
Yea, the diligence and faithfulness of good Ministers themselves successively,
who have abounded in this work, may well be conceived to have abated the
esteem of it with many, and have caused it to seem now rather a (...) of (...)
then commendation. Whereas on the other hand, the general baseness, and empty
handednesse of men toward their Teachers, sets off a slender liberality with
much luster and beauty: as the scarcity of comforts and refreshings in hell
make a drop of water to cool his tongue, seem a great boon to the rich man.

Nevertheless, my trust and confidence is, concerning you that are spiritual,
that you, by the light, partly of my labors and pains amongst you, having
served you now in the things of Jesus Christ (well near the term of seven
years) partly of my Doctrine, partly of my manner of life and conversation
otherwise, can plainly and perfectly read it written in the Tables of my
heart, how dear you are unto me; and how high and glorious my contentments and
comforts are in such amongst you, whose faces are set toward heaven, and are
resolved to take nothing in exchange for your souls. I will not be further
importune with you in pleading the cause of my indearments to you; upon this
occasion: I had rather give you an account of my heart toward you, in deeds
then in words, in power then profession: Neither shall I ever be troublesome
unto you for any greater measure of esteem, or approbation with you, then what
my carriage shall be reasonably valued at, between a Pastor and his People. If
you will please to interpret this Dedication, as a recommendation, and
testimony of mine especial love, care, and respects unto you, the burden and
weight (I conceive) of what you do herein, shall not need to lie more upon
your affections, then your judgments; and those actions ever come of with best
contentment and satisfaction to sober men, that are so divided. If you had not
been the first of my care and affections, these first fruits (it is most like)
had not fallen to your portion: There is little in what is here presented to
your view, but that which your ears have tasted already some years since. You
may by a fresh perusal of these things (besides the direct benefit of the
knowledge reaped from them) be occasioned better to understand and consider the
state and condition, as well of your hearts as memories, and to compare them
together, so as to find out, whether you be stronger in the one, or in the
other, or in both strong, or in both weak, alike. If you find the sinews,
strength, and substance of these things, in your inner man, so that whilst you
read, you seem to see the lineaments of the face of your own soul, as in a
Glass, to read the natural history of your own spirits: this is a pregnant
and precious sign unto you, that your hearts are sound, and their digestion of
spiritual nourishment, of the best. If you meet with little here, but what you
were able before, or without your reading, to have uttered, and given an
account of, this argues faithfulness in your memories also. If you lie under
the power of these things, but have little or no command of the letter, this
demonstrates a defectivenesse, or weakness in memory, but soundness of heart
(which is the great praise, glory, and comfort of a Christian) if the words,
passages, and expressions remain (for the most part) whole with you, but the
marrow and fatness, the spirit and life of them are not incorporated with your
souls and spirits, you do not find that such notions and apprehensions as
are fire in your bones, and make your consciences spring and work lively, when
they do but touch and come near them: the interpretation of this sign is,
that you have more of that which is less, and less of that which is more,
that you have memories that would do worthily (indeed) with better hearts, and
souls that would escape better with worse memories. But I hope the best things
of you. The great and mighty God of Heaven and Earth, who must teach you (and
all the world besides) to profit, whether by the eye, or by the ear, as well
by writing, as speaking, by reading, as hearing, in the knowledge of himself,
and of the great things of your peace, make these meditations as a Cloud of the
latter rain unto you, to drop fatness upon your souls; and command them to
give out their strength fully and freely unto you, that they may be felt by
your selves, in the renewing and strengthening your inner man, be seen upon you
by others, in an unstained excellency of life and conversation amongst men,
and found also in your accounts and reckonings at the great day, as having
co^tributed their share toward that joy, and lifting up of your heads for ever;
which is the promised reward of all those that know God to be the only true
God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. Which Crown of blessedness,
there is not a man of you but shall most assuredly obtain, if you be as true
to your selves, and the things of your own glory, and will run for your
selves with as much faithfulness, as he is ready to run for you, night and
day, who here in the presence of Heaven and Earth, subscribeth, and gives it
under his hand, that he is

Your loving and truly affectionate Pastor, John Goodwin.
From my Study in Coleman street London, this August 7. 1640.
To the Reader.
Good Reader:
WHether he has done well or ill, whoever he was (be it my self, or some
other) who was the principal of making more Presse-worke of these Sermons, I
conceive it is not worth the lightest exercise of thy thoughts, to consider,
judge, or determine. If he has done ill, doubtless it cannot be much: things
that are weak, though otherwise unusefull, yet will they serve for foil, to
set off that which is strong with more grace and acceptance; as the Thistle in
Lebanon commends the stature and beauty of the Cedar in Lebanon. And the truth
is, that many Books of worth and value indeed, had need of some further
recommendation, in one kind or other, unto men, then their own worth: they
suffer obscurity, and neglect at the hands of men, this notwithstanding.
Impertinencies would be of great consequence, if they could bring things of
consequence into request.

If he has done well, thou thy self wilt easily be persuaded to say, that
this cannot be much: howsoever, in this point thou and I shall not much differ.
Now then in matters where the difference is very small, and almost
imperceptible, a man may soon be out more in deliberation, then it is possible
for him ever to recover, or get in again by any resolution. As in suing at Law
for a trifle, the victory or conquest, with all the advantages, will not defray
the one half of the cost and charge of the War. I would gladly therefore
save thee thy time and thoughts touching the premises.

Yet two things there are, which have their plea in their mouths (such as they
are) for loosing their prisoners, and setting them at liberty in the world: The
one is the occasion of their Preaching; the other, their argument or Subject.

For the first, it was the Anniversary remembrance of that great battle fought
between Hell and Heaven, about the peace and safety of our Nation, on November.
5. 1605. wherein Hell was overthrown, and Heaven and We rejoiced together. I
have not (to my present remembrance) met with any thing published of late of
any special influence or tendency, to maintain the life and spirit of the
solemnity and joy of that day and deliverance. And pity it is that such a Plant
of Paradise should wither, or languish for want of watering. Such a
deliverance, may, through the Mercy and Goodness of God, prove a breeder, and
become a joyful Mother of many Children, like unto her self, if the hearts of
our Nation did converse with her more frequently, and more affectionately.

The Argument or Subject discoursed in these Sermons, is, the true Church her
Interest in God, with all her members. A Subject (I confess) that has passed
through many hands, and gained much of many: But the depth and weightinesse of
it is such, that it still calls upon the greatest abilities of men, to be
further sought and inquired into. I assume nothing unto my self beyond the
discoveries of other men: if thou meetest with any thing, that may excuse or
qualify the Printing of the whole, remember him that said concerning a sinful
City, Genesis 18.32. I will not destroy it for ten righteous men's sake. If thou
either desire, or fear the sight of any thing more of mine, thou may
make thine own bargain herein, by handling this piece accordingly. For as for
me, I am not conscious to my self, either of forwardness, or backwardness of
being made public: the tongues and judgments of men (if they could agree)
may easily overruled me either way. It argues some distemper of spirit, to be
importune upon the world, with a man's private conceptions: neither is it the
best posture, to put the world upon importunity with us, to purchase them, if
they have a mind to them.

Pardon me thus far; and that which remains, I shall pray for thee, that thou
may with the Church, have Interest in God, and that this Interest may be
established and confirmed unto thee by the reading this piece, until, through
fullness, thou breakest out with David, saying: The Lord is my Light, and my
Salvation; Whom shall I fear? Psa. 27.1. And by this time, when thou know
not whom, or what to fear, I hope thou will be at good leisure, and in case to
pray for him, who rests

Thine in the Lord always, I. G.
Colemonstreet Land. Aug. 7. 1640.
The Contents of the CHAPTERS.
CAP. I. WHerein the Coherence, together with the sense, and meaning of the
words, are cleared, and Doctrines raised. Fol. 1 CAP. II. Wherein the nature
and importance of that propriety, or interest which the Church has in God, is
declared. Fol. 23 CAP. III. Containing proofs from Scripture of the Churches
propriety, or interest in God. Fol. 44 CAP. IV. Wherein four several Grounds
or Reasons of the Churches propriety in God, are laid down, and opened. Fol.
54 CAP. V. Containing the first Use of Instruction: in six particulars. Fol.
102 CAP. VI. Wherein the Doctrine is further drawn out in an use of
Encouragement, or Consolation. Fol. 155 CAP. VII. Wherein the two first
branches of the third Use ( being an use of Reproof) are handled. Fol. 171
CAP. VIII. Wherein the third and last branch of the Use of Reproof is handled.
Fol. 215 CAP. IX. Wherein the Doctrine is applied to the enemies of the Church,
by way of Exhortation. Fol. 257
June 23. 1640.
IMPRIMATUR

THO: WYKES.

THE SAINTS Interest in GOD.
PSALM. 68.20. He that is our God, is the God of salvation, and unto God the
Lord belong the issues of death.


CAP. I. Wherein the Coherence, together with the sense; and meaning of the
words; are cleared, and Doctrines raised.
WE are met in the presence of this God of ours (as the Text speaks to our
hearts very graciously) who is the God of salvation, to pay the yearly tribute
of praise and thanksgiving, which a mercy so transcendently glorious, as that
Deliverance was, which this day calls to remembrance, has imposed upon us,
with the rest of our Brethren of this Nation. That which our Prophet spoke of
the great works of God in general, Psalm. 111.4. (though some restrain the
words to the deliverance from Egypt) may in special manner be applied to that
great Deliverance wrought for this Land, which we now celebrate; Some of our
English translations read the words thus; The marcifull and gracious Lord has
So done his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance. Our
late Translation (without any variation of the sense) thus, He has made his
mavelous works to beremembred: that is, upon such works of his, by which
he intends in any more especial manner to magnify himself on earth, he sets
(as it were) such fair and large Characters of his glorious Greatness, Power,
Wisdom, and Mercy, that all the world cannot but see, and know the
superscription whose it is. He has so done* his marvollous works; that is, in
such a manner, has put so much (as it were) of himself into them, that they
ought to be had, or must needs, or cannot but be had in remembrance: which is
the same with the other Translation, he has made his mavelous works to be
remembered; that is, he has as it were compelled the world against the natural
inclination and disposition of it, which stands to neglect, to pass by, to
forget any thing that God does, to preserve the remembrance of them; Men cannot
but do, what they do therein.

That great Deliverance which that great God of ours wrought for this Nation
(now 29. years since) is of this sort or kind of his works; among many
excellent and goodly works of his, which shine like the Stars in the
Firmament, it is one of the first magnitude; it does not require, it rather
comes with power and authority upon us, and commands this solemn remembrance
of it self by this Nation. As our Savior answered the Jews, speaking against
the people who so much magnified him: If these should hold their peace, Luke
19.4
the Stones would cry. So if we, the people of this Land, the Men and Women to
whom the duty of praising God for such a mercy does belong, if we, I say,
should have that Miracle (or rather indeed Monster) of sin found amongst us,
not to exalt the name of God under such a provocation, we might have cause to
expect that God would provoke us, and confound us, by them that are neither Men
nor Women: The very beasts of the field, or trees, or stones of the earth,
would rise up and take this glory from us: They would cry out (if we should
hold our peace) that great is that God that could and would deliver after such
a manner.

David took notice by way of thankfulness, of that special love God bare to
Sion above all other places in that Land, in that he would have his praises
heard there. Psalm. 87.2.
The Lord loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. So
have we just cause to conceive and judge by that great mercy of his to this
Land, that the same Lord loves more to be praised by us, then any other Nation
under heaven; that the English Incense is in heaven, as the Gold of Ophir
sometimes was upon earth, preferred before that of other Lands: it makes the
sweetest perfume and savor in the Nostrils of God.

And therefore because he would have it plentifully offered and sent up unto
him, he has unbared his holy arm to do those great things for us, which our
souls know right well. When he made this compact with David, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall praise me; Psalm. 50.15. it was a sign that he had a mind
to David's praises more then other men's: so having delivered this our Nation,
once, and again, and the third time also, with so high a hand, What other
construction can all the world make of such his dealings with us, but that he
delights to have his praises sung, and his name magnified by the English
Nation, more then all Lands besides?

Since therefore we have so great a testimony of the Lords good pleasule in
this kind, that he esteems our praises lovely, and desires to hear our
voice, let us address our selves to this great and honorable service, let us
fill the golden Vialls of our hearts with these sweet odors, and make a perfume
before the Lord. To furnish both you and my self herewith, I have made choice
of this rich Vein in one of the Psalms of David, (as you have heard) wherein
we shall find the praise and glory of God bearing very strongly. The Psalm
it self, is in genere laudativo, that is, of that kind of Psalm which is in
purpose framed for the exaltation of the name and praise of God.

For the scope of the words no more but this: The scope
The Prophet a few verses before, having set forth several deliverances and
victories, which God had given him and his people Israel, his heart being full
with a Commemoration, and mention of so many mercies, of the love of the Lord,
and admiration of his goodness, in these two verses (this and the former) not
able to hold any longer, he eases himself, and breaks forth into the
praises of his God in this manner: Blessed be the God that daily ladeth us with
his benefits, etc.

For the meaning of the words, and meaning of the words.
a little will suffice, because here is nothing scarce, either word or phrase,
but is every man's language. He that is our God, that is, that God with whom we
are in Covenant, whom we serve and worship. That God, whether true or false,
which any Nation or People, or any private person chooses for a god, and
bestows that fear, and love, and other points of worship, which belongs to
God indeed, is usually termed (and well may be) their or his God, because such
a People, or such a person, may seem to have a right and interest in the power
of that God (whatsoever he is) for help and succor in times of need. Out of
some such principle as this he spoke, that said, Iure venit cultos ad sibi
quisque deos; that is, every man has a right of coming to those gods for
succor whom he worships and serves.

So that David expressing himself thus: He is our God, that is the God of
salvation, it is as if he had said: Other Nations and People have their
several gods, as Paul says, There are that are called gods, whether in
heaven, or in earth, Gods many, and Lords many. The Moabites have their god,
the Amorites their god, the Sidonians their god; but (says he) He that is the
God of Israel, He that is our God, he has a pre-eminence above them all: He is
the God of salvation, or (as the original has it in the plural number)
Salvations, that is, he only stands possessed with a Prerogative Royal of a
true God, of a God indeed, namely Power to save those that worship him, and
that every way; it being one of the great royalties annexed to the Crown of
heaven, as we have it Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord.

Salvation, that is, both the power and the act, of faving and delivering are
so proper to the true God, that they are not communicable with any creature, as
is well expressed in Esaias 43.11. I, even I, am the Lord (he speaks it once,
and again, for the greater Emphasis and weight, and that they which hear not
the first voice, may hear the second) And besides me there is no Savior, not
only none so great, so mighty, etc. but none at all. Therefore it seems, but a
needless limitation of Nebuchadnezzar in that speech of his Dan. 3.29. There
is no God that can deliver, or save after this manner: the truth is, none after
that manner, or any other.

It follows: [And to God the Lord belong the issues of death] the original
sounds, issues against death. This clause may stand under a double
interpretation, it may either be taken concerning the destruction of the
wicked, or concerning the deliverance of the godly. According to the former
interpretation, the sense falls thus: To the Lord God are, or do belong Exitus
mortis, the issues: of death, that is, Judgment or death never goes out
against any man, but the hand of God is in it, it is of his fending: he has
death at that command, that he can send him forth against any man.

But I find Interpreters rather inclining to the other Exposition, which
rises thus: [And to the Lord are the issues of death] that is, E morte, From,
or out of death, so that there is no creature, one, or many, that can be
brought so low, so near unto death, or never so much under the power of death,
but God has not only one, or some few, but many secret ways of escape for it,
he has choice of ways, and means for deliverance, when it self is ready to
say there is none at all: With him there is plenteous Redemption. Ps. 130.7.

In this sense, this latter clause further expounds those words in the former
[is the God of Salvation] and adds weight to them, and imports that God is not
simply and barely a God of Salvation, that can save if he sets himself about
it in time, or if the danger and strait be not overpressing above measure. No,
but though a man be in the greatest, and deepest exigents, and extremity that
can be imagined; though in the very jaws of death, yet God can make out an
outstretched arm of help, and reach him at any distance whatsoever. This
Interpretation being more agreeable to the frequent Method of the Psalms,
wherein the latter member of the verse is exegeticall, or expository of the
former, I rather choose to follow.

In the words there are three things considerable. 1. The interest the Church
and Children of God have in God, in the first words, He that is our God. 2. The
benefit that redounds to the Church, or which the Church may assuredly expect;
by means of this interest in God; Salvation, or Salvations, Many in number and
diverse in kind. 3. And lastly, the extent of this benefit. This salvation is
not from common, ordinary, lighter dangers, but from the greatest, and deepest,
and dreadfullest of all, From death, or out of death it self, in those words,
To the Lord belong the issues of death.

The first of these, the interest the Church has in God, the God of
Salvations, pours us out the blessing of this observation.

First, That the Church and Children of God have a peculiar and special
interest in God, so that he truly is, and may be called Theirs.

The second, That the Church of God may with all confidence and assurance of
hope, expect from him Salvation, yea, Salvation upon salvation, Salvations of
all kinds.

The third, extent of this great benefit, crowns the soul with the fatness
of this observation or doctrine; That the Church of God, by virtue of her
interest in God may expect and shall certainly find safety and deliverance by
one means or other, not from common or lesser dangers only, but from the
greatest and deepest of all: or more briefly thus, (if you please) The Church
of God can never be brought so low, so near death, and ruin, but that God
has still choice of ways, and means for her deliverance.

CAP. II. Wherein the nature and importance of that propriety, or interest
which the Church has in God, is declared.
LEt us take the first thing (which is the groundworke of all) into
consideration: It is like we shall have occasion in the handling hereof to draw
in some of the best of the strength in the other two. The great and important
truth, which we are now to enquire after, and search into, is this, The Church
and people of God have a peculiar right, and interest in God, by means whereof
he may truly and properly be called theirs, or their God. For the opening and
managing this point to the best advantage for Christian service; these four
things (I conceive) are requisite to be done: 1. To show you what this
interest is, what manner of interest it is, and what is the nature and
importance of it. 2. To establish you in the truth of the point, by the mouth
and testimony of more witnesses from the Scripture. 3. To lay down, and
consider some grounds and reasons of the point. 4. And lastly, to bring all
home into your bosoms in the use and application.

For the first; That interest which the Holy Ghost here certifies, the Church
and People of God to have in him, may be shadowed out unto you, by some such
description or overture as this: It is a gracious propriety of himself, which
God by special Covenant, and deed of gift (as it were) has made over to the
creature, willing to enter into such Covenant with him, for every such benefit
and advantage to the creature, which in a lawful and regular way, such as
becomes the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, may advance the creature to its
greatest happiness, and perfection of being. I must not stand to weigh every
particular in the description: I have conceived it somewhat more fully, and at
large, that it might be better understood without further explication. The
strength of it, and that which is most material to be considered, lies in
those two things.

1. I call it a Propriety, or, A gracious propriety in God.

2. That which I make the end, or intent of such propriety, (in respect of the
creature) which is to have any thing done by God, toward the highest
advancement of it, in a regular way.

What the propriety of a thing is (in the ordinary acception of the word) we
all know; it is nothing else, but that power which every man has over that
which is his, to dispose of it as seems best to himself in a lawful way, for
his good. Propriety in a thing, if it be full and perfect, subjects the thing
unto us, and puts it into our hand to do with it what we please, according to
any improvement, any accommodation, or advantage that may be made by it. If a
man has a propriety in Land, he may Sell, Let, Exchange, Give, or Live upon it
as he please; any thing he may do in a lawful way, with that which is his
own, by the benefit of that propriety he has in it. It is true, if a man
should desire to do any thing with that which is his own, never so much, and
wherein he has as absolute a propriety, as a man can be possessed of, that
tends to the prejudice, or damage of the public; here the Law rises up
against him as a Lion in the way, and suffers him not to do it. As for
example: though a man's money be never so much his own, he may not hire men
with it to serve him in any unlawful, or sinful way, as to Murder, Poison,
Betray, or the like; (but: (...), the lawless man, he cannot sin, having no
Law upon him) but this propriety is of persons in things, which never is
mutual, or reciprocal: the things that a man owneth, and has propriety in,
cannot be said to have interest or propriety in him, or any power over him,
except it be in a Metaphorical, and Moral sense: as we use to say of great
Estates, the Silver and Gold of covetous, and base minded men, their money
rather has a propriety in them, and power over them, then they over it; but
this is not to our purpose.

There is another kind of propriety (differing somewhat from the former) which
is in persons, and is grounded either in natural, or in civil relations.
Natural, as between the Father and the Son; the Father has a propriety in
the Son, and the Son has a propriety in the Father, so it is between Brother
and Brother, and in other relations of that kind. Civil, as between Prince
and People, Master and Servant, etc. The Prince has a propriety in his People,
and the People in their Prince; and so the Master in the Servant, and the
Servant in the Master. This propriety is always mutual, and reciprocal,
though the persons be at never so great a distance, either in civil, or
natural dignity. As for example: The wife has a propriety in her husband, as
well as the husband in the wife, and so the Subject in the Prince or Ruler, as
well as the Prince in his Subject.

Now that is here to be considered, that the intent of all these interests and
proprieties, between person and person, is the same that was in that other
propriety of persons in things and possessions. Namely, that every person that
has such or such a propriety in another, should reap and enjoy every such
benefit and advantage, that by virtue of such a relation, it could in way of
equity and reason desire or expect. And if there were no sinful defects in
persons thus mutually proprietated each in other, this would be done on every
side: A wife that has propriety in a husband, should receive continually from
him every such kindness, support, instruction, and every other service of love
that may tend to her comfort and welbeeing, according to the uttermost strength
and power of her husband. And so on the other hand, the husband should receive
from the wife, the like measure of honor, reverence, obedience, etc. by virtue
of his interest and propriety in her.

So when the Scriptures give unto the Church a right and propriety in God (as
both in this place and elsewhere, as we shall hear presently it does) the
meaning is, that look whatsoever is in God, Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy,
etc. it may lawfully lay claim to all by virtue of this propriety, and may
confidently expect (and shall not be denied) that God will be unto it
according to his excellent greatness, proportionably for a God indeed, in due
time, and in the best way, all that can be for the advancement and benefit of
the creature.

So that suppose the creature it self (if it be fit to make such a
supposition, as to explain a truth of such importance little question need
be) suppose I say the creature it self were or could be personally invested
and possessed with all that infinite Power, Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, etc. which
are in God, and could do every whit as much for its own advancement, support,
deliverance, or the like, as God himself now can do, it would do no more, it
could do no more, then God will do, yea, has engaged himself to do by that
Covenant, wherein he has made over himself, or a propriety in himself to the
creature.

For this is the perfect and full extent of the benefit of such propriety as
now we speak of, of one person in another, when a man may with confidence
expect (and not be disappointed) that any strength, power, or ability of doing
him good, lodging in such a person, shall be as duly, as carefully employed for
him, according to the laws and binding conditions of that particular kind of
propriety which he has in him, as if himself had the managing and disposing
of all this in his own hands.

But the truth is, that proprieties in persons amongst creatures, neverhold out
their full weight and measure. It is somewhat a full expression this way which
Iehosaphat uses to Ahab, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, and my
horses as thy horses: meaning, he should have as much use and service of him
and his, as if they were all his own, 1 King. 22.4. Thus Paul Ephesians. 6.10.
teaches us excellently how to interpret and to conceive of this our propriety
in God: Finally my Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the power (or with
the power) of his might. What is it to be strong in the Lord, and in, or with
the power of his might? Doubtless the Apostles meaning duly considered,
rises to agreat height; he would have the Children of God, who believe in
Christ, to take unto themselves, and put on as great a confidence of their
salvation, and everlasting happiness, in regard of the mighty power of God to
effect it, as if themselves had the same Almightinesse, and al-sufficiency of
power in their own hand, to use and exercise at their own desires, and were
as mighty themselves as God is, for the effectual procuring of their own
happiness; implying, that by means of this propriety in God, they have no
more cause to fear or doubt any thing in this kind then they should or would
have, if themselves were omnipotent: this is to be strong in the Lord, and
with the power of his might.

There is somewhat the like expression, Psalm. 84.5. Blessed is the man whose
strength is in thee: That very strength which is in God, by an effectual faith
and dependancy becomes the creatures, as truly as if it self were the subject
of it. It is true in the relations we speak of between creature and creature,
as between wife and husband, son and father, etc. the propriety that mutually
intercedes, gives right reciprocally of as much as we speak of. As for
instance, the husband being the wives husband (and so she having a propriety in
him) stands bound by the Law of God and Conscience, by virtue of that propriety
the wife has in him, to do as much for her good by all the power he has, as
the woman her self could do, (I still mean in a way of equity and right) if
she were wife, and husband both, or had all that power in every kind in her
own hand, which her husband now has. And so back again, the wife stands bound
in the same manner to her husband, by virtue of that propriety he has in her:
and so likewise it is between Son and Father, and Father and Son.

But though the due debt be as round a reckoning as we speak of, (...) from
creature to creature, where any such propriety intercedes, yet it can hardly be
expected, that ever it will be either paid or received in full; the
insufficiency and disability of the Creditor being such as it is. And though
men and women be godly and upright, truly careful, and conscionable to pay all
that is issuing from them to the proprietary, yet must allowance be made for
humane frailties and infirmities. A Wife or Husband shall but wrong themselves,
to expect strictly and punctually all that is due from either by the Law of
that propriety which each has in other.

But with God it is otherwise: he is every ways sufficient and able: we need
not think of any Deductions, or Abatements to be made by him: Where he gives a
propriety of, and in himself, look whatsoever the Law of that propriety
interpreted in the largest and most favourablest manner for the creatures
benefit, can challenge, it is (and so he will esteem it accordingly) an honor
done to him, to expect from him in full payment to the utmost farthing. Now how
great (or rather indeed infinite) that sum is, we have already used an
expression unto you, which sets it forth to the full. And this for the first
thing propounded, What that right, or propriety is which the Church of God has
in him, what a mighty and glorious an Interest it is.

CAP. III. Containing proofs from Scripture of the Churches propriety, or
interest in God.
IN the next place, That they have indeed such an interest as has been
expressed, let us see whether the holy Ghost does not abundantly confirm it in
the Scriptures. Among many witnesses that would rejoice to speak in this case,
I shall desire you to hear but two or three. These are sufficient to establish
the matter, though it be of greatest importance. The tenor of the Covenant
that God long since made with Abraham, expressly contains this propriety we
speak of to the full. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. And in the latter end of
the following verse, repeating the sum of this Covenant, he adds; and I
will be their God. This seed of Abraham (as S. Paul's Exposition makes it
clear) are those that walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, and these
are that Church of God we speak of.

Now, what is the direct and full meaning of this clause, I will be their God.
In what, or in what degree would the Lord have Abraham and his seed conceive
their condition to be bettered and advanced by this bargain (as it were) that
God now made with them, in making over himself unto them?

There can be no other meaning, but to this effect: I will be their God, that
is, I will be ready at all times with my outstretched arm, my Almighty power,
to help them, to relieve them, to provide for them, to do them good every
ways, according to my greatness and excellency.

There is a greater Emphasis and weight in it (as I conceive) to promise that
he would be a God unto them, then if he had said he would be a Friend, yea,
then if he had said he would be a Father, as appears by such other places
where both these expressions are used together of being a Father unto his
people, and being a God, this being still put in the last place, as more
weighty, and adding somewhat unto the former, Joh. 20.17. I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and to your God.

For although for a creature to receive such a promise from God, that he would
be a Father unto him, may imply as much in a direct and ready consequence, as
if he had said he would be a God unto him: yet he must reason a little, to
come at the full apprehension hereof: he must consider how great he was that
made the promise of being a Father unto him; the word Father does not carry as
much in it as the other word, God, does: though coming from the mouth of God,
it draws as much after it.

When he promises, or covenanteth with the creature to be a God unto it, he
promises to do all things to it, and for it, answerable to an infinite
goodness and power, such as are proper to a God; else he could not properly
be said to be their God, or a God unto them, but only in part, or a piece of
a God; to be unto them, or to do for them, only according to the line and
proportion of a creature: as for example, to be unto them as Abraham was unto
Isaac, to give them an earthly inheritance; or as Ioshuah to the people, an
earthly Deliverance; or as David to Solomon, an earthly Kingdom: any of these,
or all together will not make up the sum of those words, to be a God unto
them. This would rather be to be Abraham, Ioshuah, or David unto them; he is
not their God, except his infinite goodness, and omnipotency be theirs; for
what is God without these?

The Prophet David often in this Book of Psalms professes and triumphs in
this peculiar interest himself had in God, as a member of his Church, and
confirms likewise the general title, and right which the Church of God has
in him. Psalm. 144.15. Blessed be the people that be in such a case; yea,
blessed is that people whose God is the Lord. Where the Prophet does not only
speak to the point in hand, to confirm and establish that, namely, that the
Lord is the God of his People and Church, (for it is clear he speaks of these,
these are the persons upon whose heads he sets this crown of blessedness) but
withal more particularly, and fully he informs in what sense it must needs be
taken, where it is said that God is the God of his people, or that they have a
propriety in him; namely, in the sense already expressed: he is theirs quantus
quantus est, as great, as glorious, as mighty, as excellent every way as he is.
For we see he pronounces them blessed in respect of this propriety, or
interest of theirs in God. Blessed is that people whose God is the Lord. Now if
their interest extended no further but to some inferior degree of his power,
the people that had some creature for their God, might be as blessed as they.
Nebuchadnezzars Courtiers had him for their God, they had an interest in their
King, and (no question) he did many things for them, for their advancement in
the world, but these were not blessed by any such interest, because
Nebuchadnezzar could not be a God unto them. Another testimony you may peruse
at leisure, 2 Cor. 6.16. I now make haste to the Grounds and Reasons.

CAP. IV. Whereing four several Grounds or Reasons of the Churches propriety
in God, are laid down, and opened.
AMongst many considerations that might be laid down as grounds or reasons of
this interest and propriety of the Church in God, I shall only insist upon
four which are most obvious, and nearest at hand to every man's thoughts.

The first is, the love, and affection that God bare unto this Church, and
people of his, yea, even before they were either Church or People unto him, or
he theirs, in any such relation as now they stand. It is true that now he loves
them, because they are his in that peculiar manner that now he has made them
his, by the great cost and charge both of his Son, and Spirit bestowed on them:
And yet I conceive he loves them as much (or rather more) because he is
theirs, then because they are his. An upright and just man loves his promise
and upright dealing more, then he does his possessions or estate, as David in
effect affirms, in Psalm. 15.4. Now God loving his People because they are
his, loves them as a wise and upright man loves his inheritance or possession;
which kind of love, in the expression of it, is capable of subjection to a
Superior, and must give place when time is: but loving them because he is
theirs, and they have a propriety in him, he loves them as he does his own
truth and faithfulness, in the performance of his promise; which is a
sovereign love, and to be commanded and overruled by nothing whatsoever.

And if God had not loved his Church and People before they became either the
one or the other unto him, it is certain he would never have loved them;
because it is impossible that any, or all other means whatsoever either in
heaven or earth, should. ever have made a Church or People unto him of persons
defiled with sin, without the concurrence and assistance, nay, without the
precurrence and ducture of his own love thereunto. Of this love of God toward
his Church, before their Church-making or drawing near to him in any such
relation, the Scripture speaks exprefly. John 3.16. So God loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.

That love of God, in the womb whereof Jesus Christ as given unto the world,
and consequently unto those, of whom his Church is raised and built, (for no
man can imagine these to be here excluded, though neither do I conceive them
to be solely and precisely intended) was conceived, must needs go before the
raising of this Temple unto him, because this was actually done by Jesus Christ
as given (at least in promise.) So John 6.37. All that the Father gives me
shall come unto me, and ver. 44. No man can come unto me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him. And again ver. 45. Every man therefore that has
heard, and learned of the Father, comes unto me. Now all these, and such like
acts of God, acted and exercised upon men, not yet actually brought home to
Christ, but for and about the bringing of them home to him, as giving to
Christ, drawing to Christ, teaching, etc. are apparently the fruits, or acts of
such a love in God toward them; which has precedence both in order of nature,
and time also, before that love of his wherewith he loves them as being in
Christ; that is, as being made a Church and People unto him. Thus it is
evident, that there was in God a love toward his Church and People before the
light of either of these, or the like relations arose upon them. Let us then
proceed in our Demonstration.

The nature and property of love (we know) that is real and in truth, is to be
bountiful, as S. Paul affirms: 1 Cor. 1.13.
The Father loves the Son, says Christ, John 3.35. and has given all things
into his hand. When the love and affection of God is cast upon the creature,
Himself, Son, Spirit, and all he has, shall not stay behind. Love, and Gift,
affection, and expression in God we shall still find together, John 3.16. So
God loved the world that he gave, etc. and 2 These. 2.16. Even the Father which
has loved us, and given us everlasting consolation. So S. Paul speaking of
Christ, says thus; Who has loved me, and given himself for me. Gal. 2.20.
Now the love of God to his Church being the greatest and most transcendent
love, he must find out an expression or gift answerable to it, otherwise there
would be loss of some part of the glory belonging to it. For he cannot be
praised and magnified but according to such a measure thereof as is manifested
to the creature. The gift that should express the height, depth, breadth,
length of this love to the full, can be no other then himself, and that as
God; all other would be defective. If there had been any thing greater, any
thing better then himself, it is like we should have had it, and that had been
fittest for his purpose herein.

I am drawn to use such an expression unto you, (which I confess might
otherwise seem somewhat hard, and strange) because I find one of like
importance in a matter not much unlike, or rather indeed very near to that we
now speak of, in that Scripture Heb. 6.13. When God (says the Apostle) made
the promise to Abraham, because he had no greater to swear by, he swear by
himself. [Because he had no greater, etc.] if that be the spirit of the words
which I conceive, (neither can I apprehend what other it should be with any
tolerable congruity of Reason) they are a strain of speech to be heard out of
the mouth of an infinite God, fearfully high and glorious. Because he had no
greater to swear by, therefore he swear by himself, clearly implying, that
if he had a greater then himself, he would have sworn by him. For this is the
reason delivered in plain and express terms why he swear by himself,
because he had no greater: As if the infinite Al-sufficiency of God himself
did not give him that satisfaction which he desired, for the confirmation of
his oath, made to the heirs of promise, in respect of the weakness and
mavelous backwardness of their hearts to believe, unto perfect establishment
and assurance: but he would have had a greater if it might have been, and have
passed by himself; if there had been infinitum, infinito infinitius, this had
been an only choice for him in this case.

To say that the words imply only this, Gods greatness above all others, makes
the sense but cold and waterish. For it is not the scope of the Holy Ghost here
to declare the greatness of God, but rather the greatness of his desire to
satisfy the heirs of promise (as they are called) that is his Church and
People, with the strongest and mightiest consolations touching the truth and
stablenesse of that promise of life by Christ. And for this purpose the words
in the sense given are (as is evident) of mighty importance. So desirous he
was, that his children should be filled with faith, and the strong consolations
of it, that if he had had any greater, or more effectual means for the
bringing it to pass, they had been used; and the words thus understood, are
but an expression and breaking out of the mighty power of that love of his
toward his Children, which all this while we speak of, which moves him to
give his own self unto them; if he had any greater then himself, they should
have had it; but for himself they shall be sure of. As we heard before of
Christ's love mentioned by S. Paul, Who loved me, and gave himself for me: Like
love, like bounty, like affection, like expression. Thus you see the love and
affection in God toward his Church to be one cause or reason why he gives them
this interest and propriety in himself, which the Doctrine speaks of.

A second Ground of the point is, gift, or bestowing of Jesus Christ upon the
world, So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. as you
heard before, John 3. Though the love of God to his Church was the Basis, or
prime cause of that propriety it now has in him, yet was it not either the
only or immediate cause thereof. This affection of his, notwithstanding they
were yet afar off (as S. Paul speaks) and lay at as great a distance as is
between heaven and earth, from being a Church or holy People unto him, from
having any such peculiar interest or propriety in him. Sin had separated (and
that with a high hand) between him and them, and had fixed a great gulf
betwixt the one and the other (moveable only by him that has power to remove
the earth out of his place) which kept them asunder from coming one at the
other. God could not reach or come at his creature with any other expression of
his love, till this gulf was removed, till sin that hindered was taken out of
the way: much less was it possible for the creature to have made any approach
near unto him to have gained any thing upon him, or in him, till then.

Now to fill up this vaste, dreadful, and devouring gulf, and so to make the
way passable from God to the creature, and from the creature back again unto
God, there was nothing else to be found in heaven or earth of any proportion,
or any ways commensurable thereunto, but only one, that might lawfully count
it no robbery to be equal with God, being God himself blessed for ever. The
infinitely wise, just, and righteous God, could have found no other
consideration of value and weight sufficient to have built a dispensation of
that most righteous and just Law of his upon, [In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall die the death] but only the death of his own only begotten.

Had all other creatures in heaven and earth consented together in one to have
given out their strength and beeings to the uttermost, to have raised a
consideration, or reason amongst them why God should have passed over those
words of his, as if they had never been spoken, should have let fall that
solemn intermination or threatening of his to the ground, never to have
executed what he had threatened, the wisdom of God doubtless, and zeal to his
glory would have despised it, and laughed it to scorn (whatsoever possibly it
might have amounted unto) and would have been more ready to have fallen upon
Mediators and Offenders together with fiery indignation, then any ways
relented, or stood so much as to consider what he had to do, upon the tender
of any such propositions unto him. It was no work, no undertaking for
creatures to salve the glory of an infinite Wisdom and Majesty, in case he
should let such words of his go for naught, and vanish into the wind, which
were uttered with such solemnity, upon such just and righteous grounds in the
sight of heaven and earth. It might justly have been thought that God had
prized such words as those at a low and under rate, and consequently
undervalued himself in the bargain, if he had sold them at any such rate or
price as the creature could have given.

But the death and sufferings of his own Son, this was a price that weighed
somewhat like in his hand: upon consideration hereof it was no ways grievous
unto him, to dispense with his Law, and suspend the execution thereof for ever,
as far as it concerns those that shall unfainedly acknowledge this inestimable
grace of his, who has thus bought them from under so heavy a curse and
condemnation. It is not the least prejudice or disparagement to the infinite
Wisdom or Majesty of God, or the least diminishing of the authority of any of
his Laws, or threatenings whatsoever, to let Laws and threatenings sleep upon
such a Pillow as this is, and not to be put into execution upon the
intercession of such a consideration as this.

And thus we see how the gift of Jesus Christ likewise was of absolute
necessity to bring about this great and wonderful thing in the world, that
sinful men and women, the generation of which the Church of God is made,
should have this dear interest and propriety in him. God notwithstanding his
love to his People, before they were a People unto him, had yet no other way to
communicate himself in any grace or favor unto them, much less to make them
his Church, and give them so deep an interest in him, but only by the living
way of the death and sufferings of his own Son, his zeal to his own glory in
doing what he had said, in executing what he had threatened, would have eaten up
and devoured all this affection to them, had it not fed upon the death of
Christ, and been therewith satisfied.

gracious Covenant that God himself has made with men to this effect or
purpose: He has made over himself unto them as by a deed of gift, by an
everlasting Covenant, for a possession, portion, or an inheritance. He has
power to dispose of himself in this kind, or any other, (for unto whose will
can he be in subjection but unto his own?) and this is the gracious
disposition he has pleased to make of himself, he thinks himself well
bestowed on men, and will not repent of it for ever. There is nothing in the
Covenant, nor about the making of it, that any ways can give occasion to the
revoking or altering of it. He was at liberty in the making of it, and was no
ways forced upon it, the creature was far enough from soliciting him thereunto,
from enforcing any such thing upon him, as far in will, as in power otherwise.
This Covenant is that which holds and keeps him close to his Church, when
other bands are somewhat loose, as Psalm. 105.8. He has always remembered his
Covenant. So ver. 42. When the People had provoked him in the Wilderness, and
he nevertheless wrought still for them, and did them good, the Holy Ghost
gives this reason for it, For he remembered his holy Promise.

Now this Covenant of God by which he has disposed himself to his Church in
respect of the different expressions of it, may be conceived to be twofold:
(Though it is true that both these are in effect and for substance but the same)

First, Conditional.

Secondly, Positive, and absolute.

The former is made and established, not with the Church of God alone, but
together with them, with the whole world. There is no creature under heaven,
but God has thus far conditioned or covenanted with it, that if it will
believe and accept of Jesus Christ from his hand, he will receive it, and be a
God unto it. This Covenant (or rather this expression of the Covenant) the
Scripture often mentions. Go ye into all the world (says our Savior to his
Apostles) and preach the Gospel to every creature under heaven. Mark 16.15. He
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, etc. Preach the Gospel to
every creature, namely, that is capable of the things you preach, or of the
great blessing offered in your preaching to the world.

Happily he uses a term of a far larger extent in signification, then
strictly to include and express the persons intended, namely, reasonable
creatures, Men and Women, for this reason: That so the Apostles in the first
offer and tender of the Gospel to men, might not be any ways straightened in
respect of Conscience, nor any ways discouraged in regard of hope, but what
kind of people soever they should meet with in the world, though for their
vileness and brutishness of their lives and dispositions, they seemed beasts
or any thing whatsoever, rather then men or women to them; yet if they had but
the Image or Superscription of creatures upon them, they should neither scruple
the lawfulness of tendering the offer of grace unto them, nor be discouraged
concerning hope of their accepting it.

It is a phrase of somewhat like importance with that 2 Timothy 4.2. where S. Paul
injoynes Timothy to preach the word, and to be instant in season, and out of
season. The expression does not imply that he would have Timothy do any thing
(no not preach) unseasonably, or out of time: but only this, he would not have
him too scrupulous, or too full of discretion, in distinguishing and choosing
times, or places, or company, when, where, or to whom he should preach: he
would have him esteem all times, places, and companies seasonable for that
work, where he could find any to hear him, and not ask any questions about
such matters as these for conscience sake. But this by the way.

Now, by preaching of the Gospel, in this place, to every creature, our
Savior means nothing else but the propounding and pressing that great and
gracious Covenant of God to every man and woman in the world which he has
established with the world in Christ; namely, that upon their believing and
receiving the Gospel and Grace tendered, he will reject none of them,
whatsoever they be, but will receive them into Grace, and be their God, and
save them. For all this (and much more) is evidently contained in that
conditional promise, Whosoever believes shall be saved, etc. So in that of S.
John often mentioned, this conditional Covenant is clearly expressed. Joh.
3.16.
So God loved the world, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, etc.

Secondly, the performance whereof is suspended upon the performance of such,
or such a thing, by him with whom it is made, puts off and loses the nature of
conditional, and passes over into that which is positive and absolute, when
the condition is performed. As for example, David covenanting with his
Soldiers, that whosoever should smite the Iebusites first, should be Captain,
or Chief. 1 Chronicles. 11.6. made in effect an absolute Covenant with Ioab, having
now performed the condition, to make him Captain. The like is to be thought of
Caleb and his promise with his Soldiers also touching the marriage of his
daughter, Judge. 1.12.

And yet this absolute Covenant of God with those that actually believe,
whereby he covenanteth, conveigheth, and makes over himself unto them, though
it be substantially and fully included in the conditional, or general
Covenant, (as has been said) yet is it sometimes distinctly expressed by it
self, Exodus 6.7. I will take you for my people, and I will be your God: with
diverse such like.

Now that this Covenant of God with men, and with his Church, besides the gift
of Christ unto death, and that affection in God which procured it, was
necessary as a means for him to conveigh himself over to his Church in such a
manner as has been declared, may appear, First,

Nay, power, yet can he not compel any creature whatsoever, endued with
understanding and will, to receive and own him against their will, because it
is by an act of the Will that he is, and must be received: and so long as there
remains an unwillingnesse in a man to receive, or own him for his God,
impossible it is that he should be received or owned by him. So that now God
must find out a suitable and fitting means to work the heart or will of his
creature to a desire, or willingness of receiving him.

Thirdly, and lastly, there was no other way or means conceivable (at least
none so con-naturall, proper, and sweet) for such a purpose, but only to
propound and offer himself in a free and gracious Covenant unto it: And so in
pleading his own infinite worth and excellency incomparably above the
emptiness and vanity of other things, to fall in with the effectual working
of his Spirit, and hereby to awaken, quicken, raise, and strengthen the heart
and soul of his creature, to a willingness of embracing and accepting his
offer, that is himself. Thus you see another Ground or Reason of the point,
The gracious Covenant of God.

Their faith in God, or dependence upon him: which is nothing else but their
acceptance of him, according to his offer, for their God. This is another thing
that makes him theirs, in that full and complete manner that he is. He
requires (upon the matter) nothing else of men to make himself theirs, or to
give them the entire propriety (we speak of) in himself, but barely that,
without which it is simply and absolutely impossible that he should be theirs.
God cannot be the God of any man, but his that is willing to take him, and have
him for his God. Dagon could not possibly have been the God of the Philistims,
nor Chemosh the God of the Ammonites, etc. except they had been willing to
acknowledge and have them for their gods. All violence and compulsion in the
world, exercised upon them, could not have made these Idols or false gods
theirs, had they not been willing and consented to have acknowledged and owned
them in that relation.

Now then this willingness in men to take, own, and acknowledge the true God
for their God (without which it is simply impossible, as has been said, that
God should be theirs) is all that is required to make him theirs, or to give
them this special and peculiar propriety in him. To believe in Christ, or
rather in God through Christ, 1 Pet. 1.21. John 12.44. is nothing else, being
interpreted, but by the means or encouragement of the Lord Christ given unto
them, really and unfainedly to take, and acknowledge the great God of heaven
and earth for our God, and to address our selves unto him accordingly, as well
inwardly with Love, Fear, Reverence, Dependence, etc. as outwardly in all
manner of conversatio^ suitable hereunto. And all this in the root and first
spring of it in the soul, is nothing else but a willingness of mind to take
and own him for our God, or to trust him, and make our dependence upon him.
This disposition being truly begotten, and effectually raised in the soul,
contains all those other things mentioned in the loins of it. Begotten and
raised it is by the means of Jesus Christ, and the word of salvation through
him preached unto us: which word the Holy Ghost taking as it were in his hand,
and managing it upon the soul, overcommeth the evil of the heart with the
goodness thereof: and smiting the crooked spirit of unbelief (which is the
grand indisposition of the soul to accept of God for our God) with the
glorious brightness and power of the truth of it, creates a right spirit of
Faith in the stead, which is nothing else in the first breaking of it in the
soul, but an aptness and willingness to believe, that is, to accept and
entertain the true God for our God. For before there can be a distinct and
complete act of Faith, or of accepting God for our God put forth in the soul,
there must be in the order of Nature, an inclination or willingness to such an
act going before. Otherwise God should forsake his usual method of proceeding
a minus perfectis, ad perfectiora, from less perfection to greater.

Now as the first and weakest act of Faith, or accepting God for our God, being
a real performance of the condition required in the Covenant whilst it is yet
secret, in the hidden man of the heart, gives a right and propriety in God
according to the tenor thereof: so does the second act, or outward testifying
to the world, a man's faith or dependence upon God, draw out the particular and
special benefits, and advantages of this their interest in God. This sets God
on work to express himself freely unto them: he cares not now if all the world
know that he is theirs. This faith of theirs in him openly manifested, makes
them fit and meet to be beloved; I mean openly in the sight of heaven, and
earth and hell.

True, God loves his Church and People (as was said) before they believe, or
else they could never come to believe, Thine they were, (says Christ) and thou
have given them unto me. Joh. 17.6.
But till they come to believe in him, other expressions of affection to them
are but ordinary, as to other men. Though they be his (in some sense) yet he
will not own them openly till they be worthy to be reputed his, that is, make
their dependence upon him.

The first differencing expression of himself to be theirs, and they his, is
the giving of faith unto them: and when this is given, and begins to work and
be active in them, he cares not then what, or how great blessings he gives them
afterward. The stumbling block is now removed out of the worlds way, all the
world cannot but confess it just and equal that God should be theirs that
trust in him. He was but a Heathen man that said, it is right and equal that
men should come to those gods for help whom they serve. And so the Scripture
still gives the reason of those special and extraordinary favors vouchsafed
by God unto his Church, to be their faith or dependence upon him. Esaias 26.3.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is staid on thee, because he
trusts in thee. And Chap. 57.13. The wind shall carry them all away, vanity
shall take them, but he that puts his trust in me, shall possess the Land,
and shall inherit my holy Mountain. See Joh. 14.21. and Genesis 22.16, 17. etc.
The Jews, upon that passage, Exodus 29.43. And Moses saw all the work, (meaning
of the Tabernacle, with all things belonging to it, and the service thereof)
and Moses blessed them, have this observation: Work is a great thing; For
Shecinah (i.e. the Divine presence, or Majesty of God) dwelled not in Israel,
till they had done the work (as it is written Exodus 39.43.) When the Faith of
Gods Church works by love, and manifests it self unto the world, God is now
at liberty to show, and manifest himself from heaven to be theirs, by mercies
poured out in abundance upon them, and by doing the greatest thing for them.
And this for the fourth and last reason of the point.

CAP. V. Containing the first Use of Instruction: In six particulars.
THe Doctrine propounded, opened, and established, is very useful and
profitable by way of Instruction, and that in sundry particulars.

First, Philanthropie, that sweet and gracious, and soule-indearing disposition
in God, wherein he inclines to that poor creature of his called Man; which
wrought mightily in him in that day, wherein he raised up the Tabernacle of
Adam that was fallen, and lifted up the heads of many thousand generations of
his posterity from the gates of death. The fountain and springhead of this
rich interest, and blessed propriety the Church has in God, can be no other
but such a nature or disposition as this, gloriously ruling and triumphing in
him.

Who would have said that ever that root of bitterness should have been
healed? that such a prey should have been taken away from the mighty? that the
captivity of the world should be turned again? that Adam with his poor,
blind, naked, and miserable children, after such a grievous fall, and
fearful elongation from God thereby, should ever have seen days of
immortality, and have been made company for the Angels, and worn Crowns of
righteousness and glory in the heavens?

Yes: He that had known, or possibly could have seen the glorious
enlargements of the soul of the Almighty toward man, that could have measured
the height and depth, the length and breadth of that love of God toward him,
he might have prophesied of, and foretold these great wonders: In the face of
this affection of his there shined a light, by which the blessed history of
man's exaltation might have been read, before any thing tending thereunto had
been outwardly acted or done.

On the other hand, if it had been possible for a creature to have comprehended
all other things in God, or should God have laid himself as open and naked
before his creature as all things are to him, hiding only from him this
affection to man (we speak of) together with the secret of his purpose for the
accomplishment of the thing; yea, should Man, or Angel have added to this
knowledge of God, the perfect knowledge of all things whatsoever besides, of
all mysteries, of all secrets either in heaven, or in earth, or under the
earth, it would have been impossible that by all the strength of this
knowledge, the least or feeblest thought should ever have been conceived for
the raising up of flesh and blood from that great death, under which it was so
hopelesly fallen. This had still been a darkness which all other light in the
world would never have comprehended.

It was more easy without the knowledge of the power of God to have said that
Sarah in her old days should give suck, then without the knowledge of the
unconceivable love of God toward man, to have said that man being once fallen,
should ever have recovered any favor or interest in God more; and therefore as
in Sarahs being brought back again from the unfruitfulnesse and
uncomfortablenesse of old age to the privilege and solace of youth (as the
sun in the Dyall of Ahaz) being made a nurse, the invisible power of God was
made visible: so in this interest and propriety which now the Church and People
of God have in God, that far more exceeding abundant love of God toward man is
brought forth into a perfect light, and the whole world filled with the glory
of it.

Secondly, propriety of the Church in God, we may likewise observe by way of
instruction a further confirmation then yet happily we have attained, in that,
which (I suppose) we have often heard of concerning the nature and property of
good, as being communicative, or dispensive of it self. The natures and
properties of things for the most part are most willingly learned from those
subjects that are fairest and perfectest in their kind. We love generally
(whether it be our prudence or pride) to be taught by great Masters. He that
desires to understand the properties and qualities of light, will rather go to
the great fountain, and inform himself from the Sun, and the full streams
of light issuing from that, then to Wax Tapers or Torches, or other inferior
Luminaries that give out their light by measure, and with more malignancy.

To know how the glory and greatness of the world tastes and rellishes in the
heart and soul of a man, what contentments or discontentments they bring with
them, the greatest Prince, or Monarch in the world is the only Oracle to
consult with: Men of inferior place or standing on earth can certify but in
part, and give but a broken and imperfect answer to him that should ask the
question, in comparison of the other. If a man would know among those that have
suffered, how sore and terrible the avenging wrath of God for sin is, if it
were lawful to enquire of Beelzebub, and he had a mind to tell the truth,
there were none to him to give information thereof. So to gain a perfect
understa^ding and knowledge what the manner, law, motion, influence, etc. of
good and goodness are, there is no such opportunity as to look steadfastly
upon the glorious God of heaven, when he goes forth in the ways of his
goodness unto the world. The lineaments, beauty, and proportion of goodness
are no where to be seen so clearly and perfectly, or upon terms of like
advantage as in the face of his goodness, because he is both the Fountain,
and Sea of goodness; yea, the Truth it self says, that there is none good
but one, and this one, is God. Mat. 19.17. None good originally, and from
himself, but God: none good, entirely, and without some touch of malignity,
but God: none good comparatively, with a full, perfect, inexhaustible,
unwearied goodness, but God.

Now in the Doctrine delivered, this property of goodness we speak of (which
we may call self-communication) is gloriously manifested, and that from the
greatest subject of it in heaven and in earth; yea, from him to whom goodness
is essential, yea, essence it self. His goodness serves him as David's zeal
to his house dealt by him; It even consumed him, and eat him up, it left no
David for David to care for, or regard: so the exceeding goodness of the most
high God has given away and bestowed him with all his Greatness, Majesty, and
Power, upon his poor creature: he has made away himself from himself, as
far as his power was to make the alienation: he cannot indeed deny himself,
says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.13. But his goodness (it seems) has tempted him
to make a fair attempt to do it. It is the excellent prerogative of his
infinite and incomprehensible being, to do with himself what he will, what
he can to the uttermost, to give, bestow, alienate, exchange himself, etc. and
yet to be never the further off from the entire and full possession of the
enjoyment of himself, but rather to enjoy himself with the most advantage at
the greatest distance.

So is it the native and genuine property of created goodness to quit and
leave the Center, to walk the circumference: to forget one, that it may
remember many: to be thrifty and sparing at home, that it may be liberal and
magnificent abroad: And the reward of this goodness is, the further it issues
and goes abroad from home, the richer laden it still returns, and makes the
greatest earnings of its own expenses. That greatness which waters not,
which refreshes not its own root by watering of others, that seeks not its
maintenance, enlargement, and exaltation by the lifting up others from the
dust, will soon vanish like a pillar of smoke, the root of it will soon be
rottenness, and the blossom thereof rise up as the dust. There is nothing
good, but that for which something is the better.

Observe thirdly, and from whence the Church and Children of God come to be so
richly furnished, so gloriously provided above the rest of the world, with
those precious habiliaments, and ornaments of grace; how they come to shine
like Stars in the world in Knowledge, Faith, Love, Patience, Humility,
Goodness, Temperance, Zeal, etc. whereas other men made of the same flesh and
blood with them, are but as dull, dusky, and slimy clods of earth, having
neither ray of this beauty, nor beam of this brightness found in them. The
Ground and Reason of the difference is to be seen face to face in the Doctrine.

The men so far exalted above their fellows have a special relation to, and
peculiar interest in God. And is it then any marvel if they be not like unto
other men, if the wealth and state, and magnificence of heaven be found upon
them, if they be arrayed in holiness like the Angels of God? We use to say
there is no fishing to fishing in the Sea; no service to the service of a King:
and may we not add, no interest to an interest in God? Can any man think that
God, who is that great King: Mal. 1.14. in his greatest love and dearest
affections, should suffer his sons and daughters to be clothed with rags, to
walk up and down the world with their nakedness seen, after the manner of
the children of the devil, whose estate is broken and sunk as low as the
bottom of hell, neither is able to give any other clothing, or covering to his
brood, but that of shame and confusion of face. The Kings daughter (says
David) Psalm. 45.13. is glorious within, her clothing is of wrought Gold:
Impliing, that the richness of her attire being not only of Gold (which is the
richest of Metals) but of Gold improved, and which has further cost bestowed
upon it by the working, is but suitable to the state and condition of her
Father, being a King.

In former times there was a rate of costlinesse in garments allowed in Kings
children, which (it seems) was not permitted others of inferior Parentage (at
least not practiced) 2 Samuel 13.18. Ignorant and carnal men whose thoughts
intermeddle not with this dear and deep interest the Saints have in God, are
ready and apt to take offense at their singular Holiness, Zeal,
exquisiteness of life and ways above other men, and to think they do but
artificially counterfeit, and dissemble by rule, and hold (as it were)
correspondence with the devil, that he might furnish them with these shows
and semblances, and appearances of great things; and that there is no truth nor
substance in them; as we read Mat. 13.37. that the Jews not knowing Christ to
be the person he was, to have the relation unto God of a natural Son, but
supposing he had Father and Mother amongst them, of as mean and ordinary rank
as most of them had, were offended at him, in respect of that wisdom, and
those mighty works that put forth themselves in him: they could not tell how
he should come honestly by either: it is like they thought he might deal with
the devil, and have these rare commodities from him.

So many in the world being strangers to those terms which stand between the
God of the whole earth, and those that are in Covenant with him, and knowing
nothing more by such (in such a way) then by themselves and others, when they
see any thing greater and more excellent (at least that seems such) in these
men then in others, or themselves, they cannot tell how they should come by it
in an ordinary and lawful way: and so the devil being nearer at hand to them
then God, he bids them challenge him for the Author thereof; bids them say, it
is he that teaches and enableth them to dissemble strongly. And they like
obedient children, conform themselves: whereby it comes to pass that the
heavenly graces of the Saints which come down from above, from God the Father
of Lights (as S. James speaks) are reproached by their Parentage, and charged
to be from beneath, and to come from the devil, the father of the darkness of
this world. Men in many cases of this nature, had rather venture the falling
into a desperate error that makes for them, then turn themselves a little
about to behold the face of a truth that is bent against them.

When we see a woman richer then ordinary in Jewels, Habit, and Attire, if she
be known to be the wife or daughter of some Nobleman, who is both nobly
minded, and by reason of the vastness of his estate, is as able to furnish
them with the richest Jewels, as an ordinary man his wife with Pins and lighter
ornaments, we never so much as once question, whether the Diamonds she wears
be Bristoll stones or no, or whether any thing be counterfeit, or base about
her: The knowledge of his greatness every ways, both for estate and spirit,
to whom this woman stands in so near a relation, stops the way against all
such reasonings as these, and overrules our thoughts. So if men first knew the
unsearchable riches of God, and of what spirit he is this way, together with
the mightiness of his power to give spiritual treasure, as Grace, Holiness,
Zeal, etc. in greatest abundance: and secondly, how near the relation is
betwixt him and his Church and People, they could not (lightly) so much as in
all their thoughts blaspheme their Graces, or once suspect or imagine that any
thing that is found upon them in that kind, that carries the appearance of
glory and excellency in it, but that it has the reality, truth, weight, and
substance also. The holiness of the Saints has no enemy but either he that is
ignorant of their interest in God, or else of that God in whom their interest
is.

Fourthly, other men. That interest they had in God has stood them in this
stead, this has been as a Fountain of living waters unto them, springing up
continually to relieve them. The Lord (says David, Psalm. 126.) has done great
things for us, whereof we rejoice.

What is the reason of that great difference between the Church of God, and all
other societies of men, and Kingdoms, and Monarchies, and Nations of the
world, which David expresses Psalm. 20.8. They are brought down and fallen;
but we are risen and stand upright: that so many great and mighty Nations that
had Chariots, and Horses, and walled Cities, and the thickest shields every
ways that could be made of flesh, for their safety, and yet these destroyed:
we that are but a few, weak, and unarmed, (in comparison) and yet we stand?
The reason of this difference may well be gathered out of the former verse.
They trusted in Chariots, and Horses; these were their own, they had propriety
in these, and so had the help they could afford. But the Church having the name
of the God of Jacob for them, this was more for their security and defense,
then all the Chariots and Horses of war, then all Castles and Fortresses
whatsoever. The one had interest in the Lord, God was theirs, his Power, his
Might, his Wisdom was theirs, and he has let them have their own in all
times of their necessity, and so they have been supported; whereas all the
world besides having no other strength then themselves, no better hope then
what an arm of flesh could do for them, have not been able to stand.

If the Lord had not been Ps. 124.1.
on our side, (says David) that is, had not God been ours, may Israel now say,
if it had not been the Lord who was on our side when men rose up against us:
then they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled against us,
then had the Waters overwhelmed us, etc. So may we say in this our solemn
rejoicing and thanksgiving for that great deliverance now remembered (and for
many others formerly) If the Lord had not been on our side, when men rose up
against us (and went down against us too) we also had been swallowed up quick:
and if not the waters, the flames of fire had overwhelmed us; but whether they
be aloft, or below, God meets with them, as David speaks: Psalm. 139.
If I climb up into heaven, thou art there, if I go down into hell (whither
these wretches were in going) thou art there also.

God has set his seal upon this great deliverance, with a fair and glorious
impression, because he would have it known for his, and make of it for
himself an everlasting name that should not be cut off. Therefore woe be to
him that shall deface this Monument which the Lord himself has erected in the
midst of this Nation, and has engraven and written praise and glory to his
own name upon it. Woe be to him (I say) that shall let the remembrance of it
perish or fall to the ground. When men's own tongues fall upon them, and cause
them to fall, All men says David, shall see and know it is the Lords work.
Psalm. 64.8, 9.

Let me say one thing further to you; I would not have you only to consider how
great the deliverance is, what a glorious train of mercies and blessings it
has to follow it, and attend upon it: but if I could, I would teach you an art
how to fulfill your own joy, how to make a double and treble improvement of
this and other mercies given you. Then must I wish you not to lay out the
strength of your joy too freely upon your deliverance it self, or all that
comes by it, (for indeed it was a Mother-mercy, having a thousand more
conceived in the bowels of it, and brings forth fruitfully to this day) but
reserve your selves rather to consider who it was that wrought it for you, it
was the Lord, it was your God. The woman of Samaria, John 4.12. thought their
Well of Sychar had a kind of blessing upon it above others, because so great a
man as their Father Jacob drank of it; but on the contrary, we that are the
Church and People of God, may truly, and with soberness of judgment think
our selves blessed indeed, that we draw all the waters we drink, all the
mercies and preservations we enjoy from such a Fountain, as the goodness of
the great God of heaven and earth. The same mercies and good things, did we
receive from another, from an inferior hand, were not the same; the best and
pleasantest taste, and relish that is in them (what ever they be) is the taste
of the hand out of which they come. And therefore profane and ignorant men
lose the best part of all the temporal good things they enjoy, because they
do not savor the hand that gives them forth unto them. The Lord, says David,
Ps. 126.3.
has done great things for us; whereof we rejoice. If David, were now alive,
and the question put to him, where the Emphasis and life of these words lay; I
verily believe his answer would be; not in the great things that were done for
them, but rather in the great doer of them, the Lord. The Lord has done, etc.

It is a rule and principle in common reason and experience, (and weak
apprehensions will reach it) which Xenophon well expresses in his language,
thus: (...). Things that are alike, or of equal worth and contentment in
themselves, coming from persons unequal in place and dignity, do not equally
affect men that receive them; but still a great difference there is, if the
inequality of persons from whom they come be great. To kiss the hand of a man
inferior to us is as nothing, rather indeed a disparagement, and a thing
ridiculous: but to kiss the hand of a Prince is a matter of favor and
countenance. So Solomon says of the light of the countenance, or favor of the
King, that it is like a Cloud of the latter rain: which often is more worth
then a Kings ransom; Prove. 16.15. whereas a good look from a mean man is
scarcely valued at two drops of water. God cannot give any light or slender
mercies, because the greatness of the giver makes them all weighty, and full
of importance and signification.

own, they have propriety in him; and this they apprehending and believing,
the full stream and current of their love keeping but the natural and
ordinary course, runs toward him, and falls wholly upon him. If ye were of the
world, the world would love his own (says our Savior to his Apostles, John
15.19.)

The Church and People of God having this special interest in God, which makes
him theirs, if they love him, what singular or strange thing do they? (in this
respect) they love but their own, which every man is apt to do. Many when
they see the servants of God carried on with a high hand of affection and zeal
in his Worship, watching daily at Wisdoms gates, and giving attendance at her
Posts, serving him night and day, and that instantly, or else engaged deeper
then ordinary, either in their Estate, Credit, Friends, Liberty, Life, etc. for
the advancement of his glory, make darkness of light, and interpret that
strength of affection which rules thus gloriously in the ways and practices
of such men, to be nothing else but either weakness of judgment, or strength
of hypocrisy, and dissimulation. They either think they have lost their own
wits to make such unnecessary expense, and wast of themselves; or else gained
in some of the old Serpents subtilty and craft unto them, whereby he
transformes himself into an Angel of light, for advantage sake. And this
Erasmus reports, that Luther in his time, seemed to the generality of men,
Partim stultus, partim malus, partly a fool, and partly a knave (as we use to
speak.) The spiritual man says Paul 1 Cor. 2.15. is judged of no man, that
is, is not rightly and truly judged of, by any man (but only by his own
society, men that are spiritual like himself) by any certain rule of
judgment, because his grounds, principles, ends, relations, etc. are not
known, believed, or comprehended by other men. But though he be judged of no
man in this sense, (for the reason given) yet is he judged and rejudged over
and over, after a fashion, by all sorts of men, and no man has more verdicts
and censures past upon him, then he, and these as wild, and inconsistent with
themselves as lightly can be: As it is with unskilful Archers, that shoot
over, and under, and on both sides, but never come near the But or Mark they
shoot at.

But if men did fully apprehend and believe this special relation of theirs we
speak of, this peculiar interest they have in God, it would neither be thought
either defect in wisdom, or excess of dissimulation, that such should with
that freeness give out their strength unto him, and bestow themselves with
that which is theirs upon him, but would judge it a sober, orderly, and
well-resolved course; a course whereunto the wisdoms, discretions, and even
natural inclinations of men usually conform themselves in other things.
Nebuchadnezzar (doubtless) was at great expenses, and lavisht Gold apace out
of the bag (what other inconveniences soever he put himself upon) when he
built that royal Palace of Babel: but because it was his own, Dan. 3.
and for the house of his Kingdom, and the honor of his Majesty; I know none
that have risen up against him to censure or condemn him for his magnificence
in that kind. If he had built for another, no ways related to him, after such
a rate and proportion of charge, men might well have asked, how the King and
his Treasure came so soon parted? and have deemed him greater in power then in
wisdom. And generally when men do bestow cost upon things that be their own,
whether it be for their credit, profit, or the like, if the subject upon which
it is bestowed, or laid out, as for example, House, Lands, Wife, Children, or
the like, will reasonably (or but tolerably) bear it, it is passed over as a
matter of no great observation; men are not taxed with the transgression of any
rule, or law either of honesty or discretion, in such a case.

Behold, is he not their God? have they not a peculiar right and propriety in
him? He that loves his Wife (says the Apostle Ephesians. 5.28. and may not I say
much more, he that loves his God?) loves Himself: Yea, he that loves his God
most, loves himself most; and does it argue either want of wit, or honesty,
that men should love themselves? Or what greater honor and esteem, yea what
greater profit and advantage can, in a regular way, be expected then that it
should be publicly known and acknowledged in the world, that that God whom
we serve, and in whom we have a propriety as our own, is the only true God,
a God of infinite goodness, power, and majesty? The true God is called the
glory of those that worship him. They changed their glory into the similitude
of an Ox that eats grass, Psalm. 106.20. So again, Psalm. 62.7. As on the
contrary, to be mistaken in a man's God, to worship and serve, and to be coupled
with a strange god, with a filthy Idol, (as the best of all worshipped gods
are, the true God only excepted) is a great reproach and stain to the dignity
and excellency of a man. They went to Baal-Peor, and separated themselves to
that shame, etc. Hos. 9.10. So Ier. 11.13. You set up Altars to that shame,
etc. Yea, to be under question or just suspicion of such an error and great
evil, is not a thing so well consisting with any man's reputation in the world.
Now that a man has indeed the Lord for his God (as David speaks) that he
that is God indeed, has revealed himself unto him, and that the devil has
not furnished him and provided him of a god, is a thing which cannot fully be
manifested by any other light whatsoever, but only by pouring out our selves,
and our whole substance freely and willingly in his worship and service. And
may not thoughts of jealousy be justly taken up against a man, that he has
some ignoble god for his god, that he goes not above the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, (if he goes so far) to fetch the deity he worshippeth, when the
sacrifice he offers is only the lame and torn of his flock; when he serves him
with an evil eye, or thinks any thing too good, or too great for him? Cursed
be the deceiver (says the Lord by his Prophet, Mal. 1.14.) which has in his
flock a Male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing. But
why should such a man be cursed? or how is he a deceiver? The Reason of both
follows (and is the same) For I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts.
Implying, that he that worshippeth or serves God, in a low, sparing, loose,
and perfunctory manner, is an enemy to his greatness, and glory of his
Majesty, and goes about (as it were) to persuade the world, that God is not
the God which indeed he is, so great and terrible: and so deceives it. This
for the fifth branch of instruction.

And lastly, this Hony-Combe will yet drop once more. This peculiar interest of
the Church in God, is a sure ground of a most certain and infallible presage,
what will be the end of all the enemies thereof, and what the issue of all the
attempts of those that shall seek to do it evil. Frustration will
(undoubtedly) be the end of all such attempts, and confusion the end of all
their enemies. The servants and people of God have been, yet are, and still
will be too hard for all the world to deal with: there is no meddling with them
but only in a way of love and kindness: and so they are the profitablest men
under heaven to converse and deal withal. He that is the Sanctuary, will be a
stumbling stone, and as a Rock to fall upon, and as a snare to all the
Inhabitants of the earth, that shall either lift up a tongue, or stretch forth
a hand against them, Esaias 8.14.

It is true, The People of God seem to be of all men Opportuni injuriis, (as he
said) Men, that if any man had a mind to do mischief good cheap, were for
his turn, because their arm of flesh (for the most part) is but weak and
contemptible: Neither does the world love them so well as to provide them any
guard of their strength to defend them. But they have one always standing by
them, who is indeed a man of War, Exodus 15.3. But shows not himself,
appears not till the day of Battle: but then he breaks out like a Lion out
of the thicket, (as the Prophet speaks) and tears all in pieces, and devours.
This for the second use of Instruction.

CAP. VI. Wherein the Doctrine is further drawn out in an use of
Encouragement, or Consolation.
SEcondly, the Doctrine propounded, affords matter of comfort and encouragement
(and those of the fullest and largest proportions) to the Church of God, and
those that are members thereof. If God be yours (you, Church and Children of
God) if you have this special interest in him, then up with those hands that
hang down, and let those knees that are feeble take strength to themselves,
and those hearts that are smitten within you, and wither like the grass, let
them flourish again like the green herb. If God be yours, why do you fear, or
why do you take care, who, or how many they be that are against you? Will you
profane the Sanctuary of your strength by your fears, and pollute that
blessed Name that is called upon you, and by you? Will you unsanctifie the holy
One? Will you proclaim it in the hearing of the world? shall Gath and Ashkelon
have information from you, that his arm is shortened? that he is now become as
man, and no longer a God? that his horse are flesh, and not spirit? What do you
else (my Brethren) that cast away your hope and confidence, (which your enemies
gather up, as fast as they perceive you to scatter, and make hope and
confidence of it for themselves) and give the cause and state of the Church of
God and Religion amongst you as good as lost, which is yet more worth then many
worlds? Sampsons courage was above his strength, ( Judge. 16.20.) because (says
the Text) He knew not that the Lord was departed from him: and therefore when
he went forth, thinking to do as he did at other times, he was taken of his
enemies. But your strength is a great deal more then your courage, because God
is not departed from you: Nay, he has bound himself unto you (whilst you
continue his Church and People) with bands which he cannot break. It is like
you will say; Ah! but we cannot discern any signs of his presence: if God be
with us, or on our side, why is it thus?

Let me reason a few things with you, to allay the bitterness of these
complaints and fears. Do ye think, or believe (in good earnest) that you
are now in greater danger, nearer ruin and destruction then you were at that
time, when he that is your God stepped in between the Match and the Powder, and
kept them from coming the one at the other? Only now (it may be) you see and
apprehend more: but the danger is not the greater, but the lesser by that. When
the Disciples, not long after the Miracle of the Loaves, began to question
their provision of Victuals, how sharply does our Savior rebuke them, as
fools, and without understanding, Mar. 8.17, 18. Why reason ye thus, because
ye have no Bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart
yet hardened? having eyes, see you not? and having ears, hear you not? and
do ye not remember? When I brake the five Loaves among five thousand, how many
Baskets full of fragments took you up? They said unto him, Twelve. And when
the seven among four thousand, how many Baskets full of fragments took ye
up? And they said, Seven. And he said unto them, how is it, that ye do not
understand?

As if he should say, it is the most unworthy and unsavory thought and conceit
in the world to lodge in you, who have so lately, and that again and again,
and so apparently seen, and had experience, both of the tenderness of my
care, and mightiness of my power in making provision of Bread for you, to
suspect or fear inconvenience that way, that ever you should suffer hunger or
be affamished. Have we not had as clear, as mighty a demonstration, in the
deliverance we now celebrate, (with many other) of the care, providence, and
protection of God over us, for the preservation of our lives, liberties, goods,
Religion? and shall we suffer such an unworthy and sacrilegious apprehension to
tyrannize over us as this, that God will now deliver us up to the will of our
enemies, because his time and our time for deliverance, are not yet met? our
time for ease, comfort, and deliverance, being always; but Gods time, many
times, not yet. Let me ask you, how many barrels of Gunpowder took ye up out
of the Vault? how many bars of Iron, and Billets, and Faggots took ye up? how
many Traitors hanged ye up? Do ye not yet perceive, neither understand, what
all this means?

Again, in Eighty eight, how many Ships did ye batter, spoil, and sink? how
many did you take for your self? how plentiful and royal a feast did you
prepare for the fish of the Sea with the flesh of your enemies, and the blood
of the mighty? David has such an expression concerning the Providence of God
toward his People in the destruction of Pharaoh, as this, Ps. 74.14. Thou
brakest the head of Leviathan in pieces: and gave him to be meat for the
people in the Wilderness. He calls the proud, cruel, insulting King, by the
name of Leviathan, (i. e. the great Whale, Job 41.1.) because he would
adventure to change his Element, and take the Seas, and meant to destroy and
devour there, as well as he did on the Land. Thou brakest his head in pieces,
i. e. thou utterly destroyedst him, leftest nothing of him remaining; there was
not one Egyptian left (says the Scripture) that accompanied Pharaoh in that
bloody Expedition. Thou gave him to be meat for the people in the
Wilderness. What is this? I conceive this to be the meaning. The People when
they came into the Wilderness, and saw small or no means to support them, saw
no table, no provision, etc. might be tempted to doubt of, or to distrust the
providence of God toward them. But God (says David) had given them Leviathan
for meat: that is, that great overthrow that was given unto Pharaoh, and that
wonderful deliverance which God wrought for his people thereby, was sufficient
to uphold their spirits, and maintain a life of hope and confidence within
them, that God that had done such great things for them, would never suffer
them to perish by forgetfulness of them, by withdrawing the arm of his
preservation and protection from them, if they would but look up unto him, and
make their dependence upon him, according to the glorious encouragement and
triumphing provocation of so great and unheard of a deliverance.

So, suppose we be now in the Wilderness, we see no means of support, of
subsisting before us, we have not those visible, those sensible testimonies of
Gods presence with us, as sometimes we have had, yet God has given us meat, to
feed and live upon: those 36. Barrells of Gunpowder, wherewith God furnished us
out of the Cellar at our enemies cost, let us drink down them, they will
breed good blood, spirit, and courage: again, those Iron bars, and billets
of the same gracious and miraculous provision, let us feed upon them, and
digest them by a mature and kind concoction; I make no question but we shall
renew our strength like Eagles, and be young and lusty again in our Faith
toward God.

When the Israelites afterward, so often proveked God in the Wilderness, (as
David speaks, Psalm. 78.40.) and grieved him in the Desert, viz. by murmuring,
and distrustfulnesse, When they tempted God, and limited the holy One of
Israel: he imputes all this sin of theirs to this, as the cause, They
remembered not his hand, nor the day wherein he delivered them from the enemy:
they forsook the meat God had given them, they gave over feeding on Leviathan,
and so they fainted, their Faith was affamished, and themselves perished.
Therefore let us preserve the memorial of this great delivera^ce, as a precious
treasure by us: Let us season the flesh of the Traitors the Gunpowder, the
Bar, the Billets, that they may keep fresh and sweet; and so doubtless they
will be a nourishment of an high and excellent spirit, both for us and our
posterities to feed upon, and to preserve the life of the peace, and safety of
the Nation, as long as Sun and Moon shall endure.

Such a Preservation, such a Deliverance as this, so deep and down laden (as
it were) with the precious spoils of heaven, the ingredients and substance of
it being nothing else but the infinite, incomprehensible wisdom, power,
goodness, love, and mercy of God, is enough to enrich a Nation alone, and to
fill the hearts of all the Inhabitants thereof with the entirenesse and
strength of Faith, and dependence upon God, which are able to laugh all future
enemies, dangers, and attempts in the face to scorn. This for the third use of
the Doctrine, by way of encouragement, or consolation.

CAP. VII. Wherein the two first branches of the third Use (being an use of
Reproof) are handled.
IN the third place, the Doctrine first propounded, is further serviceable unto
us by way of Reproof. For if the Church and Children of God have that deep and
dear interest in God, which has been opened unto you; how shall those be
excused or spared from passing under the rod of Reproof, who taking this great
honor to themselves, of being the Church of God, and People of God, (whether
truly or falsely, whether they be his People or no) and yet do things contrary
to the tenor of such an interest, and by many misdemeanors and unworthy
cariages of themselves, deface the glory of so high a prerogative, that in word
profess an interest in God, but in works and deeds (which are witnesses of
greater value) deny it.

Now three things there are (more especially) whereby men wave all interest in
God, and do little less then make open confession in the world against
themselves, that they are not the men in heart that they are in the face.

First, in a base creeping or crouching before the world, and seeking the face
of the creature, in inordinate desires after outward things, and not being
richlysatisfied with God.

Secondly, in making dependence upon an arm of flesh, and upon the creatures,
and not upon God.

Thirdly and lastly, in inordinate fears of those that are enemies, and rise
up against them, and not making God their only fear and dread.

In these particulars (especially) amongst others, men often offend (and that
greatly) against such interest as they have in God: such carriages as these
being interpreted, are as much as to say, Such men confess that they have no
portion nor interest in the Lord.

First, when men in an unseemly manner are officious in doing suit and service
to the world, when they suffer themselves so far to be brought into
subjection by Silver, and Gold, and Houses, and Lands, by fair and full
Estates, by Pleasures, and Ease, and Liberty, etc. that a man (in Scripture
phrase) is not able to live without these, yea, and to reign too, (as Paul
speaks) to live like Kings without these: this is a betraying of the glory and
happiness which is annexed to that interest, which any creature has in God.
Are there not many that would be thought people of God, and to have interest
in him, that yet are as effeminate and impotent in their desires and lustings
after things of this life, as Rachel was after Children, Give me Children, or
else I die? Genesis 30.1. So many must have the flower of the Wheat, and Honey
out of the Rock, they must have the best and sweetest aspects of the world, or
else it is not (...), (as he said) Their life is not worth the living, their
hearts die and sink within them, and they are Like to those that go down into
the Pit, (as David speaks) and what can be more prejudicial to the glory of
God? what can derogate more from his goodness, bounty, and power, then to find
men in these deep discontentments, in such faintings of heart for want of these
by-matters of the world, who pretend and challenge interest in God, and his
All Sufficiency?

Does not the Scripture prove the Resurrection from the dead? and that Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob are yet living, by this argument, that God is the God not of
the dead, but of the living.

The force and strength of the Argument and Reason (I conceive) lies in this.
That God being a God of that infinite goodness and bounty, and withal of
power, and strength, and greatness answerable, it is altogether a thing
unworthy of him, to call himself the God of such, or to ascribe that special
and peculiar interest of himself to such creatures as are deprived and
destitute of the best of their being, their life; he shall lay his own honor
in the dust to do it. What difference shall there be then between an infinite
God, and the most contemptible of creatures, in this respect, if a man might
have God for his God, have the best interest in him, and yet be as low, and as
little worth as he could be, had he had interest in the poorest creature in the
world? (For what condition more empty and poor then death?)

So (my brethren) they that call themselves by the names of Gods Children, or
People, and pretend or challenge interest in God, and yet hang down their
heads like Bull-rushes in every Storm, and are as dead men, without any life
or soul of joy or comfort, except the world puts life into them, do not these
make God to be the God of the dead, and not only of the living? by valuing
their interest in God at so mean a rate, as not to make it a sufficient ground
of joy and comfort unto them in the absence of Moon and Stars; as if there
were no efficacy and power in it, to raise the soul of a man, but only in
conjunction with Corn, Psalm. 4.
and Wine, and Oil; do you not spread a Cloud before the glorious face of the
Al-sufficiency of God, and take a course to bring up an evil and hard report
in the world of him, and his goodness, and weaken and discourage the hearts of
men for ever choosing God for their portion?

Elkanah did well and truly represent the Melancholy and uncomfortable temper
of his wife for want of Children, 1 Samuel 1.10.
as reflecting some prejudice and disparagement upon him, being her husband:
Hanna, why weepest thou? Am not I better unto thee then ten Sons? q. d. if thou
knew and did but consider what cause thou have of comfort and joy in me,
and my love and affection toward thee, thou would not be so disquieted and
troubled for want of Children; is not the interest thou have in me, valuable
with the comfort and contentment of many Children?

So if we shall say we have interest in God, and yet walk with dejected
countenances, and with hands hanging down, because The Fig trees do not
flourish, and because There is no fruit on the Vine, and the Fields yield no
meat, (as it is Hab. 3.17.) because outward comforts fail and are cut off
from us, do we not darken the face of the heaven, and shame the glory of the
infinite goodness and greatness of God? is not God unto us more then many
Houses, and Lands, then Silver and Gold? as we are unto him of more worth and
value then many Sparrows; so is not he more to us then many worlds?

Therefore now let him that claims interest in God, that says God is his
God, let him vindicate and make good so great a title and claim in the sight
of the world, by a heart full of joy, and full of contentment in the midst of
outward wants, and necessities, of hunger, nakedness, reproach, etc. If he
has an estate of joy and peace in God, it is an unseemly thing for him to fill
the ears of the world, or to break the hearts of men with complaints of wants
and misery. He that has interest in God, must be able to work wonders in the
world, or else he shall shame his glory, and the world will not believe him. As
our Savior said of those that should believe, that those signs should follow
them, Mark 16.17. In his name they should cast out devils, and they shall
speak with new tongues, and they shall take away Serpents, and if they shall
drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. So (my brethren) they that say
(with David) that God is their God, that they have an interest in him, such
signs as these must follow them as a glorious retinue in the world, to answer
that greatness: they must be rich without an estate, joyful in the midst of
sorrow, strong in weakness, they must not burn in midst of fire, nor drown
in overflowing of darkest waters, they must live without a soul, and sleep
without a bed, and be clothed without raiment, be at liberty in prison, in
their native country when they are in exile, and banishment; in a word (as S.
Paul's expression is) though they have nothing, yet must they be as though they
had all things: otherwise they are, as if they had no interest in God at all.
If God be thine, and yet thou say thou want any thing, thou art a liar,
(as John in another case says) and the truth is not in thee. For (as David
speaks Psalm. 34.) Of them that fear the Lord, we may as well, with as much
truth, (and with more perspicuity and evidence of truth) they that enjoy the
Lord, and have interest in him, want nothing: (except perhaps the knowledge of
their abundance) God will fill any man's cup alone, and make it overflow and run
over, though there be nothing in it besides.

And this reproof concerns us, not only as we are private Christians, and
every man one by himself, but as we are together a People of God, a Church of
God. If we have interest in God, (as we pretend we have, in calling our selves
the Church and People of God, as you have heard) then are we not to bow down
our backs, to suffer all kind of discontentments and discouragements to go
over us (as generally we do) and to tread down the strength and comfort of
our hearts, because the world refuses to give us the right hand of fellowship,
because they that are mounted upon the high places of the earth (as Esaias
speaks) Behold us afar off, and do not favor our righteous dealings, nor
countenance us in our ways. Is not our God unto us above all gods? (as David's
expression is) what if the faces of Rulers should be clouded, should we not
rejoice nevertheless, if the light of Gods countenance shine upon us? Shall we
complain that the Moon and Stars do not appear and shine upon us, when the
Sun shines out unto us in the fullness of his strength? were not this to cast
an aspersion upon that glorious creature the Sun, the beauty of heaven, as if
he wanted the help of inferior Luminaries to serve the world with that great
and heavenly commodity of light? And shall we not charge weakness and
insufficiency upon the great God of heaven and earth, to revive and cherish us,
if we be therefore sad and uncomfortable, because we have not alike interest in
those gods, that are made of men, I mean Kings, and Princes, and Rulers of the
earth, as well as in Him?

That Synagogue of Rome commends her self to the world for the Church of God:
yea, she must be it and no other, and challenges deep interest in God. And
interest I believe she has enough in the god of this world, he espied out for
her, and provided the best Vault he could find in all his kingdom of
darkness, for advancement of her designs, he furnished her with engines and
instruments, such as his kingdom affords, to have given that fatal and
terrible blow (as they called it) to their adversaries, but that this same
heaven is above him, and is too hard for him, and troubles him, and will not
condescend to the designs of hell, nor suffer any thing to prosper wherein he
desires to pleasure them. So that I say, in this god of theirs (doubtless)
they have interest to their hearts desire. But if they have interest in that
God which is holy and all-sufficient (as the world must believe, or stand
adjudged as heretical in that point) why are they so discontented with their
portion, as to dig into hell to find a treasure of blood, to mend their cup
withal? why could they not let this poor shovell-full of earth, cast up in
the midst of the Sea, (as one of their Spanish Kings, if my remembrance fails
me not, in the height of his malice and swelling vanity termed this Island of
ours) why did they not let it alone? If their portion be in heaven (as they
say) a shovell full of earth would have been but a mean and unworthy addition
to it. Alas, that unsatiable hungring and thirsting after blood, and that
hunting the lives of those that they judge their enemies, those six and thirty
Barrels of Gunpowder, with those Bars of Iron, and Billets of wood, (which
may be quartered for the arms of the Babylonish Synagogue) these, and a
thousand other like base desires, of drawing in the world into them, and all
they can lay hold of, and fasten their talons on upon earth, these proclaim to
the world, that they are altogether diffident, and distrust that title and
claim they lay, to be the Church of God: It is a plain sign against them that
they look for little from heaven. And therefore as Saul, when God had forsaken
him, and would not answer him, went for counsel to the devil; So do these
men (if they did but understand the voice and language of their own ways and
works) make a plain confession to the world, that God has forsaken them; and
therefore since they are desperate of having their desires out of heaven, they
will work it out of Hell, if it be to be had there.

Secondly, those likewise sin against this interest in God (and are to be
reproved) that make their dependence upon any creature, that make flesh their
arm: (as Ier. 17.5.) this sin is of some affinity with the former: But as
Simeon and Levi were brethren in iniquity, and sinned together, so must they be
rebuked and reproved together by their Father. Many will say of God, that he is
their God, and challenge interest in him, that yet do not speak unto him from
their hearts, and say unto him, as David often did, ( Psalm. 31.3.) Thou art my
Rock, and my Fortress, and Psalm. 18.31. Who is a Rock, save our God? Men will
have other Rocks to build the house of their defense upon, and their hope upon:
men are afraid to adventure the weight of all their treasure, of all they have,
and of all they hope, and of all they desire, upon God alone, except they have
some other foundation that they may see and look upon, to lay with him. As the
Israelites ( Exodus 32.1.) must have gods made them, that might go before them,
that they might see them, and look upon them, because that they had not Moses
to look upon, he was out of sight, they knew not what was become of him: Up,
make us gods to go before us, (say they to Aaron.)

So (my Brethren) most men must have something besides, and instead of God to
themselves, i. e. something upon which they may rely and trust to, and cast all
the weight and burden of their cares and fears upon, that they may converse
with by some outward sense or other, chiefly by the eye, they must see him: As
for the invisible God, of Moses, (as it is said Heb. 11.27. that He saw him
that was invisible) because he is still out of sight, they know not where he
is, and therefore they have no mind to depend upon him, no more then the
Israelites had upon Moses, when he was but a while absent.

If we could look into men, and see into the depth of their thoughts, we
should find the hearts of most bottomed with creatures, as with Silver and
Gold, Estate, Greatness, Favor, or Credit in the world, a very small remnent
with the living God: And therefore we see when any of their bottomes decay or
are knocked out, all men's hopes and comforts, and expectations run out, and are
like water spilt upon the ground that cannot be gathered up again: whereas if
men's dependence were upon God, if the weight of all their hopes and desires
rested and staid upon him, though all outward props and supports were struck
from under them, yet a man should be able to keep his standing, and not fall to
the ground, because God is a Rock, and a Rock always keeps his place, and
never gives way; if you know where it is to day, you know where it will be to
morrow.

Now this is that I say, that if a man claims that special interest in God,
which is the portion of his Children, and yet makes his dependence upon any
thing besides whatsoever: as the Maid said to Peter, that his speech betrayed
him, so such a man's way betrayeth him to be but an idle pretender to that
royal privilege, and that indeed he knows not what any such interest means.
Our full and entire dependence upon God, is the best, and highest, and most
honorable part of our service; it is the Center point (as it were) of our
obedience, that is better then all the Circle and Circumference besides:
Obedience is better then Sacrifice (as Samuel) but dependence is better then
sacrifice and obedience (in other kinds) both together. That same confidence
in God, which no persuasions, nor entreaties, nor threatenings will prevail
with men, but that they will needs cast it away from them as far as it will
fly, as a thing that would but abuse them, and do them no good, this is that
that has the great recompense of reward (as the Apostle speaks Heb. 10.35.)
as if there were inferior rewards prepared for other services, but the great
reward, the right hand and left of Christ in his Kingdom, were reserved for
this. But if men have any thing else, any creature that flatters them, and
says unto them, as the Bramble said to the Trees of the Forest in Iothams
Parable, Judge. 9.15
Come and put your trust under my shadow, place your confidence in me; Men will
hardly be entreated to cast away such a confidence upon any terms.

If a great estate, or some great friend that is eminent in place and power
should but allure us, and speak as kindly and graciously unto us, as the great
God of heaven and earth does from place to place in his Word, cast all your
care, and your burden upon us, we will take care for you: Men would take hold
of such words, as soon as they should be spoken, and would do that which was
desired of them with all their hearts, and would hardly ask any question about
it, either for conscience sake, or for fears sake. But now God inviting us to
do him that honor and our selves that ease, as to cast all our care on him,
i. e. to do it in a careless, secure, and resolute manner (as the word (...)
imports) assuring us that he does care for us, (which no creature does in
comparison of him) men will think of it ten times before they will do it
once, 1 Pet. 5.7. Even they which do any thing in this kind, they will not
cast their care upon him; all they will be brought to do is, to lay it on him
fair and softly, as we use to lay burdens of any weight upon Tables or
Stools, when we suspect the joints to be crazy and shaken, we lay them down
as gently and easily as may be, for fear we should break all in pieces, and
our burdens fall to the ground; and as men use to walk upon Ice over deep
Waters, they do not at first leap and jump upon it, but first set one foot,
and then another, to see whether the Ice crack or no, whether it will bear
them, that so they may retire back again to the ground without danger, before
they be on too far: but to go thus to work with God, is not to cast our care
upon him, but rather to tempt him, and see whether he will bear it or no.
Whereas he gives us in that, an assurance before hand, yea, gives it as the
reason or ground, upon which he requires us, to cast all our care upon him, in
such a manner. Cast all your care on him; for he cares for you. I would never
wish you to do it, to cast it upon God, but that I know he does take care for
you, and will discharge that trust alone, as much for your comfort and
satisfaction, as if you should be over-busie your selves, and would needs join
your selves in Commission with him.

Therefore now if thou have interest in God, and have any burdens, one or
more, to bear or carry, if thou will carry this burden thy self, and toil
and turmoile thy self till thou be ready to faint, and sink, and die under
it, and not cast it upon God, now walk thou laden to the prejudice and
scandal of heaven, thy burden would be honorable upon the shoulder of the
Almighty, both to him and thee. We account it a mean calling among men, and
servile, to carry burdens, but it is exceeding glorious in God, to bear all
the burdens of his Saints, that they may walk upright, and not have their
backs bowed down to the earth.

This point of the Reproof likewise (as the former did) concerns us, not
only as we are private men, but as we are together, a Church, and People of
God. If our interest in him be such as has been declared (as doubtless it is,
if we be the People of God) why do we cause this great blessedness of ours to
be blasphemed, and evil spoken of in the world, by seeking to lay other
foundations of our peace and comfort, besides the favor and power of God
alone? why do we not stand sure upon him, though we have nothing else to
establish us? why are we not built upon him? what addition can be made unto
him? if we had all the flesh in the world made up into an arm of salvation
unto us, could it add any thing to our security? Dan. 6.20.


Is not thy God (says Darius to Daniel in the Lions Den) whom thou servest
always, able to deliver thee from the Lion? Either he is able to deliver us, and
save us out of the mouths of all Lions, able to rebuke all our destroyers, or
he is not able; if he be not able, then I ask, who made heaven and earth?
doubtless it will not ask a greater power to save us, then it did to create
us, and the whole frame of heaven and earth besides. Ps. 124.8.
And therefore David in the name of the Church of God, fats and flesheth (as it
were) his trust and confidence with that consideration, Our help stands in
the name of the Lord, that made heaven and earth; as if he meant never to
trouble himself further (as long as he saw heaven and earth standing before
him) to enquire out more names of helpers and defenders to join with him that
made heaven and earth.

Our help stands in the name of the Lord, etc. Here it is permanent and fixed,
it did not remove up and down, and shift from one name to another, as if now
they were confident in God, another while confident in some creature, or
outward support; they did not remove from bottom to bottom, as men that are
double minded do, they have no standing help or comfort any where, but still
are shifting and flitting from under the shadow of one tree to another, from
under the wing of one creature to another. If he be able to deliver us, and we
be his People, and have interest in all the glory of his power, why do we
suffer any thought to enter into us of standing upon any other ground? why are
we troubled and distracted in our selves, about seeking and providing a hiding
place from storms and tempests, when we remain under the shadow of his wing?
If any enemy have power to pluck any of his feathers, then had we some cause to
fear a lying open to the weather.

And what shall we say in this point to our Roman Catholics? (for the name
of Catholics they must have to themselves, and all the world must give out
their right to them, but for the truth and substance of it, that they leave to
divide, who will, amongst them) But let it be here again considered, what
interest it is like, that they have in God, or whether their ways in the point
we speak of, be like the ways of men, Whose God is the Lord. Do they make
their dependence entire upon God? do they trust in him alone for the bearing
up of the Pillars of their Church? do they commit their cause unto him,
attempting nothing but that which is lawful and right for the advancing
themselves, their Church, and Religion? are they content to fall to the ground,
and lie in the dust, if innocence and righteous dealing will not sustain them?
(which is an essential Character of him that has confidence in God) yea, have
they not cast off his Word (as Esaias 30.12.) and trust in violence and
wickedness, (as the former) or Oppression and perverseness, (as the latter
Translation has it) and stay thereupon? do they trust more in Treasons, in
Poisons, in Rebellions, in Conjurations, in Fires, in Swords, in Ships, in
bloody Butchers, in Gunpowder, in Vaults, in Iron, in Wood, in any thing then
in God, and do they not stay themselves thereon? are not these the goodly
Pillars, and polished Corners of their Temple? do they not hope to live and
subsist in the world, and to hold up their heads above Water, by such engines
and projects, and designs as these? This is the interest that Church has in
God. Surely that Church may say, He that is their God, is not the God of
Salvation, but of Destruction: the name of their God in Hebrew is, Abaddon,
Rev. 9.11.

CAP. VIII. Wherein the third and last branch of the Use of Reproof is handled.
Wave coming toward them, they are ready with Peter (in Mat. 14.29.) to cry
out, We perish: or if they taste but some bitterness in the Broth, presently
cry out with the Prophets Children (2 Kings 4.40.) There is death in the Pot.
How many are there that say, they have interest in God, whose hearts fail
them, and become like stones within them, cold and heavy, if trouble or
affliction do but come forth, and look a little upon them, they are not able
to endure the appearance of any danger; As when the great Champion of the
Philistims did but show himself in the field (1 Samuel 17.24.) it is said, that
all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, they ran away from him and were
sore afraid: they knew not whether ever he should have come near them to hurt
any of them or no, and yet they were all afraid, and ran away, only upon sight
of him. So the Israelites (Exodus 14.10.) did but lift up their eyes, and saw
the Egyptians marching after them, and the Text says, they also were sore
afraid.

If dangers and troubles do but put forth a little, and begin to bud, we
conclude that a deadly Winter must needs be at hand. If there be but a thick
arm of flesh lifted up against us to strike, we think the blow must presently
fall upon us. If Satan does but show himself in arms, and bring forth his
troops, and display his colors before the Walls, we give the City as lost
presently. Yea, some men are as tender of their fears in this kind, and as
impatient to have them rebuked, and touched, as David was of his Son Absolon,
or Adoniah; (2 King. 1.6.) it is said that his Father would not displease him
from his Childhood, to say, Why do thou so? Some men even take such a
felicity and contentment in their fears and apprehensions of dangers, though
otherwise fear has torment, (as S. John speaks) that neither will they
displease them themselves, nor suffer any other to displease them; they will
not endure any man to dispute, or to conceive any hope, when they have once
feared. So that they seem to have a touch of Ionahs spirit in them, that was
angry with God, for not executing judgment upon Ninevch, when he had
prophesied the destruction of it. Some men seem so highly to honor the
Prophetical signs of their fears, as if they would take offense at Gods
goodness and mercy, if he should not bring upon them, and the Church of God
amongst them, the judgments and mercies that they have prophesied of in their
fears.

Now I say all such distracting and dismaying fears as these, are no ways
seemly and comely in those that profess this special interest in God. Are
they not rather a giving honor to men, and magnifying the powers of darkness,
and the devil himself above God? What are any such fears, being rightly
interpreted, but as much as to say, the rage, and malice, and wickedness of
men, are greater then the goodness, and truth, and power of God? These are
winds and waves that will not obey him, that he cannot (...) and comman^^
Should such a man as I fear, (says Nehemiah) that have professed such
confidence in God? and still you shall find, that in Scripture there is an
opposition between those fears, and that honor that is due unto God from
those that are his, and say they have interest in him: See those Scriptures,
Ezra 8.22. Nehem. 4.14. 1 Pet. 3.14, 15. at your leisure.

But you will say, If the Lion has roared, who will not, or shall not be
afraid? (as Amos) and if the Trumpet be blown in the City, ought not the
people to fear? If God himself denounce war against his people, and take part
with their enemies, and strengthen their hands daily, and suffer the men of the
earth to exalt themselves against them, and to do with his Saints even as they
list, (as it is said they did to John the Baptist, in his time) and cuts off
the wonted signs and tokens of his presence with his own, so that they can see
few or none of them left; are not these things enough to shake the foundations
of any man's confidence, to make all hands hang down, Amos 3.8.
and all knees wax feeble? to break the heart of any man's hope? who is able to
stand in the face of such a destruction coming from the Almighty, and does not
tremble exceedingly? And therefore they that fear in this case, are in no
cause of reproof, but rather to be relieved with mercy and compassion.

To this I answer diverse things,

First, The roaring of the Lion that is heard, it may be the roaring of that
Lion that goes up and down the world, seeking whom he may devour; it may be
the roaring of hell, and of the devil, coming with open mouth upon the poor
Church of God, like a ramping, and roaring Lion, (as David speaks) and not
the roaring of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, against his Church and People.
If it be so, we may give losers leave to speak, and cry out, and to roar too,
and no great cause (thus far) to be troubled at it. We must pardon the devil
the excess of his wrath, he is in great straights, his time is shorter then
ever, and that which he does, he must do quickly, the sound of his great
Masters feet is behind him, with the great chain of darkness in his hand, to
lay him up fast in the bottomless Pit for ever.

Secondly, all the ways and paths of God, are Mercy and Truth unto his
Church, and such as keep his Covenant (as David speaks) yet are there many
things in these ways of his, Ps. 25.14.
very liable (and obnoxious for a time) to another interpretation. To give the
true sense and meaning of all passages in Gods providence and administration
toward his Church, requires an Interpreter, one of a thousand. God may be
coming toward his Church in a way of Mercy and Truth, when the thoughts of
our hearts are ready to say, he is coming in a way of judgment and
destruction. There was given to me (says S. Paul 2 Cor. 12.7.) A messenger
from (or of) Satan. It was well spied of S. Paul, to find out a gift of God,
in a message, and messenger from the devil. It sometimes requires much
wisdom, and pondering, and consideration of things to understand the loving
kindness of the Lord in them, (as David speaks Psalm. 107.43.) There are some
things hard to be understood (says Peter) in Paul's Epistles, which some
pervert to their own destruction. So are there in Gods government of the
Church, many things hard to be understood (for a season) which some pervert to
their own discomfiture, till God himself, by the light of a joyful issue,
cleeres his own intent and meaning therein.

A 3. appointed (or, set up) for the falling (as well as for the rising) of
many in Israel. So is it true likewise of the whole body of the Church, God
has so appointed it, and so carries, and orders the affairs, state and
condition of it, that it shall be, and must be the great stumbling stone of the
world, upon which the principle haters of God and his truth shall dash
themselves in pieces. God could have confounded the world, and the wise things
thereof otherwise, and have brought to naught the mighty things of it, by a more
immediate way; but (said the holy Ghost) God has chosen the weak 1 Cor. 1.27,
28.
things of the world, and the foolish things, and things that are not, to do
it by.

God divides the glory with his Church, he will honor himself and his Church
together, in the destruction of the world; God could have tempered another cup
that should have been as present death to the Nations, to have drunk of it, (
Zach. 12.2.) but Jerusalem must be made the cup of poison to all the people
round about, when they shall be in the siege against Judah and Jerusalem. He
could have framed and thrown Millstones down from heaven upon all people, (as
he did upon those five Kings and their Armies in the days of Joshua, Josh.
10.11.) but Jerusalem again must be made the heavy stone for all people, that
whosoever shall offer to heave at it, and lift it up to carry it away, shall be
torn in pieces by it, though all the earth should be gathered together against
it. Zach. 12.3.

The Church of Rome indeed gapes after this privilege, and makes account, that
all Nations and Churches in the world that will not bow down and serve her,
and fall down and worship her, shall be destroyed, and imputes the fearful
desolation of the Grecian Churches, to that enmity against her, which they
profess to this day.

Fourthly, viz. in the nature of a Snare, that they may not fear, nor think
of destruction from it, till it be upon them; or that kind of destruction
which the Scripture usually calls, a being confounded. Behold all they that
provoke thee (says Esaias 41.11.) shall be ashamed and confounded. To be
confounded properly is this; when a man has been lifted up in great hopes, and
confidence of success, victory, and prevailing in any thing, and then on a
sudden, quite besides his expectation, is brought down, and falls upon
inevitable destruction, and knows not how to help himself.

And so the other word that is joined with it, of being ashamed, is a word of
like importance: we know it is not simply poverty, and want, and a mean
condition, that makes a man ashamed in the world, but only when it succeeds
riches, and plenty, and fullness. A poor man in the Country, that is borne
only to inherit the dust, that had never a good Coat on his back since he was
borne, he is not ashamed of a (...) walks, and holds up his head, and shows
his face before any man for all that; but take a Courtier, or a Merchant, or a
Citizen of best rank and quality, that have been clothed with fine linen, and
fared deliciously every day, that have not been seen but in soft raiment, in
Silk, in Silver, and Gold; if such a man shall be brought down to rags, and
have no better to put on but some course Mantle, or the like, this makes him
hold down his head, and ashamed to show his face to any that knows him. So
when the Lord says, that the enemies of his Church shall be ashamed, it
implies that they shall have a time granted them, wherein they shall flourish
like a green Bay tree, (which tastes not of Winter, as most trees besides do,
losing the beauty, and verdure, and comeliness of their leaves, which the Bay
tree does not) that they shall have a time, wherein they shall do, even what
they list in the world, (as David speaks Psalm. 73.7. etc.) or (as the
original has it) shall even pass the desires of the heart, that is, shall
have more power and authority, and glory in the world then they could well tell
what to do with, wherein they shall have the Saints of God, and the Church of
the most High under their feet, and shall throw down the foundations, and
shall see no man able to do any thing against them, able or likely to make
resistance. In this great prosperity of theirs, and poor and contemptible
condition of the Church before them, God lays the foundation and corner stone
of their shame and confusion, which otherwise (to speak properly) could not be
brought to pass.

And ^o those two similitudes (we opened out of Zach. 12.23.) whereby the Lord
represented unto us, how terms stand between his Church and the wicked, the
enemies of it in this point, viz. that the Church should certainly be the ruin
and confusion of the wicked, they both carry an intimatio^ of what I now speak
of, viz. that the Church shall be their destruction, in the nature of a Snare,
or in such a way, and at such a time, when they shall little fear it, or
expect it. Jerusalem shall be a cup of poison to all the people, i. e. when the
people shall think the Church fit to be devoured and swallowed up, and shall
think to have a very sweet and pleasant draught of it, that would do them good
at the heart, and breed the best blood that ever beat in their veins, it shall
prove a cup of poison and death to them: now poison we know (especially in a
cup) has the nature of a snare in it, men that drink it, are not aware of it;
if it be artificial and Italian right, it has neither smell nor color in it,
to cause any fear or jealousy at all in him that shall drink it, it shall
have the appearance, and smell, and manifest taste of Wine that is made by God
to strengthen man's heart; (as David speaks) and this poison God will put into
a cup too, the Church shall be a cup of poison, Jerusalem shall be made fit to
provoke the thirst of the enemy, to draw him on to take it, as Wine, or the
like is; when it is in a cup, for whilst it is in the vessel or hogshead, no
man offers to drink it there, this is not fit to be drunk, but out of cups or
glasses: So the Church, though it be at all times poison to the wicked and
enemies, if they shall drink it, yet is it not at all times a cup of poison to
them fit to be drunk, but only when the estate and condition of it is so low,
that there seems no danger at all in attempting the ruin, and desolation of
it; when the enemies conceive there is no more danger in destroying it, then a
man that is thirsty thinks there is in drinking a cup of Wine that stands
before him.

And so the other comparison, of making the Church a heavy stone, that shall
over-heare and tear in pieces him that shall offer to heave and lift it up,
falls this way also. He does not say, he would make Jerusalem a great stone,
but a heavy, or massy stone. We know the greatness or bigness of a stone may
be discerned by the eye, before a man tryes to lift it, and if it be a stone of
any extraordinary bigness, enough in appearance to load a Cart, or as big as
can well be forced or removed from place to place by an engine, a man, though
of great strength, will never try to lift it; not so much as a thought enters
into him of taking it upon his shoulder, to steal and carry it away: but the
heaviness of a stone is not so apparent, it is not known till a man taste it
with his arm or shoulder, or the like. Now the Church of God is sometimes a
great stone, the enemies have no great mind to be meddling with it, they have
no hope to heave it, there is a face of beauty, and glory, and strength upon
it, and then they make no great have to the spoil of it; but sometimes again,
the outward appearance and figure of this stone is quite changed and altered,
it seems to be brought to so small a size, that it may well be laden and
carried away; the enemies make no question but to build themselves houses with
it; but it is now as heavy and massy as ever, and will be the breaking in
pieces, and certain death of who ever shall offer to lift it up.

Fifthly therefore, at any time, when their wonted tokens are not to be seen; I
mean in respect of any favor or countenance he gives his Church in the eyes
of the world, to assist and strengthen the hand of it, there is no great cause
of fear for all this, as if the Church were now upon the point of perishing,
or sinking under water, because such a withdrawing as this from his Church, is
simply necessary for setting his Snare. The Church could not be a Gin to catch
the enemies of it in such a manner as is spoken of, except things were thus
carried in the wisdom and providence of God. If there were any visible beam
or glimmerings of the glorious Majesty of God amongst his people, his Church
might be to the world and enemies of it, as those figures and shapes of men
are, which husbandmen set up in their Corn to skare and keep vermin away, but
not to kill them. So, if the world saw or apprehended any thing to be afraid of
in the Church, (as any outward testimony of the presence of God must needs be,
that falls within the reach of their understandings) this might bind the world
to some terms of good behavior toward them, this might keep violence, and
oppression, and injury from off them, it might keep down desires within them of
doing them harm. But when men set Gins or Snares to be the death of Birds of
Prey, Vermin, Beasts, or the like, every man conveyes himself out of sight as
much as may be, and they leave nothing at all, not so much as the appearance of
a man, that looks like a man, or any part of him, but only the bait as naked
as may be, and the snare covered; otherwise, this would make the Vermin
suspect and keep away.

So the Lord intending to make the Church a snare for the wicked and wretched
enemies of it, he must wholly withdraw himself, and hide himself in some secret
place, where they may not discry him, nor yet suspect him, that so being drawn
on by their cursed hungring and thirsting after the blood of the Church, the
Lion may take his advantage, and break out of the thicket upon them, and tear
them in pieces suddenly. The truth is, that all holy and consecrate things are
snares to the wicked, (as the Scripture speaks it in a particular case Prove.
20.25. Ier. 2.2.) but there is a greater generality of the truth of it. It is a
snare to a man to devour that which is holy. His intent is not only (nor, as I
take it, so much) to express the danger a man falls upon when he has
devoured, that then he shall pay dear for it, but further, and more
principally to intimate this, that things that are sanctified and set apart to
God, are in men's way (as it were) where they may easily, and without any
visible danger come at them, and that there are few that will take heed of
devouring them, whether they be persons, or things. As snares are not only
intended to be the destruction of Vermin, when they fall into them or upon
them, but they are set in the way where they are likely to come, and make most
bold, etc.

just causes of fear to such as are the People of God, and have interest in
God. Their hearts may be lifted up within them to their destruction, as it is
said of Vzziah when he was waxen strong, and great in power, 2 Chronicles. 26.16.

When the Jews at Nazareth ( Luke 4.29.) had thrust our Savior out of their
City, and had gotten him to the edge or brow of the hill, whereon their City
was built, thinking to have made quick dispatch of him, to have thrown him
down headlong, it is said, He passed through the midst of them, and went his
way: he was as secure, and never a whit the nearer death when he was upon the
very brow and brinke of the hill, then when he was a mile off in a plain and
safe place.

So we are to conceive of the State of the Church, that it is never the nearer
destruction, for being near to destruction, Luke 12.6 Dan. 4.11.
(as we count nearness) for God may be as far from giving his voice and
consent for the desolation and destruction of it, as at other times, when there
is less danger in appearance: and we know there is nothing done without him.
If a Sparrow falls not to the ground without our heavenly father, (as Christ
spoke) without him, that is, except he orders and disposes of the silly Bird
accordingly, which yet is of so little worth, that five of them are bought for
two farthings: How shall we think that the Church of God, which could not be
bought at any under rate, then the precious blood of the Son of God, should
fall to the ground without the special hand of God; yea, either without it, or
with it? For, as it is altogether impossible it should fall without it, so is
it very incredible it should fall with it. But though it be as possible for a
particular Church to fall to the ground by the hand of God, as it is for a
poor Sparrow: yet except there be a voice from heaven calling to men on earth,
to hew down the tree of it, and break off the branches, (as Daniels
expression is in another case) it is not Edoms crying out, Down with it, down
with it, even to the ground: this will not do it, nor bring it ever a whit the
lower. Though they should get all the Carpenters, and Smiths, and all the world
together about the Church, and every man stand ready with their Axes sharpened
seven times more keen and sharp then ordinary; yet shall the tree stand in the
sight of them all, and laugh the workmen and instruments to scorn in the face.

When the enemies of the Church have gotten the greatest advantage against it
that can be supposed, yet is the Church no more nearer perishing, or falling,
then the salvation of the world was in danger of miscarrying, when Jesus Christ
hung upon the Cross, or lay in the Grave: The powers of darkness had him at
the greatest advantage, at the lowest ebb that ever they had, or are ever like
to have him more. True, he upon whom the hope of the world depended, was then
at the lowest step of his humiliation, he was fully emptied, and had nothing
left: But he went down so low, only to take his rise (as it were) to mount up
the higher and to carry all up on high with him: and he was never nearer his
exaltation, nor the world its salvation, then when he lay at the lowest point
of his humiliation.

Such is the condition of the Church, it is never nearer the glory, and beauty,
and full strength of it, then when it seems to be most forsaken of God. As
Christ was then ready (and never till then) to enter into Paradise, when he
cried out, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? Ought not Christ to
suffer (says he himself) and so immediately and without delay, upon his
sufferings, to enter into his glory? So when the Church is readiest to cry out,
and complain of being forsaken, this complaint and cry is the greatest sign of
the time of the Churches Paradise at hand. Our Savior himself has given us
this sign, and therefore it is a foundation that will bear a building of
greater weight and worth then a conjecture or a hopeful probability of such a
thing; you may cast your souls upon it, and not fear. When the Son of man
comes, viz. to avenge his People and Church of their enemies, Shall he find
Faith upon earth? (Luke 18.8.) that is, amongst those servants of his, for
whose deliverance he comes; for as for any others upon earth, this faith of his
coming, is neither to be found then when he comes, nor at any time else, in
them.

CAP. IX. Wherein the Doctrine is applied to the enemies of the Church, by way
of Exhortation.
A Fourth (and last) Use is for Exhortation.

First, the People of God themselves, that make this Church of God, and
accordingly have their interest in God.

Secondly, the wicked, that are enemies of the Church and People of God,
whether openly, or professedly such, or only secretly and under hand.

First, to dispatch with the latter, because I hope there are few of that brood
in presence, (if any) especially for Heads and Captains of that cursed
confederacy, with whom (especially) matters of this nature would be transacted
and negotiated. I cannot conceive there should be any of these before me, and
therefore the work of our Exhortation to these shall be the fewer; and then we
shall be free to converse with the first, the Church and People of God, with
whom we desire chiefly to have to do in our present Exhortation.

First therefore, if the Church and People of God stand really possessed of
that high privilege and prerogative Royal, (that has been spoken of) if
they have indeed that interest in the Lord Almighty, in his Mercy, Wisdom,
Power, with all the rest of his glorious perfections (as has been proved) then
hear all you that are enemies to the People of the God of Abraham, you that
either cry out with Edom, or speak it in your hearts with Sanballat, Tobiah,
and such like underhand enemies of the Church of God, Down with it, down with
it, even to the ground; let this generation, I say, hear from all the ends of
the earth, and suffer two words of Exhortation.

First, be exhorted and persuaded to lay aside all thoughts of violence, to let
fall all your desires and purposes of ev^^ against the generation of the
righteous, so greatly beloved on high, have nothing to do with these men in a
way of hatred, and contradiction. Break your Swords into Mattocks, and your
Spears into Sithes, and lift not up a Sword against this Nation, neither
accustom your selves to fight against them any more. Suffer them to pass
peaceably, and safely through your Land (if the earth be yours, but indeed it
is theirs) toward their own Country, their heavenly Canaan. If the motion do
not yet relish, and savor kindly with you, let me season it with a few
considerations, and motives; it may be then it will be found savoury meat unto
you, such as your souls will love.

First, your selves to be provoked and enraged by the cursed and common enemy,
both yours and theirs, the devil: These men (I say) have interest in heaven,
and are the Children, the Sons and Daughters of the Almighty; they are a people
confederate with the great and terrible Lord of Hosts, they are (...)(as they
are called) a peculiar People unto him, or (as the word signifies) they are a
People, more then a People, as John Baptist is said (by our Savior) to be a
Prophet, yea, and more then a Prophet. Shall any man (but such as love death,
and seek their own destruction and confusion, as a treasure) rise up against
these, or offer to lay their hand upon these anointed ones? Is it because
there is no other way that leads to destruction? As the People in their
murmurings against Moses, reasoned with him; Have thou brought us to die in the
Wilderness, because there were no Graves in Egypt? meaning there was
Grave-room enough in the Wilderness, but nothing else. ( Ex. 14.11.)

So let me reason the case with those men that will needs magnify themselves
(as the Scriptures speak) against this heritage of the Lord. Is it because
they think no other sin, no other way of wickedness against God, that will
bring vengeance and damnation swift enough upon their heads, unless they
provoke him in his holy ones? Know they not how to provoke the Lord to anger to
purpose, by striking at him in other places, except they smite him in the face?
Nay, except they level and aim at the very apple of his eye, which is the
tenderest part in the face? There is no Child of God, but may speak it as
truly, as the Wisdom or Truth of God it self does, ( Prove. 8.35.) He that
sins against me, hurts his own soul, and all that hate me, love death:
they love death, i. e. if death were a thing to be loved and desired, men could
take no way more ready and certain to obtain it, then by hating the Wisdom,
(and let me put in also) then by hating the Children, and People of God. What?
Is that man of sin, and all his confederates with him, all that have been
baptized in the spirit of that fornication, are they afraid and of doubtful
and deliberative thoughts, whether all their other sins and abominations
(wherein notwithstanding, they are mighty men, like the sons of Anak of old,
and other sinners in the world of ordinary stature are but Grasshoppers to them)
do they indeed question, whether all their other sins be able to bring down
that great Mountain of their power? is it made so strong, that unless they
drink also freely of the blood of the Saints, they are afraid that God
otherwise should pass them over, and forget them, when he comes to take
vengeance of the world? Are they afraid they shall perish and be destroyed, but
after the common manner of other men, and that their destruction shall not come
upon them with a sufficient glory of terror and astonishment, or (as Esaies
expression is) like a destruction from the Almighty, Esaias 13.6.
except they make havoc in the Lords heritage? Do they know that this is a
sin by it self, for the purpose, that will swell and be seen in their
destruction above all their other sins? Do they think they shall never have
their cup full of the fury and indignation of the Almighty, except they provoke
him in his Saints?

Surely (my Brethren) the tenor and proceedings of their malice, and hatred
against the servants of the living God, and glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ:
Their Faggots, their Fires, their Swords, their Poisons, their Whips, their
Ships, their Vaults, their Powder, their Billets, their Bars, these and such
like strange things and doings of theirs, being interpreted in the plain
language which the Scripture speaks, are as much as to say, we would not
fall, or be destroyed after the dull manner of other Kingdoms of the earth: we
would have the day of our vengeance celebrated with more solemnity of horror;
we shall not be satisfied with our destruction, except the powers of heaven and
earth be shaken together at the terror of it. If such a desire were indeed and
in truth to be found in these men, and in their religion, if it were a real
design and project amongst them, to procure another hell to be created for
them, by themselves, beneath the nethermost hell that is now extant, wherein
they might have more cruel tormentors then devils, a more horrid Lake then
that which burns with Fire and Brimstone, a darkness blacker then utter
darkness, a Worm that shall gnaw with greater extremity then that which never
dies, a Fire that shall burn with more pain and torture then that which is
unquenchable, where weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth should be but
pleasure and recreation: They could not furnish themselves with any other
means under heaven, more suitable and better proportioned to bring such a thing
to pass, then to set themselves in that desperate and implacable manner, as
they do, to fall upon the rereward of the Hosts of heaven (for so may the
Saints on earth be well termed: they are called Angels in the Revelation, for
that communion and fellowship they have with the Angels, in fighting Christ's
battles here beneath) then by seeking to root out the generation of the
righteous from under heaven, then by grieving and afflicting the souls that
have that precious interest in God. This is one consideration or motive to
press the Exhortation upon the enemy.

persuade the enemies of the Church of God to stay their hands, and to give
over that service of the devil, persecuting Saints, may be this: because it is
a work that never prospered in the hands of any, from the beginning of the
world till this day: but still has been a work, like the Land of Canaan, as
the spies described it to the people, ( Number. 13.32.) that eats up the
Inhabitants of it. So this work of persecuting the Church and Children of God,
has ever been a work and employment that has been the ruin and destruction
of the doers of it. Yea, the sharpest and sorest contentions that ever fell
between heaven and earth, between God and the men of this world, have still
risen about injuries and violence offered to his Church. This apple of Gods eye
has cost the world dear: The touching of it has cost the blood of the
greatest Monarchs, of many Kings and Princes of the earth. It has cost whole
Monarchies, Kingdoms, and States, the greatest, the richest, the strongest
that ever the world saw, their whole Estates, Riches, Glory, and Peace. True,
we read often of the jealousy of God over his great name, in respect of any
pollutions, and profanation of it by other sins; but we do not read of his
great jealousy, but only for, and over Jerusalem, his Church: but as
concerning the case of Jerusalem, we read of it twice in the same Prophet,
Zach. 1.14.8.2. As if God had a jealousy, and a jealousy, a twofold
jealousy, a double, and a single, a greater, and a less; and the lesser
jealousy he puts on, and arms himself with, when he went forth to execute
vengeance for other sins; but when he sets forth against the enemies of his
Church, when he comes to plead Jerusalems cause with her adversaries, his
double jealousy now went on, his great jealousy was reserved for causes of
this nature, as of highest and greatest importance for his glory. Yea, I shall
say yet more, that when men have put forth their hands to this work, I mean
to afflict the Church of God, upon the fairest terms, upon greatest advantage,
or likelihood that can be conceived, of doing any good upon it, and making
earnings of it: I mean when they have seemed in doing it, even to give the
right hand of fellowship to God himself, when he has begun to punish them,
yet did never any man come off fairly from the work; God still found
something or other against those that were his workmen and executioners, which
made a breach between him and them: they never eat of their labors, nor ever
rejoiced in any of these works of their hand, seldom any of their heads went
down in peace to their Graves.

An instance hereof we may see in the Egyptians (according to the Lords own
prediction long before, how it would fall out) Know for a surety, says the
Lord to Abraham, (Genesis 15.13, 14.) that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land
that is not theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four
hundred years: notwithstanding the Nation whom they shall ferve, will I judge,
etc. And that God did not only foresee and foretell this, that the Israelites
should serve the Egyptians, and be in bondage, but that himself had a
special hand in it, in bringing it to pass; it is evident from Psalm. 105.25.
where it is said, that God turned their heart ( i. e. the heart of the
Egyptians) to hate his people, and to deal craftily with his servants:
because they began now to be corrupted in Egypt, and to displease him; God
took off the good will and the affections of the Egyptians from them: and yet
we know how dear the Egyptians paid for that work and service the Israelites
did them; they had better have given double and treble wages to other men to
have made their Bricks, then to have the people of God make them for nothing.

Other instances of like nature you may find in Scripture, Esa. 36.20
if you read Psalm. 78.61.2. with Psalm. 65.8. you shall find a passage of like
importance. Rabsheka (it is like) lied, or at least spoke upon a groundless
presumption, viz. (because till then he had prospered) when he told Hezekia's
messengers, that he was not come against Jerusalem without the Lord (God had
said to him, destroy it.) But in Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, the case is
plain, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. it is said expressly, that God brought upon them the
King of the Caldeans: yet if you read Ier. 50.17, 18. (besides many other
places) you shall find he had his wages paid him in sorrow and desolation.
Israel is scattered as Sheep, the Lions have driven him away. First, the King
of Assyria has devoured him, and last, this Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon
has broken his bones. Therefore says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
Behold, I will punish the King of Babylon, and his Land, as I have punished the
King of Assyria, etc. So Judges 3.12. you may read the like of Eglon King of
Moab; it is expressly said, that God strengthened his hand against Israel, etc.
yet we know this meddling with Israel was his ruin.

As for example, of the just vengeance and fiery indignation of the Lord
breaking out, upon those, who without any warrant, or commission from him, have
evil entreated, despitefully used, oppressed, and persecuted the Church of
God, these both in sacred Records, and other Histories of the Church, are
without end or number. There is not only a Cloud of such witnesses, but the
whole heaven is spread over with them, and diverse of them known unto all men;
So that it would be but time lost to produce them.

Therefore now I beseech you consider, you that are enemies of the truth, that
have imbittered spirits against the holy City and Church of God, consider and
ponder with your selves the truth and weight of this motive. There was no man
ever spread a snare, to take the People of God with, but first or last, if he
continued his malice, his own foot was taken with it. No man ever dug a Pit
for such, but fell himself into it; no man ever attempted mischief against it,
and continued in it, but it still returned upon him, and fell on his own pate,
(as David speaks.) It was the argument the Lord Jesus Christ himself used to
Paul, when he took him hard at this work, busy in persecuting the Saints,
and meant to take him off from it: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? (Act.
9.5.) It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, (...), against sharp
pointed Irons, as Goads, or Nails have: teaching, that a man cannot lift up
his hand or heel against the meanest of the servants of God, but with as much
folly and madness, and with as little hope of doing themselves good, as he
that shall stand chopping and dashing his naked hands or feet against the
sharpest points of weapons or instruments made of Steel, or Iron. Pilates
wives argument that she used to take of her husband, from having any thing
further to do against Christ, was, that she had suffered many things that day
in a dream, by reason of him, Mat. 27.19.

But the argument wherewith the Holy Ghost now presses upon you, to have no
more to do against these men, is of greater efficacy: not only one woman has
suffered many things in a dream, but a thousand thousands, both men and women,
whole Nations, and Kingdoms, and States, (as was said) Kings and Princes, and
mighty ones of the earth, have suffered really, full waking, in deed and in
truth, the soarest and most grievous destructions, the most fierce, fiery, and
horrid judgments that the world has seen.

To let all other instances pass; only to mention that fiery storm and
tempest, which was the portion of those wretches to drink, whose works and
wages together, occasioned the solemnity of this day. Is not the Lord known by
executing judgment? were not these wicked ones snared in the works of their
own hands? (as David speaks, Psalm. 9.16.) Are they not perished as dung from
the face of the earth? Was not that stone they heaved and listed at, to have
removed out of its place, too heavy for them? did it not recoile upon them, and
crush them to pieces? There wanted nothing that can be imagined, that might
cause the devise to prosper in their hands. It was a design and project in all
the parts and members of it, so framed and fashioned, with that exquisiteness
of cunning and circumspection; that for a design, it was in the eyes of those
that beheld it, as beautiful as Absolon is said to have been, 2 Samuel 14.25.
From the sole of his foot, to the top of his head, (says the Text) there was
no blemish in him. There was nothing to be found about it, that fear or
jealousy it self could take hold of, but that it would bring forth, it would
do the deed. Surely the Authors of it were as much taken with the beauty and
comeliness of it, as Nebuchadnezzar was with that golden Image he set up in
the plain of Dura; they fell down before it, and even worshipped it. What is
the matter then, how came it to pass, or what strange thing was there in it,
that it proved like Corn upon the house top, that it did not fill the bosom
of the Actors and Authors of it? Why did it not make the Popes triple Crown to
flourish? Why did it not raise the glory and name of the Popish Religion up to
the heavens? Me thinks I may speak to it after such a manner, as David spoke
to, and expostulates the matter with the red Sea, and the River Jordan, and the
Mountains, and the Hills, What ailest thee thou Sea, Psalm. 114.5, 6.
that thou fleddest? Thou Jordan, that thou wastdriven back? Ye Mountains
that ye leaped like Raws? and ye little Hills as young Sheep? (q.d.) Surely
there was some strange thing in all this, that creatures should so far forget
their natures, as that the Waters in the Sea should forsake their Channel, the
Waters in Rivers should run backwards, the Mountains and the Hills (that are
so fast rooted in the earth) that these should skip and leap like Sheep.

So must I expostulate the matter with this deep project, I cannot be satisfied
without it; we must know the mystery of the thing; What ayledst thou, thou
profound, desperate, powder-project, that thou broughtest nothing to pass?
What so many Barrels of Gunpowder, so many Bars of Iron, so many Loades of
Billets, so many roodes of Faggots, such a Vault, so many politic Heads in
thee, so many hands about thee night and day, so many prayers made over thee,
and nothing of moment, no great, or terrible thing done, no Kingdomen brought
to ruin, no Nation troubled, the peace of no people disturbed? What? the
Gospel of Jesus Christ still alive in the world, and professors of it
rejoicing? What ayledst thee, thou Vault, thou Gunpowder, you Bars of Iron,
you Billets of wood, you Heads, you Hands, that you shook not the world round
about you? that you turned not three Kingdoms (at least) upside down? Have you
forgotten to be mischievous, to tear, to kill, to ruin, to destroy, to work
desolation upon the earth? Certainly it was as contrary to the nature and
spirit that wrought in this project, not to have brought all this to pass, as
it was either for the Sea to flee, or for Jordan to run back, or for the
mountains to leap, or for the Hills to skip. But David by putting this
question upon these poor creatures, to make them assoile their own riddles,
did but only (by a sweet Metaphorical strain) prepare the way, to set off
his own answer with the more grace and advantage. He did not expect they
should answer him to his question, but he answers himself, and tells us, what
the Sea, and what the Rivers, and what the Mountains, and what the Hills ayled.
ver. 7. The earth trembled at the presence of the Lord; at the presence of the
God of Jacob: that was all the ailment they had. The Sea would have done as
other Seas do, and Jordan would have kept on his course as other Rivers do,
and the Mountains would have stood as fast, and the Hills been as quiet, as
other Mountains and Hills use to be, but that the dreadful presence of God
was amongst them, they would not have denied themselves in such a manner, nor
gone out of their way, for all the world besides: So, if you would know what
this project of hell ayled, what was the disease and infirmity of it, that
according to the nature of it, it did not shake the foundations of our Land,
that it did not astonish all hearts, and make all hands hang down, and knees
feeble, that it did not bring a day of darkness upon the Church and people of
God, and the Gospel amongst us; in a word, it was only this, it was a devise
against the Lord, and against his Church, and People; And we know the Scripture
says, that there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the
Lord, nor any enchantment against Jacob, nor soothsaying against Israel, Prove.
21.31. Nam. 23.23. i. e. Both wisdom, and counsel, and enchantments, projects
from the earth, and projects from hell, they are not themselves, they lose
their proper virtue and operation, when they are bent against the Lord and
against his people: They will deal in this case with the Authors of them, as
Balaam served Balak; Balak sent for him and hired him, to curse the people of
God, but he blessed them altogether; So the policy and wisdom that were in
this plot, the Vault, the Powder, the Bars, the Billets, the Faggots, these
were all hired to curse the Church and People of God amongst us, and behold,
they have blessed us altogether. They have filled our mouths with laughter
this day, and are a song of praise, and thanksgiving in our mouths to the Name
of our God.

If such a project had been managed against Babylon, or the enemies of God,
there it is like, every creature, every instrument about it would have done its
part, Wisdom would have been wisdom, and Policy have been policy, the Powder
would have been ready to have fired alone, and Bars of Iron would have torn
all in pieces. There is no presence of God for these creatures to fear and
tremble at; and for the presence of any other, they would not regard it. As we
see by that one creature, the Powder, that when there was none in presence, but
of those bloody wretches; (though it was not managed against them, by any hand
or understanding of man, nay, (on the contrary) it was (as it were) charged to
do them no harm, there was their own eye and care upon it, that it should
not offend them) yet on the sudden, remembering it self (as it were) it took
fire and destroyed them.

So that (me thinks) this fiery Element of Powder spoke to, and dealt between
them (these Popish miscreants) and us, the Church of God amongst us, much after
the same manner as the evil spirit mentioned ( Acts 19.15.) both spoke and
dealt by those Vagabond Jews, those Exorcists, in respect of Jesus, and Paul.
When these Exorcists adjured this evil spirit, by Jesus, whom Paul preached,
the spirit answered and said to them, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who
are ye? And the man (says the Text) in whom the evil spirit was, ran on them,
and they fled out of the house, naked and wounded. So when these Popish
Exorcists had adjured and charged the Powder to do execution upon this
Kingdom, and State, professing the truth and Gospel of Jesus Christ, the
Powder made them answer; The State and Church of England, I know, the servants
of the living God. I know, those that worship the Lord Christ in Spirit and
truth, I know; I have nothing to do with these, I can do nothing against
them; but who are you, you cursed enemies of truth, and Church of God? I owe
you no such service. Therefore look to your selves, and keep out of the dint
of my fiery Whirlewinde. Otherwise your flesh will be before me, but as stubble
before the wind: I will devour you. But this for the second motive, to
persuade enemies to desist; it is a work that never has, (and therefore
certainly never will) prosper, but only to destruction of the workers
themselves.

A third motive follows. Let this consideration also prevail with the enemies
of the Church, to cause them to cease from the violence that is in their hand
against it; because this Church of God, and the members of it, whom they
persecute, living amongst them in the world, are the rock (as it were) upon
which their City is built; they are the foundations of all the peace, and all
the pleasure, and all the contentments they enjoy upon earth: these are the
partition wall between them and hell for the time. These are the Chariots and
Horsemen for defense and faseguard of their States and Lives against the fury
and indignation of the Lord, which otherwise would break in upon them, and
consume them in a moment. The great Master householder of this great house, the
world, would soon break up house if his own Children were once disposed of in
marriage, to their great husband. If these were once settled in their
inheritance the wicked would soon (with Judas) be packed away, and sent every
man to his own place. When God shall once speak, come ye blessed; depart ye
cursed, follows presently sently after it: The Chafe is not in danger of
burning, as long as it lies in the same heap; intermixed with the Wheat: but if
the Wheat be once divided by it self from it, then it is near the burning with
unquenchable fire.

It is true, that which our Savior says, Mat. 5.45. God makes his Sun to
arise upon the evil, and the good, but with this interpretation, and in this
order, (as one glosseth the place well) he makes the Sun to arise upon the
evil and the good, but upon the evil, for the goods sake. And that manner of
speaking (I take it) is much to be noted, where it is said that God makes his
Sun to rise upon evil and good. (q. d.) If God himself did not mediate and
interpose with a strong hand, between that glorious creature of his, the Sun,
and evil and wicked men, they would never agree for an hour together, the Sun
being once set, would never rise upon such men again. There is a natural
unwillingnesse and gainsaying in the whole Creation, in the Heavens, Sun,
Moon, and Stars, to do any service to, or to gratify wicked men, that are
enemies to God, though otherwise it be most agreeable to their particular
natures, to give forth their light, and influences to the world, and they may
seem to rejoice (as it were) and triumph to do it: yet since man rebelled
against God, that created him, through that natural sympathy they have with
God and his glory, there is an utter averseness and unwillingnesse upon them,
even to do that office and service to the world, for which they were created,
and are able freely to afford without any offense, hinderance, or prejudice to
themselves otherwise. But that which is their glory, their excellent light and
luster, and those heavenly influences they give down, upon the world, in this
respect is not their glory, but a grief and burden upon them, to pleasure the
enemies of God with them, and to strengthen their hand: as if through a zeal
they have to Gods glory, they would rather lose their being, though excellent,
and glorious, then to remain and continue doing service to his enemies. So
that, did not God overruled them in the thing by a strong hand, the Sun would
presently clothe himself with a sackcloth, the Moon would give over shining,
and the Stars would fall out of their place in heaven, rather then shine here
to pleasure the enemies of their God.

This I rather take to be the meaning of that place, Romans 8.20. Because the
creature is subject to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him, that
has subdued it under hope. That vanity whereunto the creature is said to be
here subject, is not to be understood of a vanity of corruption properly so
called, or dissolution, for it is a great question whether it be at all subject
to this vanity or no, whether in the heavens (which are the principal parts of
the creature) there shall be any such change that shall answer the death and
dissolution of man. It is hard to conceive, how the heavens should be invested
with a condition more glorious, and excellent, then that wherein they now
stand; which seems necessary to be held, and to be believed, if we hold any
such change coming upon them, answerable to death. What God is able to do in
this case, we do not here dispute, or deny.

And again secondly, vanity, the holy Ghost should here mean, I suppose the
Apostle would never have mentioned that circumstance, as a matter so weighty
and worthy of consideration, that it should be contrary to the will of it. For,
who knows not that corruption and destruction is contrary to the natural
desire and inclination of any thing whatsoever? therefore those words would
taste too flat and dry for the wisdom of the holy Ghost, if such a sense were
admitted.

Thirdly, from the subjection whereof the creature desires even for the
present, and that with fervency, to be free, and to be delivered, ver. 19. Now
from the vanity of corruption properly so called, it cannot be delivered, but
by undergoing and suffering corruption first; and so it would follow, that the
fervent desire of the creature, should be unto dissolution and corruption,
though not as the end, yet as the means: whereas we know corruption in that
sense, whether considered as end, or means, is contrary to the desire, much
more the fervent desire of every creature. Therefore the vanity whereunto the
creature is here said to be subject, and to be subdued unto, viz. by the
overruling hand and power of God, seems rather to be meant of a vanity in
their service and labor, implying that they do otherwise then they have a
mind to do, or then stands with their own inclination: and so it is to be
taken rather for a vanity of sorrow, then of mutability, which is called a
bondage of corruption, ( ver. 21.) either because to be thus subdued and held
to it by God, to serve his enemies, it is to the creature as unpleasant and
bitter, as a bondage unto corruption, or because such a subjection does stain
and corrupt the glory of the creature. (Notwithstanding it is the pleasure of
God so to have it for a season, and in respect of that hope God has given it,
that it shall shortly be delivered, the creature is well content with it, it is
no vanity to it, in either of these respects.)

Now if question be made, Wherefore does God subdue the creature to vanity (in
this sense) and compells it to serve and comfort wicked and sinful men: One
maine reason is this. It is because God has yet many of his Children upon the
way of their Pilgrimage in the world amongst them, and he has more to succeed
them for a while. But if these were once all through the Wilderness of this
world, and entered into their glorious rest, God would deliver the creature
from the bondage mentioned: it shall no more minister to the children of
disobedience, but shall be restored into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God, it shall be as free from serving sinful men, as these in the state of the
Resurrection, shall be free from obeying any sinful corruption.

Therefore those that seek to take away the lives of the Saints of God, they
make the foundations of the round world, to reele, and totter, and stagger, and
attempt to shake the pillars of heaven and earth. They do, as if a man should
undermine, and dig down the foundations of the house he dwells in, to cause it
to fall on his head, and those that were with him. We see whilst Lot was in
Sodom, Genesis 9.22
Sodom was in Lot, (i. e.) the safety and peace of Sodom was in Lot: I can
do nothing (says the Angel to him, meaning toward the destruction of the
City) till thou be gone out of it, and have taken Sanctuary. Now suppose the
men of the City had persecuted Lot, and thrust him out of their City before
this (as words brake out that way; they were talking of such a matter, ver. 9.)
had not the storm and tempest of the fiery indignation of the Lord, come
swifter upon them then it did? Except those days were shortened (says our
Savior of the troubles of Jerusalem) no flesh could be saved, but for the
Elects sake these days shall be shortened. Mat. 24.22.

On the contrary, concerning the mercies and good things wicked men enjoy in
this world, except these days were lengthened and prolonged, there could none
of these mercies be enjoyed: but for the elect and righteous men's sakes, these
days are lengthened unto them. And therefore the Prophet Esaias makes a solemn
and sad observation upon it, that righteous men should perish, and so few
consider it, and lay it to heart, Esaias 57.1. The righteous perishes, and no
man lays it to heart, etc. as if it were a thing of near concernment, and to
be taken much to heart, when a righteous member is cut off from the body of any
State, or Society of men: and yet of the two, it is a thing much more to be
laid to heart, that such a righteous man should be thrust our, by men
themselves, from amongst them, or lose his life by their hand, then if God
should take him away by death; It is true in both cases, it is likely he is
taken away from the evil to come; but in the former, when men destroy the
righteous from amongst them, the evil to come, is like to come both more
suddenly, and more heavily upon those that are left. Therefore they that
persecute the Saints of God, they call for fire (as it were) down from heaven,
upon their own heads; they put a sword into the Lords hand wherewith to slay
them. If that Scarlet Whore of Rome had been, or ever should be able to
perform, the devise she imagined, and yet imagines daily, to root out all the
holy Seed, the whole family that is descended of Jesus Christ in all the world,
so that she had left none but her own adulterous generation to possess the
earth, she might then think indeed that she sat like a Queen; but the truth
is, she should have prevented her judgment and torments so much the sooner;
She had but brought the fear and dread of the devil, which was, To be
tormented before his time, so much the more speedily upon his own head.
Suppose the Lord had given us up into their bloody hands, (which yet we and our
posterity shall have cause to bless him so long as the Sun and Moon
indures, that it was far from all his thoughts to do) but put case (I say)
that she had been let alone, with State, People, Gospel, Religion, that she
might have done with all these, as it is said, the Jews did by John the
Baptist, Mat. 17.12
even what she list, that she had triumphed in that fatal blow: for ought that
she knew or was aware of, she might have shaken the foundations of her own
Mountains, and have caused her Sun to have set over her head, even at noone
days: she might have thundered, even the Lord Jesus Christ out of heaven, to
have taken speedy vengeance upon those that would bring up hell from beneath,
upon the face of the earth, and that had destroyed out of the world the beauty
and glory of it.

Fourthly, The generation of the righteous, and their ways are just, and holy,
and good, therefore whoever shall touch any of these, to do them any harm, to
afflict, or bring evil upon them, cannot be innocent, but injustice and
violence will be found in his hands.

Many of those that are the sourest enemies of the Church, and that bear a
tyrannical and inveterate hatred against the Saints, are men, that for Moral
honesty and Justice, stand upon terms of honor and reputation, and think it
their great glory that they wash their hands in cleaner innocence then other
men. Decius and Trajan, two of the best and most moderate, and just Emperors
otherwise, raised as cruel storms of persecution against Christians, as
others that were seven times more loose and brutish. So you may observe many
amongst us, that stand strictly upon a straightness and rectitude of Moral
honesty, and doing no man wrong, that will tithe Mint, and Anise, and Cummin,
very truly and exactly, who yet carry the gall of Aspes under their lips, to
cast it forth upon the Children of God when they see their time, and are
always in travel of mischief against them.

Those high Priests and Pharisees, that hunted after the precious life of our
Savior, were men that began to expostulate with Pilate the Governor, and to
take it ill at his hands, that he would not so far honor and adore their
integrity and uprightness, as to proceed against Christ as an evil doer,
without knowing any other ground, why he should proceed against him, but only
because such honest and just men as they, had delivered him unto him. Pilate
then went out, and said, What accusation bring you against this man? They
answered and said unto him; If he were not an evil doer, we would not have
delivered him up unto thee, John 18.29, 30. And it may be these very bloody
thoughts and purposes of such men against the Gospel, may be a bridle in the
jaws of their unrighteous and base dispositions, and lust otherwise, and keep
them from any notorious breaking out in other cases: They may by this means,
the better color over, and cover with a Cloak of civil honesty, the
foulness of their hatred and malicious practices against holy men.

I remember, one observes well, how the Roman State of old labored to shadow
and hide from the view of the world (as well as they could) a foul and base
practice of theirs. They had an evil eye upon Ptolomies great wealth and
treasury (as they had heard it to be) and they knew not well how, or upon what
pretense to invade and seize upon it, because Ptolomy was a friend and
confederate with their State: Friend or foe, they were resolved not to lose
such a booty, and because they would put the best face upon the business they
could, they made Cato, who was the great Patron of Justice in their State, to
be the Pablicus Praedo, to be the great thief that should make the spoil for
them, Vt summa turpitudo facti, authoritate viri aliquantulum tegeretur, (says
my Author) That the notorious baseness of the fact might be a little
overshadowed by the credit and authority of the man that was the principal
actor in it.

So I verily believe that the desires and intentions that many men have, to
oppress the Church of God, and to root out the holy Seed from the earth, and
to do it in a more creditable way, that they might be thought to do nothing
but that which is just and right, and be countenanced by the world in their
deed, keeps many in awe, from breaking out into many other base and notorious
practices. Who knows whether those two thiefes should have been crucified and
put to death at all (but especially at that time, when our Savior was
crucified) had it not been to make a pretense, and bear the world in hand,
that there was the same justice and equity used in crucifying him in the midst,
that was in putting to death those on either hand? But not to stand further
upon this.

Therefore now, let such men as either intend or practice evil against the
Church of God, or any member of it, if they be worshippers of the goddess
Civil justice, let them know and consider that they shall but blaspheme this
goddess of theirs, by attempting any thing against these men; in stead of
washing their hands in innocence, they shall now wash them in innocent blood.
For these are men that live peaceably by them, and do them no harm, they take
no man's Ox, nor Ass from them, they are no enemies to the Civil peace, and
society of men; they are no disturbers of the public affairs of States and
Kingdoms: Nay, they pray for the People and State wheresoever they live; and
they have intelligence with heaven, with the King of kings, who makes earthly
Crowns to flourish upon the heads of Princes, and who watches over Kingdoms
and Nations for good, for the wealth and peace of the places where they live.

Therefore let their enemies know (whoever they be) that they cannot but be
unrighteous, and unjust in all their practices against them; Have thou nothing
to do with that just man, (says Pilates wife to him) It is a terrible thing
to measure out unrighteous and hard measure to him that is just. It is reported
by some, that the Jews till this day impute that grievous judgment of God
that has lain so heavy upon their Nation, for so many generations, from the
destruction of their City, Temple, and State, to the death of Simeon the just.
They may truly impute it to the death and murder of one that was just indeed.
But him they shall not acknowledge to be just till the time comes, wherein they
shall see him whom they have pierced.

When Stephen sought to aggravate the sin of those that put Christ to death,
and to represent it unto their consciences in the full proportion of it, that
they might the more easily apprehend it, and consider of it, he calls them the
murderers, and betrayers of that just One. Acts 7.52. And Peter in like manner
says, Act. 3.14.
Ye denied the holy One, and just, and desired a murderer to be given unto
you; which shows that the consideration of the justness, and righteousness in
those men whom they do oppress, and seek to destroy, is an argument most
likely to affect the hearts, work upon the consciences of wicked men; Know ye
not (says Paul 1 Cor. 6.9.) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? As if it were a sin of all others, most apparently
incompatible and inconsistent with the love and favor of God, even in the
judgment and conscience of natural men.

And to draw the point a little to the present occasion; those Children of the
curse, that thought to have undermined the foundations both of the Religion and
People of God, in the Land, at once, and to have turned up all by the roots;
that thought to have blasted that glory and beauty of the Land with the black
breath of their displeasure; doubtless if they had but looked the Religion and
Men in the faces, against whom they were drawing such an arrow as that was,
their bow would have fallen out of their hand at their feet: they could never
have been able (...), to look their own hellish project in the face, if they
had but considered the innocence and righteousness of that Religion, and that
People, against which the dint and fury of it was chiefly bent: they would have
relented in the greatest heat of their passion, fury, and indignation, as Esau
did toward Jacob his brother, if they had but patiently considered of what
spirit they had been, both People and Religion, whose ruin they had sworn,
and bloodily conspired.

Many good works (says our Savior to the Jews) have I showed you from my
Father; Joh. 10.32
For which of these works do you stone me? Implying, that they could have no
other reason, to proceed with violence against him, but only the good he had
done amongst them. So may the Religion, State, and People, against which these
firebrands of hell breathed out nothing but newfound death, ruin, and
confusion, say unto them, They have done you many good offices, for which of
them must they be destroyed, by such a barbarous and unchristian destruction?
They have nourished and harbored you in their land, they have sought the
conversion and salvation of your souls, they have pardoned and passed by many
foul and wicked practices of men of your party and faction before; and have
not executed the just severity of the Laws upon them; they have been tender of
their lives, and sought every way to do them good. It must be for some of
these, that the horrible pit of destruction must be prepared against us; the
Gunpowder, and Billets, and Bars of Iron must take vengeance on some good
work or other: other unrighteousness, other provocation against us can there
none be found.

But as it was true, that the Jews did seek to stone our Savior to death for
some, or all those good works he had showed them, however they rejected such
a charge with deep indignation; for thy good works we stone thee not, but for
blasphemy: and Esaias prophesied as much (in effect) long before, Esa. 53.9.33.
And he made his Grave with the wicked: he, the people of the Jews, made his
Grave with the wicked, and with the rich and honorable they did seek to shame
him, and yet honored him about his death and burial; the one they did out of
their own wicked and malicious disposition against him, the other was done by
them by an overruling hand of God; and both that which they did according to
their own desires, and that which God caused to be done according to his
desire, had the same ground and reason in the person of our Savior, viz.
because he had done no violence, neither was there any deceit found in his
mouth: the Jews they could not endure his exquisite holiness and integrity,
and therefore they labored to quench the spirit of the glory of it, and sought
to disgrace it; God on the other side, he could not endure to see such absolute
innocence altogether suppressed, and therefore he would honor him: and so they
came to divide the matter between them: (as Esaias excellently expresses it) but
evident it is from this place, that it was his perfect integrity, and
uprightness that drew out the malice of their spirits against him; so
doubtless it was the holiness, and purity of the Religion and people against
whose faces that dreadful engine of death was chiefly bent, that both enraged
the cursed spirits of these men against them, and that drew that gracious and
glorious deliverance out of the hand of God unto them.

FINIS.

