TO THE PARSON, VICAR or Curate, of and to every of them.
BEING given to understand of certain notorious abuses within this Dioces, not
reformable by ordinary courses, so that for the redress of them I shall be
constrained to use means and punishments extraordinary; ( Grassantibus
exemplis, paenae sunt aggravandae) I have thought good to give signification of
my intent in this behalf, to see, if happily, the fear of that future
punishment, may not effect that, which otherwise the example must.

1 First therefore, whereas it is informed that notwithstanding the late
Proclamation of our Sovereign L. the Kings Majesty, straightly commanding a
religious sanctification of the Sabbath day, the same is horribly profaned
every where, by using unlawful games even in the time of divine service, and
that oftentimes in the very churchyard: by reason whereof it comes to pass
that many absent themselves from service, especially in the afternoon: I must
require you to admonish your parishioners, that hereafter they take heed of
profaning either ye Saboth, church, or churchyard; and that in repayring unto
divine service as well in the afternoon as in the fore-noone, they use such
diligence as by the law they are bound; assuring the^ otherwise, to find the
uttermost extremity of that punishment which the law will inflict.

2 Whereas complaint is made that many churches and chauncells lie vnrepaired:
you are to admonish the^ to whom it may appertain, with all speed convenient
to repair and amend the same or else to expect such punishment as there
defects in that behalf may seem to deserve

3 If you cannot find means that your quarter sermons may be duly preached,
make your repair unto me that I may take order for the same.

4 If already you be not sufficiently authorized, I require you, that you
presume not to serve any Cure, or to preach within my Dioces, till by my self
under my seal you be licensed so to do.

5 Whereas People are very backward in sending their childreu unto the Minister
to be catechized you shall do well hereafter to admit none to the holy
communion that have not already received the same, except they be fit to be
confirmed by the Bishop, that is, except they be able to answer to all the
questions of the Catechism: And if I understand you receive any that are not
so qualified, you must make reckoning to answer for the same.

6 Whereas many marriages claudestine and otherwise unlawful are daily made. and
then ignorance is alleged for excuse of the fault; you shall understand, that
you ought not to mary any persons but in the church, and that between the
hours of 8. and 12. in the fore noone, none within the compass of those times
that are forbidden by law, none whose banes have not bin lawfully asked 3.
several holy days, without a dispensation for the same first had under the
hand and seal of me. or M. Doctor Trevor my chauncellor and none other. If
you shall hereafter offend in the premises, you are to be suspended ab officio
and beneficio per triennium; wherein I advise you to hope for no favor.

7 Excommunicate persons (I understand) in almost all places of this Dioces are
permitted to come to divin service: A great and an intolerable abuse. If
hereafter you with the churchwardens do not cause them to be put out of ye
church. I shall cause both you and them, as also the persons that so intrude
themselves to be punished for the same. Hereof therefore you shall do well to
give warning unto your parishioners.

8 Whereas the Cathedral church of this Dioces, not having to the value of 10.
pro annum, omnibus oneribus deductis; is now fallen into such decay, as 500
Marks will not repair the same, so that it must needs in short time fall to
the ground without some extraordinary relief: I exhort you, that so often as
you are called to any sick persons of ability, especially when they shall
make their Wills, you fail not to put them in mind of the necessity of the
said church, and to show them how acceptable a thing it shall be to Almighty
God, to contribute toward the sustentation of his house, as also how honorable
unto the party so contributing; in as much as there is a book already
provided, wherein the names of all such are to be registered for benefactors, as
shall bestow upon the same in any liberal proportion.

9 Whereas I find by continual experience that much laud is daily imbeziled
from the church, by reason that new Incumbents want direction and notize of
that belongs to them: For preventing of this inconvenience in time to come, I
think good to require you yt you procure under the hands of the best and most
substantial of your parish (as near as you can) a testimonial of the gleebe
that belongs unto your church, declaring the number of acts, the names of
every parcel, and the several meeres or bounds of the same, the said
testimonial to be written fair in one whole sheet of paper, (that with all
the rest it may be bound up into a book) and to be delivered in unto me before
the feast of Easter next.

10 Whereas many outrages are daily committed against Preachers, and Ministers
of Gods word, not only in reproachful and contemptuous speeches, but in laying
violent hands upon them: you are to admonish your parishioners from me, that
they take heed of offending in that kind of fault (which by to much lenity in
those that ought to punish it, is grown intolerable) And if you know of any
such, to signify ye same unto me.

11 Whereas many heinous offenses are daily committed against the laws
Ecclesiastical of his Majesty, which being notoriously known in all the
country, yet for fear, favor, or some other respect are never presented in
any of our Generals or Uisitatio^s: Let notize be given unto your Wardens,
Protors, and such other to whom it may appertain, that if hereafter they be
found negligent in their presentiments, they shall assuredly find that punishment
which by the law Ecclesiastical is appointed unto perjured persons.

12 Moreover that the offenses above specified may not escape unpunished, to
the great dishonor of God, and the increase of sin: I shall pray you to
intimate unto me the names of such of your neighborhood as are defamed for
any of the said Offenses, with the quality of their crimes, that I may take
order for the punishment of the same as appertains.

Matherne. Sept. 30. 1603. Fr. Landaven.

FINIS.

