A brief discourse of the late murder of master George Saunders, a
worshipful Citizen of London: and of the apprehension, arreignement, and
execution of the principal and accessaries of the same.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bvnneman, dwelling in Knight riders street, at
the sign of the Mermayde. ANNO. 1573.

FOr as much as the late murder of Master Saunders, Citizen and Merchant
tailor of this City, ministers great occasion of talk among al sorts of men,
not only here in the Town, but also far abroad in the Country, and
generally through the whole Realm: and the sequeles and accidents ensewing
thereupon, breed much diversity of reports and opinions, while some do
ius^ly de^est the horriblenesse of the ungracious fact, some lamente the
grievous loss of their dear friends, some rejoice at the commendable
execution of upright justice, the godly bewail the unmeasurable inclination
of humane nature to extreme wickedness, and therewith magnify Gods infinite
mercy in reuoking of forlorn sinners to final repentance, many delight to
hear and tell news, without respect of the certentie of the truth, or regard
of dew humanity, every man debating of the matter as occasion or affection
leads him, and few folk turning the advised consideration of Gods open
judgments, to the speedy reformation of their own secret faults: It is
thought convenient (gentle reader) to give thee a plain declaration of the
whole matter, according as the same is come to light by open trial of Justice,
and voluntary confession of the parties, that thou may both know the truth
to the satisfying of thy mind, and the avoiding of miscredite, and also use the
example to the amendment of thy life. Not withstanding thou shall not look for
a full disco^erie of every particular bymatter appendant to the present case,
which might serve to feed the fond humor of such curious appetites as are
more inquisitiue of other folks offenses than hasty to redress their own:
for that were neither expedient nor necessary. And men's misdoings are to be
prosecuted no further with open detestation, tha^ till the parties be either
reclaymed by reasonable and godly persuasion, or punished by orderly and
lawful execution, according to the q^alitie of their offense. When law has
once passed upon them, and giu^ them the wages of their wicked deserts: the^
christian charity wills men either to bury the faults with the offenders
in perpetual silence, or else so to speak of them, as the vices and not the
parties them selves may seem to be any more touched.

But (...) shall more be spoken (God willing) in the winding up of this matter.
Now I will set down, first: he murdering of master Saunders by George Brown,
with Brownes apprehension, trial and execution: then the trial and execution
of Anne Saunders, the wife of the said George Saunders, of Anne (...) widow,
and of Roger Clement, called among them trustye Roger the servant of the said
Anne Drewrie: And lastly a brief rehearsal of certain sayings and dealings
of the parties convicted, between the time of their apprehensions, and the time
of their execution, which are not things propre and peculiar to the very
body of the case, but yet incident, and therefore necessary for the hearer, as
whereby will appear the very original cause and first ground of this
ungodly deed: And this rehearsal shall be shut up and concluded with a
short Admon^tion how we ought to deal in this and al other such cases.

The ^uisdaye in Easter week last past (which was the. xxiiij. day of March)
the said George Brown receiving secret intelligence by letter from mistress
Drewrie, that master Saunders should lodge the same night at the house of one
M^ster Barnes in Woolwich, and from thence go ^n foot to (...) Marie Cray the
next morning: met him by the way a little from shooters hill, between seven and
eight of the clock in the fore noone, and there ^lew both him, and also one
John Bean the servant of the said Master Earnes.

(...) as master (...) felt himself to have his deaths wound (for (...) was
stricken quite and clean through at the first blow,) he kneeled down, and
lifting up his hands and eyes unto (...), said, God have mercy upon (...),
and forgive me my (...), and thee too, (speaking to Brown, whom in (...) he
knew not, whatsoever report has been made of former acquayntance betwixt
them) and with that word he gave up the Ghost. And Brown (as he himself
confessed afterward) was ^at stricken with such a terror and agony of heart,
as he wis^ not what to do, b^t was at the point to have fain^ed even then and
o^tentimes else that day, and could brook another meat nor dri^ke that he
received of all that day after. He was so abashed afterward at the sight of one
of master Saunders (...) (...) children, as he had much a do too forbear from
(...) in the street, a (...) (...) of the secret woorking of God^ terrible
wrath in a guilty and bluddie conscience. But M. Barnesis man having ten or
eleven deadly wounds, and being left for dead, did by Gods wonderful
providence (...) again, and creeping a great way ^n all sour, (for he could
another go nor stand) was fownd by an old man and ^is maiden that went that way
to seek their kine, and conveyed too (...), where be gave evident t^kens and
marks of the (...): and so conti^ still alive ^ill he had bin apprehended and
brought unto him, dyed the next Monday after. Immediately, upon the deed
doing, Brown sent mis^ resse Drewrye word thereof by (...) Roger, he
himself repaired forthwith to the Court at ^wich, and anon after him (...)
thither the report of the murder also* Then departed he thence unto London
(...) ways, and came to the (...) of Mistress (...), (...) he spoke not
personally with her. But (...) conference had with him, by her servant Roger,
she provided him. xx. pounds the same day, for the which mistress Drewry laid
certain (...) of her own and of (...) Saunders to gage.

And upon the next day being Thursday morning (having in the mean time had
intelligence that Brown was sought for) they sent him six pounds more by
the said Roger, and warned him to shifte for himself by flight, which thing
he fors^owed not to do. Nevertheless the Lords of the Queens Majesty's
Counsel, caused so speedy and narow search to be made for him in all places,
that upon the. 28 of the same month he was apprehended in a ma^s house of his
own name at Rochester, by the Mayor of the town: and being brought back
again to the Court, was examined by the Counsel, unto whom he confessed the
deed, as you have heard, and that he had oftentimes before pretended and
sought to do the same, by the instigation of the said widow Dr^w^ie, who (as
he said) had promised to make a marriage between him and mistress Saunders,
(who^me he seemed to love excessiuely,) the desire of which hope ha^ed him
forward to dispatche the fact.

Nevertheless he protested, (howbeit untruly) y^ mistres Saunders was not privy
nor co^sentyng thereunto. Upon this confession he was arr^igned at y^ Kings
Bench in Westmin^^er ^l on friday y^ xvij of April, where acknowledging himself
guilty, he was condemned as Principal of the murder of master Saun^^^s
according to which sentence he was executed in Smithfield on monday the. xx.
of the same month, at which time (though untruly, as she her self ^ssed
afterward) he labored by all m^, to clear mistress Saunders, of committing
e^il of her body with him: and afterward wa^ hanged (...) in ch^s ^eere unto
the place where he had (...) the (...).

Thus much (...) the very case of the murder it (...), and (...) (...) of the
principal doe^ (...) (...). As for the a^knowledgement of the former
wick^dnesse of his life, and the hearty (...) that he pretended for the same,
(...) to his (...) death, I deferce them to the (...) part of this matter, to
which p^ce (...) (...) do more peculiarly pe^. In the (...) time, mystresse
Drevvrie and her man being examined, and as well by their own confessions, as
by the falling out^ of the matter in consequence, and also by Brown^s
appeachment, thought culpable, were committed to ward. And anon after (...)
Saunders being delivered of child and ch^rched (for at the time of her
husbands death she looked presently to lie do^e) was upon mistress Drewries
man's confession, and upon other great likelyhoodes and presumptions likewise
committed to ward, and ^n wednesday, the sixth of May, arreigned with
mistress Drewrie, at the Guilde hall, the effect of whose several
inditements is this: That they had by a letter written, been procurers of the
said murder, and so accessaries before the fact: And knowing the murder
done, had by money, and otherwise, relie^ed and been ayding to the murderer,
and so accessaries also after the fact. Whereunto they both of them pleaded not
guilty. And mistress Saunders, notwithstanding the auouchement of mistress
Drewries man face to face, and the great probabilities of the evidence given in
against her by master Geffrey, the Queens Majesty's Serieant, stood so
stoutly s^il to the denial of all things, (in which stout denial she
continued also a certain time after her condemnation) that some were brought
in a blind belief, that either she was not guilty at al, or else had but
brought her self in danger of law through ignorance, and not through
pretenced malice. Howbeit, forasmuch as bare* do^all is no sufficient bar to
discharge manifest matter, and apparent evidence: they were both condemned as
accessaries to master Saunders death, and executed in Smith^ld the thirteenth
of May, being the wednesday i^ the Whitson week, at which time they both of
them confessed them selves guiltis of the fact, for which they were condemned,
and with very great repentance and weakness, received the reward of their
trespass, in the presence of many personages of honor and worship, and of so
great a number of people, as the like has not been seen there together in
any man's remembrance. For almost the whole field, and all the way from
newgate, was as full of folk as could well stand one by another: and besides
that, great companies were placed both in the chambers near abouts (whose
windows and walls were in many places beaten down to look out at) and also
upon the gutters, sides, and tops of the houses, and upon the battlements and
steeple of S. Bartholmewes.

Mistress Drewries man was arreigned at Newgate on Friday the. vi^. of May,
and being there condemned as accessarie, was executed with his mistress, at
the time and place aforesaid.

Thus have ye heard the murdering of master Saunders, with the apprehension,
arreignement, condemnation, and execution of the principal and of the
accessaries to the same. Now let us proceed to the incidents that ha^ed from
the times of their apprehensions, to the time of their deaths, and so to the
ad^ion, which is the conclusion and fruit of this whole matter.

Whereas it was determined that mistress Saunders and mistress Drewrie should
have suffered* upon the (...) saturday after their condemnation, which was
Whitson even: the matter was stayde till the wednesday in Whitson week, upon
these occasions ensuing. The book of Master ^ders accomptes and reckenings,
whereupon depended the knowledge of his whole state, was myssing. Certain sums
of money were sayd^ to: be in the hands of parties unknown, the intelligence
whereof was desired and sought for to the be^e of master Saunders children. The
parties co^ted were to be reformed to Godwarde, and to be brought to the
willing confessing of the things for which they had been justly condemned, and
which as yet they ^natly concealed.

And besides all this, one Mell, a minister that had heretofore ben suspended
from his Ministry, accompanying mistress Saunders, from her condemnation to
Newgate, and conferring with her as it had been to give her good counsel and
comfort, was so blinded with her solemn asseuerations and protestations of
innocence, that notwithstanding he had heard her indictment, with the exact
and substantial trial of her case: yet notwithstanding, he persuaded himself
that she was utterly clear, and thereuppon falling in love with her, dealte
with mistress D^e to take the whole guilt upon her self, undertaking to sue
for mistress Saunders pardon. And so what by his terrifying of her, with the
horroure of mischarging and ca^ing away of an innocent, what with his promising
of certain money to the marriage of her daughter, and with other persuasions:
she was so wholly woonne that way, that as well before certain personages of
honor, as also before the Deane of Paul's and others, she utterly cleared
mistress Saunders of the fact, or of consent to the same, taking the whol^
blame thereof to her self, and (...) to stand therein to the death, contrary
to her former confession at the time of her arr^ement.

Mistress Saunders also, after the laying of this platte, stood so stoutely
to her tackling, that when the Deane of Paul's gave her godly exhortation for
the clearing of her conscience, and for the reco^ciling of her self unto God,
as the time and case most needefully required, (as other had done before) he
could obtain nothing at her hand. By means whereof, he was ^ayne to leave
her that time, which was the Friday, not without great grief and indignation
of mind to see her (...) (...). In the mean while, the say^ Mell discovering
his purpose and whole platform to an honest Gentleman, whom he unskillfully
took to have bin a welwiller to obtain the pardon of mistress Saunders, was
partly by that means, and also by other (...) of his (...), cut off from his
enterprise. For when he came to sue for her pardon, which thing he did with
such outrage of doting affection, that he not only proffered su^mes of money,
but also offered his own body and life for the safety of the woman, whom he
protested upon his conscience to be v^ilty. The Lords of the counsel knowing
her to be rightly condemned by good justice, and being (...) to the state of
the case beforeh^nd, and also finding him out by his own unwise (...) (whereof
among other one was, that he intended to marie her) not only frustrated his
desire, but also adjudged him to stand upon the pillorie, with apparent notes
and significations of his lewd and (...) (...). According to the which (...)
(...)* he was set (...) a (...) (...) the place of execution at the time of
their suffering, with a paper pinned upon his breast, wherein were written
certain words in great Letters containing the effects of his fact, to his open
shame: (...), For practicing to color the detestable factes of George Saunders
wife. Which was a very good lesson to teach all persons to refrain from any
devises or practices to deface or discredit the honorable proceedings of
Counselors, and public and lawful form of trialles and judgments
according to Justice, or to hinder the beneficial course of so good examples.

By this occasion Mistress Sanders was utterly unprovided to die at that time,
and therefore as well in respect of mercy, as for the considerations aforesaid,
a further respite was given to them unwitting, and a repriuie was sent by M.
Mack williams for a time if need were. In the mean time, (that is to wit upon
the saturday morning) the constant report goes, that as certain men came
talking through Newgate, one happened to speak loud of the gallows that was
set up, and of the greatness and strongnes of the same, saying ^t would hold
them both and more, the sound of which words did so pierce into the watchful
ears of mistress Saunders, who lay nearehand, that being stricken to the heart
with the horror of the present death which she looked for that day, she went
immediately to mistress Drewrie, and telling her that she knew certainly by
the words which she had heard, that they should by all likelihode be executed
that day, asked her if she would stand to her former promise. But mistress
Drewrie after better consideration of her self, counselling her to fall to
plain and simple dealing: telling hi^, that for her own part she was fully
determined not to dissemble any longer, nor to hazard her own soul eternally
for the safety of an other bodies temporal life. Then Mistress Saunders, who
had determined to acknowledge nothing against her self, so long as she might
be in any hope of life, howbeit that she always purposed to utter the truth
whenever she should come to the instant of death, as she her self conf^sed
afterward: being stricken both with fear and remorse, did by the advice of
master Come, (who labored very earnestly with her to bring her to repentance,
and was come to her very early that morning, because it was thought they
should have been executed presently) send for the Deane of Paul's again, and
bewayling her former stubburnes, declared unto him and master Cole, master
Charke, and master Young, that she had given her consent and procurement to her
husbands death, through unlawful lust and liking that she had to Brown
confessing her sinfulness of life committed with him: and humbly submitting
hirselfe to her deserved punishment, besought them of spiritual comfort and
council, which thing they were glad to perceive, and thereupon employed their
travel to do them good: and labored very painfully to instruct them aright:
for (God wot) they found all the three prisoners very raw and ignorant in
all things perteyning to God and to their soul health, yea and even in the
very principles of the Christen religion. Nevertheless through Gods good
working with their labor, they recovered them out of Satan's kingdom unto
Christ, insomuch that besides their voluntary acknowledging of their late
heinous fact, they also detested the former sinfulness of their life, and
willingly yielded to the death which they had shunned, uttering such certain
tokens of their unfeigned repentance by all kind of modesty and meekness, as
no greater could be devised. For Mistress Saunders the same day sent for her
husbands brothers and their wives and kinsfolk that were in the town, which
came unto her the day before her death: in whose presence she kneeling mildely
on her knees, with abundance of sorrowful tears, desired them of forgiveness
for bereuing them of their dear brother and friend: whereunto master
Saunders. the Lawyer in the name of them al answered, that as they were very
sori^ both for the loss of their friend, and also for her heinous fault, so
they heartily forgave ^ir, and in token thereof kneeled down altogyther,
praying to GOD with her and for her, that he also would remitte her sin.

Besides this pitiful submission, she also bewailed her offense toward her
own kindred, whom she had stained by her trespass, and toward the whole
world, (...) she had offended by her crime, but especially her children, whom
she had not only ber^fte both of father and mother, but also left them a
coarsie and shame. Wherefore, after exhortation given to such of them as were
of any capacity and discretion, that they should fear God, and learn by her
fall to avoid sin: she gave each of those a book of master Bradfordes
meditations, wherein she desired the foresaid three preachers to write some
admonition as they thought good: Which done, she subscribed them with these
words: Your ^orowfull mother Anne Saunders. And so blessing the^ in the name
of God and of our Savior Jesus Christ, she sent the^ away out of her sorrowful
sight, and gave her self wholly to the settling of her grieved heart to the
quiet receiving of the bitter cup, which she drank of the next day, as ^ath
been told before. Howbeit, without doubt, to her everlasting comfort.

And mistress Drewrie no less careful of her own state, besides her humble
repentance in the prison, and her earnest desiring of the people to pray for
her self, and the others with her as they came toward execucution, did upon
the Carte not only confess her giltinesse of the fact, as mistress Saunders
had don, but also with great lowliness and reverence first kneeling down
toward the Earl of Bedforde and other noble men that were on horssbacke on
the East side of the stage, took it upon her death that whereas it had bin
reported of her that she had poisoned her late husband Master Drewrie, and
dealt with witchcraft and sorcerie, and also appeached diverse merchante men's
wives of dissolute and unchaste living, she had done none of all those things,
but was utterly clear both to God and the world of all such manner of
dealing. And then with like obeisance, turning her ^fe to the ^arle of (...),
who was in a chamber behind her, she protested unto him before God, that
whereas she had been reported to have been the cause of separation betwixt him
and my Lady his wife: she neither procured nor consented to any such thing.
But otherwise, whereas in the time of her service in his house, she had offended
him, in neglecting or contemning her duty, she acknowledged her fault, and
besoughte him for Gods sake to forgive her: who very honorably, and ^uen with
tears accepted her submission, and openly protested him self to pray heartily
to God for her.

Her servant also, having openly acknowledged his offense, kneeled meekly
down, praying severally with a preacher, as ^he of them had done at their
first coming to the place. Which done, they were all put in a readiness by
the Executioner, and at one instant (by drawing away the Cart whereon they
stood) were sent together out of this world unto God.

And Brown also, a good while before, during the time of his imprisonment,
coming to a better mind than he had been of in time paste, confessed that he
had not heretofore freque^ted sermons, nor received the holy sacrament, nor
used any calling upon God private or public, nor given him self to reading of
holy Scripture, or any books of godliness: but had altogether followed the
appetites and lusts of his sinful flesh, even with greediness and outrageous
contempt both of God and man. Nevertheless God was so good unto him, and
schooled him so well in that short time of imprisonment, as he cloased up his
life with a marvelous appearance of hearty repentance, constant trust in Gods
mercy through Jesus Christ, and willingness to forsake this miserable world.

Now remains to show what is to be gathered of this terrible example, and
how we ought to apply the same to our own behoof. First I note with S.
Paul, that when men regard not to know God, or not to honor him when they
know him: God gives them over to their own lusts, ^o as they run on from
sin to sin, and from mischief to mischief, to do such things as are
shameful and odious, even in the sight of the world, to their own
unavoidable perils. And when the measure of their iniquity is filled up, there
is no way for them to escape the justice of God, which they have provoked.
Insomuche, that if they might eschew all bodily punishment: yet the very hell
of their own conscience would prosecute them, and the sting of their mind
would be a continual prison, torment, and torture to them, wheresoever they
went. Again on the other side, we must mark the infinite greatness of Gods
wisdom and mercy, who perceiving the perverse wilfulness of man's froward
nature to sinning, suffers men sometimes to run so long upon the bridle,
till it seem to themselves, that they may safely do what they list, and to
the world, that they be past recovery unto goodness: and yet in the end
catching them in their chief pride, he rayseth them by their overthrow,
amendeth them by their wickedness, and reuiueth them by their death, in such
wise blotting out the stayne of their former filthe, that their darkness is
turned into light, and their terror to their comfort. Moreover, when God
brings such matters upon the stage, unto y^ open face of the world: It is not
to the intent that men should gaze and wonder at the persons, as birds do at
an Owl, not that they should delight them selves and others with the fond and
perad^ture sinister repor^ing of them, nor upbraid the whole stock and kindred
with the fault of the offenders: no surely, God means no such thing. His
purpose is, that the (...) of his judgments, should by the terror of the
outward sight of the example, drive us ^o the inward consideration of our
selves. Behold, we be all made of the same moulde, printed with the same
stamp, and endued with the same nature that the offenders are. We be the impes
of the old Adam, and the venim of sin which he received from the old
serpent, is shed into us all, and woorketh effectually in us all.

Such as the root is, such are the branches, and the twiggs of a thorn or
bramble can bear no grapes. That we stand, it is the benefit of Gods grace,
and not the goodness of our nature, nor the strength of our own will. That
they are fallen, it was of frayltie: wherfrom we be no more privileged than
they: and that should we ouersoone perceive by experience, if we were left to
our selves. He that looks s^erely into other men's faults, is lightly blind
in his own: and he that either vpbraydeth the repentant that has received
punishment, or reprocheth the kindred or offspring with the fault of the
auncester or alye, how great so ever the same has been: shows himself not
to have any remorse of his own sins, nor to remember that he him self also
is a man: but (which thing he would little think) he fully matcheth the crime
of the misdoer, if he do not surmount it by his presumptuousnesse.

When it was told our Savior Christ that Pylate had mingled the blood of
certain men with their own sacrifise, what answer made he? Did he detest
the offenders? did he declame against their doings? Did he exaggerate the
fault of the one, or the cruelty of the other? No. But framing and applying
the example too the reformation of the hearer, suppose ye (said he) that those
Galileans were greater sinners than all the other Galileans, because they
suffered such punishment? I tell you nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. Or think ye that those eightene upon whom the toure in Silo
fell, and slew them, were sinners above all y^ dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you
nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all perish likewise. Let us apply this to
our present purpose. Were those who^ we saw justly executed in Smith ^eld
greater sinners than al other English people? were they greater sinners than
all Lo^doners? Were they greater sinners tha^ all that looked upon them? No
verily: but except their example lead us to repentance, we shall all of us
come to as ^ore punishment in this world, or else to sorer in the world to
come. Their faults came into the open Theater, and therefore seemed the greater
to our eyes, and surely they were great in deed: neither are ours the le^e,
because they ly^ hidden in the covert of our heart. God the searcher of all
secrets sees them, and if he list he can also discover them. He has showed in
some, what al of us deserve, to provoke us al to repentance, that al of us
might have mercy at his hand, and show mercy one to an other, and with one
mouth and one heart glorify his goodness. It is said by the Prophet
Samuel, that disobedience is as the sin of Witchcrafte. Let every of us
look into himself (but first let him put on the spectacles of Gods law,
and carry the light of Gods word with him) and he shall see such a gulf of
disobedience in himself, as he may well think there is none offender but
himself. I say not this as a cloaker of offenses, that white should not be
called white, and black: black: or as a patron o^ ^sdoers, that they should
not have their deserved hyre: but to repress our hasty judgments and
uncharitable speeches, that we might both detest wickedness with perfect
hatred, and rue the persons with christian modesty: knowing that with what
measure we met unto others, with the same shall it be moten to us again.

Finally, let al folks both married and unmarried, learn hereby to possess and
keep their vessel in honesty and cleanness. For if the knot between man and
wife (which ought to be inseparable) be once broken, it is seldom or never
knit again. And though it be, yet is not the wound so thoroughly healed, but
there appears some skarre ever after. But if the sore rancle and fester
inwardly (as commonly it does except the more grace of God be) in the end it
bursteth forth to the destruction or hurt of both parties, not lightly without
great harm to others also besides themselves, as we see by this example. For
when the body which was dedicated to God to be his temple and the tab^rnacle of
his holy spirit, is become the sink of sin and cage of uncleanness the
devil ceasseth not to drive the parties still headlong unto naughtiness, till
they be fallen either into open shame and danger of temporal law: or into
damnable destruction both of body soul, according as Solomon in his Proverbs
says, that the steps of a harlot lead down unto death, and her feet perce
even unto hell. Therefore good reader, so hear and read this present example,
as the same may turn to the bettering of thy state, and not to occasion of
slander, nor to the hurt of thine own conscience, nor to the offense of thy
Christian brethren.

Farewell. A. G.

Anne Saunders confession as she spoke it at the place of execution.
GOod people, I am come hither to die the death, whereunto I am adjudged, as
worthily and as deservedly as ever died any: I had a good husband, by whom I
had many children, with whom I lived in wealth, and might have done still, had
not the devil kindled in my heart, first the hellish firebrand of unlawful
lust, and afterward a murtherous intent to procure my said husband to be
bereued of his life, which was also by my wicked means accomplished, as to the
world is known. And as I would if he could hear me, if it might be,
prostrate upon the ground, at my husbands feet, ask mercy with plentiful
tears of him, so that which I may and I ought to do, I ask mercy of God, I
ask mercy of all men and women of the world, who^ by my deed and example I
have offended: and especially I bewail my husband, and ask mecie of my
children who^e I have beraued of so good a father, I ask mercy of his kindred
and friends whom I have hurt, and of all my friends and kindred, of whom I am
abashed and ashamed: and being of my self unworthy of pity, yet I beseech
them all, and you all, and all the whole world even for gods sake, and for our
savior Christ's sake to forgive me. And I thank God with my whole heart, he
has not suffered me to have the reign and bridle of sinning given me at my
will, to the danger of my eternal damnation, but that he has found out my
sin, and brought me to punishment in this world, by his fatherly correction, to
amend, to spare, and save me in the world to come: and I beseech him grant me
his heavenly grace, that all who do behold or shall hear of my death, may by
the example thereof be frayed from like sinning. And I beseech you all to pray
for me and with me.

The Prayer which was said by Anne Saunders at the place of execution, the
copy whereof, she delivered unto the right honorable the E^rle of Bedforde.
AS I do confess with great sorrovv (O dear ^ather) that I have grievously,
and oftentimes inned against heaven and against thee, and am ^vvorthy to be
called thy daughter, so (O dear Father) I acknovvledge thy mercy, thy grace
and love toward me, most vvretched sinner, offered me in my Lord and savior
Jesus Christ, in whom thou give me an heart to repent. And by repentance
have put away my sins, and thrown them into the bottom of the Sea, O dear
Father increase and continue this grace until the end, and in the end. I
testify this day (O Lord my God) thy love, O Lord, thy saving health is li^e
everlasting, and joy without end: and because thou have touched my sinful
heart with the (...) pleasure of my sin, and with a de^ of thy kingdom, O
dear Father, (...) thy Christ's sake, as I hope thou vvilt, so I beseech thee
to finishe that good work in me. Suffer me not, merciful and loving Father,
to be troubled with death when it lays hold on me: nor with the love of
life, when it shall be taken away. O Lord, now as thou have, so still lift
up my soul as it were with an eagles vvings unto Heaven, there to behold
thee. Lord into thy hands I commit my body, that it be not troubled in death,
and my soul, that it see not damnation. Come Lord Jesus, come assiste me with
thy holy spirit, a vveake vvoma^ in a strong battle, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly save thy hand maid that puts her trust in thee, behold me in
Christ, receive me in christ, in whose name I pray saying. Our Father. etc.

Anne Sau^ders dying to the world, and living to God.

After this she also said a godly Prayer out of the Serice book which is used
to be said at the hour of death

note of a certain saying which Master Saunders had left written with his
own hand in his study.
Christ shall be magnified in my body, whither it be thorough life or else
death. For Christ is too me life, and death is too me advantage. These words
were. M. Nowels Theme which he preached at the burial of my brother Haddon
upon Thursday being y^. xxv. day of (...) Anno. Do. 1570. Anno. R^ginae
Elizabeth. 13. Among other things which he pre^ached, this saying of his is to
be had always in remembrance, that is, that we must all (when we come to pray)
first accuse and condemn our selves for our sins committed against God
before the seat of his Justice, and then after cleave unto him by faith in
the mercy and merits of our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, whereby we are
assured of eternal salvation.


