A BRIEF TREATISE Touching the preservation of the eie-sight, consisting
partly in good order of diet, and partly in use of medicines. The sixte Edition.

AT OXFORD, By JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1602.

Occasioned thorough certain speeches had with some of mine Honorable good
friends, to write mine opinion of means to preserve the sight in good
integrity, I have performed the same in this little pamphlet, wherein I have
directed my pen rather to leave rules for those, which have not in themselves
sufficient knowledge, the^ to satisfy the learned: who I know can devise
much better means and remedies. And my intent being only to set down some
order, as may be fittest for all sorts of men to continue in perfection their
sight, I thought not good to insert any discourse of the diseases of the eyes,
which will require a long treatise, and cannot well be executed, but by men
which have skill in the art of physic. Therefore it seemed meet unto me at
this time to omit that part, and to leave the reader for the knowledge and cure
of such diseases to the professors thereof, by whose helps they may receive
remedy of all infirmities and affectes, which shall happen to the eyes:
purposing in this little treatise only to declare, how the sight might be
long continued in his integrity, by such common order as may of all men in
their trade of life be reasonably followed, leaving all other harder matters
to a farther direction of the learned And now following the laudable custom
begun in ancient time, and continued in these our days of presenting friends
with new-yeares gifts, for lack of other things of greater price, I offer unto
you this little pamphlet, as a signification of my good will, wishing that the
same may be a toke^ of many good and prosperous years, which God the giver of
all goodness, send unto you.

A brief Treatise concerning the preservation of the eye sight.
THe preservation of the sight does consist, partly in good order of diet,
partly in use of medicines.

Concerning diet: Diet
some things hurtful are to be eschued, and some things comfortable to the
sight are to be used: wherefore they, which may chose their habitations, in
this respect, may make election of air clear, declining to Air
moderate heat and dryness: cold and moist air, and thick, misty, and rayny
weather is hurtful: it is best therefore to abide in dry places, from moory,
marish, and watrish grounds and specially to provide, that the site of the
dwelling be not between the wet places and the sun: southern winds do hurt
the Winds. Dust Smoke. Meats.
sight: so do low rooms: places full of dust and smoakie are noisome.

Meats are best which are easy to be digested, and which do not stay long
in the stomach: amongst such a young hen is greatly commended: so is
Partridge and Pheasant, Rasis praises the young starve, and the quail: so do
all writers the Dove both tame and wyld, but chiefly the wyld Dove, which (as
Zoar writes) has especial virtue against the weakness of the sight, which
comes by defect of spirits, and the rather, if the same be sod with rape
roots, and turnep roots: for it is accorded by all writers, that the turnep
has great faculty to do good to the eyes, and to preserve the sight. Gross
and slimy meats, and all water-foule are dispraised. Of small birds, the
martin, the swallow, the iay and pie, the witwall, the specht are noted very
hurtful to the sight: and albeit these birds are seldom, or not at all used
of the better sort, yet common people happyly may be compelled to eat them. No
fish is accounted good: yet some fishes, which do Fish.
skoure in gravely places, being sauery sodden with white wine, fenel,
eiebright, sage, persl^e, etc. may at some times be eaten: and so a little
fault-fish moderately taken does no great harm. Flesh sodden with senell,
Preparation of meats.
eiebright, mintes, sage, etc. is reputed best; next are roasted meats, flesh
fried with Intrals.
butter or oil is to be rejected, thentrals, and feet of beasts are not so
good, nor the brains for the most part, yet the brain Brains.
of an hare, of a cony, and of pigeons are said to quicken the sight.

Milk and all things made thereof are Milk.
found by experience to induce dimnesse of sight: rear roasted, rear sodden,
or poched eggs are wholesome, especially eaten Eggs.
with the powder of eiebright, fried eggs and hard are blamed.

Of sauces, veriuice, viniger of wine, and Sauces.
the juice of limonds, are accounted best; Pomgranats, not so good.

Of spices, cinnamon is commended by Spices.
Avicenna, as special good for the web of the eye, and for dimnesse of the
sight: so is saffron; ginger, both inwardly taken, and outwardly applied, does
singularly clear the sight: cloves, mace, and nutmegs, and all three kinds of
peppers, may be used. Sugar is convenient to condite things, but Sugar. Honey.
Oil Butter.
honey is better: no oil is good, save pile olive called sallet oil, and that
is better the^ butter.

Albeit few raw herbs in common use Raw herbs.
for sallets are commended, except fenell, eie-bright, young sage, terragone,
which are very good: yet these are to be avoided as most hurtful, namely
lettis, coleworts, cabbages, beets, spinach, purslane, buddes of dill, garlike,
chibbols, onions, skallions, etc. Capers may be eaten: Olives not so good:
radish roots, persnep roots, are Capers. Olives Roots.
greatly dispraised: carrot roots, the buds of asperage may be eaten, but the
turnup or rape root, and the navew root are above The Rape and Turnep.
all other noted for excellency to preserve the sight, and to that purpose
many do preserve with sugar these roots, and eat them as sucket.

The most kinds of fruits are hurtful to the sight: yet pears and the better
kinds Fruits. Pears. Apples.
of apples, may be eaten with the powder of eiebright, or with fenell seeds
thinly incrusted with fine sugar: figs are very good, not only for the sight,
but also to open, Figs.
scour, and to cleanse the breast, liver, stomach and kidneies: so are raisons,
which Raisons.
have a special property to strengthen the liver: nuts are very evil, for
that they do fill Nuts.
the head: the walnut more tolerable then the hasell nut, chestnuts are very
windy, better friends for Venus, then for the eyes: dates are not commended,
nor mulberies. Dates Confects.


Co^fectes made with fine sugar and thinly incrusted about with turnep seeds,
and navew seeds, fenil seeds, anise seeds almonds, pine aple kernels, ginger,
cinnamon, the powder of eiebright, etc. are reputed as very good means to
continue the sight: likewise in the preservation of the sight, amongst other
things, such drinks, as are in common use and accustomed, are to be allowed:
Drinks.
therefore he that has used to drink beer, may not forsake the same and so of
ale. Beer.


And in this respect it is not amiss at meat to drink wine, for them which have
been Wine.
accustomed to the same: although wine in some affectes of the eyes is
forbidden, yet to preserve the sight, wine is not inconvenient, for the
vapors of wine are drying, clear abstersive, and so do consume and extenuate
gross and thick humors, so it be moderately taken. In this place I do
greatly commend their counsels, which do prepare medicinable drinks with
eiebright, Medicinal drinks.
and other things comfortable for the sight, to be used in the morning, and at
meats, if the pacient can well endure so to drink the same: our authors
herein are very ingenious, some addressing drinks with one thing, and some
with another.

The simplest and most written of, is Drink made with ciebright.
with the herb called of the Arabians Adhill, in Latin Euphragia, in English
Eiebright, of whose miraculous virtues in preservation of the sight: Arnoldus
de villa Arnoldus de villa noua.
noua has written in these words: Eie-bright is good any way taken, either
with meat, drink or medicine, green and dry, The praise of eie-bright for the
sight.
against all impediments of the sight, whereby the clearenes of the same may be
obscured. And he vvriteth thus of wine made with eiebright, which he
calls Uinum Eiebright Wine.
euphragiatum This wine (says he) is made by putting the herb in the must
or new wine, until the same wine become clear to be drunk. By the use of
this wine, old men's sightes are made young, it takes away the impedimentes of
the sight in all men, of all ages, especially in fat men, and such, which do
abound with phlegm.

One (says he) which was blind, and did see nothing in long time, by using
this wine one year, was restored to his fight. The herb is hot and dry, and
has by property of substance, to remove affectes of the sight. And so the
powder of the herb taken Eiebright taken in an egg.
in an egg, or dronken in wine, does wonderfully perform the same. And there
are yet alive (says he) vvitnesses of good credit, which have made proof
hereof in themselves, which could not read without spectacles, by use
hereof have recovered their sight to read small letters. And so Arnoldus
concludes, that nothing to do good to the sight, is to be compared with wine
made with eiebrright. If the wine be too strong, he counsels to alay the
same with fenell water, and to that intention, you may also add sugar.

In countries which for their common drinks do use wine and water, they always
do mingle things for the sight in wine, and not in water: for wine in truth is
a fitter liquor to receive the qualities and to carry the same to the eyes,
then water: which things they do put in the must, and so let it stand,
until the wine be ripe, and ready Eiebrigh may be used in beer, in ale, or
meade.
to be dronken, and so do use it.

Notvvithstanding in other countries which have other usual drinks, the same
things may be put in their common drinks. So some have put them in ale, some in
beer, and some in meade, and no doubt but all these means are very good
according to the usage and disposition of the party. So even in this our
country, they which either by use or by constitution of body, may well bear
the drinking of wine, may well compound the same with things good for the
sight: others of hot complexions and dry, not greatly accustomed to wine, may
of ale, beer, and meade make such drinks, because in the North countries, ale
and beer are the usual and common drinks, and in some places, meade also is
much used: therefore in mine opinion it is convenient for most men, to make
these drinks with ale, beer, and meade, rather then with wine: and meade
assuredly is a very convenient thing for them which can well away with honey.

Touching the direction of those which How eie-bright wine may be used
have bin accustomed to drink wine, I do nothing doubt, but that they may
without offense bear such drinks for the sight, compounded with wine, to take
a draught in the morning, especially if they alay the same with the distilled
water of fenell, according to Arnoldus counsel. And for this purpose, choice
may be made of very good white wine, and the things may be mingled in the
countries where the wine does grow, notwithstanding in that our The use of
eiebright ale, and of eiebright beer.
most used drink with meat is ale, or beer, these are very convenient to
receive these things for the sight, and absolutely better then wine, if ye
like to drink the same with meat: as our authors do counsel. Which ale I
think better to be made with Ale made with grout.
grout according to the old order of brewing. And so the things for the sight
may be sodden in the grout, or other way put How to make eie-bright ale and
beer.
in the drink, when it is newly cleansed, and put into the vessel in which
sit is tunned to be kept, that in the working of the drink in the vessel, the
virtues and qualities of the things may be drawn and received into the same.
When these things are Eiebright meade.
compounded in meade, then the same are sodden with the honey, in such order as
other herbs are sodden, when they make methegline.

I think it best to begin with the simplest order to compound ale or beer to
each man's best liking with eiebright only, taking to every gallon of the drink
a great handful of the herb, and bind it together, The quantity of
eie-bright to the drink
or put it in raw and thin tinsell of silk, and so tie the same by a string
to the tap of the vessel, that the herb may hang in the midst of the
drink, not too low in the grownd, neither to high in the barme, being put into
the drink when it is nevvlie cleansed: let all work together until the
drink be clear and ripe, to be dronken according to the common use, and then
ye may drink of it at pleasure in the morning fasting, and at meat also if
you will, and can well like thereof; and most men may like to drink it,
because this herb does yield no ungrateful taste, but rather with a
pleasant sapour does commend the drink. It were not amiss to avoid
windines, to every handful of the herb, to add two drammes of fenell seeds,
well Fenell seeds.
dusted, and a little bruised. As I do put this for more proportion to begin
vvith-all, that the stomach be not at the first offended with the strangenes:
So after a time, ye may increase the quantity, and put to every gallon of the
drink, two handfuls of the herb, wherein ye may best be directed by the
taste, that the herb shall yield into the drink. In the winter season Spices
may be added.
ye may also add some spices, as ginger, whole mace, a few cloves, nutmegs,
cinnamon, and make as it were bragget ale: which drink besides that it does
preserve and clear the sight, will also help digestion, cleanse and cut
phlegm, and break wind.

I can witness, that many by this simple The effect confirmed by examples.
composition of eiebright and fenell seeds, have found great good for their
sight, not only to continue in good estate, but also that some have found
remedy against the dimnes and other impediments, growing in their sight. In
truth once I met an old man in Shropshire called M. Hoorde, above the age of
84. years, who had at that time perfect sight, and did read small letters very
well without spectacles: he told me that about the age of 40. years, finding
his sight to decay, he did use eiebright in ale for his drink and did also
ear the powder thereof in an egg three days in a week, being so taught of
his father, who by the like order continued his sight in good integrity to a
very long age. I have heard the same confirmed by many old me^. Rowland
Sherlooke an Irish man, Physician to Queen Marie, did affirm for truth, that
a Bishop in Ireland perceiving his sight to wax dim, about his age of fifty
years, by the use of eiebright taken in powder in an egg, did live to the age
of 80 years, with good integrity of sight.

We do read of many prinkes to preserve Drinks more compounded for the sight.
the sight, compounded not of eie-bright only, but many more things added: so
some put to it sage, some veruaine some celendine, and fenell seeds, anise
feeds, and the forenamed spices: others elecampane roots, iris, galengale and
cubebs, and in truth all these are greatly commended to preserve the sight, and
may very aptly be put in drinks for the sight: notwithstanding, for that we
are now to deliver a drink for the sight, which may be pleasing, and allowed
with meats, mine opinion is, that the same ought to be made as simple as may
be. For if Gallen in his 6. book de sanitate tuenda, does prefer the
composition of the medicine termed diatrio^ The most compound not always best.
p^perio^, which has fewest simples because (as he writes) that is soonest
and with less trouble to nature digested: surely the drinks for the sight,
which are compounded of fewest things, are most to be commended, especially
when we mean to use the same with meat, as all our authors do counsel us.
Wherefore, for my part at this time, I will only advise to have for use, either
wine, or ale, or beer, according to each man's best liking, made as is before
prescribed with eiebright and fenell seeds, and to drink of the same in the
morning, or if it so like with meat, as other drink.

It is holden better to drink often and small Drink often and small draughts.
draughts at meat, then seldom and great draughts; for so meat and drink
will better mingle, and the meat will less swim Not best to begin the meal
with drink.
in the stomach, which gives cause of many vapors to the head. It is affirmed
not good to begin the meal with drink, but to eat somewhat before you drink.

When you drink wine, if you mean to When to mingle water with wine
alay the same with water, it is best to mingle to the wine fenell water, or
eiebright water, and Montagnana does council to do the same some reasonable
time before you do drink, and not presently when you drink, as commonly men
do.

Bread in our intention is to be made of fine flower of chosen wheat, alwaie
leuened Bread.
and salted somewhat more, then common bread, well wrought, thoroughly baked,
not new nor old, of about a day or two days old. Vnlevened bread is not
accounted good: and the bread is better, if fenell Past with fenil seeds.
seeds be wrought with the past; to which purpose some do cause cakes to be
made of some portion of the dowe, in which they knead the powder of fenell
seeds, and the powder of eiebright, and do eat them in the morning, and
after drink the eiebright drink, and make that a breakfast.

As generally in the preservation of Evacuatio^.
health: so especially to continue the sight, it is convenient that the body
be obedient, and do his office for evacuation accordingly: and if nature
herein be slack, it may be procured with brothes made of loose herbs, as
mallows, violet leaves, mercury, grou^dsell, great raisons the stones taken
out, damask prunes and currantes; and if need be of more medicinal things,
surely the same must be gentle: for as strong medicines, which make agitation
of humors are not good to be used for this intention: so gentle medicines
taken in due time, do great good to the sight: which I do leave to the
appointment and direction of a learned Physician. Of all manner of evacuation,
these which are done by vomiting are most hurtful: so are fluxes of blood by
the nose. And as belkes do ease the stomach, so much belking gives occasion
that fumes do arise to the forepart of the head, whereby the sight may be
harmed.

Nothing is more hurtful to health then Fullness hurtful.
fulness. And he that will continue his sight good, must be careful of over
plentiful feeding, and therefore must end his meals with appetite: and never
lay gorge upon gorge, but so feed, that the former meat may be concocted,
before he do eat again. It is best to make light suppers, and Use of Venus*
somewhat timely. As modest use of Uenus performed in the fear of God in due
time, when the meat in the stomach is digested, and nature is desirous to be
disburdened, is to be allowed: so immoderate and unseasonable use thereof, does
of all things most hurt the sight and soonest induce sleep and watching.
blindness: over much watching is not good: very long sleeps are more hurtful
the mean sleeps of about vij. hours, are best: ye, better to abridge the
sleep and to enlarge watching, then contrariwise; sleep taken in the night is
best, as most natural, when external air does not distract natures motion,
and all external things concur to help sleep, therefore the more hours a
man does borrow of the day for sleep, the worser. It is not good especially to
this our purpose, to sleep immediately after meat: for two hours at the
least ought to be put between meat and sleep. Best to begin sleep upon the
right side, and then to turn on the left side: to sleep upright upon the
back is naught generally: to turn upon the face vvorser for the The moon
shi^e hur^fu^ ^o the sight.
sight. Care must be had that you sleep not in a chamber, or any place in
which the moon does shine.

Exercises are needful: the same best, after Exercises.
the belly has done his office, that the excrements are avoided: otherwise by
exercise vapors are stirred, and do ascend VVriting after meat
more plentifully to the head. All exercises must be done fasting, and none
after meat. And I wish you might after meat forbear writing by the space of
three hours: but if your course of life and calling will not so permit you,
you may herein follow Montagnaua his counsel, to write either standing
upright, or a little leaning and resting your head upon your right or left
cheek: in no case to write bowing your self forward, and holding down the
head. When opportunity and time will serve, frictions Frictions.
with a rough linen cloth are very good, which are to be performed thus:
first to rub the feet, the legs, then the thighs, the hips, the buttockes,
ascending to the shoulders and neck with sof^e and long rubbings, even until
the parts begin to wax red. Amongst orders to remove the weakness of the
sight, Auicenna vvriteth that the combing of the head is not of Combing hte
head.
least force, which ought to be done every morning fasting backwardes against
the hair, for it draws the vapors out of the head, and remooveth them from
the sight.

Mirth, joy, and pleasantnes of the mind is good: a little anger does not
hu^^: i^moderat Affictio^s of the mind.
sorrow, fearfulnes, and al vehement affections are forbidde^in al affectes, but
in this our case chiefly as most hurtful to the sight.

To preserve the sight by medicines.
THE order to preserve the sight by medicines, does consist of things
outwardly Outward medicines,
applied, and inwardly taken. Amongst outward medicines to preserve the sight,
it is accounted a great secret, to smell much to marierum. So these things
following, are The smell of marierum.
found very much to comfort the sight in staying the visible spirits from
wasting: vidilicet, coral, pearl, the stone called Lapis Things comfortable
to the sight.
Armenius, spectacles of Christalline or clear and pure glass, green and sky
colors, to dip the eyes in cold water, to which purpose, many have cups made
in the form of an eye, called eye cups: and to wash the eyes with Eye cups.
the waters or decoctions of eiebright, roses, and veruaine. Some other things
are put Things put into the eyes.
into the eyes to clear the sight, and to remove impediments which do often
grow there: to which purpose as approved very good and without hurt, the juices
and waters of eie-bright, of fenell, of veruaine, of marigolds, of pearl wort
are greatly commended. And Montagnana does mention a certain A preparation of
the juice of fenell.
kind of preparation of the juice of fenell, singular good to preserve the
sight from dimnesse, to take the juice of fenill in the month of April, and
to put it in a vessel of glass, with a long and narrow neck, and let it
stand fifteen days in the sun, that it may be well dried, then remove the
glass softly, that you do not trouble the residue, or grounds, and so power
it into another vessel: and to every half pound of the juice, put an ounce of
chosen lignum alaes, beaten into fine powder, and Lignu^ aloes good for the
sight.
let it stand other fifteen days in the sun. Then strain it twice through a
thick cloth and keep the clearest in a vessel of glass to your use: you may
drop a little hereof into your eyes to clear the sight. And some do distill,
this wood in a stillatory of glass and put the water thereof into the eyes
and hold this for a great secret as miraculous to preserve the sight. And
the sam^ Montagnana does compounde an oth^^ medicine more abstersive to
remedy th^^ dimnes of the sight, dissoluing in an oun^^ of the water of
Rosemarie flowers, tw^ Salgemma does clear the sight.
scruples of Salgemma very finely powd^red, and filtered, and counsels to
drop the same often into the eyes; affirming by his experience, that it does
so mightily clear the sight that suffusions are thereby wonderfully removed,
and especially moistures of the eyes.

I am here also in this place for the clensing and strenghtning of the eyes
especially to commend unto you the frequent use of old and clear white
wine, in which the Calaminar stone has been ofrentimes extinguished: and
likewise the pure liquor of good sugar candy dissolved in the white of an egg,
being hard roasted and the yolke taken out.

Also our authors do co^me^d the washing The urine of a child.
of the eyes with the vrin of a child, and sometimes to drop the same into the
eyes. A lie of fenel stalks.
And for this purpose also they do commend ^ie made, of the ashes of fenell
stalks. We ^oe read in all our writers great commen^ations, A preparation of
the liver of a goat for the sight.
of a liquor of the liver of a goat, ^repared in manner following. Take the
liver of a male goat, not diseased, nor newly ^^lled: and after it is well
washed, prick ^^ in many places, and fill the same with ^raines of pepper,
and infarce the liver with the leaves of fenell and of eiebright then roast it
with a soft fire clear, not smoa^kie, until it be reasonably roasted: and i^
the time of rosting, receive the liquo^ which does distill, in a convenient
vessel, and apply the same to your use.

Av^cenna in his third sen. third book^ and fourth treatise, cap. de
debilitate visu^ about all other things does commend the medicine called
collyrium de fellybus, for tha^ it cleanses the pores of the eyes, clearet^
Collyrium de fellibus.
and conserueth the spirits, mu^ difieth the moystures or waters of the
sight* as yo^ may read in Avicenna in the foresaid place.

Inward Medicines.
Medicines to be taken inwardly are in number many: bu^ I think best at this
time t^ mention a few, which are e^sie to be had, and as of gre^^ efficacy most
co^me^ded: a^ of such the powder following is most si^ple: yet by expe^ie^ce
aproved of such for^ A powder for the fight
that many, after their sight has bin dec^ed, have by the use of it, received
again^ ^he same perfectlye: the powder is thus made.

Take of the powder of eiebright. iiij. of mace. j. mingle them together, and
take thereof the weight of three pence before meat.

Montanu^ in his 92* counsel gives great A sirup for the sight.
praise to a sirupe, against the decay of the sight through the weakness and
dimnes of the same, which he compoundeth thus. Take of the juices of fenel, of
vervaine, of roses, of each. ij. ^he leaves of the herb eiebright of endive,
of celendine, of each M. S.
^oyle the herbs in two pints of water vn^^ll the half be spent: then strain
it hard, and mingle the juices with the decoction, and with sugar according to
art make a si^p, which is to be kept in a glass vessel. ^ou may take two
ounces of this sirup in ^^ree ounces of the water of eiebright in ^^e morning
fasting. In windy bodies he ^aketh the sirup thus, ^ake of fenell seeds, of
anise seeds, of each. iij. of the herbs of eiebright of vervaine, of
rose-leaues, of each M. iij. of celending* M. j. of rhue. M. j. S.
boil these in water until half be consumed: strain it hard, and with
sugar sirup pize the decoction: both these sirups ar^ excellent good to defend
the sight from dimnesse.

Mes^e in his book called Grabadin, wr^ting of the diseases of the eyes, above
all other An excellent electuary to preserve the sight
medicines extolleth an electuary under the name of Hamaine, as having nob^^
virtues to preserve the eyes, and to con^^nue the visible spirits in their
cleareness^ which he compoundeth thus. Take the herb called Adhil, that is
eiebright,. ij. fenill seeds, Drams. v. mace, cubebs, cinamom, long-peper,
cloves,
of ea^^ Dra. j^
beat all into powder, s^arse it, then (...) of good honey clarified, lib. j. of
the juice of fenill boiled and clarified, j. of the juice of rhue of celendine
both boiled and clarified, of each. S.
boil all to the height of an electuary, and then put to it the powders
according to art, and so reserve it in glass vessels. You may take hereos the
quantity of Dra. iij, in wine as Mesue writes: If wine seem too hot, you may
allay it with fenill water, or with eiebright water: it must be taken in the
morning fasting: and you ought to forbear the taking of other things, by the
^pace of three hou^es, and so at night, but then you must mak^ a light supper,
and sup the more timely.

Where in this little Treatise mention is Distilled waters.
made of distilled waters, I wish the same to be artificially done in
stillatories of glass, that the qualities of the herbs may re^aine in the
distilled waters. And therefore do not allow of the common manner of ^istiling
in stillatories of lead, by the which ^he watery parts only are drawn.

FINIS.

