L'ENDIMION DE GOMBAVLD ENGLISHED MDCXXXIX

LONDON



ENDIMION.

AN Excellent Fancy first composed in FRENCH by Mounsieur Gombauld.

And now Elegantly Interpreted, BY RICHARD HURST Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, for Samuel Brown, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Fountain. 1639.

To the truly Noble, and much honored, Sr. ROBERT ANSTRUTHER Knight, and one
of the Gentleman of his Majesty's Privy Chamber.
SIR,
IT is a position, and maine Tenent agreed upon by the most judicious, that to
attain unto Honor, Wisdom is the truly Polestarre, and to retain it,
Virtue the sole Patroness: It being non ad tempus Invitamentum, sed perpetuae
virtutis premium. To which, though some have arrived by favor, others by
fortune, yet it may be ingeniously confessed of You, that by Your own merit You
have won to this meridian: Into which the sacred Majesty of Great Britain
having a true inspection, out of many others, he made select choice of you,
(for your known abilities) to create his Lord Ambassador to the Majesty of the
Empire. And during your abode at Vienna in Austria, where the Emperors Court
was then kept, the Gentleman, Author hereof, Mr. Richard Hurst (now deceased)
your (then) servant and Secretary, at his more spare and retired hours, made
this his Work his play, and in his most solitude his best solace. And unto
whose Patronage may it more properly appertain, than to your Noble self,
being writ in your foreign service. This was the maine inducement, which not
only encouraged, but imboldned me to this presentment, knowing that Honos alit
Arts; and the rather presuming on your acceptance hereof, since they who in
their life time the Muses most favor, those, after life, the nine Sisters most
honor. Thus, with pardon for my boldness craved, I humbly take my leave of
You.

Yours in all Observance, S. B.

To the Reader.
Generous Reader,
HEre is commended to thy judicious view a most ingenious Tractate of Endymion,
vulgarly styld, The Man in the Moon: a Discourse intermixed, as well with
Philosophical rudiments, as Poetical raptures: The matter sublime, the style
succinct; neither ought it to be any way mis-censured for the Title: For all
that trade with Luna, are not therefore to be held Lunaticke; neither are all
things that seem fixious merely fabulous: for rare fruits may grow of rugged
trees, and golden truths may be gathered from leaden Fables. But to such as are
not thoroughly Verst in this subject, it shall not be amiss to speak something
briefly concerning Endymion and the Moon, (the argument of this present Fancy)
the better to perfect them in the perusal thereof. She is called Trivia, for
so says Virgil, Prince of Poets, in these words. Tria virginis, or a Diana And
that by reason of her three shapes, Celestial, Terrestrial, and Infernal:
when she shines in Heaven, she is Cynthia, or Luna: when she appears on
Earth, Latonia virgo, or Diana; being resident in Hell, Hecate, or Proserpina:
And for two reasons said to be enamoured on Endymion: The one, in regard he
was the first that studied to observe the course of the Moon, and therefore
was thought to have slept thirty years, because he spent so much time in
solitude, to find out that secret. The second, because the humor of the
nightly Dew, dropping from the Stars and Planets, is sucked in, and commixed
with the moisture and juice of the Herbs and Plants, to their better animating
and cherishing; as also being profitable to flocks of Shepherds, in whose
number Endymion was ranked as the most eminent amongst them. It is the
Translation of a French Copy, three several times impressed, and in the
Original cried up, even by the most supercilious Critics: with many curious
Copper Prints decorated, and to one of the greatest Princesses in Europe at
first Dedicated: and for Mr. Richard Hurst, the Translator, he was not only
known to be a Traveller, but withal an excellent and learned Linguist, of an
accute wit, and a mature judgment; who in the Interpreting thereof, has not
only equald, but transcended it, in the elegancy both of phrase and style: But
why should I so much labor to recommend that, which in the Reading can
sufficiently approve it self, only let me entreat thee to Read favorably,
as it is rendered unto thee faithfully, and with this Caution, I commit it to
thy free and friendly Censure.

Thine, S. B.

L: Gaultier incidit. 1624



ENDYMION.
The First Book.
IN the City of Heraclea, when as the Night was much advanced, and drowsy
slumber seazing the senses, had charmed all cares, and rendered small difference
betwixt the dead, and the greater part of the living: there was on a sudden
heard a great noise of Trumpets and Clarions, and without, in the fields
multitudes of people, who hastening to the top of Mount Lathmos, made all the
adjacent places resound with the Echo of diverse sorts of Instruments, both of
Brass and Copper, whereof they were furnished with plentiful store: For the
Moon, who but a little before supplied the place of the Sun, and dimmed the
luster of the fairest Stars in the Firmament, was surprised by a sudden
defection, and, as if she herself had been by some powerful hand blotted
out of the list of the Planets, her whole light was converted into such a
horrible obscurity, as added another Night to the Night it self. The infernal
shades seemed to extend their limits even to the very Heavens, or else that
Nature becoming blind, were to return to her former confusion; every thing
was so replenished with horror and astonishment, that even the most profane
were touched with a fear of the Gods. Now it was the custom of the Ancients
in such Accidents, to make use of Mettalls of the shrillest sound they could
get, as thinking by that means to recover the Moon from some trance, or
deliver her from the charms of the Magitians, who boasted that they could at
their pleasure bring her down from Heaven, under the favor of Night and
Silence: so that they, perceiving her at length by little and little return,
as she had gone, and in less than a quarter of an hour, (so soon as the
Sun had restored her the light, which the shadow of the Earth had before
robbed her of,) appear in all her several shapes, they very easily persuaded
themselves that she was much therein obliged to their care and diligence; and,
thus pleased, resolved to employ the remainder of the Night, in taking the rest
which they conceived they had justly deserved at the hands of the gods, by
having travailed themselves in the rescue of a Goddess. But as one of them,
named Pyzander, more curious in the contemplation of this fair Star, and
slow in his Retreat, had by chance stayed on the Hill a little while behind
the rest; he heard not far from him, certain accents of Lamentation, and
such as that hour of Night rendered, as more sad, so more plain and shrill.
This somewhat affrighted him, but presently inspired him with a greater
curiosity of knowing what it might be; so that softly drawing nearer to it
without discovering himself, he understood these words: Is not this Mount
Lathmos? who is this, that in an instant has brought me back into mine own
Country, from whence of late I was so far distant? And who is it, that
together with my Country has restored me my life? Alas! here is the
Sacrifice, but what is become of the Priest, or where is the Altar? And what
hand (intending to do me a favor) has brought me from amidst so great a
people? Is it thou Diana, who as thou shinest more fair than ordinary in the
Heavens, so thou now beholdest me, if at least thou vouchsafe to look on me,
more unfortunate than ever? Whether thou be cruel, or merciful, wherefore
permittest thou me not to die? Although thou bereavest me of all other
happiness, yet deprive me not at least of this last, as the common comfort of
the most miserable: will thou force me to live therein, to show the whole
choler of Heaven assembled upon one man? do thou hinder me to dye once, that
thou may keep me always dying, and that the memory of the favors thou have
heretofore done me, may consume me with sorrow, being determined (having lost
them) never hereafter to preserve any thing. That thou have loved me Diana, is
witnessed by thy exposing my life to so many dangers, that I could not have
expected worse from thy hatred, than is arrived to me from thine affection:
Thou have loved me, (I think) intending thereby to imprint in me an ill
opinion of the gods, and to let me see they are neither constant nor just. I
should have judged thy humor and disposition by that of thine Empire, which
Fortune has given thee only over the lightest and most insensible things in
the World. O ye Mortals, take mine example, to make you fear the loves of
Goddesses, least they bring you to a trial of all wretchedness: all the
honor and glory of their Love, are but vain and silly rewards, since the
excess of so many torments wholly annihilates the sense of it.

O ye gods, says Pyzander to himself, what is this I hear? me thinks I
should know this voice, but I understand not this lamentation: can Endymion be
in these parts, and I have no advertisement of it? and being returned home,
should he live as though he were still absent? and (seeking rather Desert
places, than society of men) be more diligent in visiting this Mountain, than
his dearest friends? Thus Pyzander, diversely assaulted, sometimes with one
imagination, sometimes with another, continued harkening, and Endymion
lamenting.

I endure the punishment, says he, O goddess, and know not the crime I have
committed; except it be for having added the contempt of all things in the
world to the estimation I made of thy good will. Become now contrary to thy
self, and (forgetting what thou owe to my constancy) take up against me the
plea both of the gods and men; all whom I have injured in the sole desire of
adoring thee: If thou accusest me of no other thing, thine accusation is
sufficient to justify me. Mine offense is a great merit, which makes me far
more worthy of recompense than punishment. Yet all this while I have not been
able to advance any one step, nor erect so much as a Tomb for my self: But
peradventure mine affection is presumptuous, and my complaint rash. But now I
am compelled (pardon me O goddess) to require it of thine eyes; to whom, as to
thy promises, I have been too too credulous. I would also crave it of thy
heart and memory, if happily they may be true to thee. Think not that I can
forget my duty through the too often remembering thy favors: for although I
should reap no other fruit of them, but the loss of time, and my self; yet
will I dare counsel thee, to favor thine enemies still in that manner.

It is either Endymion, says Pyzander, or his Ghost, which perhaps wanting
opportunity of passage to the shore of the dead, wanders in these parts. Has
he ended his days by Shipwreck, or some other accident, which has deprived
him of Burial, and granted him none other Tomb but the Heavens? So long as
the Sun shall behold his body, his soul shall not be received amongst the
Ghosts. But whither does mine astonishment make me wander? and what does my
fear cause me to utter? Those are not the Discourses of a dead man, but rather
of some one weary of his life. In the mean time Endymion, whose complaint,
like his passion, seemed infinite, and who, as it were, labored to convince a
goddess of ingratitude, and inconstancy, failed not (in continuing his
discourse) presently to name himself, and thereby gave Pyzander a resolution
to interrupt him. I must confess Goddess, said he, that I am not worthy of
the least favor that ever thou have done me; and that the consideration of
what I am, might justly enjoyne me silence. But what! are the gods blind? or
have they only an obscure knowledge of humane actions? do they deliberate
without judgment? or can they possibly recant their first determinations? As
for me, I ever made account to surpass all other men whatsoever in vows, and
affection to serve thee; but never thought to exceed a Goddess in resolution
and constancy: yet I find thee no less mutable than a mortal; and, as if it
were not enough to change, thou proceedest from instability to oblivion. The
name of Endymion is no more in thy mouth, than the estimation of him in thy
heart: thou talkest no more of him to thy Nymphs; no, not so much as to thy
thoughts. At this name of Endymion, Pyzander (transported with his longing)
approaching him, finds him laid along under the brow of the Hill with his
arms a cross, and his eyes fixed upon the Moon; and thus begins to speak
to him. What gods are those, that being at once froward and favorable, do
make me hear the voice of a man so dear to me, by a lamentation so grievous,
whereof the cause is also unknown to me? Have I so often desired to see
Endymion again, to the end that such a sinister accident should now make me
afraid of his encounter when it is offered me? Ah! my dear Pyzander, says
Endymion, (rising, and giving him his hand) what good fortune begins to
approach me, in restoring me the presence of him, whom my sight, but not my
thought has been so long deprived of? Or what sad mishap is this that
increases my sorrows, by afflicting thee? For I believe, none but the
unfortunate, and such as watch when others sleep, do repair to these
solitary places, in this time of night. Tell me, I beseech thee, what brings
thee hither? Verily, answers Pyzander, I have more cause, and a far greater
desire to hear thy news from thy self, since thou find me in our own
Country, where thou leftest us all, to go seek (doubtless) more strange
adventures than we. But I wonder extremely, Endymion, that thou seem
ignorant of the cause of my coming hither* for if the noise we lately made
were heard by the Moon, much more should it be come unto thine ears, to
awake thee out of the deepest slumber thou could be cast into. So far was I
from sleeping as thou imaginest, says Endymion, that I was in a place far
remote from hence, where me-thought, I was cast into an everlasting slumber:
From whence I was freed, like one that dreams, finding my self in this place,
without perceiving how, or which way I came hither. I confess there was even
now a great noise, which did do me a very ill office, and made me wish that
all things had been more quiet, and that an universal slumber had rendered all
the creatures on earth as dumb as those of the water. Indeed Endymion, says
Pyzander, I understand thee not, for thy latter Discourses are more obscure
than thy former: I beseech thee therefore keep me no longer ignorant of that
which our friendship should make common: Tell me thy good or ill adventures;
for thou know it is the property of communication to render contentments
more full, and increase the power of them, as also on the contrary, to
extenuate and ease afflictions and crosses. Alas! replies Endymion, where shall
I begin, or how shall I end? Shall I rob thee of thy rest this night, by
recounting unto thee my sufferings, wherein my own spirit shunnes the
remembrance of whatsoever most delights it: so much am I grieved to see
fortune, so unworthily insult over my torments and patience. Thus Endymion
would have excused himself touching the Discourse; but that Pyzander still
adding more entreaties and requests to his former, got him at length to sit
down by him, and to begin in this manner.

O Pyzander! how mighty a Master is Fate! and how vainly does our reason
labor in straining her self to resist, and not to follow it wheresoever it
leads us, be it to our advantage or prejudice! It takes away our judgment,
and one while by flattery, another while by force makes us lose the path of
every other adventure. Now, that I may not forget to tell thee every
particular, thou must know what chanced me, when I was in the City of Ephesus.
As upon an Holy Day about the end of the Sacrifices, we walking the Streets
passed one of the houses nearest to Diana's Temple: (for Polydamon was by
chance with me) I was mightily amazed, at a certain woman, who from her
threshold casting her eye upon me amongst the multitude, called me by my name,
which was very strange, that she having never seen me before, should then so
suddenly know me, without any information whatsoever. Besides, she was so old,
that she could scarce have found witnesses to testify that ever she had been
young: and together with her misshapen and discolored face, hollow eyes,
hanging cheeks, dry and withered skin, she had so few signs of life left,
that it seemed, she stayed only in the world, to represent the image of Death.
In brief, this woman with extraordinary pains casting up her sight, which
before was continually fixed on the Earth, and which had been long
dis-accustomed from looking up to Heaven, says, come hither Endymion; I
observing the wildness of her look, and her gestures to be such, as made her
seem transported with frenzy, or possessed of some spirit more vigorous than
her own; and not being able enough to wonder at this accident, suddenly Cr Pas
inu

stayed, without being curious to draw nearer, or answer her: but she coming
toward me, stooping and staggering, like one tired with bearing the burden of
so many years, and to whom the only distance of three steps she had to make,
seemed a long voyage, and a most tedious exercise, said, Be not afraid to
hear thy fortune; for the Decrees of Themis are inevitable both to the gods
and men: and then she uttered these Verses.

The Star that in the Forest reigns,
A thousand favorable strains
Upon thee with her beams shall dart,
But in the end those shall depart,
And thou be forced to think and tell
Inconstancy in the gods does dwell.
As the desires are violent,
Th'attempts are faint, not prevalent,
It Is hard the gods to trace:
A heavy-light enchantment does
Stop, and make thee wander both,
It kills* it gives thee grace.
And so retiring her self, Polydamon told me, he thought she was mad; for said
he, what acquaintance is there betwixt you? but I, instead of answering him,
pondered what she had told me; and ghessing that there was some extraordinary
matter in it, savouring rather of a Goddess than a Woman, and inclining more
to inspiration than frenzy, for my more full satisfaction, I instantly demanded
of one of her Neighbors what she was? who answered me, Art thou a Grecian, or
a Barbarian, that thou know not the Virgin Parthenopea, one of the chief of
the Race of the Iamides, who usually do prophecy at the Olympian Festivalls?
But another told me, in more courteous terms, that she whom we took for a
Woman, was a Maiden, of at least an hundred years old, and who, besides that
she was indeed of that race of the Prophets issued of Apollo and Evadne, having
constantly vowed her Virginity to Diana, and employed her whole life in her
service, had in plentiful measure received from her the gift of foretelling
things to come.

The greatest fear I then had, was, lest I might have forgotten some of the
words she had spoken to me, wherein the measure of the Verses stood me in good
stead: for by often turning and repeating them with my self, and by the help
of the several parts, I had in a short time imprinted the whole in my memory;
wherewithal I could not enough entertain me, for my spirit already began to
anticipate my good fortune, by hope and a thousand kinds of differently
delightful imaginations. The sweet aspects which were promised me in the
beginning, did so fully deprive me of the consideration of the cross
adventures which threatened me toward the end, that the most rigorous
afflictions that could befall me, seemed delightsome and honorable, because
they were to be for Diana's sake.

From thence forward mine eyes found none other object that could content them,
except such as put me in mind of her; and shunning all variety or diversion, I
was still contemplating either her Portraict in the Temple, or her Star in
the Heaven. But chiefly, after my return from Ephesus, I desired to remain on
the top of this Mountain, where I slept the greater part of the day, that I
might employ the night in this sweet contemplation; which begot an opinion in
diverse, that I slept always.

By this course I saw the Sun less ordinarily than the Moon, whose luster
was to me a thousand times more pleasing, than that of the fairest days: I did
so seldom let her go out of my sight, that I was able to give the world
account of the ways she held in the Heaven, from the house of Helles even to
that of Astrea, or that of Erigone, and thence to Ganymedes and farther: yea,
even when in her Chariot drawn by Dragons, she parts from the Celestial
Mansions, to go take her walk in the Countries of some of the Daughters of
Atlas: whether on the one side she go to visit Cassiope, Andromeda, and the
whole family of Cepheus; or on the other, she go to hunt toward Orions
quarter, or by chance, in the hot weather she sometimes for her recreation,
retire to the Caves of the Centaure, or in the cool of the Evening she walk
upon the shore of the great Celestial River, which is diversely named, by some
Nilus, by others Erydanus. And the Goddess took the diligence and affection I
had to make her glory known in all parts so well, that she became as willing
to show her self, as I was desirous to behold her; in so much that I cannot
say, if mine eyes were either more comforted by her favor, and less dazeled
by her light, or that by being accustomed to this exercise, they with the more
ease pierced the Heaven. But (as if she were descended into the middle Region
of the Air) me thought I saw her Chariot roll upon the Clouds; and (to
endeare and gratify me the oftener) she inclined her look toward me with the
same aspect, wherewith she beholds the Sacrifices that most delight her. She
darted for my sake the sweetest looks that her heart was able to send forth
through the passage of her eyes; wherewith these places were so enlightened,
that they seemed not sensible of the absence of the day: O wonder of Fate and
Nature! A Goddess forgets all the Gods, for the co^templation of one simple
man, and finds that thing on earth, which makes her despise the Heavens. There
is nothing lowlier than the subject which ordinarily retains her looks and
thoughts; and by her affection she seems to become (as it were) mortal and
humane: And on the contrary, a mortal contemplates only heavenly things, has
nothing but a Deity in his thought, and has his eye fixed only upon beauty it
self, that is, on Diana.

But what an extraordinary proof did I receive one day of her goodwill, when
as the Heavens, all covered with Clouds, which seemed jealous of my good
fortune, kept me from seeing her: and how happy was it for me, that there had
been some few days so cloudy, as it were on purpose! For in that time I was
advertised by the faithful relation of one of her Nymphs, that she was as
much troubled therewith, as I, and that she had bemoaned her self of it to
the Goddess Iris in this manner. Iris, said she, it would not trouble me much,
to be a while deprived of seeing a good part of the Earth, provided that I
might at least behold those places which do most delight me. Now I will tell
thee freely, that I have lately taken a particular affection to Caria, and yet
it is full four days since I last saw it: I had rather be debarred the sight
of the Isle Delos, or of my native Mountain, the name whereof I bear.
Disperse therefore I pray thee the Clouds a little, and divert them either
toward Lycia, or Ionia, or any way else, so that any hand thou hide not the
City of Heraclea, nor Mount Lathmos from mine eyes. Immediately after this
there appeared a great opening in the Clouds, and the dark vapors vanished at
the presence of the goddess, who began to appear in her fairest and most
perfect luster, and as if she had assembled all her beams about me; I found my
self in an instant wholly environed with light. O happy and fortunate
Endymion! says Pyzander, if the sweet looks of the Moon can be able to
render a man so. But tell me, what could thou be doing? and how could thou
dispose of thy self, all the times she appeared not in the Heavens? Even that
which she her self does, when she is deprived of the light of the Sun,
answered Endymion: She attires her self in a black veil, as if she could
not miss the sight of him one hour, without mourning for his absence. Even
so, what light soever shone, I seemed to live in darkness, and had no other
exercise, but a continual wandering up and down the Woods, to try whether I
could learn any news of her; or whether my Fate, or her favor would give me
leave to find her: Wherein I labored a while in vain, but at length, as it
is the custom of the gods, sometimes to prevent our hopes, and otherwhiles to
come when our expectations are tired; so this good hap chanced to me when I
least thought of it.

The night had already begun to furle up her sails, and a gentle cool gale,
the forerunner of light, sweetly cherished slumber, and with the force of its
wings, drove before it a clear thin Cloud, laden only with a light dew,
besprinkling with drops the whole earth, like Pearls, which sparkled even as
little eyes in the faces of the flowers and Plants. When as awaking, and
finding an air more pleasing than ordinary, and such a one as the gods have in
Heaven, or do bring with them when they come down to the earth: I came out of
the Cave, being moved thereunto by a certain pleasing violence, which had no
less power over me, than if some voice had called me forth. And scarce had I
passed the threshold, when as I saw before me, upon the edge of the Hill a
woman, for such at first I took her to be; but having a little nearer observed
her beauty, her stature, and more than humane Majesty, I knew that it was some
of the goddesses. With what terms now shall I possibly express that, which
then mine eyes beheld? and from whence shall I draw comparisons to represent
unto thee that which (being beyond compare) can admit none? I shall have sooner
done, if without attempting to demonstrate light by obscurity, I bid thee fix
the eye of thy imagination (so far forth as thou art able) about all the
Heavens, and there behold Beauty it self fitting, accompanied with an
everlasting youth, and such as can neither suffer alteration, or be impaired by
any accident whatsoever. O Pyzander, how far are the Divine beauties
different from these here below! and how soon did they beget in my soul a
contempt of all that before I had ever seen! But I tasted this felicity in the
most absolute degree of all, when perceiving the Bow she held in her hand, and
the Cressant which shone upon her head, I found it to be the goddess to whom
my heart addressed all its vows: this, I say, made me imagine that the day
took his being thence, and not from the rising of the Sun. Endymion, says
Pyzander, as I desire not to engage thee in impossibilities; or to busy thee
overmuch in a long and vain description of things which cannot be represented:
So will I yet entreat thee to give me some figures of this Divine beauty, as
much as our humane language can permit thee. Amongst so many perfections, says
Endymion, I know not which I should first observe; and the desire I had to
behold them all, hindered me from taking particular notice from any one, and was
cause I saw them but confusedly. One while I was amazed to see, that in so
perfect a stature, (wherein she far surpassed the best formed of women) she
seemed to be of so tender an age: for her complexion was tenderer and fairer,
than that which appears in the first bloome of youth it self, being mixed
with certain darting glances, which seemed to participate of both flames and
flowers, and accompanied with a virtue so Divine, as that it defended it from
the injuries of the Seasons, and freed it for ever from the jurisdiction of
Years. Sometimes I admired in her a kind of Majesticke demeanor, which as it
had force to attract the noblest courages, wanted not also austerity enough to
check those whom pusillanimity accused of want of worth, and to prohibit them
to approach her. Honor and Majesty seemed to sit in her Countenance, as in a
seat of well polished Ivory, keeping a perpetual residence under the rich
ornament of her fair Tresses, some whereof were plaited and wreathed; others
bound up and curled after the Laconian manner, with far more grace than Art,
there being no need of addition either to their luster or number. Some others
carelessly dispersed, and, as it were, escaped from the bands and captivity of
the rest, danced on her vermillion cheeks, and fair shoulders; catching, and
captivating (in their sporting) both Love and Zephirus: round about her Corrall
Lips appeared the sweetest smiles, and the most delicate of all the Graces,
both which jointly with their attracts and courtings, did there manure the
Gilly-flowers amidst the Lyllies and Roses. Which way soever she turned her
fair eyes, both brown and clear, the air became in an instant so sweet and
pure, that every thing was beautified and refreshed therewithal. Those eyes
are really the two Stars, who at their pleasure do beget a new Spring on
Earth, and appease the Sea when it rages and is troubled. But what do thou
embarke me in Pyzander? and what is this that I undertake? to speak to thee of
those eyes, in whose presence, there is none other able to look up, or contest
never so little without being dazelled: which was the cause that I my self was
constrained ever and anon to cast down mine eyes, and let them fall on her
fair neck, although it were only a diversion of them from flames and
lightnings, to loose them in the Snow of her bosom and breasts: where I could
see no more on each side (they being by chance half covered) than a small
Cressant of those two little (but truly Celestial) Globes, which were in
continual motion, and who, as scorning to be restrained of liberty, forced
open her garment, as much as possibly they could; so that if they could not
fully display their dazelling whiteness and beauty, at least they gave ample
testimony of the perfection of their round form; and if they troubled not the
eye, yet spared they not to shake the imagination. Herein it is, Pyzander, that
the most eloquent would become dumb, and therefore will I speak no more of
it, least the only remembrance thereof should render me speechless, and leave
me nothing else but sighs.

All those places rejoiced in the presence of this Goddess, who seemed to have
made another Olympus of Mount Lathmos. As for me, I was so fraught and
replenished with contentment, that enjoying whatsoever can in this life be most
delightful, me thought I then first began to live: I was wholly ravished with
the wonders of so rare an object, when as directing toward me her looks,
every motion whereof seemed to be conducted by the Graces themselves: Endymion
(says she, with a voice so clear and pleasant, as would with the first word
have charmed any breast) thy vows have touched me even in Heaven, and thine
affection has been acceptable to me. I know what care thou take to imprint
my glory and greatness in the knowledge of the Mortals; if I should not be
sensible of it, thou would have just reason to complain of me, and to
publish over all the World, that Ingratitude is lodged as well in Heaven
amongst the gods, as on Earth amongst men. Make use therefore of thy good
Judgment, and ask of me whatsoever thou will, wherein I may have opportunity
to testify mine acknowledgment, and doubt not of the grant: I (remaining
wholly mute and confounded, not only by seeing her, and receiving so great
honor at her hands, but also, for that admiration and respect equally enjoined
me silence) had not the power to desire any thing; esteeming my pains and
watchings too fully recompensed with one only look of hers, or the least word
she had vouchsafed to speak to me: Insomuch that at first, I was not able to
speak at all; and although I could, I knew not what to say unto her: and this
forced silence wa^ advantageous to me, in that she gave me (by an act of her
accustomed goodness) some small time to bethink and recollect me. I was once
minded to beg of her the same thing which my Father obtained of Jupiter; which
was, to live, and dye according to his good liking. At length finding that I
must needs speak, the consideration of my duty surmounting my fear, and
furnishing me with subject of discourse, in despite of the distraction
wherewith I was possessed, I thus answered her: Great Goddess, the honor thou
do me, does infinitely exceed my condition; grant me therefore what thou
think fitting; for what could I request of thee? I forget all that is past,
and can think of nothing for the future, being so thoroughly possessed with
what I at present enjoy. Give me leave rather to offer my self to thee, and if
thou gratify me so far as to receive me, I will believe thou have granted me
all things. I would gladly beg of thee, that the happiness I now enjoy,
might be made everlasting: but she, well observing the ecstasy wherein so
unwonted a felicity had cast me, and which having in the beginning deprived me
of speech, went on also to seize upon my understanding, replying asks me, how
would thou be able, (said she) to endure that long, which in a moment has so
distempered thee, as thou had need of some body to restore thee to thy self?
And as for that which thou requirest, thou could not obtain it, albeit thou
werest in the principal Rank amongst the Immortals: think therefore quickly
on some other suite, that I may be no longer detained. Assuredly said I to her,
mortal men, who live so short a space, have great reason to think time
precious, since the very gods themselves, whose Nature is infinite, are so
tender and careful to loose none of it. But whereunto do thou oblige me o
Goddess? for, considering thee as Diana, I do not see what I can ask of thee
suitable to my desire, since the honor of attendance, and perpetual serving
of thee, belongs only to thy Nymphs? and for me, I can esteem nothing
grateful, that shall enjoyne me a long separation from thy presence: I will
therefore speak unto thee as to the Moon, beseeching thee, that by the power
thou have in Heaven, thou will be pleased to allow me some place amongst the
Stars, and that I may be one of those, which go least out of thy sight, and
most frequently wait on thy Chariot whither soever thou go. Or, if the
number of the Stars be so complete, that not one more can be added
thereunto, and if the Fates resist me herein, grant me at least, the privilege
amongst the Mortals, of rendering thee the most acceptable Vows and Sacrifices,
and of employing my whole life in thy services. Hereat the Goddess (not
content to testify her approbation by a gracious nod of her head only) with a
smile, able to ravish both gods and men, added these words: Well says she, be
it in Heaven, or on Earth, I will never omit any occasion of gratifying thee;
neither would I have thee doubt of mine affection or memory of thee. Scarce had
she said those words, when on a sudden I lost the sight of her, and heard
only a small noise of the Arrows, and Quiver which shook upon her shoulders,
as she turned her self to be gone. In the mean time I forgot not to meditate
on that which I had often heard speech of, to wit, that the gods have a form
of going, different from that of men, and that without the trouble of putting
one foot before another, they have power in the twinkling of an eye, to
transport themselves where they please, and that every way on Earth or in
Heaven is alike easy to them. But alas! I much over-saw my self, in that I
procured her not to swear by the River Stix, an Oath inviolable amongst the
gods. Endymion, says Pyzander, either the gods are not, or else they are true,
and do infallibly acknowledge the love is borne them; for if they fail us,
whom shall we trust? all things must fail us with them: but this Hill will
be sooner converted into a Plain or Valley; and sooner shall Meander
(shunning the Ionian Sea) run retrograde, and stop in the source, than the
words of the gods prove instable; and chiefly those of Diana, that great
Ornament of the World, who by ordinance of the Destinies does in so many
Countries supply even the place of Jupiter himself: But good Endymion,
proceed, for I am sorry that I should employ the time in any thing, but
hearing thee; so much I long to see the success of thine adventures.

The sense I had of this so high a favor, was for a great while the only
support of my life, and raised my contentment to that height, that it admitted
no comparison; no, not with the most fortunate amongst men. The greatness and
state of the person I adored, and who reciprocally graced me with so much good
liking, did place all the honors and dignities in the world beneath my
condition and glory: All conversation, yea, even that of my dearest friends,
seemed tedious to me; as well for that they only interrupted the sweetest
delights of my soul, as for the scruple I made to communicate unto them the
least of my thoughts. My memory often represented this goddess to me, as
vively as if she had been before mine eyes: Wherein I took more pleasure,
than in the very time in which I enjoyed her presence; because, as then, the
excess of my rapture depriving me of my senses and judgment, permitted me not
to be mine own. I went a hundred, and a hundred times to visit the place where
I had seen her, and was never weary of seeking some new foote-steps of hers,
which I had not before taken notice of. I kissed the grass which her feet
(accustomed to walk in Heaven) had bruised; and became as strict a Guardian of
the place, as if it had been of a Temple or Altar. But as my thoughts
presented her before mine eyes, so also also did my dreams; dreams indeed,
more fair, and more resplendent than the day; and such, as truly I never
desired to awake from. Sometimes me thought I beheld her speaking to me, only
with the language of her eyes, which looked on me with so sweet an aspect;
that no tongue is able to express that which they seemed to say unto me.
Another while me thought she spoke to me, with a gesture equalling, yea,
exceeding speech it self. Sometimes, casting my self at her feet, I
endeavored to stay her, and kissed the hemme or skirt of her Veil, and
sometimes (O too presumptuous dreams!) me thought I kissed her hand it self. O
to what altitude of glory and felicity does sleep raise even the most
wretched! And how much greater favors did it give me taste of, then the mouth
which received them dares rehearse, it being so close shut, as if thereby
silence had been imposed upon it: and indeed I only discoursed thereof to my
thoughts. Oh Heavenly contentments, said I, are you counterfeit or real? But
how counterfeit, because so sensible? and how real, being only in a dream?
If I would complain of them, or give my vows and thanks for them: to whom
should I address my self, to Slumber, or to Diana, or to both at once? The
one shuts mine eyes, the other seals up my lips, and with a pleasing
violence contrary to it self, steals my soul from me, and yet permits it not
to issue. Oh goddess! if thou art so favorable to me, as that thou assistest,
and art really present in this sweet Mystery, wherefore do thou make use of
the opportunity of slumber? Or if thou be not present, or bear no part
herein* wherefore then do thou suffer sleep to abuse thine Image for my sake?
Oh, but perchance thou causest the charms thereof to accompany thine, that
being thus tempered, and the moderation of the one quallifying the force of the
other, my life may be preserved. Is this then the way which the goddesses take,
to communicate most familiarly with Mortals? And are their greater favors of
such disproportion with our senses, that they must be entranced, before they
can participate of them? or in a manner half dead, to prevent a full dying: It
is to me indeed a favorable foreseeing, and diverting of what might thence
befall me; for I do verily persuade my self, that if thou (when thou daignest
to make me thus happy) should not take me in my sleep, thou would inflict
more than a thousand deaths upon me by an excess of contentment, and so be as
many times troubled to restore me my life, as thou had before deprived me of
it: Thus, Pyzander, I knew by day that I was a Man, although the night rendered
me equal to the gods.

Pardon me Diana, if by chance I discourse freely that which I am not obliged
by any Law to conceal. The wise man, says Pyzander, conceales the greatest
part of his thoughts; but what rule of Wisdom ties us to keep secret our
Dreams? Every man takes the liberty to speak of them to whom he pleases, and
forbids not his curiosity to consult with any Interpreters, thereby to discover
and obtain (according to their fears or desires) some light from their
obscurity, or some certainty from their ambiguity: and besides, no man can be
censured for the follies or vanities of Dreams, since to them all manner of
liberty and freedom is allowed. There is no man, Pyzander, says Endymion, but
in his sleep does sometimes see certain obscure and cloudy representations of
such things as most content and delight the mind being awake: but to have (as
I had) every Night continual visions of Diana, to see so clear, mine eyes
being closed, and so sensibly to enjoy (my whole senses being charmed) such
pleasures as exceed any mention I am able to make of them, is a secret which I
cannot comprehend.

The end of the First Book.
ENDYMION.
The Second Book.
AWhile after, not enduring to feed longer on vain images or representations,
how delightful soever, at so great a distance, I impatiently longed, once more
to see, on Earth, her, whom I only beheld in Heaven. Wherein, albeit a
Goddess, and a very favorable one, yet to me she seemed tedious, and of too
slow and small a resolution. I durst promise my self, that she, who in respect
to the diligence and care I had taken to keep me in her presence, had been
moved to wish so well to me, would be yet more induced thereunto by my words,
if I might but speak to her. And that I might lose no opportunity, I frequented
for her sake, Hunting and Fishing; in both which pastimes I knew she* as
Mistress of those Exercises, took especial delight. But all that was in
vain; for whilst I went to seek her in the most desert places about Meander,
she was perchance on the Bank of Eurotus or Peneus* or else coursing some
Lion in Getulia, or some Heart in Creta, or Tiger in Armenia: For there are so
many Rivers, Forests, and Mountains* more delightful than those of Caria, so
many by-waies and turnings, and so many Courriers, and travailers that she
takes care of, as indeed it had been a wonder for me to have encountered her.

At last, not knowing more what to do, or with whom to consult, I called to
mind Ismen, with whom I had a very familiar acquaintance. Thou know the
esteem she deserves above all other women, and the great judgment and insight
she has both in divine and humane things: Apollo himself exceeds her not, in
the knowledge of the power and virtue of Herbs, and the Moon will sooner for
her sake come down from Heaven, than for any other. Indeed, says Pyzander, it
is held that she is able to compass whatsoever she will undertake, and that
Thessalia never had her equal. I resolving one day to go see her, says
Endymion, and to use my uttermost endeavors to charm the most charming of
Women, did thus accost her: Oh blessed Ismena, sole honor of thy Sex, and
thou whose manners and virtues are such, as yield no place to the Goddesses
themselves: What praises shall I spare to set forth thy glory* and what a high
obligation of duty shall I be bound to thee in, if thou will befriend me so
far, as to free me from the torment and affliction wherewith I am at present
enveloped; for whosoever, distressed in body or mind, labors for the honor
of seeing thee, finds thee presently favorable. Thine encounter is a good
presage unto all, and whither so ever thou go, thou art more desired than
present: but as thou have power of doing that good, which none can ever be able
to requite by any equal retribution: so must it necessarily follow, that thou
find the recompense thereof in the glory that thou duly gainest thereby.
Besides, what can all mine endeavors add to the felicity of her, who needs
not the help of any Mortal, and to whom her own virtue is a sufficient
supply of whatsoever she has use of? who with an equal power disposes both
of gods and men, and can at her own discretion alter the course of Nature and
Destiny! If thou will in all things exactly imitate the Example of the gods,
thou know it is the hurt they have power to do, which makes them feared,
but it is their clemency and good deeds which chiefly make them adored; and all
power is fruitless, that being implored, assists not. My supplication and
suite is not of such a difficult nature, as that ever the Night should thereby
be made to surprise men at noonday, or the force of Charms hinder the course
or brightness of the Stars. The Rivers shall never for my sake, run
backwards to their sources, nor their waves swell in a calm. The Husband-mans
grain shall not be thereby transported from one field into another, to beguile
his hopes at Harvest: and the Hills or Woods shall not change their situation
or owners. Neither do I petition thee to disquiet the contentment of the
living, or repose of the dead, nor yet that the Ghosts should arise and answer
thee: and far less that thou should by any charming or sinister potions,
create or extinguish any affection: No, I know thou never do abuse thy
skill, and for that cause it is, that the gods love thee, and give thee a daily
increase thereof, rendering thee equal to themselves. But yet I will tell thee
freely, that I have been of late moved by a just occasion, to a continual
visiting of the most remote and solitary places of the bank of Rivers,
Plains, Woods, and Mountains, to find, if it be possible, an opportunity of
seeing the Goddess Diana, who has heretofore obliged me with so great a
liberality, both of her presence and promises. Wherein first, I will presume to
crave thy advice, and then afterward some effect of thy power and assistance.

She having awhile silently considered with her self, lifted up her eyes which
were before fixed on the Earth, and answered me thus: I should think my self
infinitely happy, Endymion, in finding any occasion, wherein I could be able to
serve thee, which as I have devoutly wished for, so I will not spare to seek
it even amidst the greatest difficulties. I confess, there is nothing so hard,
but may by Art and Discretion be compassed: for not only the Goddess thou
desire to see, whether thou suest unto her as to the Moon, Diana, or
Hecatea; but even both the Jupiters, and all the gods, must at length give
place to the power of Charms. The most special and important thing now is,
that care be employed in making a right use of it, lest the abuse bring
inseparable revenge with it. Have thou never heard, that Nemesis (the punisher
of offenses) otherwise called Andrastea, because she is inevitable, has her
Throne placed upon the Moon, (according to the representation the Egyptians
have made of her) that she may thence the more perfectly take a view of the
actions of men and punish such as are audacious and rash? Know thou not
also, thot others figure her with a Scourge, in that hand on which side Hope is
seated, to the end that none should think to escape with impunity, if they
aspire to such things, as are not fit for them to desire? If therefore thou,
instead of bringing down the Moon, would not draw on thy head the anger of
Heaven, be careful that thou call her not, but on good and just grounds* and
with the opportunity of a perfect silence, and that when all things, even to
the very leaves of the Trees, be at rest: for if the least noise surprise her*
before she have set foot on the ground, she will presently before thy face
return up to the Heavens with greater speed than she came down. The gods,
Endymion, with difficulty and much labor are moved to come to men, but do
return with great and easy haste; as having always more cause to be averse
than favorable to them: and the least inconvenience or hindrance is of force
to distemper and give interruption to the greatest miseries. Especially this
one requires so much observance and dexterity, that it must be stolen from the
eyes of all the gods and Men: and although a general slumber should seize both
the one and the other, yet we are taught, both by necessity and providence,
that Jupiter himself (and he only*) never sleeps.

If the favor of Heaven toward us, Ismena, said I, be so small; perchance
that of the earth may be greater. And since this goddess does equally divide
her care, and presence to the one and the other, if we can encounter her in the
Mountains or Forests, what need have* we to seek more difficult means? and
(with so much danger of losing it) to prevent the opportunity, which of it
self may follow us? Indeed, says she, that is the other mean I intended to
tell thee of, which also wants not its obstacles or difficulties. For although
we may sometimes find her in Ionia it self, or some other part of Greece:
sometimes in the Woods of Merathon, or Erymanthus, other whiles on the tops of
Hymettus, Cytheron* Othrys, or Pindus; yet we must oftener expect and seek her
amongst the Sarmatae, or Garamantes, or in some other the most secret and
remote place of the World. Besides, she is most commonly accompanied of her
Nymphs, whose profession and exercises have rendered them for the most part so
rigorous, and unfit for conversation, that the only sight of men so offends
them, that a small provocation would induce them to denounce the same war to
them which they have done to the most savage Beasts. But (which is yet more
fastidious, and less supportable to those that desire the enterview of this
goddess) some of them keep their eye so constantly upon her, as if Heaven had
made them her Guardians Doris and Laomeda, ambitious, jealous, and curious
Nymphs, do so nearely watch, and so strictly besiege her, that she is not
only inaccessible, but indeed really captive. Yet, that they should aim, to
know, control, and conduct all were more tolerable, if they did not also
labor to possess all. It is almost incredible, how the very gods themselves,
as well as men, by a secret excess of goodness and indulgence, are insensibly
overswaied by the desires of those whom they favor. So that by over-gratifying
some one, or two, or three persons, they seem to retrench the greater part of
their liberality they owe to many; I will not say unto all. And whilst a small
number does even surfeit on their beneficence; whole multitudes suffering it,
accuse Heaven, and hate Government, together with their own lives, and the
light. Shall we therefore infer that the gods are not just? far be it, but
let us rather acknowledge that they govern all things by the will of Fate,
according to its innocence, or the corruption of the times. This I tell thee,
Endymion, out of the affection I bear thee, to the end thou may remember,
and duly consider every point.

Oh Ismena, said I, let me see Diana and dye: she may perchance be touched her
self with a desire to speak with me: for the gaining of this favor I am
ready to expose my life to all manner of perils; and if I lose it, that shall
not at all grieve me, if she only may know it was for her sake. O ye gods!
replied she then, my memory does me ill offices very often: and I have much
abused both the time and thy patience: for my last nights dream foretold me
all that thou have recounted to me; wherein I saw Diana her self, and received
directions from her what I should do, and prescription of means, which but
just now I was so much troubled to find out. This is the very time, and the
most fit, wherein she leaves the Heaven to pass a few days on Earth. I know
of a Forest in the World, consecrated to this goddess, whereunto the beauty
of the place, and the innocence of the inhabitants, do often invite her to
come for her recreation. That is the place where she usually keeps her Chariot
and her Arms: besides the great number of wild beasts do there afford her
more different and acceptable pastimes than in any other part. Fail not thou
on the day of the Sun, toward evening, to be at the top of Mount Lathmos:
and the morrow after, which will be the day of the goddess, I will endeavor
to make thee happy, if at least thy felicity only consist in the honor of
seeing her.

Upon this resolution, Pyzander, which was taken on Venus day, I took leave of
her, until the time she had assigned me; which seemed so long in coming, that
I can scarce tell thee, whether I had greater torment by mine impatient desire,
or more comfort in my hope. But above all, the day of the Sun seemed to me so
long, that I would have been glad to have seen Phoebus hastened with a
precipitation to his setting. At length the shadows of the Woods and Hills
began to increase, and the forerunner of the day and night, which appears
always in the Heavenly Carriere, had already lighted his Torch, and the West
became as red, as if all the fire in the World had been enclosed in the bosom
of it, or the fall of some other Phaeton had enflamed it of new. Such are the
Evenings which presage fair and untroubled days; and such was that to be,
which promised me the sight of Diana on the morrow: When I perceived Ismena,
who as lively and cheerfully mounted to the top, where I attended her, as if
Mercury had conducted, or Zephyrus carried her. At the very first she asked me
what I ailed, adding, if thy heart be no better than thy look, how do thou
think to accomplish thy enterprise? I think thou have not slept since I was
last with thee, thou art so distempered: this indeed I did fear, and that the
disquiet of thy mind could not permit thy body to take any rest; and
foreseeing the inconvenience, have not failed to fit thee with a remedy.
Behold wherewith, said she, presenting me a Violl, I was not long since in the
Kingdom of slumber, where I drew this water from the Fountain which bedewes
her Gardens, and begets her Poppeyes, and Mandragora's; being one of the
sources of the River Lethes: Take only two or three drops of it, and I will
assure thee thou shall sleep the sweetest Nappe that ever thou yet tookest.
Besides, it is necessary that thou sleep whilst I labor for thee, lest thine
impatience should trouble me. These Mysteries, Endymion, require rest and
silence, and will admit none other spectators, or witnesses, than only those
that act them, and are designed for the office. Free me then from the fear of
thy distemper, and ruin not thine own designs by thy curiosity, or presence:
which way soever I turn, go, or stir, leave me wholly to mine own liberty,
least thou become astonished by the sight of incredible things, and so at
length horror and affright seize thee. For what would thou say if thou
should see me presently descend for Heaven in the Chariot of the Moon? I
obeying whatsoever she commanded me, laid me down in this Cave, where I felt
suddenly the great virtue of that little water she had given me, which so
stupefied me, that if no body had awaked me I believe I should have continued
in an everlasting slumber. The calm of silence was general (as you may
believe) and the Stars had well advanced their course; when as, not knowing
what Ismena had done, or what virtue of Herbs, actions, or words, or what
force of Creatures, or Heavenly, or earthly power she had employed: I suddenly
found my self transported with great contentment, and little or no fear; but
do not yet know whether it were in a Chariot of Ivory, or Ebony, or whether it
were drawn by Horses, or Dragons; for I could scarce discern that which was
nearest to me: like unto vain and ambitious men, who always perceive things
remote, better than they see themselves. I cannot judge whether it were by the
inspiration of the gods, or by the industry of Ismena, or whether Morpheus gave
me such clear visions: But I knew places which, if mine eyes had been open, I
should not have known, even to the discovering and distinguishing of the
Hills, Rivers, and Provinces over which I was carried. I had one encounter
which gave me matter to think on even from the beginning: which was, that just
as I felt my self taken up, I heard a voice, and saw a Monster in the Air,
faced like a Man, but in all other parts resembled a Foul, which followed me
till he had uttered these words. Now go thy ways, with a mischief, and make
the Oracle a liar, which has pronounced that one of thy race shall deprive the
City of Olympia of a part of her glory, by building another to the memory of
his own Name, whereunto our Games must one day be transferred. Oh Pyza, Pyza,
thou art not yet borne, and yet thy fame and the mention of thee annoyes me.

This first Vision was enough to have amazed me, if what I had heard concerning
the Oracle, had not given me more hope, than the first words fear: But if I
knew not what this name of Pyza might signify, except it were meant for the
name of some City, to be hereafter built by some one of mine offspring: For
the rest, I supposed it was the Genius of Olympia that had thus spoken, or at
least some Magitian of that place, who had assumed the form of some Bird of
Night to fly in the dark withal. So making way toward the East, borne by a
divine and all Celestial motion, I passed as it were in an instant Licia, a
great part of Mount Taurus, Licaonia, Tyanea, the River Melas, Mount Argeus,
and all Capadocia, even to Euphrates, which I began to discover in the less
Armenia, and immediately after, in Armenia the greater I observed the Sources
thereof at the Hill Periardes, so famous for its fertility: then turning a
little toward the North, I passed the River Araxes, near unto the mouth of
it, where it falls into the Caspian Sea.

At length having traversed many Hills and Valleys, I found my self in a
seeming quiet place, where having remained awhile in my former astonishment and
trance, I felt Ismena, who taking me by the hand, raised me up, saying; Now
Endymion, now is the time to go, and to take resolution and courage with thee;
gird on thy Sword, (for she had a care to bring it along from the Hill) draw
it, brandish it in thine hand, and see that thou be not much moved at
whatsoever thou encounterest: for here thou have to do only with a vain and
giddy people, who not enduring the light, are constrained to wander in
darkness; and who at the only glance of Steel, do tremble with fear. What
Monsters soever shall follow, or appear to thee, suppress all affright with
this confidence and assurance, that their forms render them far more
terrible than their forces. Go straight forward, but above all, when thou
come into the Forest, where thou art to see the Goddess, beware of
cutting, breaking, or violating the least branch or leaf, for the place is
sacred, and thou may peradventure thereby unwittingly offend some Nymphe, to
whom, by the favor of Diana, a privilege is granted to live a second life,
and pass many ages under the bark of some Tree. For me, I will be as careful
to know what becomes of thee, as I have been to know where Diana was; that if
any danger threaten thee, thou shall no sooner have thrice pronounced the name
of Ismena, but thou shall see me at hand to succor thee: and if thy hazard be
such, that my power alone, without the help of the gods, be not sufficient to
deliver thee, I will, rather than fail thee, use force upon the gods
themselves, and draw the Moon from Heaven, to free thee from the danger
whereinto thou shall be plunged for her sake.

Upon these assurances I resolved to march through the dark, wherein I had
enough to do to keep my way: and having scarce gone three steps, I thought to
have turned mine eyes toward Ismena, but could neither see her any more, nor
know what was become of her. Here I believe, there is no courage so resolute,
that would not have been moved; for I found my self environed with the most
horrible Monsters that can be imagined, and such as seemed to have been
created in so general a confusion, that neither the kinds, or sexes were
discernable. There is not that thing in Africa so prodigious, but was there
presented: the Hydra's, Gorgons, and such infinite sorts of Chymaera's appeared
to me, that I should have had much trouble in my resolution, and no small cause
to fear a Metamorphosis of my self by the horrible aspect of their shapes, if
the remembrance of Ismena's words to me, had not made me repose more trust to
mine ears than mine eyes. If I looked back, I saw my self pursued with an
infinite number of wild beasts, ready to assail and devour me* and what
endeavor or invention soever I used to escape their pursuit, or shun their
encounter, I could make none other haste, than if I had had Fetters on mine
ankles, or that my feet had been fastened by some charm. On the other side,
I saw great numbers of Centaures continually crossing my way, seeking
incessantly some lost thing which they could not find. Anon I saw Harpyes
flying and devouring on all sides, not sparing to exact tribute even from the
dead carcasses: then again I found my self amidst a deformed people, and a
strange kind of men, vain; fantastic; and mutable; who had more than a
thousand assemblies about nothing, some where of were crippled, crooked, and
misshapen, others hunger-starved and feeble, and very few rightly shapen. But as
their features were vain and miserable, their exercises were far more
extravagant; some of them busied themselves in erecting ill composed edifices
upon in the ruins of their fellows: others, amongst the sad Relics of a
devouring fire, turned all things topsieturvy to seek treasure, but found
nothing but burning coals: and some sold smoke, and others trafficked with
the fruits of Tantalus Garden, which howsoever they seemed to me of no use,
were nevertheless bought up at very dear rates.

By this time I began to discover the Sky clear up a little toward the East,
and foretell the rising of Aurora from one end of the Earth to the other, when
as all those other objects began to become more rare, less visible, and at
length wholly vanished; or at least the Sylla's and Medusa's were converted
into Rocks and Trees, and the Serpents into broken Reeds. Immediately I
descryed a great Forest, which seemed to rejoice at the approach of the day,
and in the shade whereof I was well advanced, before the Sun had displayed his
beams: Since, says Pyzander, that was the day, wherein thou were to have the
honor of seeing Diana, it would have been too much to behold two such great
lights in one day. The hope of this inter-view, says Endymion, did
extraordinarily move me, and the uncertainty of what might befall me, possessed
me sometimes with one thought, sometimes with another, because I neither knew
the time nor place wherein this good fortune was allotted me. In the mean while
I observed the growth and height of the Trees, and the large extent of their
branches, which represented so great an antiquity, as that they seemed to have
been borne with the World. Oh immortal Nymphs said I to my self, (for the
place was so shady and silent, that me thought I was not free to open my mouth,
so much as to utter a sigh:) Oh Hamadryades! how many long-lived Hearts and
Crows have had leisure to live and die, and how often has the Phoenix renewed
her self since your birth! Thus I continued walking a long time, when instead
of finding an increase of light, I seemed to remain wholly betwixt the Night
and the Day, and even to follow darkness, yea, move with it, so much did the
mists grow thicker and thicker to my sight. Silence and solitude brought with
them a secret kind of horror and affright, which no less astonished me, than
the Monsters I had seen before: Besides, all this time I had gained so little
on my way, that I knew it no more; and the more I went forward, the more was I
touched with a certain respect of the places, which made me imagine, that now,
having lost the sight of humane footsteps, I was not far from the residence
of the gods. And indeed, lifting up my head I perceived a Table, fixed on a
Tree, which for bulk and talenesse exceeded the rest, wherein was this in
Inscription in Capital Letters.

Stay not long in this place, Mortals, except you mean suddenly to suffer
the punishment of your temerity. I had scarce read these words, when I felt the
Earth shake and tremble in such a manner under my feet, that the tops of the
Trees were moved therewithal. These accidents indeed had power to stay me,
but not so easily to divert my course* for, I being already so accustomed to
Prodigies and Monsters, would have been loath to fly before the gods
themselves. What could thou think to do, says Pyzander, since thou know
there is neither valor, or force in man, but must presently give way to the
threatenings of the gods? And whosoever would be so rash, as to make them the
least resistance, would only show the excess of his desperate resolution to
his own ruin. There was one sole consideration Pyzander, says Endymion,
which made me resolve to retire thence, which was an unfortunate custom I have
(by some secret Fate) never to enjoy, any more than the appearances,
beginnings, promises, and hopes of any great felicity. Insomuch, that I had a
kind of fear, that Heaven (already tired with showing grace to me) would in
stead of Diana, whom I sought, have exposed me to the encounter of Hecatea,
whose presence alone either renders men astonished, or, turning them into
stones, deprives them wholly of sense. And indeed I presently heard a horrible
noise, like unto the howling of Dogs in the dark, mingled with the roaring
of Lions, the hissing of Snakes, or some other more strange sound, which cannot
be represented by the example of any voice. This increased more and more,
advancing like the wind, which rising, murmures, and ruffles amongst the
Trees, and Woods, which oppose the course, or retard the violence of it; or as
the rain and tempest, who have always some noise going before them, seeming
to advertise us, and give us time to take some shelter, before they dissolve
upon our heads. With this, I began more and more to add fear to
observation; my face grew pale, my hair stared, and I became wholly seized
with horror and affright. I was constrained to leave the place, and even to
seek paths where there were none. I knew not which way to turn me, but
wandering thus up and down the Forest, I began to despair of my fortune, and
repent me of mine enterprise. But when as we, poor Mortals, are are reduced
to such exigents, that we can do no more, when our wits and counsels fail
us, and our best wisdom and judgment becoming blind, remains in confusion;
then I say it is, that the gods appear, and witness themselves both
powerful, and favorable to those that implore their assistance, and commit
them wholly to their protection. And so it fared with me; for that which
whilome seemed to me an ominous encounter, proved now a mean to conduct me to
that which I desired to find. But it is a common error amongst men, to place
the means which brings them to happiness, in the rank of disasters and
misfortunes. For I had not gone far, when I perceived before me a certain
shining light, whose silver beams made as it were another day, and expelling
the Clouldy mists on every side, made, for a good distance, round about the
shades less obscure. Immediately hereupon I saw a Cressant appear far
clearer than the Stars, and to whom, next the Sun, the greatest honor is
due. With which Object mine eyes were presently dazeled, and my heart so moved
with a continual panting, that I could hardly settle it. At length, having
recollected the powers of my sight, I perceived it was Diana, who, as I
thought, had her eyes fixed upon me, before I saw her; because, the fear I had
contracted, permitted me not so much to look on what was before me, as to
think on what might follow me. I stopping suddenly, found my soul wholly
possessed with joy, respect, and fear. But observing her looks, no less mild
now, than at other times, I took the boldness, yet with secrecy and silence,
to advance some steps, the better to discern the places and persons, because
the branches and leaves hid the whole Company from my sight, and in part the
goddess her self.

Then I perceived her sitting upon a Rock, which nature for her service had
raised to the G pas in

height of a seat; from whence there issued a murmuring Fountain, and about it
sat her Nymphs upon little green Turffes, some of them leaning their heads
upon their hands, and their Elbowes upon their knees, seemed to sleep, or to
be much transported with the pleasant warbling of the gliding Spring; and
others leaning over it, beheld their faces in the Water: and some others, whom
I could not perfectly see, had laid themselves down here and there upon the
grass. But I, not diverting my self much with considering the particularities
of the place, kept mine eyes always fixed upon Diana, who had hers also upon
me. And doubtless, Pyzander, if it be true, that the eyes are the faithful
witnesses of the soul, she had some intention to speak to me: But that a
Nymph, who was next to her, and who before had been writing upon the Rock
with the point of her Arrow, lifting up her head, discovered me, and being
therewith suddenly moved, she turned toward Diana, saying; oh goddess! what
is he that thus audaciously beholds thee with impunity? What privilege has
he to be in this place, and present himself before thee? Surely there is no
want on his part (having presumptuously taken this liberty) that he is not
already received into our company, and made partaker of all our actions and
secrets. Herewith taking her Bow, and fitting that Arrow to it, wherewithal
she had formerly written: Give me leave, said she, with one blow to take down
the man, and abate his presumption. No, no, answers Diana smiling, if he dye,
he must dye by my hand. So calling to a Nymph that stood behind her: (and from
whence, as I will tell thee hereafter, I had knowledge of all passages) Bring
me hither, says she, whispering to her, the two little Quivers of Arrows
which Cupid gave us the other day, as we passed by the Forest of Idalia. The
Nymph stooping only to take them up, gave them her immediately. And then Diana
(oh cruel deliverance! oh mean of saving, worse than the very intention of
destroying me!) unbinding them first, shot one, then another at me, without
taking much pains about it: for they are Arrows which do almost fly of
themselves, and seldom miss the mark, whereunto the will of the sender
directs them, especially being sent from the hand of Diana. Sometimes they
escape unawares, and yet effect no less execution, than if they were sent on
purpose, or accompanied with a design. These Nymphs do also very often use
them both treacherously and maliciously, taking pleasure in inflicting that on
others, which they themselves will never have either compassion or sense of. I
perceiving that Diana persisted in wounding me with them all one after another,
cried out (but so as she heard me not) Alas, goddess! what will thou do? Do
thou know the power of these Darts? peradventure thou scatterest them
negligently, because they seem weak and light unto thee. Was it not enough
for thee to have with one or two only, wounded my my heart, already wholly
accustomed to the sense of thy Shafts, but that thou must cover me with them
from head to foot? I stood firm, Pyzander, in this suffering whilst I was
able; but at length when she had so filled mine eyes therewith, that I was
wholly blinded, I felt so strong a poison slide into my veins, that by
degrees, losing the use of my strength, I fell flat down at the foot of the
Tree, where I suffered a continual Death, and yet saw no end of my life, as if
life and death had seemed to be in dispute, which of them had greatest interest
in me, wherein my extreme torment persuaded me every moment, that Death would
get the upper hand: so that losing the hope of ever speaking to Diana again, I
cast forth my Lamentations to the hazard of being transported to her ears.

Oh it is the only desire of seeing thee, Goddess, which has made me expose
my life to all the perils of Heaven and Earth, to come and receive my death at
thy hands! and have been spared by so many Monsters, to be reserved only to
thy rigours! Who could ever have thought that of all the dangers which
threatened me, thine Encounter had been most terrible? What crime have I
committed, that can deserve the punishment of so sudden a change, that it
seems to me thou consultest hatred and affection, to know which of them thou
should practice toward me? How can thou accord the quality of a Goddess
with thine irresolution and inconstancy? howbeit indeed thou be but too too
constant in making me feel the smart of the darts which fly from thine eyes
and hands, wherewith thou have so wholly covered me, that my wound is general,
no room being left about me to receive one stroke more, except thou will make
other wounds within these I have already. I request this only comfort of thee,
that dying by thy hand, I may at least have the freedom to tell thee so; and
that if thou take pleasure in my torment, thou will vouchsafe audience to my
lamentation, which will witness unto thee the violence thereof, or at least
show that thou art really a Goddess, and that thou read in my heart that
which my mouth might in vain labor to give thee information of.

In this wavering estate of my good or ill fortune, Pyzander, wherein the Fates
themselves seemed to be in doubt how to dispose of me, I esteemed my self
infinitely happy by having seen Diana, and suffered none other torment than
what her hand had inflicted. And although my felicities were accompanied with
my complaints, yet the cause rendered them so delightful and honorable to me,
that whosoever could not lament in the same fashion, seemed to me to deserve
bewayling or contempt: For as on the one side I experimented the whole force of
sorrow, so on the other I enjoyed the contentments of a felicity not
communicated to other Mortals, but at such time as some one of the gods
intending to ravish them with honor and delight, vouchsafes them his sight and
presence. And indeed, as if in the midst of my most violent passion, some Deity
had approached me, to drive death away, and defend me against it, or as if the
same hand, that had injured me, had also cured me; I felt a delightful Air, a
pleasing wind, and a sweet breath, such as seemed to issue from some Divine
mouth, with some other pleasures, (which cannot be expressed but by sighing)
wherein there was a mixture of sweet and bitter, so excellently tempered, that
the sower served only as a necessary ingredient to set the sweet the better
off Remaining in this ecstasy, wherein the pleasures I found amidst my sorrows
had cast me, I heard a Nymph, who calling aloud for her Dog, cried sundry
times, Licanthe, Licanthe; and at length seeking round about, drew near to me;
and having awhile beheld me, called to me, saying, Sleep thou? or what do
thou there? does any thing ayle thee? I could at first, answer her only with a
sigh: but she continuing, said, Speak to me I pray thee, and tell me thy
grief: Alas I said I, how can thou ask what I suffer, seeing me wholly stuck
full of arrows? how! full of arrows? says she, what do thou mean? Do thou
rave? Open thine eyes, look on me, or indeed, look rather upon thy self: how
can I open mine eyes, answered I, having more wounds there than in any other
part? Yes for sooth said she, and so stooping opened mine eyelids with her
fingers, saying, See, are they not very sore? Wherewith I, (but not without
great astonishment) beheld the light again, whereof I before thought I had bin
for ever deprived. Then she, taking me by the hand, I endeavored to rise, and
remaining so awhile, I cast mine eyes toward the place where Diana was, but I
neither saw her, nor any of her train, saving the Nymph that was with me.

A little after, beginning to view my self somewhat better, I neither saw the
Arrows, nor the wounds whereof before I had so much complained; yet my heart
still feeling their violence, kept a continual sighing. Being about to rise, I
was going to say, what have I done oh ye gods! to deserve to be a But unto all
Diana's shafts? But the Nymph interrupted me, saying, Do thou thus
acknowledge the grace she has done thee in saving thy life? for thou had bin
exposed to the mercy of the most rigorous Nymphs, and greatest enemies in the
World to men, and such as never suffer any that comes prying about these
Deserts and Fountains, to escape without the punishment of their curiosity.
Then I entreated her to recount unto me what had passed concerning me, which
she performed, according as I have already in part related to thee: but it is
no new thing says she, to see the Goddess so ready to gratify thee. What
think thou she spoke the other day of thee in the Assembly of the Nayades
and Nereides, about the Mouth of Meander, betwixt Milet and Priene? when
speaking alone to us, who are about her by particular service, she said, Behold
Endymions Country, it is now a good while since I saw him: inform your selves
to day of the Nymphs of these places, and of himself, if it be possible, where
his usual residence is, what study most possesses him, and what we may do
for his contentment. If perchance he present himself where we are in our most
solitary walks, and where men do least of all frequent, hinder him not from
seeing me, use him favorably, and let not your ordinary austerity deny him
admittance. And in truth said the Nymph, there is not any one of the Dryades,
Nap^ae, or Oreades, but knows thy Name, though not thy person, and that have
not learned it from the great esteem which Diana has thee in: who talks of
thee both to the Silvans and Fawnes, and conceales not her respect of thee from
the celestial Deities. Fair Nymph said I, by what I now observe, it seems
thou know that the Goddess has always graced me with her particular
goodwill. O yes, said she, I know it very well: think it not strange then,
said I, if from the same subject which so highly delights me, I draw also the
cause of all my lamentations. For how can that consist, that she so long
wishes me the good, which she never does me? What know I but that some humor
contrary in it self, opposing her intention, uncertain of what she has to
do, and tedious in resolving, may at length wholly deprive me of that which
she continually deferres; and that time, which like her self attereth every
thing, may administer so many diversions unto her, that all this affection
vanishing, she at length may her self forget that ever she thought of it, and
then in vain will it be for me to accuse the gods of mutability, and breach of
promise as well as men. Think not so ill, says the Nymph, but consider that
the gods themselves are led by Fate, and must give way to necessity. Know, that
she her self takes not the repose and ease she gives to the World. How do
thou think she can give satisfaction, I will not say to so many persons, but
to so many different peoples, who desire her favor and presence? One while
Scythia requires her, then Greece, and anon Ethiopia. But what do I say? the
whole world adores; what Country is visited with the Sun but knows Diana,
and her fame? and if thus she must be every where, how can she remain long in
one place? And yet notwithstanding all those great cares of the most weighty
affairs of the world, thou have an exceeding great share of her thoughts, and
the merit of her words. Besides, she has this day charged me, by a most
special command, to assure thee, that she often thinks particularly on thee,
and that the opportunity of witnessing it will be exceeding grateful to her:
if this suffice thee not, and if thou have ought to say to her, be to morrow at
high noone in the Valley of Pines, near the next mountain, where so soon as
I shall see thee, I will draw her alone from the rest of her Nymphs, assuring
my self she will afford thee all the liberty of speech, thou can in justice
desire of a goddess. O fair Nympth, said I, thou do so much obliege me,
that thon rendrest my life eternally subject: But give me leave to tell thee
that which thou know better than I; that is, that the difference and
inequality betwixt us and the gods is so great, that we are so far from being
able to look on them, or desire them, without rendering our selves ridiculous,
that we cannot so much as love them, except they first affect us. But again,
whenever they prevent us, then is it our part to follow them with all care
and diligence, and thus do I desire the honor of speaking with Diana, having
nothing to say to her, but only in pursuit of what she has been formerly
pleased to gratify me withal, having been oftentimes desirous to speak with
me, without any other motion or solicitation, save only that of her own
inclination and good will. If Mischance could have played me that injurious
pranke, as to make time able to remove that desire of hers, then with good
reason should respect have taken me off from such presumption, and confined me
to everlasting silence. O how happy were I, if any such propitious desire
possessed her, whereof I will endeavor to give her to morrow the opportunity,
according to the advice thou give me. Well, said she, it is thy part to
think on it; time calls me away, farewell: So, showing me the way I was to
go, she gave me from her hand a taste of such delightful felicities, as that
I asked her whether she intended them to end my sorrows, or to prolong them
into a further continuance, and render me immortal with them; whereunto
perceiving that she answered me only with a smile; as she withdrew her self,
I bade her farewell, saying, Adieu thou the most courteous and discreet of all
the Nymphs, I cannot wish thee any greater happiness, than the continuance of
that which thou already possessest, of being so near to Diana. Thus went I on,
revolving in my thoughts a thousand times all that had befalne me, sometimes
praising, and sometimes even daring to accuse Diana, since it being so easiy to
her to make me happier, she still kept me in doubt and disquiet. In the mean
time I being grown weary, and finding the day begin to increase, and the way
to hasten toward an end, I began to find the tracing of men's foote-steps,
which made me imagine, by the appearance, that I was not exposed to any more
danger. At last I ended my days work with the Sun, who was no sooner at the
end of his Carriere, than I was at the end of the Forest; where seeing nothing
but Mountains, and seeing no better retreat than the Forest it self, having
chosen a convenient place, I laid me down at the foot of a Myrtle, the Moss
being there somewhat soften than else where, as if Fortune had conducted me to
the place where Nature had long before prepared a Bed for my repose.

The end of the Second Book.
ENDYMION.
The Third Book.
NO sooner had night and silence imposed a dumb tranquillity on all Creatures,
when I began to feel that slumber disdaines not plain and simple lodgings;
but (as the Proverb says) is more frequent in the Cottages of silly
Shepherds, than in the Palaces of great Princes, amidst their golds and silk,
as if she were not well pleased that, that which the gods have so freely
bestowed on Mortals, should be made a Merchandise of so dear a rate. So I
took my first sleep, which was short and quiet: but in my second I was much
troubled with Dreams: One while me-thought I went up and down seeking Diana,
with a great deal of toil, but could not find her; another while methought I
had many businesses, and much to do with men whom I knew not: And as it is
usual to those who sleep upon any great design, or fear, to awake with the
least difficulty, and even in their very sleep to stand upon their Guards: So
I, with much longing waited for day, and troubled my rest with a thousand
disquiets. When as, about the time of Aurora's approaching, methought I saw
Aurora her self approaching me, or at least a beauty that had her Tresses, her
color, and her eyes, and which was so gorgeously attired, as if Art had
contended with Nature for the prize, and been yet surpassed; and so accoutred,
as if she had been that day to be married to some one of the gods, or of the
most eminent of men: her Robe was white, embroydered all over with Flowers,
which of all sides seemed to fall from her head and bosom; her Girdle was of
gold, wrought in the fashion of Bees upon Flowers, whose leaves were of
Emeralds; G. par in

in her right hand she had a Knife, wherewith she would feign have cut a branch
of that same Myrtle Tree, at the foot whereof I slept; but not being able to
reach so high, she was forced to have recourse to me, so, beholding me with a
look, of it self able to inform one of her desire, if it could have uttered
it, she says to me; I rose this morning a good while before the Sun, being
appoyted very shortly to assist at a Sacrifice, where I shall have use of a
Branch of this Myrtle, and find none that offers it me, except I put my self
to the trouble of requesting it. As for thee, whom peradventure the gods have
sent to ease me of this travail; I pray thee grant me this, which scarce any
man would deny me, and in acknowledgement of that good office, I will give to
thee alone that heart, and that affection which so many have desired, but never
yet any could obtain: wherein I dare say the recompense will far surpass
the pains, and that thou should never desire any other, if thou art by
Nature or Nation courteous, than the favor I do thee in requesting this at
thy hands: this she thought was enough to say on that subject, and had there
stayed, seeing me ready instantly to obey her; but as I remained immovable,
and tired with striving against the charm which held me so fast, she thought I
was insensible, and began to add other persuasions to the former: How
dull-sighted soever thou art, said she, that which thou see in me, does so
sufficiently represent unto thee what I am, that thou can not with discretion
engage me to tell it thee, much less, make any farther inquiry of the reason
or cause of this my request; yet to take from thee all subject of doubt or
excuse, I will make no scruple to declare unto thee both the one and the other.
Know therefore, for thy further information, (if herein it be more proper to
follow the general opinion concerning my self than mine own) that I am held
the pattern and honor of all the Damosells in those parts, and as one whose
virtue and beauty like a Goddess amongst Mortals, suffers neither
comparison, or envy, sued unto, and in vain solicited by the whole flower of
the Youth hereabouts, and such as at the least sign I should give them of what
I desire, would not only seek it throughout this Forest, but throughout the
World; and I cannot think thee inferior to them in courtesy or affection if
the object deserve it. Howsoever, although thine own inclination should not
move thee to oblige me, I am of opinion thy Fate would compel thee to it; and
though thou would do that for a great Goddess, which thou would not do
for me, yet I know not whether it be of thee or no, that our Oracles speak so
much, where they say, that a little branch of Myrtle shall be a cause of the
greatest and most famous Sacrifice that ever we have made to Diana; and that
she then is to descend from Heaven in favor of, and for the sake of him that
cut it, and that in the mean time I shall wear it in my bosom for thy sake;
where if it bear no fruit, it shall at least flourish, until we go both
together to the high Altar, where I am to sacrifice my heart to thee, and thou
thine to Diana. At these words I started up, ready to serve her in all her
desires; but she commanded me to stay a while, and forbear stirring, till she
had withdrawn her self a little apart; for the day begins to advance, and if
by chance I were discovered by any of the Keepers of this Forest, alone with
thee, they might, not knowing mine intention, impute it for a crime to me, and
the time would add something to the sinister opinion that might be thence
conceived. As for thee, as soon as thou have cut down the branch, retire
aside, that I may have time to come and take it. With these last words, she
withdrew her self, and I wholly ravished with this Vision, could not suffer
the loss of it, but with much grief; so in an instant I rose and looked about
me, to see what was become of her: but perceiving her no more, and for her sake
forgetting all other things, I turned toward the Tree, which was so tall a
Myrtle, that I could not so much as touch any Branch of it with the point of my
Sword, save only one little one which was lower than all the rest, with
striving to get it, I struck the body of the Tree thrice, whose tough Bark
thrice turned the edge of my Weapon; the Forest resounded of it, and Echo
distributed the noise into all parts. At length I cut the fatal sprigge, and
laying it at my feet, I uttered these words to the beauty I had seen: Whether
thou be a Goddess or Mortal, behold, what I owe to thy request, wherein I
desire thee rather to consider the ready and prompt obedience I have rendered
thee, than the thing it self which thou requiredst. I had scarce uttered these
words, when I perceived three or four men come running toward me, armed with
Darts and Axes, according to the fashion of the Country; and how unequal
soever the match was, yet I resolved in stead of yielding, to sell dear either
my life or liberty: I, with so much resolution and quickness, put my self in
posture to charge them, that they began to be afraid of me: but when I had
scattered them here and there, others came (such was my misfortune) from every
corner of the Forest, so that I finding all means of safety within the Wood
taken away, was forced to seek it without: But ere I had gone far, I
discovered Huntsmen, who seeing me alone pursued of so many, run after me with
full speed, crying aloud, what has he done? whereof is he guilty? It is a
barbarous fellow said the other, (wholly out of breath) who has wronged us
all, and violated the Laws, and honor of these places, to the great contempt
of our gods and Altars.

At these words they presently pressed to stay me, but Fortune at first so
favored my resolution and courage, that the first that approached me, soon
repented his diligence; for I struck his Horse so rude a stroke on the head
with an Axe that I had gotten from the other, that the Weapon remained so fast
behind his ear, that I could not get it out again; and besides, he rising an
end, fell backward with the man under him so violently, that he that next
followed him, stumbling thereat, cast his Rider at my feet, to the mercy of
mine Arms; but turning me with my Sword in my hand, to look to that which
more concerned me, and finding my self equally environed with horses and men,
I resolved upon a desperate attempt as my last refuge, and so laying about me
on all sides with more vehemence* and promptitude than these words can deliver
it to thee, which way soever I turned my self, I so astonished mine enemies,
that I began to find my self in a manner without resistance; and had
doubtless made them leave the place, and freed my self at last, from one and
other of them, if amidst the violence, wherewith I made their Weapons fly in
splinters, if mine own Sword also had not broken at the hilts, which gave the
courage to a young man who first perceived it, to spur his Horse so rudely
upon me, that mine indignation, seeing my self thus affronted, took from me
the consideration of his youth and extreme beauty, which were of force to
have moved the most barbarous to use him with more mildness: and so, not being
able to contain my self, I threw that piece of my Sword which remained in my
hand, the pummell whereof hit him (harder than I my self desired) upon the
bottom of the stomach, the pain whereof made him suddenly open his knees,
and fall to the ground as if he had been dead. I made haste toward him to
get his Weapons, but the others, who lost no time, failed not to seize on me;
and yet in such wise, that they durst not offer me any violence: and when they
had taken me, they still continued so afraid of me, as if indeed they had
been my prisoners, and not I theirs. Some complained of their arms, some of
their thighs, and others showed the wounds they had received in other parts.
But when they perceived this fair young man trembling and waxing pale, as if
he had been about to give up the ghost, they forget all their own pain
through their sense of his; and then despair and rage beginning to seize them,
I every moment expected that they would have revenged his death on me, before
it happened to him. I was inwardly exceeding sorry to have employed my hands
toward the destruction of such a Masterpiece of Nature, and was now no less
sorry than before I was angry, for the lineaments of his face, had now no other
motion, than such as were able to stir pity in the most obdurate minds. The
Roses only hid themselves under the Lillies, which a tender modesty, upon the
least occasion was wont to cover with the Roses: and his golden Tresses, thick,
and naturally curled, had so fair a luster, that they seemed even to dispute
with the Sun it self, insomuch that it might have bin said, that Death
delayed, and made scruple to seize on him, because so much beauty and clear
luster could not agree with the horrors of her obscurity. At length he began
by little and little to come to himself, and open his fair eyes, whereat all
the Company, and even those whom I had worst treated, were no less rejoiced,
than if he had healed them of their wounds and hurts.

Their next care was to inform themselves of me, and of mine offense, and to
bring me back to the place where they found me, where indeed I could not see
the branch I had out, but the place of it was all covered with blood, which
issued from the Myrtle in great abundance. Then they cried out to me, O thou
sacrilegious wretch, who brought thee into this Country? or what have thou to
do amongst us, thus to draw hither the wrath and vengeance of the gods, and
specially that of the Goddess, our Protectresse? what Euphrates or Thetis will
ever suffice to wash away thy crime? Presently upon this we perceived the
boughs begin to tremble, and from the curled top we heard a doleful voice
mixed with such sighs and sobs, as moved us to compassion and sorrow, which in
a confused and ill-pronounced tone, pronounced this lamentation under the
Bark: O wretched man! thou that disturbest the repose of the souls, whose new
being should free them for ever from humane passions, or the injuries of
Fortune; was there any suffering behind, which I endured not in my life, but
was reserved for me to receive at thy hands? Know therefore, that both thy
pains and thine errors are vain, and thou do herein only abuse hope, and
resist the decrees of Heaven. Whosoever has at any time observed a poor
Prisoner, pale and confounded with the apprehensions of the fatal Sentence of
his Death, may guess the estate whereinto this prodigious Spectacle had
reduced me: as well, in regard these words deprived me of all hope, of the
contentment I so long, and with so much pain and suffering had sought, as for
that I was in the hands and mercy of these Barbarians.

This puts me in mind of the Dodonean Forest, says Pyzander, the so famous
residence of the Oracle of Jupiter Chaonian, where the Trees give answer:
Indeed, answers Endymion, it was also in my thought, and I seemed amongst the
South-saying Oaks, esteeming my Disaster no less assured than if the Doves of
Chaonia had uttered it. But this is not all Pyzander; for as they were
doubtfully muttering amongst themselves, sometimes saying it was the voice and
ghost of the last deceased Priest, another while, that it was one of Diana's
Nymphs; Heaven permitted them, for clearing their doubts, and putting them out
of trouble, to hear these words: What gods and men have thus wronged
Diophania, who under this tough Bark, and the protection of so great a
Goddess, is yet thus exposed to their violence and outrage. This was all we
could comprehend of her Lamentation, for here voice failing by degrees turned
it self into an uncouth mourning, and at length insensibly vanished.

At the name of Diophania they were all astonished, and looking long one upon
another, they at length began to say, Alas! should this be the Diophania whom
we have lately lost, and whom her Father seeks throughout all the world.
Whereat one young man testified himself more moved at this Name than all the
others, and casting himself at the foot of the Tree, embraced it, and thus
powered forth his grief and heaviness in these words: It is I Diophania, it is
I who have really lost thee, and to whom no earthly thing can administer
comfort: it is I that have sought thee in all places, till dispairing of
finding thee, I have only hoped for death, to put an end to my despair and
misery: And thou without pity either of my errors or travailes, hidest thy
self in this new shape under this Bark, leaving me to the mercy of horrors
and affrights, which for thy sake have continually dwelt in my dreams and
thoughts. One while I have imagined that thine unaparalell'd beauty had incited
either some god or man to ravish thee, and carry thee hence, and sometimes
that some Monster had devoured thee, there is no danger that can be incurred
by Sea or Land, but I feared had seized thee. O Diophania, to what has my
love, and thy Fathers Le. Gaultier incidit.

rigor reduced thee? and what can I expect of this adventure, since in the
state I find thee at present, thou art much more lost to me, than if death it
self had deprived me of thee: for then I, who now only expect the hour
wherein despair and my sorrows will ease me of my wearisome life, should have
had some hope to have found thee amongst the ghosts: but now such is my misery,
that neither the dead nor living can ever be able to comfort me. He would
eternally have continued his lamentation, if the excessive surcharge of his
sorrow had not rendered him awhile speechless. The Myrtle, or rather Diophania,
was moved with it, and her trembling branches gave tokens of her compassion:
But when the others endeavored to get him thence, and remove him from the foot
of the Tree, which he grasped and embraced so fervently, that it made me expect
another Metamorphosis: Give me leave says he, to end my sorrows with my
days, and go tell Myrtavia that her daughter is found; but so found, as to
her she is no less lost than formerly. Hereupon they instantly besought him to
tell them what cause he had above others, thus particularly to bewail
Diophania: You have there with you, says he, one of her fathers principal
slaves, who knows the whole story, which I could not conceal from him, after
she had first acquainted him with it: Lentreat, says the slave, that I may be
dispensed withal, and not here in her presence relate the story, the
remembrance whereof would no less annoy her soul, than this strangers Sword
lately has injured her body; if the trunk of a tree may be this day termed
Diophania's body, whose beauty equally ravished both gods and men: come along
with us, says one of the chief, and let us return to the City, for we have
this day hunted enough, having taken this Stranger, and found Diophania. Thus
perceiving the Myrtle stir no more, nor utter any other voice, and having
used new persuasions and attempts to draw this young man from the Tree, who to
satisfy them, promised to follow them. One of them taking me up behind him,
carried me toward the City, and the slave began thus to recite the discourse
of this adventure.

There is not any one of you but knows what was the beauty of Diophania, the
only jealousy of Stenobia the Priests Niece, or what was her birth, her
fortune, the cruelty, and brutishness of her Father, or the constant and
violent suit of Amphidamas, but for ought I see you knew not of the love of
Hermodan; it was the name Pyzander of this poor lover, who, as I have been
informed was borne of an Amazone, having been in his infancy adopted by a
certain man of inferior quality, whose house was near unto that of Lycaspis,
father of Diophania: Al these things have produced the strange effects, whereof
I am now going to give you account.

You cannot but know, says he, that Diophania from her tender youth frequented
usually the fields, amongst her Fathers flocks, and that by a certain
privilege of Neighborhood, Hermodan conducted his to the same Pastures, and
so passing their younger years in pastimes and exercises, suitable to that their
age of Childhood, they were so accustomed to be together, that the one could
not live without the other. But at length they began to grow, and Diophania's
beauty took an equal increase with her age and growth: and howbeit it became
of force to captivate the rudest courage, and tame the most rebellious
opposition, yet she no whit perceived its force, or the power of the Charms of
it; and which Hermodan beheld on the other side with so much innocence, that
neither, the gods, nor men, no nor his own Conscience, was able to accuse any
one of his thoughts of the least crime: And whether the continual seeing her,
made her seem to him less rare and wonderful, or whether innocence it self
carry with it some kind of insensiblenesse, he had not so soon known she
was beautiful, if he had not so often heard it divulged by a general consent
and report. But love, without whose aid our senses would remain in a manner
useless, and indeed void of sense, lays before him so many allurements, that
howbeit he be blind, he quickly made the other understand what use he was to
make of his eyes, but yet not so perfectly as that he knew yet what was the
force or manner of a look that pierces the breast, or was skillful enough
wittingly to inflict on Diophania the least part of the great torment, he
innocently made her suffer: He contents himself with the contemplation of her,
and by his eyes, from her looks to receive the flame which secretly and
unknown to him, slidingly creepes into his heart: he is so far from
laboring to oppose the violence of an enemy he knows not, or from going about
to master that, which perchance in the beginning was not untameable, that he
not only not resists it, but on the contrary seems to do every thing that
conduces to strengthen it: for he immediately suffers himself to be lead
captive as a triumph to this secret Conqueror, and as if he took delight in
betraying himself; he aspires not so much as to the glory of having made the
least defense: In the mean time he takes pleasure in nothing but in his
torment, and what before was wont to divert and ease him, becomes now too
importune and afflict him. By night he longs for the day, whose light
nevertheless affords him no more contentment than darkness, except it by
chance show him his beloved, whom when he sees, he is no less distempered than
before. He knows not what to resolve on, and becomes so much changed from what
he was, that Diophania at length perceiving it, thinks her self engaged by
her friendship to demand the cause of this so sudden alteration; which she
once tried, but got no satisfaction therein, in regard Hermodan, who felt more
than he was able to express, and who besides, was no less troubled to
dissemble and mask his grief, than to utter it, would have wished she could
have understood it by his eyes, or at least would have contented her self,
with the best language her mouth was able to produce on this subject, which
were his fighes: At last, she still more and more urging him, the necessity of
answering, made him trample both upon fear and shame, which endeavored to
impose everlasting silence upon him: Since, says he, Diophania, it is thy
absolute decree, that I declare my grief unto thee; if thou chancest to be
troubled with the knowledge of it, remember to lay the blame thereof to the
charge of thy curiosity, and not of mine obedience. It is thy beauty,
Diophania, which wounds all men, and which assuredly will kill me, since the
remembrance and consideration of thy quality and time, so far different,
causes on my side a continual despair to accompany my love.

At the uttering of these words, it would have seemed that Hermodan had
cashierd his shamefastness, only thereby to increase that of Diophania, who
so blushed, that he would have been very fortunate, if he had thereby kindled
as great a heat in her heart as her countenance, she too late repented her
curiosity, and not knowing what to do, became so out of order, that she had
been lost in this confusion of thoughts and actions, had she not embraced some
pretext and light occasion of turning from him: O Love! thy power produces
daily strange wonders, and in a moment, at thy pleasure changes the face of
all things. But how do thou bear the name of Love, since thou executest the
office of discord? Thou put division betwixt two, whose friendship and
lives ought to have equal bounds, since their affections, which began in their
infancy has increased with their persons. Thou interruptest the freest actions
of the World, by exposing an innocent Shepherd to so many thousand rigorous
constraints and tortures: She, who formerly with freedom of heart communicated
with him her most secret thoughts, and received his with the same general
liberty, has now much a do to look upon him: she suspects all her actions,
and her self too, and (so odious is the name of love) the most indifferent
discourses of her own mouth seemed suspect to her: O ye gods! in these,
rigor, dissimulation and slight are natural to women; Diophania is already
become acquainted with the things she never learned, and without consulting any
other Oracle than her self, she has learnt Artifice enough to inflict a
thousand torments upon him, from whom she has never received any thing but
good offices. For one sole fault, which nothing but the excess of affection
could make him commit, she on a sudden commits to oblivion all the services
that ever he has rendered her, and the just acknowledgements which she owes to
his former affection: she begins so to know her self, that the more esteem
men make of her, the more she contemnes them; and howsoever the dissemble it,
she becomes no less proud of her beauty, than of her condition and birth: and
as often as she thinks on Hermodans fortune, comparatively with hers, she
laughes at his rashness, and wonders at his attempt; whilst he daily adoring
her footesteps* laments and sighs for her, and the more he implores her grace
and favor, the more he seems to provoke her disdain and choler, and what
petition or entreaty soever he makes to her, se either answers him nothing at
all, or if by chance she vouchsafe to speak, the words she utters are as so
many sentences of death pronounced against him: He knows not by what means to
render himself acceptable, nor what counsel to ask of his perturbed reason;
he consults only his passion, which forms a thousand courses unto him,
whereof he is again afterward ashamed; his projects drive out one another,
and depend more on hazard than providence. Sometimes he appears before her,
and is content to try her by his silence; and sometimes feigning an
acknowledgment, he craves pardon of her for the fault which he is resolved
hourly to commit, and promises her that which he never intends to perform:
Under this dissembled pretext he resolves to try whether he can draw any words
of more comfort from her. How now Diophania says he! since I labou^^d to give
the call, or indeed rather to acquire all, it seems thou art determined to
make me lose all, as if thou had no remainder left of thy former good will. O
no, says she, but the wrongs and mistakes, which it has drawn thee to
commit, makes me withdraw the outward expression and show of it; and if thou
trouble me any further therein, thou will make me recall and withdraw also the
substantial and real part. It was so long since Hermodan had received from
Diophania any word accompanied with favor, or any kind of freedom, that to
him, the hope, as well as the custom seemed for ever lost; insomuch that
herein striving to give some moment of ease to his passion, he lays hold on
the taste and relish of that little sweet that was contained in so much gall.
But it is so difficult a thing to a mind, to whom Love propounds so many
felicities and honors, whereunto it hourly aspires, to find any great
contentment in the ordinary pleasures of an indifferent affection, that in a
short time he was forced to give himself the lie, and to sigh more than
formerly for her sake.

It is a poor enterprise of his, to think to be able to resist so many
attracts and charms; in what estate soever he says her, or beholds her, he is
not able to be Master of himself, or subsist; and what action soever she
imployes her self in, seems to him a continual killing of him. So that one
day, being surcharged with his sorrow, he determined to implore her pity,
without which he could no longer live; or at least beg leave of her to bewail
his condition: but she, not only, not contented her self, to interrupt and
refuse audience to his lamentation, but under pretext of sending him to seek
in absence the cure of a Disease, which took hourly increase in presence,
she absolutely forbad him to come any more near her, which sentence she
could not pronounce without some passion, and a kind of choleric motion, which
rendered her eyes more fervently darting than usual, and made her thereby seem
the more beautiful. At this instant Love seeming not content to use his
ordinary shafts, armed himself with a Thunderbolt, not only to threaten
Hermodan, but to overturne him, and in one moment reduce him to ashes. Ah woe
is me! Diophania, says he, that such an express command requires so prompt an
obedience: lest therefore my life may hereafter be offensive to thee, accept
not only the farewell of separation thou have ordained me, but also that of
Death, which I am going to suffer. This being uttered, his mouth was not able
in a long time to utter any one word, nor his eyes to shed any tears; and yet
Diophania had the heart to break company first, and leave him to the mercy of
despair and frenzy which seized him. He calls upon Death without intermission,
and finding himself deprived of his beloved, grows weary of the company of his
life: But his Fate was not conformable to his will, nor any way pliable to his
entreaties, to whom then shall he have recourse? It is to no end to sigh
amongst the Woods and Wildernesses; for in respect of a Lovers lamentation, the
Deserts, the Rocks, and Diophania are all one, and have one and the same ears.

This poor Shepherd, who thought continually on his Birth and extraction, and
in whom the gods had with nobleness and generous courage, supplied the defects
of his Fortune, was never negligent in the service of their Altars, as knowing
well that upon their conduct and providence depends the good or ill Fortune of
men. But as on Earth he bore an extreme love to Diophania, so in Heaven he
performed a particular Devotion to the Sun; to him he addresses his vows and
supplications, and thus falling cut of one extremity into another, he, who
whilome invoked the most dreadful of the Goddesses, now again implores and
calls upon the fairest of the gods. O great Apollo, says he, thou Fountain
of life and light, which give being and increase to all things, if ever the
Oblations, which I with an innocent mind and undefiled hand have offered thee,
have been acceptable, give ear to my present request; and if there be any
error in my thoughts or ways, let the voluntary confession I make thereof,
expiate the offense. But first look whether the stroke that wounds me be
inevitable, and whether I have not had cause enough to doubt thy sole and
absolute authority. O thou great Author of Ages, grant me the grace of being
loved, where I love and adore, to wit, of the Sun and Diophania. These
prayers sent from a heart surcharged with passion, touched the Sun, but the
beauty of Diophania had struck him before; and he, who sees every thing, saw
nothing more worthy to be looked upon than she; as indeed there was nothing
more like unto him, or more worthy of his love. I have sundry times heard, that
which I never yet could believe; that is, that love has oftentimes moved the
gods, yea, Jupiter himself to forsake Heaven, and come down on Earth; the
verity whereof is so confirmed by this History, that it must for ever remain
indubitable; for though I cannot say, that the Magitians charms are able to
draw the Moon from Heaven, yet well I know that those of Diophania have
prevailed so far upon the Sun, whose beauty may be truly said to appear as
a Sun in the Sun it self. On a certain day, as this fair, but over-cruell
Shepherdess, avoiding perchance the love and presence of her Shepherd, had
driven her Flock into a place more solitary and quiet than ordinary, not far
from that part of this sacred Forest, which is nearest to the City, where she
thought she might be most exempt from the encounter of any thing that might
disturb or molest her: This god, whose eye pierces the most secret corners,
and whose darting beams Hell it self cannot easily shun, presents himself
before her with his beauty, which gives him the advantage above all the rest of
the gods, and with a good part of that great luster, which renders him
generally known; wherewith she was so surprised, that her fear making her
betake her self to flight, she would have bin so glad that any one would have
lent her wings to increase her speed, that if Love himself had offered her
his, she would not have refused them. She runs a great way into the Wood,
where albeit she was safe enough at the first entry, yet she forbeares not to
run continually; every shade to her seems to shine, and on which, side
soever she sees any day, she thinks she is pursued.

At length fear having as it were emboldened her, she thinks there is no
safety for her, but in that most horrid darkness and obscurity, which at other
times was wont to affright her. Take courage Hermodan, and draw a good Augury
from this accident; she thinks if thou had not bin separated from her, this
affright had not surprised her; she repents her oversight, and begins to wish
for thee. And thou Diophania, go boldly out of these shady places, for thy
fear is the vainest in the World: Of all the gods, this whom thou last saw,
is least terrible; and I wonder by what chance it happens, that he, who chases
away all affrights, has so distempered thee.

In the mean time the Sun, howsoever so very swift of foot, that he could
easily have stayed her, seeing her fly in such manner, would not follow her:
The example of Daphne having tempered him so far, that he then took an Oath,
never any more to make any violent pursuit in the like case, and therefore
chooses rather to work by persuasions than constraint: But he finding that
his many fair qualities rendered him more dreadful, and less acceptable, and
that the mean to obtain favor at her hands, was to abate of his
extraordinary great merit, and that his Deity did prejudise him, he resolves to
assume the form of a man. Now although the gods do all things divinely, yet
their wills govern not so all the authorities of Fates, but that they have
some secret reservations, which they know not of. He perceiving Diophania's
rigor to be no less than her beauty, and that she either could not be
persuaded, or persuaded only to a virtuous end, he so governes his
undertakings, that he intends with one and the same action, either to satisfy
himself, or at least grant the request of him, who incessantly implores his
assistance. He therefore puts on the shape of Hermodan, presuming that his
absence had by this time wrought some compunction in her breast, imagining that
she might dislike his so prompt obedience, or have conceived an opinion, that
if he had really loved her, he could never have been so easily commanded to a
separation: she beholds him curiously as he approaches her, and is so far
from starting aside, or withdrawing her self from him, that, besides her
fear, which before m^de her desire his presence, she discernes something in
him which renders him more graceful than formerly: O Diophania! how will thou
be able to oppose the violence that this day thou art assaulted withal, both
by the gods and men? all the powers and virtues of the world are assembled in
one body to attempt thine all alone, and are so much the more fearful,
because in acknowledging thee Conqueror, they will render thee vanquished:
They are the same eyes thou were wont to behold, and yet they have certain
beams and sparklings, which render them more clear and penetrating than
ordinary. The countenance has the same lineaments, but some attracts and
graces withal, which it had not formerly. It is indeed the same voice and
speech, but what does it not utte? and what Charms does it forbear to inchant
thine ears withal? In a word, it is the same stature, the same body, but
inspired with a Deity, of whom (to avoid being persuaded) thou must shun the
conference. She should have fled him, as formerly, but poor Diophania knows
not that there are two Hermodans at once in the world; and that the counterfeit
is far more potent than the real one; whilst she at once receives such
powerful and pleasing impressions of him, as cannot be afterward defaced, and
his image equally assisted with Love, and the god he personated, enters so
firmly into her breast, that she will for ever remain possessed therewith:
howsoever she give no other exterior sign or testimony of it, than her
patient and attentive ear to his words; wherein also she used so much
discretion and reservednesse, that a Mortal could not perceive it, but that it
was requisite to have a Divinity to discern it. But Apollo, who read her
thoughts, finding, that what arguments soever he alleged, she could not be
induced to entertain any undue affection, and that all his attempts
unprofitable to his own suit, had no other effect, but to render more
acceptable the person, of whom he bore the shape, contented himself with the
admiration of Diophanias virtue, and to grant to Hermodan the aid he required
so humble at his hands. It now only remains to make him know, that he is no
less fortunate, than he thinks himself miserable: which he presently
performs before he would quit the shape he had assumed, the more pregnantly
to prove to him, that notwithstanding his separation had prohibited him to see
Diophania, yet, that he had been both seen and heard of her* Hermodan, tired
with sighing and lamentation, was by chance risen from the foot of a Tree, and
sitting himself to retire, stood a while beholding his flock, which seemed
sensible of his anguish and affliction; when as from far he perceived the
Sun, like his second self approaching him, which so perfectly resembled him,
that he could not mistake him, without mis-knowing himself; which so much
disturbed his thoughts, that to get out of the confusion wherein he was, he
determined to go and behold himself in some Fountain, to see whether he were
not by some miracle changed into another, as he really beheld another
transformed into his likeness: he could not understand any possibility of
being in two places at once, to walk and stand still all at once, or how he
could be entire, and yet divided. And although in this object, he saw no other
thing than what he had beheld every day of his life; yet if any man should have
asked him the name of it, he would have been much troubled to have told it:
when he heard these words: Hermodan, I am the god whom thou implorest, and who
have assumed thy shape for no other end, but to render thee more powerful and
acceptable to her who gloried in disdaining thee: An affright she lately had,
made her wish for thy presence, which I have this day granted her in thine
absence, to the end, by this means, and by the strongest persuasions, and most
powerful charms, which under a humane show could proceed from a Divinity to
make her sensible. Having spoken these words, the Sun retires, and night
arrives, so that Hermodan had not time, either to adore him, or give him
thanks: And in that intention he scarce knew how to resolve to demean
himself, so much he feared to offend the gods, in Honoring his own Image. He
never had thought himself so fair or perfect, that he could easily be induced
to take his own resemblance for the Sun. Here upon a thousand doubts
assaulted his imagination, especially when he called to mind what had some few
days before been told him by an old Shepherd, who had the name and repute of
a Magician or Sooth-Sayer; to wit, that to purchase the love of the Beauty he
affected, were required the qualities of a god, under the appearance of a man:
Which he formerly had taken for a testimony of Diophania's Pride and Scorn,
and the small hope he was to expect of her. But now comparing these sayings
with the words he had last heard, that which before made him despair, gives
him now more assurance: yet as the gods, when they are disposed to appear to
us, do accommodate themselves to the weakness of our senses, and assume such
shapes as are most familiar, and supportable by us, lest by presenting
themselves in their own real Forms, the only glance of their presence
should destroy and consume us: so also by too much disposing themselves in so
gentle a way, they often leave scruples and doubts in us of their reality, and
whether they be themselves or no; suggesting by this means to our blindness a
thousand Subjects and causes of incredulity. So this poor shepherd, not
knowing what he should believe, vexes himself, and finds his Spirits
overwhelmed in the confusion of his thoughts, and passing the night with a
thousand Disquiets, could not sleep, had he not been forced to it by the
necessity of his former watching.

The end of the Third Book.
ENDYMION.
The Fourth Book.
ON the other side Diophania finds not her sleep so sweet or pleasing as she
was wont, and her ill rest begins already to make her awake before Aurora:
she never ceases to delight her spirit with the pleasures which love usually at
first represents to those whom he intends to engage in his service, and as yet
perceived not the secret thorns and prickles, covered with the sweet pleasing
Flowers and Roses: she admires the constancy and loyalty of her shepherds, and
incessantly revolves in her thoughts his discourses and his actions, which
rendered him perfectly amiable. But as her beauty acquired her no fewer
servants than all young men that durst look upon her; so amongst others,
Amphidamas had already but too much beheld her, for he thence found such inward
assaults* as deprived him of his patience, and induced him, with the day, to
go interrupt the quiet of Hermodan with this language. Now is the time and
opportunity Hermodan says he, that together with the glorious title of the
firmest friend in the world, thou may in one instant gain Amphidamas his
fortune; and whatsoever is his, if thou but accord him one good office, which,
also, no respect can permit thee to refuse him in.

Thou know that the extreme beauty of Diophania, accompanied with as great
an austerity, renders her inaccessable to all men, except only to thee, whom a
long habit of acquaintance has rendered familiar with her: In which respect I
^ntreat thee to intimate unto her my desire and suite to serve her, and to add
in my behalf whatsoever thy good will or friendship shall suggest unto thee,
to obliege me: I cannot think this message propounded by Hermodan, in the
behalf of Amphidamas, can displease her, except it be so that none but a Deity
only, can be able to deserve or obtain the grace and permission I sue for.
Hermodan, whose misfortune continually assaults and traverses his merit, and so
violently opposes his felicity, that even the gods themselves have much travile
and difficulty to witness by effects the good will they bear him, would feign
have excused himself of this so fatal Commission: But when we have to do
with men, whose condition so far exceeds ours, excuses must be well
grounded, and supported with many firm reasons, otherwise they are taken as
refusals, and injurious discourtesies. But he with this begins to conceive,
that this employment will give him a good pretext to frequent and accost
Diophania with the more confidence and be a means for him to draw from her
some proof of her late favorable change: whereupon (through his excessive
desire thereof) he could not yet fix his hope, and so resolves to gratify
this his irksome Rival with this smooth answer: That he would most cheerfully
and willingly deliver to Diophania the message he had charged him withal, and
would with no less fidelity and promptitude, render him the answer which he
should receive from her; that he so perfectly Honored them both, that he
desired to render them equally satisfied of his obedience: and that he would
rather expose himself to the hazard of incurring Diophanias displeasure, than
to omit any occasion of serving him. So Amphidamas stayed him no longer, for
indeed they were both travailed with one and the same longing: Hermodan to see
Diophania, and Amphidamas to see him set forward.

Behold now at length the happy day wherein Hermodan begins to reassume the
path he had so long lost: But although he was bound to trust more to the gods
than to himself, yet his incredulity hourly suggested new fears, and kept
him in a continual irresolution, until he came even into Diophanias presence,
whom he at first perceived nothing moved, or surprised at his sight, as at some
new thing, which somewhat fortified his resolution, yet he endeavored by these
words to gather more full assurance. There is, Diophania, says he, a new
occasion which engages me to make thee a discourse, which perchance will be
less unpleasing than that whereby I purchased thy displeasure, and procured
banishment from thy presence: Thou now have no further need to consult thy
rigor for mine answer, or employ it to make me suffer death, since the design
of Amphidamas is more than enough to ruin and destroy me; he is wholly
resolved to serve thee, and has made me promise him to give thee notice of it.
Whereat Diophania interrupting him, says; Tell me no more of this, says she,
neither let me any more hear of thee, or Amphidamas. These first words so
astonished Hermodan, that he thought himself no less unfortunate than he was
wont: He inwardly accuses both the gods and men, and imagines that his evil
Genius, or some other Devil yet more fatal to him, had assumed his form to
deceive him, and mock his hope. Then Diophania thus went forward: Had I
yesterday the patience to hear thee speak thy pleasure of thine own
affection, that thereby I should encourage thee to think that I would endure
this day to hear thee talk so much of that of Amphidamas? have thou had half
a days constancy? or have thou so little to sue for in thine own behalf that
thou must of necessity either be silent, or speak for another? Away deceiver,
thou no more remembrest the words thou speak, or the protestations thou
make, than as if some other had pronounced them for thee, or thou never had
thought on them: With this Hermodan manifestly perceiving the verity he had
been informed, began too late to repent his incredulity; yet a secret joy
seizing his heart, does so transport him beyond himself, that he forgets all
his former sorrows, and suffers now no pain, but that of excessive pleasure:
He throws himself at Diophanias feet, and begges of her the pardon he is
sure to obtain; for now all her rigours are grown feigned, and her moth
utters not that harsh word which is not presently contradicted by her eyes. It
was now that these two lovers began to sigh equally for one another, and
entertain themselves with so much delight and felicity, that there was no day
so long, which in this respect seemed not short to them; yet not their
pleasures only, but even their very desires were always accompanied of
innocence; and whatsoever violent trials love charged them, their virtue was
never injured or impaired in the least. And as they judged of all things only
in favor, and by the rule of their affections, so they soon forgot the
inequality of their fortunes; and without troubling themselves with any thing
that might be able to cross their designs, they promised themselves that time
would accommodate all things, and from thenceforward entertained only good
hopes thereof.

In the mean time Amphidamas, whose love sensible increased by the difficulty
Diophania made in receiving the advice of it, found soon after an expedient to
procure him audience: for by addressing himself to Lycaspis her father,
obtained of him all that he could request at his hands. The only respect of
his power and parentage, which ranked him as far above Diophania, as she was
above Hermodan, permits him not to consult further upon the point, and thinks
his daughter must needs be no less pleased therewith than he: and so when he
speaks to her of it, he imputes the change which appears in her face to
modesty, and the natural bashfulnesse, which in the like occasion commonly
accompanies those of her Age and Sex, and takes her silence for consent; yet
Amphidamas pressing more and more, Diophania must declare her self; and her
father, who at first is resolved to constrain her, is desirous to hear her
inclination thereunto from her self. But her fear of displeasing him, makes
her not dare to tell him, what she has before sufficiently declared to her
mother* and therefore Mirtamisa speaking for her, informs Lycaspis of that
which he desired not to have heard: which was, that her Daughters disposition,
would make her prefer the condition of the poorest shepherd of the World,
before all the wealth of him, whose person she could not affect: Which when
Lycaspis heard, his Barbarous inhumanity would not give him leave to reply any
thing, but words of reproach. And as he never had the temper either to retain
his Choler, or conceal his opinion, he failed not to acquaint Amphidamas, with
the very words, which Mirtamisa had reported of Diophania, and to advise with
him what means were most proper to be used to gain her. Amphidamas bearing
himself violently against whatsoever resists him, thinking all things due to
him upon his first demand, is not able to support with patience, at the hands
of whom he so much loves, words so full of disdain and hatred: Whosoever now
looks upon her, increases his jealousy, but especially Hermodan, who never
forsakes her Company; insomuch that the first thing he counsels Lycaspis, is
to forbid Diophania any more to see him, or admit him to her presence. Then he
commands her to resolve, and join a voluntary and cheerful obedience to the
necessity of obeying; that he had engaged his promise therein, and besides
could not think that she was so little careful of her self, or void of
Judgment, as to refuse the greatest honor and advantage that ever he should be
able to procure her. Lycaspis being far more indulgent to the desires of
Amphidamas, than to those of his Daughter, forgot not from thence forward to
repeat often to her that unpleasing Oration, and to offer her the choice of
two things, either to remain in his perpetual disgrace, or to give him
satisfaction in that which he required.

Diophania finding her self thus urged, howbeit she could not easily persuade
her self, that her determinations were in every thing to depend on her Fathers
will, or that it was more convenient for her to enter into an assured
misfortune for her whole life, than once to disobey him; resolves nevertheless
to tell him, that her will depends wholly upon his, and that she will rather
choose death than disobedience: But it was far easier for her to weep than to
answer; and from those two or three words, which she scarce was able to utter,
she fell suddenly into an abundance of tears; this is now all the exercise
she can employ her self in, and by night she chiefly torments and afflicts her
self, whilst Hermodan takes his rest, or perhaps delights his spirit with some
pleasing hope, although indeed it were time for him to despair. He longs for
nothing but the day, to render himself in these fair places, as the sole
witnesses of his felicity and contentment; which arrives for him too soon,
because with it he encounters Diophania sad and desolate, bringing him this
irksome and unpleasing message. Ah Hermodan says she, now is the time that my
Fathers tyranny is become complete, who not only commands me to love
Amphidamas, but with all forbids me to see or speak to thee: Farewell therefore
Hermodan; the small power I have over mine actions and my self, permits me not
any further conference with thee: know only that my life cannot subsist
without the continuance of thy love, and nothing can comfort me but thy
loyalty: How should I be able to express the estate our poor Lover was now
reduced, to whom this change was so rude and sensible, that he was not
himself able to signify his sorrow but by astonishment and silence? he knows
not what way to turn him, and seeing her the whole object of his love, and
only that which made his life acceptable to him, retire from him, if he could
have thought on any expedient to facilitate the approach of death, he would
assuredly have made use of it. And Diophania from thence forward became so
wholly seized with sorrow, that every hour she visibly changed, and in a very
short time became wholly unlike to her self; yet she continued fair, for her
beauty was so perfect, that neither her tears or her sorrows were able to
deface it.

I observing all those passages, and having before perceived the affection she
bare to Hermodan, although I were not resolved much to flatter her passion, as
imagining it could turn to no other thing but a necessary change of the one or
the other, or at least a common despair in both, yet her Fathers cruelty was
to her so complete an affliction, that she needed not the addition of any
other from me, who on the contrary sought all opportunities to divert and
comfort her: And perceiving that the only name of Hermodan had more power with
her than any discourse I was able to present her withal, I forced my self,
for her sake, as much as was possible, to comply with her humor, and by that
means got knowledge of the whole Story. If at any time I labored to reduce
her memory to the consideration of what she ought to do, as by that means
gently to draw her back to the knowledge of her duty, I found the opposition of
two such strong passions, her love to Hermodan, and her hatred to Amphidamas,
that the only effect of all my remonstrances was a renovation of her tears,
and a drawing of this plaint from her lips.

Ah me! says she, either our desires and affections are blind, or the Laws of
Heaven are cruel, that we must so ardently love that which we can never
possess, or be possessed by that, which we cannot affect: What likelihood is
there, that ever I shall be able to persuade my self, that Amphidamas, whom I
hate above all other men, should one day become my better part, or indeed my
second self? If the gods have so much exalted his fortune, it is only to
display his defects, and show the many wants in his person. My Father is quite
different from the disposition of other Fathers, whose children, how deformed
soever, seem fair to them; for it is his opinion, I must seem very defective
and ill-shapen, since he goes about to present me my Match in the most
imperfect man of all others, and as if I were bound to see only with his eyes,
and love with his inclination, he will purchase me a contentment, which I shall
not only never enjoy, but rather esteem it for a singular affliction. Wherein
have I ever so much offended him, that he inflicts a penance on me no shorter
than my life? and whereas others seek the good and contentment of their
Children, he will unworthily condemn me to the sufferance of an eternal
affliction. Shall I alone in all the works of Nature be linked to my contrary?
If it be a Decree of Heaven, why is it only particular to me? And why is not
light as well annexed to darkness, and all other opposites mixed with a like
confusion? It is a vain proposition they make to me, that even those, who in
the beginning are most odious to us, do become, when once the Law renders them
ours, amiable by custom, and the necessity which is imposed upon us to affect
them; Is not this a continual error that reigns in us? Thus the poor
Galley-slave becomes enamoured on the Chain wherewith he has bin accustomed
to be continually fettered; thus the very poison, retaining its proper quality,
is to many, food and nourishment: and thus must we doubtless be grown
exceeding ill, when we can find no taste but in ill things, and that we begin
to esteem Vice in lieu of Virtue.

I remember, that as she powered out those Lamentations, Lycaspis came and told
her, that neither Amphidamas or he could attend any longer, and that therefore
she should prepare her self for the consummation of the Marriage within two
days. But she, striving only to gain time, to see if thereby she might
obtain from the gods the favor that was denied her of men, answers him, that
therein her resolution should be always conformable to her duty. But since she
was now engaged to a sudden forsaking of her present estate, to enter into
that, which Fate, at her Fathers command, seemed to have appointed her, and
that she was suddenly to be cured of the jealousy she formerly had borne to
the Damosells, who had for ever vowed themselves to the service of Diana; that
at least, she desired to quit it with the approbation and favor of the
Goddess, and so desired of him some few days respite, to render her the vows
which she could not continue in the practice of during her life. And that she
might the more easily induce him to grant her this license, she added, she
would never prefer any thing, but the will of the gods, to that of her
Father; who at last unwillingly granted her the request, which he could not
refuse her: So the same day she provided her self against the next morning a
Lamp, a vessel of holy water, a Basket of Flowers, Garlands, a white Robe,
and Aromatic Odours: I waited upon her to the Sacrifice the first day, which
she performed with a white Heyfer, which by her command I conducted thither,
and immolated in her presence, upon the high Altar of Diana; wherein I marked
one sign, which till that present I had been utterly ignorant of, which was,
that the flame from all parts drew toward the Sacrifice, just as you see the
roots all jointly contribute to form the body of a Tree; and when it came to
the place, where usually it ascends directly upward, it by the contrary spread
it self into abroad top, curled, and wholly resembling that of the Myrtle we
lately saw. The next day she resolved to be alone, so that I cannot say what
she did, or with what presents her devotions were accompanied, save only that
toward the evening I saw her return so pale and dis-figured, that she seemed
only the shadow of the former Diophania, and I judged no otherwise but if that
her voyages and vows had continued, she would shortly have only her soul to
make offer of, which she was every hour ready to render: you would have said
she had been hired to deface the Fabric of her fair Body, to prevent
Amphidamas of possessing it, or at least to abolish and destroy that beauty
which had rendered her so amiable to him, whom she could never love. Thus daily
persisting in this her devout and religious demeanor, she went abroad the
third morning more early than she had been accustomed: And this is all that I
can say of her; for night being come, we were all equally amazed that Diophania
returned not. You know what desolation Mirtamisa fell into, and what
astonishment, fury, and rage seized Lycaspis at this accident; and how we were
sent abroad that very night, and all these days past, to seek her in all
places, without having ever gotten any tidings of her: And had we not by chance
lighted upon the adventure of this stranger, we might in vain have continued
our search over all the world of her who was so near us, and whom we had
before our eyes, and were yet neither able to see or know her. From the offense
he has committed, we have drawn the good of knowing what is become of her,
and in what manner he has stopped the course of our pains and labor: with
this the slave ended his story, just as we began to enter the City. They all
brought me to their Captains house, where for a while they locked me in a
Chamber alone, where I employed me in afflicting my self, expecting no less
at my issue thence, than a straight prison, or an eternal and cruel
captivity: yet I said to my self, I shall not be wholly Captive, if I can get
leave but thus to sigh at liberty. Shall it be said that I have wholly vowed my
self to the service of a Goddess, and that (she not so much as regarding it)
I must be compelled to suffer another bondage, and undergo the torment of the
injustice of men: Must I be punished for a fault which a Deity has forced me
to commit, deceiving my eyes and judgment, to make my hands the instruments to
serve her turn? But is Heaven so exact, as not to pardon an accident which no
Providence could prevent? Is it your custom, oh ye gods! that you you your
selves having an intention to destroy us, make us commit faults, and then
interpret our mistakes for crimes? Which of you all, if I may dare to speak
thus, could have refused a branch of Mirth to so many beauties, albeit they had
not been seconded with so many entreaties and persuasions: It was perhaps some
dream or vain apparition; yet it was of your own forming, if it perchance
were not some one of your goddesses; what glory will you obtain by it, that
thus to beguile one poor man you have employed such attracts, and forcible
charms, as your selves would not have bin able to have resisted.

Whilst I entertained my self with those thoughts, more full of fear than
hope, I heard one open the door, where I saw enter a great number of the
principal, and the most ancient of the City, who took special notice of my
face, my stature, and the whole proportion of my body; and then they examined
me whence I was, what was the occasion of my Voyage, and concerning the
accident that was befalne me; which done, they retired apart, and talked a good
while together, and by their gestures they seemed to me, all to consent to one
and the same thing: In the mean time, I not knowing what to do, could
conclude no other thing in my thoughts, but that I was a lost man, and bought
and sold by them, and should be presently delivered over to the best Chapman.
I waited with longing to see how they had disposed of me: And daring to expect
nothing at the hands of my misfortune, but all manner of disasters, I resolved
my self to a constant suffering of more torment than they could inflict upon
me. But in stead of this, I was on the sudden wholly amazed to see them, whom
I had newly so much incenced; to treat me, as if they had been much obliged
to me: and the chiefest of those that had taken me, suddenly turning his
Choler into Courtesy, and his injuries into good offices, was exceeding
careful that I should receive all manner of contentment in his house, and be
better treated than himself: this made me say with my self, those people are
not sensible of injuries, since they thus mildly punish sacriledges, and so ill
defend the cause of their gods. But little knew I that it was their custom to
observe the words and gestures of their Captives, and slaves thereby to
discern, which of them was best inspired to the discourse of times, and
events, and foretell things to come, and then to sacrifice them. And so
walking one evening with some of the principal of them, and being the first
that perceived the New Moon, as soon as she appeared in the Sky, I took
occasion to discourse of her, telling them how happy I thought this Country,
by being in the protection of so great a goddess; and in pursuit of this, I
began to show them her course, her motions, the causes of her several
shapes, and all her alterations and effects: Thus, whilst I precipitated my
self to my fatality, these people heard me with great attention, and admiring
that which they understood not, they took all my words for Oracles: especially
perceiving me so passionately to rehearse the praises of the goddess, and
repeat Hymns in Honor of her, such as they had not been wont to hear.
Sometimes I seemed to them to be transported even to Heaven; and that the
performance of these Discourses, required, that either I must have an
extraordinary inspiration have been an eyewitness of all her motions;
insomuch, that they all unanimously professed, and with one voice said: this
young man is questionless happened fortunately into our hands, and we have not
any one more worthy of the sacred Chain than he* for it was the custom to
honor and adorn with this Chain, the person designed for the Sacrifice)
which I then understood not.

The next morning, before Sunne-rising, they led me to the River, where,
putting off their Clothes, and causing me to do the like, the first leapt
into the water, and then took me, according to the custom of their
Purifications, and plunged me thrice over head and ears deep into the water,
keeping my head always toward the East; then perceiving me clean, without
the least spot, they clad me with new garments of black, and white, which they
had brought along with them, and added thereunto the sacred Chain, which was
of three sorts, the first gold, the second silver, and the third Iron,
wherewith they bound me after their manner, which was so, that mine arms were
not at liberty, and yet told me that, that was rather a sign of Freedom than
Captivity, to the end, that whosoever met me should honor me, and seeing me a
stranger should not take me for a slave; that all pastimes and recreations were
freely allowed me, and that I might go and take them in the Forests, and
Mountains, according to mine own choice; from thence they brought me back to
the City, not to my accustomed lodging, but to their High Priest, or
Sacrificers house, where they more and more increased their honor, and good
treatment of me: insomuch, that I knew not whether I should impute the cause of
it to the proofs I had given them of my courage, or the instruction and light
I had given them in other things, or to the nobleness of my Nation, holding it
a very easy thing for a Grecian to pass for a demy-god amongst Barbarians.

But Endymion, says Pyzander, pardon my just curiosity, which oblieges me to
interrupt thee, by asking thee what became of Hermodan all this while, whom you
lost at the foot of the Myrtle? Hermodan, replied Endymion, stayed there the
whole day, beholding Diophania in this new condition, adoring her, and pouring
out his lamentations before her: but it seems she has neither voice nor words
more, and that her Fate had already put a limit to all the Discourses she was
for ever to make, with that case she had uttered to us: neither do I think
that he received any other answer from her: or at least, if she spoke any more
to him, it was that which only served to increase his affliction to the height
of despair. At length perceiving there was no more of Diophania left him, and
that to see her in that estate, and to see her dead, was one and the same
thing; that after having acquired the affection of the rarest beauty in the
World, and been preferred therein, not only to the greatest of men, but even
to the gods themselves, there remained no earthly thing fit for him to desire:
And besides, he having been the principal cause of whatsoever had been
tragical, and most deploreable in this sad adventure^; it would have argued a
want of sense or feeling of it, and a stupidity of courage to have desired to
live longer, and purchase nothing thereby, but contempt and shame: So, finding
both love and despair, yea, and his very Conscience reproaching him with every
moment he added to his life, he resolved to rank himself into the number of
the dead, provided, that in Sacrificing himself in her presence, he might, if
it were possible, procure her a place amongst the Deities. And thus, having the
whole day watered and bedewed the foot of the Myrtle with his tears, he
resolved at night to besprinkle it with his blood; but just as he was giving
himself the mortal stroke, one by chance passing by saw him, and snached the
Dart out of his hand, which he was going to employ in this fatal execution.
Afterward he would have sought some Rock or Precipice for the accomplishing
of his purpose, if he had not esteemed it as a great crime, from thenceforward
any moment to leave her presence, for whose sake only in what estate soever
she were, he was fully determined to live and dye. He therefore implores the
pity of the gods, especially of Apollo, and conjures them so unfeignedly to
put some period to his sufferings, that the night following, when all creatures
were dumb and at rest, they also stopped the current of his lamentations, and
by a change, not much unlike that of Diophania, granted him the repose he had
so much desired at their hands. For the next morning the people who came
flocking from all parts, to see this new Nymph, under the shape of a Myrtle,
where wholly amazed with the sight of another spectacle before her, which was
that of Hermodan, represented under the figure of a wild Olive Tree, which
Olive and Myrtle were so near together, that their branches began to intermixe
in token of sympathy and affection. And since that time, the Nymphs of these
quarters have celebrated nothing so much as the names of Hermodan and
Diophania, singing continually to their praises, as of two incomparable
examples of love and fidelity, whom they have recommended to everlasting memory
and renown.

There is one doubt more, says Pyzander, to be cleared, which is, that thou
have hitherto discoursed of a City, a River, and a Country, without naming
either one or other of them. Indeed says Endymion, that question is easily
answered; they having all three almost one and the same name. The City is
called Alba; the River, Alban; and the Country, Albania. And this, as I
suppose, by reason of the nature of the place, which produces the people
generally flaxen-haird in their youth: A people excelling in beauty, of fair
stature; another race of Cyclops, inhabiting the Confines of the Caspian Sea,
and Mount Caucasus, for the most part shepherds; Galactophagi, simple,
innocent, and just of life and manners, and in a word, really such as the
Abiens, and Nomadi. Furthermore, it is a Country of pasture, the soil is so
fertile, that without any manuring it produces infinite quantity of good
fruits, which in mine opinion is the cause that the people are more negligent,
and less addicted to husbandry; for indeed they love no kind of labor,
except it be immediately followed with reward, or accompanied with pleasure, as
hunting, also they employ more fervency and affection than industry. But in
stead of Art, Nature has furnished them with the best and strongest Dogs of
the World, such as both fight with, and destroy Lions, and are not afraid to
set upon any living creature. I cannot give thee any more particular
description of it, save only, that as the fertility of Egypt is accompanyied
with its Crocodiles, so this Country has her Serpents, the teeth whereof are
mortal, and their poison of such a tickling operation, that men dye of it with
continual laughing.

That is the place, Pyzander, where I (not sensible of the disaster, which not
only threatened but pressed my life) have remained ever since thou last saw
me, and where I have passed the greatest part of my time at ease, amidst the
fresh shades, on the River sides, with fragrant and odoriferous Flowers and
Herbs, amongst the Nymphs and the May-maids, in the fullness of thousands of
delights, if my Spirit had then been as sensible thereof, as I became
afterward, when I was reduced to the like degree of torment and affliction.
There were the feasts, where I was treated with the most exquisite Cates, with
the Music both of instruments and voice, and with the Dances of young
Gallants, and fair Ladies: in a word, there was nothing but pastimes and
delights* If I were accompanied, so had I also the liberty of being alone when
I pleased; and so making daily choice of the recreations that most pleased me;
I went usually up and down the Forest, where I often encountered Diana, whose
sole presence made me live, in the same time that her change, and the
remembrance of the time past had even killed me. Sometimes I saw her walk,
attended by the sixty daughters of Oceanus, and of twenty other Nymphs, who
have charge of her Bows, her Arrows, her Busgins, and her Dogs. Sometimes I
observed her returning from her game, all haughty, and triumphing over the
Lions, Bears, and other Monsters which she had slain. Sometimes also I found
her almost all alone, where I had opportunity of seeing, and being seen of
her: But Pyzander will thou believe this? Oh do, for it is certain, howbeit
it seem scarce credible: Albeit, she saw me in the estate wherein I was,
bearing the Chain, which she knew well (though I knew it not) to be the mark,
not only of my Captivity, but of the end whereunto I was designed; although I
say, she well knew I was to be sacrificed for her, yet had she in the mean
time the heart to look upon me without pity, as if she had been changed into
another, or had sudainly lost all compassion, remembrance, knowledge, or speech
of me. If I had presented my self to the flinty Rock, where the waves of the
Sea are broken, and Mariners suffer shipwreck; I might have obtained as much
comfort: And yet it is not lawful for me to say she is a little rigorous,
since that from henceforward there is no other contentment left me, than to
allege mine affection to her, that does not acknowledge it: Yea, that Nymph
who had promised me so much favor and assistance, and to whom I had vowed so
much service, had also forgotten my vows, and her own promises; and either
vouchsafed not to look upon me at all, or else looked on me by chance, or as
it were upon a delinquent. Must the transgression of the Laws which Ismena had
prescribed me, cost me so dear? and must I thus pay for having been compelled
to violate things esteemed sacred: O Endymion, happy had thou bin if thou
had not found any Myrtle in the Forest of Diana: I should at least from
the beginning have believed the Oracle which sounded thence, and which at
length I found too true. I should have laid aside the care of presenting my
self before her, since her insensible carriage continually frustrated my
pains and expectation. But that hope which usually entertaines men with error
and vanity, engaging them after to force their Fate, persuaded me to tempt
fortune yet once more; yea, and a second time also. I went so often to the
place where I first had seen her, and received more than a thousand Deaths
from her hand, without dying, that at length it chanced me to find her there,
and participate of a spectacle far more worthy of the gods than of men.

The noise which these Nymphs made, to whom her affection and goodness
permitted all manner of freedom in these solitary places, even to a familiar
sporting with her, gave me occasion to hide my self in a thicket, which I had
before observed, where I could see all, yet no body could see me; they stood
all upon their feet before the Goddess, observing heedfully the enterprise
which two or three of the chiefest of them had engaged themselves in against
her, which she resisted only with smiling, as if she cared not much, although
they should overcome her. One would have thought, seeing them so imperiously to
abuse the power she had given them, that they had changed conditions with her,
and that she, being really subject to them, had deserved to be handled as a
disobedient and criminal person; for one bound her feet, another her hands,
with bonds of silk and gold, which they took from the Dryades that stood by:
O ye gods, thought I to my self! being amazed to see so many virtues and
beauties captive together; in what estate or fashion soever Diana at it, and
could not contain themselves. But the Nayades only laughed at it; and I took
that opportunity to retire me.

Thus much time stole away, and the Feast of Sacrifices approached: It was now
that Diana, ceasing to be any more favorable to me, Ismene might have been to
me in stead of a goddess; if the knowledge she had of what was to befall me,
and the remembrance of the promises she had made me, had moved her to have a
greater care of my return, than I had of it my self. But is it possible, said
Pyzander, that thou were not troubled, concerning the time and means she
should use to free thee from thence? I was so far from calling her to mine
aid, or once naming her, that I endeavored to deny her admittance into my
thoughts, for fear least my thoughts should come to her knowledge, and making
some attempt upon her virtue, should solicit her favor toward me; as I had
feared nothing more, than to be drawn out of the torment wherein I was: A
blind desire made me violently to pursue that which I ought to have avoided:
for whether Diana were averse or favorable, I could not forbear to go daily
to seek her: Moreover the true innocence of these people, the honor and good
entertainment they gave me, the beauty of the place and the persons, and
especially of the women, who almost generally had fair hair* and fresh
complexions, mingled with read and white, and the stature so graceful and
comely, that if they had added to their natural perfections the Art of setting
them out, with the grace and ornaments, which the Greekish Dames use, they
would have seemed goddesses. Those things which seemed in a manner to induce
Diana her self to visit them so often, might well make me for a while forget
the charms of my native soil.

Amongst other, the High Priest, named Timetes, had a Niece of about seventeene
or eighteen years of age, who shared with him in the care of the sacred
things, and seemed to vow her self wholly to the service of Diana: But her
beauty extremely resisted her vows, being such, with the Natural grace
wherewith it was accompanied, that there are very few in the world can equal
it, but none surpass it: From the first time that I saw her; I thought I had
formerly beheld and seen her else where, or at least some shadow, or
resemblance of her beauty; for, having been always separated with so many
Rivers, mountains, and remote Countries, there was no likelihood that it could
be the same: Moreover, I imagined she thought the same concerning me, because
she continually looked upon me, as if she had known me; which made me suddenly
believe we had seen each other in Heaven before we were borne into the World;
and by consequence might have some sympathy of affections: In the mean time, I
who was never unsensible in the encounter of such objects (save only since the
Law which I imposed on my self) to observe constantly the vows I had made to
Diana, whose only Idea purifies my thoughts, and banishes all earthly and
mortal thoughts from my heart, would not engage her affection by too much
Discourse, nor promise her more than I had liberty to perform, having ever
observed that Rule amongst all sorts of people, that my words should not in any
thing differ from mine intentions. But yet from my first view of her I
endeavored to render mine actions acceptable to her, thereby to do me good
will at her hands.

It happens usually that in these accidents we find something within us which
does so strongly animate us, and stirs up in us desires of on affection so
natural, that we have much ado to overcome our selves, and conceal our
passion: And although in this respect, our own inclinations were not of
themselves so prompt, yet we are obliged by discretion and civility, not to
seem wholly insensible of it. Great beauties have a secret kind of Divinity,
more powerful than Scepters and Empires: And our extreme disposition to love
them, makes our opinions add new force, and charms to them. They can so
naturally persuade and constrain; yea, without the assistance of Art, that
their very silence is more eloquent than any Language; we cannot look on them
without amazement and disturbance; and their sole presence in one instant
bereaves us both of judgment, force, and courage: for by the eyes issue such
attracts, as gives us what inspiration and motion they please, and by invisible
Chains do so sweetly force and draw us, that they make us follow them without
contradiction or resistance. A smile, a gesture, or motion, ravishes us with
admiration and sighs, and even transports us: what shall I say more? one only
look charms us, inchants us, drinks our blood, transformes and renders us
insensible. No Pyzander, I am of opinion, that if the World were without women,
we should have a familiar conversation with the gods: for indeed, what is there
but they may command over our souls? and what persuasion, compulsion, or
torture, is comparable to the force of their attracts? O Jupiter! will thou not
pardon all the wrongs malice, fraudulent Discourses, artifices, false oaths,
loss of time, and the impertinent pains and labors they engaged us in? As
for me, I neither ought nor could love any other earthly thing, being so far
engaged in the service of a goddess; yet wheresoever this fair one came into
my sight; I was much troubled to keep my self from using a secret language of
mine eyes, a persuading silence, a gesture and garb more eloquent than speech
it self, a negligence replenished with artifice, and a demeanor discreet and
moderate in it self, although toward others full of violence: Whereof at
first, by reason of the innocent freedom of her age, and her small experience
she took little heed, but within a few days I could plainly perceive that her
heart was as tender as others, and that her disposition was capable of love,
how careful soever she were to keep it private; and that a woman more expert
in dissembling her thoughts, would have been harder to be discovered. But
Stenobea (so was her name) who had not yet learned that love is a fire, hard to
be hidden, or kept from shining, and that the heat of it causes a thousand
disquiets, which beget as many several motions, thought her silence a
sufficient Mask to cover her inward trouble, as if love had had no other Organ
but the tongue to express it self by: Indeed she betrayed not her thoughts
with any one word, and so made it a dumb love, though not blind: But the veil
seemed to be taken from her eyes, only to stop her mouth. How then could
thou perceive Pyzander, that she loved thee. The end, answered Endymion will
give thee proof of the truth of it: It was that, which gave me assurance of it
my self; yet I will tell thee what it was that made me of that opinion from
the beginning, where I might reckon the extraordinary care she had of me; the
recommendation she gave of me to others, and the testimonies of it, which I
could read in the faces of her servants; and the frequent messages, she sent me
upon all occasions under the pretexts, as sometimes sending me little
Presents, or demanding where I was as soon as ever I was out of her sight:
every thing smiled, and looked upon me with affectionate eyes. But thou may
imagine that all this was only in respect of their Custom of treating those
well, who are designed to dye for them. So I, not building much on those
slighter proofs, was wholly amazed to see her in so short a time become unlike
to her self, and change her former liberty, and free actions, the signs of a
sound mind, into a disposition pensive, solitary, and languishing: Her face was
become pale, and her eyes swollen, true witnesses of her watchings and disquiet:
Her looks were sometimes wandering in the air, and sometimes fixed on the
earth, like one in a deep frenzy. Sometimes she began Discourses, but ended
them not, as not knowing well what she said: Otherwhiles leaving her works
undone, and forgetting her most pleasing exercises, they being not powerful
enough to make her forget her torment; she inclined to all manner of change,
she wandered impatiently, seeking that repose every where, which she could not
encounter in any one place: Sometimes as if she had perceived that she
discovered her self, she labored to reprove her self, by employing an
endeavor to resist her malady, and putting on a more cheerful countenance;
And if the compassion she had of my disaster had not forbidden her to add to
mine affliction, she would have made a show of hating me, to prevent the
accusation of loving me too much. But do what she could, it was of small
continuance, and immediately as Conquered, she relapsed into her former
passion: she sighed incessantly, without any apparent cause of vexation or
sorrow, and this she could not forbear whatsoever she attempted to suppress
her sighs, and smother them in the Cradle. Besides, the heart, by a secret
power, turns the eyes always toward the Object of its love: there was
nothing able to possess her so fully, but that she diverted her eyes a
thousand times from it, to return, without any occasion at all, to the
continual search of the subject of her thoughts; I confess freely that I often
observed great alteration in her disposition, insomuch that sometimes she made
me distrust my former opinion, or fear that she esteemed me unworthy of her
affection, because I showed my self, so little sensible of it: whereas, if on
the other side I had given her cause to perceive, that my breast was possessed
with another more pleasing care, it would have been as much, as if I had
played to win her hatred: for women are naturally inclined to fall from one
externity to another; and betwixt those two of their love and hatred, there is
no medium: whatsoever they will, they will absolutely; and if happily it be not
granted at the very least sign they give of their will, there is no hope to
excuse it; and on the contrary, they are all ready to proclaim to the world
the small esteem they make of it, and conserve their own interest to the very
prejudice of what they most before loved. When once they have changed their
disposition and affection, as they give themselves what opinion they please of
things past, so they endeavor in the end to persuade us that they have never
been: But when they perceive that they cannot beguile our senses and
judgment, at least, as they have lost the affection of a thing, so would they
have us lose the memory of it, whereof we dare not so much as complain; for
discretion oblieges us to silence, because their tyranny whereunto we attribute
all, has so won upon us, that the very truth it self would be always
imputed to error and vanity. But by good chance Stenobea had neither leisure
nor opportunity to come by the repentance of it, or make me taste her rigours;
for I kept my self always upright in the terms of the duty and honor I was
obliged to render her, yet so, that nothing could thereby be alleged against
me, in prejudice of my constancy, or the vows I had made to be Diana's
servant for ever. And although Stenobea was such a one, as only the affection
of a goddess was to be esteemed above hers, and that it is hard to be loved
of the most amiable creature of the world, without growing very sensible
thereof; yet I had so much power of my self, as that I was no way touched or
moved with her love; yet very much with her grief, and the sorrow I had, for
not being able to requite her with the like affection: O subject worthy of a
far better acknowledgment, and of an affection as loyal and sincere as her
own! whom, neither my Captivity, nor inevitable Death, nor the whole multitude
of just reasons which assaulted her, would ever be able to make her change
conclusion. Have I not cause to curse the day wherein I found Diana so ready to
give me testimony of her good will, and promise me her favors; since that now,
when she has made me contemn and despise all things, she bears me to the
contempt and loss of my self.

The end of the Fourth Book.
ENDYMION.
The Fifth Book.
WHilst I thus feasted my Spirit with these delights, and entertained my self
chiefly with the hope of a sight of Diana, I was suddenly amazed, perceiving
my self not knowing any thing thereof, at the even of the Feast, every one was
busy in preparing things necessary against the next morrow; decking the Temple
and Altars, and scouring the Vessels with salt, and sulphur: there was nothing
to be seen but Baskets with flowers and branches of Pine-trees; most of the
women and maidens were busied in making of Garlands, and Posies of flowers;
some prepared Incence, and all manner of sweet Odours, others the sacred
Vestments and Ornaments: for albeit these people contenting themselves with
what their fertile soil naturally produces, entertain little or no commerce
at all, contemning foreign Riches: yet through the great number of Devotions
and Oblations, which the Kings and people of the bordering Provinces do daily
bring and offer to this goddess: they do appear at their Sacrifices with
great luster and magnificence: As for me, I rejoiced in the hope I had to see
every thing in its pomp. But when I beheld the Hearts and Bulls with golden
Horns, and an infinite number of other Sacrifices, I little thought that I my
self was to be the principal piece: Observing that Stenobia's Chariot was
preparing, and that she was to execute a part of the function: I sought all
opportunityes of seeing her, and that with more greedy passion than usual,
being more moved thereunto by this new state which was providing for her; and a
little inward grief I had conceived by not having not seen her of late, so
frequently as J was wont. But whether it were too hard a task, and severe
constraint to her to see me ignorant of the approaching period whereunto I was
designed, and not give testimony of the compassion she was possessed withal;
or whether she were over-busie: So it was, that I having been deprived of her
sight all the rest of the day, and having with great impatience suffered that
privation; I cast my self upon the fair bed (this time as the last) which
she had provided for me from the beginning; where I could hear, specially by
night, the least noise that stirred in her Chamber, which joined to mine. I had
by chance passed the better half of the night in a very sound and pleasing
repose; and the Bird of the day had scarce once invited the approach of Aurora
by his shrill-tun'd call: when as hearing a noise at the door, I started up,
and drawing the Curtain a little a side to see what the matter was; I saw a
little boy enter my Chamber, with a Torch of Virgin-waxe in his hand, and
behind him a slave, which set upon the Table a Vessel filled with the water of
Purification, and a branch of Pine; for in that Country the slaves C de Pas
inuen.

I Picart fecit.

have the special charge of sacred things. Presently I perceived some more of
them appear, in the midst whereof was Timetes, who taking the branch, did
therewith sprinkle a fine light dew upon me, with no less reverence than
ordinarily it rendered to the gods and their Altars; then, drawing near me he
uttered these words.

We have hitherto observed the great advantages, Endymion; which the gods have
vouchsafed unto thee above other men; but there is yet something remaining
which must be done, ere thy glory can be brought to perfection, and this is
the solemn day wherein we are to see the strongest proofs of thy generous
courage: wherein we have nothing to desire, but that thou appear always like
thy self: great minds never yield to the assaults of the strongest
adversities, or encounter any thing greater than than themselves: and to such
all humane accidents seem so slight, that they disdain to live for them: If
then neither labor or toil can daunt them, or sorrow wring plaints from their
mouths, what is it that can terrify them in death, whom so many virtuous men
despise, so many also even contemn, and with all men must once suffice? The
Oracles which have proceeded from thine own mouth, have taught us that thou
art far more worthy of Heaven than of Earth, and that the goddess has made
choice of thee above all others, as the most dear and grateful Oblation we
can present on her Altar. And this is the cause why we have always so honored
thee, for which we shall be amply recompensed, if thou but this day bear thy
self constantly, and not fear, or seem unwilling to shorten thy life, to
give so great and large an increase to thy fame: Justify then both thy self
and us; and (if I may dare to say so) justify the goddess her self in the
choice she has made of thee, and we shall be all obliged to celebrate
eternally the memory of thee, as of one, whose life and behavior has rendered
so dear to the gods, and his death so wholesome to men. This day is to thee,
Endymion, the most happy of all other, as that wherein thou art to have so many
witnesses of thy glory; when thou shall show them that they do not so much
conduct thee to death, as to immortality; make it therefore appear, that thou
art not only a man, but that thou have a great resemblance of the gods
themselves, who will bereave men of thy Company. At these words they all
observed attentively what gesture I would use, and took special notice of my
first Motions; which I labored to overcome as much as lay in me: for what man
is able (without some change) to hear the report of my extraordinary and
unthought of accident, whether it concern him or no, and though he neither
gather thence any particular cause of joy or sorrow? Besides, Death is of it
self always hideous and terrible, in what soothing form soever it be
represented: yet I, presently resolving, thus answered them. Is it then for
Diana's sake that I must this day dye? Yes son, answered Timetes, it is for
her, the fairest, the greatest, and the best of all the goddesses. Whosoever,
replied I, has been judged worthy to dye for Diana, has lived but too
happily: it is the most grateful tidings you could have brought me: doubt not
at all of me, for my resolution is already taken, whet your knives and freely
drench them in my blood, power it it out even to the last drop for her sake,
and cover her Altar with the Crimson dye thereof: for I am so far from being
troubled or amazed with the fear of it, that I do with longing expect the
hour. This day, says he, is yet wholly thine, and howbeit the Sacrifices of
the Celestial Deities are usually celebrated in the presence of the Sun, yet
we are by some secret Fate appointed to attend the night, to the end that this
may be rendered more famous by the honor of the goddesses presence, of which
secret Fate we cannot guess the cause, except it be, that thou art the most
dear and most acceptable of all the Sacrifices that ever have been offered to
her. Be of good cheer then Son, says Timetes, kissing and embracing me;
for indeed we held it fit to give thee knowledge of it, to the end thou
might be the better prepared. Go, go your ways said I, and provide for
the rest, as for me, I will be sooner ready than you, and the delay of my death
will be more tedious to me than the death it self.

Thus they left me, looking one upon another, letting loose some sighs and
tears. Ah Stenobea! said I then to my self, is it for this that thou hiddest
thy self yesterday? have thou had the heart to refuse me thy presence only on
the last day, as if I had some suite to beg at thy favor: By this
anticipated and untimely bereaving me of one of the sweetest contentments of my
life, thou art the first that begins to kill me. And thou Ismena, what is
become of all thy promises? is this the care thou will take of me: It may be
that thou esteemest not thy self obliged to afford me succor, since I
demanded not any at thy hands: But whatsoever thou owe not to my desire
herein, thou owe at least to thine own promise; whereof, if thou labor not
to render me performance, thou remainest no less guilty: Alas! this savage and
Barbarous people have pity on my Fate; those that are to kill me, bemoane me,
and even he who is appointed to give me the sad stroke, kisses me, and
embraces me with the same arms that are to plunge the knife deep in my blood,
and open my Bowels; and yet all these things will not procure me at the hands
of Diana the least sign of Compassion: she remains unmoved, and makes as
slight account of my death as my life.

Is the Altar the place then Diana, where I must be presented to thee, to gain
thy favor, and receive the effects of thy promises: must they be sought in the
Stygian waters, and through the streams of blood and tears? Is this the way
to go take possession of a place amongst the stars? and can we not without
forsaking the apparel of this mortal and earthly body, arrive at the honor
of Heaven, or share in the glory of the gods? Oh no, I perceive the mystery of
thy design, thou have only given me verbal promises, whereof I in vain
retain thy memory, since thou art resolved to take away my hope and life
together; to the end to drown all those particulars in everlasting oblivion.
Thou repentest thee for having favored me with too much affection: but
although thou killest me, thou shall not have power to make me repent my
over-loyall adoring thee: And although thine affection to me, be wholly
blotted out of thine heart, yet thou shall not be able to banish it thy memory,
which, against thy will, will satisfy me, with a continual reproaching and
remonstrance of thy fickleness and ingratitude. Add yet some new torture to
my death, and, so it be pleasing to thee, be sure I will embrace it as a
peculiar felicity: At least, how great soever thou be amongst the goddesses, I
shall have just ground to boast my self of having something more great, and
divine than thou, when I shall have witnessed a greater constancy.

Whilst I uttered those words with a low voice, and a resolved, but grieved
mind, the sighs and sobs of Stenobea, piercing the walls betwixt my Chamber
and hers came to mine ears; suddenly imposing silence upon me, that I might
give ear to a lamentation, which was to prove so dear to me, and which more
deplored my calamity than my self. How is it possible that I can this day
behold with dry eyes so tragic and lamentable a spectacle? and that I must
assist, and as it were consent to an action so so cruel and so averse to my
life and tranquillity: and that I must bear a part in the execution: O
Endymion, Endymion, pardon me I beseech thee, and know that in the design I
had of delivering thee, I have a great while forgotten my duty both to my
Country, and my self, that I might render thee that which I never owed thee,
for who ever saw any love so loyally as I, having utterly nothing to expect of
my love, should I only have turned mine eyes on a person pensive, solitary,
and possessed with some other thoughts, which I could not conceive or
comprehend, and who only respected me so far as superficial civility, and a
kind of general custom of honoring my Sex obliged him? But alas* it is now
time to bewail, rather than accuse thee: know then, that if thou this day
receive the mortal stroke, I shall bear the greatest part in the suffering,
thou only wilt endure the violence for a moment, but I shall thereby feel an
immortal sorrow. O Endymion! why have not the Oracles set me in thy place? why
cannot I be accepted there? at least, why may not I have leave to dye with
thee, since my misfortune will not permit me to live with thee? And thou o
Goddess, so great and powerful, what advantage will redound to thee from a
Disaster, whereunto thou may with so much facility apply a remedy? Does the
glory and felicity which environs thee, stand in want of our affliction, to
render them more complete? or do they reap any advancement or perfection from
our sorrows and torments? Or if our superstition offer thee more than thou
requirest, suffer not our error to continue longer, nor force not me, by this
act of inhumanity, which has no other object than thy service, to witness
more resentment and pity than thy self: Content thee with a milder sacrifice,
and choose instead of Endymion, some Hind, or some one of those straggling
Oxen, marked with the Lamp, and which are consecrated to thee in Persia, and
live unprofitably on the banks of Euphrates; whilst the most exquisite of men
are sacrificed to thee: or if thou love one of these better, receive my life
for his: In this case death will be exceeding welcome to me, whether thou do
appoint it me in recompense of the services I have done thee, or for my
punishment, for having esteemed thee too cruel. Thus did poor Stenobea
lament, and the excess of her grief not being able to be smothered, or
retained within the limits of any respect, made her power forth more tears
than words. It was a great honor to me Pyzander, to be thus bewailed, and yet
a greater affliction to see her thus torment her self; and both these
extremes together did so comfort me, in torturing me, that finding my self
thus bewailed, I could have been loath to have dyed: I had a perfect cause to
esteem Death sweet, both for that I was to be offered to Diana, and bewailed
by Stenobea; but all those passages were only as the first signs of her
despair.

By this time it was broad day, and the hour of arising being come, I saw
enter, not the Slaves, which were wont to serve me, for they kept themselves
farther from me, rendering me no other duty than that of their tears; but one
of those who had the prime charge of sacred things, who brought me garments
whiter than Snow, the smell whereof exceeded the sweetest perfumes of Sabea,
and the delights of the Assyrians; and having presented them to me with greater
respect and reverence, than if it had been to the greatest Monarch of the
earth, he presently retired; for now the time entered wherein Stenobea was to
execute her Function: But besides that it is the usual custom of Maidens, to
be long making them ready, chiefly on such days as they are to put on their
fairest Ornaments, there is no doubt but her sorrow rendered her yet more slow;
for she made them expect her a good while, and at length appeared in more
magnificence and pomp than ever I had seen her, dressed as it seemed by the
hands of the Graces, who had not forgotten to beautify her Tresses with all
the forms of adornment that Venus had taught them, to deck her head with the
most precious stones, or crown it with the most beautiful Flowers: Then I
perceived and knew her, whom at first I had so much ado to call to mind, and
whom I formerly had seen in my Vision in the sacred Forest, and who seemed
never to be appointed to appear before me in the Equipage of her Attracts,
but either to condemn me, or put me to death. I knew her by the rich dressings
of her head, her Girdle of Gold and Emeralds, and her Gown embrodered with
Flowers, the ground whereof was a kind of white stuff, fine, and shining,
which the Nymphs who inhabit the shores of Phasis do make, of the finest
wool in the world; she wanted nothing to render her wholly the same, that
appeared to me in the Forest, but the Knife she had in her hand, which also
she had when we came before the Altar: But I could not any where about her
perceive the branch of Myrtle she had made me cut, and which she had promised
to wear for my sake. What! says Pyzander, did not thou see that which was
most visible in her? why, this her extreme but fruitless, and vain love of
thee was the true Myrtle, which was to flourish long, and remain green in her
breast, yet without hope of any fruit. This was not like the love of Thetis
(says Endymion) the day she married Peleus, nor like that of her who waits
upon the Table of the Gods; the day that by Junoes own hand she was presented
to Hercules. And howbeit poor Stenobea being then more moved than ever, had no
steadfast color, but in one instant often blushed and waxed pale again, and
bore all the tokens of sorrow, vively represented in her face; yet her beauty
shined in despite of her affliction, the tears upon her cheeks resembled the
Morning-dew on the blushing Roses, whereunto her very grief seemed to add
some new grace. She was followed of some of her most faithful Companions, all
gentile and properly accoutred, and of Maids who carried the Ornaments
wherewith she was to apparel me. The first thing she did, she besprinkled
me as Timetes had done before, with some few drops of water, which were
presently followed with a whole Torrent of her tears. She no sooner began to
put the Purple-vaile over mine eyes, and bind it upon mine hair with a
trembling hand, but that her heart, swollen with affliction and bitterness,
over-flowes more than ever with tears and sighs. She has neither power, or
commandment more of her self, and her reason losing its absolute power,
sorrow gives it self liberty. In vain do the poor Maidens labor to make
her compose her self again, their own pity and compassion prevailing so
far on them, that they are like to fall into the same distemper; which
respect obliged me to speak thus to her.

What means this Stenobea, art thou come here to afflict me? Have thou more
pity, than either my self or Diana have of me? for, by as much as I see, if
thou were in her place, perchance I should not die. Hitherto my resolution has
forbidden me to wonder, and thou alone do now trouble me; let me, I pray
thee, die in peace, and be contented, that I tell thee, I do more pity thy
suffering, than fear mine own, and should not be sensible of death it self,
but that thine affliction makes me feel it; and Fate is in no respect cruel
to me, but in afflicting thy beauty for my sake: If thou continue thus, thou will make me die more than once: O Stenobea, reserve my life and blood for the
Altar, and power them not out before hand in thy sighs and tears.

I had no sooner spoken the first word, but she redoubled her former
lamentations, in such sort, that my desire of comforting her, seemed to give
addition to her sorrow: When I had finished, she would have spoken, but had not
the power, by reason of the excess of grief wherewith she was travailed: At
length (like as after one violent undertaking we cannot enterprise another
without some intervall of repose) so she, having dried her eyes, at great
leisure, began very coldly to re-imbrace her duty, and drawing nearer to me,
began sometimes one thing, sometimes another, but could finish nothing; for
being transported, and wholly seized with the despair which before had
deprived her of her speech, she lost also at length the ease of tears and
sighs, having nothing left her but silent sobs, to testify that there
remained some little life, but great grief within her: Insomuch that she,
leaning upon my bed, the others were feign to put their hands to the work:
some of which told me, Alas! she has done her uttermost endeavor to cause
some other to be put into thy place; wherein she has been so serious, that
she has not for forborne to consult with old Women, whose Art and Experience
she thought might have furnished her with some invention to this effect:
Besides, that her fear was somewhat diminished, by the hope was given her by a
whispering report amongst the slaves, who, all with one accord seemed to
prophecy, that the course of the Sacrifices should be altered, and that the
Goddess, as being her self a Virgin, required a Virgin for Sacrifice; but
could not notwithstanding all this, find any means for thy deliverance, she
calls said I, the exposing me to a thousand torments, my deliverance; No, no,
said I, since the Moon is grown weary of seeing me, so I am also weary of
seeing the Sun; but they took no notice of my meaning herein, being three or
four hours together busy to dress me in sundry colors, and binding my
head, mine arms, and every part with a thousand different Flowers and Ribonds.
After this Stenobea, being a little come to her self, through the multitude of
importunate requests, and remonstrances they made her, passed slightly with her
hand and eye over all those things, and so taking a small Violl of precious
Oil, she powered it upon my head, and for conclusion crowned me with a Garland,
which she her self had prepared for me.

The Sun having done the moiety of his course, the multitude expected me in
Jupiters Temple, where the people assembled, and were to go thence unto the
high places, which were a good way within the Forest, and where the yearly
Sacrifice was celebrated. Then came Timetes, in a more venerable and grave
manner than usual, with his Turbant, which sparkled with the number of Jewels
that were therein, and a Cloak of the Phrigian fashion, which covered him from
the head to the feet: His other chief ministers with their Coronets of
Flowers, and all their sacred Ornaments, came with him to fetch me, and brought
me to the Temple, where with voices and Instruments they made an excellent
Harmony, until I was consecrated before the Altars, where usually the
Sacrifices were offered, in the presence of the Images of their gods, Jupiter,
the Sun, and the Moon; where the eyes of the whole Assembly were fixed upon
me: on the one side stood all the men, from the highest to the lowest, and on
the other side the women, where the Mothers, the new married, and the Maidens,
exposed their richest and fairest Ornaments to the public view. From thence
we were to part presently, and go toward the high Altar; whither the
remainder of the day was little enough for our March: yea, but Endymion, says
Pyzander, thou passest this very slightly over, do they go so without order,
or any pomp to their Sacrifices, and is there nothing in their whole Ceremony
and State worth the pains of Remembrance? Thou may well think Pyzander
says Endymion, that I could not be so curious a Spectator, being my self the
greatest part of the Spectacle, yet I will give thee briefly an account of what
I was able to observe.

Those who carried the Holy Water, the Banners, and the Images of their gods,
marched foremost, according to the Custom; next unto them were led all the
Sacrifices, amongst which were great numbers of black and white Bulls, which
amply witnessed the fertility of the Country by the largeness of their
limbs; having fair Heads, strong Horns, and unmeasurable broad and long
backs: in a word, just like those which the Egyptians worship, all worthy of
the Rape of Europa, and to be ranked amongst the Celestial Signs; yet I
cannot tell thee, whether there were more or less of them than an Hecatombe:
But well could I discern about an Hundred or six score Maidens following
them, some whereof carried Baskets full of flowers and fruits, other Myrrh,
Incense, and other Aromaticke Drugs, in such abundance, that all the adjacent
places were perfumed withal. It was a pleasure to see them with their baskets
upon their heads, their locks spread upon their shoulders, by a gentle gale of
wind that then blowed, their hands on their sides, and their tall and straight
stature, with their robes and bodies of several colors; in a word, they were
such as Ceres, or Pomena, would gladly have chosen, than to have bin the
bearers of some Present of their fairest fruits to the gods and goddesses.
After this followed Stenobea, (the sole honor of all the Troop) borne on high
above the rest, in a Chariot painted with Azure, enamelled with sundry rich
colors, and drawn by two Hearts, with silvered heads; round about her marched
twelve Virgins, chosen out of the fairest of all the rest, and were the most
gorgeously apparrelled and decked, as was possible to be imagined, bearing
Bows and arrows like Diana's Nymphs: The players on the Flute, Bag-pipe,
Harp, and Vial, never ceased betwixt her and me, who came after, mounted upon
the Chariot of the Moon; for so do they term the Chariot, whereon, for
accomplishment of all honor and respect, they make those mount, that are to be
sacrificed; whence they have a Proverb, which they often rehearse to such
amongst them as want courage, chiefly against their Slaves; which is, Alas!
thou need not fear, thou shall never be set upon the Chariot of the Moon.
In effect it is a Type of the goddesses own Chariot, being one half of Ivory,
the other of Ebony, and in like manner drawn by two Horses, the one white, the
other black. Here it was that I was exalted above all the rest of the Troop,
and seemed rather in the state of a tryumphing Conqueror, than of a Sheep led
to the slaughter, or a sacrifice to the Altar. The whole flower of the youth in
their proudest and most sumptuous accoustrements, followed, marching on both
sides of me, and behind me followed diverse young men bearing Crowns of Pine,
chosen from amongst the Slaves, whereof they usually take the best inspired to
serve for public Sacrifices, and the others to take charge of the sacred
things: they seemed transported with a kind of rage, for besides their
continual dancing C pas. in

and leaping, they murmured a certain strange kind of Oracles, singing
sometimes praises to the Goddess, under different names, according to the
places of her residence, the Functions she exercises, and the Countries of
their own Birth; so that at every other word I heard them name Diana Ortigia,
or of Delos, Diana of Caphria, Diana of Ephesus, Diana of Perga, Schithia,
Ecbatana, Alphea, Mynthia, Ilithia, Lucina, Latonia, Cynthia, Artemis, Dictina,
and by a thousand other names, wherewith she has made her self famous
throughout the world. Amongst the last appeared good old Timetes, riding upon a
little pyed Nag, which it seemed the Moon had sent him, and that the Day and
the Night had given him so equal a distribution of their several colors,
that to have seen him on one side only, one would have thought him wholly
black, or wholly white: After him followed the State, of the principal and
most honorable men, followed of the multitude, and behind them again all the
women promiscuously.

Now, by reason of their slow March, it grew late, and the Sun was entered a
good way into the Ocean, when we first entered the Forest, and before we came
to the high places, the day had forsaken us: From thence we could see the City
of Alba, as from this Mount Lathmos we can that of Heraclea; and the Forest
under us, seemed like a waved valley. There, in the midst of a large Plain,
is a fair and spacious Altar, a reverend Testimony of the devotion of the
Ancients, horrible and frightfull in respect of the Forest it self; and is
not higher raised, than even with the Earth, the place it self being so high,
that nothing can hinder it from the first and immediate beam of the Moons
light. Thither do repair, to render their most solemn vows to the Goddess,
not only the Inhabitants of Albania, but also many of the neighboring
peoples, as those of Armenia, and Colchos, the Iberians and Nomades, even from
Palus Meotis, to the Caspian Sea.

By this time the Slaves had ranged themselves on the sides, making a Lane
betwixt them for me to pass to the Altar, where round about were more than a
thousand Torches burning, and the people began to place themselves in every
quarter: Only Stenobea, who was more slow and backward staid behind, by her
Chariot, from which she was but newly alighted, I knew not what was the cause
of her delay, neither could I discern it for the Damsel that waited upon her
that day, like Nymphs upon Diana, kept themselves always so close, and near
about her, that I could not so much as see her: It seemed to me, that either
they were very attentive to the observation of some new adventure, or the
discourse of some subject which they had not been accustomed to hear. In the
mean time Timetes and his chief ministers, came and took me, and as they were
leading me to the Altar, Ismene came into my thought; insomuch that I said to
my self, O Ismene, Ismene, thy help is slow, and wheresoever thou be,
thine Art must be powerful, to deliver me from the hands of this people: What
honor or advantage will thou acquire, by having enterprised that which thou
art not able to accomplish; or to have promised that which thou had no
intention to perform? If I accuse thee wrongfully, God knows, and thine own
conscience can witness. It is not that I any more desire thine aid, as not
troubling me much about it; for that thou may know it touches me less than
thyselfe. I here declare, that I would be sorry thou should this day prove
constant, and that my Fate is so answerable to my desires, that I am far
less troubled with the death I am going to, than amazed at thy dissembling: At
length I was brought before the Altar, where I stood with a grave and steadfast
countenance, and showing more promptitude toward death than even the most
contented, are wont to embrace increase of days withal. Sorrow presented her
self before me in all her different forms, for which way soever I turned me,
I could perceive nothing but tears, or hear any thing but sighs and sobs:
Every one bemoaned me, but my self, and there was not one of them all more
willing to live, than I was to dye. Then they all at once lifting up their
voices, and sung (as it were the beginning of mine obsequies) certain sad and
mournful Hymns, in a pitteous and lamenting Tone, whilst I addressing all my
vows to Heaven; where I continually kept mine eyes fixed, (which had been
long accustomed to the contemplation of the Moon) who then ascended the
Horizon, more beautiful and clear, than ever I had before seen her; to whom
the noise of their song gave me respit to utter these words instead of prayer:
Hasten, oh inconstant Goddess, to give thy presence to the most acceptable
Sacrifice that ever I shall be able to render thee; and look at least with a
gracious eye on my death, since thou make so small account of my life: Then
my desire of giving mine eyes their last farewell of Stenobea, made me look a
little downwards, where I saw her close by me, and a little behind Timetes:
Alas I saw her, but fairer, and better composed than she was wont; whether it
were that in the presence of this so great an assembly she governed her
carriage, and used more power over her passion, than she had done formerly, or
that misfortune which makes us distrustful of every thing, did then beget that
error and opinion in me for an increase of my affliction; howsoever it were,
she seemed not the same person, who before had shed so many tears: But on the
contrary, looking firmly upon me with dry and resolute eyes, she seemed to be
another Atropos, holding the Knife in her hand, (not to cut any more branches
of Myrtle, but the thread of my Life) the sharpness whereof was so subtle, and
well prepared, that it was in a manner undiscernable; she seemed very ready,
or rather hastily desirous to present it to her Uncle; I knew not who had thus
counseled her, but she was so far from showing any remainder or token of
sorrow in her demeanor, that both in her face and actions appeared
testimonies, if not of joy, yet at least of moderation: O ye gods said I, what
change is this! she, who but lately seemed inconsolable, and wholly bent upon
the saving of my Life, is so suddenly become so resolute, and seems to long to
see me dispatched. O frail Sex! thou have spilt all thy sorrow in thy Tears,
thy lamentations were too violent to be of any long continuance, and were only
of force to kill me with sorrow: but since they are so soon passed, let us now
dye free of care, or the consent of Stenobea, to whom our very Destiny already
seems to be slow.

With this they made an end of their Songs, and I expecting every moment the
fatal stroke, lifted up mine eyes again toward the Moon: And Stenobea gave
the Knife to Timetes, who had no sooner looked upon it, but turning suddenly
toward her, what do thou mean Stenobea, says he, and what do thou here
give me? are we wont to use such Knives in our Sacrifices? why this is so weak
and so light, that me thinks I have nothing in my hand; from whence proceeds
this Novelty? Ask this Woman, answered Stenobea, that stands here, who will
tell thee strange things thereof: Hereupon I turning my self to see who this
might be, to my great amazement and wonder saw it was Ismene, who thus began to
speak.

You shall know Oh Priest, and people of Albania, that the Goddess being the
other day on Hunting in the Country of the Cimmerians, took occasion to go
and repose her self with one of the gods of that Country, who in a Banquet
gave her a taste of those rare and delightful Cates where with he is wont to
charm the cares both of the gods an men. Afterward having showed her in his
Dens and Caves, as in another World, the Magazin of all manner of Rarities, he
presented her with one of the Knives wherewith he takes his Recreation, and
cuts what he pleases in his Nocturnall Exercises; saying, what more proper or
fitter Present can I be able to make to thee Oh Goddess, who art so great a
Lover of Hunting, then the best Knife that ever our Vulcan made with his own
hand, where with thou may cut down all things that hinders thee, and make
thine own way through the thickest forests. This gift was infinitely
grateful to the Goddess, the more, because it was neatly made, light, and fit
for her hand: but through a mischance, she had no sooner taken it, but going to
feel the edge of it with the thumb of her left hand, she could not so gently
touch it, by reason of the sharp and subtle edge of it, but that she cut her
finger that some drops of blood followed; which he perceiving said, Alas,
Goddess, I gave it thee not for that use: I believe it well, said she, but
since it is so greedy of blood, I will for thy sake have it employed in the
most pleasing and acceptable Sacrifice that ever was made to me: herewith said
Ismene, she gave it me, with command to bring it hither, and present it, as I
have done, to the maiden that serves at the Altar: Doubt not then to obey the
message of the Goddess, and then you shall perceive, that obedience joined
with sacrifice is of force even to draw the Gods from Heaven: for you shall
presently see her come down (if ye be not blinded) to gratify with a gracious
acceptance, the Oblation you offer her of this young man.

She had no sooner said this, but there was presently heard a confused murmur
of different voices through the whole assembly; the greater part whereof were
rejoiced at this alteration, as supposed it tended to my delivery: but seeing
me appointed for death, they re-entred into their former fashion of pity and
compassion. Now I leave thee to judge whether I were a little amazed or no, to
see her, from whom only I was to expect life and delivery, carrying the Knife
wherewith I was to be killed. Then said Timetes with a loud voice: O ye people
of Albania, lift up your eyes and hearts to Heaven, and give thanks to the
Goddess who this day is so careful of you, and your Sacrifices: And then
turning toward me, said, Endymion, whether thou have been chosen for the
offense thou have committed, or for the generosity that is in thee, thou thy
self plainly see what confirmation the Goddess gives to the election we
have made of thee: It is thy part now to carry thy self with such resolution,
as that we may have no cause to repent us of having offered thee, nor the
Goddess of having desired thee. I, whom the fear of death touched far less
than the offense, and suspicion I had conceived of Stenobeas change; as in
those extremes, the least sign of disloyalty we discover in those who have
professed love to us, is far more irksome to us, than whatsoever else can
cross us. I could not contain my self from speaking thus to him: Did
thou not observe, said I, Timetes, that the Goddess gave express command,
that the Knife should be given to the Virgin that served at the Altar?
wherefore then do thou take it out of her hand, and hinder her from killing
me, who of her self has more desire to do it, than thou have? and who
appears so resolute? She will, doubtless, acquit her self better than thee,
and the Sacrifice will thereby be much bettered. This is not carried as thou
imaginest, says Timetes, neither is it the intention of the Goddess, or our
custom: The stroke must be given, Endimon, by that person, who of all the
assembly, either does, or should love thee best: Ah me! said I then, it must
not be done by Stenobea: But she, beholding me with the eye of innocence and
amazement, was mightily surprised at my uttering of these words; and her
receiving unjustly so great an injury from one whom she had always so highly
obliged; and to receive it in such a manner, as that the opportunity of
justifying her self, was for ever taken away, by my going to death with this
opinion, which so vively touched her heart, that I did more and more perceive
in her the extreme grief she had hereupon contracted; which also made her
retire behind Timetes; whether it were, that she would not see me any more, or
that she desired to cover the alteration which appeared in her look.

In the mean time Timetes perceiving that there was nothing wanting but my
death, to the accomplishment of the sacrifice, lifting up his hand wherewith he
held the Knife, said to me: Now is the time, Endymion, wherein thou must give a
notable proof of that excellent nature, which has been cause thou have been
chosen by the gods. He had no sooner uttered these words, but that suddenly
there arose a great murmuring amongst the people that were behind him, chiefly
amongst the Damosells, who were about Stenobea, some of which hastened to
receive her in their arms, seeing her falling down, either dead, or in a
swone, grief, despite, and choler all at once seized her, and in such a
furious and violent manner suffocated her spirits, that she became suddenly
unable either to speak or breath. What sacrifice have we here? says poor
Timetes, who was utterly lost and desperate; Do the Gods on a sudden require
two in stead of one? Endymion for the Moon, and perchance Stenobea for the
Sun? Why then am not I, wretched and miserable man, as acceptable to Jupiter,
to the end, that every one of our Gods may have a particular Oblation? What
became of me, Pyzander, at the sight of this dying beauty, when I discerned the
flower and ornament of the whole assembly lying on the ground: Woe is me,
Stenobea, said I, art thou then indeed so sensible of mine unjust calumnies?
and am I so little touched with thy good offices? Although I have not had just
cause to believe thy mutability, yet I have at least had ground for my
suspicion of it: But in vain do I confess a fault, whereof I demand no
pardon; I just now desired death at thy Hands, and have since given it thee:
How shall I alone be able to suffice to the expiation of so many crimes? Alas,
I have need to have two lives, the one to offer for Diana, the other to power
out for Stenobea: O Stenobea, thou teach me to dye, and I long to follow
thee, and my spirit in these vain lamentations loses the opportunity of
accompanying thine: Then I became incensed against my self, and mine own
Fate: and being grown wholly weary and impatient of life, I thrice called upon
Timetes, but he heard me not, being on the other side as busy in the incessant
calling upon her, as his daughter, who indeed was only his Niece: and who, by
what name soever he called her, was not able to make him any manner of answer.
At length, having by continual pulling him by the garment, gotten him to turn
toward me: Wherefore, said I, do thou lose any more time about her, on whom
thou gainest nothing? or what can thy care add to her life, or contentment?
Do not thou know that it is unlawful to interrupt the sacrifices of the gods
for vain and unprofitable respects? will thou keep those alive, whose death
Diana requires? what know thou but this may be a stroke of her own hand:
see thou not that she requires nothing but death on every side? use then the
knife she has sent thee, and keep me no longer in languishing, who am like
to dye with a desire and longing for death.

Timetes pressed with time, and mine importunity, making a sign with his hand
to the whole assembly, to impose silence upon the murmur was risen, by reason
of Stenobea's accident, and to obliege every one to the attention and respect
he owed to the Sacrifice, took the Knife by the Ebon-haft, and presented it to
me. Which when I beheld with amazement, not knowing what he meant, and
imagining that his mind was exceedingly distempered in the occasion: How now
Endymion, says he, have thou not yet learned our Laws and Customs? know
thou not, that our Sacrifices are most happy, chiefly when the person
sacrificed dies cheerfully. Now we, who by the commandment of the Oracle,
are to offer men to the Goddess, do use no other trial of their resolution
and constance, to assure us of their willing acceptance of death, than in
engaging them to be themselves the actors of it. This likes me well Timetes,
said I, taking the Knife, I shall my self far better know where my life lies
hidden, and shall not miss my heart at first stroke: And so addressing my last
words to the Moon: O Goddess, said I, I have erred I confess; but my firm
belief that the gods are always true, and not subject to change, has been
the cause of all mine errors. This heart, the most true guardian of that
affection and loyalty, which has brought me where I now am, shall presently
expiate the offense I have thereby committed. Content thy self, O Goddess, to
see, that having forgone all things for thy sake, I yet willingly lay down my
life, for testimony that I am thine even unto the Altar, and further, if it
were possible. Having finished these discourses, I struck the Knife profoundly
into my bosom, and gave my self a stroke, which so suddenly cut in sunder
the thread of my life, that I had only so much sense left me, as to hear a
pitiful lamentation of many thousand confused voices, just in the instant as
I fell down upon the Altar.

What is this thou tellest me Endymion, says Pyzander, taking him by the hand,
if from the beginning I had not embraced thee, and did not still touch thee, I
should rather think it were a Ghost than a man that now speaks to me. I do
not my self know, says Endymion, what I am, and therefore thou shall do me a
great pleasure, if thou see farther into my adventures than my self, to give
me some light; there is yet something more sad and tragical therein, there is
yet another sacrifice, and another Priest; for I do believe that the gods,
observing the small esteem I have made of death, and of whatsoever is therein
most terrible, are again resolved to enforce me to live, intending to be more
cruel to me, and keep me in a continual torment with the sorrow and anguish,
wherewith I am possessed, for having bin the cause of another more strange and
lamentable sacrifice. What sacrifice can that be, says Pyzander, or what more
strange accident can thou recount unto me? O Endymion, there are many
thousand and broad ways to go out of this life, but scarce any one for
return. How then, says Endymion, have I found it, without seeking, and how am
I returned to my self, that so little desired it? O sweet, but too short
death? who, or what hindered me from seeing the Kingdom of the Ghosts? was it
the sad and drowsy Lord, or the inexorable Judges? and that from thence I
attained not the Elisian fields, which are perpetually watered with the
streams of milk and honey, flowing and running through the meadows, wholly
enameled with flowers which no winter is either able to annoy or wither. What
hindered me that I could not participate in the delightful banquets,
revellings, and dances of the Children and favorites of the gods? I was at the
banks of Acheron, with an extreme desire to pass it, but that old, uncivil
boat-man would not receive me into his Bark; whether it were that I brought
not my passage money in my mouth, like the rest, or that my body had not yet bin
interred: I had the patience to see him cross, and return often, and as often
to offer my self to him, out of a hope, that one time might have rendered me
more acceptable than another; but all my hope was vain, and I could never
gain any thing of him: At length, as I stood still observing the multitude of
souls which repaired thither from al sides, in no less number than the leaves
in Autumn use (after the first frost) to fall from the trees, the sad and
unfortunate soul of poor Stenobea, presented it self to me, with the self
same lineaments and feature which I had usually seen in her, save only that
she seemed far greater, which did so surprise both mine eyes and thoughts,
that I knew not what to think of it, until she began to enter into this
Discourse.

What strange adventure, Endymion, makes thee wander in these obscure and
solitary places, whereunto thy Fate has not yet called thee? For (to the end
thou may not trouble thy self to ask me the same question) I tell thee;
that it is not the will of Heaven that thou shall dye yet, or that I should
live any longer: perchance the gods, being now at length tired with crossing
me, do send thee hither to give me opportunity of justifying my self of the
crime thou have unjustly laid to the charge of mine innocence; the only sorrow
which had power to annoy me even after death. Thou did me wrong in the
interpreting of the resolution, wherewith I beheld thee dye, and that I had so
soon forgot thy loss. All the resolution I took, proceeded from the hope
Ismene gave me, that the Knife would do thee no harm, and that thy life was in
far less danger than mine own. But thou esteemedst my joy for thy deliverance
as a crime, and thine exclamations were so highly injurious to mine affection,
and so sensible to me, that at length they bereaved me of sense, making me fall
down in thy presence, as the true and real Sacrifice of Love first, and then
of Diana: All the care which the maidens that were about me took to remove me
out of the throng into the grass, produced no other effect, than a
transporting me from one death to another, and under color of giving me more
air and liberty of breath, and seeking a cure for my present disease, they
gave me a general cure for all my diseases at once; for Diana, who for a while
before held me in a continual pursuit, had laid a Serpent in ambush, which
with his sting, and mortal venom had wholly infected me, before I could
either come to my self, or give any notice of it. This was a strange kind of
Sacrifice, wherein Timetes bore only the vain name and title of a Priest, and
a Serpent performed the Office. Endymion was presented, but Stenobea was
accepted. I had been far more happy Endymion, if thou had been less
curious, and had never seen Albania; then none of the gods would have made
use of my resemblance, to make thee violate the sacred Forest, or have kindled
in my breast a fire so contrary to my vows: for to be in love, and to be vowed
to Diana are two things incompatible in one subject: I had not then presented
my self at her Altar, with any other care or duty, than that which I owed to
her service, nor should have bin troubled at the fall of such other sacrifices
as were made unto her. Thus she finding me more guilty than thee, slew me to
preserve thee; my life has redeemed thine, and now, the same image that made
thee guilty, brings thee thy absolution. Farewell then Endymion, but remember
this testimony I give thee, even beyond the grave it self, that I have loved
thee, more than I have loved the gods themselves. Thou see how the Ferry-man
presses and calls upon me, therefore hinder me not to go look for rest after
death, since thou have possessed it in life.

As she uttered these words, I thrice stretched forth my hand to take hold of
hers, and stay her, and as often I grasped the air; she fled and vanished
from my sight, like a vision or dream, leaving me no further possibility of
seeing or knowing her. I would have leaped into the Boat after her, but was
more rudely repulsed than before: when I opened my mouth to call to Charon, or
Stenobea, and to power out my plaints and petitions to them, I found my self
stark dumb: being thus transported with grief, I would have wept, but mine
eyes had no more tears: Ah me, said my poor Ghost, which way shall I turn since,
as I now am, I can neither be received amongst the dead, nor the living? Thus
was I compelled to wander here and there on the shore* where instead of the
blessed troops which I thought to have visited, I encountered only
lamentations, afflictions, torments, and such like, the wretched inhabitants of
those sad confines; at length I rested my self under the sable shadow of a
large tree, whose branches spread far and wide, and whose fruit seemed to he
groundless dreams, and the leaves vain hopes. At length having continued a
while like a man that dreams, sleeps, is dead, or is not at at all, as I knew
not what path I trod to conduct me into these parts; so likewise knew I not
what way my spirit took to return to my body, or how I came to my self, yet
I began to recollect sense and motion, and was able to sigh, and open mine
eyes: Howbeit, I stood yet in doubt, whether they were those of my body or
mind; for as if I had bin ravished into the heavens, methought I insensibly
approached the Moon, but observing more nearely, I again thought that she
approached me: then I perceived her descend softly under the favor of silence
and darkness, as though she would have stolen from Heaven, or had bin afraid
to bring day with her unto the earth, in the midst of the Night, and had
therefore covered her face with a Veil: But whether it were too transparent or
untied, or that her eyes were too clear for it, it could not hinder me both
from seeing and knowing her* and so the honor which I promised my self of
her, made me forget my passed misfortunes, and bethink me what to say to her:
but she no sooner put foot on ground, but she prevented me with this grateful
language.

Thy Felicity Endymion, exceeds thy vows and thy hopes, from hence forth let
thine accusing the gods cease, for they give much better than men are able to
demand: Thy sufferings are this day crowned with glory, and have ranked thee in
the number of the Immortal; and this thou art obliged to thine affection for,
or rather, to mine. The names of the greatest number of the Stars are scarce
known to the world, but as long as there shall be any speech of the Moon, or
that she shall shine in the Heavens, thy name shall remain in the mouths and
memory of men.

Thus she continued rewarding my pains with wind and smoke, when on a
sudden a shrill noise of Trumpets, and Clarions, a confused brute of
Cymballs, and all other kinds of Instruments of Copper, and Brass, issued from
the Hills, and the Valleys, and beat the air with such violence, that it
bereaved me of her, who retired and vanished in an instant. Then I opened mine
eyes indeed, just like one that suddenly starts out of his sleep, and suddenly
stretched forth my head and hands, as if I would have followed her, or called
her back again: but having wholly lost the sight of her, I looked about me,
to see if I could perceive the assembly, wherewith I seemed lately environed,
but neither saw that, nor the Priest, or Altar; nay, I could not see my self,
it was so dark; and so making more use of my hands than mine eyes, I
endeavored by feeling round about me, to find out where I was; I began to
think my self shut up in some Sepulcher: At length I discerned a small light,
which by little and little increased, and drawing nearer to the place, where I
first saw it appear, I found my self (to my great astonishment) upon Mount
Lathmos, and the Moon in the Firmament, to whom I was making my complaint,
just as thou came to me.

Verily Endymion says Pyzander, if I be not deceived, I begin to discern the
whole my^^ery of thine Adventures, and in mine opinion I may say, thou have
done a great journey, without budging from one place, in lying still thou have
travailed far, and have seen strange Cities, peoples, and large Countries,
all in one little Cave: It was doubtless one and the same noise that recalled
the Moon from her swoune, and thee from the long sleep Ismene had cast thee
into, either by some slight of her craft, or else by some inspiration of the
goddess herself; for since the time she gave thee that water to make thee,
as she said, rest, whilst she travailed for thee, I have not observed that she
ever waked thee: Only I have noted that thou felt'st her take thee by the
hand, to conduct thy March in the dark, where thou encountredst all those
strange Monsters whereof thou made mention, which in effect are but dreams,
yet images of the truths we this day see. Moreover, the Arrows of Venus Boy,
coming out of Diana's hand, which cast thee down at the foot of a Tree, or
the Knife of Morpheus, brought as thou say* from the Country of the
Cimmeriana, the ordinary residence of slumber, do of their own nature work
no other execution, or kill any body otherwise than thou art slain there with,
as long as no other force is used with them. But what clearer proof can thou
desire of what I say, than the very words which the virgin Parthenopea uttered
to thee at the beginning by way of Oracle?

What charm can this be, but that of Sleep, by the mean whereof, Ismena to
give thy curiosity some kind of satisfaction, has given thee visions of thy
good or ill fortune, of the estate wherein thou art with Diana, and in a word,
the very same things which thou might see with thine eyes open, if thou
would well consider them. I always imagined Pyzander, says Endymion, that
mine adventures would seem so little strange to thee, that thou would
rather take them for dreams, than verities.

By this time the Birds began to raise their several notes, to give a joyful
welcome to the approach of the Morning, and the wonted noise of the Carts, and
men returning to their accustomed labor, was heard on all sides, when Endymion
at the earnest request of Pyzander, came down from Mount Lathmos, and returned
to his Houshold-gods in the City of Heraclea, and to a thousand vows and
prayers which his friends incessantly offered for his presence. From that time
forward he continued recounting, and extolling to all the World the praises of
Diana, although she had been the cause of all his miseries and tortures; and
that he had spent the better part of his time and life, either in the tedious
watchings which he had employed in the contemplation of her beauty and glory,
or in the long sleep which she had caused him to be cast into.

FINIS.

