AGGRAVATION OF SIN: AND SINNING Against KNOWLEDGE. MERCY.


Delivered in several Sermons upon diverse occasions.

BY THO: GOODWIN B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. MDCXXXVII.

AGGRAVATION OF SIN.

BY THO: GOODWIN B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the Sun in
Paul's Churchyard. M DC XXXVII.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF the Aggravation of sin.
THe subject is the sinfulness of sin. page 2. The mischievous effects of the
evil of sin. ibid. 1. It has debased the soul. ibid. 2. It defiles the soul
1. In an instant. 2. Totally. 3. Eternally.
3 3. It robs the soul of the image of God. 4 4. It robs a man of God
himself. 5 5. It was the first founder of hell. 6
The essence of sin is the cause of all these evils. ibid. Sin an evil that
contains all the evils in the world. 7 1. It is the cause of sorrows, and
diseases, and all evils. ibid. 2. There is some peculiar mischief in sin, not
found in other evils, as appears in diverse instances. 8
Quest. What transcendencie of evil is in the essence of sin, that makes it
above all other evil. 10 Answ. It is contrary to God and all that (...) 1. It
is contrary to his (...) being. ibid. being. ibid. 2. It is contrary to all his
attributes which are his name, is to himself, and what ever is his. ibid. 1.
To his laws and ordinances. 2. To his favorites. 3. To his image in man's own
breast. 11

Sinfulness of sin aggravated from the person suffering, being God and man. 12
The least sin virtually more or less contains all sin in the nature of it,
proved. ibid. Every sin inclines our nature more to sin. 13 Sin contains not
only all other evils in it, but also all of its own kind. ibid. Sin a
perfect evil. ibid. Reasons why sin is the chiefest evil. 1. Because it is
simply to be avoided for its self. 2. Because there can be no worse punishment
than it self 3. Because it cannot have a worse epithete given it than it self.
14 Use. Wonder at the abounding nature of sin. 15 Examine our own estates.
ibid. Quest. When a man's sins may be said to be his own? Answ. 1. Then he
commits sin out of his own. 2. Then he hates it not, but loves it. 3. Then he
nourishes it, and cherishes it. 4. Then he provides for it. 5. Then he lives
in sin.
17 Use 2. Consider, the punishment of sin is out of measure fearful. 18 It
contains all miseries in it. 19 What the damned speak of sin in hell. ibid.
Use 3. Only Jesus Christ can conquer sin. 21 Christ's righteousness abounds
sins sinfulness. 22 Come to God through Christ, and take him to be our Lord
and King. 23 Sin and Christ cannot stand together. ibid. We will not take
Christ while sin appears sinful to us. ibid.

IMPRIMATUR;

THO: WEEKS. R. P. Epo: Land. Cap. Domest.

AGGRAVATION OF SIN.
ROMANS 7. 13. Was that then which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But
sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good:
that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful.
WE find our Apostle in the 9. verse to have been alive, but struck upon the
sudden dead, by an apparition presented to him in the glass of the law, of the
sinfulness of sin. Sin revived, says the 9. verse, appeared to be sin,
says the 13. verse, looks but like it self, above measure sinful: and he
falls down dead at the very sight of it: I dyed, says he in the 9. it wrought
death in me, says the 13. that is, an apprehension of death and hell, as due
to that estate I was then in. But yet as the life of sin was the death of
Paul, so this death of his was but a preparation to a new life, I through the
Law and dead to the Law, that I might live to God, Gal. 2. 19. and here he
likewise speaks of Gods work upon him at his first conversion; for then it
was that he relates how sin became in his esteem, so above measure sinful.

The subject then to be insisted on is the sinfulness of sin, a subject
therefore as necessary as any other, because if ever we be saved, sin must
first appear to us all, as it did here to him, above measure sinful.

And first, because all knowledge begins at the effects which are obvious to
sense, and interpreters of the nature of things, therefore we will begin this
Demonstration of the evil of sin, from the mischievous effects it has filled
the world withal, it having done nothing but wrought mischief since it came
into the world, and all the mischief that has been done, it alone has done,
but especially toward the poor soul of man, the miserable subject of it.

Which first it has debased the soul of man, the noblest creature under
heaven, and highest allied, made to be a companion fit for God himself, but
sin has stripped it of its first native excellency, as it did Reuben, Genesis 49.
41. debased the soul more worth than all the world, as Christ himself says,
that only went to the price of it: yet sin has made it a drudge and slave
to every creature it was made to rule: therefore the Prodigal as a type is
said to serve swine, and feed on husks, so as every vanity masters it.
Therefore we find in Scripture, that men are said to be servants to wine, Tit.
2. 3. servants to riches, and diverse lusts, etc.

And hence it is that shame attends upon it, Romans 6. 21. Now shame arises out
of an apprehension of some excellency debased: and by how much the excellency
is greater, by so much is the shame the greater, and therefore unutterable
confusion will one day befall sinners: because sin is the debasement of an
unvaluable excellency.

Secondly, it not only debaseth it, but defiles it also; and indeed there was
nothing else that could defile it, Mat. 15. 20. for the soul is a most pure
beam, bearing the image of the Father of lights: as far surpassing the sin
in pureness, as the sun does a clod of earth; and yet all the dirt in the
world cannot defile the sun; all the clouds that seek to muffle it, it
scatters them all: but sin has defiled the soul, yea, one sin, the least
defiles it, in an instant, totally, eternally.

First, one sin did it in the fall of Adam, Romans 5. 17. one offense polluted
him, and all the world. Now suppose you should see one drop of darkness
seazing on the sun, and putting out that light and eye of heaven, and to
loosen it out of the orb it moves in, and cause it to drop down a lump of
darkness, you would say it were a strange darkness: this sin did then in
the soul, to which yet the sun is but as a Taper.

Secondly, it defiles it thus in an instant. Take the most glorious Angel in
heaven, and let one of the least sins seize upon his heart, he would in an
instant fall down from heaven, stripped of all his glory, the ugliest creature
that ever was beheld: you would count that the strongest of all poisons, that
would poison in an instant; as Nero boiled a poison to that height, that it
killed Germanicus as soon as he received it; now such an one is sin.

Thirdly, sin defiles it totally: it rests not in one member only, but
beginning at the understanding, eats into the will and affections; soaks
through all. Those diseases we account strongest, which seize not on a joint or
a member only, but strikes rottenness through the whole body.

Fourthly, it defiles eternally, it being aterna macula, a stain which no
nitre or soap, or any creature can wash out, Ier. 2. 21. There was once let in
a deluge of water, and the world was all overflowed with it; it washed away
sinners indeed, but not one sin. And the world shall be a fire again at the
latter day, and all that fire, and these flames in hell that follow, shall not
purge out one sin.

Thirdly, it has robbed the soul of the image of God, deprived us of the
glory of God, Romans 3. 23. the image of Gods holiness, which is his beauty and
ours: we were beautiful and all glorious once within, which though but an
accident, is more worth than all men's souls devoid of it, it being a likeness
unto God, a divine nature, without which no man shall see God. Though man in
Innocence had all perfections united in him via eminentiae, that are to be
found in other creatures, yet this was more worth than all: for all the rest
made him not like to God, as this did; without which all Paradise could not
make Adam happy; which when he had lost, he was left naked, though those his
other perfections remained with him; which is profitable for all things, as the
Apostle says. The least dram of which, the whole world emballanced with,
would be found too light; without which the glorious Angels would be damned
devils, the Saints in heaven damned ghosts, this it has robbed man of.

Fourthly, it has robbed man even of God himself: Your sins separate (says
God) betwixt you and me: and therefore they are said to live without God in the
world: and in robbing a man of God, it robs him of all things; for all things
are ours, but so far as God is ours; of God whose face makes heaven, he is
all in all, his loving kindness is better than life, and contains beauty,
honors, riches, all: yea they are but a drop to him.

But its mischief has not staid here, but as the Leprosy of the Lepers in
the old Law, sometimes infected their houses, garments; so it has hurld
confusion over all the world, brought a vanity on the creature, Genesis 2.
Romans 8. 23. and a curse: and had not Christ undertook the shattered condition
of the world to uphold it, Heb. 1. 2.
it had fallen about Adams cares.

And though the old walls and ruinous palace of the world stands to this day,
yet the beauty, the gloss, and glory of the hangings is soyled and marred with
many imperfections cast upon every creature.

But as the house of the Leper was to be pulled down, and Traitors houses use
to be made jakes: so the world (if Christ had not stepped in) had shrunk into
its first nothing: and you will say, that is a strong carrion that retains not
only infection in it self, but infects all the air about: so this, that not
the soul the subject of it only, but all the world.

Lastly, it was the first founder of hell, and laid the first corner stone
thereof: sin alone brought in and filled that bottomless gulf with all the
fire, and brimstone, and treasures of wrath, which shall never be burnt and
consumed. And this crucified and pierced Christ himself, poured on him his
Fathers wrath, the enduring of which for sin, was such, as that all the
Angels in heaven had cracked and sunk under it.

But yet this estimate is but taken from the effects of it, the essence of it
which is the cause of all these evils, must needs have much more mischief in
it. Shall I speak the least evil I can say of it? It conteins all evils als^
in it: therefore James 1. 23. the Apostle calls it filthiness, and abundance
of superfluity, or excrement as it were, of naughtiness. (...). As if so
transcendent, that if all evils were to have an excrement, a scumme, a
superfluity, sin is it, as being the abstracted quintessence of all evil.
An evil, which in the nature and essence of it virtually, and eminently,
contains all evils of what kind soever that are in the world; Insomuch as in
the Scriptures you shall find that all the evils in the world, serve but to
answer for it, and to give names to it. Hence sin it is called poison, and
sinners serpents: sin is called a vomit, sinners dogs: sin the stench of
graves, and they rotten sepulchers: sin mire, sinners sowes: and sin
darkness, blindness, shame, nakedness, folly, madness, death, whatsoever is
filthy, defective, infective, painful. Now as the holy Ghost says of Nabal,
as is his name, so is he; so may we say of sin: for if Adam gave names to
all things, according to their nature, much more God, who calls things as they
are. Surely God would not slander sin, though it be his only enemy. And
besides, there is reason for this, for it is the cause of all evils. God sowed
nothing but good seed in the world; He beheld, and saw all things were very
good. It is sin has sown the tares: all those evils that have come up,
sorrows and diseases, both unto men and beasts. Now whatsoever is in the
effect, is via eminentiae in the cause. Surely therefore it is to the soul of
man (the miserable vessel and subject of it) all that, which poison, death,
and sickness is unto the other creatures, and to the body; and in that, it is
all these to the soul, it is therefore more than all these to it: for
corruption optimi pessima: by how much the soul exceeds all other creatures, by
so much must sin, which is the corruption, poison, death, and sickness of
it, exceed all other evils.

But yet this is the least ill that can be said of it. There is 2. some further
transcendent peculiar mischief in it, that is not to be found in all other
evils, as will appear in many instances.

For first, all other evils God proclaims himself the author of, and ownes
them all; though sin be the meritorious cause of all, yet God the efficient
and disposing cause. There is no evil in the City but I have done it. He only
disclaimeth this, Iam. 1. 13. as a bastard of some others breeding, for he is
the Father of lights, ver. 17.

Secondly, the utmost extremity of the evil of punishment God the Son
under-went, had a cup mingled him of his Father, more bitter than if all the
evils in the world had been strained in, and he drank it off heartily to the
bottom; but not a drop of sin, though sweetened with the offer of all the
world, would go down with him.

Thirdly, other evils the Saints have chosen and embraced as good, and refused
the greatest good things the world had, as evil, when they came in competition
with sin. So Moses those rather to suffer, much rather than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin, Heb. 11. from 24. to 28. So Chrysostom, when Eudoxia the
Empress threatened him: go tell her, says he, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I
fear nothing but sin.

Fourthly, take the Devil himself, whom you all conceive to be more full of
mischief than all the evils in the world, called therefore in the abstract
spiritual wickedness, Ephesians. 6. 12. yet it was but sin that first spoiled
him, and it is sin possesses the very devils: he was a glorious Angel, till
he was acquainted with it: and could there be a separation made between him
and sin, he would be again of as good, sweet, and amiable a nature, as any
creature in earth or heaven.

Fifthly, Though other things are evil, yet nothing makes the creature accursed
but sin: as all good things in the world do not make a man a blessed man, so
nor all the evils accursed. God says not, blessed are the honorable, and the
rich, nor that accursed are the poor: but cursed is the man that continues not
in all things, Gal. 3. 10. a curse to the least sin; and on the contrary,
blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, etc. Romans 4. 7.

Sixthly, God hates nothing but sin. Were all evils swept down into one man,
God hates him not simply for them, not because thou art poor and disgraced,
but only because sinful. It is sin he hates, Rev. 2. 15. Isa. 27. 11. yea it
alone: and whereas other attributes are diversely communicated in their effects
to several things: as his love and goodness, Himself, his Son, his
children, have all a share in: yet all the hatred (which is as large as his
love) is solely poured out upon, and wholly, and limited only unto sin.

All the question will be what transcendencie of evil is in the essence of it,
that makes it above all other evils, and hated, and it only by God, Christ,
the Saints, etc. more than any other evil.

Why? It is enmity with God, Romans 8. 7. abstracts we know speak essences: the
meaning is, it is as directly contrary to God, as any thing could be: for
contrary it is to God, and all that is his.

As 1. contrary to his essence, to his existence, and being God: for it makes
men hate him, Romans 1. 30. and as he that hates his brother is a murderer, 1
Ioh. 3. 15. so he that hates God may be said to be a murderer of him, and
wishes that he were not. Peccutum est Dei-cidium.

2. Contrary it is to all his attributes which are his name: men are jealous of
their names: Gods name is himself; as 1. It makes a man slight Gods goodness,
and to seek happiness in the creature, as if he were able to be happy
without him. And 2. it deposes his sovereignty, and sets up other Gods before
his face. 3. It contemns his truth, power, and justice. And 4. turns his grace
into wantonness.

And as to himself, so to what ever is his, or dear to him. Besides, A King
has 3. things in an especial manner dear to him: His Laws, His favor ites,
his image stamped upon his coin: and so has God.

First, his laws and ordinances: God never gave Law, but it has been broken
by sin; (...) is the definition of it, The transgression of the Law, 1 Ioh.
3. 4. yea it is called destroying the Law, Psalm. 119. 126. And know, that Gods
Law, the least tittle of it, is more dear to him, than all the world. For ere
the least tittle of it shall be broken, heaven and earth shall pass. The least
sin therefore, which is a breach of the least law, is worse than the
destruction of the world: and for his worship, (as envying God should have
any,) it turns his ordinances into sin.

Secondly, for his favorites: God has but a few poor ones; upon whom because
God has set his love, sin has set its hatred.

Lastly, for his image even in a man's own breast: the law of the members
fights against the law of the mind, and endeavors to expel it, though a man
should be damned for it. Gal. 5. 17. The flesh (namely sin) lusts against
the Spirit, for they are contraries. Contrary indeed; for me thinks though it
hates that image in others, that yet it should spare it in a man's self, out of
self-love; but yet, though a man should be damned, if this image be expelled,
it yet labors to do this; so deadly is that hatred, a man hates himself,
as holy, so far as he is sinful.

It abounds now so high, as our thoughts can follow it no farther: Divines say,
it aspires unto infinity, the object against whom it is thus contrary unto,
being God, who is infinite, they tell us, that objectively, sin it self is
infinite. Sure I am, the worth of the object or party offended, aggravates the
offense: an ill word against the King is high treason, not the greatest
indignity to another man. Sure I also am, that God was so offended with it, as,
though he loves his Son as himself, yet he (though without sin) being but
made sin by imputation, yet God spared him not: and because the creatures
could not strike a stroke hard enough, he himself was pleased to bruise him,
Esaias 53. 16. He spared not his own Son, Romans 8. 32. His love might have
overcome him, to have passed by it to his Son; at least a word of his mouth
might have pacified him: yet so great was his hatred of it, and offense at it,
as he powered the vialls of his wrath on him: Neither would entreaty serve, for
though he cried with strong cries it should pass from him, God would not, till
he had out-wrastled it.

And as the person offended, aggravates the offense, as before, so also the
person suffering, being God and man, argues the abounding sinfulness of it.
For, for what crime did you ever hear a King was put to death? their persons
being esteemed in worth above all crime, as civil. Christ was the King of
Kings.

And yet there is one consideration more to make the measure of its iniquity
fully full, and to abound to flowing over, and that is this, that the least
sin virtually more or less contains all sin in the nature of it (I mean
not that all are equal, therefore I add more or less) and I prove it thus:
because Adam by one offense contracted the stain of all, no sooner did one
sin seize upon his heart, but he had all sins in him.

And so every sin in us by a miraculous multiplication inclines our nature
more to every sin than it was before: it makes the pollution of nature of a
deeper dye; not only to that species of sin, whereof it is the proper
individual act, but to all else: as bring one candle into a room, the light
spreads all over; and then another, the light is all over more increased: So it
is in sin; for the least cuts the soul off from God, and then it is ready to
go a whoring after every vanity that will entice it, or entertain it.

And this shows the fullness of the evil of it, in that it contains not
only all other evils in the world in it, but also all of its own kind. As
you would count that a strange poison, the least drop of which contains the
force of all poison in it: That a strange disease, the least infection whereof
brought the body subject to all diseases: yet such an one is sin, the least
making the soul more prone and subject to all.

And now you see it is a perfect evil; and though indeed it cannot be said to
be the chiefest in that full sense wherein God is said to be the chiefest good;
because if it were as bad as God is good, how could he pardon it, subdue it,
bring it to nothing as he does? and then how could it have addition to it, one
sin being more sinful than another? Ezekiel. 8. 15. John 19. 11. But yet it has
some analogy of being the chiefest evil, as God the chiefest good.

For 1. as God is the chiefest good, who therefore is to be loved for himself,
and other things but for his sake; so also in sin the chiefest evil, because
it is simply to be avoided for its self; but other evils become good, yea
desirable when compared with it.

Secondly, as God is the chiefest good, because he is the greatest happiness
to himself; so sin, the greatest evil to it self: for there can be no worse
punishment of it, Romans 1.
than its self; therefore when God would give a man over, as an enemy he
means never to deal withal more, he gives him up to sin.

And thirdly, it is so evil, as it cannot have a worse Epithete given it, than
it self; and therefore the Apostle, when he would spek his worst of it, and
wind up his expression hightest, usque ad hyperbolem, calls it by its own name,
sinful sin, (...), Romans 7. 13. that as in God being the greatest good,
quicquid est in Deo est Deus ipse, therefore his attributes and names are but
himself, idem praedicatur de seipso: so it is with sin, quicquid est in
peccato, peccatum est, etc. he can call it no worse than by its own name,
sinful sin.

USE.
AND what have I been speaking of all this while? Why? but of one sin in the
general nature of it. There is not a man here, but has millions of them; as
many as the sands upon the Sea shore; yea, as there would be Atoms, were all
the world pounded to dust, it exceeds in number also; and therefore ere we go
any further, let all our thoughts break off here in wonderment at the abounding
of sin, above all things else; for other things, if they be great, they are
but a few; if many, they are but small: the world, it is a big one indeed, but
yet there is but one; the sands, though innumerable, yet they are but small;
your sinfulness exceeds in ^oth.

And next, let all our thoughts be wound up to the most deep and intense
consideration of our estates; for if one sin abounds thus, what tongue can
express, or heart can conceive their misery, who to use the Apostles phrase, 1
Cor. 15. are yet in their sins? that is, stand bound to God in their own
single bond only, to answer for all their sins themselves; and cannot, in
the estate wherein yet they stand of impenitencie and unbeleefe, plead the
benefit of Christ's death, to take off and ease them of the guilt of one sin,
but, all their sins are yet all their own, which to a man in Christ they are
not; for his own bonds are cancelled, and given in, and Christ entered into
bonds for him, and all his sins translated upon him.

Now for a proper character of their estate, and suitable to this expression:

First then a man's sins may be said to be still his own: when he commits
sin, out of his own, that is the full frame and inclination of his heart.
Thus the devil is said to sin, Ioh. 8. 44. (...) out of his own; the whole
frame of his spirit is in it; which a man in Christ cannot be so fully said to
do, for he has a new creature in him that sins not, 1 Ioh. 3. 1, 9. that
can say even when he sins, It is not I, but sin.

And secondly, then sin is a man's own, when he hates it not, but loves it:
The world loves his own, says Christ, Ioh. 15. 29. and so does a wicked man
his sin, more than any good; which is David's character, Psalm. 52. 3.

And thirdly, what is a man's own, he nourishes and cherishes; therefore Ephesians.
5. 19. No man hates his own flesh, but loves it, and cherishes it: so do
men their sins, when they are their own. Those great and rich oppressors,
Iam. 5. 5. are said to nourish their hearts in wantonness, and in pleasure, as
in a day of slaughter; as living upon the cream of sinning, and having such
plenty, they pick out none but the sweetest bits to nourish their hearts
withal.

4. So what a man provides for, that is his own; so says the Apostle, A man
that provides not for his own, is worse, etc. When therefore men make
provision for the flesh, as the phrase is, Romans 13. 14. have their Caterers and
contrivers of their lusts, and whose chiefest care is every morning, what
pleasures of sin they have that day to be enjoyed, it is a sign that their
sins are their own.

In a word, when men live in sin, it is the expression used, 1 Timothy 5. 6. She
that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. When the revenewes of the
comfort of men's lives come in, from the pleasures of sin, and that supplies
them with all those necessaries that belong to life; as when it is their element
they drink in like water; their meat, they eat the bread of wickedness, Prove.
1. 7. and it goes down, and troubles them not; their sleep also, they cannot
sleep till they have done or contrived some mischief, ver. 16. their
apparel, as when violence and oppression covers them as a garment, and pride
compasses them as a chain, Psalm. 73. their recreation also, It is a pastime
for a fool to do wickedly, he makes sport and brags of it, Prove. 10. 23. yea
their health, being sick and discontented, when their lusts are not satisfied,
as Ahab was for Naboths vineyard; Amnon grew lean, when he could not enjoy
his Paramore.

All these, as they live in their sins here, and so are dead whilst they live,
and so are miserable, making the greatest evil their chiefest good; so when
they come to die (as we all must do one day) and how soon, and how suddenly
we know not; we carry our souls, our precious souls, as precious water in a
brittle glass, soon cracked, 2 Samuel 14. 14.
and then we are spilt like water, which none can gather up again; or but as a
candle in a paper lantern; in clay walls, full of cranyes, often but a little
cold comes in, and blows the candle out;) and then, without a through change
of heart before, wrought from all sin, to all godliness, they will die in
their sins. And all, and the utmost of all miseries is spoken in that one
word: and therefore Christ, when he would sum up all miseries in one
expression, tells the Pharisees they should die in their sins, John 8. 28.

Use 2.
ANd let us consider further, that if sin be thus above measure sinful, that
Hell that follows death, is then likewise above measure fearful. And so it is
intimated to be a punishment without measure, Ier. 30. 11. compared with Isa.
27. Punish them as I punish thee (says God to his own) but I will punish thee
in measure. And indeed, sin being committed against God the King of Kings, it
can never be punished enough. But as the killing of a King, is amongst men a
crime so heinous, that no tortures can exceed the desert of it: we use to say,
all torments are too little, any death too good for such a crime. Now peccatum
est Dei (...) as I said before, a destroying God as much as in us lies: and
therefore none but God himself can give it a full punishment: therefore it is
called a falling into Gods hands, Heb. 10. 31. which, as he says there, Isa.
40.
is fearful. For if his breath blows us to destruction, Job 4. 9. for we are
but dust heaps; yea, his nod, he nods to destruction, Psalm. 80. 16. then what
is the weight of his hands, even of those hands, which span the heavens, and
hold the earth in the hollow of them? and if God take it into his hands to
punish, he will be sure to do unto the full. Sin is man's work, and
punishment is Gods, and God will show himself as perfect in his work, as man
in his.

If sin be malum catholicum, as has been said, that contains all evils in
it; then the punishment God will inflict shall be malum catholicum also,
containing in it all miseries; it is a cup full of mixture, so called Psalm. 75.
8. as into which God has strained the quintessence of all miseries, and the
wicked of the earth must drink the dregs of it, though it be eternity unto
the bottom. And if one sin deserves a hell, a punishment above measure, what
will millions of millions do? And we read that every sin shall receive a
just recompense, Heb. 2. 3. oh let us then take heed of dying in our sins,
and therefore of living in them; for we shall lie in prison till we have paid
the very utmost farthing.

And therefore if all this that I have said of it will not engender answerable
apprehensions of it in you, (this being but painting the toad, which you can
look upon and handle without affrightment) I wish that if without danger you
could but lay your ears to hell, that standing as it were behind the skreene,
you might hear sin spoken of in its own dialect by the oldest sons of
perdition there, to hear what Cain says of murdering his brother Abel; what
Saul of his persecuting David, and the Priests of Jehovah; what Balaam and
Achitophel say of their cursed counsels and policies; what Ahab says of his
oppression of Naboth; what Judas of treason; and hear what expressions they
have, with what horrors, yellings, groans, distractions, the least sin is
there spoken of. If God should take any man's soul here, and as he rapt His,
into the third heavens, where he saw grace in its fullest brightness; so carry
any ones soul into those chambers of death, as Solomon calls them, and leading
him through all, from chamber to chamber, show him the visions of darkness,
and he there hear all those bedlames cry out, one of this sin, another of
that, and see sin as it looks in hell! But there is one aggravation more of
the evil and misery sin brings upon men, I have not spoken of yet, that it
blinds their eyes, and hardens their hearts, that they do not see, nor lament
their misery, till they be in hell; and then it is too late.

Use 3.
BUt what, does sin so exceed in sinfulness, and is the venom of it boiled up
to such a height of mischief, that there should be no name in heaven and earth
able to grapple with it, and destroy it? Is there no antidote, no balm in
Gilead more sovereign, than it is deadly? Surely yes, God would never have
suffered so potent and malicious an enemy to have set foot in his dominions,
but that he knew how to conquer it, and that not by punishing of it only in
hell, but by destroying it: only it is too potent for all the creatures to
encounter with. This victory is alone reserved for Christ, it can die by no
other hand, that he may have the glory of it; which therefore is the top of his
glory, as mediator, and his highest title, the memory of which he bears
written in his name JESUS, for he shall save his people from their sins, Mat.
1. 21. And therefore the Apostle Paul, his chiefest Herald, proclaims this
victory with a world of solemnity and triumph, 1 Cor. 15. 36. Oh death, where
is thy sting? oh grave, where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin, the
strength of sin is the Law: but thanks be to God that gives us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ: which yet again adds to the Demonstration of
the sinfulness of it: for the strength of sin was such, that like Goliath it
would have defied the whole host of heaven and earth. It was not possible the
blood of Bulls and goats should take away sin, Heb. 10. 4. nor would the
riches of the world, or the blood of men have been a sufficient ransom: Will
the Lord be pleased with rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my
transgression? No, says he, there is no proportion, for thy first borne is but
the fruit of thy body, and sin is the sin of thy soul, Mich. 6. 7. it must
cost more to redeem a soul than so, Psalm. 49. 9. No, could thou bring
rivers of tears, in stead of rivers of oil; which if any thing, were like to
pacify God, yet are they but the excrements of thy brains; but sin is the
sin of thy heart: yea all the righteousness that we could ever do, cannot
make amends for one sin: for suppose it perfect, when as yet it is but dung.
Mal. 2. 3. and a menstruom cloth, yet thou owe it already as thou art a
creature; and one debt cannot pay another. If then we should go a begging to
all the Angels, who never sinned, let them lay all their stock together, it
would beggar them all to pay for one sin: no, it is not the merit of Angels
will do it; for sin is the transgression, the destruction of the Law, Psalm.
109. 1. and the least (...) is more worth than heaven, and all that is therein.

Only, though it be thus unconquerably sinful by all created powers, it has
not gone beyond the price that Christ has paid for it; the Apostle compares to
this very purpose, sin and Christ's righteousness together, Romans 5. 15, 20.
It Is true, says he, that sin abounds, and that one sin, (...), and
instanceth in Adams sin, which staineth all men's natures to the end of the
world; yet says he, the gift of righteousness by Christ abounds much more;
abounds to flowing over, (...), says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 14. as the sea
does above mote-hills, Malach. 7. 14. Though therefore it would undo all the
Angels, yet Christ's riches are unsearchable, Ephesians. 3. 8. he has such riches of
merit, as are able to pay all thy debts the very first day of thy marriage with
him, though thou had been a sinner millions of years, before the creation to
this day: and when that is done, there is enough left to purchase thee more
grace and glory than all the Angels have in heaven. In a word, he is able to
save to the utmost, all that come to God by him, Heb. 7. 5. let their sins be
what they will.

But then we must come to him, and to God by him, and take him as our Lord,
and King, and head, and husband, as he is freely tendered, we must be made one
with him, and have our hearts divorced from all our sins for ever. And why
not now? do we yet look for another Christ? and to allude to us, as Naomi said
to Ruth, Is there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your
husbands? So say I, Has God any more such sons? or is not this Christ good
enough? or are we afraid of being happy too soon, in being married to him?

But yet if we will have Christ indeed (without whom we are undone) how shall
we thou continue in sin, Romans 6.
which is thus above measure sinful? no not in one. The Apostle speaks there
in the language of impossibility and inconsistencie. Christ, and the reign of
one sin, they cannot stand together.

And indeed, we will not so much as take Christ, until first we have seen
more or less this vission here, and sin appear to us, as to him, above
measure sinful: naturally we slight it and make a mock of, and account it
preciseness to stick and make conscience of it: but if once sin thus
appears to any but in its own colors, that man will look upon the least
sin then, as upon hell it self; and like a man affrighted, fear in all his
ways, lest he should meet with sin, and starts at the very appearance of it;
he weeps if sin do but see him, and he do but see it in himself and
others; and cries out as Joseph did, How shall I do this, and sin? and then
a man will make out for Christ, as a condemned man for life, as a man that can
no longer live, oh give me Christ, or else I die; and then if upon this Christ
appears to him, and manifests himself, as his promise is to the^ that seek
him, Ioh. 14. 21. his heart thereupon will much more detest and loathe it: he
saw it evil before, Out then it comes to have a new tincture added, which makes
it infinitely more sinful in his eyes; for he then looks upon every sin as
guilty of Christ's blood, as dyed with it, though covered by it; the grace of
God appearing, teaches us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. The love
of Christ constraines him. Thinks he, Shall I live in that for which Christ
died? shall that be my life, which was his death? did he that never knew sin,
undergo the torment for it, and shall I be so unkind as to enjoy the pleasure
of it? No, but as David when he was very thirsty, and had water of the well
of Bethleem brought him, with the hazard of men's lives, powered it on the
ground; for says he, It is the blood of these men: So says he, even when the
cup of pleasures is at his very lips, It cost the blood of Christ, and so pours
it upon the ground. And as the love of Christ constraines him, so the power of
Christ does change him. Kings may pardon Traitors, but they cannot change their
hearts; but Christ pardons none, he does not make new creatures, and all old
things pass away, because he makes them friends, favorites to live with, and
delight in; and if men put on Christ, and have learned him, as the truth is in
Jesus, they put off as concerning the former conversation the old man, with the
deceitful lusts; and he cease from sin, that is, from the course of any
known sin: they are the Apostles own words, 1 Pet. 5. (...)
which shall judge us; and if we should expect salvation from him upon any
other terms, we are deceived; for Christ is author of salvation to them only
that obey him, Heb. 5. 9.

AGGRAVATIONS OF SINNING AGAINST KNOWLEDGE.

BY THO: GOODWIN B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for John Rothwell, (...) be sold at the Sun in Paul's
Church (...) M DC XXXVII.

Contents of Aggravation of sinning against knowledge.
Doct. TO sin against knowledge is the highest aggravation of sinning. page
34 1. Demonstrations of the point, by comparing it with other kinds of sinning.
36 How much sins against knowledge do transcend sins of ignorance. 37 1. In
sins of ignorance there may be a supposition, if he had known it, he would not
have done it: but not so in these. ibid. 2. The vast difference between them
appears in the repentance God accepts for each: a general repentance for the
one, not so for the other. 39 3. Some kinds of sinning against knowledge
exclude from mercy, which done ignorantly, leave a capacity of it. 40 4.
Sinning against knowledge is the highest, but that of sinning against the holy
Ghost. 41 6. Reasons. 1. Because knowledge is the greatest mercy. 42 2.
Knowledge is the immediate guide of men in all their ways: a man sins against
his guide. 43 That knowledge is so proved, in that an erroneous conscience
binds. 45 3. Reason: Knowledge lays a further obligation to obedience. ibid.
Laws come in force when promulged. 46 4. There is the more contempt cast on
the law. 47 5. In sins against knowledge the will of the sinner closes more
with sin, as sin. ibid. 6. In sinning against knowledge, a man condemns
himself. 48
Three things handled concerning sins against knowledge. ibid. 1. What it is to
sin against knowledge explained. 49 1. Distinction, To sin with knowledge and
against knowledge do differ. ibid. A regenerate man guilty of more sins known
than another. ibid. Yet not of more sins against knowledge. 50 2. Distinction.
Men sin against knowledge either objectively or circumstantially only. 51 1.
What it is to sin directly against knowledge. ibid. 2. What to sin against
knowledge circumstantially only. ibid.

This distinction explained out of this Chap. ibid. Sins directly against
knowledge reduced to two heads. 52 1. In regard of our selves 5. ways. ibid.
1. When we abuse knowledge to help us to sin. ib. 3. Ways.
1. To plot and contrive sin. 2. To color sins committed by lies. 3. To color
sins by pretense of religion, and use their knowledge of religion to plead for
and justify their sin.
ibid. 2. When men neglect to get knowledge that might preserve them from
sinning. 53 3. When men refuse knowledge that they may sin more freely. 55 4.
Is to hate the light, and to endeavor to extinguish it. 55 5. When men hold
opinions ag: their consciences. 57
2. Men sin directly against knowledge it self in respect of others. 58 1. By
concealing knowledge. ibid. 2. Men endeavor to suppress knowledge in others. ib.
3. When men go about to make others sin against their consciences. 59

2. General Branch.
Sins committed collaterally or circumstantially against knowledge. 60 It is
done
1. Either in particular acts of sinning, or 2. In continuing in an estate of
sinning against knowledge. ibid.
Particular instances being infinite. 61 A distinction is given concerning
them. ibid. 1. Some sins more transient. ibid. 2. Some more permanent and
continued, until recalled, though but once committed. ibid.
Which are of all other most dangerous to commit, when against knowledge. 62 2.
Going on in a sinful estate against knowledge. ibid. Three sorts of men thus
sin:
1. Such as for worldly ends forbear to profess Christ and his ways, which
they know to be such. 63 2. Those that defer repentance. 65 3. Apostate
Professors go on in an estate of sinning against knowledge. ibid. Application.
67
2. Head: Rules whereby to estimate sins against knowledge. 68 Of two sorts:
before sinning, or in sinning. 69 1. Before sinning, 3. Rules. 1. The more a
man considers the issues and consequents of a sin. ibid. 2. The more
consultation, and debates before. 70 3. The more testimonies and warnings
against a sin. 71
2. Rules to measure the sinfulness of such acts in sinning, 3. 73 1. The
less passion or temptation to a sin against knowledge. ibid. 2. The more
inward regreet, and sorrow, and reluctance, the stronger is the knowledge, and so
more against it. 75 3. The more hardness of heart in committing a sin known to
be a sin, the greater the sin, as it is a sin against knowledge. 76

3. Head: Aggravations drawn from the kind of that knowledge we sin against,
which are five. 77 The more strong the knowledge, the greater the sin. 78 1. To
sin against the inbred light of nature. ibid. 2. To sin against the light of
education. 80 3. The more real and experimental light men sin against. 82 4.
The more shining the light is in the conscience, joined with a taste, the
greater the sin. 83 5. To sin against professed knowledge. 85
How great an engagement and motive it is to men of knowledge to turn to God,
and to take heed of sinning. 87 1. Such an one cannot sin so cheap as others:
their sins are more castly and (...). ibid. And will have less pleasure in
sinning. ibid. 2. Such are given up to greater hardness of heart. 88 3. Such
God gives up to the worst and grossest of sins. ibid. 4. At death, knowledge
sinned against, gives up to more horror and despair. 89 5. In hell it
increases torment. 90


FINIS.
AGGRAVATIONS OF SINNING AGAINST KNOWLEDGE.
ROMANS 1. 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened.
THere are two general aggravations the Apostle insists on, in these two
Chapters, of the Gentiles sinfulness: First their unthankfulness, ver. 21. in
despising the riches of Gods goodness, Chap. 2. 4. Secondly, of Rebellion, in
sinning against knowledge: That when they knew him, they glorified him not as
God. And of all other he inculcateth this of sinning against knowledge, as the
greatest: for bringing in a long, large, and particular indictment of many
several sins, Idolatry, ver. 23. unnatural uncleanness, ver. 26. etc. and
all kinds of unrighteousness, ver. 29. he does both in the beginning, and end
of the bill, bring in this aggravation, that they sinned against knowledge in
all these. So ver. 18. he begins the indictment and promulgation of Gods wrath
above all for this, that they withheld the truth in unrighteousness; which
was as much as all that unrighteousness committed, barely in it self
considered: And then again in the end, when he comes to pronounce sentence, he
comes in with this, after all particulars had been reckoned up, Who knowing
the judgment of God against those which do such things, yet do them.

So that this Doctrine is clear from hence, Doct.
That to sin against knowledge, To sin against knowledge is the highest
aggravation of sinning.
either in omitting good duties which we know we ought to perform, or
committing of sins we know we ought not to do, is the highest aggravation
of sinfulness.

I put both in both sins of omission and commission: for so the particular
sins the Gentiles are taxed for here, are of both sorts; as not glorifying,
or worshipping God, as well as turning his glory into a lie, etc. to omit
prayer, when your consciences tell you, you ought to do it: to omit holy
discourse, examining the heart, when you know you ought to do them, are as
well sins against knowledge, as to tell a lie against your knowledge, or as
to steal and forswear, or murder, or be drunk, etc.

Now when I say, it is an aggravation to these sins, my meaning is this: That
take any sin thou think most gross, and view it barely in the act of it,
put the act nakedly in the one scale, be it a sin of uncleanness, or
drunkenness; and then put this circumstance which was added to it in the other
scale, that before and when thou did it, thou knew it to be a sin,
this alone weighs as much, yea more than the sin it self does: that as it is
said of Herod, that he added this to all his other sins, that he cast John in
prison, who told him of his Herodias, and so is made as much as all his former
sins: so is this brought in here, that in and unto all their
unrighteousness, this was added, they withheld the truth, the light of their
consciences (which is as a Prophet from God) they did imprison in
unrighteousness, ver. 18. And therefore when Daniel would convince Balshazzar
of his deservednesse to lose his Kingdom, and that he was not able to hold
weight in the balance, Dan. 5. 22. what puts he into the other scale against
him to weigh him up, and to show he was too light, ver. 21, 22? he tells him
how his father knew the God of heaven, and how that his knowledge cost him
seven years the learning among wild beasts, and thou (says he) his son
knew all this, and yet did not humble thy self. Here is the aggravation
weighs down all: he knew the God of heaven against whom he sinned, and that
judgment on his Father for his pride; and then withal he tells him, that this
God, in whose hands is thy breath, and all thy ways, thou have not glorified.
I name this place among many others, because it is parallel with this in the
text. I Will name no more, but give reasons and demonstrations for it.

Demonstrations.
The greatness of this kind of sinning might many ways be made appear;
Demonstratio^s of the point, by comparing it with other kinds of sinning.
we will demonstrate it only by comparing it with other kinds of sinning.

To sin, though out of simple ignorance, when that ignorance is but the causa
sine qua non of sinning, that is, so as if a man had known it a sin, he had
not done it, does not yet make the fact not to be a sin, though it lesseneth
it. For Luke 12. 48. He that did not know his Masters will, was beaten, when
the thing committed was worthy of stripes, though he did not know so much,
because the thing deserves it. And the reason is, because the Law being once
promulged, as 1. to Adam it was, and put into his heart, as the common ark of
mankind; though the tables be lost, yet our ignorance does not make the Law of
none effect. For the Law of nature for ever binds, that is, all that was
written in Adams heart, because it was thereby then published in him, and to
him for us. But positive laws, as I may call them, as to believe in Christ,
etc. anew delivered, bind not, but where they are published. Josiah rent his
clothes, when the book of the Law was found, because the ordinances were not
kept, although they had not known the Law of many years; yet because they
ought to have known it, therefore for all their ignorance, he feared wrath
would come upon all Israel. So also Lev. 5. 17. sins of ignorance were to be
sacrificed for: yet however, it lesseneth the sin, therefore he shall be beaten
with few stripes.

And sure, if ignorance lesseneth them, knowledge aggravates; for contrariorum
eadem est ratio: therefore he that knows, shall be beaten with many stripes.
Yea such difference is there, that God is said to wink at sins of ignorance.
Acts 17. 30. The time of this ignorance God winks at. Whiles they had no
knowledge, God took no notice: yea and he abates something for such sins,
because the creature has a cloak, has something to say for its self; (as
Christ says, John 15. 22.) but when against knowledge, they have no cloak. Yea
farther, Christ makes a sin of ignorance to be no sin, in comparison: So
there, If I had not spoken and done those works never man did, they had had
[no sin.] (That is) none in comparison, but now they have no cloak, How much
sins against knowledge do transcend sins of ignorance.
no shelter to award the stripes, or plea to abate of them.

And that you may see the ground of this vast difference between sins of
ignorance, and against knowledge, In sins of ignorance there may be a
supposition, if he had known it, he would not have done it: but not so in these.
consider first, that if a man sin ignorance merely, there may be a
supposition, that if he had known it, he would not have done it; and that as
soon as he does know it, he would or might repent of it. So 1 Cor. 2. 8. If
they had known, they had not crucified the Lord of Glory. The like says
Christ of Tire, Sidon, and Gomorrha, that if the same things had been done in
them, they would have repented. But now when a man knows it before, and also
considers it in the very committing it, and yet does it, then there is no room
for such a supposition, and less hope. For what is it that should reduce this
man to repentance? is it not his knowledge? now if that had no power to keep
him from his sin, then it may be judged, that it will not be of force to
bring him to repentance for it; for by sinning the heart is made more hard, and
the knowledge and the authority of it weakened and lessened, as all power is,
when contemned and resisted, Romans 1. 21. their foolish heart becomes darker.
Aristotle himself has a touch of this notion in the third of his Ethics,
that if a man sin out of ignorance, when he knows it, he repents of it; if
out of passion, when the passion is over, he is sorry for what he has done:
but when a man sins deliberately, and out of knowledge, it is a sign he is
fixed and set in mischief; and therefore it is counted wickedness and malice.
And hence it is, that those that have been enlightened with the highest kind of
light, but that of saving grace, Heb. 6. 4, 5. and Heb. 10. If they sin
wilfully after such a knowledge of the truth, God looks on them, as those that
will never repent. And therefore likewise the school gives this as the reason
why the Devils sin obstinately, and cannot repent, because of their full
knowledge they sin with; they know all in the full latitude that it may be
known, and yet go on.

Secondly, the vast difference that in Gods account sins of knowledge, The
vast difference between them, appears in the repentance God accepts for each. A
general repentance for the one, not so for the other.
and of ignorance, will appear by the different respect and regard that God
has to them, in the repentance he requires and accepts for them; and that both
in the acts of repentance, and also in the state of grace and repentance, upon
which God accepts a man, or for want of which he rejects him.

First, when a man comes to perform the acts of repentance, and to humble
himself for sin, and to turn from it, God exacteth not, that sins of
ignorance should particularly be repented of. But if they be repented of but in
the general, and in the lump, be they never so great, God accepts it. This is
intimated Psalm. 19. 12. Who can understand his error? cleanse me from my
secret sins: that was confession enough. But sins of knowledge must be
particularly repented of, and confessed, and that again and again, as David
was forced to do for his murder and adultery, or a man shall never have
pardon. Yea farther, greater difference will appear, in regard of the state of
grace and repentance: for a man may lie in a sin he does not know to be a
sin, and yet be in the state of Grace, as the Patriarchs in Poligamie, and in
divorcing their wives: but to lie in a sin of knowledge, is not compatible
with grace: but unless a man maintains a constant fight against it, hates
it, confesses it, forsakes it, he cannot have mercy. This cannot stand with
uprightness of heart. A friend may keep correspondencie with one, he
suspects not to be an enemy unto his friend, and be true to his friendship
notwithstanding: but if he knows him to be an enemy, he must break utterly
with the one, if he leanes to the other.

Some kinds of sinning against knowledge exclude from mercy, which done
ignorantly leave a capacity of it.
that some kind of sins committed out of and against knowledge, utterly exclude
from mercy for time to come; which done out of ignorance, remained capable of,
and might have obtained it; as persecuting the Saints, blaspheming Christ, etc.
Paul's will was as much in those acts themselves, and as hearty as those that
sin against the Holy Ghost: for he was made against the Church, and in these
sins, as himself says, not sinning willingly herein only, but being carried
on with fury, as hot and as forward as the Pharisees that sinned that sin:
only says he, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I did it ignorantly, therefore I obtained
mercy. Though it was ignorantly done, yet there was need of mercy: but yet in
that he did it but ignorantly, there was a capacity and place for mercy, which
otherwise had not been. But thus to sin after a man has received the
knowledge of the truth, shuts a man out from mercy, Heb. 10. and there is no
more sacrifice for sin, for such sins; I say, such sins as these, thus
directly against the Gospel, when committed with knowledge. For sins against
the Law, though against knowledge, there was an atonement, as appears Levit.
6. from the 1. verse to the 8. where he instanceth in forswearing: But to
persecute the Saints, and Christ's truth, with malice, after knowledge of it,
there is no more sacrifice: not that simply the sin is so great in the act it
self of persecution, for Paul did it out of ignorance; but because it is out
of knowledge: so vast a difference does knowledge and ignorance put between
the guilt of the same sin.

And therefore indeed, Sinning against knowledge is the highest to sinning
against the holy Ghost.
to conclude this in the Holy Ghost: which must needs argue it the highest
aggravation of sinning, when it ascends so high, when it brings a man to the
brinck, and next to falling into the bottomless pit, irrecoverably. And
therefore to sin presumptuously (which is all one) and to sin against
knowledge, (as appears Numb. 15. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. it being there opposed to
sinning out of ignorance, (such a sin as David did, of whom it is said, 2 Samuel 12. 9. that he despised the word of the Lord: which phrase also is used to
express sins of presumption, ver. 31. of that 15. of Numbers) To sin, I
say, presumptuously, is the highest step: So in David's account, Psalm. 19. 12,
13. For first he prays, Lord keep me from secret sins, (which he makes
sins of ignorance) and then next he prays against presumptuous sins,
(which, as the opposition shows, are sins against knowledge:) For (says he)
if they get dominion over me, I shall not be free from [that great offense.]
That is, that unpardonable sin, which shall never be forgiven: so as these
are nearest it of any other: yet not so, as that every one that falls into such
a sin commits it, but he is nigh to it, at the next step to it. For to commit
that sin, but two things are required; light in the mind, and malice in the
heart: not malice alone, unless there be light; for then that Apostle had
sinned it: so as knowledge is the Parent of it, it is after receiving the
knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10. 27, 28.

These are the Demonstrations of it, Secondly, Reasons, which are 6. 1. Because
knowledge is the greatest (...).
the Reasons are
First, because knowledge of God and his ways, is the greatest mercy, next to
saving grace: He has not dealt [so] with every Nation. Wherein? In giving the
knowledge of his ways: and as it is thus, so to a nation, so to a man; and
therefore Christ speaking of the gift of knowledge, and giving the reason why
it so greatly condemns, Luke 12. 48. says, For to whom [much] is given, much
is required. As if he had said, To know his Masters will, that is the great
talent of all other. There is a [much] in that. Thus it was in the Heathens
esteem also: They acknowledged their foolish wisdom in moral and natural
Philosophy, their greatest excellency: and therefore Plato thanked God for
three things; that he was a man, an Athenian, and a Philosopher. And Romans 1.
22. the Apostle mentions it as that excellency they did profess. And Soloman,
of all vanities says this is the best vanity, and that it exceeds folly, as
light does darkness, Eccles. 2. But surely much more is the knowledge of the
Law, and of God, as we have it revealed to us; this must needs be much more
excellent. And so the Jews esteemed theirs; as in this second Chapter of the
Romans, the Apostle shows also of them, that they made their boast of the
Law, and their form of knowledge of it, and approving the things that are
excellent. And what do the two great books of the creatures, and the word, and
all means else serve for, but to increase knowledge? If therefore all tend to
this, this is then the greatest mercy of all the rest.

For secondly, 2. Reason. Knowledge is the immediate guide of men in all their
ways: A man sins against his Guide.
God has appointed knowledge as the immediate guide of men in all their ways,
to bring them to salvation and repentance, for to that it leads them. It is
that same (...), as the Philosopher called it: and therefore the Law, Romans 7.
1, 2. is compared to an Husband, (so far as it is written in, or revealed in
the heart) that as an Husband is the guide of the wife in her youth, so is the
Law to the heart. And whereas beasts are ruled by a bit and bridle, God he
rules men by knowledge. And therefore if men be wicked, notwithstanding this
light, they must needs sin highly, seeing there is no other curb for them,
as they are men, but this: if he will deal with them as men, this is the only
way; and therefore if that will not do it, it is supposed nothing will.

It is knowledge makes men capable of sin, which beasts are not; therefore the
more knowledge, (if men be wicked withal) the more sin must necessarily be
reckoned to them: so as God does not simply look what men's actions and
affections are, but chiefly what their knowledge is, and accordingly judges
men more or less wicked. I may illustrate this by that comparison, which I may
allude unto: That as in Kingdoms, God measures out the wickedness thereof,
and so his punishments accordingly, principally, by the guides, the governors
thereof, what they are, and what they do; as in the 5. of Jeremy, the 4.
verse it appears; where first God looks upon the poor people, but, he
excuses them, these are foolish, and know not the way of the Lord: and
therefore God would have been moved to spare the Kingdom, notwithstanding
their sins. But from them at the 5. verse he goes to view the Rules, I will get
me to the great men, for these have known the way of the Lord: and when he saw
that these had broken the bands, then, how shall I pardon thee for this? So is
it in his judgment toward a particular man: when God looks down upon a man,
and sees him in his courses exceeding loose, and wicked, he looks first upon
those rude affections in him, which are unclean, profane, debaucht, greedy of
all wickedness; Ay but says he, these are foolish of themselves, but I will
look upon his understanding, and upon the superior faculties, which are the
guides of these affections, and see what they dictate to these unruly
affections, to restrain them: And when he finds that the guides themselves
are enlightened, and have known the way of the Lord, and that the will and the
affections, though informed with much knowledge, yet break all bands, then how
shall I pardon thee? Thee, who art a knowing drunkard, and a knowing unclean
person, etc. so as thus to sin, aggravates and makes sin out of measure
sinful.

Now that knowledge and reason is a man's guide, That knowledge is so, proved,
in that an erroneous conscience binds.
will further appear by this: That even erroneous knowledge does put an
obligation, a bond, and a tie upon a man: which can be in no other respect, but
because knowledge is appointed to be a man's guide. Thus if a man thinks a
thing (which is in it self common and indifferent) to be a sin, and
forbidden, (as Romans 14. 4.) although the Law forbids it not, yet to him it is
unclean, though in Christ it is not unclean, that is, by the Law of Christ.
For, this his knowledge and judgment of the thing has to him the force of a
Law: for it propounds it to him as a Law, and as from God; which reason of his,
God has appointed as his immediate guide: and the will is to follow nothing
that is evil, which is represented to it, as evil; this is the Law of mere
nature in all conditions; therefore if a man should do an action which is in
it self good, if he thought it to be evil, he should sin, and so e contra,
for he goes against the dictate of nature. So that erroneous knowledge, though
against the Law, is a law to me, though not per se, yet per accidens. Now
therefore if to go against a false light of conscience be yet a sin, though
it proves that the commandment allows the thing was done, and was for it,
then to go against the true light of the Law, how sinful is it?

Again, thirdly, the knowledge of the law binds Knowledge lays a further
obligation as obedience.
by how much the more he knows it: so as though it would be a sin, when he
knows not the Law to transgress it, yet when he knows it, it is a greater
sin. It Is true indeed, that conscience and the Law, when they meet, make up
but one Law, not two distinct Laws: and therefore in sinning against knowledge,
though a man does not commit two distinct sins, yet the knowledge of it does
add a further degree of sinfulness to it: As a cloth is the same cloth when
it is white, that it was when it is dyed with a scarlet dye; yet then it has a
dye, a tincture given it, which is more worth than the cloth: and so when you
sin, not knowing the Law, the sin is the same for substance, it would be if
you had known it; yet that knowledge dies it, makes it a scarlet sin, as Esaias
speaks, far greater and deeper in demerit than the sin it self: and the
ground of this is, Laws come in force when promulged.
because Laws then come to be in force, when they are promulged, and made
known: so as the more they are promulged and known, the more is the force of
their binding, and so the greater guilt. Therefore Deuteronomy. 11. 12. 3. 8. God
straitens the cords more, the binding force of the law more upon those Jews
consciences, to whom he at the first personally with majesty had promulgated
it, than upon their children, though upon theirs also. Now if all Gods Laws,
being made known to Adam, bind us, and are in force, and this when we know
them not; then if we do know them, or might know them, they bind much more:
and still the more clearly we know them, the obligation increases, and the
guilt ensuing with it: and the rather, because now when we come to know them,
they are anew promulged, in a way of a peculiar mercy; we having defaced the
knowledge of them in our fall.

Fourthly, when the Law, being known, is broken, contempt cast upon the Law,
There is the more contempt cast upon the Law.
and the Lawgiver also; and so a higher degree of sinning. And therefore
Numbers 15. 30. He that sins out of knowledge, is said to reproach the Lord,
and to despise the word. And therefore Saul sinning against knowledge, Samuel
calls it rebellion: and though it were but in a small thing, yet he parallels
it with witchcraft. So also Job 24. 13. they are said to rebel, when they
sin against light; because rebellion is added to disobedience: For knowledge
is an Officer set to see the Law executed, and fulfilled; and makes God present
to the conscience. Therefore Romans 2. 14. it is called a witness; and therefore
in sinning against knowledge, men are said to sin before the face of the Lord
himself; now what a great contempt is that? Therefore also Psalm. 50. the
hypocrite sinning against knowledge, is said to cast the law of God behind his
back: so as there is a contempt in this sinning, which is in no other.

Fifthly, the more knowledge a man sins against, the will of the sinner is
discovered to be for sin, In sins again^ knowledge, (...) will of the sinner
closes more with sin as sin.
as sin. Now voluntarium est regula and mensur a actionum moralium:
willingness in sinning, is the standard and measure of sins. The less will,
the less sin: so much is cut off, the less the will closes with it; at
least wise so much is added, by how much the will is more in it: and therefore
the highest degree of sinning is expressed to us by sinning willingly, and this
after knowledge, Heb. 10. Now though an ignorant man commits the act as
willingly, as when Paul persecuted the Church, yet he commits it not considered
as sin, till he has the knowledge of it: but then when it is discovered to
be sin, and the more clearly it is so discovered, the will may be said to
join with it as sin. Therefore the Apostle says, To him that knows to do
well, and does it not, to him it is sin. James 4. 17. because by his
knowledge the thing is represented as sin; and so he closes with it the
more, under that notion and apprehension.

against knowledge, a man condemns himself; In sinning against knowledge a man
condemns himself.
but when out of ignorance merely, the Law only does condemn him. So Romans 2.
1. A man having knowledge in that wherein he judges another, he condemns
himself. So Romans 14. Now as self-murder is the highest degree of murder, and
an aggravation of it; so self-condemning must needs be reckoned. God took it
as a great advantage over him that hid his talent, that out of thine own mouth
I will condemn thee, thou wicked servant.

The doctrine being thus proved, ^. Things handled concerning sins against
knowledge.
First, I will explain, what it is to sin against knowledge.

Secondly, I will give the aggravations of it.

Thirdly, I will give rules to measure sins of knowledge by, and the
greatness of them in any act.

Lastly, the use of all.

For the first, what it is to sin against knowledge. First, to explain it, I
premise these distinctions.

The first distinction. 1. What it is (...) sin against knowledge, explained.
That it is one thing to sin with knowledge, another thing against knowledge.

There are many sins do pass from a man with his knowledge, 1. Distinction
To sin with knowledge and against knowledge do differ.
which yet are not against knowledge. This is to be observed for the removal
of a scruple which may arise in some that are godly, who else may be wounded
with this doctrine through a mistake.

A regenerate man is, and must needs be supposed guilty of more known sins,
than an unregenerate man: and yet he commits fewer against knowledge, than he.

First, A regenerate man guilty of more sins known, than another.
I say, he is guilty of more known sins: For he takes notice of every
sinful disposition that is stirring in him, every by-end, every contrariety
unto holiness, deadness to duty, reluctancie to spiritual duties: and when
regenerated, begins to see and know more evil by himself, than ever he did
before: he fees as the Apostle says of himself, Romans 7. 10. all
concupiscence: and the holier a man is, the more he discernes and knows his
sins: So says the Apostle, Romans 7. 18. I know that in me dwells no good thing.
And ver. 21. I find when I would do good, evil is present with me. And 23. I
see another law. All these, he says, he perceived and found daily in himself:
and the more holy that he grew, the more he saw them. For the purer and clearer
the light of Gods Spirit shines in a man, the more sins he knows: he will
see lusts steaming up, flying in his heart, like moates in the sun, or sparks
out of a furnace, which else he had not seen: the clearer the sun-beame is
which is let into the heart, the more thou will see them.

But yet in the second place, Yet not of more sins against knowledge.
I add, that nevertheless he sins less against knowledge: For then we are
properly said to sin against knowledge, when we do take the fulfilling of a
lust, or the performance of an outward action, a duty, or the like, into
deliberation and consideration, and consider motives against the sin, or to
the duty, and yet commit that sin, yield to it, and nourish that lust, and
omit that duty: Here now we sin not only with knowledge, but against
knowledge: because knowledge stepped in, and opposed us in it, comes to interrupt
and prevent us: but now in those failings in duty, and stirring of lusts in
the regenerate before mentioned, the case is otherwise: they are committed
indeed with knowledge, but not against it: For it is not in the power of
knowledge to prevent them; for motus primo primi non cadunt sub libertatem; but
yet though such sins will arise again and again, yet says a good heart,
they must not think to pass uncontrouled and unseene: Therefore let not poor
souls mistake me, as if I moant, throughout this discourse, of all sins which
are known to be sins, but I mean such sins as are committed against
knowledge: that is, when knowledge comes and examines a sin, in or before the
committing of it, brings it to the Law, contests against it, condemns it, and
yet a man approves it, and consents to it; when a duty and a sin are
brought before knowledge, as Barrabas and Christ before Pilate, and thy
knowledge does again and again tell thee such a sin is a great sin, and
ought to be crucified, and yet thou cryest, let it go; and so for the duty, it
tells thee again and again it ought to be submitted unto, and yet thou omittest
it, and committest the sin, choosest Barrabas rather than Christ, these are
sins against knowledge: now such sins against knowledge break a man's peace,
and the more consideration before had, the more the peace is broken.

The second distinction is, 2. Distinction. Men sin against knowledge, either
objectively, or circumstantially only.
that men sin against knowledge, either directly, or collaterally:
objectively, or circumstantially.

First directly: when knowledge it self is the thing men abuse, or fight
against, becomes the object, What it is to sin directly against knowledge.
the terminus, the butt and mark shot at; this is to sin directly against
knowledge it self.

The second way, collaterally, is, when knowledge is but a circumstance in our
sins: so as the pleasure What to sin against knowledge circumstantially
only.
and that our knowledge steps but in between to hinder us in it, and we commit
it notwithstanding, though we do know it; here knowledge is indeed sinned
against, yet but collaterally, and as a stander by, but as a circumstance
only, shot at per accidens, concomitanter, and by the by, as one that steps in
to part a fray is smitten, for laboring to hinder them in their sin, as the
Sodomi^es quarrelled with Lot: they are both found in this Chapter, and
therefore come fitly within the compass of this discourse. This distinction
explained out of this Chapter.


First, This collateral kind of sinning against knowledge is mentioned in the
21. verse, where he says, They knew God, yet they glorified him not: there
knowledge is made but a circumstance of their sinning; they sinned against it
but collaterally. But then that other kind of sinning directly against
knowledge, is mentioned ver. 28. They liked not to retain God in their
knowledge: that is, they hated this knowledge it self, so as now they did not
only love sin, they knew to be sin, but also they loved not the knowledge of
it; so that because both are thus clearly instanced in, we will speak of both
more largely.

Now sins directly against knowledge it self are many: Sins directly against
knowledge reduced to two Heads.
I will reduce the chief heads of them into two branches: First, in regard of
our selves.
Secondly, in regard of others.


First, 1. In regard of ourselves five ways.
in regard of our selves, five ways we may thus sin against knowledge it self.

When we abuse knowledge to help us to sin, 3. ways.
as first, to plot and contrive a sin, as Judas plotted to betray his Master,
if he could conveniently; so the text says, Mark 14. 11. he would do it
wisely: 1. To plot and contrive sin.
and thus those that came to entrap Christ with most cunning questions, did
sin, and those who plot against the just, 2. To color sins committed by lies.
as Psalm. 37. 12.

So secondly, when men use their wisedoms to tell a cunning lie, 3. To color
sins by pretense of religion, and use their knowledge of religion to plead for,
and instifie their sin^.
to cover a sin; as Plato says, men of knowledge, sunt ad mendacia potentiores
and sapientiores: whereas fools, though they would lie, yet often tell truth
ere they are aware.

But also thirdly, when they abuse moral knowledge, which yet, as Aristotle
says, is least apt to be (I am sure should least be) abused, so as to make a
show of good pretenses to cover their sins, and dissemble them; not only by
finding out some cunning artificial color, as David did in the matter of
Vriah -- Chance of war (says he) falls to all alike: but when men are so
impudently hypocritical, as to make use of religious pretexts, (as the Devil
sometimes does) as Saul, who pretends to Samuel, I have done the will of the
Lord: and when Samuel told him of the cattle, oh, says he, they are for a
sacrifice; when God had expressly commanded to kill them all. But this shift
shifted him out of his Kingdom, Samuel pronounces him a rebel in it,
Rebellion is sin against knowledge, therefore he knew it. Thus also Iezabel
colored over the stoning of Naboth with a solemn fast. So Judas fisheth for
money with a charitable pretense, This might have been sold, and given to the
poor. In sins against knowledge, usually the mind indevours to find out a
color, and that provokes God more than the sin, because we go about to mock
him. We see men cannot endure a shift, much less the All-knowing God, not to
be mocked: and we see it is hard to convince such an one. David was feign to be
brought to the rack, ere he would confess, when he had a shift; and men do
seek such shifts only in case of sinning against conscience: for else there
were no need, When men neglect to get knowledge that might preserve them from
sinning, etc.
they would be sure to Abimelech did.

Secondly, when men neglect the getting and obtaining of knowledge, which
knowledge might keep and hinder them from sinning, and might make them expert
in duties. This is as much as to sin against knowledge, although the sins be
committed out of ignorance: yet that ignorance being through their own
default, it comes all to one: when it may be said of men, as the Apostle does
of the Hebrews, Chap. 5. 12. That for the time they have had to learn, they
might have been teachers; they had yet need be taught again the first
principles* If a man had an Apprentice, who through negligence and want of
heeding, and observing what he daily sees and hears about his trade, might
have got for his time much knowledge in his trade, whereby he might have saved
his master much, which he now has lost him; and rid and perfected much work,
he daily spoils him; such careless blockish ignorance it is just for his
master to correct him for, and to charge on him all that waste and loss,
because he might have known how to have done better. And therefore even they
who thought ignorance in it self no sin (wherein they erred) yet the neglect
of knowledge upon this very ground, they thought a great sin, and that it
would be so far from excusing sins, as that it would aggravate them. So
here we see these Gentiles shall not only be reckoned with for the actual
knowledge, they had attained to, and sinned against; but also for what they
might have had, and have picked out of the creatures. For so the Apostle brings
in this here in the 20. verse, that the power of God being clearly seen in the
creatures, they neglecting to spell and read it, so much knowledge as they
might have got, God will reckon to them, and aggravate their sins by.

Thirdly, which is yet much worse, when men When men refuse knowledge that they
may sin more freely.
that they may sin the more freely; and do stop the ear, lest they should
be charmed: As when men are loath, and afraid, and dare not read such a book
as discovers, or might discover that truth to them, the submission to which
would prejudice them, and this to the end that they may plead ignorance of
their sin. Thus also those that assent not to truth when it comes in strongly
upon them, but seek to evade it. But 1 Cor. 14. 38. when the Apostle had
clearly discovered the truth in those things controverted, so as who ever was
spiritual, or not fully blind, might see, and would acknowledge the truth:
then he shuts up his discourse about them, ver. 27. If any be ignorant, let him
be ignorant: for it is wilful, it is affected; he speaks it, as elsewhere,
Revel. last, it is said, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: that is,
he that will be unjust, and refuses to turn, let him go on. This is a great
sin, for God, you see, gives such a man over: one that is but neglectfull, or
dull of capacity, God will take pains with him, to teach him, and bear with
him, as Christ did with his Disciples: but if he be wilfully ignorant, he lets
him die in his ignorance, and yet will reckon with him, as if all his sins
had been committed against knowledge, because he refused to know.

The fourth is to hate the light, and to endeavor Is to hate the light, and to
endeavor to extinguish it.
This is yet much worse, when men hate the Word, and the Ministers of it, the
examples of Gods people, and the light they carry with them (they shining as
lights in a crooked generation, Phil. 2. 15. and yet they hate these, as
thieves do a torch in the night, and fly against the light, as batts do, and
as the Jews did, John 3. 20.) This Christ says is the great condemning sin
of all others. So these Gentiles put Socrates to death for reproving them. And
thus men sin also, when they labor to extinguish the light in their own
consciences, and like not to retain God in their knowledge, verse 28. but
would study the art of forgetfulness: When men have put the candle out, and
drawn the curtains, that they may sin, and sleep in sin more freely and
securely. Thus those also sin in a higher measure, who have had a clear
conviction, that they ought to be thus strict, and ought to sanctify the Lords
day, and pray privately, but now have lost this light, and think they need not
be so strict: when men continue not in what they were once assured of, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 14. these sin against their knowledge, and are the
worst of such sinners: and this estate Aristotle himself makes statum maligni,
the state of a wicked one, namely, when the sparks of light are extinguished or
hated. For when any man's light is lost and turned into darkness by sinning,
then, as Christ says, how great is that darkness? When good laws are not
only not enacted and embraced, but repealed also, (it is Aristotle's
similitude, to distinguish an incontinent person, and a wicked man) this is an
high kind of sinning: So of these Gentiles it is said, their foolish heart was
darkened; they had extinguished some of that light God gave them. As some drink
away their wits, so some sin away their consciences; and thus by degrees, they
first sin away the light of the word they had, as they in Jude, who were
religious once, and then they quench even that little spark of nature that is
left. Also verse 10. corrupting themselves in what they know naturally.

Fifthly, Men sin against knowledge yet worse, When men hold opinions against
their consciences.
So many are said to do, in 1 Timothy 4. 2. he foretells they should speak lies
in Hypocrisy, and invent lies that should have a pretense of holiness; which
they know to be a lie, or else they should not be said to speak lies in
hypocrisy; but they do it to maintain their honor and greatness, which
must down, if their doctrine prove false: and though many are given up to
believe their lies, 2 These. 2. 11. as a punishment of their not loving the
truth; yet others of them shall know they are lies, and yet vent them for
truths. Thus when men fashion their opinion to the times and ways of
preferment, and their dependances on Great ones, or to maintain and uphold a
faction, or out of pride, having broached an error, maintain it, though the
pulling out that one tile does untile all the house. These are the two causes
given of perverting the truth, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. namely, pride and covetousness,
and supposing gain godliness, and so fashioning their religion accordingly:
when men are Knights of the post, that will write or speak any thing, whereby
they may get gain and preferment.

Secondly, 2. Men sin directly against knowledge it self in respect of others,
men sin against knowledge in regard of others.

First, by concealing it: the Apostle indeed says Have thou knowledge? keep
it to thy self. By concealing knowledge.
He speaks it of opinions, or practices about things indifferent, which might
scandalize the weak; but if thou have knowledge, which may edify thy brother,
thou ought to communicate it. Socrates, knowing there was but one God, said,
in his Apology for his life, that if they would give him life, upon condition
to keep that truth to himself, and not to teach it to others, he would not
accept life upon such a condition: and I remember he expresses his resolution
in words very nigh the same words the Apostles used, Acts 4. 20. whether it be
better to obey God than men, judge you: and, we cannot but teach the things we
have heard and seen, says Christ: for knowledge is a thing will boil within
a man forvent, and cannot be imprisoned: It is light, and the end why light was
made, was to be set up to give light. And Christ argues from an apparent
absurdity to put a light under a bushel, which may give light to all the
house; Have thou knowledge of God and of his ways, thou can not but speak
(if withal thou have but a good heart) to all in the family, to thy wife in
thy bosom, etc. God took it for granted, that Abraham would teach his children
what Abraham. Men endeavor to suppress knowledge in others.


Secondly, when men endeavor to suppress knowledge. As the Pharisees, they
kept the keys of it in their hands, and would not open the treasures of it
themselves, nor let others do it neither. So they ( Acts 4. 16.) could not
deny but a great miracle was done by the Apostles (say themselves) but that it
spread no further, let us threaten them, and charge them, that they speak no
more in his name. And this they did against their consciences by their own
profession, we cannot deny it: as if they had said, if we could we would, but
it was too manifest it was the truth. So when Masters keep their servants from
the means of knowledge, they are thus guilty.

Thirdly, when we would make others sin When men go about to make others
sin against their consciences. John 9.
The Pharisees, when the blind man would not say as they said, they cast him
out; they would have had him say that Christ was a sinner, when through the
small light he had, he judged it evident enough, that a sinner should not do
such a miracle, as was never done since the world began. And so Iezabel made
the Judges, and witnesses sin against conscience in accusing Naboth: and so
some of the Gentiles, that would hold correspondencie with the Jews, would
have constrained the Galathians to be circumcised, Gal. 6. 12. Those that knew
that circumcision was to be abolisht, yet they would persuade them to it by a
clubb argument, drawn from avoiding persecution, not from evidence of the
Truth, or by reasons that might convince them, and their consciences: therefore
he says, they constrained the^. The perswaders might indeed glory, as having
their cause and side strengthened, but they wanne little credit to their cause
by it; for as the perswaders arguments were suited to flesh, so the others
yielding was out of flesh, and so they glory in your flesh and weakness, says
he; as the Papists urged Cranmer, not by arguments, but threats and promises to
recant; this is the greatest cruelty in the world, to have a man murder
himself, stab his conscience. To offend a weak conscience is a sin, if but
passively, when thou do something before his face, which his conscience is
against: but if thou make him wound his own conscience, and to do an act
himself, which his own conscience is against, it is much worse: as if thou
be a Master, and have a servant who pleads conscience, that he cannot lie
for thy advantage in thy shop, or who will not do unlawful businesses on the
Sabbath day, and pleads conscience, will thou smite him and whip him? God will
smite thee, thou whited wall. How dare thou smite him, and so cause him to
do that for which God will whip him worser? Show mercy to those under you,
inform their consciences, wring them not, 2. General Branch: Sins committed
collaterally or circumstantially against knowledge.
you may hap to break the wards if you do.

Now for sins committed collaterally, or per modum circumstantia (that I may
so express it) against knowledge, they are done either when particular acts of
sin are committed, It is done, 1. Either in particular acts of sinning, or 2.
In continuing in an estate of sinning against knowledge.
and duties omitted, against light and knowledge; and so the Saints may and do
often sin against knowledge. Or,

Secondly, in regard of a known estate of sin, and impenitencie persisted
in; when men continue, and go on in such a state against conviction of
conscience, that such is their estates.

For the first, Particular instances being infinite.
because particular acts of sin committed against knowledge are infinite, and
there will be no end of instancing in particulars, A distinction is given
concening them.
therefore I will not insist: Only in brief this distinction concerning such
acts may be observed, and the observation of it may be useful: That some acts
of sins against knowledge, are merely transient: that is, are done and ended
at once. And though the guilt of them is eternal, yet the extent of the act is
finished with the committing it, and reaches no further: 1. Some sin more
transient
as a vain oath, breach of the Sabbath, etc. which acts cannot be repealed,
though they may be repented of. But others there are, which though the act may
be but once outwardly and professedly done, 2. Some more permanent and
continued, until recalld, though but once committed.
yet have an habitual and continued permanency, life, and subsistence given
it, such as that until a man does recall them, he may be said continually to
renew those acts, and every day to be guilty of them, and to maintain it, and
so habitually to commit them. As it is with Laws, which though made but once,
are yet continued acts of the State, whilst they stand in force unrepealed: so
is it in some sins. For instance, when a man does take goods from his neighbor
unjustly, the act indeed is done but once: but till he restores them, he may
be said to steal them; every day, every hour, he continues to do it
habitually; So a man having subscribed to falsehood, or recanted the truth
publicly, the act, though done but once, yet until a retractation be some
ways made, he continues that act, Which are of (...) other most ^angerous to
^ommit, when against knowledge.
and so is daily anew guilty of it. So if a man should marry one, whom it is
unlawful for him to marry, (as Herod did) though that sinful act of
espousals, whereby they entered into it, was soon dispatched; yet, till a
divorce, he lives in a continual sin. And such acts (of this latter sort I
mean) against knowledge are most dangerous to commit; because to continue thus
in them, though but once committed, hazards a man's estate; and therefore men
find, when they come to repent, the greatest snare, and trouble, and difficulty
in such kind of sins; to extricate themselves out of them by a meet and true
repentance.

But as concerning the first branch of this distinction, namely, of particular
acts committed against knowledge; besides this last distinction briefly
touched; I will anon give you several aggravations and rules whereby to
measure the sinfulness that is in such acts so committed: but in the mean
time the second branch of this former distinction must be insisted upon, and
therefore I will bring in these aggravations and rules which concern
particular acts, as distinct heads, after I have briefly spoken to this other,
which is, That

Secondly, 2. Going on in a sinful estate against knowledge.
those sin against knowledge, who go on in an estate of sin and
impenitencie, which they know to be damnable: As Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27. who
confessed that the and his people were wicked, and yet hardened himself in sin
most dangerously: and yet three sorts of men may apparently be convinced thus
to sin. Three sorts of men thus sin:


First, those that keep out, and withdraw themselves from professing Christ
and his ways, Such as for worldly end forbear to profess Christ a^ his ways,
whi^^ they know to be such.
and confessing of it even unto salvation, (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 10) and
yet out of fear, or shame, keep still on the other side, drawing in their
horns all together. These go on in an estate of impenitencie against
knowledge; for put all these together, and it must needs appear to be so: as
First, when they are convinced that this is the truth, and that salvation and
the power of religion is only to be found in such ways and men: and Secondly,
that these are to be practiced and professed, and yet Thirdly, out of shame,
etc. keep still a loofe off, and go on a contrary way; these must needs know,
that they go on in an estate of impenitencie against knowledge. This was the
case of many of the Pharisees, who therefore sinned highly: they believed, and
were convinced, that Christ was the Messiah; and so then to be confessed, and
followed, and to be cleaved unto: and then also they must needs know, that his
followers only were the Children of God: Yet Ioh. 12. 42. it is said, though
they thus believed on him, yet they durst not confess him for fear of the
Jews, and of the Pharisees, and of being put out of the Synagogues. At the
latter day, Christ shall not need to sever such from the rest, as he will do
the sheep from the goats; for they willingly remain all their days amongst
them, whom they know to be goats, and refuse the company, and fould, and food,
and marks of the sheep; which they know to be such: they may apologize, and
make fair with the Saints, that their hearts are with them, but they will be
rankt at the day of Judgment, as here they ranked themselves, Psalm. 125. ult.
with the workers of iniquity. Of these does the Psalmist speak, Those that
turn aside by their crooked ways, them shall the Lord leave with the workers
of iniquity.

Those also thus sin, and are to be joined with these, who know the terms
and condition of salvation, and how they must part with all for Christ, and yet
will not come to the price; such do go desperately on against knowledge in a
bad estate, and do judge themselves unworthy of eternal life. Thus the young
man in the Gospel, he was told, that he was to sell all, and that was the
condition, and he knew heaven was worth it, and was convinced of the truth
herein, that thus he ought to do, for he went away sorrowful: now if he had
not known that he went away without happiness, he needed not have been
sorrowful at all; but he knew the bargain of salvation was not struck up, and
likewise what it stuck at, and yet still rested in his former condition, and
chose rather to enjoy his many possessions: This man now went on in his state
against knowledge.

Secondly, as also those who upon the same or like Those that defer repentance.
these go on in a bad estate, and must needs know they do so; for in that they
promise to repent hereafter, and take up purposes to do it, when they have
gone on a little while longer, to add drunkenness to thirst, they do thereby
profess that there is a work of grace, which they must attain to, ere they
can be in the state of grace: for they would not promise so much hereafter, but
that they know not how, without such a work, they should be saved. Whilst
therefore such shall rest without present endeavoring after it, so long they
are judged in themselves to be in a bad estate at present. When men know the
curses due to their present estate, and yet say as he, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. I will
go on in the way of my heart, and shall have peace afterward. This man sins
most highly, and therefore Gods wrath smoakes against that man, and he says of
him, that he will not be merciful to him, in that place.

Thirdly, sunk and broken professors, such cannot Apostate professors go on in
an estate of sinning against knowledge.
when either men are fallen from the practice and profession of what is good,
which once they thought necessary to salvation; or when they continue to hold
forth their profession in Hypocrisy. Those that have escaped the pollutions of
the world, through the knowledge of Jesus Christ, but are returned to their
vomit again, some of these are ingenious, and acknowledge both themselves
fallen, and their present estate most miserable, and yet go on in it; and such
are to be pittyed, but yet are in a most dangerous condition. Saul when he was
fallen away, yet had this ingenuity a while left, he desired Samuel to pray to
his God for him, and told David, that he was more righteous than he; yet still
went on in his courses, and in the end (as some have thought) sinned against
the Holy Ghost.

But others there are, who though they be fallen from all the inward, powerful
and secret performance of duties they once did practice, and from all
conscience of sinning, yet retain their profession which they know to be but an
outside: these of all others go on against knowledge: and Rev. 22. 15. they
are said to make a lie; not only to tell a lie in words, but to make a lie in
deeds. Now a lie is a sin of all others most against knowledge, and indeed
against a double knowledge, both facti and juris: and so is this. 1. That they
profess themselves to be that they know they are not. 2. That they will not
endeavor after that state they know they ought to get into, if ever saved. This
is the condition of many, who being convinced of the power of religion, have
launched forth into a profession, and hoyst up sail, but now the tide is
fallen, the spirit withdrawn, the conscience of sin extinguished in them; yet
for their credit sake still bear their sails up as high as ever: even as many
Merchants do, who are sunk in their estates, still bear a fair show, yea
will seem richer than ordinary, by purchasing lands, etc. Such a professor was
Judas, he began seriously, and thought to have gone to heaven, and was earnest
in good duties at first: as they also, 2 Pet. 2. 18. they really, or (...),
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of Christ: but in
the end Judas became a gross hypocrite, one that pretended the poor, when he
loved the bag; and on the sudden betrayed his Master, when yet the Disciples
knew it not, suspected Judas as little as themselves; and the end of those
also, in that forenamed place, is said to be worse than their beginning. Now
because such sin so highly against knowledge, therefore their punishment is
made the regula of all other wicked men's; as when it is said, that other
sinners shall have their portion with Hypocrites: as the wicked Angels
punishment is made the measure of men's: Go ye cursed into the fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels: so among men, such gross Hypocrites, their
punishment is made the rule, and so the chief of all kind of torments, which
sinners of the sons of men shall undergo.

Now let me speak a word to all such as thus go on in a state of impenitencie
against knowledge: Application.
this is a high kind of sinning, and of all the most desperate, and does argue
more hardness of heart, and despising the riches of Gods goodness. For if, as
in the Romans 2. 4. to go on in sin, when a man [knowes not,] that is,
considers not that Gods mercy leads him to repentance, is made the sign and
effect of a very hard heart, treasuring up wrath, then much more, when thou
know and considerest thou art in an impenitent condition, and have many
motions leading thee to repentance, is thy heart then to be accounted hard?
When a man commits a particular act against knowledge, he happily and usually
still thinks his estate may be good, and that he shall not lose God utterly, or
hazard the loss of him; only his spirit, being at present empty of communion
with him, he steals out to some stolen pleasure: but when a man knows his
estate bad, and that he is without God in the world, and yet goes on, he does
hereby cast away the Lord, and professes he cares not for him, or that
communion which is to be had by him, as Esau did his birthright.

David, though he despised the Lord, yet he did not cast away the Lord, as
Saul did: for Saul ventured utterly to lose him, knowing his estate naught.
David, when he sinned, thought Gods eternal favor would still continue,
though for the present he might lose the sense of it. But when a man goes on in
a state of sinning, he ventures the loss of Gods eternal love, and slights
it, and knows he does so: when a man knows that he is condemned already, as
being impenitent, and that all his eternal estate lies upon the non-payment of
such duties of repentance, etc. and that the guilt of all his sins will come
in upon him, and that an execution is out, and yet goes on, this is more than
to commit one act against knowledge, whereby he thinks he brings upon himself
but the guilt of that one sin; and upon the committing of which, he thinks
not the morgage of all lies, though it deserves it; herein men show themselves
more desperate. 2. Head: Rules whereby to estimate sins against knowledge.


In the next place, I come to those rules, whereby you may measure and estimate
sinning against knowledge, in any particular act of sinning; and they are
either before the sin, or in sinning: Of two sorts Before sinning or in
sinning 1 Before sinning, 3. rules. 1. The more a man consider the issues and
consequents o^ a sin.
three of either, which I make a second head, to explain this doctrine by.

First, before.

The first rule is, The more thou knew, and did consider the issues and
consequents of that sin thou did commit, the more thou sinnest against
conscience in it: when as in Romans 1. ult. Thou knowing (says the Apostle) that
those that commit such things, are worthy of death: that is, thou considerest
that Hell and Damnation is the issue and desert of it, and yet committest it;
yea and this when happily hell fire at present flasheth in thy face, and yet thou
go on to do it, in this case men are said to choose death, and to love it,
Prove. 3. 36. When a man considers, that the way to the whorehouse are the ways
to death (as Solomon speaks) So when thou a professor considerest with thy
self before, This sin will prove scandalous, and undo me, disable me for
service, cast me out of the hearts of good men, and yet do it. Thus that
foolish King was told again and again, Ier. 38. 17, 18, 19. that if he would
yield to the King of Babel, he should save his life, and City, and Kingdom,
and live there still; but if he would not, he should not escape: but as
Jeremy told him, verse 23. Thou shall cause this City to be burnt with fire,
yet he would not hearken: This is the word of the Lord (says Jeremy,) and he
knew it to be so; and yet being a weak Prince, led by his Nobles, he would not
follow his Counsel: and thus Judas fully knew the issue: Christ had said
again and again, Woe be to him by whom the Son of man is betrayed, and yet
went on to do it.

The second rule is, Rule, The more consultations and de^^tes before.
the more consultations, debates, and motives against it, did run through
thee before thou did it, so much the greater and more heinous. How often did
mercy come in, and tell thee, that if thou look for any hope or part in it,
thou should not do such an evil? how often came that in, Shall I do this,
and sin against God? did any Scripture come in to testify against thee in
the nick? did God send in the remembrance of such a mercy past, to persuade
thee; or some mercies to come, which thou dependest upon him for? That which
made Spira's sin so great, was such debates as these before: and this made
Darius sin, in casting Daniel into the Lions den, so great; he debated it
with himself, Dan. 6. 14. he was sore displeased with himself, and labored
to the going down of the sun to deliver him; he considered that he was as
his right hand in all the affairs of his Kingdom, and a man entrapped merely
for his conscience, and that to put him to death was to sacrifice him to their
malice; he knew him to be holy, and wise, worth all the men that sought after
his life, and yet yielded; these considerations troubled him before, and also
after; insomuch as he could not sleep for them, ver. 18. Now because that every
such consultation should set an impression upon the heart, and countermand the
motions of sin, when therefore thou do it, maugre all such debates and
motives to the contrary, this is much against knowledge, and very heinous.
Therefore the Pharisees, Luke 7. 30. are said to have rejected the counsel of
God, (...), in or against themselves: the words will bear either: In
themselves, because they knew it, and took it into consideration, and yet
rejected it: and against themselves, because it was their destruction.

The third rule is, 3. Rule, The more testimonies and warnings against sin.
that the more confirmations any man has had of the knowledge of that which he
sins in, and testimonies against it, the greater sin against knowledge it
is: when a man has had a cloud of witnesses in his observation against a
particular sin, and yet does it, and goes on in it, it is the more fearful.
To go on against that one witness, the bare light and grudging of natural
conscience only, is not so much; but when it is further confirmed, and backed
by the word written, which a man has read, and with testimonies, out of which
a man meets with such places, wherein again and again in reading of it, such
a practice is condemned, and observes it; and then also hears it reproved in
Sermons, and of all sins else, hears in private conference that sin spoken
against also; yea has in his eye many examples of others sinning in the like
kind, which have been punished, yea happily himself also; yet to sin against
all these is exceeding heinous. Sometimes God orders things so, as a sin is
made a great sin, by such forewarnings; so he contrived circumstances that
Judas sinned a great sin; for Judas knew before that Christ was the Savior
of the world; he knew it by all the miracles he had seen, as also by his
gracious words and converse; and he professed as much in following of him; and
he had the written word against it, Thou shall not murder the innocent. But yet
further, God to aggravate his sin to the highest, orders it so, that Christ
should tell him of it when he was to go about it, pronounces a woe to him,
John 22. 22. that it had been good for that man that he had never been borne.
Mar. 14. 21. and the Disciples they were sorrowful at Christ's speech, when he
suspected one of them; and showed an abomination and detestation of such a
fact, there was a Jurie of eleven men, yea witnesses against it; yea and Judas
against himself, he asked if it were he; yea and Christ gave him a sop, and
told him, thou have said it, and do what thou do quickly: which even then
might argue to his conscience, that he was God, and searched and knew his
heart, and yet he went out and did it immediately. How did he sin against
the hair, as we speak, and how did all these circumstances aggravate his sin?

But yet a more clear evidence of this is that instance of Pilate, whom God
many ways would have stopped in his sin of condemning Christ, who examining
him before the Pharisees, he could find no fault with him, as concerning those
things whereof they accused him, Luke 23. 14. and yet to allay their malice,
unjustly scourged him, verse 16. And further, when he sent him to Herod, as
being willing to rid his own hands of him, Herod also found nothing worthy of
death in him, verse 15. which was another witness might have confirmed him
concerning Christ's innocence. Yea yet further, that the fact might be more
aggravated, a most notorious murderers life must be put into the scale with
Christ's, and either the one or the other condemned: and when the people yet
chose Barrabas, why (says Pilate) what evil has he done? ver. 22. then he
distinctly knew and considered, that he was delivered up through envy: Yea and
when he was upon the bench, and ready to pronounce sentence, as it were, God
admonisht him by his own wife, Mat. 27. 19. whom God himself had admonished
in a dream, she sending him word she had suffered many things by reason of
him that night, and therefore have nothing (says she) to do with that just
man: yea he himself, when he condemns him, washes his hands. And thus it
falls out in many sinful businesses which men are about, that God often and
many several ways would knock them off, and stops them in their way, as he
did Balaam; reproves them, as he did him by a dumb Ass, 2 Pet. 2. 16. so
there by some silent passage of providence, and not only so, but by his Spirit
also standing in their way, with the threatenings ready drawn and brandisht
against them, as the Angel did with a drawn sword against Balaam, and yet
they go on; this is fearful. 2. Rules to measure the sinfulness of such acts
in sinning, 3.


There are 3. Rules also, whereby the sinfulness of sin, as it is against
knowledge, may be measured, from what may be observed IN the act: as

First, The less passion or temptation to a sin against knowledge.
the less passion, or inward violence or temptation to a sin committed
against knowledge, the greater sin against knowledge it is argued to be: For
then the knowledge is the clearer, passion or temptation being as a mist. But
then to sin, when a man is not in passion, is to stumble at noonday. For as
drunkenness takes away reason, so does passion (which is a short drunkenness)
cloud and mist a man's knowledge. And so Aristotle compares the knowledge of an
incontinent person, to the knowledge of one that is drunk. When Peter denied
his Master, though he had warning of it before, and so it was against
knowledge, and it was by lying, and swearing, and forswearing, which are sins
of all other most directly against knowledge, yet he was taken unexpectedly;
and when that which might stir up fear to the utmost in him, was in his view;
for he was then in the Judgment Hall, where his Master, just before his face,
was arraigned for his life, and he thought he might also have presently been
brought to the bar with him, if he had been discovered to have been his
Disciple; so as his passion being up, his soul was distempered, reason had
little time to recover it self; and therefore though it was against knowledge,
yet the less against knowledge, because knowledge had laesam operationem, it
had not its perfect work upon his heart: but now Judas, in betraying his
Master, had not only warning before, but was not tempted to it, but went of
himself, and made the offer to the Pharisees, sought how conveniently to do
it, plotted to do it, had his wits about him, had time to think of it, and
therefore it was (besides the heinousness of the act) more also against
knowledge, and so the greater. So David when he went to slay Nabal, was in hot
blood, in a passion; but when he plotted to kill Vriah, he was in cold blood:
he was drunk when he lay with Bathsheba, but sober when he made Vriah drunk:
he went quietly and sedately on in it. And therefore we find David blamed
only in the matter of Vriah, not so much for that of Bathsheba.

Secondly, The more inward regreet, and sorrow, and reluctance, the stronger is
the knowledge, and so more against it.
the more sorrow, renisus, or reluctancie, and regreeting of mind there is
against a sin, it is a sign that the knowledge of it is the stronger, and
quicker against it, and so the sin the more against knowledge: for that
gaine-saying and displeasure of the mind against it, arises from the strength
and violent beating of the pulse of conscience, and opposition of it against
the sin, it springs from the greater and deeper apprehension of the evil of
the sin in the action, which is then in doing; and though that reluctancie be
a better sign of the estate of the person, than if there were none at all; as
there is not in those who are past feeling, and commit sin with greediness;
whose estate is therefore worse, and more incapable of repentance, yet the fact
it self is argued to be the more heinous, for it argues it to be against
strong, active, stirring knowledge. This argued Herod's sin to be much against
knowledge (as indeed it was) Mark 6. 26. the text says, he was exceeding
sorrowful: now that he could not have been, unless he had exceedingly
apprehended what a great sin it was to behead John, who, he knew, was a just
and an holy man, ver. 20. and who was one that had a great place in his
estimation, for he observed him, and was wrought much upon by his ministry,
and he knew that he did but sacrifice him to the malice of a wicked woman; and
in this case the sin is also hereby made so much the greater, in that
Conscience does stir up a contrary violent passion in the heart against the
temptation, and therefore yet to do it, when there is such a bank cast up that
might resist it, yet then to break all down, such a sin wastes the conscience
much.

The more hardness of heart in committing a sin known to be a sin, the
greater the sin, as it is a sin against knowledge.
and want of tenderness, in committing that sin, which a man knows to be a
sin, it is argued thereby to be the greater sin against knowledge; not
only the greater sin, but the greater sin against knowledge. For hardness
of heart in sinning, is an effect of having formerly sinned much against
knowledge before. For as the light of the Sun hardneth clay, so the beams of
knowledge and conscience, lighting upon men's hearts, use to harden them, and
do make them in the end past feeling. And therefore in 1 Timothy 4. 2. sinning
against knowledge is made the cause of a seared conscience, they speak lies in
Hypocrisy: and therefore knowingly that they are lies, and such lies as damn
others as well as themselves, which who believe are damned, 2 These. 2. 11, 12.
and if so, no wonder if it follows, having their Consciences seared with an
hot iron. It is not a cold iron will sear their consciences, and make them
insensible, but an hot iron, a burning and a shining light, which once having
had place in their consciences, and being rejected, they begin to be hardened
and seared. For knowledge makes sins and the apprehensions of them, familiar
to a man, and so less terrible and frightfull in the end, as Bears and Lions
do become to their keepers, through custom. Judas had a hard heart, when he
came to betray his Master, surely his conscience had smitten him at first more
for nimming out of the bag, than it did now for this of murder. He could never
have had such a hard heart, had he not had much knowledge: was it not a hard
heart, that when he was challenged to his face, he could set a brazen face on
it, and did ask as well as the rest, Is it I? when also Christ cursed him to
his face, who should do it, and the Disciples all abhorred it: had not Judas
lived under such blessed and glorious means, and sinned long against
knowledge, all this would have startled him, and have staggered in his purpose:
but he goes on as if it were nothing, though when he had done it, his
conscience was then opened too late; when a man formerly has been troubled
with a small sin, more than now with a gross lie, which he can digest better
than once the other: or, when before, if he omitted praying, it troubled him,
now he can go a week without, and is not sensible of it, it is a sign that
his knowledge has hardened him.

Thus having given such rules, 3. Head. Aggravations drawn from the kind^ of
that knowledge we sin against, which are five.
whereby you may estimate the sinfulness of particular acts, I will now
proceed to other ways, aggravations taken from the kind of knowledge a man
sins against, to sin against what kind of knowledge is most heinous and
dangerous; and these are five, drawn from the several qualifications of that
knowledge, and the light which men sin against. The more ^ong the knowledge,
the ^^eater the sin.
For the greater, or the more strong and efficacious the light and knowledge
is, the greater is the sin of knowledge thou committest; and this I make a
third general head to explain this doctrine by. All these five rules being
applicable and common both to particular acts against knowledge, and also lying
in an estate of impenitencie against knowledge, and all other particulars which
have been mentioned.

To sin against the inbred light of nature.
that is, in such sins, as though thou had wanted the light of the word in,
thou would have known to be such: This is a high kind of sinning. Such the
Apostle speaks of, Jude 10. What things they know naturally, in these they
corrupt themselves, as bruit beasts, putting as it were no difference of
actions, no more than beasts, no not in what nature teaches them, and
therefore therein are as beasts: for it is the light of nature puts the first
difference between men and beasts; and in such kind of sins the Apostle
instanceth in this first Chapter, as namely, that of unnatural uncleanness,
in three particulars: as 1. self-uncleannesse, ver. 24. (...), that is, alone
by themselves: so Beza and Theophilact understand it, which he makes there the
first degree of unnatural uncleanness, which is therefore unnatural, because
thou destroyest that which nature gave thee for propagation, quod perdis homo
est. Then 2. the unclean love of boys, men burning in lust with men, ver. 27.
be it discovered in what dalliance it will, though not arising to an act of
Sodomie, doing that which is unseemely, ver. 27. which he therefore says, is
the perverting the use and intent of nature, and so is a sin against nature,
leaving the natural use of women. My brethren, I am ashamed to speak of such
things as are done in secret. These kind of sins, by the Apostles ranking
them, are in a further degree of unnaturalness, than any other, because they
are made the punishments of other sins, which yet were against the light of
nature also: namely, not glorifying God when they knew him: yet that being a
sin, the light of nature was not so clear in comparison of these, therefore
these are made the punishments of the other, as being more against nature. So
for men to be disobedient to Parents, stubborn to them, and without natural
affection, as the Apostle says, ver. 30, 31. this is against nature, even the
instinct of it. So unthankfulness, and requiting evil for good, is against a
common principle in men's minds. Do not the Gentiles do good to those that do
good to them? your hearts use to rise against such an one out of common
humanity; or if you see one cruel and unmercifull, which is another reckoned
up, ver. 31. there being usually principles of pity in all men's natures, by
nature; therefore for one man to prey upon, and tyrannize over another, as
fishes do over the small ones, as Habakkuk complains, this is against
nature; Hab. 1. 14.
which teaches you to do as you would be done to. So covenant-breakers, and
lying, and forswearing, mentioned ver. 30. inventers of evil, and
truce breakers, are sins against nature, and natural light; lying is against a
double light, both moral; both juris, which tells us such a thing ought not to
be done; and facti, whilst we affirm a thing that is not, the knowledge of the
contrary arises up in us against, though there were no law forbade it;
therefore of all sins else, the Devils lusts are expressed by two; lying,
which is a sin in the understanding, and malice in the will, John 8. 44.

To sin against the light of education.
when thou were young, to sin against the light of thy education, this is an
aggravation, and a great one. There is a Catechism of a blessed mother
Bathsheba, which she taught Solomon when a child, put in among the records of
sacred Writ, Prove. 31. wherein she counsels him betimes, not to give his
strength to women; she foretold him of that sin: and because it is incident
to Kings most, they having all pleasures at command, she tells him
particularly, it destroys Kings: and so also not to drink wine, was another
instruction there he was forewarned of: this aggravated Solomon's fault the
more; for read the 2. Chapter of Ecclesiastes, and we shall find there, that
he was most guilty in the inordinate love of these two; but he had not been
brought up so, his good mother had not thus instructed him. And thus also when
God would aggravate his own peoples sin unto them, he recalls them to their
education in their youth in the wilderness. So Ierem. 2. 2. Go and cry to
them, Iremember the kindness and towardliness of thy youth: he puts them in
mind of their education by Moses their Tutor, and their forwardness then. And
so Hos. 12. when he was a child, I loved him; and then God had their first
fruits, ver. 3. this he brings to aggravate their backsliding, ver. 5.
Therefore the Apostle urges it as a strong argument to Timothy, to go on to
persevere in grace and goodness, That he had known the Scriptures from a
child: and therefore for him to fall, would be more heinous. The reason is,
because the light then infused, it is the first, a virgin light, as I may call
it, which God in much mercy vouchsafed to pre-possesse the mind with, before
it should be deflowred and defiled with corrupt principles from the world; and
did put it there to keep the mind chaste and pure: and this also then, when the
mind was most soft and tender, and so fitter to receive the deeper impression
from it. And hence ordinarily the light sucked in then, seasons men ever after,
whether it be for good, or for evil; it fore-stalls, and pre-judgeth a man
against other principles: and though a man comes to have more acquired
knowledge and reasons after put into him when he is come to perfect age, yet
the small light of his education, if it were to the contrary, does bias him,
and keeps him fixed, and bent that way. So we see it is in opinions about
Religion: the light then entertained, can never be disputed out: so in men's
ways and actions, Train up a child in his way, and he will not depart from
it. Prove. 22. 6. To sin therefore against it, and to put out the beams of it,
or defile it, and to wear out the impressions of it, how wicked is it, and
what a wretch art thou to do so?

Many of you young scholars have had a good Bathsheba that instructed you, not
to pour out your strength to drink or women, but to pray privately, and to
fear God, and love him; and when you come hither, you have good Tutors also,
who teach you to pray; Ministers, who instill blessed truths into you, from
which, one would think, you should never depart; yet you do.

Think how grievous this is; for if it is made an excuse for many a man in
sinning, that it answers but his education; that he never knew or saw better,
as you say of many Papists; then must it needs on the contrary, be an
aggravation of sinfulness. And as it was Timothies commendation, that he knew
the Scriptures from a child, so it will be thy condemnation, that thou knew
better from a child, and yet rebellest against thy light.

real and experimental the light is, The more real and experimental light
men sin against.
men sin against, still the more sin; as when they have learnt it from
examples of godly men, whom they have lived amongst, or the observations of
Gods dealings with themselves or others, and not only from the word
notionally. To sin against such light, this adds a further degree; not only
to sin against the bare light of nature, but also further, when nature has
besides lighted her torch at the Scripture, and then when beyond all this, the
real examples and observations made of Gods dealings with a man's self and
others, shall confirm all this, this makes a man's sinfulness much more
grievous; for as exempla efficacius docent quam praecepta, so the knowledge got
by experiments of mercies or judgments, is of more force and evidence.
Knowledge learnt by experience, is the most efficacious. Therefore Christ
himself, who knew all things already, yet learnt (in the school of
experience) by what he suffered. A little of some knowledge distilled out of a
man's own observation, is most precious, every drop of it; therefore the
Apostle urges it on Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 14. Continue in the things thou have
learned, and been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them. There is
a twofold motive, and both emphaticall; First, he was assured in himself; and
secondly, that which strengthened that assurance, and was a means to work it,
was the example of the holy Apostle, and of his own Parents, Knowing of whom
thou have learned it: And so ver. 10. the Apostle again urges his own
example, Thou have fully known my doctrine and manner of life; and then also
brings to his mind the education of those his godly Parents, who instructed
him. Hence also, Esaias 26. 10. it is made an aggravation, that in the land of
uprightness men deal unjustly. Thus light drawn from the observation of Gods
judgments upon others, it much aggravates: it is laid to Belshazzars charge,
Dan. 5. 22. Thou knew all this, how God dealt with thy father
Nebuchadonezer. So some of you come here, and live in a religious society, and
see sometimes one, sometimes another of thy Colleagues turn to Christ, The more
shining the light is in the conscience joined with a taste, the greater the sin.
yea happily chamber

Fourthly, the more vigorous, strong, powerful the light is that is in thee,
and more stirring in thy heart, and joined with a taste, the greater the sins
committed against it are to be accounted. The more thou have tasted the
bitterness of sin, and Gods wrath, and have been stung with it as with a
Cockatrice, the more thou have tasted Gods goodness in prayer, and in the
ordinances, the more of such a knowledge, and yet sinnest the worse. In the 5.
of John, 35. Christ aggravates the Jews unbeleefe in himself, and their
present hardness, that John was to them, not only a shining, but also a
burning light; that is, they had such knowledge engendered by his ministry, as
wrought joy and heat, as well as light; therefore it is added, they rejoiced
therein for a season. And thus their fall, Heb. 6. is aggravated, that it was
such a light as had tasting with it. For to explain this, you must know, that
between ordinary notionall light, or that assenting to spiritual truths which
is common with men, from traditionall knowledge living in the Church, that
between it and true saving light, or the light of life, there is a middle kind
of light, which is more than the common conviction men have, and less than
saving light: it is a light which leaves also some impression on the
affections, makes them feel the powers of heaven and hell, and be affected
with them. Now the more of such light against a sin, be it drunkenness, or
uncleanness, or oppression, and yet fallest to it again, the worse. For this
is a further degree added to knowledge, and not common to all wicked men. And
therefore as those Jews, who had not only common means of knowledge, but
miracles also, and yet believed not, John 12. 17. shall be more condemned; so
those who have such tasting knowledge set on by the holy Ghost (which is as much
as if a miracle were wrought, for it is above nature, a supernatural work of
the Spirit.) And therefore to sin against such light, and such only, is that
which makes a man in the next degree of fitness to sin against the Holy Ghost.

Fifthly, to sin against professed knowledge, is an To sin against professed
knowledge.
and an heavy one. To sin against a man's own principles which he teaches
others, or reproves or censureth in others. Titus 1. last, Those that profess
they know God, and yet deny him, these are most abominable of all others: For
these are liars, and so sin against knowledge as liars do, in the 1 John 2.
4. such an one is called a liar in a double respect, both in that he says he
has that knowledge he has not, it not being true; and because also he denies
that in deed, which he affirms in word, this is scandalous sinning. So Romans 2.
24. the Jews beasting of the law, and of having the form of knowledge in
their brains, caused the Gentiles to blaspheme, when they saw they lived
clean contrary thereunto: and therefore a brother that walks inordinately,
was to be delivered to Satan, to learn what it was to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 2. 20.
That is, to learn to know how evil and bitter a thing it is, by the torments
of an evil conscience, to live in such a course, as made God and his ways
evil spoken of, as it befell David when he thus sinned. Yea 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.
though they might keep company with a heathen, because he was ignorant, and
professed not the knowledge of God; yet if a brother, one that professed, and
so was to walk by the same rules, did sin against those principles he
professed, then keep him not company: Thus did Saul sin. All the Religion he
had and pretended to in his latter days, was persecuting witches: yet in the
end he went against this his principle; he went to a witch in his great
extremity at last. And thus God will deal with all that are hollow, and sin
secretly against knowledge in the end. He suffers them to go against their
most professed principles.

These are aggravations in general, applicable both to any act of sinning, or
going on in a known state of sinning.

USE.
NOw the use of all that has been spoken, How great an engagement and motive
it is to men of knowledge to turn to God, and to take heed of sinning.
what is it, but to move all those that have knowledge, to take heed, more heed
of sinning than other men? and those of them that remain in their natural
estate, to turn speedily and effectually unto God? For if sinning against
knowledge be so great an aggravation of sinning, then of all engagements to
repentance, knowledge is the greatest.

First, thou who have knowledge, can not sin so Such an one cannot sin so
cheap as others: their sins are more costly and chargeable,
who is ignorant: Therefore if thou will be wicked, thy wickedness will cost
thee ten times more than it would another. Places of much knowledge, and
plentiful in the means of grace, are dear places to live in sin in. To be
drunk, and unclean, after enlightening, and the motions of the Spirit, and
powerful Sermons, is more than twenty times before; thou might have
committed ten to one, and been damned less. This is condemnation (says
Christ) that light came into the world. and will have less pleasure in sinning.
Neither can thou have so much pleasure in thy sin as an ignorant person; For
the conscience puts forth a sting in the act, when thou have knowledge, and
does subject thee to bondage and the fear of death. When a man knows how
dearly he must pay for it, there is an expectation of judgment embittereth
all. Therefore the Gentiles sinned with more pleasure than we. Therefore Ephesians.
4. 18, 19. the Apostle speaking of them, says, that through their ignorance,
and darkness, and want of feeling, they committed sin with greediness, and so
with more pleasure; they not having knowledge or hearts sensible of the evils
that attend upon their courses.

hardness. Such are given up to greater hardness of heart.
If the light that is in thee be darkness (says Christ) how great is that
darkness? therefore the more light a man has, and yet goes on in works of
darkness, the more darkness that man will be left unto, even to a reprobate
mind in the end.

Such God gives up to the worst and grossest of sins.
more than another man; for God when he leaves men, makes one sin the
punishment of another, and reserves the worst for sinners against knowledge.
These Gentiles, when they knew God, they worshipped him not, God gave them up
to the worst of sins, whereof they were capable, as unnatural uncleanness,
etc. But these are not sins great enough for thee, that art a sinner of the
Christians; to be given up to drunkenness, or adultery, etc. otherwise than to
discover thy rottenness, these are too small sins; but thou shall be given up
to inward profaneness of heart, (as Esau was, having been brought up in a good
family) so as not to neglect holy duties only, but to despise them; to despise
the good word of God and his Saints, and to hate godliness and the appearance
of it; thou shall be given up to contemn God and his judgments, to trample
under foot the blood of the covenant, or else unto devilish opinions; those
other are too small to be punishments of thy sin: For still the end of such an
one must be seven times worse than the beginning, as Christ says it shall; if
thou were a drunkard, a swearer, or an unclean person before, and thy
knowledge wrought some alteration in thee, thou shall not happily be so now at
thy fall, but seven times worse; profane, injurious to Saints, a blasphemer, or
derider of Gods ways and ordinances.

Fourthly, when thou commost to lay hold on At death, knowledge sinned against,
gives up to more horror and despair.
thy knowledge will give thee up to more despair, than another man. Knowledge,
though when it is but newly revealed, it is an help; yet not made use of, turns
against the soul, to wound it, and to work despair; and this both because we
have sinned against the means that should have saved us, as also because such
as sin against knowledge, sin with more presumption; and the more presumption
in thy life, the more despair thou art apt to fall into at death. Therefore
Esaias 59. 11, 12. what brought such trouble, and roarings like Bears upon these
Jews? and that when salvation was looked for, that yet it was so far off from
them, in their apprehensions? our iniquities (say they) testify to our face,
and we know them. Now then sins testify to our face, when our conscience took
notice of them, even to our faces, when we were committing them; and then also
the same sins themselves will again testify to our faces, when we have
recourse for the pardon of them. Therefore thou will lie roaring on thy death
bed, and that thou know them, will come as an argument, that thou shall not
have mercy. As ignorance is a plea for mercy, I did it ignorantly, therefore
I obtained mercy; so I did it knowingly, will come in as a bar and a plea
against thee, therefore I shall not have mercy.

Hell it ineaseth torent.
both here and in Hell, it is the greatest executioner and tormenter. In this
sense it may be said, Qui auget scientiam, auget dolorem: He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, as Solomon speaks: for knowledge enlarges our
apprehension of our guilt, and that brings more fear and torment. Have they no
knowledge, who eat up my people? Yes, there is their fear (says David.)
Therefore Heb. 10. 28. after sinning after knowledge, there remains not only
a more fearful punishment, but a more fearful expectation in the parties
consciences. And this is the worm in hell, that gnawes for ever. Light breeds
these worms.

But then you will say, it is best for us to be ignorant, and to keep our
selves so.

I answer, no: For to refuse knowledge will damn as much as abusing it. This
you may see in Prove. 1. 23. Ye fools (says wisdom) you that hate knowledge,
Turn, and I will pour my spirit upon you, and make known my words to you.
Well, ver. 24. they refused, and would none of his reproof: Therefore says
God, I will laugh at your calamity: that is, I will have no pity, but instead
of pity, God will laugh at you; and when your fear comes, I will not answer,
because ye hated knowledge, ver. 29. so as this is as bad. There remains
therefore no middle way of refuge, to extricate thy self at, and avoid all
this, no remedy but turning unto God: otherwise thou can not but be more
miserable than other men; yea and this must be done speedily also: For thou
having knowledge, God is quicker in denying thee grace, and in giving thee up
to a reprobate mind, than another man, who is ignorant. He will wait upon
another that knows not his will and ways, twenty, thirty, forty years, as he
did upon the children of the Israelites that were borne in the wilderness, and
had not seen his wonders in Egypt, and at the red sea: but those that had, he
soon swear against many of them, that they should never enter into his rest.
Christ comes as a swift witness against those to whom the Gospel is preached,
Mal. 3. 5. he makes quick dispatch of the treaty of grace with them. Therefore
few that have knowledge are converted when they are old, or that lived long
under the means. And therefore you that have knowledge, are engaged to repent,
and to turn to God, and to bring your hearts to your knowledge, and that
speedily also, or else your damnation will not only be more intolerable than
others, but the sentence of it pass out more quickly against you. Therefore as
Christ says, Ioh. 12. 36. Whilst you have the light, walk in it: For that day
of Grace, which is very clear and bright, is usually a short one. And though
men may live many natural days after, and enjoy the common light of the
sun, yet the day of grace, and of gracious excitements to repent, may be but
a short one.

FINIS.
AGGRAVATION OF SINNING AGAINST MERCY:

By exaggerating the Riches of common Mercies men sin against.

BY THO: GOODWIN B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, at the brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard.

MCD XXXVII.

THE TABLE.
THe first general Head.
What goodness, or bounty, patience, and long suffering are in God. page 3.
Bounty in God described. ibid. 1. He must be a giver. 4 2. What he gives must
be his own. ibid. 3. He must give largely. 5 4. He must give all he gives
freely. 6 5. He looks for no recompense for time to come. 7
Patience is a further thing than mercy. 8 1. Though we injure God, and he be
sensible of it, yet he is patient. ibid. 2. He vouchsafes that time he
forbeares them in to repent. 9 3. He waits that men would come in and repent.
ib.
Lastly, Long suffering is but patience lengthned out farther. ibid.
The second general Head.
Riches of this goodness spent on us. 10 1. They are riches in themselves.
ibid. 2. All the world spend on these riches. 11 3. The time he has forborne
men. 12 4. The expensive prodigality of sinners in all ages. ibid.
Patience is precious. 13 1. In regard of what those manifestations of his
goodness cost. 13 2. In regard of the usefulness. 14

The third general Head.
All this patience is used as means to bring men to repentance. 16 1. All this
goodness witnesses a gracious hand in all these. ib. 2. Our own conscience
bears witness of offending a good God. 17 3. A common principle will witness
against us when we return evil for good. ibid.
An Use of expostulation with sinful and impenitent men, and considerations
drawn from. 18 1. Their creation out of nothing. 19 2. Their being made men. 20
3. Having all the members of a man. 21 4. Preparing the world for them. 22 5.
Suffering them to live a long time in it. 23 6. Giving them space to repent in.
25 7. Living upon his cost and charges. 28 8. Filling up their years and time
with goodness. 31
As riches, credit, friends, comfort in them all.
AGGRAVATIONS OF SINNING AGAINST MERCY.
ROMANS 2. 4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto
thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God?
THis is the last and most weighty aggravation which the Apostle puts into the
measure of the Gentiles sinfulness (which in the former Chapter he had, verse
29. pronounced full before) to make it fuller yet: Their sinning against
mercies, and despising the riches of Gods goodness, patience, and forbearance,
the hateful evil and iniquity whereof, can be better no way set off and
illustrated unto men's consciences, than by a display of the riches of that
goodness which mea sin against. My purpose therefore is to unlock and carry
you into that more common treasury of outward mercies, and lead you through
the several rooms thereof, all which do continually lead you unto
repentance: That then reflecting upon our ungrateful waste, and abuse of so
many mercies in sinning, thereby our sins, every sin, the least, may yet
appear more sinful unto us, who are less than the least of all those
mercies. Know then, that besides that peculiar treasure of unsearchable riches
of grace laid up in Christ (the offer of which neglected and despised, Ephesians.
2. 7.
adds yet to all that sinfulness, a guilt as far exceeding all that which
shall be spoken of, as Heaven exceeds the Earth) There is another untold Mine
of Riches the Earth is full of, Psalm. 104. 24.
as the Psalmist tells us, and the Apostle here, which these Gentiles only
heard of, and which we partake of all as much as they. As there are riches of
grace offered to you which can never be exhausted; so there are riches of
patience spent upon you, which you will have spent out in the end; the expense
of which, cast up, will alone amount to an immense treasure, both of guilt in
you, and of wrath in God, as these words inform us.

To help you in this account, I will

1. In general, show what Goodness, or Bounty, Patience, and long suffering
are in God.

2. That there are riches of these spent upon all the sons of men.

3. That these all lead men to repentance. And then

4. I will expostulate with you, and aggravate your sinfulness, in going on to
despise all these by unrepentance, as the Apostle here does.

First, in that God is said here to be Good, or Bountiful: 2. Patient, or
forbearing: 3. Longsuffering, they seem to note out three degrees of his
common mercies unto men.

First, he is a good, or a bountiful God: for so, as goodness is here used, I
exegetically expound it: For though it be true, that goodness and bounty may
differ; yet when riches of goodness are said to be communicated, it imports
the same, and is all one with Bounty; And such is God. And all those noble and
royal qualifications and properties which concur to make one truly good,
and bountiful, do meet and abound in him, in all those good things which he
does bestow; and are found truly in none but in him: so that it may be truly
said, that there is none good but God, as Christ says of him.

Now Bounty, in the general, which is in God, may be thus described:

It is a free, willing, and a large giving of what is merely his own, looking
for no recompense again.

To explain this, that you may see, that all these conditions are required to
true goodness, and all of them to be found in God only.

1. He that is Bountiful, he must be a Giver, and Bestower of good things: and
all he bestows, it must be by way of gift, not by way of recompense unto, or by
desert from the party he bestows all on: Luke 6. 33.
Therefore Christ says, Luke 6. 33. that to do good to those who have done,
or do good to us, is not thank-worthy, nor is it Bounty. But God is therefore
truly good, because he simply, merely, and absolutely gives away all which
he bestows: For he was not, nor can any way become beholden to any of his
creatures; nor had formerly received any thing from them, Romans 11. 35.
which might move him hereunto: so Romans 11. 35. Who has first given him, that
he may recompense him again? Nay until He gave us a being, we were not
capable of so much as receiving any good thing from him.

2. He who is truly termed Good, or Bountiful, all that he gives away must be
his own; Psalm. 24. 1.
And so all which God bestows, it is his own. So Psalm. 24. 1. The Earth is
the Lords. The ground we tread on, the place we dwell in; He is our
Landlord. But is that all? for the house may be the Landlords, when the
furniture is the Tenants: therefore he further adds, And the fullness of it is
his also: that is, all the things that fill the world, all the furniture, Psalm.
50. 11, 12.
and provision of it both; all the movables. (So Psalm. 50. 11, 12.) The
cattle and the fowls upon a thousand hills are mine, says he; and also all
the standing goods, the corn and oil (which you set and plant) are mine, Hos.
2. 9. yea and the Psalmist in the same 24. Psalm, adds further, that they who
dwell therein are his also: not the house and furniture only, but the
Inhabitants themselves. And this, by the most sure, and most sovereign title
that can be, better than that of purchase, or inheritance, of and from another:
for he has made them; All is thine, because all comes of thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.
says the same David, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. And all things are not only [of
him] but [through him] Romans 11. 36. that is, they cannot stand nor subsist
without him. Even Kings, (the greatest and most bountiful of men) their bounty
is but as that of the clouds, which though they shower down plentifully, yet
they first received all from the Earth below them.

3. He must give largely, it is not Bounty else. Now God is therefore said to
be rich in goodness, because he is abundant in it. So we find it, comparing
Psalm. 33. 5. with Psalm. 104. 24. in which it is said, that the earth is full of
his goodness, and his riches; which we may judge of, by what he says in the
27. verse of that 104. Psalm, of what an house he keeps, and what multitudes
he feeds: All these (says the Psalmist) wait on thee, that thou may give
them meat, and thou openest thy hand, and they are filled with good. King
Ahasuerus, to show his bounty, made a Feast to his chief Subjects, but it was
but for half a year, and not to all: some few half years more would well
nigh have beggard him; but God does thus continually. The greatest and most
bountiful of men, when they would express the largest of their bounty, speak
but of giving half of their Kingdoms, (so Herod, and he did but talk so too)
But God bestows whole worlds, and Kingdoms, as Daniel speaks, Dan. 4. 35.
and gives them to whom he please.

4. He that is bountiful, must give all he gives freely, and willingly. Which,
though I put together, yet may imply two distinct things: As first, that he
that gives, must be a free agent in it, who is at his choice, whether he would
give any thing away or no. The Sun does much good to the world, it affords a
large light, and even half the world at once is full of its glory: yea and all
this light is its own, not borrowed, as that of the Moon and Stars is; yet
this Sun cannot be called good or bountiful, because it sends forth this
light necessarily, and naturally; and cannot choose but do so; nor can it draw
in its beams. But God is a free giver, he was at his choice, whether he would
have made the world or no; and can yet when he pleases, withdraw his Spirit
and face, Psalm. 104. 29.
and then they all perish, Psalm. 104. 29. Secondly, it must be willing by also:
that is, no way constrained, nor by extraction wrung from him, who is to be
called Bountiful. A willing mind in matter of bounty, is more accepted than
the thing, 2 Cor. 8. 12. Now of God it is said, Dan. 4. 22. that he gives the
Kingdoms of the world to whom he will, and none swayes him, or can stay his
hand, ver. 35. yea he gives all away with delight. So Psalm. 104. 31. having
spoken of feeding every living thing, and of other the like works of his
goodness, throughout that Psalm, he concludes with this, God rejoices in
all his works: that is, does all the good he does to his creatures with
delight; It does him good (as it were) to see the poor creatures feed.

Last of all, looking for no recompense for the time to come. This is another
requisite in Bounty. Says Christ, Luke 6. 34.
Luke 6. 34. If you give to receive again, as sinners do, this is not
thank-worthy: but ver. 35. so does not your heavenly Father: For (says he) Do
good, and hope for nothing again, so shall you be like your Father, and then
you shall show your selves true children of the [most High.] In which word, he
insinuates a reason why God gives all thus: because he is so great, and so High
a God, as nothing we do can reach him; as David speaks, Psalm. 16. 2.
Psalm. 16. 2. My goodness extends not unto thee: he is too high to receive any
benefit by what we do. And even that thankfulness he exacts, he requires it
but as an acknowledgement of our duty, and for our good, Deuteronomy. 10. 12.

And so much for the first, namely, what goodness and bounty is: and how God
is truly good, and he only so. But this attribute of his, and the effects of
it, he exercises toward all our fellow creatures, and did to Adam in
Paradise. But now to us ward (as the Apostle speaks) namely the sons of men,
now fallen, he extends and manifests a further riches, namely, of patience
and long-suffering, which the devils partake not of, the good Angels and other
creatures: that sinned not, are incapable of. For as Christ says, Luke 6. 35.
Luke 6. 35.
In what he bestows on us, he is kind to such, as are evil and unthankful.
Mercy is more than goodness, for mercy always does respect misery: and
because all the creatures are subject to a misery, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. of
bondage and vanity, therefore his tender mercies are over all his works. But
yet patience is a further thing than mercy, (as mercy is than goodness) being
exercised, not toward miserable creatures only, but toward sinners, and
includes in it more three things further toward them.

1. Not only that those persons he does good unto do offend, and injure him;
but that himself also is exceeding sensible of all those wrongs, and moved by
them, and also provoked to wrath thereby; it is not patience else. So in the 2.
of Pet. 3. 9. It is not slacknesse (says he there:) God is not slack: that is,
he sits not in heaven as one of the Idol gods, that regarded not what acts were
kept here below; or took not to heart men's carriages toward him; but is
long-suffering, or patient; that is, he apprehends himself wronged, is fully
sensible of it; is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11.
Psalm. 7. 11. he has much ado to forbear, even when he does forbear, and
lets them alone; he exercises an attribute, a virtue toward them, namely,
patience, in keeping in of his anger; which is as to keep fire in ones bosom.

But secondly, this is not all; he does not simply forbear, and restrain his
anger, but vouchsafes that time he forbeares them in, that they might repent
in it; and his mercies, as means leading to repentance. So it follows in that
2 Pet. 3. 9. But God is long suffering to usward, and his long suffering has
this in it, not willing that any should perish, but come unto repentance. So
also Revel. 2. 21. it is called space to repent. Revel. 2. 21.
And all the blessings he vouchsafes, he gives them as means and guides to
lead them on to repentance, as here. And Mat. 18. 29. Mat. 18. 29.
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. That is, give me a longer day
and space to pay the debt in, and be willing to accept it when I bring it, and
let me lie out of prison, that I may be enabled to pay it.

Thirdly, there is yet a further thing in his patience, namely, a waiting, and
expectation that men would come in, Luke 13. 17.
and repent. So Luke 13. 17. These three years have I [come seeking] fruit,
but have found none: There was an expectation, a longing, a desire it would
bring forth fruit, Oh when shall it once be, says God, Ier. 13. last?

In the last place, that other attribute of long suffering, which is the third,
is but as a further degree of patience; but patience lengthened out farther,
that is, when God has been thus patient, has forborne and waited for their
coming in, and that not for three years, but happily thirty, forty years, and
still they turn not; his patience then begins (as we would think) to be (as it
were) worn out, and his anger begins to arise, as if he could forbear no
longer; (as it was toward that tree, Why cumbereth it the ground? Cut it
down) yet he goes on to spare a man another year, and many more years still
after that; and endures with much long suffering (as Romans 9. 22.) the vessels
of wrath, endures to wonderment, above measure, beyond all expectation, all
patience, as it were; this is long suffering.

The second general head is, that there are [riches] of this his goodness,
etc. expended on us.

It is a rich goodness, patience and long suffering: Rich in themselves, in
regard of their abundance, as they came from him: and rich also in regard of
their precious usefulness unto us, as they may be improved by us.

First, in themselves they are rich: if we consider what is expended, all that
while, He lays out, not simply his power to sustain and uphold all things,
and to maintain us freely: so to do is nothing to him. For whilst he does but
so, nothing goes out of purse, or is detracted from him; (as I may so speak) he
feels not the expense either of power, providence, etc. All this cost him but
words: For he upholds all, creates all by the word of his power, Heb. 1.
Hebr. 1. And thus to maintain the Angels, and to have maintained all mankind
before they fell, had been no more. But (my brethren) when now he maintains us
sinners, not simply power goes forth from him, but his glory is expended, and
taken from him, and for the while wasted, detracted from; he loses, at
present, every day infinitely by us, and he is sensible of it; every sin
takes glory from him, robs him, as he himself complains: that he who made the
world, upholds it, (keeps it together, as the hoops do the barrel, it would
fall to pieces else, to nothing; in whom all live, as fishes in the Sea, yea
upon whom all live) that He should live unknown, John 1. 10.
unthought of, unserved; yea disgraced, dishonored in the world, and have this
world lost to him, as it were; and sin, the Devil, wicked men, to have all
the glory from him, to be exalted, to carry the whole world before them: This
spends upon him, he had need of Riches to do this.

Secondly, consider the multitude of sinners, that thus spend, and live upon
these riches, no less than all the world: He had need of multitudes of
patience in him: He forbeares not one, but all and every one. We look upon one
man, and seeing him very wicked, we wonder God cuts him not off; we wonder at
our selves, that God did not cut us off before this, when once our eyes are
opened: nay then cast your eyes over all the world, and stand amazed at Gods
forbearance toward it. Take the richest man that ever was, to have millions of
men in his debt, it would undo him soon. All the world are in Gods debt, and
run still in debt every day more and more, and yet he breaks not, nay breaks
not them.

Nay thirdly, to manifest this abundance yet more, consider not only the
multitude he forbeares, but the time he has done it: to forbear much, and to
forbear it long: he has forborne, and been out of purse from the beginning
of the world, since men were upon the face of the earth, five thousand years
and a half already; and how long it is yet to the day of Judgment, we know
not: And yet ye see, He is as patient, and as bountiful now in the latter
days of the world, as he was at the first. Did that greatest Convert that ever
was, that had not lived past thirty years in his sinful estate (for he was
young when he held the stoners clothes that stoned Stephen) and yet was the
chiefest of sinners, did he yet (as himself says) think himself a pattern
of long suffering, 1 Timothy 1. 16.
1 Timothy 1. 16. though it a great matter God should forbear so long? what is
the whole world then? if he, being but one small poor vessel, was so richly
laden with the riches of Gods patience, how is this great bark of the world
then fraught, that has gone over so vast a gulf of time? how much of these
his riches have been laden in it?

And then fourthly, add to this the expensive prodigality of all these sinners
in all ages; every sinner spends something, and how lavish are men of oaths?
All the thoughts of men's hearts from their youth up, they are evil, and only
evil, and continually: and how much then has every man spent him? every sin
is a debt.

In the second place, this is a rich goodness and patience in regard of the
preciousnesse and usefulness.

First, precious, in regard of what all these manifestations of his goodness
and forbearance cost, 2 Pet. 3. 1.
even the blood of his Son, who as a Lord has bought and purchased all
wicked men; their lives, and their reprivall, all that time that here they
live; and all the blessings and dispensations of goodness, which here they do
enjoy. Christ's mediation so far prevails with God for all the world, that it
puts a stop to the present proceedings of justice, which otherwise had said of
all, that day thou sinnest, thou dyest. So that as Christ may be called the
wisdom and the power of God; so also the patience and the long suffering of
God. For, for his sake, and through his means, it is exercised: God would not
show a drop of mercy, but for his Son. Which, I take, strongly and clearly
intimated, in that dealing of his, with the Jews, ( Exodus 23. 20. compared
with Exodus 33. 2, 3, 4, etc. Immediately after God had given the Law, (by the
rules and threatenings whereof, God the Father in his government was to proceed)
and after they had transgressed it, He there declares, that he could not go
with them: (...) rested thee, and told thee, this world was no place for thee,
Acts 1. 25.
for hell is only our own place, Acts 1. 25. thou shoulest have been
executed the first day. And is not so much time of ease from punishment
infinite mercy? Cast but your thoughts upon the Angels that fell, that have
been in hell from the first moment of their sinning, do but think with your
selves, what they would give to have so much time, cut out of that eternity,
they are to run through, and to have it set apart for ease, and to be void of
torment; if the rich man in hell, made it such a great suit, and counted it so
great a favor to have but one drop of water (which could but for a little
while (scarce more than a moment) have cooled and eased, not his whole body,
but the tip of his tongue only) how much more would he have thought it mercy,
to have lived so many years again as he had done free from torment? what is
it then for thee, to live so many years free from the falling of the least
drop of that wrath, whereof the full vialls should have been poured out many
years ago? The same Law was out against us, which was out against the Angels;
2 Pet. 3. 9.
That day thou eatest, thou shall dye the death: what put the difference? the
Apostle tells us, his long suffering to us ward: not to them: for in Chap. 2.
4. he had told us that he spared not the Angels which fell, but posted, and
threw them into hell, as soon as they had sinned.

Sixthly, But further, in the 6. place; Is this all? has it been barely a time
of ease given thee, a time of reprivall? No, it has been more, space to
repent, and so to obtain thy pardon in, Rev. 2. 21. And as it has been more
than ease of torment unto thee, so also consider it has been more than
slacknesse in him that has afforded it to thee, as the Apostle there does tell
us. It is not that he has took no notice of thy offending him, but he is
sensible of every idle thought, of every oath, vain word, and as the Scripture
tells us, he is pained at the very heart, in so much as he repents that ever he
made thee; Genesis 6.
he is angry with thee every day thou risest, every time he looks on thee,
when ever he meets thee going into the Tavern to be drunk, the whorehouse to
be unclean, when he meets thee reeling in the streets, he has much ado to
forbear killing thee, as he had to forbear Moses when he met him in the Inn:
He is ready to have a blow at thee, and it should not need be any great
stroke, or fetching his arm about; if he did but blow on thee, thou were
consumed. To suffer thee to live, does therefore cost him much riches of
patience; but to cut thee off, need cost him nothing: he can do that with
ease. But further, all is joined with a willingness that thou should repent,
and not perish, as that place tells thee. It were much mercy for a Traitor to
be reprived, to have a lease of his life for twenty years, though there were
no hope nor means of obtaining his final pardon after that time spent, and
this also, though month, a year? what others, who have lain gasping, would
have given a world for time again, (as I have heard one crying day and night (
call time again) or if not then, oh what in Hell:

The third thing I am to show, is, that all this goodness, patience, and
forbearance, is afforded toward you as a means, and helps to bring you to
repentance. Acts 17. 26, 27, 28.
Acts 17. 26, 27, 28. God (says the Apostle there) has allotted to men, both
their times to live in, and also their places of abode and habitations, all
richly furnished with blessings to uphold their lives and beings. And to what
end are both these thus afforded? That they might seek the Lord, if by groping
after him (even as men in the dark) they might happily find him. But men being
in the dark, and destitute of guides to bring the^ unto God, may yet be as far
of finding him as ever. Therefore add but the words of my text, to what the
Apostle says there, and we see, that this goodness of God takes us by the
hand, and leads us to repentance; to turn from sin unto God, and so to find
him. And thus lead are you unto God, by the help of three several guides,
which each after other sweetly lead you, and point you out to this.

First, all this goodness bears witness to your hearts of a gracious hand
that extends it self in all these; therefore in that 17. of the Acts, he
subjoynes, God is not far off any of us. That there is a good God bestows all
things on you, is a thought lies at next door of all his blessings, not far
off. Yea they all (says the Apostle to the same Gentiles, Acts 14. 16.
Acts 14. 16.) do bear witness of him, (though they went on in their own
ways) yet (says he there) God left not himself without witness; that is, an
impression on their hearts that his good hand bestowed all on them, when he
filled their hearts with food and gladness.

Secondly, His goodness having brought thus God to men's thoughts, then your
own consciences take you, and lead you down into your selves, and bear
witness, that you by walking in your own ways, do nothing but provoke and
offend this good God. So Romans 2. 15.

And then thirdly, there is an indelible principle common to all men to love
those who love them; Luke 6.
which after the two former have brought you hitherto, point, you to
Repentance, as the conclusion. [Shall we go on to sin against this good, so
good? return evil for good?] Is not this a natural necessary consequent out
of all these, to say as they, Let us therefore fear the Lord, who gives us
the early and the latter rain, Ier. 5. 26, 27.
as it is Ier. 5. 26, 27? And though men are said not to know this, in the
text, yet the meaning is, they do not thoroughly and effectually consider thus
much, so as thereby to be brought to Repentance, yet however there is such a
witness of all this in all men's hearts, and thus are they led on unto
Repentance, would they see their way and follow their guide.

The use shall be an use of expostulation (as here the Apostle carries it) with
men sinful and impenitent, for going on to sin against all this mercy;
together with an aggravation of their sinfulness hereby. Men, if young, do
usually take the advantage of this their precious time, (which out of so much
long suffering is vouchsafed them) and of all those precious opportunities, and
blessings they enjoy, to improve them only, in reaping and gathering in to
themselves the pleasures of sin; making the time of youth their harvest of
sinning, and yet think to escape by repenting, afterward: and then when old,
after they have already enjoyed a long and a fair Sunshine day to turn to God
in, and to have sown much seed to the Spirit, the comfort whereof they might
now have reaped; yet as they have altogether neglected so to do all their
youth, so they go on to do so still, whilst they see they have any day left,
be it never so near the setting; and do choose rather desperately to venture
their estate in the world to come, upon the riches of his mercy pardoning,
(though without all care and endeavor to change their hearts or lives) upon
the experience they have had of the riches of his mercy forbearing them in this
world, thinking to find him the same in both. With all such, let me reason a
little, and from the riches of Gods goodness, patience, etc. spent upon them,
at once expostulate with them, for their impenitency, and aggravate to them
their sinfulness, and also, if possible, prevail with them to go on to
despise it thus no longer. And if there be any principle of common ingenuity,
any spark (I do not say of grace, but of goodness of nature) left
unextinguisht, me thinks it should affect you, and do some good on youere I
have done.

And to that end, consider a little, and compare together Gods loving
kindnesses toward you, and your unkind dealings toward him.

To begin at the very beginning of thy being: how much riches of goodness were
there laid and buried in thy foundation? when the first corner stone was laid,
when thou were made a man, (besides the cost which has been spent upon this
building since) and, cursed as thou art, even that very foundation was laid in
bloody iniquities, in which thou were conceived; and the very materials of
soul and body, thou consistest of, being tempered with sin, Hab. 2. 10, 11.
like the stone in the wall, and beam out of the timber, cry out every moment
to God against thee, Psalm. 137. 7.
as Edom did, Raze it, raze it, even to the very ground.

Consider how but the other day thou were mere nothing, and when an infinite
number that never were nor shall be, were in as great a possibility of being as
thou, (for when he made this world, he could have laid it aside wholly, and
created millions of otherworlds) yet he chose thee to have a room in this, but
one world, (for he means to make no more) and this world could have stood
without thee, and did before thou were, and shall do when thou art gone: yet
he called thee forth out of nothing, and by his Almighty power, bade thee stand
forth when there was no need of thee. I say he chose thee to have a being: for
as there is an election of things that are to salvation, so out of things that
were not unto being. And wretch that thou art, if thou repentest not, thou
destroyest what God has made, and had better have kept nothing still, and
never have peept out, or else to skulk into thy first nothing again, for thou
art lost, better never to have been borne.

Secondly, Consider yet more goodness. Thou might have been admitted into
the lowest form of creatures, have been a worm, a flea, a fly, which we men
fillip and crush to death at pleasure: but to be made a Man, created one of the
States, Barons, Lords of the world the first hour, admitted into the highest
order, crowned a King in the womb, as David says of man, Psalm. 8. 5. made a
little lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8. 5.
but crowned with glory and honor; made to have dominion over all the works of
his hands. The one half of thee is more worth than a whole world, [thy soule]
as Christ says, that went to the price of souls; upon which God has bestowed
an eternity of being, and made it the picture of his face, his Image, when
other creatures do wear but his footsteps. And thy body the other piece, and
indeed but the Case, the Sheath, (as Daniels phrase and the Chaldee has it,
Dan. 7. 15.) of thee, what a curious workmanship is it? wonderfully and
fearfully made, Psalm. 139. 15.
as David says, Psalm. 139. 15. curiously wrought in the lower parts of the
earth: So there he calls the womb; because as curious workmen, when they have
some choice piece in hand, perfect it in private, and then bring it forth to
light for men to gaze at: So God out of a tear, a drop, he has limmed out the
Epitome of the whole world; the Index of all the creatures. Eccl. 12. 2.
Sun, moon, stars, are to be found in thee. And yet wretch as thou art,
thou art withal the Epitome of hell, and broughtest into the world with thee,
the seeds and principles of all the villainies, that have been acted in the
world, and if thou repentest not, thou had better have been a toad, or
serpent, the hatefullest of creatures; and would change thy condition with
them one day.

Thirdly, being a man, have thou all thy members that belong unto a man? it is
because he wrote them all in his book, Psalm. 139. 16. if he had left out an
eye in his commonplace book, thou had wanted it; is not that a mercy? ask
the blind. If thou had wanted those windows to look out at, thy body would
have been a dungeon, the world a prison. If a Tongue ( which is thy glory) or
an ear, thou had lived among men, as a beast among men. And yet when God
gave thee all these, what did he but put weapons into an enemies hand? for have
thou not used all these, Romans 6.
as weapons of unrighteousness? Insomuch as the tongue, but one member, is
called a world of iniquity by the Apostle; and if thou repentest not, thou
had better (as Christ says) have entered into the world without an eye, an
care, a tongue, than with these go for ever into hell.

Fourthly, when thou were taken out of the womb, (where thou did remain,
but whilst thou were a framing) what a stately palace has he brought thee
into, [the world] which thou find prepared, and ready furnished with all
things for thy maintenance, as Canaan was to the Children of Israel; a stately
house thou buildest not, trees thou plantedst not, a rich Canopy spangled,
spread as a Curtain over thy head; he sets up a Taper for thee to work by [the
Sun] till thou art weary, Psalm. 104. 23.
Psalm. 104. 23. and then it goes down without thy bidding, for it knows its
going down, ver. 19. and then he draws a curtain over half the world, that
men may go to rest, thou causest darkness, and it is night, ver. 20. An house
this world is, so curiously contrived, that to every room of it, even to every
poor village, springs do comes as pipes to find thee water. So Psalm. 104.
10, 11. Psalm. 104. 10, 11.
The pavement of which house thou treadest on, brings forth thy food, ver. 14.
Bread for strength, wine to cheer thy heart, oil to make thy face to shine,
ver. 15. Which three are there synecdochically put for all things needful to
strength, ornament, and delight. The very chambers of that house (as David
calls them) drop fatness, and water the earth, ver. 13. He wheels the
heavens about, and so spins out time for thee, every moment of which time
brings forth some blessing or other, and no one is barren. Psalm. 65. 11.
Therefore Psalm. 65. 11. the year is said to be crowned with goodness: a
diadem of goodness encircles it round: and yet thou have filled this world
thou thus art brought into, with nothing but rebellions, as he has done with
blessings, and have piled up sins to heaven; and thou have pressed all these
armies of blessings thou find the world filled with, to fight against their
Maker, under the devils banner, whom thy wickedness sets up as the god of
this world. And as the year is crowned with goodness, so thy years with
wickedness, and no moment is barren; but all thy imaginations are evil
continually. Yea thou have sinned against heaven and earth, and subjected the
whole creation unto vanity, laden the earth, and filled it so with wickedness,
that it groans, the axeltree of it is even ready to crack under thee, and the
ground thou treadest on to spue thee out.

Fifthly, since thou came into the world, what a long time has God suffered
thee to live in it? he has not spared thee three years only, (as he did the
figtree) but thirty, forty. And when thou first made bold to thrust forth thy
traiterous head into the world, Death (which thy sin brought into the world
with it) might have arrested but for one treason, and though all that time of
his reprivall he carries and behaves himself never so obediently. But unto
thee, this time has been more than a longer day of life, and putting off the
execution (which for the guilt of that first rebellion should have been acted
on thee in the womb) it has been time to repent in: And yet has not this
time of thy reprivall made thee so much the more rebellious? and have not thou
spent all this time in making up the measure of thine iniquity full? and has
it been will ingnesse only in God that thou should not perish? yea more,
joined with waiting also, when it should once be, thinking the time long, as
longing and desiring that thou would repent, that he might pardon thee. Thus
Ierem. 13. last, God expresses himself, when shall it once be? yea and
consider how many days of payment have been set, and how many promises made,
and broken all by thee, and yet still he walteth unto wonderment. Thou
receiuedst press money at thy Baptism, when thou did promise to forsake the
devil and all his works, and to begin to serve him, when thou should begin
to discern between good and evil. But no sooner did the light of knowledge
dawne in thy heart, but thou beganst to fight against him; and thy first
thoughts to this day have been only and continually evil. And then (happily)
in thy younger years, before thou had tasted of the pleasures of sin, he
gave thee an inkling, by means of thy education, of his goodness toward
thee, and of that happiness to be liad in him, and thou had the first offer
of him, ere thy tender years were poisoned by the world; and he has dealt
with thee again and again, both by his Word and Spirit; not waited only, but
wooed thee, and has been a suitor to thy heart long: and I appeal to your
hearts, how many promises you have made him, of turning from all your
rebellions to him, after such a Sermon, which was brought powerfully home: in
such a sickness, and in such a strait, thy conscience knows full well: And
still God has made trial of thee, and given thee longer day; and though thou
have broke with him again and again, yet he has forborne thee again and
again, and has waited this twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty years, when
thou should come in, and be as good as thy word, and still thou have failed
him. And yet behold and wonder, and stand confounded at the riches of his long
suffering, that after so many years expense, and promises broken by thee,
expectations failed in him, and many mockeries of him, after all this he is yet
willing to accept of the remainder, if thou would spend the rest of the time,
left thee in the flesh, according to his will, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 4.
3.
1 Pet. 4. 3. even to lose principal, use, and all, for what is past, and
requires but the same composition was propounded the first day; yea and not
only so, but with promise to become a debtor unto thee, to bestow further
riches on thee than ever yet thou saw, or art able to conceive: yea and all
this, when he could have his penyworths out of thee another way, and lose not
one farthing by thee, but by punishing thee in hell, recover all to the utmost.

Neither, seventhly, has it been barely and simply an act of patience and
forbearance, though joined with this willingness, thou should not perish; or
merely a permissive act of suffering thee to live. But God shows forth yet
more riches of goodness joined with this long suffering; in him ye live, and
move, and have your being; and do thou live in him only? nay thou live on
him also, upon his cost and charges; I have hung upon thee (says David) from
my mothers womb. And consider what thy life is, that of so small a bottom, he
should spin out so long a thread! had he not drawn it out of his own power,
as the spider does her web out of her own bowels, it had been at an end the
second minute; to maintain that radical moisture, that oil that feeds the
lamp, and light of thy life, that radicale balsamum, this is as great a
miracle as the maintaining the oil in the cruze of the poor famished widow.
And further yet; has he maintained thee only? Nay more, has he not defended
thee, took thy part, protected thee, took thee under his wing, as the hen
does her chickens, to shelter thee from those many dangers thy life has been
exposed unto? Otherwise, how many ways, ere this, had thou been snatched away
out of the land of the living? Is thy case, the case of the figtree only,
which before we mentioned, that when God cried, Cut it down, another cried,
spare it? but there have been many have cried, Cut thee down, and God has
cried, spare Thee: there is never a minute, but the devils would have had a
blow at thy life, as he longed to have had at Iohs. That thou, a poor lump of
flesh, should walk through, and in the midst of such an host of fierce and
cruel enemies, whose hearts are swelled with malice at thee, and God should
say to them all, concerning thee, as he did to Laban concerning Jacob, Touch
not this man. And yet if thou were not liable to their malice and power, yet
consider how many dangers and casualties, besides, thou have been kept in, and
from; as falls, drowning, killing many ways; how often have the arrows of
death come whisking by thee, took away those next thee, (happily of thy kindred,
brother, sister, yoke fellow, of the same house, family with thy self) and yet
have missed thee? And if we look no farther than these days of mortality we
have lived in; two great plagues in this Kingdom, how have the most of us all
here survived, and now the third is increasing and growing upon us? To have our
lives in such dear years of time, when to have our life for a prey is mercy
enough, as Jeremy told Baruch! that these arrows should fly round about us,
over our heads, and miss us! that Gods arrests should seize upon men, walking,
talking with us, and spare us! how often, many other ways, has thy neck been
upon the block, and the axe held over, and yet has fallen besides! To go no
farther than thy own body, the humors thereof, if God should not restrain
them, would overflow and drown it, as the waters would the earth, if God
should not say to them, stay your proud waves. And when in a sickness they
have been let out, yet God has kept a sluice, that so much should break forth,
and no more, which should purge, and wash the body, and make it more
healthful, as the overflowing of Nilus does. And when then thy body has been
brought low and weak, and like a crazy rotten ship in a storm, taking in
water on all sides, so that all the Physicians in the world could not have
stopped those Leakes; yet he has rebuked wind and sea, has careened, mended
thee, and launched thee into the world again, as whole, as sound, and strong
as ever; and God has said, Job 33.
as Job. 33. that Thou should not dye. In a word, if thou consider but what
thy life is, and the dangers it is subject to, thou will acknowledge it as
great a wonder to preserve it, as to see a glass, that has been in
continual use, gone through many hands, and has had many knocks, and falls,
to be kept for forty, fifty, sixty years whole and unbroken: God has carried
thy life in his hand, as it were a candle in a paper lanthorn in a strong windy
night, and kept it from being extinct, when as we often see in many, that a
little cold comes but in at a little cranny, and blows their candle out, as
Job speaks.

And eighthly, how have these years and hours of thy time been filled up with
goodness? and with how many comforts? For a Traitor to live, though but upon
bread and water all his days, what favor is it? and so had thou lived all
this time, never so miserably, though all thy days thou had eaten thy bread
in darkness, and had had much sorrow with thy sickness, Eccles. 5. 17.
(as Solomon speaks.) Some there are, who, as Job speaks, Job 21. 25.
Job 21. 15. dye in the bitterness of their souls, and never eat with
pleasure, scarce seeing a good day; and if this had been thy case, yet this is
infinite mercy. Even whatsoever is on this side Hell, Lamen. 3. 22.
is mercy. Lam. 3. 22. say they in the worst estate the Church was ever on
earth, It is thy [mercies,] not mercy only, but multitude of mercies are
shown us, that we are not consumed, because his mercies are renewed every
morning. If at the brink of hell, and not in, it is mercy. But has he not all
this while filled thy heart with food and gladness, Acts 14. 17.
as the Apostle speaks, Acts 14. 17? It were infinite to go over the
particular kinds of common comforts, which God vouchsafes men here: not half
the riches of his goodness is yet told: It would require an age to make an
Inventory of them. Have a house in the world to hide thy head in, and keep
thee from the injuries of the weather? (which was more than Christ had) God he
is thy Landlord, (though it may be thou payest him no rent;) he it is that
builds the house, Psalm. 127. 1. Have a bed to lie upon? he makes it, especially
in thy sickness, Psalm. 41. 3. Psalm. 41. 3.
Have thou sleep (which is the nurse of nature, the parenthesis of all thy
cares and griefs,) he rocks thee asleep every night; and as he gives thee a
house, so he gives thee rest, Psalm. 127. 2. Psalm. 127. 2.
It is God keeps off those gnatts of distracting cares, and griefs, and
thoughts, and terrors of conscience, would buzze about a man, and keep one
continually waking. And when thou sleep, is thy sleep pleasant to thee? God
makes it so, Ier. 31. 26.
Ier. 31. 26. Have thou clothes to cover thy nakedness? read old Jacobs
Indentures, Genesis 28. 20. Genesis 28. 20.
and thou shall see by them whose finding they are at; if Thou will give mer
raiment, that is one of his conditions mentioned. Yea, do thy clothes keep
thee warm? even this is attributed to him, Job 37. 17.
Job 37. 17. He fills thee, feeds thee, spreads thy table, serves thee, fills
thy cup, as David describes his goodness, Psalm. 23. 5. and gives thee thy meat
in due season; and has not failed thee a meals meat, but thou have had it at
thy appointed time, as Job speaks. And have thou health? which is the salt to
all these blessings, (without which thou would say, thou had no pleasure in
them) He is the God of thy health, and keeps off diseases. Exodus 15. 26.
Exodus 15. 26. I will put none of those diseases on thee; I am the Lord who
heals thee; that is, preserve thee from them which else would seize on thee.
And these mercies he vouchsafes unto you that are the poorest, Psalm. 68. 19.
and loades you with these and the like benefits every day.

But have thou Riches added to these, and abundance? The blessing of God makes
rich, Prove. 10. 22. Though thou had them by birth, yet he made those
friends, and parents of thine, but feoffees in trust for thee: they were no
more, it was God who bequeathed them, Eccl. 2. last. Or whether thou have got
them since by thine own industry, it is he gives thee power to get wealth,
Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Prove. 12. 24. and out of a small estate makes men great, Job 8.
7. It is he by his providence has stopped the secret issues and draynes of
expense, at which other men's estates run out; has stopped that hole in the
bottom of the bag, as the Prophet speaks. And with these riches has he given
thee a heart to use them. This, as it is a farther mercy, Eccles. 5. 19. and
Chap. 6. 2. so also from him, as it is noted there.

Or have thou credit (which is better than riches? Prove. 22. 1.
so says Solomon, Prove. 22. 1.) it is God who gives it, not thy wisdom,
parts, or worth: Eccles. 9. 11. favor is not always to men of skill: that is,
not acceptance of what they do, without a farther blessing from God.
Therefore besides the gift of wisdom, he gave a further promise of honor also
unto Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 1. 11. It is God who fashions men's opinions. The Apostle
prays to God his service might be accepted of the Saints, though no service
was like to be more acceptable, for it was the gathering and bringing in of
alms and relief to them. It is he rules men's tongues, bids men bless, as
well as he bade Shimei curse: and he has kept thee from such gross sins,
which, as flies, would have putrifyed the ointment of thy good name, who also
conceales those thou have committed, and hides thee from the strife of tongues,
Job 5. 21.
Job 5. 21.

Have thou friends, or do any love thee? (wherein much of the comfort of our
lives consists, and therefore David says of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1. 26. 2 Samuel 1.
26.
Thou were pleasant to me) it is God who gives favor in men's eyes: So he did
Joseph, Genesis 39. 21. Genesis 33. 10.
If any man or creature does thee a kindness, he touches their hearts, (as it
is said of the men who clave to Saul) and visits for thee; He made the
Egyptians beyond all reason the Israelites friends, gave them favor in their
eyes, as the text tells us. And hence, Genesis 33. 10. Jacob says, He saw the
face of God, in reconciled Esaus face; for Gods favor appeared in his look.
He put you into your callings, ranks, and stations, gives you all your skill,
success in them; The meanest of trades, to sow, and plough, and thresh, they
are from the Lord, who is wonderful in working, (Esaias 28. from the 23. to the
end) even as well as the skill of the most curious Ingraver, Limbner, or
Embroyderer (as of Bezaleel) the Scripture says, God was his Master, taught
him. Have thou enlarged parts and gifts for higher employments? Job 32. 8, 9.
it is not thy birth, or age has acquired them unto thee: Job 32. 8, 9. Great
men are not always wise, therefore it goes not by birth; nor have the aged
always understanding, it goes not only by experience; but it is the
inspiration of the Almighty. And have a calling answerable to thy parts, to be
a Scholar, and have thy mind enriched and ennobled with the best and choicest
jewel the world has, wisdom and knowledge; whereby the mind is elevated as
much above other men's, as they are above beasts? God has been thy great
Tutor, The mind of man is Gods Candle, and he makes wiser than a man's
teachers, as he did Moses in Egyptian learning, Daniel, David.

To conclude, have thou comfort in all these? in riches, learning, credit,
wife, children, meat, drink, etc. He puts in all the sugar, delight and
pleasure that especially depends on him; even to fashion the heart to all
these. As air lights not without the Sun, nor wood heats not without fire;
so neither does thy condition comfort thee without God. Acts 14. 17.
And therefore Acts 14. 17. it is said, He filled their hearts, as with food,
so, with gladness.

And besides all these, consider the many peculiar passages and turnings of his
providence toward thee for thy good; the working of things together, ever and
anon to do thee a good turn; the packing and plotting all for thee, better
than thou could have plotted for thy self; as thy relief in many streights,
success in many businesses; He works all our works in us and for us, as Esaias
speaks, Esaias 26. has he not taken such special care and providence of thee,
as if he had regarded no man else in the world?

And now when thou have considered all, bethink thy self withal a little of
thy dealings toward him: what have been the effects and fruits of all this
goodness? hold up thy head man, look God in the face. It is well yet, that
shame begins to cover thee. How has that his patience and long suffering,
vouchsafing thee space to repent, wrought with thee? how nigh to repentance
has it brought thee? Such is the perverseness of man's nature, as Solomon
tells us, Eccles. 8. 11. Eccles. 8. 11.
that because sentence against an evil work is not presently executed,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set to do evil: Because
God defers punishing, they defer repenting; thou think to spend the most
precious of thy time and strength in sinning, and give God the dreggs, the
bottom, the last sands, thy dotage, which thy very self and friends are weary
of, and all these blessings and comforts which God has vouchsafed thee, how
have thou used them against him? This oil which should have been fuel to thy
thankfulness, has increased the fire of thy lusts, and thy lusts have
consumed them all, James 4. The riches he has given, thou have made Idols of,
and sacrificed thy dearest, morning, daily thoughts and affections unto, as God
complains, Ezekiel. 16. from the 15. and so on: [His meat] (as at the 29. ver. he
calls it) thou sacrificedst to thy belly, which thou have made thy God; thy
strength to women; the wealth he has given you, you have made use of, but to
live at a high rate of sinning, and to procure the sweetest bits, the daintiest
and most costly sins; The edge of that sword of power God has put into thy
hand, thou have turned against him and his, happily both his Children and
Ministers; so that God, by giving thee all these, has but made thee more able
to offend him, and has strengthened an enemy, and by sparing thee thus long,
has but made thee more bold to do it; all his mercyes have but fortifyed thy
heart against him; Do ye requite the Lord thus, ye foolish people and unkind?
as Moses expostulates the case, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Deuteronomy. 32. 6. as Christ said to the Jews, For which of all my good works do
ye stone me? So say I to you, for which of all his mercies is it, ye sin
against him? what, to fight against him with his own weapons? to betray all he
gives you into the devils, his enemies hands? What iniquity did you ever find
in him, thus to deal? God will one day thus expostulate his cause with you,
and heap coals of fire upon all your heads, (if that you turn not) because
you have rendered him evil for good: and all these mercies thus abused, will be
as so many coals to make hell fire the hotter. And to reason this point yet
further with you out of the Text, and what arguments it will afford to work
upon you.

Consider, first, what it is thou do; whilst thus thou go on, thou art a
Despiser of the Riches of his goodness: that which is opposite to goodness,
must needs be transcendently evil. What, art thou evil, because God is good?
and so much the more evil, by how much the more he is good, surely there must
needs be an unexhausted treasure of wickedness in thee, which will also cause
in the end a treasure of wrath in him; what and sin against mercy, patience,
long suffering, added to goodness? of all attributes, as the richest to the
most glorious; for it is that he glories in: in the abusing of which, therefore
he thinks himself most debased: of all attributes the tenderest: what, kick
against his bowels? so are his mercies called: can hit him no where else but
there? to despise a man's wisdom, power, learning, is not so much as to despise
his love; what can thou imagine will become of thee, when thou come to
dye? what is it thou will then come to plead and cry for? O mercy, mercy; why
wretch that thou art, it is mercy thou have sinned against. Riches of mercy and
patience abused; turns into fury. I may allude to that speech, 1 Samuel 2. 25.
If a man sin against his brother, 1 Samuel 2. 25.
the Judge shall judge him; but if against God, who shall plead for him? So
had thou sinned against any other attribute, Mercy might have pleaded for
thee; but if against Mercy it self, who shall?

Well, if thou go on thus to do so still, thou have a hard heart; it argues
the greatest hardness of all other; that is the second. You use not (however
it comes to pass) to deal thus with the worst of men, sinner like to your
selves; but to them that love you, you tender love again, Luke 6. 33. and will
you deal so with God? Is it a small thing to weary men, but you must weary God
also? Esaias 7. 13.
says Esaias, 7. 13. He thought it infinitely less to abuse men than God; but
you carry your selves as men, to men, but as devils toward God; herein ye
have not the hearts of men in you; not principles of common humanity, whereby
ye differ from beasts; The cords of love are called the cords of a man, Hos.
11. 6.
Hos. 11. 6. the spirit of man breaks, melts under kindness; beasts indeed
ye use to prick with goades, but the cords of a man are the cords of love; no
principle being more deeply engraven in men's hearts, than this, to do good to
those who do good to you, Mat. 5. 46. Mat. 5. 46.
Nay, would ye had herein yet the hearts of beasts; The Ox knows his owner,
the Ass his masters cribb, but my people have rebelled against me. A sin so
much against nature, that he calls upon those creatures, who have no more than
mere nature in them, viz. Esaias 1.
the heavens to stand astonished at it. But as nature elevated by grace, rises
higher than it self; so being poisoned with sin, it is cast below it self,
sins against it self, and the principles which are begotten in and with it
self; if it were not so, how were it possible thou should hate him, who
never did thee hurt? and go on to wound him, who weepeth overthee? and despise
that in him most, which seeks to save thee? and load him with sins? Amos 2. 13.
Amos 2. 13. who loades thee daily with his mercies, Psalm. 68. 19.
Psalm. 68. 19.

There is a third consideration the text suggests, to show the fearfulness of
thy sin in this respect; and that is, that thou go on every minute sinning
and in impenitency, by despising his goodness, to treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath; to sin against mercy, of all other increases wrath; thou
must pay treasures, for treasures spent. As thou lavishly spendest riches of
mercy, so God will recover riches of glory out of thee: God will not lose by
thee, but will reckon with thee in wrath for every offer of patience spent; for
every sand of long suffering that runs out, he drops in a drop of wrath into
his Vialls, and it will prove a treasure, such a treasure as shall bring in an
eternal revenue of glory unto God, of all his glory lost, and riches spent,
with advantage; such a treasure, as will ask an eternity of time to be spent
upon thee, and yet be never emptied or made less; and the longer thou go
on, the greater heap it will swell unto. And do thou know and consider how
fast this treasure fills, and how much the longer thou go on to add to it,
still the more thou addest, still the last year more than all the years
before? every minutes impenitency adding to this heap and sum, as new
figures added in a sum use to do; the first is but one, the second makes it
ten, the third an hundred, the fourth a thousand, and what a sum will this
grow to?

Ay but thou will say, Tush, I am in prosperity, in health, wealth, and ease,
and to day shall be as to morrow, and much more abundant. Esaias 56. 12. Well,
but fourthly, consider out of the text, that there will come a day at last, the
morrow whereof will be a day of wrath: It is treasuring up now, but is not
brought forth till the day of wrath, till which day thou may go on and
prosper, as Job giving us the reason why wicked men prosper here, says, Chap.
21. They are reserved to the day of wraths, in the plural, because treasures
are laid up against then; thou art yet spared, because thy sins are not yet
full, and that Treasure is not full, as the sins of the Amorites were not; and
all this thy present prosperity fits thee but for hell. So Romans 9. 22. they are
said to be vessels fitted for destruction, by long suffering. And so Nahum
tells us, they are but as stubble laid out in the Sun a drying, till it be
fully dry, Nahum 1. 10. that it may burn the better; and like grapes that are
let to hang in the Sunshine till they be ripe, Revel. 15. 16. and so thou for
the winepresse of Gods wrath.

But thy senseless heart may hap to say, I see no such thing, and these are
but threats, I think so; therefore it is said in the Text, that it is a
Treasure; which, as Treasures use to be, is hid till that day comes, and then
revealed, as the words have it. For though thou see not this day a coming,
yet God who sits in heaven, sees thy day a coming, as David says, Psalm. 37.
13. who is therefore said to see it, because himself sees it not; and it is a
coming faster than thou art aware of it, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
2 Pet. 2. 3. Damnation slumbereth not, though thou dreamest not of it;
lingreth not: as an hue and cry, it is sent out, and is on its course, and will
in the end overtake thee, and that when thou least think of it, as a thief
in the night, when thou art asleep, yet dreamest not of it, 2 These. 5. when
thou art least prepared for it, 2 These. 5.
as in the old world, when they were eating and drinking: as God watches when
his child is at the best and ripest, and then takes him; so he will watch thee
to take thee for thy neglect, at thy worst, and give thee happily no time to
prepare; they go down to hell in a moment, Psalm. 73 9.

FINIS.
IMPRIMATUR;

THO: WEEKS. R. P. Epo: Land. Cap. Domest.


