THE TRAGEDY OF ORESTES, Written by THOMAS GOFFE Master of Arts, and Student of
Christ's Church in OXFORD: AND Acted by the STVDENTS of the same HOUSE.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. for RICHARD MEIGHEN, and are to be sold at his shop
at the middle Temple-gate, near Temple-barre in Fleetstreet. 1633.

The Prologue.
THe hushed contentment of two silent hours,
Breath pleasing airs on these attentive ears;
And since we see in this well furnished room,
All our best neighbors are so kindly me^,
We would devise some pleasing talk to spend:
The lazy hours of the tedious night:
But for our own invention, 'twas too weak,
Whereon our young Muse durst wholly lean.
We here present for to revive a tale,
Which once in Athens great Eurypedes
In better phrase at such a meeting told
The learned Athenians with much applause:
The same we will retell unto your ears,
Whose Atticke judgment is no less then theirs:
We here as builders which do often take stones,
From out old buildings, then must hew and cut,
To make them square, and fitting for a new;
So from an old foundation we have ta'n,
Stones ready squared for our new aedifice,
Which if in pleasing our weak skill offends
In making corners disproportionate,
Some room too narrow or some loft too high;
Yet we will hope, if the whole structure fall,
Your bands like props will serve to bear up all.
Spoken by the Author himselfe^
The names of the Actors.
Agamemnon, King of Greece. Clytemnestra, The Queen. Tyndarus, Clytemnestra's
father. Strophius, Father to Pylades. Orestes, son to Agam. Pylades, son to
Stroph. Two dear friends. Electra, Daughter to Agamemnon. Aegystheus,
Adulterer with Clytemnestra. Mysander. A Favorite, and Parasite. A young Child
of Aegystheus Nurse. Two Lords. Chamberlain. A Boy. Attendants.
The Tragedy of ORESTES.
Actus primus,
Scaena prima.
Enter as from war, Agamemnon: Clytemnestra: Orestes: Pylades: Aegysteus: cum
caeteris. Agam. NOw a fair blessing bless my dearest earth,
And like a Bride ado^ne thy royal brow,
With fruits rich Garand; a new married Bride
Unto thy King and Husband, who too long
Has left thee widdowed: O, me thinks I see
How all my Grecians with unsatiate looks Turns to the spectators*
And greedy eyes do bid me welcome home:
Each ear that hears the clamor seems to grieve
It cannot speak, and give a (welcome King:)
Come Clytemnestra, let no^ anger make
His wrinkled seat upon my loves fair brow,
I have too long been absent from thy bed,
Chide me for that anon, when arm in arm
I shall relate those proiects in love terms,
Which when they first were acted, made Mars fear
To see each man turned to a God of war.

Clyt. O my dear Lord, absence of things we love,
Thus intermixed, makes them the sweeter prove:
That your departure pierced my tender soul,
Witness those Crystal floods which in my eyes
Did make a sea, when you should go to sea,
Thos^ streams which then flowed from the veins of grief
At your return do ouerflow the banks.
But it is with joy.

Agam. Now these ears indeed
Have changed their place: they which were wont to hear
No music but the summoning of war
Blown through discords brazen instrument,
Are blessed now with accents that do fill
My age-dry'd veins with youthful blood again.
These eyes which had no other object once,
But Hector twixt the arms of Greece and Troy,
Hewing down men, and making every field
Flow with a sea of blood, now see's blood flow
In my Orestes cheek: heaven bless this plant Orestes kneeles,
Sprung from the sap of this now iuicelesse oak,
Now be thy branches green, under whose shade
I may be shaddowed from the heat of war.
Rise young Orestes, Oh how it glads my soul,
To see my Queen and Son, my Son and Queen.

Clyt. But come my Lord, true love still hates delays,
Let no ears first be blessed with your breath,
Till on my breast resting your wearied head,
You tell your war, wh^^e that the field's your bed.

Aga. My Queen shall have her will, see how times change,
I that last night thought all the world a sea,
As if our common mother earth, had now
Shot her self wholly into Neptunes arms,
And the strong hindges of the world had cracked,
Letting the moon fall into the swelling waves,
Such watery mountains often did seem to rise,
And quite o'rwhelme us, all the winds at war,
Banded the sea one to the others coasts,
Jove thinking Neptune began to strive for heaven,
Sent a new sea from thence, and with his thunder,
Bad silence to the waves, they uncontrolled,
Kept on their noise, and let their fury swell,
Turning heaven, earth, sea, clouds, and all to hell,
Such Trojan that was saved then' began to cry,
Happy were they that did with Priam die.
It glads me now to think, that that night was
No star, no, not Orion there appeared,
But this night's turned to day, and here does shine,
For a good Omen my embraced Queen*
With whom her Agamemnon still will stay,
Till age and death shall bear him quite away.

Exeunt Agamemnon: Clytemnestra: eumeateris* SCEN. II.
manet Egysteus. Aegyst. ANd that shall be ere long, tush (shall be's) slow,
My vengefull thoughts tell me thou now art dead.
Fie saint Apollo, weakling infant-God,
Why would thou let lame Vulcan's hammers beat
Down those brave Turrets which thou help'dst to build?
Venus, I see thou art a woman now,
Which here are like to take a double foil,
For me, that whilome reueld in thy camp
In the sweet pleasures of incestuous sheets
Must leave our loved unsatiate desires:
But now begin, thou black Eumenides,
You hand-mayds of great Dis, let such a flame
Of anger burn me, as does Etna's forge,
On fury, on, our hate shall not die thus:
I Will draw my poisonous arrow to the length,
That it may hit the mark and fly with-strength. Exit.

SCEN. III.
Enter Orestes: Pylades: Orest. COme now my dearest friend, my other self,
My empty soul is now filled to the top,
Brimfull with gladness, and it must run o'r
Into my dear friends heart: those silver hayres,
Which Time has crowned my Fathers brow withal,
Do shine within mine eyes, and like the Sun,
Extract all drossie vapors from my soul,
Like as the earth, whom frost has long benumbed,
And brought an Icie dryness on her face,
Her veins so open at a sudden thaw,
That all plants, fruits, flowers, and tender grafts,
Kept as close prisoners in their mothers womb,
Starts out their heads, and on a sudden does
The sad earths countenance with a summer look,
So in this breast, here in this breast, dear friend*
Whiles Annus ten times circled in the world
Ten clumzie winters, and ten lagging springs
Has with my Fathers absence frozen been
All thoughts of joy, which now shall make a spring
In my refreshed soul;
" Things that we daily seeth' affections cloy,
" Hopes long desired bring the greatest joy:

Pyl. Nay, but dear Cousin, give not the reins too much
To new received joys, lest that they run
With so much speed, that they out-Breath themselves;
Your Father is come home; but being come
Should now some wilful afterclap of fate
(Which Omen Jove forbid should come to pass)
But take him hence again, and cross your joy:
Each spark of gladness which you now conceive,
Would turn a flame, for grief still on extreme
Altring his course, turns to the diverse theme.

Orest. Tush Pylades, talk not of what may be,
We may, indeed in the clearest afternoon
Expect a storm.

Pyl. Yes, and such storms often come,
And wet shrewd too, before we get at home.

Orest. O, but I Will be above all fatal power;
I that have such a Father new come home,
I that have such a friend, such too rare gifts,
Who gave me these gifts, thought no scowling frown
Of angry fortune ever should throw me down:

Pyl. Call them not gifts Orestes, they are but lent,
Mere lendings friend, and lendings we must pay,
When ever the owner shall appoint his day.

Orest. True, Pylades, but owners use to warn
Their debtors when they must bring in their sums,
But heavens tell me with favoring aspects,
I still must keep their lendings, and possess,
With fro like joy, all their happiness.

Pyl. Trust not the heavens too much, although they smile,
Good looks do mortal hearts too often beguile:
The heavens are usurers; and as often it is seen
A full poucht churl give a most fair good Even
To his poor Creditor: who trusting that
Has slackt his payment: on the morrow next
He has been rooted out by the tusky boar,
Which gave thee fair good Even the day before:
The heavens can do thus too --

Orest. Tush: mortals must
Lean on the sacred Heaven with greater trust;
But it grows far in night, come let us in
To morrow shall our joys a fresh begin. Exeunt.

SCEN. IV.
Enter Aegist. Clyt. with naked daggers, Agam. lying in his bed. EGyst. Night,
now only spread thy sable wings
Over this climate, gather all thy fogs
That they may meet, and make thy face more black;
Let horrid murder take thee by the hand
And come along: I have a prodigy
Equal to all the murders, all the blood
That has been shed in all Troyes ten years seige He draws the curtain.
So, snore returned King; good Morpheus hang
Thy leaden weights upon his drowsy eyes
Let him not wake till he shall see himself,
Drencht in a sea of his vermilian goare:
Thou do no Trojan, now no Hector fear,
But yet I Will show thee a new Hector here.

Clyt. See, I Will turn man too now, and to the hate
Which women bear, I Will add a manly strength,
My mind does tremble, what I mean to do
Breath forth your vapors, O ye stygian powers,
And listen to hateful woman's prayers.
Pluto stand by me, for to aid my hand*
I may strike home now, and perform an act
May make Medea blush, she thought not of*
Could the old dry bon'd dotard ever dream,
Now he had drawn forth all his strength abroad,
He could be welcome to lie bedred here
And supple his numbe joints in my fresh arms?

Aegyst. Spoke like a queen, spoke like Aegysteus love,
Now great Thyestes Genias, which did prompt
Me to this act, come, be spectator now,
And see revenge for Athens bloody feast.
And thou wronged Clytemnestra call to mind
How his unsatiate, lustful, loathed desire
Doted on every female face he saw,
Raped the Priests daughter, and so brought a plague
On all the Grecian host:

Clytem. yes, yes, Aegysteus, ye^
And raped young Briseis from Achilles bed;
Crowd all reuengefull thoughts into this hour,
Now let thy sword let out that lustful blood
Wound him Aegisteus, kill him not at once, Aegist, stabs him,
We Will be true Tyrants, let him feel he dies

Agam. Help Clytemnestra, help me my dear Queen.

Clytem. Yes dotard I will help thee, thus, yes thus:
Remember the Priests daughter: this for her, She stabs him.
And this for Briseis:

Agam. see, my Grecians, see,
Your King which you so gladly entertained:
Sol hide thy self in everlasting night,
Or when thou risest let thy blushing face,
Make these to blush;

Clytem. I, so, curse on, curse on:

Agam. O Clytemnestra, O my once dear wife,
Is this the entertainment that thou give;
Thy new come husband, gratulat'st thou thus
My ten years absence? see these frosty hairs
Would even move Hecuba to pity me,
Look on these aged arms which in this bed
Thought to have been blessed with thy kind embrace,

Clytem. Yes, mine or Cassandra's, old adulterer?

Agam. Kinsman Aegisteus; O my dearest wife
Whom shall I call; me thinks you both are mine,
What Titius, what Megaera has put on
Aegysteus and my Clytemnestra's shapes?

Aegyst. Calst thou us friends? Stabs him again.

Agam. O be not so, and I Will not call you so:
Let not your coward weapons wound this head;
That erst did scorn to shrink at Priams blow.
O hew me not down thus for my sonns sake,
Dear Clytemnestra for Orestes sake.
Is this the Trojan tale how I should tell!
That here great Hector slew Antiochus,
And here that Meontiades was slain,
And poor Prothesilaus dear to Laodamie:
I thought to tell how these men lost their blood;
And see my blood is thus let forth at home.

Aegyst. Is your hot blood yet cold!

Clyt. breath dotard, do?
You shall have gapes enough to let your soul
Find a free passage to his deserved flames.

Agam. No pity yet? O then, no pity light
On you, nor yours; but let dire revenge
Come learn how she may after handle you:
O, I am drowned in blood, and now must yield
To murderers weapons; treason win's the field;
Alas this coming home has had small joy,
Argos has worser foes then ever Troy.

Clyt. Now I am Clytemnestra right, now I deserve
To add one more to the three Furies, now
Do I count this more then my nuptial night
It Is mine, it is thine Egystheus, and none else
Shall share a minute of this right, but we.

Egyst. Me thinks I now go equal with the stars
And my proud head touches the highest pole,
Hark, Hell applauds me, and me thinks I hear A noise.
Thyestes tell me I have done enough:
And now I kiss my hands, whilst yet they bear
This tincture on them, and embrace my Queen,
Now made my love; lets in, this night the Fates
Have amply fed us with reuengefull cates. Exeunt,

SCEN. V.
Enter Orestes, as from his bed, vnbuttoned in slippers, a torch in his hand.
WHat horrid dreams affright me? I see naught
That I should fear, and yet me thinks I fear.
Mine eyes scarce closed, my busy fancy saw
A sight that dashed all comforts of the day:
Me thought my Father lying in his tent,
Hateful Achilles for his wronged love
Comes in with Briseis, and they two let forth
Streams of fresh blood from out his aged side,
With that his Echoed schrieke did make me wake;
But I remembered then he was come home,
And yet I Will see him, still me thinks I quake,
Do I still dream? are not mine eyes vnclos'd? he draws the curtain.
Is this a torch? yes, it is, it burns, I see
I am awake, do not delude me night!
Now stand on tiptoes Atlas, lift heaven higher,
I may have air enough to breath my woes,
O let me yet recall thy posting soul
If Charon have not hurried thee too fast
If yet thou have not drunk on lethes poole,
Come back, and tell me who it is this night,
Has don this deed far blacker then the night?
Ha! art thou fled past call? why thou were old
Me thinks thou should not haste so fast away:
Was it for this thou swe'rst so often in Arms!
Was it for this that the froth swelling foame
When thy ships top touched Heaven, and deep placed hell,
That thou must yet escape curled Neptune's waves
To be a Palinurus in thy shore
There drown thy aged locks in crimson goare.
O if one spark yet of thy Princely Soul
Remain within this trunk, now let it shine
And light my ignorant eyes to read the names
Of these night vultures, whose devouring bills
Have made a Titius of thy royal corpse:
Who did not fear great Agamemnons sleep?
Arm, arm your selves all you, all potent Gods
You which we term Just ministers of Heaven,
Shoot forked lightning from the marble poale
Let the all-seeing eye of heaven shoot flames
Which may parch up the marrow from their bones
Should they lie coucht in the breast a'th Thunderer,
Or be entrencht with guards of Furies,
Heaven, earth, nor hell should keep them from my sword
Do thou sleep Jove? O could thou snore so fast,
And let thy great vicegerent thus be torn?
Some of the immortal powers have had fathers,
And know what'tis to have them murdered thus.
But I turn woman now, O I rave out
My passions; do grief, pour out thy self,
That thou may make room in my empty heart
To fill it with revenge.
SCEN. VI.
Enter Clytem. Aegyst. in night-robes. Clyt. HOw now? what ails our son, how
now Orestes!

Orest. O some are come now to help me greiue,
See, see mother, see, your husband and my Father,
The King of Greece, great shepherd of his Land
See, see him here: She faines her self to swown: Aeg. catches her falling,

Cly. O help now good heaven to keep my sex
Let me dissemble.

Aegyst. Help my Lords the Queen.

Clyt. O why let you not my soul, that whilst he lived,
Was linkt to his, and would too now have fled
With winged desire to have been with him,
What do I live for, Agamemnon slain,
My Lord, my King, my Husband, wake my Lord,
What bloody Trojan followed thee from thence
To kill thee here, could he not one night
Have let me rested in thy sweet embraces?
Must he for surenesse make so many holes
For thy sweet soul to fly to be a God?
O let my tears be balm to these thy wounds,
Let my lips kiss, and warm thy gelid lips,
Let my hair wipe these clots of blood away
From thy age-honor'd side: O dry your tears,
Join knees and prayers with me, awake ye Gods,
And send our vows, since we can send no wounds: They both kneel'.
Come son, we women still know how to curse,
Let him that did it be an Adulterer;

Aegyst. Faith she begins well, sure she knows the man:

Clytem. Let him be conscious he has done a deed
Deserves revenge, whether it fall or no;
Let him for ever bear in mind this night,
And who 'twas helped him in this bloody act.

Aegyst. Yes, he will remember how you curse him now,

Orest. If ever he have children let them be
Murdered before his face, that he may know
How nature binds a father and a son,

Aegyst. Now hands I thank you, now my soul: grows glad,
Had not he greiu'd thus, I had lost revenge.

Clyt. But come my son, now let us talk of graves,
Of Epitaphs, and tombs, and's soul being fled, Draw the curtain, and carry
him away.
Let Us lap his Trunk up in a sheet of lead.

Exeunt Clyt. and Aegyst. manet Orest. Orest. Me thinks I see a Tragedy at hand,
To which this night has as a Prologue bin;
I Will make a prayer now worthy Atreus grandchilde,
Let the foul Adder sting me as I walk,
The poisonous toad belch her black venom forth*
In my despised face, let it be thought
I never had a father, but some monster
Bred by a slimy exhalation;
If my revenge fly not with ample wing,
Till then rest soul, hate told may lose his sting.

ACT. II.
SCEN. I.
Enter Cassandrasola as a mad Prophetess. Cass. O Ye dead Trojans leap within
your graves,
O mother that thou had lived this night,
Now thou'ldst be glad to have lost so many sons,
The Grecians are revenged upon themselves,
I thank thee soul, that thou keptst here till now
To let me see Greece overcome it self;
I live, I live, I Am here, I live to see it:
I do not dream on it, no, I saw the blood
Run from his side, whole Catarackts, all Greece:
Apollo how am I bound now for this
That I do only see this happiness,
Hecuba, Priame, young Astianax
Look Hecuba, Greece now does act your woes,
Laugh Hecuba, for now Electra weeps:
And Tyndarus he knows not what to do:
Come little Cuz, come my Astianax,
Orestes is in a worse case then thou.
Still I had others for to weep with me,
But none are left to laugh now, but my self;
What should he fear at home? A conqueror fear?
It Is don, it is done, leave fighting Hector, leave,
The Grecians mean to fight against themselves,
From Tyndarus the first brand took fire
Which burnt down Troy: and now an other here
Kindles from him, to set a fire Greece,
Graia iuuenca venit, quae se, patremque virumque
Perdidit, Io laetor, Graia iuuenca venit:
Hellen, thy sister Hellen, nay she is thine:
Who could have thought that Hector being slain,
Old Priame made a sacrifice to death,
Troy turned to cindars, poor Andromacha
Dragged by her hair to death, Astianax
Sent out o'th world before he well came in,
Ha, ha, who could have thought after all this
Cassandra should have ever laughed again,
One hour of laughter following many years
Of discontent, does help to sweeten tears. Exit.

ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Aegystheus. Clytem. Aegyst. Fair morning to my Queen, nay more, my
love,
How likes my sweet her change of bedfellow?

Clyt. Look as a hollow leafelesse failing oak,
To whom for that he has bin her weight too long,
The earth denies to lend him moisture, so
His sap fails, and he stands on a green
Among sprouting Elms, that they may seem more fresh
Whilst he is but held a monument of years,
Such one seemed Agamemnon; a dry tree:
Thou like a sprouting elm, whom I embrace
Like twining Iuy, with these now-blest arms,
Blessed whilst this treasure in them they holdlockt.

Aegyst. O who'ld not do a murder for a woman!
Heaven had but two things for the Gods reserved
Fire, and women, when with Giant thought
Promotheus had taken one, Jove in his rage
Threw him the to'ther, bad him keep 'em both,
O they are rare creatures, they have such Maeanders,
Their tears will come and go with such Art,
Come now my Queen, one sweet Ambrosian kiss;
O Nectar! prithee had thou taught thy tears
How they should flow before:

Clyt. No, trust me love,
I knew my tears would soon be at command,
And faith the boy had almost made me weep
Really once: were not my curses rare?

Aegyst. Yes, all was woman like, but yet that boy
He took it deeply, would he were with his father,
So gone, it skills not how, were he away
We would act freely all our lustful play:

Clyt. O but my love, he is mine; nor can the raven
Dig her sharp beak into her own birds breast;
He will forget his father: woe will break,
It Is not the greatest grief that most does speak.

Egyst. O but he will bear a still suspicious eye*
And who in bloody Scenes does act a part,
Thinks every eye does penetrate his heart.
Nor can we ere be free, or I enjoy
True pleasures, we must be but thieves at most,
Close in delights, and have a Pander still
To be a Factor, 'twixt thy bed and mine
This we could have before, what now we do
The world should see done, and applaud it too.

Clyt. Why my dear Love, I that would set my hand
To stain my marriage sheets with husbands blood
Would let these hands instructed now in ill,
Not leave one arm of that vprooted tree;
Could but Aegystheus give me any hope,
That from this top there should one spreading branch
Grow up and flourish.

Aegyst. Now thou art thy self,
Yes, yes my love, there shall one spring from us
Shall be a lofty Pine, let this be cropped,
Murder must murder guard, guilt add to guilt,
After one drop whole streams of blood be spilt. walks away.

SCEN. III.
Enter Pylades: Orestes: Electra: Strophius. Dear friend, what mean you, to
o'rwhelme your self,
In such a sea of grief?
Orest. Father dear Agamem.

Pyl. Nay let this tempest fall, thou have lost a father,
Why, it is but change, my father shall be thine,
I Will be thy brother, nay, I Will be thy self,
Weep when thou weep'st, and where thou go I Will go,
And bring thee on thy pilgrimage of woe.

Elect. Brother, look up, have not I lost a father?
Yes, and would a river of fresh tears
Turn Lethes stream, and bring him from the wharf,
With a North gale of windy blowing sighs,
I would expire my soul, become all tears.

Stroph. Come, you have lost a father, I a brother,
The Queen a Husband, all the Land a King,
Yet all thi's but a man; Therefore must die:
Our woes may all be in one balance poys'd,
His book of life the Fates had ouer-read,
And turned the leaf where his last period stood*
Now an immortal wreath circles his brow,
And makes him King in heaven, who was before
At most a God on earth; Hence difference springs,
Kings are earths Gods, and Gods are heavenly Kings.

Orest. Let us join words then now, and Swan-like sing,
The doleful dirge to a departed King:
Thou friend did of this misery divine,
Therefore the burden of the song is mine:
Words Orators for woe, which plead the cause,
When griefe's the Judge, and sighs are all the laws,
Each one a sob, for Diapason bears,
Our tunes shall drown the music of the spheres:
O what Hirudo with unsatiate thirst,
Could draw the blood from out those Princely veins,
From whence flows comfort to so many souls. Spies his mother, goes to her.
Mother, when wept you last, here take a scarf
Dry your eyes, now by Jove you need none,
What shine of comfort has dried up your tears?

Clyt. Our sonne's too saucy with his mother Queen:
Why, Sir, shall you tell us a time to weep?

Orest. Us? good: Who is it makes the plurality?
'Twas wont to be my father, does he live?

Clyt. Sir, curb this lavish speech, or I Will forget
You are my son, and make you but a subject.

Aegyst. Good Cousin add not disobedience
Unto your mothers griefs.

Orrst. My mother, no,
She is not here, no, she has hid her self
In some odd nooke, or angle vnperceiu'd,
She might not see this impious stygian world.

Clyt. Aegistheus, can thou still suffer thy dull sword in the sheath?
Take the rank head from this o'r-growing weed.

Stro. Remember Clytemnestra, he is your son.

Clyt. He is so, and I Will learn him to be so:
Had I a brazen bull, it should be heat,
Hotter then for the Tyrant: Disobedient?
More harsh then Adders hisses is thy voice,
Sir, you shall die, but with a living death,
He still shall live, but live to know he dies;
Who strait threats death, knows not to Tyrannize.

Exeunt Aegystheus, Clytemnestra. Stro. What temper's grown on the distracted
Queen!
Has grief conceived for her late husbands death,
Brought her so far, she has forgot her self?

Orest. No Uncle, no, by heaven, I do suspect,
O, my propheticke soul divines much ill:
Well, I will fly, but hear this stratagem,
It shall be rumor'd in the ear o'th Court
I was found dead, I Will put a new shape on,
And live alone, to hear how things go here.

Pyl. Nay, not alone Orestes, whilst I live,
Should make thy bed upon the rigid Alps,
Or frozen Caucasus, wrapped in sheets of snow,
I Would freeze unto thy side; we will tell tales
Of Trojan warriers, and deposed Kings,
Tell of strange shipwreck, of old Priams fall,
How mad Andromacha did tear her hair,
When the wild horses tore brave Hectors limbs:
We Will think they all do come, and weep with us;
Grief loves companions, and it helps woe,
When it hears every one groan forth his (Oh)
It eases much, and our plaints fall more sweet,
When a whole consort, in one tune do meet.
The halfe-dead ship-man, which has shipwreck borne*
Seeing many drowned, it makes him less to mourn:
It made Deucalion care the less to die,
When he had all the world in company.
Thus we will sit, and our tears turns shall keep,
Thou for thy father, I for thee will weep;
If actors on the stage having no cause,
But for to win an hearers hands applause,
Can let fall tears, we will think we Actors be,
And only do but play griefs Tragedy.

Orest. O, but dear friend, should we but act a part,
The play being ended, passion left the heart,
And we should share of joy, but my whole age
Must never move from off this woeful Stage:
But we must take our leave; Uncle, farewell,
Remember what I spoke; and Sister, you
Must tarry here, my thoughts shall busied be,
To find the man that let my father blood;
Can I but find Aegystheus did consent,
To spill one drop, O I would pierce his heart
With venomed daggers, and so butcher him,
That all Apollo's skill in physic herbs,
Nor Aesculapius the Epidaurian God,
Should keep his soul out of Enio's hand;
Come my dear friend, to all the rest farewell,
If heaven relate it not, I Will know it ftom hell.

Exeunt Pylades: Orestes. SCEN. IIII.
Enter Aegysteus: Clytemnestra: Mysander: Strophiu^s: Electra another way.
Aegyst. WHat, is Orestes fled? sure there is some plot,
If you dear Queen, but search Elect. well,
You Will find she knows whither her brothers gone,

Clyt. If in her heart there be but lodged a thought,
Unknown to me this hand shall rip her breast,
And search her inparts: but I Will find it out.
Mysander, call Electra:

Aegyst. O, were that moat taken from our comforts beams,
No cloud could ever then o'rshade our joys,
His life must be cut off without delay,
Mischief by mischief finds the safest way;
But here is Electra:

Clyt. Why, how now Minion, what a blubbering still?
Huswife, pray where is your brother, where is my son?

Elect. Mother, pray where is my father, where is your husband,
Hail to my gracious Queen, here is one at door Enter Strophius, and speaks.
Brings you a message, he will not relate
To any, but your self, he says it is sad.

Clyt. Why, the more dismal, the more vvelcome it is,
But as for you.

Elect. Good mother do your worst,
No plague can ever make me more accursed,
Nothing is worse then death, that I Will not fly.

Clyt. Yes, life is worse to those that feign would die.
But where is the messenger?

SCEN. V.
Enter Nuncius. WHat whirlewind rising from the womb of earth
Does raise huge Pelion unto Ossa's top,
That both being heapt, I stand upon them both
And with an hundred Stentor-drowning voice,
Relate unto the world the saddest tale,
That ever burdned the weak jaws of man:
Aegyst. Why, what portentuous news? Amaze us not,
Tell us what ever it be.

Nun. Were my mind settled, would the gellid fear,
That freezeth up my sense, set free my speech,
I would unfold a tale which makes my heart
Throb in my intralls: when I seem to see it.

Clyt. Relate it quickly, hold's not in suspense.

Nun. Upon the mount of yonder rising cliffe,
Which the earth has made a bulwark for the sea,
Whose peerlesse head is from the streams so high,
That whosoe'r looks down, his brain will swim
With a vertigo: The space removed so far
The object from the eye, that a tall ship
Seemed a swift flying bird: upon this top
Saw I two men making complaints to heaven,
One's voice distinctly still cried, Father, King,
Great Agamemnon: whose diuiner soul
Fled from thy corpse, exiled by buchers hands,
His friend still sought to keep his dying life
With words of comfort, that it should not rush
Too violently upon the hands of Fate.
He deaf as sea, to which he made his plaints,
Still cried out, Agamemnon, I will come,
And find thy blessed soul where ever it walk,
In what fair Tempe of Elisium
So ever it be, my soul shall find it out;
With that his friend knit him within his arms,
Striving to hold him but when it was no boot,
They hand in hand, thus plunged into the maine.
Strait they arose, and strived, me thought, for life,
But swelling Neptune not regarding friends,
Wrapped their embraced limbs in following waves.
Until at last, their dear departing souls
Hastened to Styx, and I no more cloud see.

Stro. O, 'twas Orestes, 'twas my Pylades,
Which arm in arm did follow him to death.

Elect. O my Orestes, O my dearest brother
It Is he, it is he that thus has drowned himself.

Aegyst. Why, then if Agamemnon and his son
Have brought their leaf of life to the full end;
I am Thyestes son, and the next heir,
To sit in Argos Throne of Majesty.
Thanks to our Alpheus sea, who as't'ad strived
To gratify Aegystheus, raised his force,
And gathered all his waters to one place,
They might be deep enough to drown Orestes:
But come my Queen, let us command a feast.
To get a kingdom, who'ld not think it good,
To swim unto it through a sea of blood.

ACT. III.
SCEN. I.
Enter Tyndarus: Misander. Tynd. Our daughter send for us? how fares she? well?
She mournes I Am sure for her husbands death.

Mis. My Lord, she took it sadly at the first:
But time has lessened it.

Tynd. I, grief soon ends
That flows in tears; they still are women's friends:
But how is it rumord now in Argos, though,
That Agamemnon did.

Mys. Why, he was old,
And death thought best to seize on him at home,

Tynd. 'Twas a long home, he got by coming home,
Well, well, Misander, I like not the course,
The peoples murmr makes my cheeks to blush.

Mis. My gracious Lord, who trusts their idle murmr,
Must never let the blush go from his cheek,
They are like flagges growing on muddy banks,
Whose weak thin heads blown, with one blast of wind,
They all will shake, and bend themselves one way:
Great minds must not esteem what small tongues say.
All things in state must ever have this end,
The vulgar should both suffer, and commend,
If not for love, for fear; great majesty
Should do those things the vulgar dare not see.

Tynd. O, Sir, but those that do commend for fear,
Do in their hearts a secret hatred bear.
Ever learn this; the truest praise indeed,
Must from the heart, and not from words proceed.
I fear some foul play: does Aegystheus mean,
Then totally for to inuest himself
In Agamemnons seat? Where Is young Orestes?

Mis. Why my Lord? he for the great grief conceived,
Being young, not knowing well to rule himself
With sway of reason, ran upon his death,
And threw himself with my Lord Strophius son,
Into the midst of Alpheus, so was drowned.

Tynd. How took my daughter that?

Mis. Why, wisely too,
And like her self; not being in despair:
Her royal womb will bring forth many more,
Shall be as dear as ever Orestes was.

Tynd. I fear heaven cannot look with equal eyes
Upon so many deaths, but means to send
Plague after plague; for in a wretched state,
One ill begets another dismal Fate:
But go and tell my daughter I will come,
And help to solemnize her nuptial night:
Her hasty wedding, and the old Kings neglect,
Makes my coniecturall soul some ill suspect. Exeunt.

SCEN. II.
Enter Orestes, and Pylades. Orest. IF ever God lent any thing to earth,
Whereby it seemed to symphatize with heaven,
It is this sacred friendship: Gordian knot
Which Kings, nor Gods, nor Fortune can undo.
O what Horoscopus, what constellation,
Held in our birth so great an influence,
Which one affection in two minds unites?
How has my woe been thine, my fatal ill
Has still been parted, and one share been thine!

Pyl. Why, dearest friend, suppose my case were thine,
And I had lost a father, would not thou
In the like sort participate my grief?

Orest. Yes, witness heaven I would.

Pyl. So, now thou have lost a father,

Orest. True, Pylades, thou putst me well in mind,
I have lost a father, a dear, dear father,
A King, a brave old King, a noble soldier,
And yet he was murdered: O my forgetful soul;
Why should not I now draw my vengefull sword,
And strait-way sheath it in the murderers heart?
Minos should never have vacation,
Whilst any of our progeny remained.
Well, I will go, and so massacre him,
I Will teach him how to murder an old man,
A King, my Father, and so dastardly
To kill him in his bed.

Pyl. Alas, Orestes!
Grief does distract thee* who is it thou will kill?

Orest. Why, he, or she, or they that killed my father.

Pyl. I, who are they?

Orest. Nay, I know not yet,
But I will know.

Pyl. Stay thy vengefull thoughts,
And since thus long we have estranged our selves
From friends and parents, lets think why it is,
And why we had it noysed in the Court,
We both were dead; the cause was thy revenge,
That if by any secret private means,
We might but learn who'twas, that drenched their swords
In thy dear fathers blood, we then would rouse
Black Nemesis in flames from out her cave,
And she should be the vmpire in this cause.
Man's soul is like a boystrous working sea,
Swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
And tumbling up and down from day to day,
Grows greater still in indignation,
Turns male content, in pleaselesse melancholy,
Spending her humors in dull passion, still
Locking her senses in unclosed gins,
Till by revenge she sets at liberty.

Orest. O, now my thirsty soul expects full draughts
Of Ate's boiling cup: O, how two'ld ease
My heart, to see a channel of his blood,
Streaming from hence to hell, that killd my father,

Pyl. I, but dear friend, thou must not let rage loose,
And like a furious Lion, from whose den
The forrester has stolen away his young,
He missing it, strait runs with open jaws
On all he meets, and never hurting him
That did the wrong; wise men must mix revenge
With reason, which by providence will prompt,
And tell us where is the mark, whereat we aim.
Till then in Cinders we will rake up our grief,
Fire thus kept, still lives, but opened dies,
From smallest sparks great flames may one day rise.

Orest. True, friend, but, O, who ever will reveal
This hideous act! what power shall we inuoke?

Pyl. Yes, harken friend, I have bethought a means;
Not distant far from this place where we live,
There stands a cave hard by a hollow oak,
In a low valley where no Sun appears,
No music ever was there heard to sound;
But the harsh voice of croking ominous ravens.
And sad Nyctimine the bird of night,
There Is now a shed under whose ancient roof,
There sometimes stood an Altar for the Gods,
But now slow creeping time, with windy blasts
Has beaten down that stately Temples walls,
Defaced his rich built windows, and vntil'd
His battlemented roof, and made it now
A habitation, nor for God, nor men:
Yet an old woman, who does seem to strive
With the vast building for antiquity,
In whose rough face time now has made such holes,
As in those uncouth stones she there has made
Her self a cell, wherein to spend her age;
Her name's Canidia; great in Magique spells,
At whose dire voice, the gods themselves would quake,
To hear her charm the second time pronounced.
One that can know the secrets of Heaven,
And in the air has flying ministers,
To bring her news from earth, from sea, from hell:
Which, when thick night has compas't in the world,
Then does she go to dead men's graves and tombs,
And sucks the poisonous marrow from their bones,
Then makes her charm, which she nere spent in vain,
Nor does she comes as suppliant to the Gods,
But making Erebus, and Heaven to quake,
She sends a spell drowning infernal thunder,
By which all secrets that were ever don,
In fair white parchment writ in lines of blood,
Locked in the inmost room of hell it self
Is brought unto her: and by her we may
Have leave to look in Pluto's register,
And read the names of those most loathed Furies,
Which rent thy Fathers soul from out his truncke,
But she must see thy Fathers dead bones first,
Them we must bring her, for by them she works:
This if thou dare assay, I Will go along.

Orest. If I dare assay? yes, yes, dear friend,
Were it to burst my Fathers sepulcher,
And wake his Manes, show them Radamanth,
Their iterated sight will burn my soul
With such a sparkling flame of dire revenge,
As Nessus shirt did burn great Hercules,
If that the scrowle which did contain their names,
Were in a lake of flaming brimstone drencht,
I Would take it out, or fetched from Pluto's arms:
But come; I fea^th have such a creature as can tell,
Twill save a journey for this once from hell.

SCEN. III.
Enter Aegyst. Clytem. Tynd. Msiander Strophius, Electra, cum caet. with a
crown. Aegyst ascends the throne, Miander crowns him: Clytem*great with child.
Mys. ALL years of happy days, all hours of Joy
So circle in thy state, as does this crown
Wreath and combine thy princely temples in,
All speak! Jove still protect Aegystheus.

Aegyst. Thanks to my Fathers subjects:
Now Argos swell up to the brim with joy,
And streams of gladness flow on Tyndarus,
Now made our Father; see old King, see here is
My Queen does mean to make thee a grandfather,
See how thy royal blood shall propagate,
Whose Kingly drops like heaven distilling dew
Shall add fresh life unto thy withered root.

Tyn. Yes, but Aegystheus, there were arms before
Grew on this tree; but the Fates envious axe
Has cut them off before they had time to sproute:

Clyt. O Sir, the Fates needs must have leave to make
Ways for themselves to manage what they do:
Had Agamemnon and Orestes lived,
They could not then have blessed me with these gifts:
Still when the heavens and Fates do work their will,
They intend good, though sometimes there come ill.

Tynd. O but pray Jove the Fates now were not forced,
But deeds like words no man can e're recall,
Be It good or ill; once don, we must bear all.
(...)
Come Father sit we down, and make a feast, They set to the feast.
To glad our hearts; Heaven still does for the best.

Stroph. O let my latter age not live to see
Aegisteus wear great Argus diadem:

Elect. Fear not good uncle, there will be a time
To pull him down, although he yet does climb:

Tynd. Who ever trusted much on fortunes gifts,
On wife, on state, on health, on friends, on lands,
May look on Agamemnons coming home:
Fortune me thinks never showed her power more,
How quickly could she turn her Fatal sword
Upon his breast, that thought himself past harm,
She that had used death like an angry dog,
Holding him up, when that he should have bit,
When all the game was past, and's fury laid,
The King being past all danger, safe at home,
Then he slip's collar, never until then;
And fortune she stood hissing of him on,
Till he had torn the good Kings soul away.

Aegyst. Nay but good Father let pass elegies, Clyt. seems to weep
You draw fresh tears now from your daughters eyes,
Who shed enough before at's funeral,
Let Us talk who are to live, not who are dead;
And think what progeny shall spring from us
May bear your Image stamped upon the face,
This we must talk of now, not what griefs past
But of the joy to come:

Aegyst. My Queen not well?
Now good Electra look unto your mother, Clyt. rises from the table.
Lucina be propitious to the birth;
Why, will not now a young Aegystheus be,
As grateful as an old Orestes was?
Thou times good lengthener, age, posterity,
Spread thy self still upon Aegistheus line,
Help me to treasure up antiquity,
And from Thyestes loins let spring an heir,
Shall ever sit in great Thyestes chair. Exeunt.

SCEN. IV.
Enter Pylades and Orestes, with his arm full of a dead man's bones and a
Scull. Pylad. Near to this shady grove, where never light
Appears, but when `tis forced with some charm,
Canidia dwells, in such a dusky place,
That the night goblins fear to come too near it,
Here let us knock.

Orest. Nay, Pylady, see here,
O give me leave to descant on these bones:
This was my Fathers scull; but who can know
Whether it were some subjects scull, or no:
Where be these Princely eyes, commanding face,
The brave Maiesticke look, the Kingly grace,
Where Is the imperious frown, the Godlike smile,
The graceful tongue, that spoke a soldiers style?
Ha, ha, worms eat them: could no princely look,
No line of eloquence writ in this book,
Command, nor yet persuade the worms away!
Rebellious worms! could a King bear no sway?
Injurious worms! what could no flesh serve,
But Kings for you? By heaven you all shall sterue:
Had I but known't; what must my father make
A feast for you? O ye devouring creatures!

Pyla. Now some Archilocus to help him make
Vengefull Iambiques, that would make these worms
To burst themselves; Passion must please
It self by words, grief told it self does ease.

Orest. You cowardly bones, would you be thus vncloth'd
By little crawling worms! by Jove I never thought
My Fathers bones could e're have been such cowards:
O you ungrateful worms how have you used him;
See their ingratitude: O ambitious creatures,
How they still domineere, or`e a Kings carcass,

Pyla. How could they think Orestes, when thou came to the crown
That thou should bear, that these should eat thy father,

Orest. True? Pylades, should not I rend their maws,
Devise some new tortures? O most horrible treason,
That worms should come unto a great Kings face,
And eat his eyes: why, I would undertake
But at one stamp to kill a thousand of 'em,
And I will kill these: Stamps upon them.
Go you Kings-eating creatures: I will mar
All your digestion.

Pylad. Alas, where be his wits?
He stands declaming against senseless worms,
And turns more senseless then the worms themselves;
Where Is now the oracle you should consult,
The great Magician, now the Centaurs thought
Shall be example to all future years,
And now transcend Proserpina's invention,
Ha, have thou found them out, ha, were they worms?

Orest.. O prithee laugh not at me me, call her, call her; Pyl. knocks.
Whilst I stand gathering up my Fathers bones,
His dear disiected bones; O, I remember, here
Ran the strong sinews, twixt his knitting joints,
Here to this bone was joined his Princely arm,
Here stood the hand that bare this warlike shield,
And on this little joint was place't the head,
That Atlas-like bare up the weight of Greece,
Here, here betwixt these hollow yawning iaws
Stood once a tongue, which with one little word
Could have commanded thousand souls to death:
Good hands endure this your weighty task,
And good eyes strive not to make moist his bones
With weeping tears:
What sin's our Procustes ever could
Have hackt a King into such things as these;
Alas here is every part now so deformed,
I know not which was his, yet all was his.

Sound infernal Music. SCEN. V.
Enter Canidia, like an Enchauntresse. Orest. PRotect us O ye Ministers of
Heaven,
Stand near me my good Genius, my soul has lost
His humane function, at this hellish sight.

Can. Who is it disturbs our cave, what messenger
Has Pluto sent, that would know ought from us,
What are you, speak, Canidia cannot stay.

Pylad. Prompt us some Ghost,
Great fear of earth, and gouernesse of nature,
In whose deep closet of that sacred heart
Are written the characters of future Fate;
And what is done, or what must be thou know:
Whose words make burning Acheron grow cold,
And Jove leave thundering, when he hears thy name,
To thee we come: O turn thy secret book,
And look whose names thou there shall see inscribed
For murderers, read over all the catalogue,
Until thou find there, engraven those
Which killed the King of Greece, great Agamemnon.

Orest. Yes, he that did owe these bones which worms have eat;
It is not now one of the meaner sort
That craves this boon, but it is the heir of Greece,
Heir only now but to my Fathers grave;
I not command, but my astonished soul
Entreats to know.
If in thy book it be not yet put down,
Command the Gods to unlock the gates of Heaven;
And fetch forth death, command him to relate
Who 'twas put Agamemnon in his hands,
This is our business, this, great prophetess,
Made us approach to thy most hallowed cell.

Can. Ho, ho, ho, I tell thee fond young Prince!
A lesser power thou might have implored,
Which might have urged th'vnwilling fiends to this:
Our dire enchantments carry such a force,
That when the stars, and influence of heaven,
Have sucked the lively blood from out men's veyns,
I at my pleasure bring it back again;
I knew each hour in the Trojan fight,
What Grecian, or what Phrygian should die,
And fierce Achilles had no sooner pierced
Great Hectors side, but fate did send me word:
Earth, Sea, deep Chaos, all the stony hills,
Will open themselves to show me prodigies;
Night will unmask her brow, to let me see
What black conceptions teeme within her womb.

Orest. O then relate great Mistress of thy Art,
The things we crave:

Can. What time of night is it?

Pyl. Upon the stroke of twelve.

Can. Strait when a cloudy Even clappeth the Air,
And all light's drench't in misty Acheron,
When the black palpherys of the full cheektmoone,
Have got behind this parta'th Hemispheare,
And dark Aldebor, and is mounted high
Into the fable Cassiopeias chair,
And night full mounted in her seat of iet,
Sits wrapped within a cabinet of clouds,
When serpents leave to hiss, no dragons yell,
No birds do sing, no harsh tuned toads do croake,
The Armenian Tiger, and the ravenous woolfe,
Shall yield up all their tyranny to sleep,
And then none walk but hells disturbed spirits,
Children of night, such as belong to me,
I Will show thee thy desire; give me these bones.

Orest. Here, take them Mother, use them gently,
They were a Kings bones once; O not so hard.

Can. Why senseless boy, do think that I respect
A Kings dead bones, more then an other man's;
O they smell rankly; I, this sent does please, Smells to them.
But I must now to work: why Sagana.

Pylad. Look here thou King of Greece, fond Menelaus,
Thou which did bring so many goodly shapes, Taks up the scull.
Into such things as these, and all for Helen,
Which when the worms bred of her dainty flesh,
Shall have knaw'd off her tender rubie lips,
And left her gumlesse, look upon her then;
And thou would even disgorge thy self to see,
Such putride vermin to lie kissing her.

Orest. This head had once a royal diadem,
Now knock it, beat it, and 'twill never cry treason.

Can. Why Sagana.

Orest. There was a player once upon a stage,
Who striving to present a dreery passion,
Brought out the vrne of his late buried son,
It might the more affect him, and draw tears:
But I, as if I had no passion left,
Not acting of a part, but really
In a true cause having my Fathers bones,
His hollow scull, yet crawling full of worms,
I cannot weep, no not a tear will com.

Can. Why Sagana, Veia, Erictho, know you not your time?

SCEN. VI.
Enter Sagana, Veia, Erictho, 3. witches. Sag. What would you Beldame?

Can. Has not triform'd Hecate put on
Her Styx-died mantle, is it not now fit time
To work our charms in?

Veia. We here are ready against thy sacred charm.

Can. You two, sitby, and bear in mind this charge,
Who e're you see, who ever I present;
Let your tongues be percullist in your iaws,
Stir not, nor speak not, till the charm be done.

Pyl. Fear not, it shall be chained with silence.

Can. Night, and Diana sacred Queen,
Which ever have spectator been
Unto our balefull hideous rights,
Never acted but in darkest nights,
Now in this fatal hers-bred hour,
Show to my rites thy greatest power.
Erictho when my torch shall twinkle,
Auernall water thou shall sprinckle
About the room, now let us kneel,
Our heavy burden Hell shall feel:
Lets all coin words, now we may see
Who 'twas did work this prodigy.

Omnes. Pluto, great Pluto, we command,
Thou send unto us out of hand,
The shapes of those that killed the King,
Great Agamemnon.

Infernal Music. Enter in a dumb show Aegystheus, and Clytem. with their
bloody daggers, look upon the bed, go to it, and stab, and then make a show
of gladness and depart. Or. O it is above my bearing, were I linkt here with
chains,
I would like Cerberus draw Alcides back:
Stay, stay, by heavens, revenge shall (...)
Nay, I will follow you, should they take (...)
Where Aetna vomits fire, I would in:
My mother, Clytemnestra, Aegystheus, was it they?
Nay, I will o'rtake them.

Can. O son, remember what I told you son,
Many a rockie hill and stony mount,
Many a sea, and vast Charybdis gulf,
Stands betwixt them and thee, though they seem near.

Ore. O piety! O most prodigious nature!
What creatures have thou made to live on earth?
How have thou clothed black darkness with a scarf
Of unstained purity, and put a godly face
Upon portentuous devils? Oh, how my mother wept!
How Clitemnestra! how that Hiena wept!
No more my mother, I abjure the name,
She did not bring me forth, I know she did not:
But I Will o'rtake 'em; show me Canidia where,
Which way they went, where have they hid themselves.
Should they mount up to the chariot of the Sun,
And in his Carre fly to the Antipodes,
Or in the farthest nooke of yonder sphere:
Get up and place themselves betwixt Taurus horns,
The fire-breathing bull, nor Lerna's Hydra,
Were there no entrance but ten Lions jaws,
I Would run through all, and make my way my self:
I Would fix them to the Axell tree of heaven,
Where their infectious Carcasses shauld hang,
Abait for flying spirits in the Air.
Canidia, I thank thee for thy pains;
Still may thy sacred Act reveal such deeds,
Still keep the gates of Orcus yawning open,
Make the dark powers ready at command.

Pyl. But let us haste dear friend, this vast worlds room*
Allows us none, but thy dead fathers Tomb:
Here Is naught but airs of death, no bed but stones
Our pillow's a dead scull, companions bones,
Thi's all our comfort, if we needs must die,
We have a grave prepared wherein to lie.

Orest. Now pale Tisiphone, O for thy Snakes!
O that renonw'ned spirit, that more then man,
Whom all the Trojan host could not o'rwhelme,
Murdered; but what brave warrier wore a crown,
By guilding a dire sword in his dear blood?
Hector, nor Priam, no, nor Mars himself,
Only his wife was his Bellona now.
O miserable valor, to escape foes,
And come for to be murdered of his friends:
O shameful conquest! O most coward Fate,
That a weak woman was competitor
In Agamemnons death: had it been any, yet
It should have been a Goddess at the least,
And yet snee's but a Queen, a mortal woman.
Were she a Goddess, I would make he mortal;
Dull coward that I am, and, worse then all,
After so many wrongs, yet unrevenged,
Their Palace now should fire o'r their heads,
And the huge beams dash out their guilty brains:
The roof, should fall on me, so't fell on them.
Begin revenge, and now perform an act,
May give a theme to all posterity,
Ever to talk of, fraught so full of horror,
Aegystheus and my mother, may with their's,
Yet none was ever greater, yes, my deed.
Revenge is lost, unless we do exceed.

Pyl. But a bad mother, friend, thou should not hurt,
The law of nature does forbid such thoughts.

Orest. Nor Gods, nor nature shall keep me inawe,
Why toward my mother, by heavens Parliament,
Who is most guilty, is most innocent.

Can. Shall I thus by some magique Art, my son,
Take both their pictures in pure virgin wax?
And wound the place where that the hurt should stand,
And so wound them?

Orest. Tush, this is too little.

Can. Shall I breed them hate?

Orest. Too little too.

Can. Shall I consume their children?

Ore. All this too little.
Hell and the furies shall stand all amazed,
Al^cto shall come there for to behold
New kinds of murders which she knew not yet:
And nature learn to violate her self,
I Will instantly to th'Court, and what I do,
My self will see done, yes, and act it too.
Thanks great Canidia, this black night being done,
Revenge now knows her game whereat to run.

Exeunt omnes. ACT. IIII.
SCEN. I.
Enter in state, Aegystheus: Clytemnestra: Tyndarus: Strophius: Electra:
Nutrix: cum nouo partu: Aegyst. Never but when a royal offspring comes
From a Kings loins, can he be truly King,
Then does he sit firm, rooted in his state,
Then is he truly man, and then the Gods
He knows do love him, which when Kings do want,
The curse of nature does deny them fruit,
And brands their bed with loathed sterility.

Tynd. Aegystheus, since the Gods have blessed you so,
Have care their blessings turn not to your woe.
Your joy, my daughters joy, and my joy too,
Have care it be preserved, and brought up well:
And take heed, son, of Agamemnons blood,
Pierce not with envy the Babes tender heart.

Aegyst. Tush father, now not without grief I speak
All brooks which from the Princely Ocean ran,
Are quite dried up, only Electra here,
Our dear Electra, whose great weight of love
Is in our balance equally so poys'd,
That she shall ever think her father lives,
Our heart shall be so parallel with hers.

El. Yes, great Aegystheus, were but our mothers will,
What she thinks good of, I must not think ill:
Besides, your love ever since my fathers death,
As (...)ame from his departing soul,
And (...) with had revived again in you,
(...) prospectiu for me, to see
(...)oubled, though the obiect's changed,
(...) a brother, if you please,
That I may challenge in your royal blood,
Here do I tie with all affections bands,
My self unto this Babe, which is as dear
Unto my soul, as were Orestes here.

Clyt. Daughter, your heart now with obedience strung,
Makes a sweet music sounding from your tongue.
Nurse, bring the Babe, give it Electra, so,
You daughter shall have oversight of it.

Nutr. O, shall I part from't then?

Clyt. No, good Nurse, no,
Electra with her care, you with your pains.

Nutr. Now by Lucina, had it gone away,
I should have sit, and sob'd away my heart;
It Is the sweetest Babe that ever Nurse did kiss.

Aegyst. Look here good father, look my nobles here,
Upon this Babe scarce crept yet out of earth,
For you shall grow an Autumn of ripe years,
When time has brought it to maturity,
Look on thy Grandchilde, Tyndarus, see, it is thine,
This came from thee, old man, see how it smiles
Upon the Grandsire, as if wise nature had
Taught him his kindreds names fore he came forth.

Tynd. I see it Aegystheus, and my aged blood grows warm,
As if my self were a new father made,
And all the blessings I can render it,
Shall drop like golden showers on the head:
Me thinks it does recall my sliding age,
And makes swift time retire back again:
It does unfold those wrincles in my face,
Which grief and years had fixed as their signs
Upon my brow, and now it shall be seen,
Althoug my hayres are gray, my joys are green.

Clyt. Long may our father his opinion hold,
And you, our daughter, let not sinister thoughts
Wrong your suspicious mind, though this being young,
It makes our Lord, and me to speak our joys,
Yet our affection and our natural love,
Is not a whit to you diminished.
A mother can be mother unto many,
And as from one root hid within the ground,
Springs many flowers, that lends sap to all:
So from a parents heart run veins of love;
Which, though to many, they without do flow,
Yet from one heart, one root, they all do grow.

Elect. I hope our gracious mother cannot think
We do suspect her love, witness this charge,
Which you have blessed my arms and soul withal,
And as your love committed it with care,
My care shall still defend it with my love.

Aegyst. We thank our daughter, come Lord Strophius, come,
Grief still sits heavy on your sighing heart,
Be frolike, learn of us, in all the grace,
And pleasure our Court extends, you shall have place.

Stroph. I thank my gracious Lord, time has by this*
Almost eat out the memory of our son,
And since the heavens let fall their dew on you,
And watered Argos with such springing hopes,
I will not seem a stock, incapable
Of such a general comfort, but revive
My buried thoughts, and for my Souerignes sake,
Old Strophius will a young man's person take.

Aegyst. We thank old Strophius, and if honor can
Keep thee still young, our Princely hand is wide,
And freely shall extend all graces on thee,
And you all our subjects, which bear part
Thus in our joy; and here I do proclaim,
And personally from my own mouth pronounce,
Sealing it with the signet of my State,
A general immunity to all
Murders, rapes, treasons, thefts, conueyances,
Which have been from the birth of our dear child,
In all the confines of our Empire done;
Nor shall your license date be quite expired,
Till the slow year seven times runs out his course.
Our self thus speak it; until then all is free,
Kings win their subjects by immunity. Exeunt omnes.

Manet Strophius, and Electra. Stroph. Electra, you are happy in your charge.

Electr. Yes, Uncle, and you happy in my favor.

Nur. Madam, shall I stay here until you come? comes back.

Electr, Yes, Nurse, sit down and sing, look to the Babe,
I Will only with my Uncle change a word.
Nurse sings. Lullaby, lullaby Baby,
Great Argos joy,
The King of Greece thou art borne to be,
In despite of Troy.
Rest ever wait upon thy head,
Sleep close thine eyes,
The blessed guard tend on thy bed
Of Deities.
O, how this brow will beseem a crown!
How these locks will shine!
Like the rays of the Sun on the ground,
These locks of thine.
The Nurse of heaven still send thee milk,
May thou suck a Queen.
Thy drink Jove's Nectar and clothes of silk,
A God may thou seem.
Cupid sit on this Rosean cheek,
On these rubie lips
May thy mind like a Lamb be meek,
In the vales which trips,
Lullaby, Lullaby Baby, etc.

Elect. You never heard from my brother, Uncle,
Nor from your son, they have been long away?

Stroph. In troth, Electra, I am in despair,
Almost of ever seeing them again;
Sure if Orestes live, and ever hear,
Unto what pass Aegystheus brings his state,
Seated him in the throne of his mothers bed,
And like to leave Argos hereditary
To his posterity, it cannot ever be borne,
Orestes spirit will endure no scorn.

Elect. Uncle, his long delays make me surmise,
Or he will never come, or come with prize;
He, if now come, he must not show himself,
But live unknown, unnamed, or change his name.

Str. His name, Electra, yes, and's nature too,
Which I do fear me he will hardly do.
But if we hear not from them now e're long,
I Will listen by some means about the land,
To hear of them; mean time you to your charge,
Officious duty must our lives enlarge.

Elect. Come Nurse. Exeunt.

SCEN. II.
Enter Orestes, and Pylades. Orest. O, here is the Palace under whose kind roof
My tender years were gently fostered:
But now the sight on it seems to strike my soul,
When I but think it holds within the walls,
The patrons of such lust incarnate devils,
Mere Pythonists, that fascinate the world.

Pyl. Nay, but Orestes, think now of your self,
Complain not of your wrongs, but seek to right them.
We might have lived in the woods still to complain,
And to that purpose we may turn again.
Whet up your former thoughts, and spend not time,
To rave, but to revenge this odious act.
We know they were their shapes, and no Chymera's.

Orest. O, Pylades, knew I thou art my friend?

Pyl. I hope you think it.

Orest. I do, I dare swear it,
So I dare swear it was Aegystheus, and
The dumb witch, the O, what things enough
To be an attribute to term her by.
The Clytemnestra, O, we saw her do it.

Pyl. 'Twas a black deed indeed, and past all thought.

Orest. O, hell it self has not the pattern to it:
Some stench, some fogs, vapors stop their breath,
Exhald from out the dampish womb of Styx,
Did ever foul, disastrous, friendlike hands,
Cast up so huge a heap of hell-bred mischief.
Were I to diue to the depth of Phlageton,
Or fetch young Ganimed from the arms of Jove,
To rend Proserpina from Pluto's bed,
Or take the vulture from off Titius heart,
And set it on my mothers, I Would do it;
I Will break open doors, and nayle'em to their bed;
Harka, revenge calls me, I, I come, I come,

Pyl. Nay, still outrageous friend, good now contain
Your heady fury in wisdoms reyne:
Harken to my advice.

Orest. I will, dear friend,
Thou have played music to my doleful soul;
And when my heatt was tympaniz'd with grief,
Thou lauedst out some into thy heart from mine,
And kepst it so from bursting; thou have tide
With thy kind counsel, as these loosned strings,
They should not crack asunder with their weight.

Pyl. Then listen now, the best plot I can think,
Is this: we here will live a while unknown:
Orestes, thy profession shall be physic,
I as your friend t'company you at Court;
Carry it neatly, learn a few strange words,
Palliate your woe a while, and coope up grief,
You may in time so minister to the King,
Physiques occasion fit revenge may bring.

Orest. Rarely invented, I Will speak Amphorismes,
Sublimed purgations, Quintessence distilled.
Each dose I give shall make a heart to bleed,
And prove a true Physician so indeed.

Enter Misander, having o'r-heard their talk. Mis. 'Twas my good Genius guided
me here now,
To hear conspiracy; wherefore I Will attach them.
Save you Gentlemen.

Ore. Save you too, if you please.

Pyl. Sir, 'twas small manners to interrupt our talk,
And give no warning of your being near.

Mis. Warning? you shall have warning, yes, I know
I heard you both, and understood your plot,
You Will turn Physician, Sir, and give rare glisters,
Shall work like Stibium, to purge out hearts,
You thought to act well true Physicians parts.

Ore. Therefore on thee our medicine first shall work.

Mis. Help, murder.

Ore. Nay Parasite I Will gag you, Stabs him.
You shall not fawn again, or wag your tail,
When the King nods.

Mis. O help me, I am slain.
Stop his breath quickly, if but he be dead,
We may escape the danger of the treason,
Nay he is silent; O but we are beset.

SCEN. III.
Enter a Lord and others at the outcry. Lor. Look out, me thought I heard one
cry out murder,
Some voice I am sure did disturb the court,
It was Misanders voice me thought that cried, Spies him dead.
And see he is slain; one whom the Kings esteem
Did rank among the best; there are the murderers,
Fellows, how durst you thus abuse the court?
Go, haste to'th' Kings tell him the men be here.

Pylad. Gentlemen, we as lovers to the court,
Came here as strangers, for to see the King,
This man being coming out, too soon for us;
And for himself used us uncivilly,
We have been gentlemen, though our Fortunes now
Have put on beggars weeds upon our backs*
Who answering in the same sort he proposed,
He struck us, and men cannot endure blows:
So thinking much to be struck again,
He grew so hot, he drw and made a Stab;
At which encounter both enclosing him
'Twixt us, he took a wound worse then we thought
To give, for we did think to have given none;
But since it is thus, we must appeal to the King.

Lor. Yes; and here comes his Majesty in person,

SCEN. IV.
Enter Aegystous, with a guard. Aegy A Guard there on us, here is murder don,
What is Misander killed our trusty servant?
Where are the villains?

Orest. O hold good heart, hark, hark, he calls us villains*

Aegyst What is the matter, speak, how came he dead?
They shall die two deaths, that did cause him one.

Orest. O I am now undone; he must sit judge,
To condemn us that should massacre him.

Pyl. Nay keep a temper, hold good friend a while.

Lord. My gracious Sovereign, these two be the men,
Which have confessed the deed:

AEgyst. Are you the men which thus abused our state,
Was It one or both, if both, you both shall die,
If one, that one, we are just in our decree.

SCEN. V.
Enter Clyt. Tynd. Strophius* Electra. WHat, is my Queen come here, to hear
the cause,?
We Will then ascend, and judge them instantly Ascends the throne
Or. O crack my eye-strings, let these balls drop out
Or the quick sights like darts fly to their souls,
And pierce their entralls; he King, my mother Queen!
The Briseis and Achilles, that in my dream,
We come to be condemnd amongst our friends,
I will to speak to them, Electra's there,
And Strophius your old father, Pylades.

Pyl. Show thy self valerous, overcome thy self,
If we be known, we surely are condemned.

Aegyst. Father, Lord Strophius sit and hear the cause.

Clyt. Why, my Lord, what is it makes the business thus?

Aegyst. My queen shall strait way know, bring them away,
Although it is not fallen out of our mind,
Of a free act or pardon of all faults,
Committed in the date of such a time,
Our hand of mercy must not be so soft,
To cover over with gentle lenity,
Such vlcerous sores as these; there is no place
For mercy left; murder must not find grace:
Therefore our doom is past, one needs must die,
Blood still for blood unto the gods will cry.

Orest Then, if thy doom be spent, great King here stands;
The man that did it, showing his guilty hands.

Pylad. O hold thy doom a while, it was not he,
His serious studies in the learned Arts.
Hearing acute Philosophers dispute
'twixt life and death, and of a future state
Would feign haste to it; but the man was I,
Believe not him, 'twas his desire to die.

Orest. No King, it is he which in his desperate thoughts,
Would loofe the bands betwixt his soul and him,
Ones self against ones self is witness store,
My self confesses, what would thou have more. kneels,

Pyl. Believe him not, upon my knees I vow,
These hands are only branded with the guilt,
And for ones blood, let not two lives be spilt.

Orest. And on my knees I the like oath do take,
I gave the stab, my dagger's bloody yet.

Pylad. That was my dagger King, he took't from me,

Or. He does me wrong, by heaven 'twas ever mine.

Aegyst. This does amaze us, I never yet saw two
Turns Rhetoricians so to plead for death.
Would not the pardon of this odious fact,
Like a foul stench, or an unwholesome air,
Send an infectious vapor through the land,
And choke up Justice; this fidelity
Should for this one time set two murderers free.

Cly. Now good my love, me thinks I pity them,
And prithee for my sake, I know them not,
Abate thy edge of Justice for this once.

Orest. O what she spoke, to dambe, it had been better.

Aegyst. My love, thou know I never look too stern,
Upon a fault that could ask lenity.
But this is so transcendant, and so great,
It must not be slipped without impunity,
To do a heinous murder, and in the court,
In The place of Justice, where the King might hear,
Upon a chief attendant of the Kings,
Murder it self is past all expiation,
The greatest crime that Nature does abhor,
Not being, is abominable to her,
And when we be, make others not to be,
It Is worse then bestiall, and we did not so,
When only we by natures aid did live,
A Heterogenious kind, as semibeasts,
When reason challenged scarce a part in us,
But now does manhood and ciuility
Stand at the bar of justice, and there plead,
How much the'r wronged, and how much defaced
When man does die his hands in blood of man,
Judgment it self would scarce a law enact
Against the murderer, thinking it a fact,
That man against man would never dare commit,
Since the worst things of nature do not it.

Orest. O how his words now rail against a sin,
Which beat upon his conscious thoughts within.
His tongue speaks fair, his inparts, look on them,
And they like Iury-men himself condemn*

Pyl. But O great King, if justice must have right,
Let me stand only guilty in thy sight.

Orest. No it is not King, 'twas I that did the deed,
And for my action, let no other bleed.

Aegyst. In troth this make my doom it cannot fall:
Will none of you confess? Strophius weeps.

Orest. Yes, I confess.

Pylad. No King, it is I confess.

Aegyst. How now Lord Strophius, what affect you so,
That makes your tears be wrayers of some passion.

Stroph. My gracious soueraigns, this strange spectacle
Renues the memory of my once great loss,
And my dear Queens, we once were blessed with two,
Which so had linked themselves in bands of Love,
As these men now do seem to me they have.
One stream of love did in two hearts so glide,
One with the other lived, with other did.
And would my Queen be my competitor,
For our sons sake my suits should join with her,
Since Justice craves but one, and both will go,
Even save them both, and right wrong justice so.

Clytem. I, good my love, let justice come and look,
If she can find in all her statute book,
Two men for the same crime should rightly die;
She will not say so, justice cannot lie.
And since they both will die, let ones love save
The others life, and so both life shall have.

Agam. In troth my Queen, and my old Lord have moved
Well, since your loves are both so strongly tide,
And friendship like an old acquaintance sends
To her friend, Justice, that she should be mild,
And looks with eyes of mercy, on your fault,
Considering our immunity proclaimed,
And such petitioners as you both have got,
Death in our sentence now shall have no part,
Whilst who should have done worst confession strives,
Too much confession thus saues two men's lives:
But now we must demand what you made here,
What business or condition you profess.

Pylad. Great King, our duty owes to thee our lives,
And were we men that strived to set a cloud
Before these gifts, Art has instructed us:
Or we have purchac't at a most dear rate,
Of cost and labor, yet thy clemency
Commands us to lay open all to thee,
Yet for my self I rather count my state,
Blessed that I lighted on this happy man,
Whose accurate and watchful indagation,
Has taught him for to heal the wounds of Nature,
By his exceeding skill in wholesome herbs,
One that when I did think my thread of life
Had been quite cut, did tie it up again,
And make it last: recald my youthful days,
And made me Aeson-like become thus young,
For which great practices I did owe my life,
And thence proceeded our late pious strife.

Aeg. Nay then I Am glad our mercy did extend
On men whom such rare virtues do commend;
Or love shall then grow greater, and our court
Shall entertain you, and't may chance we will,
My queen and I make trial of your skill.

Orest. My gracious sovereign, words must not have wings*
To pass and out-flye the bounds of truth,
Only to win the Elixar of opinion;
But for my friend does here profess so much,
And for my life do stand so deeply bound,
That all my Art can never make recompense,
Please but your graces self and your dear queen,
Appoint the secrets of the safest room,
To let me show my self to none but you;
Though Nature dried up with too much time,
Deny to spring in fruit from forth your loins,
Or any other strange impediment,
Or Art preserues from sickness ruining,
And 'twill be blessed to show it to a King.

Aegyst. Ha, prithee let me speak with thee apart.
Thou strik'st on tunes now, make me glad to hear,
We will commit our secrecy to thee,
Cans't water barren wombs with such a dew,
Shall make'em flourish and wax green with fruit?
Although we cannot altogether blame,
That Nature has been too unkind to us,
Yet we would plant each corner of our Realm,
With springing branches of our royal self,
To compass in our selves, and we stand in the midst:
Kings in their children do great blessing find,
And great men love to propagate their kind.

Orest. Great Sovereign, boasting words shall never outweigh
The things I will perform, I speak not fame,
But what I first have said, I Will do the same.

Aegyst. We like thy temper well, and we will trust,
Therefore this night we will appoint it so,
Thou shall be guided to our secretst room,
And there shall use thy skill; which if it take,
Or love shall honor thee for Physics sake.

Exeunt Aegyst. Clyt. Tind. Orest. Good heavens I thank you, your effectual
power
Has showed your justice in this blessed hour, They take Str. and Elect. back.
Now is occasion put, thus murder lays
The trap wherein it self, it self betrays.

Pyl. Old Lord a word with you,

Orest. and with you Lady.

Pyl. Had not you once a Son loved the young Prince?

Stop. Yes Sir, but Fates envied my happiness,
And holds both Prince and Son away too long.

Orest. And had not you a brother Lady once?
When heard you of him last? he went travel.

Elect. In truth I had, but I can hear no news. They discover themselves*

(...) O see my son, welcome my dearest boy.

Elect. Our brother, our Orestes is come home.

Stroph. It Is they indeed, O how my blood reuiues,
Let me embrace them, O ye'r welcome home,
Now is the Autumn of our sorrow done.

Elect. What silent place has smothered you so long!
Of what great power have you counsel taken,
Concerning the great plot you had in hand.

Orest. Uncle, and sister, we must not stand now
Embracing much, and bidding welcome home,
You see before I come, how things do stand;
My business hastens, and my friend, and I,
Have yet a greater project to perform:
Only Electra we must have your aid,
To help with their child, for now is the time,
When blessed occasion strives to help revenge.

Elect. Why brother, is the child in any fault,
That was unborn when that our Father did?
And it is a lusty boy: O hurt not that.

Orest. Tush, I must have it, it shall have no hurt,
Worse then my Father:

Elect. Shal't not, indeed.

Orest. Believe me, no worse hurt; but let us be gone.
I Will be tripode Paracelsian. Exeunt.

SCEN. VI.
Enter a Chamberlain, and a boy to sweep the room. Cham. BOy, sweep the
room, set each thing in his place,
The King and queen take Physic here to night.

Boy. Sir, and you will help me, I am ready here, They set a table.

Cham. Fetch them two chaires boy.

Boy. Yes, Sir,
What carpet mean you shall be spread a'th board.

Cham. That of red velvet, set the silver cups,
There may be use of them to take the potion: Sets two bowls
So, now all is well, the room is well prepared.

Enter Orestes like a Doctor of Physic. Orst. Is this the room, friend,
where the King must be?

Cham. Yes, this is the room Sir, it is the priuat'st, this.

Orest. You must avoid it then, and tell his Grace,
That I stay here provided against he come.

Cham. His grace shall know it. Exit.

SCEN. VII.
Enter Pylad. with a little boy in's hand. Pyl. I Faith Orestes prithee spare
the child,
It has no fault, but it is too like the mother.

Orest. Like my mother, O most execrable
Had ranked the confused Chaos of all sins,
Thou could not have found out a fault more black,
More stinking, more infectious to my heart,
Art like my mother, O transcendent crime!

Child. Some say I Am eyde like her, but in the face
I do resemble most the King my father.

Pyl. Poor babe.

Orest. The King thy father, yes, too like them both,

Ghil. Electra says I Am somewhat like Orestes,
Her brother that is dead.

Orest. How, like Orestes! when did see him child.

Child. Indeed I never saw him, but I love him.

Pylad. Alas, dear friend, see the pretty knave.

Orest. Would thou were not my mothers, I could weep*
But see, O see now my relenting heart,
Must now grow flinty, see my Father, see,
Now to show pity were Impiety.

Enter Agamemnons ghost passing over the stage all wounded. Ghost. Why flaggs
revenge? see thy now yielding soul,
Made me burst open my strong iawd sepulcher,
And rip the feare-cloth from my wounded breast,
O can a child smile blanke the memory,
Of all these horrid wounds, which make me groan,
In the dark cauerns of the vncoucht earth,
From whence I come for to infect thy soul
With air of vengeance, may make Acheron,
Yea, and our selves at the performance quake;
Fruit of our loynts, first vigor of our youth,
Look on these wounds, as on the Gorgons head,
And turn thy heart to stone, houering revenge
Is fallen into thy hands, O graspe her close
By her snake knotted front, and make her do
Things may incite a horror to her self.
Forget all, mother, in that disloyal witch,
Whose damned heat raging in strumpets blood,
So soon did condescend to murder me.
By all the rites of Father, I conjure thee:
By Atreus, Atreus, he whose reuengefull soul
Is echoed through the world superlatiue;
Do thou make Nemesis as great a feast,
And be enthroniz'd in her fiery chair,
In her triumphant chariot ever ride,
In which, Bears hurry her from the womb of hell,
And bear this Title as thy deserved hire,
The brave revenger of thy murdered sire.
Think on me, and revenge. Exit.

Orest. Stay, stay, and see it,
Stay Spright, thou strik'st no terror to my soul
For vnamaz'd I now would dare out-looke
Ranks of Medusa's, and the grim aspect
Of the most frowning object hell affoords:
Think on me, and revenge: yes, those two words
Shall serve as burden unto all my acts,
I will revenge, and then I Will think on thee:
I Will think on thee, and then again revenge,
And stab, and wound, and still I Will think on thee.
I have a dropsy now to suck up fumes,
And drink the reaking streams of vengeance some:
Great Agamemnons Ghost, I will be dew,
Thy hearse with blood in steed of brinish tears,
And build a pile up of their murthred truncks,
To burn thy marrow less consumed bones.
Arrows of forked lightning never flew,
More swiftly from the awful arms of Jove,
Then Nemesis black Scorpions from me.

Pyl. 'Twas a strange fight.

Ore. I, did thou see it, friend?
All of those wounds will I stick in his breast.

Pyl. Alas, one will be enough for him!

Or. I, but she shall have more, a while go by: Pyl. takes the child aside*
Were all the world their lives, the world should die.
Now Tragedy fetch out thy crimson robes,
And buckle sure thy purple buskins on,
Steep't ten grains deeper in their scarlet die;
This night shall give me now a deep carouse,
Of Clytemnestra's and Aegystheus blood,
And Cerberus himself stand by to pledge me,
Whilst to hells fire I shall sacrifice
Three Hecatombs; it does the furies good,
When ever we wet the Altars with such blood.
And now ye fiends of hell, each take a place,
As 'twere spectators at a first days play,
Raise all the hellish winds to expel nature;
Great Goddess give me leave now to forget
All strains of duty; all obedient thoughts
Die in me quite: a mothers memory,
Pious affections take no hold on me.
Be all my senses circled in with Fiends,
And let Erynnis hold her flaming brand
To guide my murderous sword; for all lights else,
Vanish from out this Center, be this room fraught
So full of mischief, may make the Fabric crack,
And let no time, now come into my thoughts,
But that dire night wherein my father di'd.
I Will only be a Doctor now in word,
Each potion that I give shall be my sword:
But I must change.

SCEN. VIII.
Enter Aegyftheus and Clytemnestra, in their night-robes. Aegyst. O Doctor, you
are busy for our coming: Ore. looking on the cups.

Orest. My gracious Lord, I had no cause to fail.

Cly. Nay, but is this fit time for physic Doctor?

Orest. First, Madame, for the physic that I give,
Now the diastall fabrique of your pulse.
Shows all your passions most hystericall,
Pleases your grace sit down? one at each end o'th Table.

Aegyst. Yes, must we sit, sit there my Queen.

Orest. Yes, now is Saturn, governor of nature,
In free conjunction with the planet Venus:
And just at this time, Jupiter begat
Great Hercules, Sol, Luna, Mercury,
In that Diameter, now favor propagation,
And now will my Alexipharmacum,
Stir the Analeptique veins and arteries:
If you out-liue this night, you will live to see
A royal, strange, and Princely progeny.

Aegyst. Think thou so Doctor?

Orest. Think it, nay, I know it: Hem.

Clyt. Surely he means to work rare Art upon us.

Egy. Pray God thy physique take.

Ore. Yes, it shall take. Hem. Pylades binds Clytemnestra to the chair:
Orestes, Aegystheus: Pylades brings in the child.

Aeg. Treason, we are betrayed.

Orest. Nay, it is your priuat'st room,
View me well mother, ha, do you know me yet?
Here, here is the drugs my Art has thought upon, Puts off his gown.
Be pitiless now Pylades, be my friend.

Child. O Help me father, else these men will kill me.

Aegyst. O my boy, my boy.

Orest. O, yee'r fast bound,
Yes, he is thine, thy face, thy eyes, thy heart,
And would I knew where Nature had couchd most,
Of thy damnd blood, I thus would let it out, Stabs the child.
And thus't should spirt in thy most loathed face

Aegy. O, now, the heavens rain vengeance on our head

Child. O mother, mother, save, me save me father.

Orest. Hold Pylades, be steadfast, for by heaven
He wounds me, that persuades me not to wound.

Clyt. O turn thy bloody weapon on my breast*
'Twas this womb that brought forth this Babe and thee*
If that be guilty, I have made it so.
Rip up this place which first did bring thee forth*
It Is I'intreat thee, it is the mother, she
Which gave thee house-roome here within this breast,
Upon whose dugs thy infant lips did hang.

Orest. It was my father, he entreated you,
Who many a time had clipped you in his arms,
Who made you Queen of Greece, yes, it was he*
Good Agamemnon, he did plead for life.

Aegyst. Bathe not thy hands in a poor infants blood,
Nor in thy mothers, I deserve to die:
And yet remember how my doom saved thee,
How easily mercy did obtain her suit.

Orest. Nay, but Aegystheus, you can aggrauate*
To do a heinous murder, and in the Court;
In The place of Justice, where the King might hear,
Upon a chief attendant of the Kings.
Murder it self is past all expiation,
A crime that nature most of all abhorres,
And look how manhood and ciuility,
Stand at the bar of Justice, and there plead,
How much they are wronged, and how much defaced,
When man does dye his hands in blood of man.
Now harken King, I Will use thy Rhetorique,
Thou did a heinous murder in the Court,
Not which the King did hear, but which he felt;
When no petition could (good man) prevail,
Therefore this dies, this first shall have his due. Stabs it again, that the
blood spirts in his face. Turns it to her.
This mischief done, revenge shall prompt a new:

Aeg. O, the Gods blush, and heaven looks pale at this,
A fathers face besmeared with his own blood.

Ore. My haste deceiues my will; tush, all this yet,
May be called piety, you shall taste too mother.

Cly. O, why dos't banish nature from his place?
Look on thy mothers teares' worse then those groans,
And pangs she had, when she first brought thee forth,
When of thy friends or parents thou have wrong,
Patience, not fury does to thee belong.
Is this the blessing that thy knee should ask?
Repay'st thou thus my kisses and my tears,
Which flowed from me to thee in tender years.

Orest. O why did you so banish woman-hood,
When you and this damned villain, base adulterer,
Made in my fathers side so many wounds,
And brought a brave old King into this state: Pulls bones from his pocket.
See, here is his bones, my pocket can contain
Great Agamemnon; and repayd you thus
His kind embraces? all his loving signs?
Aegysteus, you are thirsty, you shall drink, Fills two cups with the
Heniochus child's blood: gives it them.
Yes, you shall clear your throat, by heaven you shall.

Aeg. O mischief above mischief! what
Bred on a stony rock, could ever endure
To see a fathers thirst quenched with such blood?
Have thou no measure? has revenge no end?

Ore. Who first does mischief, may keep mean in the deed,
But who reuengeth, must all mean exceed.
Nay, mother, we will not bar you of your draught.

Clyt. O Nature, see here all thy law infringed
A mothers prayers prevail not with her son.

Orest. Pray with Thyestes, it shall never move me:
But first, Aegystheus, do thou haste revenge. Stabs him.

Aegyst. O, I am wounded, O when do thou end?

Or. Nay, I have scarce begun, now mother, you, Stabs her.
So now I Will stand and look, and on hell call,
Nay, my revenge must not be usual;
One more for thee. Aegystheus; only let out,
The blood you drank before.

Aegyst. O, my heart feels it,

Orest. Now mother you, and your love the same.

Clyt. O kill me quickly, time prolongs my woe,
And since I must die, let me quickly go.

Orest. You know your sentence, let him feel he dies.
Who strait threats death, knows not to tyrannize.

Aegy. This brings ten deaths.

Or. Would't would a hundred bring,
One death's too little to revenge a King.
Hence, hence, adul^erous soul to Tantalus,
And let hell know who 'twas sent thee thither: He dies.
Now, mother, you shall follow, but he first,
Lest that like lovers you go hand in hand.

Clyt. Why son, whose death is it thou do revenge?
Thy fathers? but on whom? upon thy mother!
On her which brought thee forth, which took most care,
To bring thee up, from whom thou tookst thy self,
You Are sure thou art mine, but do not know,
Who it was begat thee.

Ore. Will It Bastardize me?
Yes, mother, yes, I know I was his son:
Alas! why, what are you? a senseless piece
Of rotten earth can do as much to corn,
As you to me, bear it, and bring it forth,
But Agamemnon he that seed did sow,
And only unto him my self I owe:
And for him thou shall die.

Cly. O, I confess,
My conscience tells me, I deserve no less:
And thus thy mother from thee does depart,
Leaving vexation to torment thy heart: She dies.

Orest. Now friend, I see my father live again,
And in his royal state at Argos Court:
This is the night in which he first came home,
Oblessed powers of hell, divine Canidia,
Now am I satisfied, now has revenge perfection.
And nothing grieves me, but that Tyndarus,
My mothers father, did not see her dye.
I Will in and tell him, my thoughts must reveal
Those acts I do: this night who would conceal?
Now soul tr^umph, whilst that my deeds shall shine,
In The face o'th Court, and all the world know it mine.

ACT. V.
SCEN. I.
Enter Orestes in his gown: Tyndarus: Strophius: Electra: Pylades: two Lords.
Orest. MY Lord your daughters potion works most rarely.
The King's asleep, God bless his Majesty.
O: do not wake him, faith it is pity, la:

Tyn. What do I see? ha, blood? the little child
Dead; his daughter bleed, Aegysteus killed?

Orest. Your Lordships eyes do fail, it is but spilt w(...)

Tynd. Lay hands o'th villain, it is the Physicians de(...)

Orest. Nay friends, hands off, it is no Physician now: D(...)uers him(...)
See, see, old Tyndarus, do thou know me yet?
Fetch me my Crown and robes, nay, I Will ascend:
Is not Atrides eldest son your King?

Tyn. What have thou done, foul Viper, to eat out
Thy mothers bowels, what, was this thy deed?
Thy silence says 'twas thine, what Tanais
Tygris or Rhenus, or what flowing sea,
Should wash thee in the salt Meotis stream,
Or Tethis at full tide o'rflow thy banks,
Still would the spots of murder stick on them.

Orest. Why Grandsire, I go not about to wash,
By heaven, 'twas all the fruit thought to win,
To think all mischief here could be no sin.

Tynd. See, see, thy mother, look upon her now,
On her, whose eyes thou have for ever closed,
Which eyes have often wakned at thy cry,
And hushed thee with a lullaby to sleep:
See, see, these hands, which often with so much care,
Wrapped gently up thy unset tender limbs:
See, see, this face, wont at thy signs to smile,
When nature gave not leave unto thy tongue.
To utter thy child's meaning.

Ore. See, see these bones, these nasty rotten bones,
Which had so often locked his hands in hers;
Here stood the tongue which often had called her sweet,
Dear Glytemnestra, and then stopped his speech,
And told his love in a more speaking sign.
Here stood those eyes, which fed upon her face,
And made her of thy daughter, a great Queen,
And thee made him a dish for loathed worms.

Tyn. Suppose she did, there was but one yet dead,
And with ones death again should be repaid.

Orest. No, Tyndarus, had I desired but one,
I should have thought I had desired none.
Why, me thinks, I should too have killed thee,
The number is too little yet of three.

Tyn. Into what land, what country will thou fly?
All earths, all lands, all countries will fly thee:
The heavens will look with a more cherefull brow
On Cerberus.

Orest. Why, let heaven look as 'twill, it is my crown,
That I have done an act shall make heaven frown:

Tynd. O, what earth loves so much a guilty soul,
That it can bear thee?

Ore. Why, Sir, this is mine,
And this shall bear me. Am I not righ heir?

Tynd. Thou heir to kingdoms! thou a subject rather,
To help to make a Players Tragedy.

Orest. Why, that will make me swell with greater pride,
To think my name shall drop in lines of blood;
From some great poets quils, who well shall paint
How bravely I revenged my fathers death,
That is the thing I wished, and it is my glory,
I shall be matter for so brave a story.
But where is my Crown?

1 Lord. No murderers, we will rather join with him,
This old man here to take away thy life,
Then such an homicide shall frame us laws,
Who has himself rac'd out the laws of Nature.

2 Lord. Yes, and we will set here Argos Crown on him,
Who shall enact some punishment for thee;
Which although none can equalize this deed,
Yet what our griefs can think, all shall be done,
And we will forget you are Agamemnons son.

Ore. Why, think you upon your worst, I scorn to crave.
I had three lives, you but my one shall have.

Tyn. Then since vile wretch thou have committed that,
Which while there is a world, throughout the world
Will be pronounced for the most horrid deed
That ever came into the thought of man;
A thing which all will talk of, none allow;
I here disclaim that name of Grandfather,
And I must quite forget that in thy veins,
My blood does flow, but think it then let out,
When thou letst out my daughters; and since you
Kind Lords commit the state unto my years,
Years too unfit, heavens know, to bear a state:
My mind, me thinks, contends for to decree
Somewhat, which to my self I dare not tell:
Just conceived wrath, and my affection strives,
Hate forbids pity, pity forbids hate,
And exile is but barren punishment:
Yet let me banish thee from out these eyes,
O never let thy sight offend me more,
All thy confederates, and all thy friends.
You, Pylades, which did so smoothly cloak,
The damnde profession he did undertake:
You, Strophius.

Stroph. My Lord, I know not ought,
Yet, since one foot is now in Charons boat,
If it please you, let the other too afloate.

Tynd. Not so, but I will banish you the court,
And you Electra, come, I must forget
Affection too toward you, you gave the child,
Which you had charge of to the murderers sword.

Elect. Why Grandsire, I herin no wrong do find,
Since all these go, I would not stay behind.

Tyn. Nay, but no one shall company the other,
Hence thou Cocytus stream of this offense,
Strophius and Pylades, Electra, hence: Exeunt Stroph. Pyl. Elect.

Orest. Why farewell Grandsire, since thou bidst, I fly,
And scorn companions for my misery. Exit Orest.

Tynd. Unto this punishment this one more I add,
That none shall dare to give Orestes food,
And this decree shall stand; I speak with grief,
And here pronounce Orestes no relief.
Hence with these corpse; poor child what had thou don?
Thy Nurses prayers, that there might spring a rose,
Where e're thou trod'st could not keep back thy foes.
Some plague he has, but such a matricide
Should never die, although he ever did.

SCEN. II.
Enter Elect. and Stroph. Elect. THus never less alone, then when alone,
Where to ourselves we sweetly tell our woes,
Thou Uncle, chief companion to our griefs,
And sole partaker of our miseries,
Why do we live, when now it is come to pass,
It is scarce known that Agamemnon was,
He dies far easier, who at first does drown,
Then he which long does swim, and then sinks down.

Stroph. Nay Niece, me thinks I now do see the Haven.
Where my ag'de soul, must leave this tossed bark,
Made weak with years and woes, yet I commend
Unto my Son the heart of a true friend,
That Is all the will I leave, and let him know
Friendship should ever be, but most in woe.
And so I leave thee Niece, I first must die,
To haste a periode to this Tragedy. He dies.

Elect. O envious Fates could you not use me thus?
Have not I grief enough to burst my heart?
Was my life's thread twisted and knit so strong?
That the keen edge of all these miseries
Can never cut it off; Must I bear more?
It Is all my safety now not to be safe,
Are there so many ways to rid ones life?
And can I hit on none? they say that death
Is every where, and yet I find him not:
Tush, but I seek him not, why my own hand
Might graspe him to me, if I did but strive.
Now hand help ease my heart, and make a way Stabs her self
To let out grief, that has so long dwelt here,
Now knife tha'st don good service, there lie by,
Heaven well decreed it, nothing life can give,
But every thing can make us not live.

SCEN. III.
Enter Cassandra. NOw Priams ghost, haste, haste, I say to look,
With cheerful eyes on the sinister book,
And there to Hecuba my mother show
The tragique story of thy conquered foe.
And let Andromacha my sister see,
What Agamemnons race is come to be.
Now Troy gratify that most sad doom,
Conquered by those that thus themselus or'ecome,
Let Greece so flourish still, let Argos be
Puffed with the pride of their great victory.
Let it bear Soldiers, so withal it bear
Orestes too; now mother never fear
Argos makes me to laugh, which made thee weep,
The Trojans in the grave now sweetly sleep.
Their sorrow has the end, now these begin
To ouerflow themselves with mutual sin:
And after all, Orestes, we may see,
Has lost his reason, man's sole property.

SCEN. IV.
Enter Orestes furens. Orest. BY heaven you shall not, nay, I am decreed,
Do tear, tear me, yes, I have deserved it.

Cass. O brave, O brave, he is mad as well as I;
I Am glad my madness has got company.

Orest. Mother, why mother will you kill my father?
Then I Will kill you; tush, I have don't already.
Much patience will grow fury in time,
Follow you me, you beast, you damned Aegysteus,
I Will hew thee piece by piece, look of my mother.

Cass. I am she, or one loves thee well.

Orest. Out you witch, you witch.

Cas. Murderer, murderer,

Orest. Do whisper with the devils, to torment me,
O how they lash me with their snaky whips,
Why Megaera, Megaera, wilt not hold thy hand?
Are you there too, Erynnis? hay, all hell,
My Grandsire Atreus he stands fighting there,
But he will ha'th better on it; keep Cerberus keep,
Keep the fates fast, or all hell breaks loose.
Mother I see you, O you are a whore,
Did I kill you witch, do thou lash, do thou?

Cas. Why this is fine, my very looks do whip him.

Orest. Could I but get the stone from Sysiphus,
I Would dash thy brains out; O are you there I faith, Spics Stro. and Elect.
dead.
A bed so close with you adulterer,
I Will stab your lustful souls with your own knives. Stabs them with
Electra's knife.

Cas. O clap, clap, O rare beyond expectation,
Hold good heart, do not burst with laughter,

Orest. Will you not wake, sleep, sleep then your last,
Look how they flyi'th air,

Cass, I see them see them,

Orest. Why Jove, do mean to let them into heaven,
O thou art come down, and gone to hell,
Pluto, see Pluto he is afraid of them,
O spare my sides, my sides, my sides, the blood
O now you touch my ribs:

Cas. Hay, how he skips, O excellent, whips himself,
O sweet Catastrophy, does none see it but I?
Clap, clap, again, would all Priams sons,
And daughters were here now to help me laugh.

Orest. Lash on, lash on Canidia, arth thou there?
Why grandsire would it were to do again,
Nay Aeacus I fear no whipping posts, currentes Exeunt.
Laugh'st thou, thou witch? I Will follow thee to hell.

SCEN. V.
Enter Pylad. alone. Pyl. THus seeking others, I have lost my self,
My friend and father banished, and whilst I
Wander to seek them for to ease their woe,
I hear more grief proclaimed against my friend,
That none must succor, none must give him food,
And yet I Will seek him, and should all the laws,
That Tyranny should think upon, restrain,
I Would draw my blood forth for let him drink,
But O what is here? O I have found too son, Spies Stroph. dead.
One which I sought, my Fathers wearied soul
In sighs has now expired out it self.
Now O ye Sisters, your great task is done,
You never vntwinde what you have once begun.
Thus obuious to our Fates to our selves unkind,
We haste to seek, that which too soon we find.
Alas why do our souls too greedy burn,
To hasten thither whence we never return,
We run to it of our selves, though death were slow,
Should he come tardy, we too soon should go.
For the first day that gives us our first breath,
Does make us a day nearer unto death.
All this huge world, which now on earth so strive.
To morrow this time may not be alive.
Great Troy is down since Agamemnon fell,
Since my dear Father, which but now was well.
O art thou come dear friend, for thee I sought, Enter Orest.
Here Is some food yet, in spite of all the laws:

Orest. Wilt bid me to dinner Pluto, ha, with what?
Give me no snakes, I, I go, I go,
Up to Cythaerus top, I hate thy meat.

Pyl. Heavens! he is distracted, now does fury right,
When thus against her self, her self does fight.
It Is I man here, it is Pylades, not Pluto;

Orest. Ha, Pylades, I, they have banished him,
But grandsire look to it, I Will tear out your maw,
Pylades, Pylades I come --

Pylad. Why I am he, look friend, do not know me.

Orest. Yes, yes thou were with me when I killed my mother
And see, the Furies now would whip thee too,
Alecto look, look, here is Alecto too,
O Clytemnestra, hay, how the lion skips,
And Taurus he would toss me on his horns.
Look on the Ram, see the Bear roares at me,
And Charon he would fling me into Styx.

Pylad. He fears the heavenly signs, nay then now time
Has brought true punishment on every crime.

Orest. Dash out the puppets brains, the little boy,
The bastard, my mothers bastard: so blood, spin,
My mother killed my Father, killed the King,
But she got little by it, look on her breast
It bleeds, it bleeds; so, so Aegystheus, so.

Pylad. O what a strange distemper stirs his brain,
Thou gentle Somnus, in whom care does rest,
Kind father of cold death, and son of peace,
Which comes to Kings and poor men all alike:
Bind his disturbed brain, tie up his sense.
Let him but live to die; now it is not long
Before we both shall sing our funeral song.

Or. Ha, must I sink, can I not keep a loft? Falls a sleep.
What is the stream so strong? why then I Will diue,
And come to hell the sooner.

Pylad. So gentle sleep,
Thou gather'st up his wandering brains again,
This is but half dead, yet half dead he lies,
But it is not long; before he wholly dies. Music within.
Hark they play music; O these sounds do harm,
Enticing woe with their melodious charm;
These please not men in woe; these time do keep,
But miseries best falling is to weep.
Or stops are naught but sobs, our hearts we bring.
Whereon we pricked the soulefa which we sing.

A song within together with the music. Weep, weep you Argonauts,
Bewail the day
That first to fatal Troy
You took your way.
Weep Greece, weep Greece,
Two Kings are dead,
Argos, thou Argos, now a grave
Where Kings are buried.
No heir, no heir is left,
But one that is mad,
See Argos, have not thou,
Cause to be sad?
Sleep, sleep wild brain,
Rest rock thy sense;
Live if thou can
To grieve for thy offense.
Weep, weep you Argonauts, etc.
Pyl. Peace Music, peace, our plaints have louder cries,
A heart that is sad can never harmonize.
Grief cannot keep his time, all time's too long,
Sighs are best sembriefes to his doleful Song.
My ditties mournful though thou sweetly play.
Thus do we all even blow our lives away.
But do thou wake Orestes? is rest fled, Orest. wakes
Sleep never dwells long in a molested head,

Orest. Hark, hark the Furies entertain my mother,
Orpheus would fetch Euridice from Hell,
See, he looks back, would venture so thou fool,
I Would see my mother burnt before I Would go,
Why should thou bring her? she would stifle thee,
Stifle thee in thy bed as my mother did.

Pylad. Still harping on thy mother?

Orest. Harping, no,
Let Orpheus harp: O, I, she was, she was,
A very, very Harpie.

Pyl. Thus madness plays,
And keeps a certain measure in his words,

Orest. O I sucked out my mothers dearest blood,
I did indeed, O she plagues me for it now,
O I must go lie down in Tytius place,
Ixion too, he Sir would feign resign.
I scorn your petty plagues, I Will have a Worse,
O the vulture, the wheel, the vulture.

Pyl. See how his conscious thoughts, like fiends of hells*
Do arm themselves, and lash his guilty soul.
He see's no vulture, nor no Scorpion strikes,
Yet does his conscience whip his bloody heart,
He needs no witnesses, he has within
A thousand thoughts which testify his sin.
No punishment so strickt, no deadly smart,
As private guilt that smites on the heart.

Orest. I did, I confess I did, I killed them all,
Ripped up the womb that bare me; nay I did,
O Tantalus thy plague, some meat, some meat,
Who pulls thoseapples hence? let them alone,
Nay sink to the bottom, I will follow thee, Lies down to drink*
The rivers dry, my mother has drunk all.

Pyl. Alas, come, go with me, we will find drink.

Orest. Is Pluto's buttry open, his drinks too hot,
I doubt 'twill scald me, but I Will taste on it yet
The Eumenides stand to whip me as I go,
Nay I will pass you, I will out-slip them all. Exit currens,

Pyl. See in his conscience lies hels punishment,
Our own thoughts judges none are innocent. Exit.

SCEN. VI.
Enter 2. Lords. 1 Lord. WE that have here ben born to see this change,
May leave the court, and tell our children tales,
Of the dire fall of Inachus great house,
The young Prince mad, the Princess killed her self,
Old Strophius dead from grief; and murder heapt,
Corpse upon corpse, as if they meant t'inuite,
All hell to supper, or some Iouiall night.

2 Lor. Nay but my Lord this is most pitiful,
That the young Prince should thus from door to door,
Beg for his food, and yet none dare to give,
I saw him wandering yesterday alone,
Flying from every crow, or prattling Pie,
Crying out mother, and as if there had
Tormenting Furies following him with fraud,
And truth I thought to tell old Tyndarus,
To move his ruthful years to pity him,
And will you join petitioner with me,
We Will tell the cause, it is good to ease misery.

1 Lord. My Lord I like your motion, and will join
For Agamemnons sake my honored Master. Exeunt.

SCEN. VII.
Enter Orestes, Pylades, with naked rapiers. Orest. MY Fury leaves me, now I Am
at my last,
And now me thinks thou truly art a friend,
Now with undaunted spirit prevent my grief,
And let thy rapier drink blood greedily,
As if it loved it, cause it is thy friend,
Now rid me of my woe, thy friendly vow,
Never did truly show it self till now:

Pyl. Why then dear friend I thus erect this arm,
And will be strong to thee, as thou to me,
We Will look upon our deaths with better face,
Then others do on life; come Tyndarus, see,
We scorn to live when all our friends are dead,
Nor shall thy Fury make base famine be
The executioner to my dearest friend,
Whilst I can kill him, therefore spite of thee,
We Will free our selves past all calamity,

Orest. Yes Pylades, we will beguile our time,
And make him search through every nooke a'th world,
If he in all his race can ever spy,
Two that like us did live, like us did die:
But we delay our death, now bravely come*
And the last parting word shallbe strike home. they run at one another run
again

Pyl. O bravely rstook dear friend yet once again.

Orst. Yes at one thrust two friends must not be slain,
O, how I love these wounds, heaven dropping showers,
When the outrageous dog makes clouds of dust
Upon the thirsty earth, come not more sweet,
Then the blessed streams of blood, thy rapier raines.
Hence weapon: for my loins now scorn all props,
But my friends arms, O, bear good legs a while,
The weight of murder sits upon my soul,
And bends my staggering joints unto the earth.

Pyl. Haste, haste, I faint, but O, yet let my strength
Be Atlas to sustain the falling world;
Breath, breath sweet vapors of two trusty hearts,
And let our breaths ascend to heaven before,
To make a room hard by the frozen pole,
Where that our winged souls shall mount and sit,
More glorious then the Concubines of love,
Wreathed with a crown of rich enameled stars,
Leaving all ages to deplore our death:
That friendships abstract perish with our breath:

Orest. Fly thou best part of man, where Hecate
Borne on the swarthy shoulders of the Even,
Sits in agroue of oaks, till gray eye'd morn,
Bids her to throw off nights black Canopie.

Pyl. Will It die before me? Stay, stay, I come.

Orest. O graspe me then, our names like Gemini,
Shall make new stars for to adorn the sky.
Is thy breath gone?

Pyl. O, yes, it is almost past,
Then both together, thus we will breath our last.

They fall down dead, embracing each other. SCEN. VIII.
Enter in haste Tyndarus, Lords, with others. Tynd. WEnt they this way? my
Lords, you move me much,
Could I find him now, I would seat him new,
In his right Kingdom, which does weigh down me.

1 Lord. I see my Lord Orestes, and his friend,
Without your leave have made themselves an end.

Tynd. Then now is Argos Court like to some stage,
When the sad plot fills it with murdered Trunckes,
And none are left alive but only one,
To ask the kind spectators ( plaudite)
All else have bid ( valete) to the world,
The man reserved for that, is Tyndarus,
Who thus has seen his childrens childrens end,
His Grandchild, a bad son, a most dear friend;
The Scene must now be ouerflow'd with groans,
Each man sits down to wail his private mones:
One for the Queen does weep, one for the King,
All taste the bitter waters of this Spring:
The Nurse bewails the child, that part she bears,
All have their subjects to bedew with tears;
Each one yet have but one; but all of me,
Challenge a part in griefs sad sympathy.
Orestes, Clytemnstra, I must call,
These all for mine, thus must I weep for all:
Let none believe this deed, or if they do.
Let them believe this punishment then too.
It Is vile to hate a Father, but such love,
As breeds a hate to the mother, worse does prove:
Our life consists of air, our state of wind,
All things we leave behind us which we find,
Saving our faults; witness Orestes here,
Who was his own tormentor, his own fear.
Who flying all, yet could not fly him self,
But needs must shipwreck upon murders shelfe:
And so his breast made hard with misery,
He grew himself to be his enemy.
Thus grief and gladness still by turns do come,
But pleasure leastwhile does possess the room.
Long nights of grief may last, but lo, one day
Of shining comfort slideth soon away.
He, whom all fear on earth, must fear a fate,
For all our powers are subordinate:
Three hours space thus well can represent,
Vices contrived and murders punishment.
A Monarchs life can in this little space
Show all the pomp that all the time does grace
His risings and his falls, and in one span
Of time, can show the vanity of man.
For none of us can so command the powers
That we may say, to morrow shall be ours.
Now Fortunes wheel is turned, and time does call,
To solemnize this friendly funeral.
No force so great, no so disaster wrong,
As can unknit the bands which holds strong
United hearts: who since they thus are dead,
One room, one tomb shall hold them buried:
And as these friends joined hands to bear their Fate;
So we desire you to imitate.
Who since they all are dead, we needs must crave
Your gentle hands to bring them to their grave.

THE END.

