THE TRIAL OF TRAVEL OR, 1. The Wonders in Travel, 2. The Worthes of
Travel, 3. The Way to Travel.


In three books Epitemizd. By Baptist Goodall Merchant.

They that travail down to the sea in ships, and pass opon the great
waters, such see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. Psalm.
107. 24. Ignoti nulla, cupido. LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, and are to be
sold by JAMES VPTON, at his shop in Paul's Church yeard at the sign of the
Fox, 1630.

TO THE THRICE NOBLE And Illustrious Lady: prime seat of all princely worth,
Great honor of travel, Pattern of Piety and patience ELIZABETH.

Queen of Boheme, Countess Palatz of the Rhine, Duehesse of Bauary
Marchioness of Morauy.

These tripart trials of travel are consecreated by Baptist Goodall: in Hope
of her Honorable acceptance, with Wishes of joys External, Eternal.

To all the sons of Noble travail whether Merchant, Martial, or Maryne
Negotiators.
TO you the lively Characters of my muses Epitome (as more due) I present her:
not for shelter, but suruay, her sonets are in short the trophes of your
trauails: Antidots against oblivion, and the Aconite of skillesse censure.
Therein may ye reuise the wonders once viewed, the worths preconceiued, with
the ways of travail traced already: so doing scan how short you are of what
may be; as well as revive time of that has bin. Action is proper to you
speculation to scollers: what they Aenigmatically peruse, you personally visit,
now although she can neither much augment your notions, nor yet fortify your
Judgments by these her primortiues, so sub alternate to your sufficiencies:
yet hapily in the garden of her diversity* some flowers may selected no less
delectable then profitable, if not serve they as s^uchions pendant in memory of
more Iuditious observations: or ever dure they as pledges of an unlimited love
to all the Noble sons of travail, Such primly Whose wishes drilled her out
from pen to press I am not ignorant how our crittick can cavil, therefore
have I fortified her with divine, and Moral Ancient and modern marginals, as
little how our satirist in his Laciuyous textures confront the like Carpere vel
noli nostra, vell edetua, nor how the Tertullian will puff at her plainness, A
(...) faut point d'enseigne, alas deformityes in nature, are only ^dulterate
defects obscured deceptio visus fits homespune punies, not blades who pump for
their wits midd salt surges and have ^ur^ ^yed more countries thou the carier
countrytownes, my (...) (my present wife) is as plain as young nor less true
then uncommon please she you with her songs I am satisfied our speech by pa^
death proves silence what suruiues in abscence is writing either after us, or
far of, Quo lic^ at libris non licet ire mihi. she may speak when I cannot,
where I may not. I commit her to your custody, wishing your happy progress in
travail, with peace forever.

Your fellow trauailer, Baptist Goodall.

The Prologue to the General
THat our unwise domesticke many discern
With the Agrestick Travails worths to learn
And that Both may behold as in a glass
Pleasures of such who foraine parts do pass
Vnuailing so the vices of a crew
Who guess all things by them unseen untrue
I have in short set down my thoughts therein
Some credit to that choice estate to winn,
First from my own li^es who a small have seen
Yet better may the worths of travail deem
Then from the house bird, and the Dormouse dull
So from our critic, and the vnletterd g^ll
Now if as 't may be) the sons of Didimus
In Stoicke humor Daine not to believe us
Lo the Sacred writ will urge a credit to it
No Antidote but seeing else will do it
Divine, and Moral, Modern, and the old
All in her worths v^asked with us hold
The Patriarcks, Princes, Ptophets stories Churches
And worlds of more of all sorts sort with these
The Jews, Greeks, Turks, Moors, Indians: and we
All ages times, and states, there to agree
To Christian some, to Mortal travail all
Trovaile to every mortal must befall.
Ci^ill alone is now our muses task
Which ^he (by Zoilas leave) shall now unmask
Its wonder, worth, and way and plant from hence.
Canons dismount all homebred impudence
^pell their false avouch, whose trembling pen
Like Canaan spies disconsolateth men
Read all or none at all, do but as due
Thou't say though young and short, ^hee's plain and true.
Quem recitas meus est fidentine libellus
At male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus,
Martialis. The wonders in travail.
What time Iehove had all things ready made. Geneseos. 1. Adam primus homo
damnauit seenla prima, 3

The Sea, Land, rivers, winds the Sun and shade
The day and night, both foul and Firmament
Heaven and earth formed all to man's content,
Him made he then the microcosme of all,
Seated in costly Eden, whilst his fall, Qui facit magna and inscrutabillia
absque numero Eliph.

Makes him accursed of a Lord compleats
Insweat of brows adindg'd his bread to eat
And pilgrimewise henceforth on earth to wander,
Pacing about it as a crookt meander,
Thenearth for sin sustaines a whole delusion Oshominisubline dedit omne metam
1. caput.

And Nimrods plott produces tongues confusion
Sin, still and sorrow relatiues in us
We are to spend our days in travail thus.
Diuinest for sight armed the world with store nihil in terra Sine cansa sit
Job. 5

Of adhuments to travail long before
To this end we are the winds volutions framed
Which east, west, north, and south, by man are named.
To this end were both seas and floods prepared
As is in the Creations rule declared.
And so become the tongues confusion good Deus (...) totus quodenim togitat hoc
Loguitur and qvod loqnitur togitat Iren Lib. 2. c, 48.

One aids the other to be understood.
Yea hereunto was shipping preinuented,
Least intercourse twixt nations be prevented
Since man to sweat and travails destind here
So to consume in life day, month, and year.
It Is nothing else to travail but to breath
Travails ordained posterities bequeath.
It Is nothing more to travail then to live Qunti instit Liber, ^:

Earth cannot least reposd contentment give
Nor may the wise, or great, or fair, go free
But equaly the trace of travail see.
Travail tripartite prime to all the rest
Is mortal travail, all thus interest.
The Christian and Civil stand dependants
Both being on our mortal course attendants
Civil we treat of it is we understand
Man's state of intercourse by sea and Land
As they are destind here to undergo,
Great Jove in his degree commands it so.
To tell such wonders they at sea have seen,
His greater fames forgotten to redeem.
Of things unknown a Credit to procure,
And men to see his greatness to allure
Of natures rares indifferent of Climes.
To tell the worths, strange qualities and times. Vti beneficia omnibus horis
-- sunt consideransa Chrisostom:

Acquaint the earth with miracles unknown,
which oney are by civil travails shown.
And friendly chang of each lands fruits thus made,
Yea many thousands each way fed by trade.
Thus travails wonders first their maker praise,
Then add they store and sollace to our days
The form of civil travails thus prepared
Now shall its wonders briefly be declard
Not able to conceive the cause of much In mare:

Her miracles in her surueyes are such Microcosme

Each man's a wonder of himself alone
Much wonder may a man suruay at home
Much more in many millions disagreeing
Inform wits manors, nations habitts being
The invisiue deiety hearin disclosd Romans. 1.

Omnipotence in natures frame proposd
To leave says scripture man without excuse
When faithlesly men cause his powers abuse Psalm. 8. Qui desendunt mare in
nauibus facientes operationem in aquis multis ipsi viderunt opera domini and
mirab^llia sua in profundis:

Wise David first at heaven, then earth admires
From whence with wondering down to sea retires
Such as descend to deep (quoth he) such see
The powers of Iehova what they be
His fame is raised by every days success
The rudest region will explain no less
When men says he are tossed in the maine
So that their souls consume in sense of pain
Sometime are tossed to the cloudy skies,
Hence in a have hell low, her shipping flies
Billows carreyring toss too and fro
And wash her as a wherry high and low
Now pray they and their sorrow seeks an end
Past hope or help or harbor to defend
The stormy winds are stild, the men have hope
When in a calm the ship finds larger scope
The men rejoice, bless God, and well ariue
And in the midd of many perilles thrive
It Was sure a wonder Iouas under went
When he in travail crossed Jove's intent
The monstrous Whale should harbor be to him
Who in his soul had harbourd so much sin
Three days alive transported in his Chest
Yet all this time with life and safety blessed
Then laid ashore, out of his mighty power
Whose quality is solie to devour
Aegypts red sea to admiration parts
And from an ocean to dry land convert
Billows, are walls, they pass on dry foot ground Patientia dei 12^ annes
dura vit cumarca si^bat.

When Lo! their foes the Aegiptians are drowned
No less admired was the Ark of Noah
Prepared to travail in earths overthrow
The monstrous Generation, mocked his skill
How ere it was formd by God Almighties will
All earths indeluge he and his are fownd
Careyring safe in shipp, all others drowned, Solares est quae ^omines obsentes
presents facit Turp: de fit viciss Quibus pusumnusetiam abcetibus alloqui
August,



And by this rare inventions h^rbinger
The world does always with it self confer
Shipping ar embasies, he get relation
Through far remote twixt nation, and nation
Posts packing each way with intelligences
Garners to store mortals assure defenses
The wandrous arc anchours Ararats mount
Her docke, and now the nations recounte
Having a pattern how her like to build
Then from a future deluge still to sheyld
And I, make the waters passable they try
Phenicanus bow the first in history Naue primus as egypto damnus, aduenit
pliny

Egypt proceeds the Greek and many omre
Solomon trads to Opior for his ore.
Thus did divine prescience ships invent
Man's Chiefest friend, the temples ornament Reg: 1,

Our Lord and his desciples once at sea
Great gulfts arise and tempest ouersway
The shipp suckes billows as her only diett vide: Mark. 4. 38.

Makes the desciples fearful and unquiet
He wakes, they cry help master or we perish.
Often times thus fear by unbelief is cherisht
Christ gives the word and bids them all be still
And gladly they as soon obey his will
So that the faithless Jews are forced to say
Oh what is he whom winds and seas obey.
Examples move often more then reasons good
where sense and sight ar wholly understood monumenta aetotum Lest: L:

Lo! Last in paull his voyage is a wonder.
When sea and winds tear all their ships in sunder
Each boardes convey, and safe the people land Act. 27 20:

Ruled in the Love of Paul by highest hand
See now at sea the wonders trauail knows
Where God himself in omnipotence shows
Proclames a power exceeding other places Vbitung fuerit dei prouidentia

And sea above the land with wonder grace ^rustrautar vniuersa contraria^
August:

Next acts his matchless mercy greater part
And seeming death to long life does convert
Daily experience fortisies our faith
Should we surmise unsure what scripture says?
Our eighty eight Gibralter and the rest
Would with amazement scale our flinty breast
As thus on sea Jove in high wonder passes
So him in sea his creatures wonder graces Creatura miranda.

Witness the worlds of fish of various birth
When waters broad does simpathise the earth
Liuiathan Iohes wonder as a rock
But at a ship maiestickly does knock
His huge and massy beard whole billows brusshes Job 41 6. Corpus eius quscuta
susillia compactum se squamis se prementibus

He through the ocean as a whirle wind rushes
Or as an earthquake makes the seas to shake
Devouring shoules, and supping dry the lake
His sins plowe way in midest of proudest waves
Thus Neptune like he all the sea out braues
Puffes out a challenge, what can quele my might
Or who like me can on an ocean light
Forgetting how the sea man in mere play
Winnes him in sport, to throw his bulcke away
And drunkard like allies the Barrel ore
Till he appears naked one the shore
Now gald with darts that clouds of blood ensue
And die the nearer streams another hue
The slimy sea horse; and the Cow contend
Better then the terre^ themselves to send
Yet on the ice will wallouw in a rowte
And both brought Captive by the seaman ^lente
Men monsters and the Sirens rares to see
Yet on the waves such wonders daily be
Scene in the north and Southern hottest climes
Chifely the former in our latter times
The boulting sea hogg spouts against the storm
And will attend though wild sweet musickes charm
Whose consorrs Saluson, Codd, and Sturgeon be
Such in our native soil has primacie (...).

It Is said of sages not so old as true
That althings silent show Gods powers due
And that some works of his mirit admire
Rather then reason how and why inquire
His providence in heavens high influences
To the other regions else are sole defenses
Sunn, Moon, and stars, air, Earth, and sea direct
Order, dispose, rule, alter, get, protect
Their dispositions have effects in all
In sea, in sky, or earth, men creatures call
Their constant motion divine influx causes
The sea store has at large a share in these
A second earths store, as the shapes of us
So Brutes, horse, dogs; and all sorts wonderouse
Yea vegetiue and mineral appear
The sword, fist, pike, cuts, tortise far and near
All sorts by sholes in order know their like
Their forms so strange, men in amazement strike
For note as every Clime does various stand
The object Zones ruling the nether land
So every sea as is the Climes degree
Differs in Creatures shape and rarity
All which howere to home bred men unknown
Yet are in midd of travail wondrous shown
The rule of Reason is my argument
It brings in men (things near so strange) Consent
For a relation in one body rownd
Twixt sea and land was in Creation fownd
In Creatures kind though different in form
Yet cannot natures liknesse be out worn
This of the wonders on, and in the ocean
The fruits there off are only travails notion Cumfreta discuditrapidisque

See now the sea it self miraculouse
His height exceeds earths, and is fluctuos tumes^rre ventis and am circumdare
litora terroe metam Lib. 1.

Yet gives God says David to him bownd
Nor can earth by its ouerheight be drowned
A miracle exceeding common since
And wherein reasons proof is impotence
As is the cause of tides slux and retreat
Howere by luner motions made complete
This watery orb is various every where
Now red, then black, then yellow, greenish clear
Now hot and seethes, there ice mountes her cover vtque duae dexcaelum to tidem
qu si a^sira, part secant zon^, quinta^ stard en^^orillis etc.

Wonders best known by such as travail over
Five zones earths guards, the Equinoctial girt
Which under Climes still as they are Convert
Two frigid, one fire hot two temporate
Gouernd by the high Celaestiall fate
the differing seas, and seasons under each
How ere known part by speculationes reach Guide metam: 1:

Yet sights the sure, and teitruth of a notion
Not subject, to the pens unsure devotion
Travails adiacents more miraculous
Enable man to press seas reaches thus
The compass by his loadstone wonders chief
Yields in vnknownest paths a known relief
Teaching the steareman how to runn his way
And midest of Rockey billows take survay
Now sunn and stars are hid not to digress
In nauall calculations more or less Instrumenta naevallia mir^nda,

In course to Cape, I Will, harbor, stranger nation
But find the true rowmb, in winds variation
In midd of misty fogges secure to runn
Although in darkness and defect of sunn
Knowing and surely too, each Cape and Cliffes
where slatts, sands, shoules, safe harbors rocks or riffes
That Ephimerian callender a wonder
There astrolab, Crosstaff viewd asunder
Whose issues and effects p^sse home Conceits
Wherewith our seamen act admired seats Bernar in Cantic: 76

The Compass Card, scale limbs of every shipp
That plannifp here, and tranfames so be fit
In rarest art, suns horall height to know
And the altitude of every star to show
Northeasting, and Northweasting by a line
What way is made, which way the length, the time
The North star where above tho pole or not
Skilles wherein every home bredd proves a sott
My relation Hebrew, he athen Greek, yet know
It Is now my talk sea miracles to show
Suns surgere gresse in every latitude
Harden then heera at home ar to conclude
Each lands dimension length, and square and site
The solar progress, every where his height
Tides in all countries by the moon to find
Their flux and reflux, and the depth they wind
Timly meridian, solles true Declinations
The North stars power, Globes rule in Nauigations
The pillotts art his Chanall sownds, quick view Vesputiones Ano 1499:
Collumbus: Anno 1492. Darcus Anno 1579. In learning advancement. Magell anus
1520: Candish 1587

Lo! from these fruits our voyages accrue
Amazing earth in great discoueties made
Enriching Europ with a potent trade
Thus every way at sea are wonders shown
I will not name discoueries well unknown
Those new found Gulphes: exacter reuolutions
Collumbus, Drakes, or candishes conclusions
Vesputius Norts or Dauis nouigatianes
For earths pacts latly rowue by many nations
The through lights by travel made are clear
Through which our new world does to the old appear
Amerricca her sisters three scarce knew
While travel brought them to an enter view
And now acquainted both in admiration
Honor, and use as briges Navigations
Thence to the skies high wonders travail sees
Cosmographies the plott discouers these
The leven heavens, Circular effects
Trauail in all her wondros dessects
That Zodiac, his twelve parts operation
Discrepant to the subdependent nation
The Equinoctial change, earths axaltree
Embraces differently her orb ye see
Here stars both fixed and motive alter Case
Wondrous in act according to the place
The four winds Rhouts, and thirty two partitions
Eclipses solar, lunar; such positions
As these are plainly writ, I need not say
The worths in sight its sure, beyond denay I am quod videtur sciri potus quam
credi dicitur.

For so much as the thing is fancies better
View passesse reading, its contents are greater
The heavens declare Gods glory, Heavens power
Is picturd in earths woundrous parts each hour Gregor in Euangeli. 32.

Earths miracles in traveling are more
Since the Almighty formd here greater store
That so the sons of men in admiration Terraemira.

Might pass to view from nation to nation
Varieties still added to desire Terra vires vrbesque gerit frugesque faerasque
fluminaque hec superest Caelisulgentis. Imago met: Lib: 1.

Filling the greedy stranger with admire
The men, towns, fruits, rivers and brutes all Change
Turn any way in travail things are strange
Geography treats most of arts hearin
But travail only sweet of sense does winn
Earths sipherall orb both i will and continent
According to their sits are different
Complexions to the Climes do bear relation
So is in men a diverse propagation
How full of miracles is nature now
Which every way such difference can allow?
Men's statutes, colloures, hair much different
In humors, and in manners diverse bent
Our Northern clear, the Southern swarty brown
That's merry plain, this cunning bent to frown
Ons frolic other sad and dull of spirit
Thus diverse Climes their diverse breed inheritt
Europe the Queen though least of sisters four Ad me undum foc^etatem home
natura ferter sua Aug. De ciuitat Lib. 19. cap. 12.

Greatest in fame, in arts in wits in power
In wines and mines high Garmany exceedes
As Mosco Beauers, and the rich furr breeds
The Belgic fish, and linen, a iarring nation
Yet much suprasseth most in navigations
The french her wines, and silks of Itally
Spaines fruits, rich ores, and Irons raise her high
The Danish tackle skins, and whales suplie
The Norway plankes, firres furies, and fishery
The polish flaxes, Sweadish Brass, and mast
The Turkey stuffes Hungarian coppers Cast
The florence silk, Beams Buffe, moluccoes spice
The British wooltrin, lead, corn, cole of price
Sicillian Coralls sugaries Candie wines
Zauts Corrants, and the venice Muskadines
The Chinaes gould, pearl, musk, and Iuory
The Indian silk, and mines of ores supply
Behold the diverse store each land affordes
The wonders in creations due the Lords
Each land in worths to wonder disagreing
In nature, color, quantity and being
Hence may we wondering in a higher strain
On trauells stage admiring mount again
Scorning the least of lying wonders told inhil^minus i am Obsequium amicos
veritas obuim parit. Terentius.

By sicophants to object baseness sold
Telling of foothigh pigmeyes, doggeard men
Blue black and yellow collored, called by them
Out scoggin, skinke, and like to these in credit
Fables, ales hate, travails eiection merit
What need fond men, the vulgar be deluded
Or yet the Lord of nature be abused?
His names almighty in true wondrous things
And truth alone sound satisfaction bringes
He Is truly great in all, abhorres all glozing
Dishonourd much by each false tales composing.
Yet wants no fame; the little ants a wonder
Much more those many thousands all out number. Edifficia miranda.

Id circo credere debemus que non vidimus vt videre me reamur quae credimus.
Hug: victor cap: 1.

De fid invi^:



See but some rares in fabrickes admiration
Duly attends on some in every nation.
That Chinan wall twelve hundred miles in length
Their mighty cities and, vnuoted strength,
Those Piramids of Egypt twelve miles rownd
And fifty cubitts mounted from the grownd
The tower and walls of mighty Babylon
The Capital and ruind worths of Room
The venice fabrics, Cayroes circle strong
The spannish bridge admired three leagues long,
As these the creatures vegetiue excel
And sensitive their alterations tell,
That Indian figtrees an admired thing
Whose touch to earth causes a world of spring
Breeding a long atracke of mighty store
Ones brood often Carreyeth a furlong ore,
Those silver sands, and peatlie veins distilling
The spanish with their matchless treasures filling
The olive nutmegg, and the cloves are rare
And may with Mirch, and lemond well compare,
Land Creatures wonders in the Ellephant Creatura mirada.

He most for massy fortitude does vaunt
Able to tuggship laden in a calm
And fell the Dragon with his massy palm
Carry a fort of Cannon, understand
Yet willingly obey his guiders hand,
Writters admire at fieirce Rhinoce rosse
His horn, said the mightiest can toss
With glassy scales encounters greater things
And to the new beholders terror bringes
Poor muskcats ciuer as a rare received
The Bezar, ambir, rubies rares conceived
But the Camel Leopard hatches an admire
In all that to the Southern poles retire.
A Composite, two natures mixed we see
Bearing to both an equal Simpathy
The cruel Dragons' fell devouring iawe
The serpent makes his venamous sting his law
Both lurking close in rocks of desert springs
And an affrighting of the neighbor things,
The Crocodile whose teeth in sumder sharke
Making decision limit to his mark Numquid ^volet R^moceros, tibi s^ruire? aut
morab^ur is ad prae sepe tuum. Job. 39.

Hatched of an Egg oh wonder of admire
To all in travails in the torrids are
She men and beasts often by land deuoures
More fish in sea and rivers ^ue his powers
Yet often the musket meet his high attempt
And with his ruin does a hurt prevent
Strange Armadillo armed round about
Scales has as Iron with, a swinish snout
Teeth cruel bent, yet help his bones to Cure
Whose rareness travails view does often allure,
But should I pen the tenth of all the store
The things some see; good writers record more
Nor paper, pen, nor skill could sure suffice
Let us hearin with modesty be wise
Instancing truths, truth bears the only sway
When worlds of extant fictions decay.
Our days are short suppose no one has had
A view of half in progress of his trade
Each what it is add truly to the store
Of wondrouse brutes now say my muse no more,
Omit the Lion, Bear, wolf, unicorn
The Elck, and Estrich, and the Heart, forlorn
In wildernesses with the Leopard pacing
And with the Tiger travails wonders gracing
Pass by the Eagle, faulcon, para, kite
And fly the tortoise, and the Rockfish sight.
And add to these as different conditions Tot species tani tosque ortus
varosqueuouatus ipsa clies apperit conficit ipsa dies. Ovid: Amorum.

The Spanish pride, and insolent ambitions
French, and Itallien lust, and light conceits
The unbelieving Jew in close deceits
Dane, German, Pool, Norwegian Russe, and Duch,
Tainted with cupping clownishnesse as much
British how bold, how various, belly bent
Turks cruel, chinenses maleuolent, Germani multos possunt sufferre labores o
vtinam possiut tam been far sitim. Vt nos dulce me rum sic vos venus impia
turbat; lix ventri imposta est Iulia nalla mere. Vestitus varys.

Rude Indians, and Tartarians Idolizers
The morish black Barbarians bloody mizers,
The west, and southern soyles to lust runn madd
The East, and north, in drunkenness us bad.
As natures illness diversely does vent
Having in climes peculier extent,
See how the habits men, and women wear,
Vary to admiration every wheare.
The Russe his furd long Coat slopt, Collers bears
The Dane his pointed buffes, wives wreathed hairs
The German Iumphre huicke, Crague hull, and Copp
The swedish mustzell, and long flemish slopp
The french all puffes, naked Itallian vailes
The Spanish bagg fleues, Long sauoyan tails
The Irish rugg, welsh freez; and highland trouses
The British proteus, Course norwegians Couses Ciuitatum varic tas.

Where ere in travel thou arrive thus see
One named for worlds what various habits be
Fabric of realms, as fashions alter much
One used hear of wood; Brick, with the Duch.
The Geanovoijs guilt, leaded marble frame.
Venice for fite and glazing bears the name.
Mad rid his fiery wall, St. Lawrence grace
The Ancient Roman edifice, high race
Cayro and Paris greatness, Londons plenty
The famous neatherlands structures no place empty
Antwerp, and Culloyne,, temples goodly site
This handful for the heap in travails sight.
One passing still another in some rare
Wherein alone he triumphs past compare,
But that the wisest God may seem more high
Heel mix his honors with diversity,
And time the Epoch pass their fittest birth
And when and where dispersed to be one earth
One land this graces, and another that
Yet the supremist worths not to relate
If one way Spain passes for grapes our i will Societatusub lata omuis cuitaest
suqlata Ciiucunditas. cero: de Amicitia.

In food, and cloth we more then countervaile
If India pass for ores and pearls the Duch
Their nauies pass the Indian as much,
If china, sends with Turkey silken store
Our sheep clad, and our benes feed thousands more
If Norway whale, Ruff furr, and swedish brass
By steetes in trafick to the western pass
They turn gould, wine, and fruits of contentation
So might I instance much in every nation
One succors other, traficke breeds affection
The whole is gouernd by the high protection.
For winds, seas sky, and travel all agree
To frame one earth a just conformity
That nature hots, and coulds may be suffied
And every parts commodities be prizd
And all men muse to view Earths aged form Solemaenum do videntur demerequi
amiciam. Sieve qui auitam incundam nullo modo habere passvmu^s Cicer: de
Amicitia.

Triumphs in travail more; as less out worn
Thousands unseen assisting one another
And the Barbarian rude the Christians brother
This harmony in nature, and each nation
Hatched by travails howrely propagation
Nor war, nor iarr, can totally mollest
But some way find they mutual interest,
Ordaind to fit in all parts man entire
Begetting travails wonder, our admire,
Whereof hours much more might instancd be
Yet I conceive enough in what we see
The wise may by the model judge the mass
So speed my muse to travails worths a pace
In sea, sky, earth, fish flesh; reason and sense
Lo! wonders of divine omnipotence
Some scatterd each way; travail must discry
And industry, and wisdom move to try
Occasional wonders these attend on time
And we for them since none can pre divine
In Christian travails, an almighty hand
Protects his Church, and Children in each land
In mortal travails steard by force of fate
Men may presume but no way can rebate
What strange effects they are allotted too
What wonders they are destind here to do
Life it is a trauile through earths sea of woes
And miracles does Christian state disclose
Neither the matter of my muses song
They to divines and moralists belong
And my discourse of civil trauails worth
After her wonders let her utter forth
Prostrating so his self to travails friend
So much in short of wonder makes an end.
Aut face, Aut tace.

The worthes of travels.
CAuses fortunne effects Logitians say Est enim iustitia Vnicuique Suum
tribuere: cic: de officijs.

Ignorantiae duae Filiae falsitas and Dubietas, illa misereor, ista
miserabillior illa peruitiotior ista molestior Austin



As subjects ever Lead their adjuncts way,
Though trauells worths are in wonders shown
Yet by her rare effects she is better known,
Justice say sages is to give each right
Oppon its worth apparent to the sight,
Worth must be known, ere't can be justly prizd
In ignorance it can but be surmisd.
The fruits then seen pluct off the fertile tre^,
Can best express it is worthiness to thee,
Commit it to the taste of any man
Thens no more need it is excellency to scann,
Pleasures, and profitts Commonly are cross
And the, gain of one is still the others loss,
But if they in one subject met agree
That never faild to prove a raritie,
Behold heers both, and larglie too extended,
Whereby earths seed from ruin is defended.
Profits abayte t'allure the thrifty mind
Though he small pleasure in the object find,
How trauail suits in both is admiration
Man's wit, and wealth of these a first relation
The wise terms wit, a silver gliding stream
The wits of nobler natures it is I mean
For there is the cause the earthly minded lake
Nor will nor can of travails worth partake,
Such wits I say still flowing from the fountain
And inbred vigor of the holy mountain
Natures remains more clear by graces shine,
Both by assistance influence divine,
Still throuh the nations current are more pure
By sunnc^re^^ne, made active to endute,
Man's wit and fence by travails daily tried
Remain by issue still vnputrified,
Oath harmony in diverse wits accord Officiisvitae humana Constat mutuis
omnisque ratio and insti Cutiovitae qumanae adiumenta desiderat cicero off.
Lib: 2.

Never Could Clime all sorts Comactt afford,
Lands must be loving borow much of each
The nearer wits perfections to reach,
The God of nature calls for mutual trade
Diuersicie this enter course has made,
The Stoic Jew loves of the Christians learn
And we in them frugallity discern
The Could dull northern practice western wit
And they a true plain hartednesse in it.
The rudest Indian manners of our planter
His heathen skill became our trades aduancer,
The orphean music with Itallian dwelles
The Spannish linn^ing every way excelles,
The deep Giunosophist, the Captive grecian
The paracelian phisicks with Venetian,
The Expert Pool, and Pertian horst in war
The prying Crees his judgment of the star
In some all pass that none may be dejected
But none in all that all may be respected.
As arts inuentors here and there abide
That they might be to all always discried
When the decree aginst, Lewd earth was past
And God by waters meant the Earth to wast
He then instnicted Noah first ship to build
Both him and his from waters force to shield
The eye of man Could not forsee the worth
This rare art does posterities bring forth
By it earths spacious kindred Comes acquainted
And Christian faith midd infidels is planted,
But not Enthusiall, but by practice skill
Men Nauigations miracles fulfill
A rarat mounts taught the Phenicians how
A second arc by Industry to bow,
Hence Egipp, next it to the Greeks extends
Who add the Deckes, ones art the rest befriendes
The Creet, then Carthage hence the Roman next
But providence assigens it to them next.
And winds transport a ship of Tire to them
So are the Romans made sea fairing men, Cret^nsis n^scrit peligus.

Become sea masters, whence our Britain learnes
Belgickes french, spsnish all the art discernes
Behold the fabric out of diverse nations
As this so other arts have propagations
Ciprus the large, Illyrians the Bark
Rhodes forms our frigates; nay the tackles mark
Beotia ores, Dedalus mast and sail
Which bred first poets fond I Carian tale. (...) nibus grande leuatur onus.

The Tuscans ruder, heime and stern invent
And stearing from skild Typhis first descent.
Lo! now the lot is every way disposd
We see some here some there of arts disclosd Icarcus Icarijs, nomina dedit
equis.

The wise may by his matter judge the mass
And see Gods goodness clear as in a glass.
The issues they shall force thee to believe it
Worthy to tell, and try true travails credit
As Noah and his survive by this innention
And Solomon at Ophirs Long desceusion.
Whence he the temple ornaments did bring
Gold, pearls, and Jewels, worthy such a King
So since the new world and the old shake hands
And friends are found in many, foreign Lands
wilt man be witty, then thy days deuote
or some of those some traueld worths to note.
For travails fruit is reapt by obsuruation eorum filij nos dicimur quorux
actiones imitamur Grigeni^ ezeck homi. 4.

And there is a several Cropp in every nation.
For all men's genius some way Chiefly bends
It to accomplish some way he intendes.
It may he thine cannot at home be sitted
Some artists prove elsewhere, far sharper witted.
The handmaid travail brings you both as friends
So now ye purchase your desired ends.
Thou shall suruay behauioures of a world
All in exact diversities in rowld Hec ediseas and vigilare Laborare Solon.

Cull out the Choice of flowers in the feilds
So deck thy wits with that each climate yields
Sweet pleasant savors of their virtues love
And noisome sent of vices disaproue.
So bring home harvest with the ant with thee Equidem exempla multa docere
Possu^t.

Which in thy gray hairs may a sollace be.
Come to the proffits next each state enioyes
By just Comerce, and travails Counterpoise
How as in man each member aideth other
So over earth each Climes suports the the other
Earth never knew it self while travel rose Ovid: am^:

Which did it self unto it self, disclose
Man's mcrocosme can scarsely be accquainted
But Brutall be from rational disionted.
Loose in himself himself his heart unknown
Though in his midest but to his god alone
Much more the Globe, howere the Globe is round
Thousands of Angls mere unknown a bound.
One cannot aid another while unseen
Travail the prospect medium between
A tripart lamelesse Long possessed its form
Whilst by the force of enter view outworue,
In reasons order it was adjudged rownd
But which wayt only it was by travail found,
Long time past Assia vaunting all alone
She only she in scriptures travail known
While africa ascends on Churches stage
And does it self for E^ropes search engage.
Down to the Romans yea to Spain it comes
And so to Britain hither to her homes,
Thus in a glory travails the most high
O^e earth with that his Arc triumphantly
Britain and thule vngill accounted last Christoprero columbo, deind
Ameri^oue vesputio vnde and Americiae ^omen fortitur.

When we abroad the earth as scumm were cast
While latlie Lo! as Light^ing trauils flies
And then a fourth America descri^s
With worlds of wealth and mines of ore repleate
And all but man, wild man there vncompleate,
Sweet trees, raie gummes, rich ores and liluer sands
In length and breadth surmounting other Lands. Dubartus.

Collumbus and Magellian Prowdly venetrd
Then Drake, vespuritis and our forbish enterd,
Peruana and the Mexican are cleard
But the south regiones what they are unheard Terra Australis Incogn. ta est.

The worlds of wealth thence to our Lands acc^ue
And the many fertile Coloines ensue.
In many large discoueries is declared
An therefore shall in my discourse be spared.
I only aim the wealth trade bringes to tell
All as one household ruld by fate to dwell.
Europ the chiefest right by travel tries
Fix one those Indies your indicious eyes.
Virginia, and Bermudaes, Britain plants
And Spain in her west Indian highness vauntes.
The Northern riches; whales and fures brings home Vt enim Solitudo in
odioest, ita in dulcedine and appetitio sodalitalis S^nn ep. 9

Things to our fathers, and to theirs unknown
And we the flemish French and all crept in
A part in Spaines rich Indian soil to winn
As lands so Cities yea and men are made
Potent by trauile, and recourse of trade
Whence comes it princes scorn not merchants style
By it their Cosers they with substance pile
For as of war are silver strings the ties
So it by trade and travail must arise.
That prowdest monarck who the whole Earth claims
And would have Earth called Gods stild only Spaines
May make a Saint of travail for his ore
Ere those adventures, never prince more poor.
It Was Tire, and Memphis privilege so great
That holy writts their merchandise repeat
The Haven Low become now highlands better
The I Will though but a blott a whole lands greater
The merchants warchouse as a princes store
Some states in rule are rich in venture more.
Some use them as supports in a relation
On to the other mutual propagation. Quantum quisque sua numorum seruatin arca
tantum habet and fidei.

Defensive potence makes trade better thrive
As trade preserues a potency alive,
No in stance but the Netherlands, and hantz
A mutual knot, their welfares to advance.
Trafickes true nerves armistically mixed
And twixt marine, and land end avoures fixed
No way mechannieke for a boore to know Impiger mercator Horrace.

Nor mind I merchants mysteries to show
Yet who Denies those mystery of exchange
(If able to be sounded) show how strange
The proper subjects are themselves should know
Nor any else how goes it high or low.
How rich to states ye nether Nobles say, Omnia adiues habet nam
praestrantomnia numin. 1. Marcell.

Who her with can Spaines magnitude or sway;
And Countercharme his indies by your tra^le
And the victorious fleets by flemings ma^^e
Nor dare I bank our eighty eights defense
Though primely due to high omnipotence,
The Noblemeane wear ships of victory Martius aduerso dux strennus obv^at
hosti quandr sub hac veluti palladi bella gerit. Matheus leiueruill vbi:

Mixed with adventures ost tried v^liancie.
What agents he who travail never knew
Wanting such parts as tradings worths a true?
But by a broker in a foreign soil
Become mere slave to forrainers beguile.
See cities clad with shipping as a robe
Whose natives send to search about the globe
How fraught with riches, both of soul and mind
He that perceius not this is wilful blind
Sugars and wines we from caunaries have
From Florence silks, from Naples satens brave.
From Candy Currants Oil and muskadine,
From Indies East store of all spices fine
Arabian odoures, sweet, and ^ubaes ore
From the Could russe fine furs and fishes store.
From Newfoundland, the norway firr and flax
The swedish Coppers, Cordage ambers wax,
The flemish hope his linen flanders say. Volupias nonnisi varietate confistit.

Our british stores we know no more suruay
The sea wind weather shippings stores and sail
All iump the worthes of travail to avail.
So that in short it serves the sons of men
No more of trauails profits needful then
Now forits pleasures, pleasure it is to tell.
Those multitude that do in travail dwell.
Both soul, and senses mutually filled
A secret solace in them both distild
Christ's cross a modellis of what we say
It Is a mere travail passing all denay,
Wherein (as Paul) the christian is assaild
With many woes, to virtues lot intayld
Yet Lo! as he in all becomes victorious
And joys in sorrow, by abasment glorious
Tramples on sin and sorrow by an aid
Which makes the fell infernal curres affrayd
Of this to come, as man all for content
Poor man his curses bitter would prevent
By various objects relishing his toil
Whereof he finds out some in every soil
His senses servants to his will desire
Nothing so much as novelty require,
Wise Solomon saw this when once he said
My eyes with seeing is not satisfied
Nor tongue by taste, nor ears with hearing filled Et deprendi uihill esse
melius quam Laetari in opere sua and hane esse partem illius Eclesiafies.
Delectant alterna magis vetitisque potiridulcius and sordent qua possunt semper
haberi: pallin.

Nor nose by sents, nor hands by touching stild
Yet is men's solace here below quoth he
To prove what pleasure may procured be,
And as a creature consolate the mind
While he in heaven comforts period find
To this end wear those rares of nature framd
Where by creation god great power proclamd,
Diversities each clime, and country spreading
Diversities, of creatures diverse breeding.
That as the temple made by Solomon
Was framd of foreign rares as well as stone
From Sheba some, from Ophr others sent
The Fabric fmisht bredd a st^ueshment.
So we the temples, reasonable soul
The temple it earths wonders to enrowle
And view the total, or judge by a part
Each Creatures rareness, the Creators art.
Our passive humors prove not half so well
The active chiefly to delight excel
The sight, the taste, and touch, and actions like. ^. Amor,

Those at the ground of noble solace strike
When hearing reading and dull absence go
Void of delight, or certainly to know.
On others pens or lips it is to rely
Onth only organs of uncertainty
When thou do see and seeing understand
The various objects in a foraine land
The men in habit, and condition strange
Their Cities sites and form, of stru and ures change,
Religion differ men of savage breed
The rarity in cloth and what they feed,
There speech and paradox themselves and all
Nothing but what thou different may call
Much inward Cheer the senses will surprise
Taste, touching smelling seeing ears and eyes
It Is not for vnexperience to express Dci beneficia omnibus horis Consideranda.
August.

Such as have tasted will avouch nolesse.
Thout bless thy God for thy Religion pure
And all will in thee thankfulness procure
And much contentment in thie course of trade
How ere it with a forrainer be made,
When thou shall taste from tree the foreign rare
Vine juice the mirch and such spics are
Viewing the Cloue and cinamonds delight
And worlds of such a stonishing the sight
Supose the pleasure, and the contentation
Attend the florehouses of every nation.
When thou shall sail the Course in surges high
Noting thy ship mount proudly to the sky Psalm. 10.

Then delue the deep then toss thee up again
And curtey sporting with thee through the maine.
By aid of card and compass strangly guided
And by her way those Labyrinths divided.
The dolphin and huge whale swim tumbling by
The mariners their tricks to gore them try
These wonders shall surpass thy admiration Stulta placent Slultis obsonia
quisque palato querit Dignasuo non emnibus vita voluptas mare: Paline.

Yet clear thee with a world of contentation
We speak as men (conceive us as we say)
The soul we know suffied another way
In midd of these she is active by a hope
Surmounts wide oceans in their largest scope
And by a joy in praise of God Creator
Extolling thanfully his wondrs power
Lo landed now thou can not turn thy head
But cause is given to be astonished
To view in East the Bear and Lion strong
The Unicorn or Elaphant, high and long,
The herds of wilds Ele, beeuer ernim Fox
Such stores of treasures deluued out the rocks, Psalm. 19.

Those many models of ancient ruind things
The rare Erections of our modern Kings,
Thy eye will fix thy heart one pleasures midd
Nor would thou for a world have any hid.
But be spectatour: it was thewisests wish
Who spent much time although a prince in this
And from the Cedar to the Shrub did go
The rares in stature amplier to know
Yet thousands have more pleasures understood
Who have in larger travails bin improud
It Was that thy spirit shebaes queen thee blessed
When thou by hearing had bin now possessed,
And seeing of his worthy government
Raised her strangely to astonishment,
To cry thy wit o King exceeds report
Blessed was I to Jury to resort
A like the sons of foreign travails cry
When they the wonders where they pass suruay Nam vt quise arnant adhibent
speculum, ita gesturus negotium Proponat sibi illustrum virorumexempla Plutarke.

It Was of a truth O King of Kings we said
Thy wonders, each way sure wear vndenayd,
But now behold above conceit we find
Fair more then could while now possess our mind
O! all thy works great god thee each way praise
Both sea and thy fame to heaven raise.
Our factour who in youth full days is seen
The Merchants goods by enter cource to vent
When seated in the clime, and manor both
Now to return to native soil is loath,
The change of cuntries and of pleasures move
This man then there as native to approve
Full often is seen in fortunes great preferred Viri excellentis antipites
varijsque casus habent admirationem, Laetitium, molestiam siuero exitu notabili
conclud untur expletur men's gaudio sum^o cicer: Lucullo Episto. 12.

And die he there is famously enterrd
Thence if return parts language and behauour
Mount him to worth respectednesse and honor
He longs and's thirsty through the midd of danger
To travail out, remain at home a stranger
Such pleasures, and commodities accrue.
To men who travail honestly pursue.
We seeastatist scarce fix statsman be
Unless he foreign parts, and passage see
And get more language then his mothers say.
Whereby he coop well for his Country may,
By writ, embassage, treaty or protest
As by his state he then is interest.
He sportes in all their rates so entertaind
His princes welcome is in him proclamd, (...) venustas in mari ^Span quid
babies laus est omnesque vi^e parts bonaesunt Me^rodorus

Their wines, rare presents, pleasures all are his
And he though great holds his most worth in this.
Returned prince, people and religion love him.
And the foreign prince (if worthy) all approve him,
Thus soul and senses, both have pleasures cropp
And's brought by travail to his wishes topp
The valiant soldier, Captain, Colonel,
Will not be confind to his mothers Cell:
But try the fortunes foreign quarells yield
And learn what proiects there besit a field.
Trial the Guards french spannish, and Itallien,
The foot from flanders, horse from Poole and Persian,
Triumph in sportes of leaguers fortified
And have seige, afterseige his valloures tried
The persons here in famous i will nor name
Since shortly we shall come to persons fame,
Their pleasures now Ingenerall I note qualis qu^que aerbor tales solet dear
fructus.

Who do them thus to traueling deuote.
But know the aim of noblest youthful men
Is still in forraines to accomplish them
Sea captains in the joys of Navigations,
Land captives where war is extant in a nation.
Nobles at courses of greatest sport, and fame,
Merchants to port towns of the richest name,
Discouers to the far remotest regiones
The unsettled Crac-kbrane 't Ansterdams religiones,
The nouelest, to the shadow of a sieidge
Rome, Compostella, or Castillian Bridge,
Laurettoes relics, or old Iuryes Celles,
The wild and savage wonders lapland tells,
So each his humor couets to attend
For travail every humor can befreind,
Some to the East, some west, or Northerue run,
Others discoueries to the South unknown
All sorts of solace trauelers attending
And them with their desired joys befending, Quallitates des;iderande

Good propertyes in travails learnd are many
Qualities not inferior to any,
Of other subjects men on earrh enjoy
Or this our tedious pilgrimage employ,
That betters man within, without and both,
Expelling sickness, laziness, and sloth,
Subjects man both to health and happiness,
Must needs be iudgd an earthly worthiness
True travails this it excercises men
That these home oppilations choke not them
Clearing the stomach by the seas purgation
The mind of dumps by motive recreation,
The brain of melancholy blockishnesse
The bo^y of laciuious filthiness,
If well pursued, thus worthy I conclude
Chearing the soul and checking sonces rude,
That breeds eternal quietness to men,
Begetting virtuous faculties in them Virtutem veram qui possidet ille beatus
ille satis felix permitat cetera diuis marcell.

Must needs be worthy in their native kind
Worth the embraces of each noble mind,
Lo! travails this humility it causes
Conducting man thence to deserud applauses,
Ciuility breeds by experience made
Diligence by true practice in each trade,
Policy by suruay of thousands acted
Patience by endure of griefs effected, Siqua amisis^^ vitae gaudia negotiatio
est parua amitere vt maiora lucrerir:

Pity by religious observations
Courtesy from the use of best seen nations,
Complement from the order of the Court
Manners and trade where factories resort,
Agillity and actiuenesse by motion
Wisdom collecting every way good notion,
Sea arts from view of practizd nauiga ion Chrisost: Romans 7 ad pop: antis:

Parts from the travail of each days delatian,
Language by trade and forayners comerce
And what in brief of worth man may rehearse,
And though most miss this, it is not it but them
Wisdom is hid from greatest part of men.
And man must practice long with patience
And thank his god for what he gathers thence.
Therefore I say neerlesse, these qualities
Will urge the wise her worthynesse to prize,
O Could we but consider at the sea
How in a storm the trauailer does plea Mercator facturus iter terretur and
alt^: pectore d^^ gemitus, metu ens scopulos^reta ventos.

With god for mercy, aid and preservation
Expecting still a fatal inundation,
His faith now conflicts with his fear therein
Vowing to god preserud near more to sin
But live renewd and thankful evermore
The Lord ore come with penitence deplore,
Soon sends a calm as wished to cure his heart
And winds and weather to desire convert,
He passes now with praises to his maker
And vows himself to vice and sin forsaker
Next course he meets with pirates opposition
And must endure a soldiers condition,
The smoke and bullets smoke it many die
A time to importune the god on high.
If Jonas house the whales belly made him pray
Or the Desciples when the storm oresway,
Or Paul's associates at approaching night
Then needs the christian in his nauall fight.
His faith and valor grow by use more strong
Praises to god in conquest are his song
So that the foe surpressed with the sight
By prostrate yeildance forced is to flight
The medicinal rares on earth dispersed
With exceilencies not to be rehearsed
Besides those waters bath and Spaw excelling Sicredire dignum est, Ovid.

Both many noisome foul defects expelling
The Poets fictions of acadian wells
Wherein the per^urd only die he tells
Azaniam causing hate of wines and drink,
Matters for puny shallow pates to think
Such and a crew of frothy fictions vain
As sotts surmise, mere simples entertain
I hate to name, the mentions a disgrace Colligitac ponit temere and mulatur in
horrace imberhis iunen is tandem custode remote gaudet equis canibusque and
aprici gramine campivtilium tardax prouisor

Plain truth that claims justly travails place
Her worths are in true properties relation
Not needing any fained innovation
Note but the rusticke hatched with pap at home
In mothers manors; plow-trickes only known
Either in City or with gentry plast
At first how motley raw, dispisd disgract.
While by the nurtures of a better breed
He Is with behauiours better far agreed
Just thus it is with a new hatched trauailer Noratrus in Art p^etic^.

In foreign way on each file bent to err
Though iudgd, at home sufficient any way
Come here he is wanting what to do or say
It Is with him thus I say and nothing less
Until he parts, and language too possess
His home bredd posture cannot act his part
That's folly here, theers estimate an art
Experience it wiil work an Uniform
And observations strangers hedge from scorn
It Is somes ambition they were gentile bred
Too little manors taught and too much fed
When such (as often it fales) are disapointed
And from their former golden hopes disioynted
Strange it is to see the shifts they undergo
Who near in youth desire of worth to know
The trauailer (the wise it is I mean)
Though of all fortunes disposessed clean
Wisely with sage, old Bias still can say Omnia me a mecum porto cic: Some: sc:

Yet all my wealth I bear with me away
In spite of Pirate so of iosse or cross
Which would a fool to desperation toss
My wits my arts and learnings and good life Hipocrates.

Are to me riches, houses, children, wife,
A trauailers experience as Physician
Is such as none, s' at home of like condition,
Each for rain soil still stored with some rare
Having it may be else where no compare
Nepenthes clearing of the broken heart
Euphones purging of the envenomd part,
The Corrall, Cipres, Rhewbarb, mandrakes use
The Melt take it for all yields sugared juice
Makes weapons, phisicks needles, thridd, and line,
Balm, suckets parchments, sweet pursumes, and wine,
Cures serpents sting, both french, and stone disease,
One Indian tree to wonder does all these.
As places prove in nature all deliciouse
So are they still in some case all propicious
We see somes health at sea got by purgation
Some in the Eastern, some the Western nation, Pectoribus mores tot sunt quot
in orb Figurae: Qui sapit innumeris moribus aptus crit

Some in the freezing North can thrive a pace
Some though in scorching Southern come to grace.
Sorting with noble David in opinion
That Gods sole sovereign King in each dominion
Promotion coming not from East nor West Ovid 1: Amor.

Nor man alone in North, or South are blessed,
But every where cares cround with good effects
As every where the Lord the just respects
And every soil the wisest has a thing
Which will him custom, trade, and traficke bring,
Good propertios are always worth respect,
As bad deserve reiection, and neclect.
In mental matters faculties of mind
Some better one way, some elsewhere we find. Flumina pauc^ vides magnis de
fontibusor ta plurima collectis multip licantur aquis ibid.

The works of sages: and of churches too
Transported every way as still they do
So harmonize each documents perfection
That trauails this way worthy als protection.
Their sayings, ours, ours theirs, both so survive
By mutual favor cherished aliues
Next huma^^, arts we see have propagation
By reference twixt nation and nation. Barbaro and Indianor peritia,

How acurate some wa^ mechanics are
Whom christians count but brutish in compare
That now the gray hairs of the world appear
And age her to confused vice does wear
Trauails tricks up and keep her still alive
Noy more, she seems in wrincles to survive
Since lately that America so vast
Has her whoel self to the three sisters cast
And an acquaintance made by traficking
Makes our new planters much admire the thing
Each for his ends: some pass to blessed ends
Whose aim to heathens true conversion tends
Others to live, to labor, and remain,
Transplants, from Britain, Holland, France, and Spain,
The properties of traualle so imense
Taken in christian; or in Civil sense
Profit esteemed worthy als embrace
Pleasures and properties excel in grace
The one assuring Chiefly youth to try
The other midage, the judicious eye
The third to gain even aged do proceed
Until they run their glass of time decreed,
Lo! as the objects thus in brief appear
Next now their subjects in their place come near
Examples often above all precepts sway
Men mind more how we do, then how we say.
It Was the holy order God used in creation Non intendunt qua a nobis di^^ntur
gen^ilia sed quae aguntur (...) ^om. 7. ad pop: autio.

Ands worthy every artists immitation
The sky, sea land, fish, flesh, and all else framd
Then formd he man, and man he Adam namd
So we the instance framd, objects of worth
Next shall in brief train travails subjects forth
To name those clouds of subjects (men I mean)
Who have had part in acting travails scene
Is with no art, nor labor to be acted
As much as need shall briefly be compacted.
And by the goulden rule mete what we say
In mortal, Christian or in civil way.
So by Commixion of this rule of three
Sum travails worthies so their worths to see.
Nor need distinction, we of total treat
In travail men says God his bread must eat
Jew gentle, all some way must have a share Eorum fily dicimur quorum actus nos
immitamur Grigen: ineze

And all have interest in what we declare.
When Adam and his house had spent their days,
In cares and travail wandering many ways,
Now by the naked sword from Edon guarded
And justice thus their treasons had rewarded, Genes. 4,

We all attainted, all his offspring cast:
Yet after him in arebellion have Since the fall, we travail all.

So that our maker missing his intent
Fales now of man's creation to repent,
For Lo! the Sons of God men's daughters wedd Ca. 5.

Whereby a monstrous generations bred
The highest angry, powrs his fury down
And (but a remnant left) all earth does drown.
Noah and his house now travail in this flood
And by his arc the waters are withstood
A hundred days and fifty straying so
Now all the earth beside lay drowned below. Genes. 7.

From Vr to Canan, Abram, trauails next Caput. 11. 12. 14.

With Heathen ills his righteous soul now vexed
Forsakes by Iouahs call his fathers land
By says obeing this divine command,
Through Haran, Bethell, Egypt Terah dies
At first: from Hay he then for famine hies
To Egypt: yet at Egypt cannot stay
His wife abusd here makes him furrher stray,
From Bethell now by his brothers quarrel chaste
Then captiued by the four Kings, and displast
Thence rescued by his brothers valient hand
Thus wanders Abram out his fathers land.
While aged in years, and Iorneyes he departes
To Machpelah his grave: sole end of smartes.
Nor differs Isaac from his fathers days Genes. 25. 26.

But as a pilgrim down to Gerar strayes
As his son Isaac, Jacob Isaacks child
Wanders by Esaw (brothers ire) exild.
Goes pilgrim wise to Padan with a staff
Travailing from his native brothers wrath,
To Shechem next, whence, he to Beathell goes
Where in a cave he takes his last repose
A hundred and eighty years the one
And five years less old Abram? Jacobs moan
God heard in famine and a Iosepth sends
Who father land and brethren all befriends
Old Jacob travails) few and ills my days
(Quoth he to Pharaoh) troblesome many ways. Hic enimnos diuersorium
comorandi, non habitandi habebus. cic^^ sence^^

He buried now! note Joseph's traualle blessed
Who in his days exceeded all the rest.
Though in a pit him first his brothers cast
There iudgd to die; yet saud, then brought at last Gennes. 37

Carried to Egypt set to sale yea sold
To Potiphar 'o wonders to be told
By lot made ruler of his Lords estate
But as best meritts meet on earth most hate,
His Ladies Lawless lust procures him ire Vt hoc ag^mn^^ in deum offendere?

Since his chaste humor crossed her lewd desire.
He Is cast in prison yets, exalted there
When by his divination dreams were clear.
He, next made Egypts Lord, wears Pharaohs ring
And by his travails blessed of bondsman, King
His wits the seven years of Famine feeds ^enres. 50

Supplying fathers lands and brothers needs,
Here ruling fourscore years, much blessed; then dyed
When thus in travail strangely dignified.
As thus the father so the Church did stray
Ands merely militant, as scriptures say. Hic Eclesiamillitans Illie triumphans.

Not Chaird in room or any where in rest.
But's millitary and in travails blessed
More then in ease, still pooles they gather mudd,
And drousie sweets souest corrupt good blood.
Both Church, and soul, and virtues mount more high
As they in travails through temptations fly. Exodus. 15.

Yea man is model of the whole we say
Best are the best men, most when motiones sway. Exo. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9.

Earths in fancy in travails nursed ever
The Churches in the partriarks thus peseuer,
Come now to any growth is Egyps hate
Joseph now gone the blood hound of her fate
The bondage noted and theit cries come up
Moises is raised to beget a hope
Lo! he at first saved among the reeds
And mid wives knife) him there his mother feeds
By pharaohs daughter fownd) pity preserud
Nursed him and so's in Pharaohs Court preserd,
Where he in state did forty years abide
Whence in great fear he down to Midan hied
Kept sheep a while there married alterd thus
The Lord accommpanies him in a Bush.
Sends him to court thence to redeem his land Vide ^t Israelitarum vita
deseribitur quinque libris moist Iosue iudicu^r, and regum.

Where he with wonders does before Pharaoh stand
Turns waters blood, brings frogs, and flies and lice
Murren sores thunders grashopers and nights
Instead of days next are there males destroyed
In trauails thus is Moises now imployd.
Is pharoahs god: the socerers Admiration:
Egyps scourge, but deliverer of his nation
Bring Israel safe through the sea, when foes are drowned Caput, 14.

Six hundred thousand strong the church is found
And is to Canaan promisd traueling
Having been four hundred years flaues to that king Deutronom. 13

forty years travail has now ere they rest
Being in their travails wonderfully blessed
Apparel wears not nor dare foe withstand Exodus 13, etc.

Pillar of fire their day stare, cloud on land
Forty and two great iorneyes in the wild
The Rocks yield waters, are with manna filled Iosuah: 1.

And with all dainties still their journeys flow
Their foes the heathen have the overthrow,
In view of Canaan come, now Moises dies Caput. 24.

And with the rule God Joshua dignfies,
Who Ierico, then Ay quite overthrows
And flayes both prince, and people of their foes Job: 1, 2, 3. etc

Thirty and one lands they in travail got
So now the Church parts Canaan by lot,
Triumphs in Rule of judges would ye know
The case more clear? behold the scriptures show Caput. 42. 10.

Nor can we christians sure be ignorant
Of what the Jews of travail use to vaunt
This only this, may serve to shadow forth
The Patriarckes, Churches both their trauails worth.
About this time was holy Job in east
In mortal travail oh so much oppressed
Bereft of Children goods and friends turn foes
Be guirt by satan round and round in woes
Yet Lo! when patience had her perfect aim Ruth. 4 13

He Is easd of travail and releast of pain.
Come on to ruth a woman trauailer
You Will find it will that weaker sex prefer
From Israelles famine she to Moab goes Hestre, 2. 16.

Where for a wife her wealthy Boaz Chose
Renowned Hester of a Captine Queen
Though poor rema^ning as a iemm unseen
Empress of thirty two great provinces Vide litincra Daiud a regum 13. priads.
cunterlij.

Proving the Churches fauster dame in these
Hamans confusion, Mordecayes sole raise
One woman all the Churches foes ore swaies.
All telling plain gods blessings where means want
Whose loves in travails are the just to plant
I need not name great David's traveling Jonah. 2.

Before nor after he was anointed King,
Though as a flea by saul in travail chaste
Saul's flaine and David Lord of Israel graet
But to that antitipe of our redemption
Jonah from plague for sin had no exemption,
Cast into sea the waves deny receite
The whale may swallow but he may not eat,
But from his vaste chest cast him one the sand.
And after three days postage comes to land.
So now lets hence to the churches head away
Behold how he in travails here does stray
While he on earth our shape did under go
For of his life himself confesses so,
The fowls they have their hooles, a nest each bird
But I poor I no hole to hide my head
His mates to travail chose he travelers Math. 3, 15. Esaias 61. 11. John 46
Ma^^ ^. 21.

Ship men and fishers these our Lord preferes
At Beathlem born hies to Jerusalem,
Taking a journey down to Egypt then,
In fear of Herod's cruel bloody aim,
But Herod dead, retireth back again,
To Gallile: and Nazaret, to teach
And thence to Capernauum there to preach.
Much cares and crosses every way enduring
Yet ever teaching, doing good, and curing.
And Lo! at last our Lord is first betrayed
Next by another of his own denayd,
Araind, whipped, scorned, spitted, and despisd Omnis Christi actio, nostra est
instructio august

And at Golgotha after crucified.
Our Lord and King thus travailed below
Ways of earths travails to us all to show
Now out of sea in midst of many storms Math. 27. Math. 16, 19.

And then on land in midst of many harms
In hunger thirst, wants, woes and trauails tried Math, 3, ^*

And now with heavens high honors dignified.
To tell us all and give us this to know Hebrews. 11.

Our rest is up above and not below.
Which apprehension moves by faith our mind Caput. 14. 12. 10: Baptistae vita.
Luc. 1.

To spend our travails here, that rest to find.
That grave forrunner of our Savior, John
In wandering through the wildernesses known
Hard bred with locusts, and wild honey there
Rough skinn, and Camels hair his softest wear Actor, 14. 16. 2. Cor. 5. 22.
1 Timothy 4. 16.

After all travails by a virgins hand
Is sent to heaven, the forexpected land,
Now Paul and Peter travail Christ to preach
And middst the gentiles Christ ascended teach
In Selench, Cipres, Lystra Pergamus
Antioch, Paphos Derb, and Ephesus,
Troas, Cilicia, Creet, Neapolis.
Athens, Cesarea, Spain, Amphipolis,
Macedon, Tire, Samos, and Milletum,
Phenicia, Ptolomais, Trogillium,
These for a mapp of cuntries Paul did see
And lastly suffered Roman tyranny. Apocahp. 1* 1,

Weel Close with John to Pathmos banished
So rownd about it by the spirit ledd.
Much wonders to him in his travails told
Prophesies ages since each day un fould,
And having much foretold of Church and nations
With heavens description ends his relations
I my relation too of persons worth
Who have the way of christians life chalkt forth
Closing as paul these clouds of witnesses
Our passag cleard by worthies worlds of these
Let Us arm our feeble joints with faith pass one
In travail to that high Imperial throne,
Now that the matter each way plain appear
Let Civil cases see themselves as clear.
Tell of A^^illes valloures victories
Aeneas great sea trauails noble prize
The worthy Curios winning worlds of grownd
And by partition sighing each his bownd,
Those three rare Decij vowed to countries good
In travail and feirce battle venturd blood
Hectoreroy hope, renowned Sce^uola Vide policron Graston.

High Pompey brave victorious sway) these may
With Fablos and Marcellios (Rooms support)
And lofty Scipios valors well report,
Much to have done in travail to regaine, Fortitudo parentum filliorum
segnitia narrat.

Their countries freedom; friends, and houses name.
Now should I down to modern times retire?
To tell the tith would Illiads require,
That Cordeliew his travails in the East
And Edwards too thence Saladine suppressed
Wann much of that old holy land again
Wherein both trauaild undergoing pain
Our black prince battles in the spanish war
And conquests poicters tell his fathers share,
Henry of Monmouth rare victorious acts
Our Glousters, Warwicks Huntingtons high facts
In travail e^ch for country to proceed
Eliza was victorious indeed.
Much of her father, Henry's fame france says Erat fide nobilis quae omnibus
ornatibus ornamonto sine quauil tam ornatam quod ornare queatnin. Salui. ep. 1.

Both sure a spurr to our declining days
Forhish, brave Drake, and Candish, hand in hand
With Willowbeys high ventures grast our land.
But now by trippletye our peace combind
Elizaes second acts her part behind
Through Paltz, then Beam (oh! fate) she makes retire
In spire of foe with patience past admire
Long live the friends of this thrice noble Queen Netantiuiri lauds minere
oratione m^a potus quam exornarem, culpetur sane in genium non voluntas Chris:
de sacr Liber: 1.

And for her branches dure they ever green
While pacient travail period has, and then
Both shall be scene victorious to men,
Gracing his greatness whose almighty power
Keeps time that Romish Dragon to devour.
Behold next peace, and prince arrelatiues
Yet travail in her acme still suruiues,
Our Sovereign sent his son its worth to learn
What he before by trial did discern
Lo? how so high a prince passes unknown
That travails fame might freelier be shown
His happy crop, great cause of comfort gives
In peace, and true religion Britain lives
Als joy, our hope true Christians defense
Rests primely in his sacred excellence
And long may he great God our i will defend
With whom (as period Travails worthys end.
Praise we the highest, cause of each good thing
Uniting love, and duty to our King.
Hy hence in have half mazd Caliopea
Refresh thy self with consorts of the sea
Both Travails wonders, and her worths appear
Return and make thou travails way as clear
Thy choore's not common) Momus if thou lowre
Know them the Issues of a vacant hour,
The sacred sonets since compild in verses

No shame to him less worths a like rehearses. (...) parent animos,
compraendunt plurima paucis: aures delectant, pristina comemorant


Good matter graced by so sweet a form,

Shall not by, time, nor envy be outworne,

The way to travail.
LYeurgus lacedemons Lord of old
When he youths rudeness did at home behold, John sab comentar in Arist: and
hoc.

their wits through ease as standing pooles corupt
Their virtues growth, by sloth of vice ore topt,
Adds to his volumes of good laws this one
That heel, admit of none to stay at home,
All youth must out) some traynd in forrayne parts
Others in tents in the feilds must practice arttes,
For there says he they are clearest of temptation
And may in travail learn from every nation.
What we have said of wonders and of worths,
And of advantage brought by travail forth,
Is modeld in this wise man's observation
A rule well merits each man's imitation
For the effects brave Lacedemon grast
And him among the wise of princes plact.
But as a wiser Solomon once said
That's truly worth to get it use all aid
The fool sees, and neglects a thing of prize
Where as its seen and sought of such are wise.
That wisest Merchant saw a pearl quoth Jesus
And bought with whole estate what is prised thus
It Is not the bare hearing of its worths suffice
But the way to winn them laid before our eyes. Quaese scopulosis ardua clmis,
in longum prorum pit iter riget. aspera prim^ ingressus.

Of the manor now or form we are to treat
The goods good issue, and the bads deceyte
Forms of performance, bad as good we know Hes^ed Liber. 1.

The task is then the better Part to knew.
Way as an adiunct local may be held
So how attendant fitting to be teld
Way as the manor, how to travail taken
What Is worthy choice, what is fit to be forsaken
The latter part the former comprehends
And first my muse the formal part intendes.
It Is asked how a man may best attain
When, where, and fittest way, to cross the maine?
In course of traficke civil now we treat
The Clergy often the other way repeat
And Christian life is plentifully spread
But often where most is known worst ways are led.
Yet all accord by right of reason too
He that near knows the way can never do,
In civil course then know againfull way
Is from the paths prescribed not to stray Quod been fit his fit.

For note we this the bests are worst abused.
Travails the bad of all bads, badly used
Twill in a moment ruing man and state
And prove of all paths most unfortunate.
Turn in a trice the ablest youth to Death
And as a viper suck away his breath
What mischiefs are but it illframd procures
And man confounded then constraind endures, ^ustitia in sevirtutes continet
omnes. Pythagorus.

Wherefore some just proportions to be had
At first twixt man and therein he is to trade
It Is as the ruler stearing travails shipp
Else must the passenger suffer wrack in it
Some corespondence, possible relation
The moving cause of tradings propagation.
It Is not each Boor can travail to avail
Nor call we each slugg-ship, can hoise a sail,
Nor every place can every man befit,
Nor every one each way employ his wit
Reciprocal affection must be had
And mutual betwixt'th, person and his trade.
The subjects birth must suit his way he aims Naturam expelolac furcalicet
vsque recurret Haman vid Woolsey. etc.

Birth greater aptness then ye think contains
And mi-imployd beyond its reach destroys
The man employed, and what he imployes
If one vnskilld rawbred, high matters pass
He spoils both matter: and is proud an ass
For ignorance gets scorn to him of all
Besides the thing must wanting manage ^ale
The reasons plain for natures inbred hue
Vnpotene made above her reach to serve
Struggles against fate; and streams of higher strain
So needs is forced maimed, back again, Exemp, Phaettonis

Proprietatum equabilitas requiritur.



As Isops frogg effuse her entrails out
Coveting proudly lion like to strout.
Ambition cause of this aspiring sense
Ever in final fales to impotence.
We see our bold Mechanicke vncontent
In discret way, his manualles to vent
Will now be merchant yea pry hither too
Whenskill else pride procures his undo
Our modern merchant toss a statists weild
Nor will in fashion scarce to courtier yield.
Deemes he is employment ^it of silly jest Preda suis tanibus non minus ille
fuit metam: lib. 1.

By the supply of forriners suppressed
Much like that ass clad in the lions hide
Vncast was scornd and woried for his pride.
As such unmeet ascents prove ruinous
So the most base descents befoole it thus
When high borne minds debase their breed for gain
Any slavish travail entertain
Or use in trauale an unequal hand
Matters to low for such to understand.
Distinction in matters vulgar use,
Twixt personal, and Casual abuse,
Say sages truly merits to be made
When as a virtue out extremes is had.
The frown of fate may force a just debase
In men of worth and once in mighty place
Our stories tell, proportion is our meat
Necessities are banished our treat.
Complect ons corespondence to our way
What native vigoures more, or lesser sway.
Must be obserud) according to the time
And place imployd, and quality of clime.
This in these paths is needfully requird
Else if not death, disgrace quells all desird
Natures and nations lump in true relation Numquid amore (...)

Though scatterd ore the earth, have propagation.
Employ thy travails where these likes accord
And as they inbred powers to do afford
Hott noble spirits actiuest are found
As could with flemy sottishness a bound,
Accord thy place and person, first united
To tread a nation like, both be incited
The Russe, and Norway, or could Groynland trade As in Russy a Groynland etc.

Best by the could hard Phlegmatic is made.
The coulds extremes such safely entertain
And may a brother hood in dull coulds attain
Is potent made to labor, tugg and toil
The best ^rchiements in a frozen soil.
For here his coulder humors meet their like
When coulds to death the choleric shall strike
Or nose, toes cheek, and hands, we see they loose
See then proportion herein is too be chose,
Let nobler natures places nobler trace
For there is accord twixt natures place and place
Hott natures active bent and passive too
Able to invent, and judgments scann to do.
The could are merely patients practizing
Alike it is in place in time in thing
The rarest fruits I know take putrefaction
The ablest parts, worst chiefly in ill action
And as it was iudgd Themistocles would prove
Worst if ill nurtured best by good improve,
So may we censure of complexions power
In travail bent to much gain or devour
Climes their complexions have in each degree
To which in travail men have simpathy
The tozzid zones one sort of rule command
A differents called for in the frigidd land
The observation trauailers daily use
Makes me no further now hearein peruse
As persons thus must be the places meet
So some proportion due in parts discreet
Twixt him now travails, and his way of trade
For trial hereof must at home be made
Wherein respectively difference is requird
According to the state of that desird
Some general parts, as strength and languages Qualitatum proportio.

According to the clime, all must have these.
Particular notions as now interest In vitium ducit culpae fuga sicaret art.
Horatiua.

If as in public or his own invest,
I cannot stand to point at each man's way
The wi^e may see the whole by what I say.
And application proper to the thing
Can on ly sollid satisiaction bring.
He must have tongues each way bownd out to treat
Else shall he be a pray to men's deceit. Recte collata retina expectant predam^-

Each aiming at his properends avail
And joys to see the sortish stranger fail.
When ignorant to make his sales or buy
Or if abused understands not why.
If soldier, merchant, greater strangers raise
For what they point to he constrained paies
If a mechanicke hoodwinkt walks all mumm
A meet allusion for all cheates to come.
If on his way, ambitious to see rares
In high way errors ignorantly shares.
And what he sees, or where, not say where now? Ignorantia confusionis matter
non.

But what is a guide to strangers, strangers know.
Chancing on sales, turns now, knave brokers ape
For as the Dauus wills 't must rise, or bate Potos, Sotos, deuotes.

Yea if more noble in a treaty sent,
If ere state sent out such an imnecent.
The terms appear in writing, as if there Hisp: pro.

A scipher sent, and no Embassage wear
In short send any mere vnletterd out
And he is a nose of wax made out of doubt.
It Is true times short and many cannot have
Paris for each place, where tranaile passage crave
But let us note language collatrall mixed Non satest been ali quul sacere
visietiam fiatvenuste.

Under both Poles by providence is fixed
And general tongues for generals lead way
Which generals each way specials over sway.
Old Roman Latin in the western lands
Italian, Spanish, French, and us commands,
Old Greek the spacious Adriaticke climes
Hebrew the East, honored in first of times.
High Dutch the danish pole, and Northern tracke
So having one we cannot wholly Lack
And by the general language that way vsd I anuo lingnarunt gramatica.

Perticulars will more easily be infusd
Since a propensitions causd in tongues confusion
Many as members have to one head allusion
Then fit thy self such specialles to collect
And laziness worths canker worm reject.
The many parts each state of way requires,
Causing succesfull progress in desires
Are in such special manor suting it
So as no parts but such in that place fit.
In all a search is easily made: Let those
Who pass themselves it to themselves disclose.
The fourth and last attending the persons grace Equabilitas infortune bonis.

I hold propertion ^n Estate to place,
Assighning period to the three before
The rudder steareth steadily to shore
Mon^es Great Traian terms trades nerves to be
This we in daily course of traficke see.
When language, natures worth, men's bredings fail
Now means in travail seem to strike their sail.
Yea in the merchanicke how beit their hands
Seem to supply this want in trackt of lands
A small it is true accomodates his place Qvantum quisque sua, etc,

When higher steps ascend a higher race
Which as it must of force in use be had
So like wise corespond the place to trade.
I say no more let specials be applied
The merchants this way chiefly dignified
Where many lands, and rarityes are eyed.
As a mere oreplus; to the gain of trade;
Which to advantage is in forraines made.
Plessures attending profits every way,
Others conditions costlier are to stray.
For trades increase, and minds contents concure
Accomodating each by trading fuir. Quam fausta^ habet regma pecunia sorts
vtque sit hec seltx quamque beata vide ibid. Aruillarj vbij

The fashionists expenses buy his humor,
The nouellists paies dearly for a rumor.
The Noble gallant spends, no substance gains
The aerie Camelion only feeds his brains,
Means is the matter, formd by all the rest,
But their effects it wanting all suppressed.
Yet as the little puff makes small barks fly
When greater Caricks, wind bound grouling lie:
So smailer means a m^aner way well serves,
When wanting sustenance a greater sterues
Or Comes confounded in his crossed wits,
This of the four the persons self befits.
Subjects that have good adjuncts their attendants,
Well grace their own worths, mutual defendants.
Two sorts of ways one method has proposd
What way man goes in as his cause disclosd
Whereto or which way and the clime, that's next Via in qu^.

The time, and these kept trauaile's vnperplext.
The way or state man passes in is tried,
And by this touchstone needfully discried.
If consonant, not cross to pious life, Non nobis solum natisumus sed liberis,
sed a micis and patriae.

Nor cause of countries, or religions strife.
And honest just, and void of fraud and guile,
Causing thy own weal too, this good way style.
Which four, though four, are linkt in unity.
And handmaids to our christan travails be. Cicero: de offi.

For christian travail it all travails blesses,
If not besure thy harboures in distresses.
For us not for us christianst' understand,
As heathens do als good to take in hand,
After we once from native Climate go,
As if the great God did not all lands know
He sees in secret as wise David says
As seend I to the Heavens, Heaven he suruayes
Decend I down to Hell he notes me,
And in the midd of darkness he can see.
Yea should I say I Will hence to sea als one.
Or to the outmost I Will, he there is well known
It Is therefore mee^e we Christians stand in awe
Forming our travails to Iehouahs law
Well may we then expect great happiness
And in most aduers times desire success ^t quis non causas mill doloris
babet.

Alas what is Earth as sea us mortal tofses
Sometimes in sunny calmes and then in crosses
Our destinies our ships transports us ore
Times trimmer of the sails and hies to shore Ovid amor.

What men? all men are passengers therein
Some travail in gods siruice, some in sin
Gods hand it steares, yet none the hand can see,
Nor yet fates fleets, wherein we sailing be
Some sport, some sleep, some work, the voyage hies Vns hoar zey^

Youth midage, dotage, posting through he flies.
Our harbor Earth, graves houses, welcome death, Royta^n skepke royt: all
zij^gh diewills ver ^i moyt in hettzee van tribulation icke zal vster ckene met
in i^^ gration.

By sortowes, sicknesses, when loss of breath.
Thus ore earths ocean glides our fatal shipp
Jehovah steares, time rows, man ends by it;
This mortal travail; Christian consumates
And though in both we are guided by the fates
Yet may we guess success by our attempts,
And by the form of travail judge events.
Nor need we part, but in the whole we say.
Come by both Christian and Civil way.
With piety our travails must agree,
Nor must our gain religions ruin be.
That proteus like, we as a feather change
Nor through religions as through realms we range. Heylichey^ ni^t in de
sc^ii^.

Love Calvin here, there Luther: Bellermine
And to advantage make a stall of sin
See mass, hugg relics, trade in Images,
Bulls, paxes, pardons, or like trash as these.
Nor as the priest, and giddy brain steal ore,
To serve before their state, that Romish whore.
And when returned plot mischief day and night.
To make some simple puny profelite
Entise alas in shape of boy disguizd.
Ore to a Cloister to be Idolizd
Where often her guts give way to ore devotion,
And in rebellions rumor make comotion,
Our cracksculd Brownist steal to Amsterdam,
Ore to tribe of Gad, their chambered cham.
There cucko like our Church their Dam bewray
Professing als prophetical they say
Runn strange division on their iarring muse.
When still the close is native soyles abuse.
In civil case the mono Politan
Aiming as Atlas, trades, whole orb to spann
Feeding open the general defect Our (...) transporters. Ex malo dogn^te
pra^usque moribus dig^oscuntur lupi. Melancton.

These ways and more past namm meritt reject
The common good we Crossing cannot thrive,
But our disgraces in our deeds survive
Nor can in justice fraud, or false deceites
Prove ought but gravel in our tasted meats
Conueiances exceeding law near thrive
When men their common weal of weal deprive
Turn machiuillians by coueyance ore,
Of what is in proper of their native store.
For forreynors it is base; a worser thing.
In such as owe alleagence to their King,
L'o next our travail must our own good breed
You Will say this caveat sure is more then need
It Is true the other three the fourth Create
None benefits himself undoes his state
Nor can it be thy gain thy god offendes,
Nor when thy travails in injustice ends,
Yet bodily some faculties wear meet
Mentiond before (doubt ye look back and seet)
And howsoever matters pass relation,
Which out the womb of time have propagation,
Yet each may view many undone alas
By rash attempts of travail brought to pass.
Somes progress to Vtopia for a toy
Making their mendicant pilgrimage a joy
Currey from Saints to relics, up and down.
Others by plotting mischief seek renown
As Herostrats, or Dionise seek grace,
Their own lands welfare, by their force to face
Riot and revel in a lawless wise,
As if their tricks were soly worthy prise.
Neclect their native family, and roue
After some foreign whotish lawless love
At least wise wander in a thriftlesse kind
Deprauing both the body and the mind Spend^brists

Such holy writ styles worse then infidels,
Whoes careless of his household where he dwells
And Solomon terms a destroyers matc,
The man (more soole) that lauishes his state
But since our treaty yet some pilot wants
Come we to travails true concomitants
Virtues adorn the progress of the action
Keeping, its body clear from putrefaction
Of vices poisons fogg, obscuring earth, Sollace. Our crack brains come bome
by weeping cross Qui populari inititur aur a domini in luto extruitur. Match.
1. princip.

And none as these our late days equal birth.
In danger desperate, and disconsolate,
Many such symtomes could I now relate.
But see at sea their frothinesse is scourgd,
And by a timely pyll there brains are purgd,
Turn tail to travail now retird to shore,
Love England now so well theyl out no more.
Others in rashness (placed) dominere,
As if they Lords, or Denizons wear there
Esteem their pride extold in als abuse,
Forgetting fools they are here with out excuse,
Are bandied well, informd their not at home.
And the other sweet tooth glad to pick a bone.
Oh sy! that travail ere allowd such brats,
Fitter to hedge the fire with dogs, and catts.
For there they still may play with mothers dugg,
And pamperd, counsel with an Irish rugg.
Provident travail never hatch these brains,
It Is true she still of their abuse complains,
Fond Chimy Cricket know that travails way, Orst: west: This: best.

Is danger, and adventure: and no play.
The bests are hardest ever to be gaind
And with endurance must be entertaind
In dye^, rest, speech, welcome, people all,
Make no exceptions take what lots besale.
Expect no sleepy sollace as at home,
Nature it differs in each clime is shown,
Expect no other but a share in crosles,
As thou through travails desert each way passes
With good Lo! bad must equaly be shard,
Provide then, be thou for them both prepared,
See as a second diligence attends,
The man that travail honestly intends.
Sagacity by sages termd of old,
When wits are active and hereby more bold
Timely advantage in our way attempt
And what a foe may plot that to prevent
On raging seas yeald have a storm to still, Dilligentia-Sagacitas. Nil tam
d^fficile quod non solertia vincat. Temperantia, Modum vocoid non dolorem
afferens Pythagoras.

And valiently oppose a pirates skill.
If crossed by strangers courtesies timely use,
Whereby a foes engaged not to abuse.
If trafickes commodities to cull,
Yiedling in sale a harvest plentiful.
Hour employed, for it is not to repeat,
Our ends to purchase and prevent deceit
Neclects assaylants, do molest this care,
And sottish dullness, in a slow prepare
Time crowns with laurel gains a quick embrace,
And diligence will many lets displace.
By temperances rule and bodies kept,
From routes of illes, in latter ages crept.
Comands the senses, rules by moderation,
In drink, and meat, according to the nation,
And pleasures, too, for know no vice more raighnes
Then this intemperance in youthful veins.
Incontinency issues as effect,
And due reward of temperance neclect.
Much like the passages of drunkenness,
Worthily said our Brittons to possess.
As hear at home: in foreign soil men tell
Some place their packhouse in a frothey Cell moderation praised. Quis secum
preit? ebri^tas, sopor, otia, Lux us qui comites? rixa, bella, odiae opprobium.

Puffed vpse Dutch, nor fails Lascivious end,
Immoderate drinkings duly to attend.
Whereon the Epicurean vain serves constantly,
Let travails worthies worthless vices fly.
So shun such sins so many still destroy.
Unhappy he intemperance shall employ.
Some have I noted who have diet kept
In eating, drinking: and pleasures sweetly slept, Marulus^ Lecheritanians.

When others on a surgions box append,
Or on a doctors bill as bad attend
Some have I heard of wisely note the Clime,
Great dangers to prevent by keeping time.
In rising after foggs by sunn are clear,
A death to othets who neclect it there
The freezing could in russe, know how to quail,
And in the Torrid cuntreyes heets assail
Swellings and sudden pa^sies ginny boyles.
For diverse illes encounter diverse soyles.
Men must, as Masinissa keep good diet,
Else must the body languish out of quiet.
Luxurious sardinapals imitation,
And Bachus Trophyes are in every nation.
Couers thou now to shun these lion clawen
Be temperate, and timely shun the cause.
For venery is occasiond often by Drink.
Then men once in, turned prodigals, soon sink.
Wherefore an opposition must be framed,
Whereby the lets of travail may be tamed,
Prudence of moral virtues for her grace
Merits her rank in travails primest place,
The straites of virtue so by vice beset,
As we may well perceive a world of let.
Where for an opposition must be framed, Prud niia est habitus agendi orta
human ^ b^na v^ra cum (...).

(...) Vt corpus absque ^ceulis, ita and vir^r n^gotio im-prouidens By^n



Whereby the letts of travail may be tamed,
Prudence of moral virtues for her grace
Merrits her rank in travails primest place
By providence the armies sentinel.
Discry the things that let to travail well.
Forsee the Western lust with chaste intents,
And the drunknesse in the East alike preuents.
The vices that attend in court and city,
Becoming by the better view more witty.
It being no less wit ills to escue,
Then that is good by science to pursue,
A quality, next serving to her worth.
Whereby a form of manage issues forth:
Gracing the subject with admird affection,
An industry well merits alls amplexion
Pericles science praised is herein,
As did V^lisses in his Homer winn.
Pirgoteles hear by the picture drew.
To Allexanders wish when none else knew
Good Joseph's foresight in his travails feed,
Pharaohs, al, Egypts, fathers, Brothers need
And moises science, and great weekenesse raisd,
Him though a man of Great love to be praisd.
The Churches travail, wants, and wichednesse,
By his contriuing, purchased release.
Yea so has arts by search bin brought to light,
When sciences peruse proves man's delight.
Tiresias, and Archilochus for lines,
And Aristotle phisickes best of those times.
As Bazaleel, and Aholiabs skill.
God those thus with his spirit did fulfill.
All Curious arts of sciences to know,
And one the temples fabric all to show
Thus providence is sent forth to project,
How to supplant in travail each defect. Opitime creed i^uat rerum pru dentia
cunctos, ledtiur aduersoqui necligit vndique fate-Hesiod. Note.

This seconded by science to an action,
Both to the subjects travails satisfaction.
The Contraryes encountering in this season,
Are rashness, and a shallow use of reason.
Reigning in many a giddy straying pate,
Who all things done does to the fancy shape,
Lantloping crocheits, any way is best. Landloper.

When once the giddy humors preposest.
Little for seeing Scyllaes straights ar nigh,
As they in travails from Charibdis fly
For know howere our whole discourse is forth,
Of trauails wonder, praised way, and worth:
It Is not to be assumd as due to all,
But only such whom God to it does call,
In honest wise, it is the Appostles case,
Wherere man's called, abide he in that place,
Conditions praisd are propper to the men,
Who are and rightly too instald in them.
And every man his limits due assighnd, Giddy pate-Nunquam tefall aut animi sub
vulpe latentes impia sub dulci melle venena latent Augustine.

We must dehort, not raise a straggling mind,
Least by refusal they with Icarus,
Or Phaeton descend to ruin thus.
Such have I scene in giddiness depart,
From a good settled Course to some foreign part,
Squander their means in fruitless lawless life,
Vncald forsaking families and wife,
Yet shrouded ever in some poor pretense.
Of need, friends, bettering faith or conscience.
Some small time spending vainly, guld retire,
With poverty the fruit of rash desire.
What man's to build says Jesus will not first
Able, or not to end be prepossest.
Or who is to encounter any foe,
But first his own sufficiency will know?
And if too weak in time from both surcease,
Of thoughts to build, and sue to have a peace.
For know this rashness founded one the send
Of impotencie withers out of hand
Such have I seen in diet disapointed,
In raging humor on the waves distoynted.
Cursing the climate next, the hochpoch there Iustitia in se vir^^tes ^^ntinel
omnes.

Longing for English powder beef, and bear
One cries his bones Crach on the Cabin ropes
A second as forlorn now nightcome gropes
A third nice youth his clothes are spoiled cried
Would to god when I came down I had dyed.
Of justice worth I somewhat said before
And only speak a distribution more
Comutatiues in dealing just proportion
Distributive in Charities devotion
Give each his own in way of honoring De iustitia vni^uique quod suum
distribure cic, do: offe:

Fear God above fitst honor then the King
Preserve thy credit, and thy fellows state
Whose chance in travail is to be thy mate
Do as thou woulst be done by, Christ commands
And deal with justice, alms in other lands
A generous and noble mind is meet
That men may praise thy country when they set'^
For such as thou thy land stands estimate
And by the subjects men adiudge the state
Contraryes are that miser ^^arous
Who count a stranger as a dog to v^
Where as the Church of Israells c^ld to cherish
The strangers heart, and none by need to perish
The Prodigal one lusts will rather spend
Then strive the poor and needy to befriend,
Let none here neither enter a mistake
Frugality next trauails worth I make.
A saving habit of both time; and state, Frugalitas cla^is conse ruandi quod
est maphae: Note. Magnanimitas*

Making a man thrifty and considerate.
A worth if ere in any course required
In this its ten times more to be desired.
Preuents a famine often of store at sea,
Yers merciful when others wantings plea.
Attends at pinch, and in extremes befriends.
When lavish prodigallity still spendes. Si fortuna. Sonat caveto ^o'li, cum
fortuna tona tonat: ca^e to mergi Cato,

So have Post seen soldiers vainesse paid
When with the pot and pipe purse is decayed
Trugg towid the Lumber (fool) for more supply,
And now begins on lavishness to cry
Where had he i^ueld means and score at first
Good licour might served, stead of thirst
So much in short, one instance stands for all,
And hence I down to next of virtues fall:
Being a mind magnauimously bent,
With courage eresses bitter to prevent:
Armd in a faith and hope in a tempration
Anchord firm in gods mercy past narration,
To this the scriptures plentifully move,
And daily trials wonder or sly improve.
A bar against whole billows of temptations
Calling man to despair, in cross of nations
Crosses are the godlyes lot, true churches sat
The earthes sur^ayours; every mortals state
Whence comes it travails termd the Godlies lot
No perfect sollace can below be got
The civil trauailer first (if christion) suffers
Then as a mortal, many, crosses shares.
Next in his place (for no place so defended
But sometimes is and shall thus be attended)
Sometime by ship wrack, then by pirates theft
And then by trust of any estate bereft,
Now in profession, then in body beats,
Then in his travails multitudes of cares.
But Lo! his courage, christian faith begets?
When any danger sea or land besets:
As Paul he is bold, and fortifies the rest,
Being with a heart magnanimous possessed.
For all things work he knows to him for good
Nor can he be by Hell or Hagg withstood.
Cross to this worth is fearful pale distrust,
Not rating God as merciful as just.
It Was the disciples weakness; Thomas sault, Gratia been ordinas quae dedit
creatio Bernardus in tract: Degr^: Lib: 6:

And too to common still when storms assault.
Or hight of a presumption in our selves
That the apprehension faith begets quelles.
Thus Peeter stood, upon his resolution,
Which made him fall to fearful in conclusion.
Though all for sake thee Lord yet will not I
Yet lead he first the other to deny Note!

Now to a habit effable we come
Not to be Churlish bent, or Cinicksom, Effabilit as quid.

Vneffable behauioures purchase hate Haman.

And scorn of strangers in a foraine state,
Yet see we some, too many too aspird Ixion!

Into some state of travail as desird:
Stand puff, and huff, to natives coming ore Phaeton!

The priest forgets he was a clearke before Icarus!

Looks squint at strangers turns imperious
A small employment, hoists a Haman thus Primus mali m^tor cachedra pestilent a
superhia, Augustine

And higher to! It Is one of those great illes
Solomon says Earth with impatience filles
A servant when he reigns, a fool in hanst:
wise men on foot, and sotts on horse aduanst
Denies to know, condition, or kinn,
Or as a iockey, ever to have binn
Arms fixed agambo, and his beauer cock
Is learnd in better manners by a knocks
Sequestered pride, attends a speedy fall,
whereas the meek are effable to all.
Procures of forraynes by the fact a love,
Yea with the very infidels approve.
Those churlish Nabals, Doeg minded men
Never succesfull scarcely one of tenn.
Come thus far through the paths of traualling, Ambitis secretum virus. pe^tis
occulta doliartifex matter hipocrests liuori^ parens vitior un^ origo tinea
sanctitatis cordium excatrix. etc: Bernard: in ser q^adragess-

Lets in our course observe another thing.
Verity to be used in word and deed
Through all the paths of travail we proceed.
Adding a credit mid the strangers town.
And purchasing a truth of much renown.
For witness, hand, and oath, thus bare word passes
And much a christian Carriage each way graces.
When lying stops a strangers love intended,
And treachery when matters pass pretended.
It Was Abners bane, yea Ioabs, Judas kiss,
Recorded for a treachery in this.
Great Allexanders fame allurd to treachery.
By base Parmeno, that I should gain say.
Was I Parmeno, but I am my self,
And prize sayre victory above all wealth.
Worthy Fabritlus told pirrhus though a foe,
How he was moved to his overthrow.
Not Ianus Bifrons with a Harpey smile,
Bent both ways equal falsely to beguile:
But Jonathan like pattern true affection,
Merits true travails grace: a false reiection.
See thou a smooth salute, proffer too great
Beyond relation? Consure a deceit
The whistle sweetly plays the fond birds hye Note! Beware of machi uillian
fawning, and simplician slaves.

Thus are surprizd by th'fowers fallacy.
Comes one to aid thee slauishly officious.
Such hasty helps have births are to pernicious
The wolf will work the sleep from out the bryer
Poor sheep thy ruin is his next desire.
Thy language, and thy owen endeauours trust;
Unused armours subject are to rust:
And men's deceit is silly ones to cheer
They know experience will not brook dec^ite N^te;

Findst thou a country man of base report,
With him of all men never once resort,
No Jew or Turk can prove more rauinous:
Then will a christian once appostulate thus.
Avoid as death a reconsciled foe,
Nor ever with him confidently go. West (...) end (...).

The sore smothd up not cured out will f^ie,
And soonst infect a careless stander by.
Man of a cross religion do not trust,
He has causion^ be with thee unjust.
Power allows the lawesse to offend.
So does the Lion on his pray descend. Voorzich ^ich in all. keert meni g^en val

Deal not in points beyond thee with a foe,
Better then wit abusd, is not to know.
And in their I and thus falst thou in a snare,
Of entermedling in beliefes beware.
A Temporizer shunn though allied, Vibanitas quid.

May a viper's in the bosom breed,
And fear thy mates accompanying thee, Non volo tescu^ ram, sed fi pot^s este
facetus ^* alling.

The fox Clad in the sheepeskin warning be
Whose vnspectednesse likeness did deceive
And the silly lamb down to his den bequeath,
These caueats so in short the wise may ^end,
The world is now too basely old to amend.
Last lovely posture sages noble deem,
Vrbanityes defind its an esteem.
Of every passage as its worth requires,
And joy in person as his love desires
Not stoickes, surley melencholy all.
Much merry parts in traueling befall.
Wherein men's action present is at gage,
And ableness of discourses set one stage.
Now stands the case and touch stone of a man.
When strangers shall his worth of breeding scan
Behauior Crowns the outer man's desire, merus stoicus merus A sinus.

And makes him great men's presence to aspire.
When Lo. the sottish ci^icke self devoted.
Sits in his tubb, how wise so ere^noted.
Opon the way a scipher to the view,
And passes Living, as one dead in show.
Nones sollace, not his own, sad humors seat,
Be ware thou never with a stoicke treat,
In melancholy fancies only ioyed,
Whereby loves true Vrbanity is destroyed.
And travails paths disconsolaterate made.
Man a mere deadman mid a Living trade. Comes secund^^ in via pro vebi culoest.

Good mirth and gladness grace true courtesy
As do good properties good men discry.
A merry consorts chariot in the way,
And makes a long way short as sages say.
Arts acting parts, then history attending,
Then the merry muses with their hores descending.
The wood and water nimphe bring in there shares,
And time of old it self a new declares,
A scholer's half a trauailer at home.
Attended in his studdy though alone.
Yet better fitted travails rites to use,
Then mid books dull acquaintance sit and muse.
Learnings most proper to the fortaine breed,
Whereby both they and these at home are fed.
His protects, plots, and parts of traveling
Assist the state, himself, his church, his King.
Come to the climes of sweet discourse he is rare,
Here say and ignorance still attendants are.
Yets hear a moderation much expected,
Jests become scurrill once the mean neclected,
Scu^llity exposing man to hate,
Chiefly much used in a foreign state,
The Clownish rusticke short another way
Chuff as idol wanting what to say
Blurts forth in a presumption homebred shame
Two sorts unworthy use of travails name Horat: in Su: lib: 1:

When Lo! in true vrbanit yes no wast,
Offense, ill mirth, presumption or distaste.
Apelles like I leave vnfinisht quite
The shape of travails sits for should I write?
The decades decour more: all worth Narration
So might men Judge it too prolix relation. Hl^ is zo meant acht

With Socrates lets give a judgment now,
Ask if he would Heracli^s writs avow?
What I have viewd and understand is good:
So sure (quoth he) that is not understood
These Comely habits for the rest may stand
As generals may the specials command.
As for the christian progress, its daily taught, Viuat, Valeat Vincat Carolus

And bless we him his plenty here has brought.
A like much care for mortal travails taken,
What Is best to be embraced? what forsaken?
Travail to foreign parts, I only tend,
Wherein the rest I briefly comprehend.
Circumstance says our lawyer alters Case,
Our circvmstances shall be time, and place,
Part for the whole, though more might be proposd
The whole may in his parts be full disclosd:
First for the time to travail in most free,
Is as the persons interessed be: Met ghemat men gaet verr.

Person with place and time colatertali made
Respective to the calling, cause, of trade.
The Sunny beams of peace most cheer the most
How ere the soldier may of quarrels boast.
For wars a viper that deuoureth ever
It canker like consumes, but comforts never, Beati pacifici. math: 5.

Yet thens the time, the warrior travails forth.
And now is the season best to show his worth.
Times they are as men's purposes require,
And hearein every one must back retire,
And note his own occasion when best
How should I be with each man's way possessed?
Yet there is a time for all things to be donn,
The wisest says) enuirond with the sunn
A seed time, spring, a harvest, and a frost:
A time to linger travails time to have,
A time to laugh, to morn, to sport to stay. Elt hefi ze^n tij^ Omnia tempus
habent, and suit spatijs transe vnt vniuersa sub caelo Ecles. 3. 1.

A time to fight, to rest, to war, to pray,
A time to fish, and furr, and fir in East
A time for oil, and vintage in west,
A time to care, to watch to plodd, yet then
A time without time, that's unknown to men,
Wherefore while time is present pass thy trade
By this pursuit are many wise men made
When as the foolish late are wanting oil: Naufragium, occursus pirat arnm.
Pall.

Others in fruitless desperation toil.
Time is when storms at sea much multiply
And Hymall clouds Enuelop sunn, and sky,
When art, and skill, and trial, turn to doubt,
Ignorant which way now to use the route.
When deckes are clad with cloudy oceann,
And dreary gusts incarcerate each man.
Now skill of Compass Card and crostaffe, failest
Poor man as in a second deluge sails,
No harbor, hope, or help seems to assist
Yet then the ship to wonder does resist
She trauiles up toward heaven as if there,
Conuoy Elyas fiery Chariots wear:
And nests in mounts billows of Neboos hight
Quauering as drunk thereon; a scarring sight
Not now content she shifts from hill to hill.
And in her progress sore against her will. Psalm. 107. Jonas. 3- Acts. 23.

They post her downward as an arrow shot,
When lo! her next pursuer sees her not,
As if to those dejected Angels fled,
Chaced from thence, by the Almightyes dread,
When see no sooner ^^ovvsd in valleys deep
But at a start she monnts a gain as steep,
No more, Wife David Limbs it more at life,
Jonas and worlds of try all end the strife,
Note only this in all these trafickes scenes
Time, ioynes with place, both act as primest means
The issues serve the cause, cares are arrendants,
Since providence and wit ^eare, no defendants.
For see the sea men strangely terrified,
Nor land, sun, stars, or light can be discryed*
Yet pry, and hale, and pump, and all to save. Ziet opt eynde. Apres lapluye
vientle bean temps.

And now the merchants bilt the saylours slave.
His life more precious makes him, pump, and pull,
Storms make each filly shipper master^ull,
Each dye themselves their couch and goods in waves,
And in this dreadful postutes play the slaves.
Their prayers, and pains and tears, are multiplied, Est modus in rebussunt
certi denique fines.

Winter storms terrors not to be descried.
The vernall view fell Bore as homeward Chases
And Calmes for storms and light for foggs replaces,
Thus often at last an unexpected rest
Possesses Mariners and Merchants breast:
Cross time grows ^ilder, mists are vanished,
Billows made plain, and Rocks discovered:
Men are at ease, the Ship now quieted,
And th'hilly Ocean as a sheet is spread
But see! the time, times will be waited on,
It Is better therefore, ta^ry ^ now at home:
I mean now Sol to Caprecorne has hyed,
And Eolns suruayes the Seas in pride.
When churlish Neptune counter maunds our ends,
Herein it is my Muse true time commends:
The time again is as the Climate stands,
Since diverse times attend on diverse Lands:
For East, and North, by icy hyemes closd,
Travail these ways is crosly now oposd:
No green-land, nor a Mosco voyage then
Presumptions eat the lives of many men: Temporibus modicina valent data
tempore prosunt and data non apto tempore vinanocent.

The times of passage under zoones observe,
Be sure thy bodies rule to it reserve
Such timely moderation health Commands
When much diseases neclects attendant stands
A time most suting every limb of trade,
For true avail by aid of time is made Ovid: art am:

One time another Crossing in her state
And what is a gemm now: thens quite out of date.
A time when by iuuasion and war,
That country where our course is, is at iarr: Temporiserua, near stauentis
phooilides.

And Garrisons, and rutters domineere,
It Is no good season now to travail here.
For Lion like fell war deuowres all right,
And laws, are prostrate to a vulgar might,
A time for specialles, such i will not discover,
For Propertyes in time surpass each other.
Iarres suit ye see to somes best benefit,
When, 'ts good for others peacefully to sit.
Peace fits Republic trafick to avail,
And Actual smiles the mariner assail,
Lo! now a limb of travails way is this,
Not of true times of travailing to miss
Occasions figure epitomes these things
Since time still flies, and hies with swiftest whings
The deed is crowned thus executed well,
And now I come of places rites to tell.
Times hour glass runs, and sword deuoures on [earth,
Yet each days dissolution is his birth: Front capillata postest occasio calua

Serving attendant to the God above,
Fitness of time one such his grace does love:
Next to the place our travails must be fitted,
Else must the sequel show us shallow witted.
Man must Each Climes condition preconceaue.
And different humors there in use perceive.
For natures wondrous fabric sorted stands, Natura gaet voor lecre.

In all the parts and paralells of Lands.
Earths circled kernel with the Heunes according:
Relative course to object climes affording
A local method causing to admire,
Whose fruits scene; feed, the trauailers desire
Since discrepant subject to the clime,
In creature, feature, fruit, delight and time.
Expect none but colaterall relation, Wat noodich is moet vergaen

Petwixt a diverse people, clime, and nation:
View well their wiles, the Sutherne nations use,
B^nt to alure, betray, cheat, and abuse,
The Northern course condition, stupid sense,
For arm thy self to these by providence.
The Turk Moore Jew, and Christian have their illes, Extreman^cent virtus
medio,

Man judging all place one: it is that killes:
Men to their climes still good or worse are fitted,
Had not each then in sight be sharper witted?
With Tom, his plow, or cow no cheats at home,
But millions are intrauailes traces shown, ziet menkan godt niet bedrieghen

It Is requisite thou Corespond the place,
In all things fit, to decour travails grace.
For first, once shipped: now 'ts good to meditate*
Where thou art now reposd, thy dangerouse state
This place requires much prayers and preparation
Sorted with some suruay of navigations
See to thy body seaficke keep it warm,
Vital powers opend, the bodies most in harm.
Use exercise above, and little sleep,
This Galene houlds will thee in temper keep.
Know thou a Captain here is as a King,
And please the mariners in any thing.
It Is they defend thee from fell waves devour.
And he has now thy liberty in power.
See th, master have in seafkilles able share,
And in the stearage look one have a care.
It Was Palinure Aeneas shipp did save,
Never make choice then of a skillesse slave.
Chanct in a storm hale tackle, and assist,
Two better may then one, assaults resist:
If in a fight scorn cowardice to use,
Better by far life, or a limb to loose,
Then be a slave to tyranny of so, Gratiarum enim cessat de cursus vbi
recursus non fuerit.

Bern: sermon: 55.



Many by try all have anoucht it so,
But guess the worst, it is odds that valience slaves,
And thus the place well, vsd your foes are slaves.
Landed now is place of thanks for gods defense,
So each have to his own place free from hence,
Twere frivolous for me to scale the orb,
Of local rites each country does afford:
Take compasses and mete, each man his own,
And in that place keep compass as is shown.
Earths various forms, in travails wonders see,
Then parallel and with thy own agree.
And to thy state, occasion and clime,
Fit upon trial course of place and time.
And thus the mapp of travails way is spread
The Compass in the midd; each line is lead
By point: the Rhomb, thou seek shall direct,
Thee by the causes to censure they effect.
Fates Loadstone right to will of highest set,
Cannot we say by art of man be let.
Yet by our runrace; judge we the arrive.
Since cases common to their causes thrive.
So had I done and set my muse at rest
Had she not smelt some savors of disrest,
Ascending from the fogg of misty Zoyle,
And with a puff or two thus ends the broyle
The Infidel, or home hatched misty eye,
Seeing us travails wonders thus descry. Obiectio: 1.

Puffes out his froth: I never saw the things, Defoliuge breue sort nce.

And sight alone from me a credit brings.
Dull didimus the force of thy salvation
Depends not on thy view but application:
Blessed are they says Jesus trust unseen
Whose faiths their goulden medium between.
Thus then thy soul the better parts affected
Why'es Charity thy senses quite rejected?
A local distance causing thy distrust, (...).

Yea all eyes blind and men but thee unjust.
Lo! every day a confirmation comes,
Of wonders waiting at our very homes.
Strange births and mereoures, deluges. and fires
Issues for sin of the all potents ires;
Yea creatures common in our clime no rares,
But wondrous to a stranger here repaires.
As is the clime: lands are miraculous,
Blind ignorance thee metamorphisd thus.
Creations worth, though Gods first work unknown
Thy sight, not reason Credits what at home.
Elie know how ere in tales are much abuse
The eye of wit will pass twixtlyes and truths.
Reason, and learning prospects will discern
And the' truth amidd a world of fallace learn.
Well its enough then; now i will read and credit,
So can I sit by the fire and purchase it, Obiectio. 2.

The wise man's sluggard vsd indeed to say
Yet some more sleep, as lions in the way Quisqxt habet mores ita iudicat itaq
fatur: M: Palling.

Such shallow puffes are fruits of necligence,
Still it is enough; is every sotts pretense
This makes thee man so unbelieving bent,
Because come short of travails true intent:
Orlando, Bevis, Palmeryn and such,
Are by the fire side credited as much
As truer travails; if oppofd thou wilt say
A man may credit, or he may denay
Reeuiew the worth of travail and be hold!
She triumphs midd of wonders manifould.
Then recollect the loosing difference, Licet acrioraqua legas, altius tamen in
animo sedent quae vult us, habitus; and gestus dicentis ad figit.

Twixe passive, and betwixt the active sense.
Had our heroickes trusted passive senses,
And made their ease and safety home pretenses
The ways of travail never had bin known
Nor Earth it self ere to it self bin shown:
Nor mutually each others rares imparted, Pliny. Epistola: 4: Lib: 2.

Or the rude heathen to the truth converted:
Or yet the wonders of Almighty spredd
But each bin blind fould by relation ledd.
Be ruld by me still keep thy chimney warm,
A sluggish spirit breeds but trauails harm. Obiectio. 3.

I Will not repeat her many worths to thee,
Tarry at home, let others go and see, Omnibus sane factis in est periculum
neque quis nouit quo apulsurus esta: negotii principio Solon

Well I agree a third cries to travail due
In wonders: and her worths wotthy pursue
But oh! the dangers in the way affright
Better then try: I Will trust what others write.
It Was the fond crochey t Isreal's spies possessed,
Sent by the Church to view that land of rest
The An^kims great Giants guard that land
And how can we these enemies withstand?
This cowardice these saithlesse disinherits
Caleb and Joshua prosper by faiths merits,
Thou read of Christ his travailing at sea,
when help us Lord, was the disciples plea.
He checked soon storms as Lord of sea and land
Nor can the proudest wave his word withstand
Art, thou a Christian? know Gods providence,
At sea, or land is equal strong defense,
Thy lot that's to thee man predestinate
Nor can over run or over stay thy fate
Perishes on man's lineage traueling?
Another dies in bed? why heeres the thing.
I Will never come swearst thou where these wear lost
No nor to be by sea or pirates crossed
And why forswearest not fool thy bed alike?
Where death each day does greater numbers, strike?
And aches, pains, yea crosses too: are more,
Then at the sea or of our native shore
I had for got in travails ways to tell
How thou art skild in this distruct so well
It Is penury of faith to fortysye.
And breed in thee a noble constancy
Thou live at home an unbelieving course
Nor do with God in priuacy converse
Prayers a stranger to thy study cases,
This makes thee so prophaine in foreign places.
A conscience pure is always lion bold,
Impures to ill and desperation sold.
A good man bears the record in his breast
That all to him shall issue for the best.
The man holy at home he is fortified
And's, both for storms and opposition tried: Ibi fides nullum habet meritum,
vbi ratio buma nahabet experimentum. Gregor: in euan ^6.

Comes and is bold gods works at sea to see
Longing to know his wonders what they be
Armd well by prayer, and patience for a storm,
And fortified by faith can cach no harm
Knows providence his portion hies a way.
And safely can in midst of pirrils stray, Oivitae secur a vbi est
conscien^^a pura. Romans. 8. Caelum non animum mutant qui transemare currunt.

Counts crosses, deaths and all, like aduantagious?
And how can this man choose but pass courageous?
Thy ignorance how blesst it is, opposes.
Time every day true travails worth discloses.
Se Moises, Joseph, Hester and the rest,
In foreign travail wondrously blessed
For where means seems vacant god supplies,
And in defect gods greatest honor lies, Posse pati facileest tibi ni
patientia desit. Ovid: amor,

Let men says David tell his wonders then
Delivering best: when worst to eyes of men,
Life is at home an ocean of crosses, Iazillan gebuz Basimah, turk. procua.

Amapp of cares, a labyrinth of losses,
It Is ^ut a change at sea, a local shift,
God cannot be prevented of his drift,
Thy lot is in thy forehead writ by fate Obiectio. 4. Exemplis flectite quoque
posse puto Amorum;

It can thou not alter, amend, abate,
Another Mimick and a worser says
Tush trauailers can live no other ways
Look back blind Doeg to the troops before
Rings, princes, prophets, who have travailed more?
The wisest, richest, greatest lead the way,
And well may then the meaner after stay,
Think thou because poor in her way are blessed
No men but base are in her interrest?
Gods no accepter of the persons grace
His blessing waytes on every lawful place.
How able means is to the place declard,
Look back: for now that labor shall be spard.
Yet Know if thou have small at home to spend,
Much less can costly traualle thee defend.
Thou meanst perhaps the lawless leagauer crew
Whose profits by all nationes bate accure
Or the land straying spendthrifts Indian course,
Or the bankrupt cheater bandid of the buise:
Or the giddy pated critic stird with error,
Or the offendour chaste with conscience terror.
The beast and noblest roades some villianes use
Nor can we travails noble path excuse.
Let lawless strayers see in Jonas mapp,
And turn a straighter course for what may happ, Oune saurit faired'une buse
unespre ^ier.

And thy revile experience checkes unjust
And shows thou have to travail lesser trust.
It may be thou and such for mentiond gulles, Acarion crow never good bawke.

Have sluggishly consumd your means as fools
A broad at home and each way base neclect,
Makes man's weldoing equal in defect.
Sir it is confessed a fifth says many gain, Obiectio quinta:

But many more by loss of it complain.
It Is part amends with Thomas thou believe.
Travail has in it potence to releive,
Yet he that Credits clouds shall never mow,
Nor the obiecting flowbacke seldom sow
It Is true great losses many times befall
But donot greater gains the loss recall? Angli^ano, (...) de: (...) de.

Letts parallel the trafickers condition
And judge him, (as thou us) without commission
Who more adventures? passes too, and fro?
To Spain? to Zant, to east and west we know
Mixing the gains and losses in account?
Yet do the gains By much the loss surmount?
How comes it earth ore no degree in state
Proves so wealthy, able, fortunate?
If (as it sales by land too) comes a Cross Impig^r extremos currit mercator
ad indos: per mar^ pau periem vitans Horat:

By storms or pirates unexpected loss,
His comforts this it was not his own neclect
Nor as a spend-thrift, lost it by defect,
Men subject are their losses to repeat
But not of blessings thankfully to treat
Hurts are in marble graud: but gifts in sand
And thus misprise men the almightyes hand
Yea some as Changlings travail will belly
Faulting it for their own ill husbandry
Lo! Losses wayt one men as much at home,
And Crosses charge us thicker's daily known.
Unkindness in strangers grieuie us less
Then such who though of land, and blood oppress:
And man can travail harder, and content:
Then when his home friends eye his poor intent.
A thousand honest shifts men there effect,
Which end in worth, success, and good respect,
Which they abasht at home could never try
Or in a worse sort suffer misery.
To you let me appeal who have it proud Note Apapret virtue in prosperis; at
emin et aduersie Bern: cant. 7: Dan: lib:

And pass far under what your births behoud
In losephs bondage to endure compeld
And in a willing patience mildly yield
By cruel Egypt, or a Turk affected,
And Daniell like over all respected.
Be ye in midd of bloody Lions cast,
Your cause (is good) his issue good at last.
The more the peril, the more providence
And greater glory God in man's defense.
Then Is only time for him to spread his power,
When dangers seem most sudden to devour
So have I seen, but often heard it told,
Men by the very sea storms made more bold.
And in the midd of likely losses gain,
And (more abroad then near home) grace attain.
And lesser cares in foreign cases serve
Then where their birth more mercy did deserve,
Yea more abroad rich then in father land,
See! trauailers help, in the Almighties hand.
Infine a six says, what need this a do
Us now in peace to traueiling to woe?
Sir we are well seated under mothers whinge
Ill never travail further then my king! Obiecti^ 6.

Fond How sworme keep thy chimny corner still,
To win unwilling sots it is not our will,
Let every man in his condition stay.
To Gad is not to travail but to stray.
The church, and every christians militant,
Yea every soil supplies another want
There Is most need man of travail in a peace Fac quod fecit.

The cause of plenty; author of increase.
Native comodius good to utter forth Iaia ost west thuys best.

Causing a city, or a countries worth,
Such men whose causes suit to sit at home
And the unwilling may reside alone,
Traficke and peace reciprocal suruiuers
Still where the one, to wonder both are thriuers None hac^t Ca^ll^rs A bo^
entend^urilnef^ut que demye parol Carpere vell noli nostra, vel edetua Martial.

In warts no time for free recourse to be
This we by trial, and experience see,
Embrace thy mothers dugg in promisd peace
Embrace thy slothfulness thy shames increase
Till times of trial or confusions come
Then runnst thou (as a madd man) bout thy home
If not thy pride is clownish ignorance,
The plow or cart thy uttermost advance.
See now my muse no more of momus crew
Appear as yet thy progress to pursue Recollectio. Generalis At male dum
recitas incipit esse tuus Martial:

The wise can tell sots soon can cavil more
There Is worth respondence, or a rea ding ore:
And man may sooner Change the moorish hue
Then force a fools belief, be it near so true.
To the ingenious traveler I bend,
Thus by a short suruay the total end
His wonders great in sky, on sea, on earth
Having each day, and way, a newer birth
His worth in pleasure, and true profits gain
How they both soul, and senses entertain,
His worths the persons highly dignifie,
How rares declard in royal property,
His way worth note, in persons fitness stands
Nature, birth, parts, and ableness commands
The place wherein he passes, pious good,
For god our state, and self is understood.
Next note we virtues common worth embrace
And vices ready travail to disgrace
The circumstantiall place and time attend
So did my muse against the critic bend
Who with the dart of truth expelled thence.
Gave cause (least tedioue now) we hy us hence.
Travails a rose, man the industrious be
Wise trauailers suck, and hiue up swauity
Badd spider like suck poisons to devour
Tiauai e is as the rose: a curious flower,
None can come near its colloures curious sents Dat rosa mell apibus qua sugit
aranea virus Granger.

Delicious rosall rites, and ornaments:
The base near less to uenome virtues change,
And if grow worse by travail it is not strange,
One as the Be sucks honey from this flower,
The spider gale, and venom to devour,
Not that the venom in this rose does grow Exemplo tanginen propriore potes

For it is of natures sweets most rare we show
But that the others humor poisonous
Conuerts these sweetes to Aconita thus:
In all the parts of manage more pernicious, Ovid: amor:

As is the subject in affection vicious.
Well mannagd travails only ornament,
In Christian, civil; and a true intent. Diuersorium enim hic commorandinon
habit andi habemus. Cic: desen^^^nt

Als use: the heuens, planets, and spherall pace,
The soul, and senses progress, travails grace.
Man's ages childhood, youth, and midd age hye
To sum at death account of destiny
Which destiny in secret set by God,
From all beginnings sealed by his word,
Proceds in progress with unknown envent
Man cannot stop his makers just intent:
He cannot have his fate, it keeps pace
Nor stays while periods added to the race,
Its travail mazeth all the earth to see
The strange effects in destiny there be
From birth to nonage, middle gray and grave
Which some at sea, some land all some way have.
Some poor of rich, some high of low arise,
Thus wanders man, in him his destinyes.
A sparrow cannot fail but by his fate
Who could ere? once prolong; amend abate?
True Christian travail makes the mortal blessed
And him that in the two is interest,
The course of civil travail was our task,
Daily, divines the other two unmask, Trauails welfare to be added.

The issues seen (if worthy uiew) it is well,
Many more learned the form may happ excel, Veritas ^^e and (...)

The matter founded on the rock of truth,
Both recreations of my muse in youth
Courage then travails noble sons advance
Arm and expect a mapp of cross mischance:
Rocks pirates gulphs straights sirens storms and store
Of remoraes and monsters of the shore. Ille quidem dus gratus est eu: coginat^
hoc sunt: omnia sue (...) rerum se (...) ad usus Hefio^^^.

Behold as virtues vices are attendants
ye must be both assailants and defendants:
Hang not on aerie hope of fate alone,
Providence only industry will own.
Suppose the worst in travail that may come
Scorning those flashy preconceyts of some,
Who guess all done, to do strange things effected
The goulden mean of modesty neclected
When if a loss, or crosses wart there intent
The gains despair the end astonishment Ep: Eronn.

Level thy doubts and hopes so though all lost
Thy patient soul of gain in loss may host: Ephilegu^

Thus travails wonders worths and ways declard
And travails walfares as a fourth prepared,
Caliope by Cinthius called: flies forth
Denying travail welfare to his worth: ^ax pocali Patriaeque ^alus, and
gloria regni, Carol^^.

Since oh the times, fell mars his welfare crosses
By pirates rapins ruins murders losses
Mourn o my muse in secre^t and retire,
Till Europe live in peace, his long desire.
when on his welfares thou more ^ee may sing,
And Britain bless Iehoue who wrought the thing.
Then for a fourth her wellfar^ ^ shall ascend
And until then my trial has an end.
Si been quid feci deo gratare Datori
Si male quid feci noueris esse meum.
Olimpiad: in seriptit
FINIS

