The legacye or embassate of the great emperor of Inde prester John^, unto
Emanuell king of Portyngale, in the year of our lord M.v.C.xiii.

Of the faith of the Indyans, ceremonies, relygyons etc.

Of the patryarche and his office.

Of the realm, state, power, majesty, and order of the court of prester John^.

John^ More to the christian sten reader.
FOr as myche as every man naturally is desirous to here new things and
strange (as both authors testyfye, and experyence proves) all though there
were none other commodyte thereof then the neweltye: I thought yt a thing
worth the labor, to translate this little work, late happed in my hand
through the help of a special familyar friend of mine / syns surely I thought
it should be a work not only new, true, and plesaunt to the reader, but also
for ye knowledge of sundry things therein contained very profitable and
necessary. For in this little treatyce be contained, the state, the faith, the
relygyon, the ceremonies, the Patryarche with his office, the power, the laws
of the land and empire of prestre John^, besides his royal majesty and order
of his court. All which things were rehearsed unto ye mighty and pusaunt
prince Emanuell king of Portyngale, by the mouth of one Matthew, sent from
the emperor of Inde prester John^, unto the fornamed Emanuel, in the year of our
lord M.v. hundred.xiii. And all though of this prester John^ sir John^
Mau^defeld knight, in a work yt he made of the dyscrypcyon of countries,
somewhat has made mencyon: yet this embassatour that came from thens to the
king of Portyngale, as he to whom every thing perteynyng either to the
religyon and faith of that people, or to the polytyque order of that land, was
myche more perfytely known, yt is no marvel though he myche more perfytely
descrybe them, namely to that prince, which from point to point was curyouse
to inquire. This empire of prester John^ is reputed as great a maygne country
in a manner (if yt be not gretter) as all the remanaunt that now remains
christened, except the new founden lands, that have been bycomen chrystened
within few years of late. And therefore yt greatly may, and of reason greatly
ought to rejoice all good chryste^ people, to perceive that though there are
diverse things wherein they and we dyffere in rytes laws, customs, and
ceremonies: yet in all other things necessaryly perteynynge as well to the
virtues of faith and relygyon, as all other virtues moral, they so farreforth
accord and agree with these christian nacyons of ours, and with the catholyque
doctrine of the church, that yt may well appear even by that thing alone,
that the spyryte of god has wrought and works this full agreement and
consent, in so many things necessary to salvation, through so many great
countries and regyo^s as ours are and theyres both, ye tone by so long space
having so little access unto the the other, that of many years till now very
late, we could not well tell whyther they were well cristened or not. How be
yt yet appears well now by many things, not in this book only, but in those
letters also, which now very late the emperor of that land that now is, and
son unto him that sent thembassatour unto the king Emanuell, did send not
only to the noble king of Portyngale that now is, son unto the said noble
king Emanuell, but also to the popes holiness that now is Clement of that
name the.vii. by his embassatour, with his obedyence after the manner of other
christen princes: by this treatyce and those letters yt does I say well
appear, that the said emperor and all the church, that is to wit all the
christen people of that empire, be of the same faith that we be. And in this
treatise ye also se, that ye great things which have been before this times
establyshed against heretyques by general counsayles of old, against which
old determynacyons these new heretyques make new business now, the self
same things have the christen people of that great christen empire from the
time of their first co^uersyon, which was forthwyth upon the death of Christ,
co^tynually byleued and ever observed still. So yt this point is able alone if
yt be pondered as yt is worthy, either to turn and convert or put to
silence for shame, all the besye brethren that would make men so mad, as to
wene that those things were new devised and late brought up here by prestes
/ which things them self se well enough (though they dyssymyle and say nay)
in the books of old holy saints, and which things are now well known to have been this.xv. hundred year byleued and used thorough that great empire as great
a people as ours, into which our prestes as far as men can tell of, never
came hense to teach them. But sith that we begin now each to hear more of
other, I pray god as there is in both many things very good, and some things
that might be better: each people may learn and take of other those things that
be good, and let the badde go by. And that we may make both so but one
church mylytant here in earth, that we may both be parts of one gloryouse
church, that ever shall be tryumphaunt in heaven.

Damyane Gooes a Portyngale, unto the right reverent father in god lord John^
ye great Goth, archbysshop of wpsalen^ inhabytyng the country of Swetia sendes
gretynge.
THrough the great famylyar frenshyp (god thereof the undoubted author) that was
between your holiness and me when we were to gether at Dantiske, what time I had
there matters of my pryncis to do, after often metynges, at the last happened us
co^munycacyon of ye matters of Porti^gale, as of ye viages of the Indyans,
Arrabies, and Perses. And also of the long and dyffyculte passage into those
countries, of the parelles of the main Occean see also, and of the co^tynuall
war that the inhabytours as well on this side Gau^ge as beyond, made again ye
Arrabyans, Persya^s, and Indyans, of the yearly invasion of the Turks, which
by their mighty naueyes sent by the sea of Arrabye unto Inde the less, all
though not venqueshyd, yet greatly vexed and troblyd our people. But after we
had much debated this matter, your holiness put well in mind of the high
emperor of Inde prester John^. From whom surely my self ones saw an
embassatour sent unto our king, and being present by, hard all that ever he
told, as well of the faith, as of the ceremonies and estate of prester Iohn^s
empire, which he parcel mele descrybed in the presens of many of his nobles.
All which when in order I had showed your holiness you required me, if ever yt
chanced me to return to the low countres, that I would send you all those
things breuely descrybed, with the artycles of the faith, ceremonies, and
estate of their country. which I faithfully promised to do. Therefore, after
ones (though a thousand dangers escaped) I was come saufe to the low
countries, calling to mind your most holy company (which I never forget nor
never shall) and therwyth all my promise, all those things as was your request
dylygently have I done, which now here I send you. I send you chyefely the
copye of the letter which the high and mighty prince the emperor of Inde
prester John^, writ on a season unto my maystert he king of Portyngale / and
after that, all the artycles, as the religyon, ceremonies, themperours power,
the noblenes of his court, even in as compendyous manner as the same legate
descrybed them.

More over then this (to thentent the troth of the matter more plainly may
appear) I shall show you bryefly, how presently I both hard and saw all
those things.

In the year of our lord a thousand, five hundred, and.xiii. there landed and
arrived in Portyngale, an embassatour of the high emperor of Inde prester
John^, and of queen Ellynes his mother, sent unto the most chrystened prince
Emanuell king of Portingale. Thembassatours name was Matthew, an Armenicane
born^, with whom was joined in commyssyon a another noble young man an
Abessyne, brought up in the^perours prester Iohn^s court, and his name was
James. These were very well welcomed of ye king, in whose court they abode and
remained.iii. years to gether, and had there in great reputacyon, found only
at the kings cost and charge / till afterward they took their leave, and so
merely returned saufe home again to their country. This Matthew then, all
such things as he had in commandment, commyssyon, and charge, ones declared
to ye kings hyghnes, and likewise the letters of his emperors delyueryd: the
king within few days after caused the^ to be sent for / and so there in the
company of certain well learned men, and presence of his nobles, demanded by an
interpretour, of the faith, ceremonies, and estate of the^pyre of Inde.

Now the^ at this time was I.xii. year old, and one of those children that
are wont to bring in the kings service unto the kings table. Two year after
I had done the kings grace service in that office, I was by at all this as
other of the court were, and both hard saw and understood all, as myche at least ways as my young and tender age would give me leave.

But here you may obiecte and say, how could thou being so young (as then
thou wast) other write or remember all those things, so that thou sholdest
thereby be able so long time after, in every point so perfytely to describe yt.
I answer, I confess my yough would not suffer me to do it But after I had
spent full.x. year in that office, the most chrystened prince king Emanuell
my brynger up, gave me a new office. He sent me hither to the low cou^tres
on his busynes. whether as soon as I was come, I found a companyon a very
noble quycke young man, both of the same order and office I was on, whose name
was Roderyke Fardynande, which now was there for matters of his prince (and
such a one in their vulgar tongue is called a factour) He being before sent
as an embassatour from the king Emanuell unto Maximiliane the emperor, and
Alberte the duke of Bauarye, had received letters from Antony Carnere ye king
Emanuelles secretary, in which letters these artycles which ones he had
written before the king had inclusyd and sent. Now after I was fully
acquaynted with this Roderyke Ferdyna^de, and each had showed a another others
besinesse I happened to speak of his legacy into Germany, chau^sed us also to
fall in co^munycacyon of Inde. After which he showed me he had received from
Antony Carner, both thartycles fore remembered, and also the copy of the letter
yt was sent unto the king, from the high emperor of Inde prester John^. which
as soon as I had hard, incontinent I desired he would let me have a sight of
them. He was content. I took them, and as well as I could, have translated
them out of the Portyngale tongue into latyne. To you I dedycate them, to you I
send them. In which if ye espy any Barbarous speech perdon me, as a courtyer
and unlearned, and with great besynes very myche let and troubled. But how so
ever they be written, true they be. Al which we require your holiness to take in
good worth. But now hear you, what that high and mighty emperor prester
John^ wrote unto our king, here I say this letter unto our king not feigned,
but very true and, word for word almost, translate out of the Caldeane
language (which speech they most use) into the Portyngale tongue, and so again
out of that into latyne.

The letter of the high emperor of Inde Prester John^ unto the most mighty
prince Emanuell king of Portyngale.
IN the name of the father the son and ye holy ghost, three persons and one
god, health, grace, and the blessing of our lord and redemer Jesus Christ ye
son of Mary the vyrgyn, borne in the house of Bethleem, be with our
well-beloved brother, the most chrystened king Emanuell, lord of the sees, the
subdewrr of the fers and mysbeleuyng Moers. Our lord god prosper you, and send
you thouer hand of your enymyes, and dylate and enlarge your kingdoms and
realms through ye devout prayers of the messengers of Jesus Christ our
redemer, that is to say of the four euangelystes, saint John^, saint Luke,
saint Mark, and saint Matthew, whose holiness, and prayers preserve you.

we certyfye you our interely well-beloved brother, that here unto our country
be come out of ye high noble court of yours, two messengers, of which two one
is named John^ and calls him self a pressed, and the other Gomer who of us have
desired vytayle and soudiers. wherefore unto you we send our embassatour Matthew
with the leave of ye patriarch Marce, which gives us his blessyng, and sendes
prestes to Jerusalem, which is our father, and of all those that be under our
domyon, the pyller of Cristes faith and the holy trynyte. He by our
commandment has sent unto your great capytayne of them, that in Inde fight
for the faith of our sauyoure Jesus Christ, to show him that we shall be always
ready when need requires to send them both vitayle sustynaunce and soudyours.
Therefore the fame goes that ye prince of Cayry prepares many a navy against
your armies to be revenged of the iniurys and damages, that they have sustained
by the capytayns of your war that ye have in Inde. which (as yt is informed
us) they have often suffered, wherein I pray god of his great goodness daily
prosper you, that so in conclusyon all infydeles may utterly be subdewed. we
therefore against their assaute shall send soudyours, which shall abide and
tarry at the sea of Mecha, that is to wit at Bebalmamdes, or to be sent (if you
so think best) unto the haven of Judah, or Thor, that so at the last you may
rydde out of the way and destroy such myscreant Moers, so that the gifts and
oblacyons, that be offered up at the holy sepulcre from that time forward be
not devoured of dogs.

Now is come the time that was promised in which (as they say) Christ and his
blessed mother Mary forshewed, that in the later days of the Christian countries
in Europe, a certain king should arryse, which should destroy the hole nacyon
of the Babaryanes and Moers. And surely this is the same self season which our
savior Christ promised to his blessed mother Mary should come. Furthermore
what so ever our embassatour Matthew shall show you, account you yt, as spoken
of mine own mouth and believe him. For he is one of the chyefe of our court,
and for that cause we wylled to send him to you. we would have committed all
this, to your own messengers you sent hither, had yt not ben that we feryd
lest our besynes should not come to pass according to our mind.

we send unto you by this our embassatour Matthew a cross, made of the same
self wood, on which our savior Jesus Christ was crucyfyed at Jerusalem. A
pyece of this holy wood was brought unto us from Jerusalem, of which we have
made.ii. crosses, whereof the one still remains with us, and the other we send
by our embassatour unto you. The color of the wood is black, and hangs at a
little silver ring. Moreover if it please you either to mary your daughters
with our sons, or your sons with our daughters, yt shall be very plesaunt and
profitable for both parts, and a great stablyshement of the brotherly lege all
ready enterd, which I pray god long to co^tinew. No more at this time but the
health and grace of our redemer Jesus Christ and of his blessed mother our lady
saint Mary the vyrgyn, hold their hand over you, your sons, your daughters,
and all your hole household. Amen.

Besides all this we certyfye you if we list to assemble our power that we have
strength enough to destroy (if god be our help) all the enymyes of our holy
faith. But as for our realms and countres so be annexed and joined to gether,
that on no part we can break out to the sea. wherefore we have no power on ye
water, wherein (god be thanked) you of all nacyons are most mighty.

Jesus Christ be your aid, help, and succor, for the things that ye have
done in Inde / be surely more by gods might then mannis. If so be it you would
prepare and set out a thousand sail to se, we shall find vytayle, and all
other things, plentyfully, necessary for the furnyshynge of your nauey.


After that the most chrystyned king emanuell by the interpretour had well
understood these letters, very desirous to hear of Christian matters, gredy to
know again, of the legate, how the matters and Crystes faith stood amongst
the Indyans / after certain days, calling to gether the nobles of his court,
commanded that by certain well learned christen deuyns, which was there ready
at hand, he should be demanded in his presens, of every point. And he
answering by parcel mele declared all things, as hereafter in order follows.

The confession of the faith, ceremonies, and manner of their relygyon, of the
empire of prester John^.
IN this point, first of all, they believe as we do, three persons and one god,
in which one and most best father they faithfulli trust and believe.

2 Item that he of no subject matter at all, nor of nothing erthly, but by a
meruaylous means made both heaven and earth, and like wise all things contained
in them.

3 Also that Jesus Christ, that anointed king, our sauyoure, the very Messyas
so often by prophets promised, is the very son of very god borne in Bethleem
the cytty of David (according to ye prophecyes) of Mary, which continued a
vyrgyne, both before the birth and also ever after.

4 Moreover that the same Jesus Christ for our sin at Jerusalem before
Pontius Pylate a Romayne there presydent and governor of Jury, by an unjust
judgment, both was condemned, suffered, died, and was buried.

5 Furthermore he incontenent after his death descended to hell, and their gates
shaken and all to broken, the third day arrose from death to life having the
vyctory of his enymyes and death, and that after he returned again, and
meruaylously ascended up to heaven from whens he came.

6 Bysydes this, they faithfully confess that after all this mortal life,
they look for an universal and endeles resurreccyon of our body.

7 Also that by the same faith they look for Christ to be judge, who shall give
an universal judgment of good and evil, in which each man shall receive a
just reward, according to his deserte in this world.

8 By which judgment given ones, good men shall have eternal joy with out
end, and evil men everlasting pain vexacyon and shame.

9 Therefore they as well as we, solemnly observe and dyligently keep the.x.
precepts of Moses.

10 Also they reke^ as we do the.vii. dedely sins.

11 They have also all ye books written of Moses, and finally all the
prophets, with all such other volumes of the old law.

12 The four eua^gelistes have they in great estymacyon, even the self same
that we have, that is to wit, saint Matthew, saint Mark, saint Luke, and
saint John^.

13 Of Poules epystles they lack nothing, which each by name he there in
presence recyted.

14 The creed made by thapostles and every article of the same they well allow.

15 The pater noster made by Crist they so much set by, that they prefer yt
before all other prayers.

16 The Aue Maria also they mich use, in the honor of the mother of god the
virgyn our lady saint Mary

17 Their children the.vii. day after their birth, both be baptized, and also
after Moses law cyrcumcysed. And that not for any respect of merit or trust
they have in it, but only for yt yt so has remained of an old custom from
their forefathers, and so to them left from hand to hand.

18 All the people in the remembrance of the true and their ones received
baptyme, yearly in feste of the epyphanye with a meruaylouse great gladness and
reioysynge of mind, openly a fresh profess the faith of Christ, and be
solempnely baptized again.

19 In the remembrance of our lords maundy, even in manner as we use, they
say mass, but that not for any reward money or lucre, unless that percase
some of a good relygyouse mind freely without axynge give their almoyse.

20 The blessed sacrament of thauter they recounte for the highest sacrament,
fyrmely with a syncer and pure faith, professyng it to be the undoubted body
and blood of our lord Jesus Christ / and according unto Christ's ordinance,
receyuynge yt under both the forms.

21 As for the sacraments of anoylynge and vnxyon, they confess.

22 Strayte ways as soon as they have committed any dedely sin, they get
them a priest to whom in secret they confess their fautes.

23 They receive pain for their trespass (which in their vulgar tongue they
call penance) lymyted at the dyscrecyon of the confessor, which the party
confessed fulfylleth with all dylygence.

24 On fasting days (as often as they come) they absteyne both from flesh
and fyshe, without the receyuynge of collocyons or refeccyon.

25 Instead of the lenton fast, they fast the septuagesime. And that (as we
may gathere of the time) bygynneth with our lent.

26 As for sondayes and other holy days, appointed by their bishops, in the
remembrance of god and our lady and other saints, they keep with al reverence.

27 In the later weke of their lent, they use the memoryall of Crystes passion
even as we do.

28 They keep ye palm sunday yearly even about the same self time that we
do, and as we do.

29 And they use to burn tapers as we do, and at the same time that we do.

30 The go on common processyons, as the time or necessyte requires.

31 Ones in ye year they use to have a solemn dyryge for all christen souls.

32 They use to take ashes, both in the manner we do, and also about the time
that we do.

33 There is there an infynyte number of monasteryes, as well of women as of
men, living very straytely in great abstynence.

34 Amongeste these monasteryes some there be, whereof each has in yt either
vii. hundred viii. hundred or a thousand monks.

35 In that realm is there a certain montayne, that has inhabytynge here and
there upon yt.xii. thousand monks.

36 All those monks as many as they be, get their living by their handy
labor, nor in no wise may go to axe almoyse house by house, in streets,
vyllage, countres, or towns. All manner of beggynge is utterly forbidden them,
unless that some of a good godly mind give them any thing freely, then may
they receive yt, not as begged, but as freely given.

37 Here and there be preachers, which preche to the people the faith of
Christ, and those be prestes or monks, and that of the best learned.

38 Every where be many hospytalles, whereunto all pore folk be ge^tylly
welcomed and received.

39 Their holy houses, that is to wit the temples of saints, if any
malefactor fle thither for aid and help, yt shall succor him and serve him.
But this herein provided yet, that if any happen to come thither for murdering
of their neighbor, they give him so small a porcyon to eat, that at the last
he is compelled to dye for hunger.

40 If one die, they make myche a do at his buryeng, even as it is with us, with
prayers, crosses, prestes, and such other kind of ceremonies, and burye him in
the church.

41 Such as have been holy, and men of good conuersacyon in their life, after
they have been long time deed and buried, they make dylyge^t search of their
virtuous living. which done, they recounte him a saint, that is to say (as
the greek word is) canonyse him.

42 The housbandes solempnely with a great company come to the church doers,
and mary only but by words that they speak of the present time.

43 Of an old custom they have, men may not mary any of their kyndred within
the.vii. degree / within which, no not their high patryarche in any wise either
may or will presume to dyspense.

44 In their chyrches and temples they have and worship the images of god,
our blessed lady saint Mary the vyrgyn, with other holy saints.

45 They have in their temples holy water, which they believe good and
effectual against evil and wicked spyrytes.

46 Very many costly temples and belles they have.

47 The garments wherein they say mass in, use to be consecrate.

48 Chyefly they honor the feast of saint John^ Baptyste.

49 They begin the year at September.

50 The pope of Rome they knowledge / but the cause why they do not their
obedyence to him (as other christian people do) is the evil dyffycult way.

51 Saint Bartholmew thapostel of Christ, preached first the gospel and
Christ's faith unto them.

Of their patryarche, and of his office.
THey have but one chyefe priest or bishop which they call a patryarche,
that is to say the chyefe of the faders. He only has power on spyrytuall
matters, that is to say as well in ecclesiastycall offices as dyspensynge with
benefyces, without the interrupcyon of any te^porall person / and he lives
contynually unmarried.

2 This patryarche has very great possessions / for the thryde part of prester
Iohn^s reueneus comes to his part, and that besides all the tithes of the
hole realm.

3 All the profytes hereof is bestowed only upon pore folk, the marriage of
fatherless children, and prisoners.

4 when the patryarche dies, the emperor prester John^ is the heir of al his
goods. His successor has no manner a thing left him, besides the dignyte of
ye patryarches chair, and the cure of al his fold of sheep committed to his
charge.

5 This patryarche is called the patryarche of Alexa^dry / and for this cause.
For that where of old there were only four through out al crystendome, of
which Inde chansed to have the patryarche of Alexandry.

6 This patriarche of an old usage was wont to be chosen at Jerusalem only,
and that by the voices of all good relygyous men of thempyre of prester John^
that there were at the same season dwelling.

7 This patryarche extends his curse or exco^munycacyon upon such as are
obstynate and rebellyous persons / which in so farforth is dreded and feryd,
that who so ever stand so accursed dare not touch neither meat nor drink till
time he know him self assoyled. For if so be yt there be any so obstynate a
person that he cares not for the curse, but that not wythstandynge he leueth
not from the crime for which he so was accursed: his meat and drink shall be
taken from him, and he so compelled to dye for famyne.

8 This patryarche shall not let or forbydde the people from the sacraments of
the church, for no manner of offense but only for murder.

9 The prestes have wives / but when one is deed, they may not mary another.

10 Bastardes shall never be admitted to be prestes.

11 Never shall there be any admytted to the order of presthed, but that before
he shall be examined, by a well learned company, whether he be mete for yt or no.
If he be not mete, he is rejected with shame enough.

12 The emperor him self. Prester John^, has no manner power on the clergy.
For that is a thing bylongeth only to the patryarche.

13 If any spyrytuall man commits any abomynable crime, him the patryarche
after his own dyscrecyon suffers to eat but certain ounces of meat, and so
lyttel and little to dye for famyne. But none of them even out of hand puts
he to death, but only murderers.

14 That same patryarche gives plain and full remyssyon and absolucyon of
sins.

15 Twelve has he of his cou^sayl, with whom he orders and governs al
spyrytuall matters.

Of the realm and estate of the emperor prester John^.
AFter all this being further demanded of the emperors realm and domynyon, he
answered in this manner.

1 First he has in his realms very many cities and towns.

2 His nobles wear garments of sylke, cloth of gold, velvet, satyn, damask,
with such other precyouse things.

3 The comen people were nothing but cloth.

4 Diverse kinds of marchaundyse has he in his realms, and those very
precyouse.

5 He has great plenty of mynys of gold, silver, and other metal.

6 Money has he none, but that is brought out of realms next borderynge
there about. They take gold and silver by weight instead of coin.

7 Great plenty of corn have they, and that of diverse colors, both black,
white, read, and gray. But as for their meal of all of the^ is very white.
Benys, pesyn, tarys, and all such other codware, have they enough both plente
and also of diverse kinds.

8 There grows great abundau^s of sugar.

9 Oxen, sheep, horse, mulys, camelles, gotes, hogs, with such other
household cattle besides birds they have great plentye.

10 Porke eat they none / not for ye that either their conscyens or relygyon
that forbyddeth, but because they find it not wholesome for their bodies.

11 Themperours estate and power is very great, for he has under his domynyon
three skore chrystened kings. which be kings of great mighty kingdoms. whose
names the legate there showed openly.

12 Besides these three skore kings, yet has he.v. other Machomet kings under
him.

13 Moreover he has under his dominion meruaylous many great men, as princes,
dukes, marquyses, earls, barons, lords of very great lands and reueneus.

14 They observe and straytely keep what so ever the emperor commands them.

15 The Chronicles and noble acts of their princes they keep saufe, and what so
ever is worthy remembrance their secretary dylygently regesters.

16 The rytes, laws, statutes, and comen ordinances made for the peoples
governance, they saufely keep in writing.

17 The Emperor has ever.xii. men present with him of his counsayll, whom he
may comen with of all the matters of his realm.

18 Through all the realms and domynyons of his empire, there be judges
appointed, which serve (according to the truth of ye matter) both to hear
causes and judge them.

19 No judge may judge any man to death but only for murder.

20 The emperor has very great trybutes.

21 The emperor has as well of ye inhabytours as of other merchant
strangers, the.x. part of their gaynes / their stock saved hole.

22 There be souldyours of a certain relygyon, which ever go in white, with
crosses on their cote armor / always ready for to war for Crystes faith, if
need be.

23 Of the inherytau^ce of their fathers, one has as much as a another, no
respect had to the age, whyther they be older or younger.

24 In all those realms and prouynces, there be no Jews, all though yt is
well known that ones there were many. But when the people could not suffer or
bear their naughtynes, suddenly they set upon them and utterly destroyed them.

25 Many fayres and rich markettes have they by reason of ye merchants that
resort thither.

26 The realms, prouynces, and countres of prester John^, stretches to both
the parts of Nilus floode.

27 The people know none another but Erithrea^, yt is to say the red see.

Of the order of the same empire, and manner of the court.
1 THe emperors proper name is David. His common name prester John^, king of
the Ebessyns.

2 His tytles be in this manner. David king of kings, king of the Ebessins,
prester John^, king of kings unto the Ebessyns and of all his prouynces, both
next and also at the end of the sees. The king of Nilus flood, and judge of
ye great Sodane, and of the country of Cayre, and the sea of Alexandrine. By
the power of god and our redemer Jesus Christ, and by the power of our lady
the vyrgyne saint Mary.

3 This emperor of an old custom maryeth ever the kings daughters that be
under his domynyon.

4 The eldest son ever succedeth his father in his kingdom.

5 This son of his is verily well nuryshed and brought up within his
fathers court / as for his other sons (at lest ways if he have any) be
brought up like noble men, either under the kings, or else some great
princes of the emperors domynyon.

6 The inherytaunce of his empire neuere descends to the daughters. But if
the emperor hap to dye without issew male, then comes yt to the next of his
blood.

7 Themperours wives be had in great honor and keep a great port.

8 The Emperor has ever ready at hand a meruaylous great number, as well of
horsemen as fotemen.

9 The emperor to thentent he would exercise his souldyours, in acts of
war, is ever for the most part in the field amongst them. where they
apply them self to fetys of arms.

10 In the emperors court the chamberlayn has the chyefest rome.

11 The Emperor has for sauegard of the body, ever at hand.xii. of the noblest
of his realm. Each of whom have under him.xii. thousand fighting men.

12 Those same.xii. noble men occupyes ye gretest romes in the court.

13 They keep very dylygently in writing pedygrees, names, and surnames of
their ansetours, whereby every one may perfytely know his nacyon and stok.

14 Themperours sons and doughthers be married unto the sons or daughters of
other kings under him with great dowers given with them in marriage. And then
all ye people come, and of their own mocyon give them gifts.

15 Themperoure what time necessyte so requires uses thobedyence and service
of his subjects.

16 The men chylderne of the kings, that be under him, be (to win their
fathers good wylles) brought up in themperours court.

17 He admytteth and suffers chalenges among his subjects.

18 The name of the emperors prester Iohn^s mother yt now is, is Ellen, a
very holy woman, and one that shows a great example of chastyte, to whom for
here especial goodness, and the nonage of her son, is committed all the hole
order and rule of the realm.

19 Of kings, emperors, or the christen princes of Europe, they never had
knowledge but only of the frenchmen whom they call in their vulgar tongue
Cristyans. But by ye reason of certain noble acts that were done few years
passed by the Portyngales, against the Turks, Persys, Arabyens, and Indya^s,
the name of the king of Portyngale begone to be well known and had in myche
reverence and reputacyon amongst them.

HEre have you now right reverent father ye things I promised your holiness (at
my being with you) of the legacy of Inde. But yet to thentent you may give the
more crede^ce to the matter, I shall put somewhat to, that a very noble young
man, and one of my famylyar acqueyntau^ce, named George Lupe Dandrade (what
time we were to gether about our princes besynes in the low countries, and
also hosted both twayn in one house at Antwerpe) told me. On this wise was his
tale.

In the time of his being at Inde for certain matters he had there of his
prince (where he remained by the space of certain years) one a very valyant
man Lupus Soarez, by the kings commandment was the chyefe captain of the
Portyngales wars, and chyefe ruler of all the realms, cyttes, towns, and
castelles, that be under the king of Portyngales domynyon, even from Ethiope,
thorough out the Chynas. This Lupe had prepared him a meruaylouse great nauey,
to sail as his au^cetours were wont to do from Cochine (now is Cochyne ye
castle and dwelling place of the Portyngale captayns) and so intended to come
to the sea of Araby commenly called the red see, against the Turk / which
Turk now instead of the Soldayne occupies the country. when he was arrived
in a certain I Will, called of the inhabytours Camara, that lies in that cost /
incontyne^t he caused two ships to be made ready, and took un to him a
certain chosen Portyngales both famylyar and faithful, among whom this
George was one. This done he commanded they should cast over to a another I Will
called Mazua, to the intent that when he were there ones, he would send out
three espyes unto the great emperor of prester John^, under the pretext of
marchau^dyse, and that for two causes. One to be certyfyed of the legacye
whereof Matthew before showed unto our king, and to know whether those things
were true or false. Secondely that they very narrowly should search, what
ports and what havens were under the dominyon of Pester John^. Of these.iii.
spies one was well learned and very expert in scripture whose name was Iusarte
Viegas, a Baccaren borne. After they were ones saufe come home again both man
and ships to their capytayne, and had made an end of their vyage / they
showed him all, both that they had seen there, and also hard of the
inhabytours of that country / and further declared that they knew for a
suerty that the legacy of Matthew was true / and that the same Mathewe they
said was such a one as we had seen him with our own eyes ones embassatour
before our king. The cause and manner of the legacye they say was sych.

After that Ellyn the mother of David prester John^, that then was a very wise
and a dyscrete governor of all his hole realm (for he was but a child) had
learned of certain Portyngales which were come to her court, and specially of
one called John^ Clerk, all that ever we had done at Inde against the
infydeles, she sends that Matthew in a secret legacy unto the most christyned
prince Emanuell, the first of that name, king of Portyngale / with whom she
sends also a another young man an Ebyssyne borne an noble man, James by his
name, of whom before in the descrypcyon of the legacy, we have made mencyon.
To them she gave here letters of commendacyon dyrected to the head ruler of
that prouynce, under the domynyon of prester John^, whose power stretches to
Mazua and the sea of Araby, to pray him to help them as secretly as he could
with all such things as they should need, making as though they were merchant
men which came thither for marchaundyse. This ruler (and who so ever happens
to be in that office) is called in the Ebessyne tongue Baruagays. This Mathewe
and his companyon the Ebyssyne; through the letters of commendacy. on they had,
were loui^gly welcomed, where as they made merry a certain space, never
telling no man their purpose, neither what he would do there, or where when
he thens departed he would become. But (to the intent he might bring his
purpose to pass with less parell) feigned him self a lether byer, and in the
mean season now and then bought certain presents which pryuyly he sent unto
queen Ellyn. And under this cloak, perused diverse prouynces, menyng this, that
escapynge saufe without hurt, through enmyes of the Portingales, at last might
come to Portyngale yt self, and so there do the things he come for. For other
way then this was there not. Always whether so ever he went or where so ever he
became, he took with him this young man his fellow the Ebyssyne, leuynge all
his hole household at Arquyke, which is a cytty nere the sea cost,
appertaynyng to prester John^, dystant about a mile from the isle of Mazua.
wherein that Baruagais before named then abode. For it is ever the abiding
place of that offycer.

But now if percase any capcyous fellow would obiecte why of so many noble
men, as there is no dout but there be in so great a court as prester Iohn^s is,
there were not sent in that embassate, some oldermen, men of more grauyte, of
greater experye^ce and bysydes this Ebyssyns borne, which might have borne a
greater port and majesty before our prince rather then these, of whom the one
was far from the nobilyte either of an Ebyssyne or Indyane either, because
being an Armenycane / and the other all though he was an Ebyssyne and in ye
kings court brought up, yet but a young man, an without the company waytyng
on him yt becomes a princes embassatour to have / and thereby shows not the
dygnyte of a legate. But hereof may there be two causes alleged.

The first, in all those regyons (as great as they be) from the sea of Araby,
to the water of Gange, there be but two languages, that is to wit, Persyke and
Arabyke. which languages who so perfytely knows, may easily pass thorough
all those prouynces. Now in Prester Iohn^s court be there very few or none
nobles, Ebyssyns borne, that can skyll of those tongues. First because they
have little company or acquayntau^ce with the out borderars. Secondely for
that yt seldom causes them to go out of their own country, as being
content with their country laws. And for yt cause the same Matthew, skylled
in both the tongues and in all the prouynces there about, for he had often ben
in them / and seeing that at that time, all though he were an Armenyane, yet he
was of the quenys counsayll, and very great about her, he was thought the
metyst for that message / namely syns he had one joined with him an Ebyssyne
borne, which both knew the tongues and manners of many nacyons / so that if
need should require, he were mete to be sent on a like embassat.

The second cause is. The acts of war of the Portyngales done with the
Indyans, against the Turks or Persyes at that time was not so well known of
the Ebyssyns, that they thought it needful to ve^ter any old noble Ebyssyne,
and specially syns they were vnexperte in ye tongues, in so far and so
dyffyculte a vyage, till time they were farther certyfyed by some other. And
therefore pleased to send that Matthew, an Armenycane borne, as most meat for
that besynes which not greatly acco^panyed, but as a merchant should go and
espy al to gether. And that it so was meant, the matter self showed. For after
ones all was exactely tried by him, there was then a another embassatour sent,
both an old man, a noble man, an Ebissyne borne, and a priest, connyng both in
scripture and Calday / on whom waited a very great company of nobles of the
Ebyssyns, of themperours p^ster Iohn^s court. And this man was sent unto the
most mighty prince one John^, ye third king of Portyngale. For Emanuel that was
his father departed almost.x. years ago. This legate with all his company at
this present day is with our king, myche made on, and had in great
reverence. whom questyonlesse they would never have sent, had they not ben
before surely certyfyed of our matters by Matthew. But now we be a littell
degressed therefore let us again return to our purpose. This Matthew then under
the pretexte of feigned marchaundyse, after his being at many other cytyes,
resorted to Aden / which is a city by ye see of Arabye under the Turks
domynyon, byelded even as our cytyes be, very rich, and very well fensyd with
fortresses. where after he had fallen in some familiare acqueyntau^ce with
certain merchant men, and had serched all thing to the utter most, and
fynyshed the matters he came for, making him self ever amongst ye Turks a
Turk, for other wise could he never have escaped and done his business saufe
without danger, he returned to Arquique where before he had left his household
with his companyon the Ebyssyne, and thus he removed, took his household again
and so returned to Aden, hoping that from thens he might sail with his warys
and his household to India. For why at the town of Aden they are wont to take
shippynge toward India. where when he was landed he sold al his lether and
bought other marchandyse of Alexandrye to carry with him to Indy, by which he
must needs pass into Portyngale.

Now was a ship ready going to Inde, and he ready with all his marchandyse to
go with that ship, while there spronge a certain suspycyon among the
cetezyns of Aden, that he should be a spy. wheruppon he was tarried and let
that he could not take passage at that season. But he as one of a great wit
and experyence, so clearly purged him self of that suspycyon, proving in deed
he was a merchant man, and that there he sought nothing but marchaundyse,
that they gave him with his household free pasporte, to depart whether him
pleased. But now then being dysmyssed / he found never a vessel going toward
Inde. Then he was fayn to hyer one, and so he with all his company took
shyppyng, and came toward Inde, to a certain noble rich city called Xaer.
which is dystant from Aden about a hundred mile, where likewise he found no
ships going to Inde, because yt now yt was winter, which there begins
in March. And while yt lasts no man may sail toward Inde, for the great
storms of wind (which is a meruaylous thing) yt contynually blows contrary
out of one quarter. But when the sees served him, he sailed from the city of
Xaer unto a town called Fartaque, there in every place faynynge him self a
merchant of Turkey. From whens he went to a place called the inhabitours of
Dabul / and from thens to depart to the town of Goa. where the^ wyntered the
great Alfonsus Dalbubarque a Portyngale, the chyefe capytayne of all India,
predecessor unto Lupus Soarez, whom we have made mencyon of before, which was
he ye subdewed all that same Inde, Araby, Perse, Malach, and the hole see of
Ganges, and made all them subjects to Portyngale. Dabull is dystant from
Fartaque, which is in the cost of Inde.iiii. hundred mile, from Goa.xl. from
Dio.iii. score great mile. Dio is a very rich city, under the domynyon of
Cambaie very well fensed, with gonnes and such other ingens of war, and very
well walled.

Furthermore he tarried at Dabul from May to Dece^ber, and there occupied him
self about marchau^dyse because in all that time he could not take shyppynge.
At last he gate him a small vessel, and began to get him away. And by ye
reason he showed certain of his friends and the master of the ship that he
would go unto Portyngale with his marchaundyse, by and by yt was showed to
certain head officers of the town, that there was a stranger one unknown,
which pryuyly would convey him self to Portyngale. wheruppon wottynge never
what they should think of the matter, they kept him still with fair words, and
so let him of his passage for ye season. After he saw this incontyne^t by
certain merchant men which were wont to be co^uersant in Inde with the
Portyngales, which he before had made his friends, he wrote secretly unto
the capytayne Alfonsus Dalbuberque, certifyeng him as diligently as he could
how it stood with him. He as soon as he knew it sent thither certain ships
and galleys some great some small unto him. Siluester Corzo was ye capitayn of
them, where when he was arrived, strayt way he showed the officers of the town
that he was sent unto them from ye great duke Alfonsus Dulbuberque to seek a
certain merchant man which he must needs speak with all, and that the same
Matthew was he whom he sought / which known they gave him leave to speak with
him and so delivered him into his hands. For this cause the Dabulenses used
this liberalyte toward hi^, for fere they should seem our open enimyes, for as
much as they take much profit by our Portyngales which use Goa and Inde, and
yet in place and time when the may, secretly do us displease. This Matthew then
co^uayde from the city of Dabull, came with this noble young man ye Ebyssyne his
fellow, and al his famyly, at ye last to Goa, where as we before recyted, ye
noble capytayne Alfonsus then wintered with a great number both of people and
nobles of the Portyngales. There is both an i will and also a city of this name
of Goa. The city I say as it is very rich, so is yt also very habu^dau^t of
all thing that seruyth for the fyndyng of men. In that dwells merchant men
of all kinds, Indians, Arabyes, Persya^s, with diverse of the realms of
Narsynga and Cambaia. In this isle be.iiii. great and very well fensed
fortresys, well ma^ned with many hyered souldyers of the Portyngales. There
inhabiteth the city, about.xv. hundred Portyngales. These be cytezyns there,
with their wives, children, and servants, besides many other, as soudiours,
and merchants. Both that hole I Will the city and the casteles, be under the
Portyngales. In the city be gra^mer scoles kept, where in is taught in common
scoles both the latyne and the Portyngale tongue. whereby the inhabytours of
those parts, be as well skylled in both those la^guages, as in the language of
their natyue country, where they were bread and brought up. The faith of Christ
is every where received amongst them. Many sumptuous and costely temples and
houses of relygyo^ be there as well of other as of saint Frau^ces order, where
daily is used divine service. Over ye highest part of a gate in the city,
which they call saint Mary da sera, be kept and had in great veneracyon and
honor, the bones of that capytayne Alfonsus Dalbuberque. But now after yt
Matthew had arrived, from the town of Dabull in the haven of Goa, the Captain
Alfonsus commanded him to come unto him. He denied and said he would not come
out of the ships, alledgynge yt he was not the legate of any mean prince but
of ye high mighty emperor of Inde Prester John^ / and hereu^to added that it
were not co^uenye^t nor metely that thembassatour of so high a mighty
chrystened emperor, should be received to so noble a duke as Alfonsus is
without dew reverence and honor. The^ Alfonsus calling to gether his clerks,
prestes, and all his nobilite yt were nigh at hand, goth forth (namely syns he
was ye embassatour of the emperor Prester Iohn^s) to mete him with crosses, and
such other ornaments of the church, the prestes and clerks singing this
hymn: Te deum laudamus, within a few days after Alfonsus began to ask him
of his legacy, to whom he answered, yt he was sent from prester John^ unto the
most Crystened prince Emanuel king of Porti^gale, and that he ought only to
open the cause of his embassate to no creature but unto him alone. which when
he hard the duke Alfonsus axed him no further questyons. within a while after
when he saw his time, this Matthew and this noble young man ye Ebyssyne, with all
his company making have toward Portyngale, Alfonsus very gentylly accompanied
him unto ye haven, where taking shyppyng from Goa they came toward Porti^gale.
All this showed un me this George Lupe Dandrade, that he knew of a suerty for
truth, for as myche (as we have showed you before) the great rular of Inde
Lupus Soarez had sent him from the I Will of Camara, as a spy among the
Ebyssynes under the pretexte of marchau^dyse, to search out the truth of that
legacye. when he and that noble young man the Ebyssyne, with all his famyly
came to Portyngale, my self (as I have showed your holiness before) was by,
whom I both saw and spoke often with all. He was a man of mean stature, very
whitly visaged and somewhat sallowe, with a side and hoar here, with a long
white berde. which a little more at length I have showed your holiness, to
thente^t you with all other yt be desirous to know the very truth shall not
think yt be a lie or feigned.

Of the people of Pilapes.
I Very well remember me right reverent father how you showed me at my last
being with you, that under your archbyshopryke, was ye same wyld regyo^ of
Scythyce other wise calls Pilape where they neither know god or Christ, nor
aw have they none among them for them to live by. Surely a very miserable
case, and a thing nothing chrystenlike considered of your men. For yt was
told me both of good men and virtuous men also (and that for a suerty to)
that your nobles (the more shame for them) were in fault why those people were
no better then brute bestes, nor came to chrystendome. For so they fere they
shall lose a great part of their polling and pyllynge and their accustomed
ravenous roberye, thorough the which they pytyfully oppress with insacyable
auaryce those sylly pore innocent people. And therefore I desired you then (and
yet again in Christ's name do) and that not I alone, but also as many as
think as I do, that syns yt is your office (as being their herdman, and they
committed to you by god) you would cause those nobles of yours, to leave their
covetous crueltye, and so in conclusyon to bring those simple souls to the
knowledge of Christ, and so payenge their dew trybutes to their kings, as other
christian people do to their princes. Let those nobles of yours take heed
therefore what they do, that they compel not so great a fold of sheep in time
to come, in the presence of that just judge Jesus Christ, to axe judgment of
that tyranny of theyrs. I desire your holiness to do that lies in you, which
doyenge, se what glory and what reward you shall obtain of god, what prays
and laud bysydes of the world. No more to your holiness but thus fare you
well. I suppose that I shall be shortly at Portyngale with the kings hyghnes or
else at Germany. But where so ever I become I shall be holly yours. I pray you
I may be hertly recome^ded unto your brother Olaus the great Goth, a very
special friend and lover of mine.

At Antwerpe out of the common houses of our realm of Portyngale, in the
Calendas of December, the year of our god M.D.xxxi.
Prynted by W. Rastell in Fletestrete in saint Brydys church yard. 1533 Cum
priuilegio.


