The explanation of the Frontispice.
A Leuite in his journey goes
To wicked Gibeah for repose,
Which is denied, but having found
Another lodging then the ground,
(Such is th'vnkindnesse of their sin)
They make a prison of his Inn.
From whence he shall not issue free,
But by his wifes Adultery;
So when from thence to have he minds,
Her dead before the door he finds,
When to express their crime, and make
The villains at their own guilt quake,
Into twelve pieces he diuides
The body that was once his Brides,
Now Gibeah is besieged, and though
They twice have given the overthrow
Unto their betters, yet at length
They find Vice has no lasting strength:
For now their town's as hot as their Desire
And as they burnt in Lust, so that in fire.
THE LEVITES REVENGE. by Robert Gomersall.

LONDON. Printed for John Marriott 1628.



THE LEVITES REVENGE: Containing POETICAL MEDITATIONS UPON The 19. and 20.
Chapters of IVDGES.

BY R. GOMERSALL.

Imprinted at London in the year M. DC. XXVIII.

TO HIS VVORTHILY RESPECTED FRIEND, MASTER BARTEN HOLYDAY ARCHDEACON OF OXFORD.
WOrthy Sir; Whilst others are ambitious of an honorable Dedication, I am
thankful for a friendly one, this in the mean time being mine happy advantage
over them, that they expect, but I enjoy a Patron. And yet I have not such a
scarcity of great names, to whom I might pretend with as good a confidence as
the greatest part of Writers, but that some of the higher ^^nke (to whom for
their frequent courte^ies I must confess my self an unequal debtor) might
have expected, others almost challenged my Dedication: to whom I know no other
answer of more respect and satisfaction then this, that I concluded the work
to be below their notice, how much more their protection; and that I would
have others to take notice more of my Friendship, then of my Ambition: But it
may be that some will conceive an Ambition in this Friendship, when I of such
an infancy in study shall boast the favors of so grown a virtue, and intrude
upon his fame. If this be an offense, I must profess I glory in it, this
accusation I confess and am proud of: such is the ambition of him that is
enamoured on virtue, of the man who would be indeared to heaven; whose desires
would not be so good, were they not so high, and the Angels might still have
stood, had theye never known another Pride. But not to insist on that (which
nevertheless I can never too much insist on, the remembrance of our
friendship) to whom could I more fitly dedicate a Poem, then to him that has
showed such excellency? or a Divine Poem, then to him that has showed such
Religion in his composures? Of this truth Persius is a witness, whom you have
taught to speak English with such a grace, that we can understand when we
hear him, and find no one syllable in his Dialect offensive either to the
Elegant, or to the Chaste Ear. Of this truth Iuvenall may be a witness, whom
though we do not yet hear in public bettering his expressions by your exact
rendering him, yet they that have inioy'd the happiness of your nearer
friendship, confidently and upon the hazard of their understanding affirm,
that he is far unworthy of such an imprisonment, that he should be obscured
by that hand which cleared him. But it is Divinity that is the subject of these
verses, and it is Divinity which is the exercise, and glory of your studies,
which makes you an inhabitant of the Pulpit, nay which makes every place where
you will vouchsafe to discourse, to be a pulpit, for such is the bounty of your
religious conversation, that howsoever the place may be changed, the Sermon is
perpetual. Sermons that at the same time make us devout and witty, which by
first winning the Preacher, have the easier Conquest of the Auditory: who are
never with less difficulty entreated to their happiness, then when they see
they do not go alone. So that now when I consider what I present, and to
whom, I begin to suspect the lightness of my work, and think I have some
reason to fear the censure of such a Friend, to whom if I shall be excused, I
expect some glory from others, not because the Leuite, but because He was mine;
to whom, having thus far tried his patience, I have nothing more to add but
this, that I am his,

In all the duties of Affection, ROBERT GOMERSALL.

To the Reader.
REader, I must first entreat thy Patience, afterward thy Ingenuity; thy
Patience, that thou will read somewhat before my verses: thy Ingenuity, that
thou will not censure the worse of them, because thou shall find them censured
to thy hand. The purpose of this Poem is Religious Delight, which if thou shall
find in any place wanting, or disjoynd, understand, that it was either not my
intent, or mine Error. And yet I dare affirm no man shall be the worse by it,
and that if there be any want, it is more of the Delight then of the Religion:
If I intended excuses I could tell you, and that truly too, that these Verses
were not now first made, although they are now first published, and the
Composure was a younger man's, though the Edition be a Divines. This I could say,
if I thought Poetry incompatible with Divinity, if it were a serious truth,
that God could be only magnified in Prose: But when I consider that Nazianzen
could be both a Poet, and a Saint, and that it was heresy that cast Tertullian
out of the Church, and not his Verses. I dare acknowledge these for mine own
and fear not to suffer in that cause, wherein those Worthies were so
magnified: Especially, since these Essays (which I fear their weakness will
too strongly testify) were not my study, but my Recreation when in the
vacations having for a time intermitted my more serious affairs I chose Poetry
before Idleness; yet I have not chose Poetry with the hazard of my Conscience,
and so in stead of a Divine have writ a superstitious work; howsoever Malice
or Ignorance may wrest a passage unto Popery; I mean that, where Abraham
prays for the victory of the Israelites: But besides that the Intercession is
general for the Church, which no judicious Divine but will allow for Orthodox,
it is made by him, whom a Popish Divine will deny at that time to be able to
intercede: there was no soliciting of him they saw not, and God they did not
see (as they would tell you) till after the Ascension: I have the more fully
expressed my self in this, because I would not be esteemed as one of them
(whereof there is now too great an harvest) who play the wantons with Religion,
that will halt between two parties, and in spite of the Prophet, at the same
time scrue God and Baal* who like not Orthodoxe truth, unless delivered in
heretical terms, and so by a notable new trick of Iuggling, call that
Pacification, which is Conspiracy; of whose proficiency in Religion I can
speak little; but this I may most confidently affirm, that (perhaps not after
the Apostles mind, yet certainly in his words) they go on from Faith, to
Faith. Of this crime, and of the suspicion of it, I trust I am sufficiently
acquitted: for other errors which Malice and Curiosity will abundantly
multiply, I only refer my self to the truly Judicious, who know that a
good Poem is as a good Life, not wherein there are none, but wherein there are
the fewest faults.

To my learned and highly esteemed Friend, Mr. ROBERT GOMERSALL.
HAd such a Labor in this iugling age
Sought after Greatness for its patronage,
Not after Goodness, I had then been free
To love they work, though not to fancy thee;
But thou have won me: since I see thy book
Aims at a judging eye, no smiling look.
Greatness does well to shelter errors, thou
Not having any, fear no frowning brow,
But wisely crau'st a view of his, that can
Not only praise, but censure of a man.
Thou needst not doubt seuerer eyes, if he
Add but applause unto thy Poetry.
His works such monuments of fame do raise,
That none will Censure, if he once but Praise.
Commend I would, but what? here is nothing known
Can be called thine, when each has claimed his own.
Ioue-bred- Minerua challenges the wit,
Mercury flies, and swears he languag'd it.
Thy Arts the Muses claim; the History
Savors of nothing but Divinity,
Transcribed from Gods records; Then nothing's thine
(But grief for the Levites sin) since th'yse is mine.
But now dear Friend, though this sufficient be
To raise up Trophies, and eternize thee:
Give leave to him that loves thee, to desire
To serve thee friendlike, though in mean attire.
The glittering star that darts a glorious light
Were lost if not commended by the night:
So stands it with thy verse; I writing set
Their beauty off, as Crystal is by let.
Nor does it trouble me; since that my end
Is not to be a Poet, but a friend.
And yet perhaps these looser lines of mine
May prove eternal; cause they usher thine.
Midd. Temp. C. L. I C.
Epitaphium Concubinae.
Quae tristis ignes, Gibeah, passa est tuos,
Cultrumque sponsi, cuius amplexum peti^
Non vnus ardor, ecce in amplexu perit,
Non vna facta victima and multus rogus.
Discant puellae formasit quantum Nihil,
Virtus venusta est, pulchramens solus decor.
Englished thus.
Who suffered Gibeahs Lust, and her Lords knife,
Whom not one Suitor would have had to wise;
By many Suitors perishing, here lies,
A not-one Course, and many sacrifice.
O who would trust in forms, that hours impair
Virtue's true shape, and only Goodness fair:
PSALM. 9. 2. I will be glad and rejoice in thee, yea my Songs will I make of
thy name, O thou most High.
FAther of Lights, whose praises to rehearse
Would pose the boldness of the ablest verse;
Who art so far above what we can say,
That what we leave is greatest: show the way
To my weak Muse, that being full of thee
She judge Devotion the best Poesy,
Teach her to shun those ordinary ways
Wherein the greater sort seek shameful praise
By witty sin, which ill affections stirs,
Whose pens at leastwise are Adulterers.
O teach me Modesty: let it not be
My care to keep my verse from harshnes free
And not from lightness; let me censure thus,
That what is Bad, that too is Barbarous.
Then shall my soul warmed with thy sacred fire,
Advance her thoughts, and without Pride aspire;
Then shall I show the glory of my King,
Then shall I hate the faults which now I Sing.
THE LEVITES REVENGE.
Canto I.
The Argument.
The Levites love, her flight, and then,
His fetching of her home again:
Gibeahs harsh usage, with the free,
Unlooked for old man's courtesy,
Their base attempt, her wretched fate
This song to Time does consecrate.
Whilst Isreal's government was yet but rude,
And Multitudes did sway the Multitude,
Whilst all the Nation were so many Kings,
Or else but one great Anarchy. Fame sings
That there a Leuite was (Levites may err)
Who had a Concubine, and doubted her.
Durst Lust, and Jealousy so high aspire
To one that only knew the Altars fire?
Must he feel other Flames? to wanton eyes
Must even the Priest be made a sacrifice?
Or has he offered incense so long time
For Judah's fault, that he has gained their crime?
Appeased for sins to learn them? in times past
Whilst yet the ancient innocence did last,
Leuy could kill a Rauisher, but now
Leuies base offspring does not disauow
To be a Ravisher. Perhaps to show
His Grandsires rashness, who would headlong go
To punish that crime, which ere long might be
His own, at least in his Posterity.
For so 'twas now: the Leuite loves, and more,
Suspects at last, whom he did first adore:
For Fame speaks hardly of her: but poor man
What other hope could thou imagine? can
One that has broke with honesty, be true
To him that made her break? or else are you
The only Tempter? does there no blood boil
Besides the Levites? can they only toil
In sins, that preach against them? if they can,
Yet such as she are made for every man.
What none can challenge his, is due to all,
Lust should not imitate a Nuptial.
She now suspects her Levites jealousy,
And hasts home to her fathers house: o why
Left's thou that house? or why return'st thou ever?
Where thou should always stay, or return never.
Was then a Father to be visited
When thou were made a Mother? what hope bred
That madness in thee, that unto a mild
Father, thou should be welcome for a child?
Or unto whom would thou have welcome been?
A Father? it is the nature of thy sin
To make them doubtful: they that live like thee,
Ashamed of nothing but of Modesty,
Banish themselves from all, but their dear sin;
And loose at once their virtue, and their kin.
But when the Leuite saw that she was gone,
That she was lost, whom he so dored on,
Reason almost forsook him too, to prove
Anger can blind a man as well as love:
It may be Israel was holy then
And sacrifices for the guilty men
Came slowly in, this might increase his grief,
And be an accessory, if not chief:
This might confirm him in his angry sin,
Robbed of his profit and his concubine.
But he will not loose her: will thou seek her then
That does fly thee? that to an host of men
Has given thy due? as if she meant to try
Which were the most vnvanquisht luxury
Of Priest or people: whom if thou should find,
Thou have not yet recovered her lost mind,
That wanders still, and will thou fetch her thence
To try, or else to teach thee Patience?
Can she teach any virtue? can there be
Ought learnt from her besides immodesty?
All that this journey can effect, that thou
Can promise to thy self, if thou speed'st now,
Is, that she will loose the bashfulnesse she had,
And only prove more confidently bad.
You now may think him near his iourneyes end;
Where long before his thoughts had met his friend,
Scorning his bodies sluggish company,
And now both are arrived, where to his eye
^he first appeared, for whom alone, I find,
Be thanked the heaven that did not make him blind,
For which he should have thanked them: he had been
Then nor a Lover, nor a Priest: no sin
Had crept in with the light, nor ever made
In that good Darkness, an unhallowed shade.
But who had seen him when he first descried
Who 'twas that met them, how he slipped beside
The wearyed beast, and with full speed did run
As if he meant to tempt temptation;
He would have judged that women strongest were,
And men object the weakness which they are.
Thus when he should wisely have understood,
And thanked the kinder heavens, who made him good
Against his will almost, having removed
That which did hinder him from being beloved
Of God, and goodness, not unlike the Fish
Which seems to be desirous of the dish,
(As if for his delivery he did wait,
And therefore were ambitious of the bait:)
Into a known snare, he does gladly run,
And foolishly pursues, what he should shun.
And is not this, I Would know, the readiest way
To make God think, we mock him when we pray
When we pretend desire, that we may be,
As from the Fault, so the Temptation free:
Whilst (as we had not known what we had said
Or hoped that God observed not how we praid)
Lest that we should receive our hurt from far,
We both the Tempted, and the Tempters are,
And thus the holiest name we take in vain,
Praying as never meaning to obtain.
And now her father comes, who after words
As kind and Elegant as that place affords,
Entreats her pardon: but alas, good Age,
Who shall entreat thy pardon, or assuage
The Levites passion now? who does auerre,
That he alone does sin, who taxes her:
With this he smiles on her, and yet does fear
Lest she should think that this a Pardon were,
Or reconcilement: without much ado,
You might persuade him now he came to woo,
And not to fetch her back; but by the have
Of carrying her from thence, fearing the wast
Of the least minute, she might well descry,
What ere his words, his deeds spoke Jealousy.
Hardly he condiscends to one nights stay
Though it were with her, but how he spent the day,
How his desires were speedier then the Sun,
(Whom then he thought to creep, and not to run)
Twere tedious to relate, though the old man
With all the Art, and all the Cheer he can,
Detaines him three days longer, which appear
As long as fancy can extend a year.
Minutes are Ages with him, and he deemes
He has out-lingred grave Methusalems
Nine hundred year by such a stay, and fears
That she may once more shun him for his years.
Sure such accounts the wise Egyptians made
Who added wings to Time, as if he had
Moved on too slowly, or as if they meant
To take his fore-top from him, with intent
To make him bald before too, whose records
Had very near as many years as words.
Making full forty thousand ere the fall,
And pu'ny Adam of no age at all.
The fifth day dawnes, but ere the rising Sun
Had showed the victory which he had won
Of cloudy night, before the sleepy Cock
Had proved himself to be the Country Clock
Showing the mornings hour, when now we might
Have spoke no falsehood had we called it Night.
Our Leuite for his journey does prepare,
And his are dressed, ere Phoebus horses are:
To whom the Father comes, and gently chides
^is early sonne-in-law, who, forced, abides
Till afternoon with him, and then he goes
Not from the house so fast, as to his woes.
Sure the old man did prophecy the harm,
Which would ensue, when he did seek to charm
Our Leuite to a longer stay: but O
It Is double misery before hand to know
We shall be miserable! then why has man
That cursed ability, that well he can
Prognosticate mishapps, when they are near?
And all his knowledge teaches but to fear.
Which yet our Leuite has not learnt, who rides
Doubting no danger: now the worlds eye glides
To his west Inn, when Iebus he espies,
Whom he counts his, because Gods enemies.
Hearken ye Gallants that will cross the seas,
And are industrious for a new disease,
If you will needs be gadding, and despise
For foreign toys, our homebred rarities,
Take this example with you, if you go
Travel not from Religion: why, although
You never touch at Rome, or else perchance
You scarce see Spain, and gleane but part of France*
You may be weary, think your travel great,
And spare at once your conscience, and your sweat*
You see our Leuite though the night draw near,
His love be weary, and no town appear
Where she may rest herself, although the way
Were troublesome enough even in the day,
Yet she resolves gladly to undergo
More miseries then Night and danger know,
Ere he will venture there to make his stay
From whence the Idols had drove God away.
O far unworthy of thy future Fate
By this best Action! miserable state
Of too great virtue ill-imploy'd! to be
Punished, when he did shun Iniquity
As he did Iebus. How he spurs, how rates
His tardy beast! how his own slacknesse hates
Which forced him by his traveling so late
If not to stay, yet to deliberate.
Within the Center of the Earth there stands
Near to the fiery streams, and ashy sands,
A dreadful palace, of such uncouth frame
Each part so shaped as if twere built to shame
All Architecture, that if one did see
The vastness of it, and deformity,
He would not make the least demurre to tell
That it was a lodging for the Prince of Hell.
What ere does beautify a house, here wants,
The walls are black as the Inhabitants,
Made out of Iett, into such figures framed
That Nature dare not own them, nor be blamed
With so much Monster: we in doubt may call
Whether the trimming, or material,
Had the more horror. No birds here are heard,
But such whose harsher accents would have seard
The most resolved: they punish in their rimes,
And all their ditty does consist of crimes.
The fly Praecisian that could gull the eye
Of the most sharp, by close hypocrisy,
Whose mischiefs only he that did, could tell,
Who, we may think might even have cheated Hell
With such dissembling, sees his vices bare,
Naked, and foul, as when they acted were:
One lays oppression to his charge, another
His sisters incest, murder of his brother.
They show his zeal was only to contend,
And all his reformation not to mend
But to confound the State, that his knitt brow
(Which looked so stern as it would disallow
The most indifferent act, and like of none
But such as did pretend perfection)
Was but an easy Vizor, such as Rage
Can give it self, and must receive from Age.
That he did only know external Grace,
And all his holiness was in his face.
Is goodness in a wrinckle? can we find
That what does cloud the face, does cleanse the mind?
To me it is a trick of rarest art
That hollow brows should have the soundest heart.
These are the sounds, but then the smells are worse,
Enough to make that Harmony no Curse.
Under the walls there runs a brimstone flood
The top of flames, the bottom was of mud:
Of such gross vapor, that to smell was Death,
Prisons are sweet, compared unto that breath.
And to maintain the fire and stench at once,
The fuel is prepared of usurers bones.
Loose Madams locks, the feathers of their Fan,
With the foul inside of a Puritan.
In this sweet place as sweet a Prince does dwell,
The chief of fiends, the Emperor of Hell
Grand Lucifer, whom if I should relate
In the worst figure that the eye does hate:
I should but faintly his foul self express,
Nor reach to his vnpattern'd ugliness.
Death keeps the entrance, a tall sturdy groom,
Who emptying all places fills no room.
But like the fond Idolater of pelf
Denies men, what he cannot have himself:
Here does this shade send challenges to all,
Who would have entrance first to try a fall,
They try, and they are thrown there is none so great
But yields to him, who knew but one defeat
And that long after, but his prime was now,
His bones some marrow had, some grace his brow.
No plagues as yet, no famines had been known
The sword was thrifty, making few to groan
Under his edges. Death yet had lusty thighs,
Nor spent himself with too much exercise.
Here there stand numbers, which exceed all sums
(For they refuse none here, who ever comes)
The murderer first, and without much ado,
Sometime he will admit the murtherd too.
Then the incontinent, but if that he
Be known by Incest or Adultery,
His seat is chief: nor have they a low place,
Who with an open and alluring face,
Delude their trusting friends, till they have won
Their deeper proiects, which they built upon.
The rest of lower crimes, whom we may call,
Downright offenders, such as after all
Their time of trespass, have not gained the skill,
And only know the taint, not art of Ill:
Have no distinguished rooms, but venture in,
As headlong to their pains, as to their sin.
But now some other enter; for a charge
Past from the Prince of shadows, to enlarge
The Imprisoned Crimes, that all might now confer
(Such is his will) with their Lord Lucifer.
What noise there was? what striving at the door?
This would be first, and that would go before:
Pride claims precedence, and cries who ere
Ventures to make a step before her there
Is impudently foolish, that the place
Is hers by due, and only theirs by grace,
When she would yield it: unless first they would
Bring more conuincing reasons then she could:
For who should to the Prince of Hell first go
To visit him, but she that made him so?
And who had made him so, she would know, but she,
When with his God he claimed Aequality?
Peace, Wrath exclaimes, and with so deep an oath
As all those fiends, with Hell to boot, were loath
To hear another such, he vows no more
To bear the brauings of that scarlet whore,
He Will first a Rebel, first a Virtue be,
And no more Wrath, but Magnanimity.
She smiled, and bid him be so but whilst they
Were hot in this contention, Envy lay
Gnawing her breasts: feign would she have bin higher
Had but her spirit equaled her desire.
But since she cannot be revenged of them,
She uses an unheard of stratagem,
Tears her own hairs, and her grimme face beslimes
Thus punishing herself for others crimes.
By this time Idleness comes in the rear,
As proud, though not as active, as they were;
He scarce would take the pains to speak, but loath
To loose his dignity by too much Sloth,
He gives them these few words, Why strive you so
About the place which all to me do owe?
Do not ye know, I am the reigning Crime,
Most general, and most lofty of the time?
I make the Lawyer silent, though he see
His clyent full; I am beyond a Fee:
When Laws do not, I make the Preacher dumb
Even when the Tiger, or the Wolf do come:
But above all, I in the Court do grow,
Beggars are proud, but Emperors are slow.
Drunkenness could not answer, but does think
It Was fit that Idleness should yield to drink:
And reeling to encounter him, does fall
Just in the entrance, and excludes them all.
Now is the skirmish hotter then before,
Now Pride begins to scratch, and Wrath to roar;
Drunkenness lies unmoved, and Sloths intent
Is to sit still, and to expect the event.
But in this civil broyle, at last comes Craft
Of whom no Painter ere could take a draft,
He had such change of shapes, who when he saw
These tumbling warriors, and that no awe,
No fear of Lucifer could teach them peace,
He Will try his skill to make these broils to cease.
Fie Pride, says he, What? give your self the fall?
And Wrath, are you no more discreet withal
Then quarrel with a woman? Come agree,
If not for fear of Hell, for love of me.
But out alas, you do too well agree,
When Wrath is Proud, and Pride will Wrathful be.
Go hand in hand (thus friendly Craft decides)
Only the upper hand let that be Prides.
They enter the great hall, where they do see
The Hellish Monarch in his Majesty,
Where having made obeisance, he begins,
Thus to break silence, and vpbraid the Sins.
The reason why I called you (not to dwell
On an unnecessary praeamble)
Is to inform you, that we find of late
You have not been officious to the State:
It Is true, you bring me daily what is mine own,
And plentifully reap what I have sown.
In the gross Heathen you do hourly cause
Vices, which never were forbid by Laws,
Because never thought of: but what is this to me,
Whether that Lust or Infidelity
Fill Hell with those, nay and oppress it too,
Which must come thither, whatsoere they do?
You do like those, who in the other life
Buy their own lands, and woo again their wife.
A goodly act, and wherein's danger store,
You give me that, which was mine own before.
Whilst Judah all this while has me withstood,
And dares, when I forbid them, to be good.
They honor Parents with a zealous strife,
And with their goodness do prolong their life.
In them no malice nor no rancor lies,
Nor shed they blood, but for a sacrifice:
Adultery's scarce heard of in a life,
And they are men only unto their own wife.
In such a loved community they live,
None need to steal, all are so apt to give.
While you suppose that highly you deserve,
If you can say that you have made them swerve
From goodness that never had it: well you have done
If that Semiramis once doat upon
Her wondering issue, and begin to swell
With such a birth, that would pose us to tell
How she should call it; and what she did bear
If it her daughter, or her grandchild were.
You have discharged your office, if you make
Some bloody Nations their own issue take
And offer unto me; or if you draw
Some to the practice of that wicked Law
That after fifty they their parents kill,
And not that only, but suppose that ill
To be their duty. O fond thought! and thence
Do estimate their child's obedience?
Hence truant Crimes, auant, no more appear
In my dread presence, no more let me hear
Those petty actions, if you do not straight
Revenge my wrongs, and ease me of this weight,
Which thus oppresses me, if Israel still
Shall dare to cross what I shall call my will;
By Hell I Will do -- but what? I say no more,
If you are wise, prevent, if not, deplore.
This said he star'd so fiercely that they feared
He would perform much more then they had heard,
Nor know they well how they their tongues should use,
Whether twere best to promise or excuse.
At last Lust rises, and becalmes him thus,
Why do you loose your wrath, great Prince, on us?
Us your sworn vassals? who nor think nor do
But what your will is their command unto.
What though w'aue spent our pains not the right way?
Yet they were pains nor can an enemy say
But we were active Furies, and have done
What lesser feinds durst not have thought upon.
And yet (if that I may have leave to tell
From your dread grace) preciser Israel
Has not escaped us wholly, nor has bin
More noted for their Law, then for their Sin*
Was that a Virtue too, when being led
By Gods own hand, and filled with Angels bread,
They did, (I joy to caus't, but blush to tell,)
They did repine even at that miracle.
Fasting and full they murmr, nor are less
Angry with Manna then with Emptiness.
I could speak more, and truly: but in sum,
To prove my past acts by my acts to come;
If by your gracious leave, I have the fate
To have a joint commission with Debate,
I Will make a fire within their blood to burn,
Shall their proud Cities into ashes turn:
And they shall know how foolishly they err,
Who are not willing slaves to Lucifer.
Lucifer nods, and Lust does swiftly run
With his unlimited Commission:
Which with what Art, what mischief he did use,
Is now the grief and business of my Muse.
But now she must to our sad Leuite have
Whom we left trau'lling, when the day was past.
The sun sets over Gibeah; when that he
Draws nearer thither ward, but then to see
The blush of Heaven, with what a red it shined,
(As if the Sun his office had resigned
Unto those clouds) to all that understood,
It would have showed that it did figure blood.
And now our Leuite is arrived, but finds
The walls more courteous then the peoples minds:
For these had gates which let him in, but they
Were merciless, and rougher then the way:
Men that had only studied to oppress,
Whose minds were shut against the harbourlesse:
And yet he sees large houses, some so high
As if they learned acquaintance with the sky,
What ever pleased their fathers now grows stale,
Their buildings to the hills exalt the vale:
And such thick palaces the mountains fill,
As if the quarry grew without the hill.
Some are of that circumference, you would guess,
They had been built for him, who had no less
Then the whole world his Family. But when
Our Leuite was inquisitiue, what men
Filled up that Princely dwelling? and if there
Might be found hope of rest for them that were
But two more then the Family? they tell
That two are the whole Family, 'twas well,
And stately too (as state is at this day)
So might they live at home, and yet away.
O the great folly of Magnificence!
Houses are little Cities, and from thence
Cities are lesser worlds, that man may have
Room enough here that cannot fill a grave.
He must have Halls, and Parlors, and beside
Chambers invented, but not named by pride:
And all this for one man, as if he sought
To have a several lodging for each thought,
But none for any stranger: this truth seems
Too certain to our Leuite, who esteems
That prisoners are in better state then he;
Nay, even the prisoners of mortality,
Such as are fast immured within the grave
Who though they want a life, a lodging have:
Inhumane wretches! have you then forgot
That you were sometime strangers? Were you not
In Egypt once? where the Propheticke land
Did justly scourge your baseness before hand,
Knowing you would be barbarous, and so
Made you to reele the harshnesse which you show?
O^^uelly forgetful (...) that endure
To act, or else out-doe the Epicure,
Whilst he feeds on the Air; that think it meet
To lie in Down, while he lies in the street!
An old man thought not thus, but to his house
Intrea^^s the strangers: it is malicious
To lay the imputation upon Age
That it is covetous (as if the sage
Hairs of the Ancient were therefore white
To signify their silver Appetite.)
Peace you blasphemers, see an aged man
Covetous only of a Guest, who can
Repay him nothing, but his Prayer, and be
Indebted once more for his Piety;
But if my Muse have any power over time
And sin have more mortality then rhyme,
Old man thou shall be ever old, and have
No entertainment in the silent grave
For this thy entertainment: here a while
Let me admire how that a town so vile,
Which we would think with stangers had decreed
To shut out Virtue too, should rarely breed
Such a strange Virtue? quietly we hear
Of courtesies in Rome; of kindness there
Where Greece is named, who counted it a sin
Not to have made each noble house an Inn
For worthy strangers: but when one shall fall
In commendation of the Canniball,
Shall say that they, who on their guests do gnaw
And entertain their strangers in their maw,
Are hospitably minded, that even there
May be a mouth which is no Sepulcher.
We stand aghast, as if we did conspire
Not to believe the good we did desire.
Whence sprung this Singularity? whence came
This worth which so deserves and conquers Fame?
Our Virtues are not borne with us, and they
Which will innoble man till times last day
Live after them they make to live, what we
Call goodness is the gift of Company.
Our study not our Nature, and could these
Teach any other thing besides disease
In manners? it is fit then we confess
Mercy is learned amongst the merciless,
And rather then a Leuite shall want rest
Avarice self shall entertain a Guest.
But now the Leuite has forgot that he
Had felt the hard streets hospitality;
He finds such kindness, that he does suppose
Courtesy wore no other hairs then those
To grieve the honest world, who now might fear,
That she was hasting to her sepulcher.
Into an anticke room he leads him first.
Where one would guess that Abraham had been nurs:
Or a more ancient Patriarch, the walls
Composed of that which from a wett shoe falls
In weeping winter, which a man would think
Their age had now dried up into one Chinke.
Yet such a room one comfort does afford,
It was not built to ruin its sad Lord.
For who will beg a Cottage? who would make
A guilty wretch, that he his rags might take?
To that whence nothing comes is no regard:
None would be vicious too but for reward.
No, let them fear who dwell in arched vaults,
Who in much room do seek to hide their faults.
Where hundred columns rise to mate the sky,
And mock their Lords with false Divinity.
Envy is proud, nor strikes at what is low,
And they shall only feel who scorn her blow:
She on no base advantage will insist,
Nor strive with any but that can resist.
Now is the table spread, and now the meat
Be'ing set, each takes him his appointed seat:
No courtship here is showed, no caruing grace,
The entertainment (homely as the place)
Spoke only hearty, and that plain intent
Which greater entertainers complement.
So Abraham feasted heavenly guests, as when
He made the Angels eat the bread of men:
Soon the like guests hospitable Lot,
Bestowed the diet which they wanted not;
In this ours differs, nay in this exceeds,
That he bestows his kindness where it needs.
One would have thought so, when he heard the noise,
Of confused multitudes, men mixed with boys,
All ages in the cry, as if they meant
That now the Babes should not be innocent:
Bees do not murmr so, and angry hounds
In their full rage send forth but easy sounds,
Compared to this: their inland Sea stood still,
Wondering to hear himself out-scar'd, and till
This time, that noise has such a silence bred,
That even since it has been styled the Dead.
Now they besiege the house, and one would fear
That their loud tongues so many engines were
To batter it: down with the Gate, cries one,
Another laughes at that, and with a stone
Threatens to force a Gate, and deeply swore
To give them entrance, all the House was Door.
But then another that would needs be wise,
And counted chief in this great enterprise,
Exhorts them to a Parley: Why, my friends,
Make you such have, says he, to loose your ends?
Have you indented with the stones you throw
To miss the Leuite? Do you think no blow
Can fasten on him, or do you mean to prove
If that the stones are riualls in your Love?
Stones and not men! with that the hands were still,
But all the noise, the Hubbub, with an ill
Consent, cries for the Leuite, whom they feign
Would only know, and so return again.
And could you see him in the street so long,
As far from being laid, as this your wrong
Shall be from after-Ages, when he had
No cover, but the kinder heavens, (whose sad
Compassion hindered them from shedding tears,
Lest such a grief should make th'vnkindnesse theirs)
Had you so full a view of him, and yet
Do you desire to know him? No, forget
That ever there was such an one, and then
Posterity may think that you were men:
How will they wonder else, when they shall hear
You loved him in the house, whom you did fear
To bring into your house; that you were mad,
In the pursuit of that you might have had?
You aimed another, a worse way, and just
His answer is, that calls your Knowledge, Lust.
But how were they so long time innocent?
How was this Prodigy of Desire even spent
Before it was expressed? here we may see
In impudence there was some Modesty:
They would not sin at home, the worst abhorred
To be a Beast, where he should be a Lord.
And it seemed better to the vilest breast
Not to receive, then to abuse a Guest.
Now the Old Man not fearing any harm
That might ensue, whether he hoped the warm
Lust of their Youth, would by his Age bequelld,
And that those flames would to such winter yield:
Or whether he was then rather addressed
To offer up himself before his Guest
Unto their Fury, forth he goes: they thought
That now they should obtain what they had sought,
Whom thus he does bespeake, Have patience
My friends, I come, not to entreat you hence,
But to fulfill your pleasure, only change
The Se^^ I have a daughter and what is strange
In this not town a Virgin^ at your sure
I am content to make her prostitute.
So that my stranger may nor injured ^e
Nature shall yield to Hospitality.
O constant goodness! O best act, which can
Conclude the Virtue, older then the Man*
How I could (...) my self in praising thee,
Man not of Age, but of Aeternity!
Who did respect thy guest beyond thy blood,
And knew'st the difference betwixt Fond, and Good.
Henceforth scorn all comparisons below,
Only thy Maker, thy Superior know:
Such was his Mercy that he did bestow
His only Son a ransom for his Foe;
(This was a pattern fit for the most High)
Yet next this Mercy, was thy Charity:
Thy Act at least is second to the best,
Who would not spare thy Daughter for thy Guest
But they will not be prescribed in their desire,
Who think to alter, were to quench their fire:
They must the Leuite or his Sister know,
(For Sister they interpret her) to show
Our saucy Laymen how they should expound
Their Preachers actions, not to be profound
To search their faults, but well and wisely too,
Do what they speak, and not speak what they do.
This they exclaim, and this our Leuite hears,
Who now has spent his Reason, and his Fares,
Such a Confusion he is fallen into,
He knows not what to shun, nor what to do,
So in raised Seas, when that the angry wind
Threatens destruction to that daring kind,
Who to a flying house themselves commit,
(Seeming at once to fly too from their wit.)
The well-stor'd passenger, (when he does find
That all this fury of the wave and wind
Is for this Treasure) now resolves to dye:
(Death is not so much feared as Poverty)
And now resolves that he will venture on
More loss before that Resolution:
He does from this unto that purpose skip,
And now his mind more totters then his ship.
Till after all this tedious, foolish strife,
Which he shall save, his treasure, or his Life,
He shall save neither; and thus being loath
To hazard either, he does forfeit both.
And now she shall be Passive. O Fates sport!
He Will now betray, that should defend the Fort.
Such Revolution did you ever see?
Who erst was Jealous, will a Pander be.
O Life, thou most desired, and wretched thing!
Thy love betrayed his love, from thee did spring
This Contradiction of cross Faults. O why
Chose he not rather to do well, and Dye?
Why did he so desire to shun his Friend,
And call that Misery, which was an End?
The Dead do fear no Rauisher, no Lust
Was ere so hot, to dote upon cold dust,
Were he once dead he should fear no crimes then,
Neither his own, nor those of other men:
And could he wish a longer life? let those
Who do not know (but by inflicting) wees
Hugg that desire, but he who wisely ways
What many miseries are in many days,
Let not him be so mad to wish his fears,
And only prove his Dotage by his Years.
Never did Morning blush so much as that
Which next appeared; when up our Leuite gat,
And running nimbly to the door, he sees
His love before the door with her fair knees
Grown to the Earth, so close, that one would sear,
She took a measure of her Sepulcher,
With hands outstretch'd, as if, fearing to fail,
She meant to make a Sexton of her nail
To dig her grave: or else (for who can tell?)
Suspecting by her injuries an Hell
Not to be far, where such sins had a birth,
She lay so close, to feel if it were Earth.
He wonders at the posture, nor knows why
She had not chose to rest more easily.
And now he will be satisfied, but she
Had lost her tongue too, with her Chastity.
He thinks she sleeps, and therefore louder cries,
Why do we dally here? Wake, and Arise.
But let him cry on, she has heard her last,
Deaf to all sounds now, but the latest blast.
And art thou dead, he cries? what dead? with that
You Would wonder which had been alive, as flat
He lay, and speechless, glad of the same death,
But that thick sighs betray that he had breath:
Which only serves his Anger: now he hyes
Home to mount Ephraim, all his ielousies
Are dead with her, and now he means to make
Her common after death: each Tribe shall take
A piece of her; O the obdurate mind
That so could part, what God had so combined!
I faint in the relating it, nor well
What he durst act, dare undertake to tell.
Twelve made of one? O who would not be mad,
To think upon that madness? if she had
But such another grief, with both oppressed,
My Muse would then be dumb, which now does rest.
Canto II.
The Argument.
The twelve pieces of his wife
Cut out by the Levites knife,
To the field to do him right,
Draw the neiled Israelite.
Abraham's Prayer, Heavens decree,
Beniamins glad victory
Twice repeated, make the sum
Of the book which is to come.
SVch crimes amongst the Israelites? I fear
Incredulous posterity will swear
Mine was the fault, and when they muse hereon
They Will judge the Crime was in my Fiction.
When Vice exceeds a Probability
It gains excuse, so that to sin on high
Is politic offense, for he that shall
Sin so, is thought not to have sinned at all.
It Is the corruption of the minds of men
To judge the worst of actions, but it is when
The fault is frequent, when the daily use
Gives it at once, the guilt, and the excuse:
But if a crime swell to the height of this,
Murder, or Incest, or if any is
Of fowler name; when man will man abuse,
We do absolve more gladly then accuse,
Can it be possibly presumed that they
To whom the God of Jacob showed the way,
Both of their feet and manners, who had seen
His frequent Miracles, nay who had been
Part of the wonder too, so to have fell
As to commit a greater Miracle?
Sodom in Judah? now the Fable winnes
Credit, and is out-acted by true sins:
Report has made Pygmalion to have loved
That which he made, who by his Art was moved
To palpable Idolatry, yet so
At least he loved a woman in the show:
He Is fixed on his fair Image, so that one
Would wonder which had been the truer stone.
Yet 'twas a Woman's Image, so that I
Wonder at's luck, more them his vanity,
A Painted Woman will cause love: i am moved
More, how he did obtain, then why he loved.
These do affect what to obtain is worst,
What in the very thinking is accursed:
In other loves the wife may barren prove,
In this the barrenness is in the Love,
In other faults there have excuses been,
This has no other Motive then the Sin.
And can this sin be theirs? Yes know it can,
Man forsakes God, and then he doates on man.
But who did tutor them to this offense?
For, though we find it in each conscience
That we are naturally vicious,
That there is no true good in the best of us,
That we pursue our ill, as drawn by Fate,
Yet it is example does specificate,
That teaches us This sin: it is mine own Vice,
But that I am more lost in Avarice,
That I do choose Adultery, or prefer
The lustful man before the Murderer,
I have from Praesident: and thus our ill
Comes from the Pattern too, as from the Will.
Egypt denies to have an hand herein,
(Egypt the house of bondage, not of sin.)
Their cruelty I hear, and which is odd,
I read that their chief sin, is their chief god.
They make their gardens heavens, and in each plant
They find a Deity: If that any want
Be in their fields, if thence they do not gain,
It is their gods they want, and not their grain.
Their superstition yet might issue hence,
The Calfe, on which they placed their confidence,
Which act this glory to them does afford,
They make themselves the beast which they adored.
Or did the Desert make them thus to stray,
And cause them loose their Manners with the Way?
Did those vast places, which wise Nature framed,
Wherein wild man should by his fear be tamed,
His fear of wilder beasts, instruct these men,
That there are beasts which are not in the Den:
And that when ever we neglect, or scanne
The Lords commands, the Monster is the Man?
No, these suspicions may suspected be,
As far from Truth, as they from Honesty:
Egypt was free from this fault, and much less
Can we impose it on the Wilderness.
They had no King: as well the fools as wise
Did all what did seem right in their own Eyes.
And Sodomes crime seemed right to some to see
When every man will his own Monarch be,
When all subjection is ^one quite away,
And the same man does govern and obey,
How there is no obedience nor rule,
How every man like to the Horse and Mule,
Which want the understanding of their bit,
And neither have their own, nor Riders wit,
Make a swift pace to Ruin. Give me then
Leave to admire, and pity those poor men,
Who think that Man should his own Ruler be,
And exercise Home-principality:
Who in one speedy minute strangely do
What Alexander but aspired unto,
Conquer all Kingdoms, which they'affirme to be,
No better then a well-nam'd Tyranny.
Let me inquire of these, if they have read
Any such crimes where people had an head?
Let me inquire of men, as yet not wild,
Whether they think themselves Lords of their child?
Whether their servants Masters? whether they
Suppose that God did not make some to obey.
In Innocence there was Dominion,
And the first man was the first Lord: that one
King of the Creatures, whom for this none blames,
He proved his Sovereignty by their Names.
That he was his wives Sovereign, in the Fall
He fell not from his Monarchy, when all
His Righteousness was vanished, that remained
And so a knowledge of this truth he gained,
(A truth he could not know had he still stood)
We can be longer Powerful then Good.
Nay let us look on Hell, and we shall see
That there is a Prince of that obscurity.
It is a torment such as Hell has none,
To want that order in confusion:
That is the best, we may conclude from hence,
That is in Hell, and was in Innocence.
But I do wonder at the fault so long
That I defer the punishment: my song
Must to the Leuite turn, or rather be
No more a Song, but a sad Elegy.
He having carved his Love, as you have heard,
And done that act, which Hell and Furies feared;
Sends a choice piece to every Tribe, to plead
Their injuries, and tell why she is dead:
Benjamin shall have one of them, lest he
Might dare commit a crime, he durst not see.
A several messenger to each Tribe is sent:
But he that unto Princely Judah went,
Carrying the head of the dismembered coarse,
With such a voice which sorrow had made hoarse,
(Least he should rave too highly) thus begins,
Is there an Heaven? and can there be such sins!
Stands the Earth still? me thinks I hardly stand,
Feeling the Seas inconstancy on Land.
After this Act, why flows the water more?
Why does't not stain, which always cleared before?
It is not Air we draw now, it is a breath
Sent to infect us from the Land of Death:
The Fire, whose office it is to warm and shine,
Grows black and downwards, as it did repine
To see the fact, and sheds a kind of tears,
Quenching his heat, because he cannot theirs.
Can you behold these eyes without a tear?
Can you with patience longer think they were,
And are not the worlds wonder? yet I err,
It is Revenge, and not a Tear fits her:
Let women weep for women, then you shall
Show you have sorrow'd heartily, if all
Do sorrow which have injured her, and be
Examples, as of Crimes so Misery.
Gibeah 'twas (O 'twas not Gibeah)
Credit me not, believe not what I say,
I scarce dare trust my self, and yet again,
Gibeah 'twas, that did this Fact: and then
He tells them all, what I before have wept;
Now Judah storms, and as a River kept
From its own course by Wears, and Milles, if once
It force a passage, hurryes over the stones,
Sweepes all along with it, and so alone
Without storms makes an Inundation:
Such was the peoples fury, they are so hot
That they will punish what we credit not,
And be as speedy as severe: but some
Who loathed the bloody accents of the Drum,
Who thought no mischiefs of that foulness are,
But that they gain excuse, compared with war,
And war with brethren; these, I say, of age
The chief amongst them, do oppose their rage,
Exhort them to a temper: Stay, says one,
And be advised before you be undone.
Whence is this fury? why do you make such have
To do that act which you will repent as fast?
Are any glad to fight? or can ought be
Mother of war, beside Necessity?
Be not mistaken, brethren, take good heed,
It is not Physic frequently to bleed.
He that for petty griefs incision makes
Cannot be cured so often as he aches.
Are then your sisters, daughters, wifes too chaste?
Or are you sorry that as yet no wast
Deformes your richer grounds? or does it stir
An anger in you, that the soldier
Mowes not your Fields? Poor men, do you lament
That still you are as safe as innocent?
We yet have Cities proudly situate,
We yet have people: be it not in fate
That your esteem of both should be so cheap
To wish those carcasses and these an Heap.
Me thinks our Jordan has an happier pace,
And flows with greater majesty and grace
In his own natural wave, then if the sword
Should higher color to his streams afford;
Should paint and so deforme it: to mine eye
A Riuer's better then a Prodigy.
But I desire, dear Countrymen, to know,
Whose is the blood that we must lavish so?
Perhaps the Philistines ambition
Would to our Shilob bring their Ascalon,
And these you would encounter: or t'may be
Egypt still envying that you are free
Intends a second bondage: or perchance
Your daily conquered Enemies advance
Their often flying ensigns, those at hand
Possessors and destroyers of the Land;
Whom God reserving for our future Pride,
Left to our eyes as thorns, pricks to our side.
No none of these, but all your swords intend
I grieve to speak't, the ruin of a friend:
And all the sons of Israel do press
That Israel may have a son the less.
Joseph I Have read suffered his brothers hate,
(Joseph of near acquaintance unto fate
The mouth of Destiny,) they would kill him first,
But after sell him, to try which was worst:
And yet no reason for this spleen appears,
But that his glory was beyond his years:
To hate the younger still is too much sin,
And after Joseph to spoil Benjamin.
Has twelve no mystery? do ye ascribe
Merely to Chance, that there is no odd Tribe.
Trust me my brethren, they do iniure God,
Who say that he delights in what is odd:
I think it is parity best pleases heaven;
And what is most just, loves what is most even.
Do I excuse them then to please the time,
And only make an error of a Crime?
Am I sins Advocate? far be it from me
To think so ill of War as Sodomy:
For Sodomy I term it, Justice calls
That, fact; which never into action falls,
If it has past the license of the will:
And their intent reached to that height of ill;
But whose intent? O pardon me, there be
Beniamites spotless of that Infamy.
Shall these be joined in punishment? a sin
You Would war against, O do not then begin
To act a greater, as if you would see
Whether Injustice aequall'd Luxury?
This madness was from Gibeah, it is true,
Yet some do more distaste the crime, then you,
Even in that City: hear then my advice,
And God shall prosper what you enterprise.
Exhort them to do justice, if that then
They still be partial to these guilty men,
Their guilt is greatest, let them perish all
And equal their offenses with their fall.
Thick acclamations break off his discourse,
They Will hear no more because they like't: Remorse
Ceizeth each conscience, they already hate
The civil war, which they so wished of late.
Ambassadors by general voice are sent:
But Benjamin conceits that to repent
Were the worse sin, and that who ere will do
A wicked act, he ought defend it too.
But are not we true Beniamites in this,
And aggrauate what ere we do amiss
By a new act? as if the second deed
Excused the former, if it did exceed.
Did we not thus, an end were come to war;
Did we not thus, no more should private jar
Molest our peace; Kings might put up their swords,
And every quarrel might conclude in words:
One conference would root out all debate,
And they might then most love, who now most hate,
The most sworn foes: for show me, where is he
Would seek Revenge, without an Injury?
A wrong received, or thought one? then no need
But to deny, to excuse the deed,
Why is Defense? O what do they intend
Who justify those acts, which they should mend!
O Pride! O folly! O extreme disease!
O Fact, which he condemns who practices!
Who in his soul confesses he offends
And yet doubles his guilt when he not ends.
Great crimes find greater patrons: impudence
Follows each fault, to make us think that sense
Has fled us with our Virtue, and that men
By such an hardness are turned stones again.
So wifes of Entertainment (who do know
More then one Husband) in the public, show
As virtuous as the best whilst vndescry'd,
Whilst they have this good left, that they will hide
And veil ore their offenses: but if once
Either their husbands just suspicions,
Or their security betray their fact,
No more do blush to answer, then to act,
As if 'twere meritorious, and so, did
Appear no sin no longer then 'twas hid.
Why should the bad be bold? why should there be
Audaciousnesse joined to impiety?
Whence is this daring? Sin was child to Night,
How dares he then approach and blast the light?
How dares he stand th'examining, and try
If men can find out his deformity.
I have the reason, we are flatterers all,
And to our selves the most; if any fall
Into gross errors, still he thinks he is free,
And Pride supplies the place of honesty.
He thinks it is good to have a virtuous name
And cares not for the goodness, but the fame.
Which makes the Beniamites reply: we'admire
(To say no more) at your so strange desire.
And at the craft on it most, that you pretend
Love and advice, when you subjection send:
Are we so stupid, and so senseless grown
As to be thought not fit to rule our own?
Benjamin was the youngest we confess
Of Jacobs sons, and yet a son, no less
Then Leuy, or proud Judah: he that gave
Life to each Tribe, intended none a slave,
Nor shall you make us. But you will say, that you
Out of a general love to goodness sue
For justice against her Enemies. It Is poor
If what we would we cannot cover over
With specious pretenses: it is an ill
Physicians part so to betray his pill,
That children may perceive it want of dress,
And choose disease before seen bitterness;
But let me tell you who so ere does deal,
In the affairs of a strange commonweal,
Is tyrannous or mad: he would be known
Either another Lord, or's not his own.
Yet what is it your grave Masters do advice
Our sleepy Council of? whose duller Eyes
See only open vices: we have heard
The Leuite and his Concubine, we feared
You Would have us punish him: then you relate
That coming unto Gibeah something late,
And willing to depart the earlier thence,
He found his Chaste one dead: O dire offense!
She had the punishment she deserved, and just
It was, that who had lived should dye by Lust.
And yet for fear Levites in time to come
Might want such easy favorites, and some
Would leave their courteous trade, if there be found
No cure, no remedy for such a wound:
We are content to be severe: but then
We do expect, you name those guilty men.
Out's the more hard and thanklesse task I trow,
For we will punish those whom you but show.
These mockes do whet the Isra'elites so far,
Nothing remains now but a civil war:
Now all the Tribes have unto Mispah ran,
With such consent you would think they were one man.
If war had ever reason, or if men
Had ere authority to kill others, then
Certainly these, in so divine a cause,
It Was not the peoples quarrel, but the Laws.
Here no ambition, no untamed desire
Of Principality, of growing higher,
Put on these Arms, nor was it fault enough
That Benjamin was rich, to raise these rough
Spirits of Mars, nor is it a true surmise
That private wrongs did cause these Enemies:
These fight the battle of the Lord, herein
Justice on one side fights, on the other Sin:
So that in height of blood, heat of the wars,
They rather Judges are, then Soldiers.
The Israelites if they now spare, are shent,
The more they kill, the more they are innocent.
Our Age makes us again these actions see
An Age of war, though not of victory.
For it is not victory to win the Field,
Unless we make our Enemies to yield
More to our Justice, then our Force, and so
As well instruct as overcome our Foe.
Call you that Conquest, or a Theft of State,
When in a Stranger region of late,
The Eagle built his nest, having expelled
(Upon a mere pretense that he rebelled)
The former Ayry, for no other cause,
But that his bill was strong, and sharp his claws:
To see the malice, and the power of hate,
That made even the Elector Reprobate.
When Caesar did not stick, nor blush to do
What they detested, who advised him too,
When that all laws their ancient force might loose,
He made a Choice of him that was to Choose.
Now all occasions can persuade to sight,
When Power is misinterpreted for Right.
There is a Lust of killing men* so great,
Rivers of blood can scarce assuage the heat:
Our lives are cheaper then the lives of beasts,
Then those whose very being is for feasts;
Who have no use but for the throat: hard plight!
Anger not kills them, but our appetite,
If we have eaten once, we spare: and then
If we are full are kind: but to kill men
We have a lasting appetite, shedding blood,
Our famine is increased even by our food:
Such Erisichthons are we, they that have
Unlimited desires, Death and the Grave
But shadow this affection, and to it
Compared, the Horse-leach wants an Appetite:
It may be weighing man's high faculties
(Which make him claim a kindred with the skies)
They seem to doubt of his mortality
And only strive to know if he can dye.
Nor do they care on what pretense (lest ought
Should make their crime the less) no reason's sought
To mitigate their fault, and they are thus
So far from good, they scarce are cautelous.
But it is a sore will fester, if you touch,
Away my Muse, sometime a truth's too much
For Honor, or for safety: he alone
Prospers who flatters. But if any one
Shall ask a Probability for this
How such a multitude, such a swarm is
Assembled of the Israelites (for then
There met at once four hundred thousand men
Against their brother Benjamin,) whilst yet
They had not dispossessed the Canaanite,
(There was a mixture not a Conquest made)
How durst they then so foolishly invade
Their brethrens Country, when they left their own
Subject to imminent destruction?
Or when was this invasion made? To me
The Number has a more Facility
For credit, then the Time; do we not find,
That Israel wanting Judges was assignde
To bondage, as to Anarchy? they groan
Under a foreign yoke, wanting their own.
Carries it any likelihood; or can
It sink into the fancy of a man,
That when they were oppressed, they should oppress?
As full of folly as of savageness:
This were to perfect Eglons victory,
And act what Iabin but desired should be.
And yet it might be, Joshua being dead,
Then was the time, the people lacked an head:
Who taking no care for posterity,
It Was the worst act of Joshua to dye.
Moses deputed him, and if that he
Had left another Governor, it might be
Our Leuite had been chaste: and Benjamin
Been noted for his virtue, not his sin.
Then were these multitudes no miracle,
And Canaan so often beat by Israel,
In likelihood would rest quiet, and expect
If these would do what they could not effect.
Besides, their dwellings in the Valleys be
So that their seat teaches humility:
And then to climb the mountains was such pain
As that the labor did exceed the gain.
And thus you see, that they may fight: but ere
Their enemies Countries by them wasted were,
They to the Oracle repair, to know
If victory shall grace them, or their Foe?
Yet pardon me, I err, they are so strong
As that they would imagine it a wrong
Done to their valor, it we should suppose,
That they entreated conquest of their foes;
No, being sure of Victory, they ask
Which of the Tribes shall undertake the task
Of the first onset, and the Tribes refused,
Envy at Iudahs choice, as if abused,
And injured they esteemed themselves, that they
Should loose the dangerous honor of the day.
Such was their pride, such thoughts their Numbers brod
Numbers, whose fear, might strike the Enemy dead:
Whose hands deserved a fiercer Enemy,
And matter of an harder victory.
With these they think, they might to Memphis pass,
And make the Egyptians know, what bondage was.
With these they thought with ease to force a Way
(Though nature did oppose) to India.
And in a saucy victory out-runne,
The primitive vprising of the Sun.
How large are our desires? and yet how few
Events are answerable? So the dew
Which early on the top of mountains stood
(Meaning at least to imitate a flood)
When once the Sun appears, appears no more,
And leaves that parched, which was too moist before.
That we are never wholly good! that still
Mixed with our Virtue, is some spice of ill!
The Israelites are Just, but they are Proud,
As if a lesser fault might be allowd
For punishing the greater: yet I Would know
Whilst yet they might suffer an overthrow,
Why they rejoice as if they had won! or why
They have a Pride ere they have Certainty?
Their numbers are incredible, it is true,
Yet multitudes have been overcome by few:
Their army is complete, it is right, but then
We know it is an army but of men,
Of future carcasses, so quickly some
They have no time to think of death to come:
To whom no star a certainty does give,
That they at least to the next Field should live.
Four hundred thousand carcasses; enough
To give the beasts a surfeit, and allow
Fertility which Nature had denied
Unto those Lands: So that their height of pride,
Of hope, of glory, and of all their toil
Is to enrich the Land which they would spoil.
So thought the Beniamites, who though they saw
That Power too was against them with the Law,
Yet resolutely they intend to die,
And such despair gives them the victory.
They are not Cowards, yet, though they are bad,
They slay more numbers then we would think they had.
Whence comes this Courage to the Desperate?
The bad me thinks should be effeminate,
And as the Bees (the subject or the King)
Having abused it once, do loose their sting:
And to enforce a Stoic unto laughter,
Being once too fierce, they are always sluggish after
Converted unto Droanes, so it seems fit
(And not so much heavens Justice, as its wit)
That who has lost his Virtue once, should straight
Loose courage too, oppressed with his own weight.
The Israelites though amazed at this defeat,
Yet gather head, and to their camp retreat;
There might you see Sorrow and Anger joined,
Nor do they grieve so much as they repined.
Here fathers weep their only sons, and there
Brothers for as dear losses dropp a tear,
Accompanied with threatenings, they are mad
Till they bestow the sorrow which they had.
Once more to Shiloh they repair, to hear
If God at last will aid them, and for fear
That it was pride did frustrate their first suit,
They Are now as humble, as then resolute:
In stead of fighting they now weep a day,
Sighs they do think and tears can make a way
Where swords are vselesse, they will gain victory
No longer by their hand, but by their Eye.
Great and just God, says one, we do confess
That all this heavy anger is far less
Then our deseruings: should thou fully weigh
Our sins enormity, it is not a day
Lost to the Foe, can expiate: did we feel
What ere we saw in Egypt, did the steel
Pierce deeper in our bowels, should the skies
Shed those hot showers in which Gomorrah fryes,
We could not tax the Justice of our King,
But after all, owe still a suffering.
Yet thou have ancient mercies, we'aue been told
Of all thy courtesies, which were of old
Showed to our Fathers; O vouchsafe them still,
And make us heirs of those: we have done ill,
Prodigiously ill, there is no offense
Which we are guiltless of, each conscience
Accuses, and amazeth us: yet now
Our flinty hearts to a repentance bow:
Yet now at last vouchsafe thy favor to us,
And as thy rod has scourged, let mercy woo us;
We dare not look for victory: O no,
Give us at leastwise a more virtuous Foe.
Thy wrath is just great God, and it is our suit
Only just men thy wrath may execute.
We beg not for our lives, they are thy loan,
Which when thou will, receive, yet as thine own,
Let not their swords bereave us of our breath,
And we shall find a benefit in death.
Yet what a glory can it be to thee
That we are dead? and that the Heathen see
Thy anger on thy Children? that thy wrath
In stead of being felt, is told in Gath,
And published in fierce Ascalon; spare us then
If not for us, yet for thy self; and when
Thou think of plaguing us, thy self exempt,
Since that our Ruin will breed thy contempt:
Let then thy mercy above justice shine;
If we are bad, consider we are thine.
Thus grumbled they a prayer: and he that sees
Counsels vnhatchd, and what he will, decrees,
(Yet ever justly) does perceive that they
What ere they feign, do murmr, and not pray.
Which he decrees to punish: they would know
Whether that once more they shall fight* or no?
Once more he grants that they shall fight and thus
They Are not so craving, as he Courteous,
If they but ask him, he will not deny,
Fight's their desire, and then his answere's I.
Had they but asked the victory as well
He would have heard his troubled Israel:
He that delivered them from foreign arms,
And taught their weak hands to repair their harms
With admirable victory. He I say
Would have bestowed the honor of the day
On them, had they desired it; they have known
How he has warred for them from heaven, and shown
Such miracles in their defense, they fright
Those whom they save, as when the wondering night
Thought herself banished from the world (the Sun
Standing unmoved, forgetting how to run.)
If they now loose the day the fault is theirs,
God does no mercy want, they want right prayers.
But they suppose it too too fond to stand
Begging of that which is in their own hand.
This they conceive were to mock God, to crave
That to be given which they already have,
A power to use their arms: No, if once more
They may have field-roome, may but fight it over
Though Heaven do not fight for them; they suppose
They cannot loose, if Heaven do not oppose.
They think no chance can possibly bestow,
The foil on them, the Laurel on the foe.
What though they lost the praise of the first day,
And fought as though they came to runne-away:
It Was not for want of courage sure, but either
The foe had got advantage of the weather,
Or else the wind had raised the dust so high
That they supposed fresh enemies to be nigh,
And feared to be enuiron'd round: what ere
Occasioned their first overthrow, no fear,
No chance, shall cause another; and the slaves
That now triumph, shall find their trenches, graves.
Is this their Crime alone, or do not all
Partake as of their fault, so of their fall?
Israel is not only mad, there be
Some vices which we give posterity,
And this is one of them: O how vain is man!
O how his Reason too is but a spanne,
And not his stature or his Age! we have long
Injured the beasts, and done them too much wrong,
By calling them Irrational; could they speak
Thus in rough language, they would fiercely break
Their mind unto us: O you only wise
To whom kind Nature has imparted Eyes,
Leaving all other blind; pardon if we
Do tell you where you have forgot to see,
Where we are clearer sighted: can you show
Where ever beasts did to that madness grow,
As to pronounce of that, which is to come,
Of that which only seems in Chances doom?
Yet thus you do; and doing thus have shown,
Reason's your title, our Possession.
The Israelites had to their cost of late
Found confidence to be unfortunate;
(Their confidence in Numbers) and yet still
(Though now contained in smaller room) they will
Forespeake their victory: why, because they see
That they are many yet; poor vanity!
When they were more, they were overcome, yet dare
Conceive a Conquest when they fewer are;
Because still some are to be killed: as though
Success to Multitudes did homage owe,
And multitudes impaired: as if the way
To win another were to loose one day.
But had we seen the City now! what joy
Reigned in those streets, sufficient to destroy
Those whom it comforted (for pleasure too
Can find a way to death, and strangely do
The work of heaviness and grief) I say
Had we but seen the glory of that day:
The whooping, dancing, and the general noise
To which the sea and thunder are but toys;
We should have thought it (so the sounds agree.)
No noise of Triumph, but Captivity.
At last they do repose themselves, and one
Of highest judgment and discretion,
Instructs them thus: My dearest Countrymen,
Who ere intends his private ends, does pen
A speech unto the Ear, his study is
Which words sound well, and which are thought amiss:
He tryes all ways, he lays all colors on
To cheat the Judgment, sooth the Passion,
So that he hopes at last that it must hit
Either the subject, or the clothing it:
But I whose end is Public good, intend
Nothing but that which caryes to that end:
Pardon me then if I am harsh and round,
If that I am not Plausible, but sound.
We won a victory last day, so great
We hardly dare believe we were not beat:
Our conquest easier was then our belief;
And with great reason too: for tell, what chief,
What petty captain is so vain, so mad
As to ascribe to his conduct the glad
Event of last days hazard? to my sense
The Conqueror was only Providence,
And we but instruments: then I Would advice
That as you have been happy, you would be wise:
That man does still in greatest glory stand,
Whose brain is better thought of then his hand*
And so I wish that yours should be: we know
That what is gained by Fortune is lost so,
She has no constant Favorite, then now
Whilst yet our victory does means allow
To purchase peace at our own rate, and thrive
By Covenant more then Battle: let us drive
All thought of war far from us, it is in vain
To get that hardly, which we may obtain
By easier means, and he does more then rave
Who hazards that which he may certain have.
More was he speaking, when a thousand tongues
Made his be silent, one would think their lungs
To be unequal to that noise, so fierce
Their clamor is, such sounds the heavens do pierce.
So have I often heard in our Theater
(When that a daintier passage wan the Ear)
A thousand tongues, a thousand hands rebound,
(As if the Plaudite were in the sound,
And most noise were most pleasing:) they express
Their liking so, as these their frowardness.
Who rave from noise to action, one stoopes down,
To reach a stone, another fiercer clown
Shakes a steeled Tauelin at him, all the hands,
Against which Israel but weakly stands,
Aim now at one; who dreadlesse, vnimpair'd
In courage, neither wished life, nor despaired.
At last a serious Counceller stood up;
Much had he tasted of the liberal Cup,
And thankefully expressed it in his face,
To which a larger wound would be a grace
By hiding his rich pimples: This brave man
Raises himself, and with what speed he can
Stutters thus to them; Cease my noble boys,
Quiet your threatenings now, and stint your noise.
It Is a just anger you have shown, but yet
The time in which you show it is unfit.
Now should we dance, my bloods, now should we sing,
And make the wondering firmament to ring
With joyful acclamations; now brave spirits
To show the most joy, is to show most merits.
Sadness is only Capital: in fine,
Now should we shed no blood but of the vine.
For you Sir whom we doubly guilty see,
Of Treason first, and then Philosophy
If these do please, thus we pronounce: to show
How little we do fear you, or the Foe,
We Will send you first unto their camp, and then
We Will fetch you by our conquest home again.
This is a mercy if well understood,
You shall enjoy the fortune you think good.
Here his breath fails: when all the people cry
He has spoke nobly, none this day shall dye.
And yet the Traitor shall not escape at last
Whose execution is deferred, not past.
It Was neither peace, nor war now, either side
Having sufficiently their forces tried,
Take breath a while: O happy men, if still
This mind continue in them! If they kill
Their appetite of killing! if this rest
Can at the last inform them what is best!
To bury their slain friends* both sides agree
Unto a two days truce: Stupiditie
Nor to be borne with! had they known the use
At first of that which they now call a truce,
This truce had been unnecessary, then
They might have spared, whilst now they bury men.
And that they now may bury, they entreat
Respite a while from war: thus all their heat
Is buried for the time: good heaven to see
The Omnipotency of Necessity,
Whom all the nearest ties of Neighborhood,
Religion, Language, nay of the same Blood
Could not contain from fight, but that they would
(To see if it were theirs) shed their own blood,
These are entreated to a form of peace,
Their fury for a day or two can cease,
Commanded by Necessity: they fear
Lest the Air by so much carcass poisoned were:
Lest to revenge the blood which they had shed,
They now might feel the valor of the dead,
Of strong corruption: these thoughts hold their mind
These thoughts a while enforce them to be kind
On both sides (for they do not jar in all)
Nature preuailes not, but a Funeral.
Nor does this long prevail, for when they had
Interred some carcasses, they yet are mad
Till they have made some more, till they have done
A second fault, as not content with one.
They see their Error, and commit it, thus
Who are not eminently virtuous,
Are easily entrapp'd in vices snares,
And want the poor excuse, that unawares
They were engaged, we greedily run on
Offending with Deliberation.
And can you call this but Infirmity?
Nickname a Vice? O call it Prodigy.
Call it -- O what? What name can well express
The miracle of humane guiltiness?
Could he pretend an ignorance at least
And be in Nature as in Fact a beast,
He were not worse then they, then he might be
Both from the Use and Fault of Reason free.
But what new horror ceizeth me? what fire
Reigns in my thoughts, and prompts me to rise higher?
Hence you low souls who groueling on the Earth
Basely deiect your selves below your birth,
Sold to your senses: I intend to tell
What none can know but in whose breasts do dwell
Celestial fires, and unto whom it is given
To have a nearer intercourse with Heaven.
Yet pardon you pure souls, whom no one dares
Eased of our flesh, to trouble with our cares:
Pardon I once more ask, if my weak pen
Fitting it self to ordinary men,
Attain not to your height (to us unknown)
And give you those words which you shame to own.
The Lawgiuer, who saw as in a glass
All in the Word, what ever 'twas did pass
In these near enmities, as far as Man
Perfectly happy knows a grief, began
To feel Compassion: Have I then said he
Delivered Israel for this misery?
And did I free them from the Egyptian
Only to find them graves in Canaan?
I did foretell their Land should ouerflow,
But never thought to be expounded so;
Never with blood: I meant that they should have
More blessings then the covetous can crave.
The flowing Vdder, and the vntyr'd Be,
An happy Deluge of Fertility.
O how would now proud Pharaoh rejoice!
How would he have a Joy beyond a voice,
Beyond his tyranny, could he but know
What Israel does endure without a Foe!
Was it for this I did so often repeat
Wonders before him, wonders of so great
Exuberance of power, so highly done,
That they contemn all admiration?
How were thou Nilus bloudy'd into Red,
Thy waters as unknown as is thy Head?
When all thy finny progeny did find
That to destroy now, which did breed their kind,
When by a nimble death they understand,
The River as discourteous as the Land?
Can I forget that when I did bestow
A liberty as heretofore to flow
Unto thy now pale waters, there did pass
An issue stranger then his Color was
From the too fertile river? Frogs are found
With such a multitude to hide the ground
That there is no grass appears, no corn is seen.
The spring does blush because he looks not green.
Their numbers and their noise equally harsh
Make Egypt not a Region but a Marsh.
What a small portion of my acts were these?
How scarcely to be counted passages
In my large story? Dust is changed to Lice
And now begins to creep, which the most nice
And curious eye before could never find
To move at all, unless 'twere by the wind:
Which could not scatter those thick clouds of Flies,
That would not let them, no, not see the skies.
When I but threaten all the cattle dye,
And Aegypts Gods find a Mortality.
But lest the men should think that they were free
From the fault too, if the Calamity^:
I taught their bodies with black goare to run,
And imitate their souls corruption.
What was a Face is now a Pimple grown,
And in each part is plentifully sown
A store of blaines, so ugly, that to me
It was a kind of Judgment but to see.
And if this were but little, was it not I
That called those candy'd pellets from the sky,
Which in a moment ouerwhelming all
Did badly change their color in their fall:
And by the murdering every one they found
Within their reach came red unto the ground?
When to repair the numbers they had slain
(Beasts of all sorts) the land is filled again,
But it is with Locusts, such a swarm they see
Made for the shame of all their Husbandry,
That they could wish, so they were rid of these
The former Murrein, ere this new increase.
But who can tell the following Prodigy?
Last day the Earth was hid, but now the sky
Chaos returns, the Sun has lost his rays
And Nights obscurity is turned to Days.
Who could a greater miracle afford?
God made the Light, I Darkness by a Word.
Which had it lasted, had it never been spent,
They would have called it a kind punishment,
They had not seen then their first borne to die,
To challenge death by their Nativity:
All (...), but why? was it to see
(...) suffer fuller misery?
To gain the Country which they could not hold,
From which their own arms ignorantly bold
Expel their own selves: O let no man tell
That Israel did banish Israel.
My prayers forbid, nor let it ere be said
That Moses was unkind since he was dead,
That in the grave I left my goodness too;
And could not pity when not feel a woe.
Having said this, with all the speed he may
He seeks out holy Abraham, who that day,
By his dear Isaac seconded, did sing
The ancient mercies of their heavenly King.
One tells how having now worn out a life
And so being fitter for his Grave then Wife,
Nay then when she had lived unto those years,
To be accounted with the Grandmothers,
When Sara now was so unweildy grown,
Her legs could scarcely bear her self alone,
She bears another burden, and does swell
Not with a child, but with a Miracle.
This said, he stops; and then again goes on
No more with story, but Devotion.
O praise the Lord my soul, let me not find
My body was more fruitful then my mind.
O let that teeme with thankfulness, and be
Made sweetly pregnant by my memory.
Father, says Isaac, I have often heard
That we do tell with Joy what we have Feared,
And what in suffering terrifies our sense,
Does in relating please: what violence
Of bliss possesses me, when I compare
My dangers past with joys that present are!
Methinkes I yet carry that fatal wood
(A burden which I hardly understood
Should carry me) methinkes I still enquire
Where is the sacrifice, and where the fire?
How little did I think, or fear till then
That God commanded sacrifice of men!
How little could I guess in any part
That God in such sort did desire the Heart?
Yet pardon Father, if you now must know,
Your silence seemed more cruel then your blow:
Could I oppose my mind against your will,
Or wish him spared, whom you decreed to kill?
Wherefore was all this circumstance? what need
But first to tell, and then to act the deed?
I never knew what disobedience meant,
And your distrust was my worst punishment.
I must confess I was amazed, my blood
Congealed within me, and my faint hairs stood
Yet not for fear of death (Death was my profit)
But for the manner and the Author of it.
Was this the heavenly promise? and must I
So strangely borne, somewhat more strangely dye?
What should I say now? or what shall I do?
That frustrate by my death Gods promise too.
Should I inuoke Heavens aid? alas, from thence
Came the iniunction for this violence:
Should I implore my fathers help? why, he
Would sooner hearken unto heaven then me.
And so he did: for when the trembling sword
As if he knew the temper of his Lord
Threatened a death, most fortunately then
He that did arm you did disarme again;
Showing your will was all he did require,
Commanding you to that you most desire,
To be again a Father: O the power
And mercy of our God! who in an hour,
Who in a minute, can make all things well,
Can bring and then deliver out of Hell.
These were their Accents, when that Moses says,
It is an holy business to praise,
To magnify our Lord, so to go on
In the intent of our Creation.
To this all times, all reasons do obey,
And we may praise as often as we pray.
But now let us change these tones, let us be mute
In all discourses now, but in a suite;
Let us at once conioyne our prayers, and see
If our one God will hearken unto three.
Your issue, and my charge, whom I have led
Through those paths that never man did tred,
(As if they feared a scarcity of foes)
Do their own selves against themselves oppose;
And their destruction (unless we repair
Sooner to aid them) will prevent our prayer.
It was a place above the Air, the Sky,
Whither Man cannot reach, not with his Eye,
Nay if the exactness of the height be sought,
Whither Man cannot reach, not with his thought.
Beyond the place where hail, and rain do grow,
Above the chill-white treasures of the snow;
To which compared the starry heaven is fell
Unto a nearer neighborhood with Hell.
And when I shall of Gods abode entreat
It does become his prospect, not his seat.
To which compared, the Crystal heaven does meet
With Earth, to be a stool unto his feet.
This was the Place (yet pardon 'twas not so,
Places are things which only bodies know,
Our bounds of Air, from which the heavens are free
As from Corruption and Mortality)
But here it was His sacred throne did stand,
Who with a word created Sea and Land:
Who with a word was Maker of his Throne,
Who till he made it never wanted one.
Bring me the richest goldsmiths treasuries
(Those baits that do allure our hearts and eyes)
The dusky Sapphire, the Pearl richly white,
The sparkling Diamond, yellow Chrysolite,
Or if there be a gemme Nature has framed,
Of so high price that Art has never named.
Ransacke the Inga's tombs, where there does lie
With their corrupted dust their treasury:
(Who to that pretty bounty do attain
That they bestow their gold on earth again.)
Search me their graves, or if you fearful be
Of treasure guarded by Mortality,
Rob all the mines fenc't with so many bars,
(Where Nature in the Earth has fancied stars,
Whose luster least our weakness cannot bear
Her kinder wisdom made her store up there)
Bring these unto the view, to an exact
Figure, which Phidias durst call his Act:
Yet to this throne compared, it will appear
So far from shining, it will scarce look clear.
Here does the Ancient of days disclose
The glory of his Majesty to those
To whom he daynes his presence, who enjoy
At full, what would a weaker eye destroy:
Whose bliss shall never have a period,
Who therefore live because they see their God.
How could I ever linger, ever dwell
In this so blessed Relation! O how well
Should I esteem my self entranced, if I
By staying here should lose my History!
Here thousand thousands wait upon his call
Of humane servants, and Angelical,
And such a multitude inuest his throne
(Millions of Spirits waiting upon One,)
That it may be we should not say amiss,
Their Number stranger then their Nature is:
Here sound the Halleluiah's, here the Quire
Of Heaven is high, and full as their desire:
No voice is here untuned, they do not find
Aiarre, more in the sound, then in the mind.
Their power of singing grows on with their song,
And they can longer sing, because thus long;
Thus here themselves they fully strengthened fee,
To a melodious eternity.
Here Abraham presents himself, and says
O thou above the injury of Days;
Who making Times art subject unto none,
Who give all knowledge, and art never known;
Who in my days of flesh did gladly lend
An ear unto my suit, and would not bend
Thy plagues against thine enemies, until
I knew the intent, and thou had asked my will,
The will of me poor mortal, nay far worse
Of me a sinner then, the ancient curse
Stuck deeply in me, that I might have feared
My faults, and not my prayer should have been heard:
Could I speak then, and am I silent now?
Did Sodom move, and cannot Israel bow?
O pardon me if I bewail their state,
If I their Father prove their Advocate.
Did not thou promise when I had given ore
All hope of Father, when I wished no more
Then a contented Grave, that then from me,
Should come so numerous a progeny:
That all the cleerer army of the sky,
And the thick sands which still unnumbered lie
Should come within account before my seed,
Which not my Sara, but thy truth should breed?
How often I thought that promise did include
Their lasting too as well as multitude;
That their continuance should be as sure,
As long as either sands or stars endure.
If they have sinned, thou know they may repent
And be the better by a punishment,
Never by Ruin: O then use thy rod
Think that they are thy People, thou their God.
And if they are so, O then let not be
Any more strife, but who shall most serve thee,
If they are so, let Abraham once more
Receive those children which thou gave before.
Now they have left their heavenly ecchoing,
Now all the Quire does wonder and not sing,
When from the eternal Majesty are heard
Speeches, which all but the dread Speaker feared.
Am I as Man that I should change? or like
The son of man to threaten and not strike?
If I pronounce my wrath against a Land
Shall that continue, and my word not stand?
If I do whet a sword, shall it be blunt,
And have no direr sharpness then it was wont?
Beniamins crime h'as such an horror in it,
(Who have confirmed their faces like a flint
Against all dye of modesty) that till
Their blood (which now their too hot veins do fill)
Flow in their fields, till that their Numbers be
Of as small note as is their Chastity,
It shall not be remitted: yet to show
That I can pay that which I do not owe,
A remnant shall escape: but for the rest,
(Those other Tribes which boast they are the best,)
And yet to verify their goodness, less
Speak, as if they were injured by success,
So making the fault mine, who therefore have
Been lib'rall benefactors to the grave
By their thick deaths) until that I do see
A confirmed truth of their humility,
They shall not see a victory: I Will make
Benjamin punish these, and after take
Vengeance on the Reuengers, till they see
My mercy has not spent mine Aequity.
This I pronounce, this is my constant will.
Now all the holy company do fill
The heavens with shouts of praise, and loudly cry
All Honor, Glory, Power to the most High.
But now the Israelites once more have brought
Their troops into the field, once more have fought,
And whether 'twas the fault of them that led,
Or of the soldier, once more they have fled:
And now because their battle was not long
I will not be more tedious in my Song.
Canto III.
The Argument.
The Levites vision, Phineah's Prayer,
The Israelites late caused despair
Now turned to courage, when by them
A new inuenned stratagem
Draws the enemy from the walls,
Until within their net he falls,
With the full righting of the wrong
Does both conclude, and crown my Song.
When will Vice fail? when shall we see the eue^t
Of wicked acts as bad as the Intent?
As yet the worst are prosperous, and worse,
The good as yet have never missed their curse:
Reuiew the Levites wife, and you shall see
When she had forfeited her honesty,
Her father entertained her; but once more
When she was come to what she left before,
Her Lord and Virtue, when that all her strife
Shall be to gain the name of a good wife,
Gibeah will not harbor her; O poor!
Gibeah were guiltless had it done no more:
But Gibeah will murder her; and now
Return we to the Camp, and there see how
They prove this fatal truth, twice had they tried
The valor of their enemies, and twice died
The fields with their best blood, so hardly crossed
That they have fought no oftener then th'aue lost:
And yet their cause was best: neither were they
The only people which have lost the day
Which they deserved to win: search the records
Of every Age, and every Age affords
Examples of like strangeness: who can tell
What the Assyrian did to Israel?
How in despite of all their lofty towers,
(Which hoped a standing to the last of hours)
He made one hour their last: unlucky hour,
Where vice showed what 't could do when it had power.
The sword did sport with life's, nor were they such
Whose loss or preservation did not much
Pertain unto the state: but the Kings sons
In the same time, the same Pauilions,
By the same tyrant are enforced to dye,
And which exceeds all, in their fathers eye.
Poor Zedekiahs kingdom first is gone
And then his heirs, O harsh inversion!
If he had lost them first, it might be thought
His kingdoms loss would not have moved him ought,
He would have made the best of the other cross
Esteeming it an easing, not a loss.
As he might now to be deprived of sight
When he should covet the kind screene of Night
Between his woes and him: if in his mind
He saw, it was a blessing to be blind:
That then he should be forced to see no more
When he could not see what he saw before.
This Israel suffered, and his Ashur did,
And yet I dare affirm it was not hid
Not from the Assyrian even in his own doom
That they were better who were overcome.
Or if the goodness to his side he draws,
It Is that his sword was better, not his cause.
I could go on in presidents as true,
Actions between the Heathen and the Jew,
Between the Turk and Christian: but what need
To show there is no birth without a seed?
No speech without a tongue? or if there be
More truths of such known perspicuity.
How do they doat then, who would tie the Lord
To be so ayding to his childrens sword,
As that he never should use his own, nor do
Any one act, but what they wish him too?
Are they so good? or is his love so fond,
As of a courtesy to make a bond?
Shall they indent with him? and say thus far
Thou may correct, but if thy judgments are
Of longer date, they are unjust? for shame
(All ye that glory in a purer Name,)
Hence those blaspehemous thoughts, far hence remove,
Lest they deserve the plagues they would reprove.
Is it injustice to suppress our pride,
To bring unto our eyes what we would hide,
Even from our selves, our close deformities?
Or, may not God, to show how he does prize
His servants labors, make them thus appear,
As does the Sun after a cloud, more clear?
His judgment certainly we will says too quick,
VVho'l prove one bad because he sees him sick;
These judgments are discases, and bestowd
At pleasure, and not where they most are owd:
Yet due they are where ever they are found,
Since there are none so Catholikely sound,
But in a word, but in a thought have strayd,
Perhaps in those Afflictions, when th'aue wayd
Their deeds and sufferings which they think to be
Of far more rigor then Aequality.
Then courage noble Countrymen, nor fear
Though you should want success a while to ^eare
Your names up to your ancestors, (who did
Those acts which now were better to be hid:
Lest that they should vpbraid us) do not fear
That Spain is nearer the Almighties Ear
Then our devotions: he that could bestow
A victory after a second blow
Upon the doubting Israelites, can still
Create our better hopes even out of ill.
Or if he do not, if he have decreed
That our just plague shall be their unjust deed:
That Israel shall be once more overcome,
And David fly away from Absalom:
Yet let this glad us in our chiefest woe,
Man may be good and yet unhappy too.
Now are they truly humbled, now although
No curious eye could guess their overthrow
When he had seen their numbers, yet at length
They will rely upon another strength,
Or if to numbers they will trust again,
It Is to Gods numerous mercies, not their men.
He can deliver (they have seen) by few,
And they do think it possible and true
That he can help by many too, they find
Without him all their actions full of wind,
Of emptiness, and with him they not doubt
To be as well victorious as devout.
Now Pride has left them, now they goodness yield,
Now have they lost their vices with the field.
Such holy lessons do misfortunes teach,
Which make our once bad thoughts bravely to reach
At Heaven and glory: if you mark it well
Whilst yet it was a numerous Israel
It was a proud one too, but when that now
God looks upon them with an angry brow,
When all their troops half weary and half sick,
Are grown to easier Arithmeticke,
They Are truly penitent* hence we may see
The power, the good power of Adversity,
We Are bad if we are happy, if it please
Heaven to indow us with a little ease,
If riches do increase, until our store
Meet our desires, till we can wish no more,
If that our garners swell (until they fear
Ruin from that with which they furnished were)
We but abuse these benefits: our Peace
Brings forth but factions, if that strangers cease
To give us the affront; our selves will be
Both the defendant, and the Enemy.
Our riches are our snares, which being given
To man, to make a purchase of the heaven,
We buy our ruin with them, the abuse
Is double, in the getting, and the use,
So that our sums unto such heaps are grown
When Avarice succeeds Oppression.
In brief, our garners so well stuffed, so crammed,
Detain our Corn, as if that it were damned
To everlasting prison, none appears,
And thus we give dearth to the fruitful years:
Being to such a proud rebellion grown,
Famine is not heavens judgment but our own.
So wretched are we, so we skillful grow
In crimes, the which the heathen do not know.
We wrong God for his blessings, as if thus
We then were thankful, if injurious.
Why should not mercy win us? why should we
Be worse by that, whence we should betterd be?
Blessings were never intended for our harm,
Why do we hearken then to the fond charm
Of such temptations? O how base is man!
How foolish Irreligion has wanne
Upon his reason too! Do we not call
Whom only stripes can master, bestiall?
O what is man then! who never hears his Lord,
Till that the famine call him, or the sword.
Who (as he meant to tire his patient God)
Yields not unto his favors, but his rod.
And can we yet entreat him to be kind,
To alter his, when we will not change our mind?
If we are heard, we will offend again,
And all our prayer does but entreat a Sin.
Thus prayed the Israelites, but if they are heard
If he that made them scorned, will make them feared:
It is in chance, no, it is as sure as fate,
Having forgot their misery of late
They will rebel again: like those good hearts
Who though they know the pains, the many smarts
Which fruitfulness is fruitful with, still give
Death to themselves, to make their issue live:
And if they escape this death, they try again,
And boldly venture for a second pain,
As if twere pleasure, or as if they meant
Rather to dye, then to be continent.
Thus have we seen a barren, sandy soil
(Made only for the husbandmans sad toil
And not his profit) when the full heaven powers
His moisture down, easing himself by showers:
Drowned with the drops, to make us understand
A figure of the Sea upon the Land,
When once those drops are spent, when that the sky
Smiles with his new restored ferenitie,
Swifter then thought, before that we can say
This was the place; the water's gone away,
There Is a low Ebb, again we see the Land
Changing its moisture for its ancient sand.
Yet he that knows this their infirmity,
At last will pity it, and from on high,
(When now their thoughts of war they will adiourne
When there is no talk now, but of their return)
He Will hinder it by victory: with that
(About the time that pitchy night had gat
The conquest of the day, of which being proud
He wrapped himself within his thickest cloud,
Thinking perhaps his conquest to be void,
If any saw the triumphs he inioyd)
Unto our Leuite he a vision sends
Clad in her dearest shape, in whom he ends
All thoughts of Fancy: Whom when he had seen
(And quickly he had spied her) Fairest Queen
Of heaven, he says, what is there here on earth
That could persuade thee to a second birth,
Thus to appear again? needs must thou know
(For ignorance belongs to us below
Excluded out of heaven) that our sad stare
Is for its goodness proved unfortunate;
That Benjamin is conqueror, and that we
Could not revenge, but only follow thee:
Nor was it one loss, one petty overthrow
Has daunted us, but (as if fate would show
All her choice malice on us) we have tried
How many ways 'twas possible t'aue died.
Believe it, heavenly one, no cowardice
(Which heretofore being base, is now tearmd wise)
Lost us the day, no providence, no zeal
Nor that (which can the maymes of actions heal)
Council, and grave advice was wanting to us:
Only the heavens, which we had thought would woo us
To prosecute thy vengeance, and from whence
We looked for days, like a good conscience
Shining and clear, with cruelty unheard
Give us an overthrow for a reward;
That we can only (such our wretched fate)
Deplore the loss, which we should vindicate.
Is this your Justice heavens? nay I would know
If it at least be wisdom, thus to show.
Your wrath upon you followers? if there be
Such a desire in you to make us see
What power you have, wherefore do you not use
That power on those, who impiously abuse
Us and your selves? O there are heathen still,
People that neither fear, nor know your will,
If you will ruin these, or any wise
But lessen, you have the fewer Enemies:
On these be powerful; but if you doubt
Whether such nations may be singled out,
That sin has fled the world, then here begin,
For all the Heathen are in Benjamin.
Are we the only faulty? or am I
Picked out for eminent Iniquity?
All lights on me, it was I that raised these wars,
It Was I that this thick people like to stars
Have lessend into Number; I alone
Merit both peoples curses joined in one.
Benjamin does detest me, and I guess
Isreal's hatred is more close, not less.
What shall I do, what course is to be tryde
When safe I cannot go, nor safe abide?
No more says she, nor foolishly conclude
To give complaints in stead of gratitude.
Wee'are heard my dear, and he at whose command
The earth will learn to move, the heaven to stand
Fast as the Center, who brings down to hell,
And out of deeper mercies (which to tell
Would pose them that they bless) brings back again,
Making the pleasure greater by the pain,)
Has crowned our wishes. O joyfully good!
Not to be had on earth, nor understood:
Heavens high superlatiue, for unto me
Revenge is better then Aeternity.
Revenge upon Gods enemies: know my dear
(And know that thou must do what thou shall hear)
It is the will of heaven, when once the sky
Is proud of the next mornings livery,
All Israel should meet, where what shall fall
Just with wishes, or exceed them all,
I must not now discover, yet thus much
I care deliver (my affection's such)
A truth, that is confessed as soon as heard,
That he who knew to plague, knows to reward.
Our Leuite wakes, but stretching out an arm
He feels no body, no, nor no place warm
To prove she had been there, he thinks 'tmay be
No vision, but a birth of Fantasy:
An issue of a troubled brain that framed
Forms to it self which Nature has not named.
Have I not slain enough he says, but still
Is it my office and my curse to kill?
It Was but a dream inioyn'd me to be bad,
A dream, a vapor, and am I so mad
For nothing to be monstrous, and commit
A crime, that men shall fear to dream of it!
But can I disobey what it has pleased
Heaven to command me? O how I am ceaz'd
With strange extremes! nor readily can tell
Whether this Revelation should dwell
Closed in my breast? or whether I go on
As counting it a Revelation?
There may be guilty silence, if we fear
In the affair of heaven to wound an ear
With threatening Rheroricke; this will not be
Excused by a pretense of modesty:
Rather twill prove the judgment of just heaven,
We shall receive the doom we should have given.
Now all the people know what he has heard,
Now they have all their forwardness declared
In sacrifice, when Phineas appears,
One that had lived unto so many years;
He knew not how to count them, and that knew
The Desert wonders, and could prove them true
By his own sight, that could the more engage
Men to believe, not by his tongue, but age.
Nay I have heard some having duly way'd
How long in that high office he had stayed,
Conceive they may affirm without a check,
Him of the order of Melchisedec;
And prove (as only judging what they see)
Their Priesthoods, by their Priests eternity.
Who having entered, all the people bowed:
(For 'twas not yet as perfect zeal allowed
To be irreuerent to their Priest, that name
Which now is proved a title but of shame,
Then was the badge of glory) he indeares
Himself, more by his office, then his years
To those, who think these two can never agree,
To scorn the Priest, and serve the Deity.
Before the Altar his weak knees he bends,
Which age before, but now devotion sends
Unto the ground, where with a voice so low,
That he could only hear it, who could know
What it would have before it spoke, he thus
Whispered a prayer;
King of Heaven, of Earth, of Seas,
And of men exceeding these:
Thou, that when thy people ran
From the proud Egyptian,
Ledst them through a liquid path
Safe, and scarce wet, when thy wrath
Wonderfully made them know,
It Was a Sea unto the foe.
Thou that when the heat, the sand
Of a barren thirsty land,
Made our tongues be so confined
To our roofes, they scarce repined,
But in secret, so that we
Only feared a blasphemy.
Thou then by a powerful knock
Made a Sea within a Rock,
And gave Israel to know
For them drought should ouerflow:
Thou art still the same, and we
Stand in the same need of thee.
Pardon then if we presume
To an hope, and so assume
Courage to us, when we join
Our wants to that power of thine.
Yes our wants, for we can find
None of merit, w'aue declined
Every good way, and have still
Been ambitious of ill,
So that when we are exact,
And have all our good deeds rackt
To the highest rate, there is none
Dares appear before thy throne:
Only this desert we see,
Continuance of adversity.
Nay such monsters have we bin,
Such proficients in each sin,
That we durst not look on heaven,
Nor entreat to be forgiu'n.
Had not thou vouchsafed to do
What our wishes reached not too:
Had not thou vouchsafed to be
Tutor to our Infancy:
And bestowed when we were mute
Both our prayer and our suit.
O the Courteous
Respect heavens bears us! Scarcely had he done,
Scarce finished his imposed devotion,
When on the sudden, ere you could have said
The Priest had sacrificed, or he had prayed,
Through all the Camp a light was spread, to this
Compared, the Sun but a dark body is:
And in respect of so divine a light
Our day is honored, if he be tearmd night,
Nor this alone, but that they there might see
And fear their God in his full Majesty,
Such voices and such thunders fright the Air,
That they suppose they want another prayer
To be assured from them; so they declared
They were afraid to hear, that they were heard.
Down on the pauement every knee is fixed,
Some groueling on their faces, when betwixt
Astonishment and hope, whilst yet they doubt
What all this preface means, and whilst the rout
Feared judgments which they merited, they hear
A voice, for which they wish a larger care,
It was so sweetly merciful: Once more
Go up (it says) and though that heretofore
You Have had the worst. yet thus my sentence stands
I Will now deliver them into your hands.
Have you beheld how some condemned to die,
When they were fitted for Aeternity,
When life they did despise, and all below,
Received a pardon, when they feared the blow
That should vnman them, have you seen them then
Almost forgetting that they were but men;
How to express their mind they want a word,
Joy having done the office of the sword,
And made them speechless? then you may in part
Conceive the wonder of their joy; which Art
Confesses it exceeds her power to show
At full, which only they that have can know.
Thus brave Corvinus, then whom fame nere knew
Any that to an higher virtue grew,
When once it pleased Fortune to leave her frown,
Made an exchange of Fetters for a Crown.
Thus, not to seek a foreign president,
Our Henry, whom the Heavens courteously sent
To set a period to our Civil broils,
To join both Roses: after many foyles
Received and conquered, after he had seen
Himself an Exile, who a Prince had been,
When banishment was enuy'd him, when naught
Would please his Enemy, unless he bought
His death of him that harbored him; even then,
To fool the proiects of the cunningst men,
This withered root begins afresh to spring,
And from a banished coarse reuiues a King.
Thus (not to seek out a stale president,
Mentioning mercies after they are spent
And lost in story) Englands present Joy
(Whom Fate can only threaten, not annoy,)
How has he tried variety of grief!
How been in dangers, as in Rule our Chief;
That when there is a speech of suffering,
He is no less our Pattern, then our King.
The Seas spoke loud, yet if we rightly poyse,
There was more danger, where there was less noise:
Yet was he freed from both, when in man's eye,
Success had seemed to smile on Treachery.
These are your wonders, Heaven, and not so much
Favors (although the Favor too be such,
That it does pose our gratitude, and so
Only proclaims that we are made to owe,
Our poverty of merit) to be short,
They Are not so much your Favors, as your Sport.
You in an instant raise, whom we would swear
Nayl'd to the Earth, him that had left to fear
More then he suffered, that had been so long
Acquainted with ill luck, with such a throng
Of misaduentures, that he does not know
What it is to be free from them, and so
This courteous intermission he expounds
Rather a Change then Cure of his near wounds:
You in an unthought Minute can depresse,
Whom we believe in league with Happiness.
And as upon the Stage we often have seen
Him act a Beggar, who a King has been:
For no default, but that the Poets art
Thought at that time he best would fit that part?
So in our serious Theaters, when you please
Kings are as varying persons as are these,
Only in this their disadvantage lies;
That they may fall, but cannot hope to rise.
They, whom the bands that make a kingdom strong,
Succession to the Crown both right and long
From worthy Ancestors, obedience
At home, and lastly sure intelligence
Abroad has fortifyed, those that supposed
True joy to be wholly in them enclosed:
If you but please to frown, in one short day
(When they not think their Enemies on their way)
Are conquered by them, and at last retain
This comfort only to allay their pain,
That their misfortunes (if the heavens decree)
May be the portion of their Enemy.
Why then do trifling miseries so grate
Our minds, and make us more unfortunate
Then heaven intended? if out of a sum
Of money (not so rich as troublesome
By the large room it occupies,) some one
Willing to teach us moderation,
Nibble a little, how we fret! we rave!
How for our treasure we distraction have!
As if we did believe (to say no more)
Heaven only had the power to make us poor,
But Israel thought not thus, but does prepare
All things that for the Action needful are:
He thinks now double diligence is due,
That he may be victorious, and God true.
On the Eastside of Gibeah there stood
An ouergrowne and unfrequented wood;
The trees so thickly placed, that you would guess,
(Had you beheld that horrid wilderness:
How darkness all the Mastery had won,)
It Was made for the discredit of the Sun;
Never did any raye pierce through those leaves,
And if at any time it light receives
It Is only when the heavens do miss their stroke,
And passing wicked men, murder an Oak.
So that the brightness that adornes the same
Serves not so much to inlighten, as inflame.
Here never did the nimble Fairy tread,
Nor ever any of the Wood-nymphes bred
Within this grove, but it was singled out
For Pluto's regiment, for that bad rout
Of Hell-borne furies, there you might have seen
Alecto stretched at her full length between
Two fatal Yughs, where while her rest she takes,
She gives an intermission to her Snakes,
Who in a thousand curles there hissing lie,
And she sleeps sweeter by their harmony.
Here had the Canaanite in former times
(Whilst that Religion did consist in crimes,)
Offered his sons in sacrifice, as though
He meant to pay back heaven all he did owe
Or did conceive, (that which he should despair)
To be without sin, when without an heir.
This horrid place till now had empty stood,
But now the Israelites conclude it good
To plant an ambush there: for thus they plot
That when the skirmish shall be growing hot,
They will draw back, to make the Beniamite
Conceive that stratagem to be a flight,
And leave the town for the pursuit; when straight
Upon a sign given, they that lie in wait
Shall ceize upon the City, and so force
Their Enemy to such a desperate course,
That being pursued by those he put to flight,
He shall not know, whether to fly or fight.
Hearken ye silly ones that do suppose
You ought not to bear Arms against your foes:
Who having cast off ordinary sense,
Affirm that they do war with Providence,
Who prouidently war, that they distrust
The power, or care of heaven, who will be just
To their own cause, which you will noise to be
A spice of wiser Infidelity.
To these I need no other answer find:
Shall we be foolish because heaven is kind?
And when your industry might do as well,
Will ye enforce God to a Miracle?
It is a truth I grant, which you pretend
That God has destined all things to their end,
Which stands immovable: nor is it in Fate
To alter what he will praeordinate:
Yet never any did so far proceed
In folly, to affirm that he decreed
Only the end, that 'twas in Gods intents,
Whilst we did sleep, to bless us with events
We dream not of: Such fondnes cannot find
Any excuse (unless they were designed
Ineuitably to it:) for I would know
(If they suppose it possible to show
Their mind in these affairs, or if they be
Not hindered from an answer by Decree)
Why they do eat? and why they do not hence
Conclude rebellion against Providence?
Why they do cloth themselves? and why desire
When cold oppresses them to choose a fire?
Have you forgot that for his holy ones,
God can at ^ase produce e'ne out of stones
As solid sustenance? or is it lost
In your frail memory, that when Israel crossed
The Desert out of Egypt, forty years
Nor Tailors they employed, nor Shoomakers?
Trust me if you your selves think your selves true,
Your care does vilify Gods care of you;
And every dish that to your board is brought
Vpbraides him to his face, as if you sought
To mend his purpose; and by this odd feat,
You do blaspheme as often as you eat.
The Israelites are wiser far, although
They have that unknown happiness, to know
Their victory aforehand, though they hear
This truth from him, from whom they cannot fear
Any deceit, (whose powerful word alone
Makes that a truth which he resolves upon,)
Although they will allow his Act for chief,
Yet they will do their part too: to be brief,
Every soldier to himself says thus;
God will bestow the victory, but by us.
The night they spend in prayer, but when the morn
Had dimmed the pride of Cynthiah's cleerest horn
By higher luster, being called away
Not by the Cock, the Trumpetter of Day;
But by an earlier trumpet, then you might
By her unwilling and yet hasting light,
Discern, and seeing, almost rightly poyse
Whether were more, their number, or their noise,
And unto which more fear was to be given,
Who fill the Earth with Numbers, with Noise Heaven.
Benjamin takes th'alarme, and having chose
One in whose faithfulness they might repose
A wary confidence; they quit the wall
And to the wider field issue out all,
Lest if they stayed within, and did oppose
Rampires and ditches only to their foes,
They might have bragged, (as if that they had won)
Making a prison of their garrison.
Now both the Hoasts themselves so near do find,
That it would ask more labor to have declined
The field, then to have won it, yet they stay
Hoping that innocence is in delay,
If they are slowly guilty: now spears fly
Shiuer'd in thousand fitters to the sky;
And whether it revenge or fortune were,
Every piece becomes a Murderer,
And from their bodies frees a many soul,
Doing that broken, which they could not whole.
Could Xerxes here have sat upon an hill,
To see these warriors, he would not still
Fondly lament, nor lavish out a tear
Because they could not live an hundred year,
But melt into just passion away,
Because they could not live out all that day.
Now might you have beheld the fiery horse
Proud of his own, and of his Masters force,
Robbed of his Master, whom you now might see
Running, as if twere after Liberty.
Or you'de conceive, had you but seen the race
That 'twas no more a battle, but a chase.
No stroke falls idle, nay they are so near;
They need not strike at all: death is caused here
By their bad neighborhood, the whole and sound
You might have seen here dead without a wound.
To save the guilt and labor of the sword,
Bodies to bodies their own ends afford.
Now nothing but the dust is to be seen
Which like so many Emblemes flies between
The mingled armies, which in silence says,
They are no better then the motes they raise,
Then those poor Atoms: but they think to shrowde
Their acts from sight of heaven under that cloud,
And therefore did their utmost: yet as though
These hands were slugglish, or this fury slow,
The trumpets chid them to a lustier guilt
And the loud drums proclaimed, you have not spilt
Blood enough yet: O what were they that found
Out first the use and malice of that sound?
Which makes us kill with greediness, and when
It Is the Corrupted Nature of most men
Hardly to yield unto the destitute,
These will not suffer us to hear their suite.
This drownes the groans: but now both armies reele,
Now this gives back some ground, now that does feel
That it is pressed too hardly. Thus the seas
When ever it the angry winds does please
To exercise their fury, do not know
What course to take, nor whither they should flow:
This wave breaks that, and then another blast
Makes that the conqueror, which was conquered last.
At length the Israelites give back indeed,
And though in order, yet with such a speed,
Benjamin calls it Flight, all is ours they cry,
If we can run we have the victory:
With that what ever men the town affords,
Skillful to use their fingers or their swords,
For spoil or for pursuit, issue out thence
With such a noise, they give intelligence
That they have left it empty: O the vain
Attempts of foolish man! O deserved pain!
They Are made the spoil, that they intend to make,
So wisely can just heavens their vengeance take
On bad attempts, so all heat assuage,
And make our Ruin greater then our Rage.
It never entered into their proud thought,
They should receive the damage which they sought
To give unto their brethren: who having left
Their woody covert, and the friendly cleft,
Which entertained them, by a quick surprise,
Take the unguarded town: O who can prize
Those losses to the full? or who rehearse
Those misaduentures in an equal verse?
They spare no age, but (cruel) take away
From the old men, the solitary day
They could expect to live: now Infants dye,
Even those, who yet within their mothers lie,
Finding a Night before they see the Morn,
Being buried thus, before that they were borne,
For whom their murderers no crime could choose,
But that they were, and had a life to loose.
Nor does the weaker sex escape the rage
Of these intruders, and as every Age,
So every Person suffers, only here
May be the difference, (if that any were)
Either they are killd outright, or which is worse,
They think their life to be the greater curse.
Here mothers see their daughters whom they bred
As Votaries unto their Maidenhead,
Vn-virgin'd in their sight, where having lost
That peerless jewel, which they valewd most,
They do receive to vindicate their name
A death from them, from whom they had their shame.
Avarice follows Lust, now they have leisure
To ransacke all those Mineralls of treasure
Long peace and thrift had hoarded up, at last
As children when their Appetite is past
Spoil what they cannot eat, and badly kind
Pamper their dogs with that they leave behind:
So these, as surfeiting with such a store,
(Which made them lose all fear of being poor)
What is not ready spoil, give to the fire,
Whose conquering flames unto the heavens aspire,
As boasting of their service: through the town,
Swifter then any thing that has renown
For speediness, they run, one hour does spoil
(Unlucky hour) what was an Ages toil
Now crack the houses, now the Temples fry,
Now the poor Citizens resolved to dye,
Doubt of what death: and know not which to try,
The fire, the downefalls, or the Enemy.
Had this misfortune happened in the Night
(Though Nature had opposed) such a full light
Had made a day, and so again had won
A Conquest of the town, and of the Sun.
Never did Sailor with such joy behold
Castor and Pollux when his ship was rolled
Upon the angry Ocean, (whose proud waves
Made the most haughty minds freeze into slaves
With a base fear,) as Israel does view
Those flames, which he does fear not to be true,
They are so great, and yet he hopes to see
These flames to light him to a victory.
Now all the face of things is changed anew,
Now those which erst seemed vanquished do pursue:
The Israelites confirming by their Fight
That they could cause as well as act a Flight.
Benjamin grows amazed, and does not know
What he should do, nor on what grounds to go,
Which probably seem safe: if he should fly
He runs away unto the Enemy:
And shall he fight? alas! but he will find
It is impossible to fight behind,
Where he shall be assay'ld: yet he shifts ground,
And figures out his battle in a round.
And since he has no hope to escape away,
He Will nobly sell, not give away the day.
They never fought till now, all the whole day
Before, was only somewhat fiercer Play,
Murder in jest, but now they are so fierce
As if they would enforce their swords to pierce
Beyond the body; this a while, at length
Despair does yield the victory to strength;
And Fortune (that the world henceforth might find
That they had injured her who called her blind)
Crowns the best side, and prouidently tryes
At once to prove their Conquest, and her Eyes.
The Parellell is easy; was it not thus,
When Heaven was pleased to be as kind to us?
We felt the prickles first, but then our Nose
Sucked in the sweeter virtue of the Rose.
We had success, as it were chose, and picked,
And what we feared to suffer did inflict.
When Brett and Burrowes (that I speak their due)
Revived to France, Talbot and Montague.
(O too like Montague, that lost thy breath,
By the same fatal Engine of quick death.)
When the choice valor of each rank, and fyle
Made up a double Sea within the Isle
Of blood and tears, O give us thanks, kind heaven,
And add a virtue to our Fortune given,
That we may all acknowledge his desert,
Who nobly gained a conquest of the heart
Of them, whose bodies he had conquered first,
To whom he then discovered, what he durst,
And after what his Nature was, when he
In the sad field had spent his Cruelty,
For when they offered to redeem their dead,
Sums which another would have vanquished,
He freely yields unto the suitors breath,
And gives the Grave, as easily as the Death.
Whilst they do give -- O how I blush to tell,
A poisoned knife, a poison that will dwell
And eat into their fame till earth be gone,
Till poison have no more to work upon.
Teach us our right to him, but then to you
What shall we give? and yet what not leave due?
Then, O kind Heaven, for this let me be pleader,
May we still sing your praise, who led our Leader.
And now I have unto my songs conclusion,
Isreal's conquest, Bentamins confusion
On all that valiant number which but now
Made treble numbers to their valor bow:
Only six hundred escape away, so few,
They were scarce able to commit a new
The Crime for which they suffered; had not Night
Became their vmpire and forbad the Fight,
Those few had perished too; then at the last
Let future Ages learn of Ages past
How vice rewards her servants! Let them be
Afraid at leastwise of the misery,
Who slight the sin: why should a beauteous face
Make my soul foul? and an external grace
Bereave me of my inward? O despair!
Shall I be bad because another's fair?
Hence that poor folly, rather let us win
A conquest by the loss of Benjamin.
To know that those belied, and stolen delights
Are not of so long lasting as the Nights,
In which we did enjoy them, how the Day
Takes both their darkness, and our sweets away:
To understand that tardy heaven is just,
That Ruin is the consequent of Lust.
And now O Father, once more I repair,
To thy great presence, O thou only fair!
(Who dwelling in the light that none comes near
Can not be seen of us, because too clear;
To whom created beauties if compared,
Ruin such as have the wisest eyes ensnared,
Are nothing but Deformity at best,
Dirt somewhat better colored then the rest)
Instruct my youth, O teach that I may know,
What mischiefs lurk under a seemly show;
What a sweet danger woman is: O thou
To whom the knees that do not love, do bow,
Whom all obey, even such as have no sense,
Who do not know their own obedience;
Whom all obey, even such as do go on
In a perpetual Rebellion,
The Spirits accursed: Grant me, that chastely wife
I enter into Covenant with mine eyes,
Never to look on Woman, not to see
What would persuade my soul to forsake thee,
To make a God of flesh: But if that I
Forced by Temptation, or Necessity,
Must see my Ruin, yet thus much, O thou
Whom my soul loves, and would more, knew she how,
(For his dear sake and worth, in whom was found
Only a place, no reason for a wound)
If I must have the sight, yet I require
I may at leastwise not have the desire.
If I must see, let it be to despise
So shall my heart be chaste, if not mine eyes.
FINIS.
A Thanksgiving for a recovery from a burning Fever.
I Burn again, methinkes an holy fire
Kindles my dull devotion, and far higher
Raises my spirit, then my hot disease
Inf^am'd my blood: how with a sacred case
Feel I these flames through my glad soul to rush!
Life those, which made a Chapel of the bush
When God did tutor Moses; would 'twere found
That this place too were such an holy ground:
Then should I boldly vent my Gratitude,
And being Godly, not be counted Rude.
The Night approacht, when by my pains I might
Suspect it would have been my lasting Night:
I had a grief beyond a Cowards fears,
And such a grief, it robbed me of my tears.
I was all Fire, the greedy element
Left no one part vnsing'd, as if it meant
To cross the vulgar notions of our birth,
And prove that man was not composed of Earth,
That he was made of Flames, that past all doubt
To dye was nothing, but to be put out.
And yet the truth of this, this truth denies,
Man is not made of that by which he dies.
And had I died thus, they had been unjust
Who had pronounced, we give dust unto dust.
Ashes they well might term me, and so turn
My Christian burial to a Pagan vine.
Without a tedious pilgrimage to Rome,
(If that the torment make the Martyrdom)
I might be Canonized, and sooner far
Then some whose names in the gulld Calender
Burn in red letters, of whom none can tell
Whether they only felt a Fire in Hell.
O heat! O drought! O am I quenched as yet,
Or is not this Remembrance a new fit!
Yet in my fiercest fit how often I thought
(Whilst yet there was some moisture left, which fought
With my hot Enemy) how durst liberal men
Give us a freedom of our wills, that when
Ever we list we may be good, and so
Owe to our selves as well the Cure as Blow?
Who gave us this strange power, can any tell,
Not to be Bad, and yet not to be Well?
Can we command our sins so easily,
And faint at a poor Fever? tell me why
You will consent to dye? and wherefore still
You plead not then a liberty of will?
My God cried I, though I must needs confess
Unto my shame, that all my pains are less
Then my demerits, yet I grant as free
That they exceed all possibility
Of mine own cure, and yet I sooner can
(Spite of Disease) turn my Physician
Then my Redeemer, thou alone can do
A powerful cure on soul and body too.
With that I felt recovery: my flame
Was kindly lessened to a lower name,
To moderate heat. Sleep did my senses charm,
And I that burnt before, was now but warm,
Health and Devotion ceize on me, my fire
Had lest my bones to live in my Desire,
And I was sick of thankfulness: then now
Teach me O Lord not why to praise, but how:
Bow my stiff knees, that they may beg a powr'e
Of full thanksgiving to my Savior.
Some praise for less: Iu'e read of Ionab's arc
(Which was of surer carriage then his Bark)
Th'inhabitable Fish, and yet we see
That he gives thanks for his Delivery,)
From his Preserver; and shall retchlesse I
Delivered from a nearer death, now dye
In the Remembrance? first, O Lord return
My tutor-torment, let me again burn.
And now great God, I do entreat, and change
My praise into a prayer, (for it is not strange
That benefits should make a suppliant,
Since courtesies cause prayer as well as want)
It Was thy great mercy made my body whole,
O let me find that mercy to my soul,
Then shall I boldly hasten to the grave,
And wanting Life, not want what I would have.
Upon our vain flattery of our selves, that the succeeding times will be
better then the former.
HOw we daily out our days!
How we seek a thousand ways
To find Death! the which if none
We sought out, would show us one.
Why then do we iniure Fate,
When we will impute the date
And expiring of our time,
To be hers, which is our Crime?
Wish we not our End? and worse,
Mak't a Prayer which is a Curse?
Does there not in each breast lie
Both our soul and Enemy?
Never was there Morning yet
(Sweet as is the Violet)
Which man's folly did not soon
Wish to be expired in Noone;
As though such an have did tend
To our bliss, and not our End.
Nay the young ones in the nest
Suck this folly from the breast,
And no stamm'ring ape but can
Spoil a prayer to be a Man.
But suppose that he is heard,
By the sprouting of his beard,
And he has what he does seek
The soft clothing of the Cheek:
Yet would he stay here? or be
Fixed in this Maturity?
Sooner shall the wandering star
Learn what rest and quiet are:
Sooner shall the slippery Rill,
Leave his motion and stand still.
Be it Joy, or be it Sorrow,
We refer all to the Morrow:
That we think will ease our pain,
That we do suppose again
Will increase or Joy, and so
Events, the which we cannot know
We magnify, and are (in sum)
Enamored of the time to come.
Well, the next day comes, and then,
Another next, and so to ten,
To twenty we arrive, and find
No more before us then behind
Of solid joy, and yet have on
To our Consummation:
Till the baldness of the Crown,
Till that all the face do frown,
Till the Forehead often have
The remembrance of a Grave;
Till the eyes look in, to find
If that they can see the mind.
Till the sharpness of the Nose,
Till that we have lived to pose
Sharper eyes who cannot know
Whether we are men or no.
Till the tallow of the Cheek
Till we know not what we seek;
And at last of life bereaved,
Dye unhappy, and deceived.
FINIS.

