The History of the great and mighty kingdom of China, and the situation
thereof:

Together with the great riches, huge Cities, politic government, and rare
inventions in the same.

Translated out of Spanish by R. Park.



LONDON. Printed by I. Wolf for Edward White, and are to be sold at the little
North door of Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1588

AA


To the Right worshipful and famous Gentleman, M. Thomas Candish Esquire,
increase of honor and happy attemptes.
IT is now above five and thirty years passed, right worshipful, since that
young sacred, and prudent Prince, king Edward the sixth of happy memory, went
about the discovery of Cathaia and China, partly of desire that the good young
king had to enlarge the Christian faith, and partly to find out some where in
those regions ample vent of the cloth of England, for the mischiefs that grew
about that time nearer home, as well by contempt of our commodities, as by the
arrestes of his merchantes in the Empire, Flanders, France, and Spain:
foreseeing withal how beneficial ample vent would rise to all degrees
throughout his kingdom, and specially to the infinite number of the poor sort
distressed by lack of work. And although by a voyage hereuppon taken in hand
for this purpose by Sir Hugh Willobie, and Richard Chancellor a discovery of
the bay of Saint Nicolas in Russia fell out, and a trade with the Muscouites,
and after another trade for a time with the Persians by way of the Caspian sea
ensued, yet the discovery of the principal intended place followed not in his
time, nor yet since, until you took your happy and renowned voyage about the
world in hand, although sundry attemptes, at the great charges of diverse
honorable and well disposed persons, and good worshipful merchants and others
have been made since the death of that good king, in seeking a passage thither
both by the North-east, and by the Northwest. But since it is so (as we
understand) that your worship in your late voyage has first of our nation
in this age discovered the famous rich Islands of the Luzones, or Philippinas,
lying near unto the coast of China, and have spent some time in taking good
view of the same, having brought home three boys borne in Manilla, the chief
town of the said Islands, besides two other young fellows of good capacity,
borne in the mighty Island of Iapon, (which hereafter may serve as our
interpretors in our first traficke thither) and that also your self have
sailed along the coast of China, not far from the Continent, and have taken
some knowledge of the present state of the same, and in your course have found
out a notable ample vent of our clothes, especially our kersies, and are in
preparing again for the former voyage, as he that would constantly persevere
in so good an enterprise: we are to think that the knowledge and first
discovery of the same, in respect of our nation, has all this time been by
the Almighty to you only reserved, to your immortal glory, and to the
manifest show of his especial favor borne toward you, in that besides your
high and rare attempt of sailing about the whole globe of the earth, in so
short a time of two years and about two months, you have showed your self
to have that rare and especial care for your country, by seeking out vent for
our clothes, that ought upon due consideration to move many thousands of
English subjects to pray for you, and to love and honor your name and family
for ever. For as you have opened by your attempt the gate to the spoil of the
great and late mighty, universal, and infested enemy of this realm, and of
al countries that profes^e true religion: so have you by your great care
wrought a way to imploie the merchants of England in trade, to increase our
Navy, to benefit our Clothiers, and (your purpose falling out to your hoped
effect) to relieve more of the poorer sort, then all the hospitals and alms
houses can or may, that have been built in this realm, since the first
inhabiting thereof.

And Sir, if to this your late noble attempt, it might please you, by your
encouragement, and by the help of your purse to add your present furtherance
for the passage to be discovered by the northwest, (for proof whereof there
be many infallible reasons, and diverse great experiences to ^e yielded) our
course with our commodities to the rich Island of Iapon, to the mighty empire
of China, and to the Islands of the Philippinas, for the vent that you have
found out, should be by the half way shortened, and you should double and
manyfolde treble the credit of your fourmer late enterprise, and make your
fame to mount, and your self to live for ever in a much higher degree of
glory, then otherwise it might be, or that by any other mean you could
possibly devise: In which action so highly importing the general state of this
land I have perfect experience that many worshipful and wealthy merchants of
this city and other places would most willingly join their purses with yours:
and to play the blabbe, I may tell you they attend nothing with greater desire
and expectation, then that a motion hereof being made by some happy man, your
self and they might friendly and seriously join together for the full
accomplishing of this so long intended discovery. And to descend to ^ome
particulars, there is one special reason that gives an edge unto their
desires, proceeding from the late worthy attemptes of that excellent and
skilful pilot M. John Dauis, made for the search of the aforesaid northwest
passage these three late years, having entered into the same four hundred
leagues further than was ever hitherto thoroughly known, and returned with an
exact description thereof, to the reasonable contentment for the time, of the
adventurers, and chiefly of the worshipful M. William Sanderson, whose
contributions thereunto, although they have been very great and
extraordinary, yet for the certain hope or rather assurance that he
conceiueth upon the report of the Captain himself and all the rest of any
skill employed in these voyages, remains still constant, and is ready to
disburse as yet to the fresh setting on foot of this enterprise entermitted
by occasion of our late troubles, even this year again for the final
perfection of so profitable and honorable a discovery, a far greater portion
then in reason would be required of any other man of his ability. And albeit
sir, that you have taken in your late voyage, besides the knowledge of the way
to China, the intelligence of the government of the country and of the
commodities of the territories and provinces of the same, and that at the full,
according to the time of your short abode in those parts, yet nevertheless
for that of late more ample understanding has been in more length of time, by
wonderful great endeavor taken by certain learned Portingals and Spaniardes
of great observation, and not long ago published in the Spanish tongue, I have
for the increase of the knowledge of the subjects of England, and specially
for the illuminating of the minds of those, that are to take the voyage next
in hand to Iapan, China, and the Philippinas, translated the same work into
english, and committed it to print, passing over Paulus* Venetus, and sir John
Mandeuill, because they wrote long ago of those regions: which labor to say
truth, I have undertaken at the earnest request and encouragement of my
worshipful friend Master Richard Hakluit late of Oxforde, a gentleman, besides
his other manifold learning and languages, of singular and deep insight in
all histories of discovery and parts of Cosmographie: who also for the zeal
he bears to the honor of his country and countrymen, brought the same first
above two years since over into this court, and at this present has in hand
a most excellent and ample collection of the sundry travails and nauigations
of our own nation, a matter long intended by him, and serving to the like
beneficial and honorable purpose, which I hope will shortly come to light to
the great contentation of the wiser sort. In the mean season, having now at
length finished according to my poor skill and leisure this my translation, I
thought best to dedicate and commend the same to your worshipful patronage,
as the man that I hold most worthy of the same, and most able of our nation
to judge aright of the contents thereof, and to correct the errors of the
author whenever you shall meet with them: beseeching you to accept in good
part the travail and good meaning of the translator: and so wishing unto you,
health, increase of knowledge, with fortunate and glorious success in your
further courageous attempts, I leave you to the protection of the almighty.

From London the first of January, 1589. Your worships always to command,
Robert Park.

The Printer, to the Christian reader.
WHereas (good courteous Reader) in this history describing the kingdom of
China, with the countries there adjacent, thou shall find many times repeated,
and that in some things too gloriously, the zeal of certain Spanish Friars
that labored in discovery of the said China* and the declaration of certain
miracles (but falsely reported) by them to have been wrought, together with
examples of diverse their superstitious practices: which happily may give
offense unto some in reading: thou must understand that this is to be rather
imputed unto the first writer of this history in spanish, than to any fault of
mine: for the Spaniardes (following their ambitious affections) do usually in
all their writings extol their own actions, even to the setting forth of
many untruths and incredible things: as in their descriptions of the
conquestes of the east and west Indies, etc. does more at large appear.
Notwithstanding all which, our translator (as it seems) has rather chosen to
be esteemed fidus interpres, in truly translating the history as it was,
though containing some errors, then to be accounted a patcher or corrupter of
other men's works.

But howsoever, either our first author, or the translator, have showed
themselves affectioned, sure I am, that the knowledge of thi^ kingdom, will
not only be pleasant, but also very profitable to our English nation: and by
playing the good Be, in only accepting herein that which is good, I doubt
not, but the reading of this history will bring thee great contentment, and
delight.

Vale.
The History of the mighty kingdom of China, in the which is contained, the
notable things of that kingdom, touching that which is natural.
CHAP. I. The description of the kingdom and the confines that it has
belonging.
THis great and mighty kingdom of China, which we do mean to treat of in
this History, has been discovered by clear and true notice, within this
ten years, by Spaniards that were dwellers in the Islands Philippinas, that
are three hundredth leagues distant from the said kingdom: Notwithstanding,
that long time before, there was relation given, by way of the Portingall
Indias, by such as dwelt in Macao, and did tra^^ke to Canton, a city of the
same kingdom of China. But this was by relation so, that the one nor the other
could satisfy, for that there was found variety in that which was true, till
the year of 1577. Friar Martin de Gorrada prouincial of the Augustine friars,
who were the first discouerers of the said Islands Philippinas, and ministered
first the holy baptism amongst them, with his companions, friar Hieronimo
Martin, Pedro Sarmiento, and Myghell de Loarcha chief officers of the city of
Marrila in the said Islands, by the order and commandment of Guido de
Labassares governor thereof, did enter into the said kingdom of China, Led
and governed by a captain belonging to the king of the said kingdom called
Omoncon.

Of the coming of this Omoncon, unto the Islands Philippinas, and of his
hardines to carry the aforesaid unto the firm land, he being commanded to the
contrary upon pain of death, and how he was received, and great courtesy
showed, and of other things very curious, you shall ^inde in the second part
of this history, where as is the substance and whole relation of all that was
brought unto the king of Spain.

You shall understand that this mighty kingdom is the Orientalest part of
all Asia, and his next neighbor toward the Ponent is the kingdom of
Quachinchina, whereas they do observe in whole all the customs and rites of
China. The greatest part of this kingdom is watered with the great Oriental
Ocean sea, beginning at the Island Aynan, which is hard by Quachinchina, which
is 19. degrees toward the North, and compassing toward the South, whereas
their course is Northeast. And beyond Quachinchina toward the North, the
Bragmanes do confine, which are much people and very rich, of gold, silver
and precious stones, but in especial, Rubies: for there are infinite. They are
proud and hawtie men, of great courage, well made, but of brown color: they
have had (but few times) war with them of China, in respect for that betwixt
both the kingdoms there are great and mighty mountains and rocks that does
disturb them. And hard unto this nation joins the Patanes and Mogores,
which is a great kingdom, and warlike people, whose head is the Gran Samarzan:
They are the true Scythas or Massagetas, of whom it is affirmed that they were
never overcome by any other nation: they are a people well proportioned, and
white: by reason they dwell in a cold country. Betwixt the West and the South
is the Trapobana, or Samatra, a kingdom very rich of gold, precious stones and
pearls: and more toward the South, are the two Iauas, the great and the
less, and the kingdom of the Lechios: and in equal distance, are the
Iapones: yet notwithstanding those that are more indifferent to this kingdom
are the Tartarians, which are on the self firm land or continent, and are
alonely divided by a wall, as shall be declared in the 9 chapter of this book.
These Tartarians have had many times wars with them of China: but at one time
(as you shall perceive) they got the whole kingdom of China, and did possess
the same for the space of 93. years, till such time as they of China did
rebel and forced them out again. At this day they say that they are friends
one with another, and that is, for that they be all Gentiles, and do use all
one manner of ceremonies and rites. They do differ in their clenes and laws,
in the which the Chinas does exceed them very much. The Tartarians are very
yealow and not so white: and they go naked from the girdlested upwards, and
they eat raw flesh, and do anoint themselves with the blood of raw flesh, for
to make them more harder and currish, by reason whereof they do so stink,
that if the air does come from that part where they be: you shall smell them
afar off by the strong savor. They have for certainty, the truth of the
immortality of the soul (although it be with error) for they say that the
soul does enter into other bodies, and that soul that lived well in the first
body, does better it from poor to rich, or from age to youth: and if it lived
evil, to the contrary in worse. The sons of the Tartarians do very much
observe and keep the commandment in obeying their parents, for that they do
wholly accomplish the same without failing any jot of their will, under pain
to be seuerly and publikelie punished. They confess one God, whom they
worship, and have him in their houses carved or painted, and every day they do
offer unto it incense, or some other sweet smelles: they do call him the high
God, and do crave of him understanding and health. They have also another God,
which they say is son unto the other: they do call him Natigay: this is their
God of terestriall things. They have him likewise in their houses, and every
time they go to eat, they do anoint his face with the fattest thing they
have to eat: that being done they fall to eating, having first given their
gods their pitance. They are a kind of people that very seldom do fable a
lie, although their lives should lie thereon, and are very obedient unto their
king: but in special in their wars, in the which every one does that he is
appointed to do: they are led by the sound of a drome or trumpet, with the
which their captains do govern them with great ease, by reason that they are
trained up in the same from their youth. And many other things are amongst
them, in the which they do resemble them of China, (who) if they did receive
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is to be believed that the Tartarians
would do the same, for that they are taken for men very ducible, and do imitate
very much them of China.

CHAP. II. Of the temperature of the kingdom of China.
THe temperature of this mighty kingdom is diversely, by reason that almost
the whole bigness thereof is from the South to the North, in so great a
length, that the Island of Aynan being near unto this land in 19. degrees of
altitude have notice of some provinces that are in mo^e then 50. degrees, and
yet they do understand that beyond that, there be more upon the confines of
Tartaria. It is a strange thing to be seen, the strange and great difference
betwixt the colors of the dwellers of this kingdom. In Canton a mighty
city, whereas the Portingales had ordinary traficke with them of China, for
that it was nigh unto Macao, where as they had inhabited long since, and from
whence they do bring all such merchandise as is brought into Europe: There is
seen great diversities in the colors of such people as do come thither to
traficke, as the said Portingales do testify.

Those which are borne in the city of Canton and in all that cost are brown
people, like unto them in the city of Fez or Barberie, for that all the whole
country is in the said parallel that Barberie is in. And they of the most
provinces inwards are white people, some more whiter then others, as they draw
into the cold country. Some are like unto Spaniards, and others more yealow,
like unto the Almans, yelow and red color. Finally in all this mighty
kingdom, to speak generally, they cannot say that there is much cold or much
heat, for that the Geographers do conclude and say it is temperate* and is
under a temperate clime, as is Italy or other temperate countries, whereby may
be understood the fertility of the same, which is (without doubt) the
fortress in all the world, and may compare with the Peru* and Nuoua Espannia,
which are two kingdoms celebrated to be most fertile: and for the
verification, you shall perceius in this Chapter next following: wherein is
declared such things as it does yield and bring forth, and in what quantity.
And yet above all things (according unto the sayings of friar Herrada
provincial and his companions, whose relation I will follow in the most part
of this history, as witnesses of sight) unto whom we may give certain credit
without any exception: They say that the country is so full of youth, that it
seems the women are delivered every month, and their children when they are
little, are extreme fair: and the country is so fertile and fat, that it
yeldeth fruit three or four times in the year, which is the occasion that all
things is so good cheap, that almost it seems, they sell them for nothing.

CHAP III. Of the fertility of this kingdom, and of such fruits and other
things as it does yield.
THe inhabitants in this country are persuaded of a truth, that those which
did first find and inhabit in this land, were the Neuewes of Noe (who after
they had traueiled from Armenia, whereas ^he Arc stayed* wherein God did
preserve their grandfather from the waters of the flood) went seeking a land to
their contentment: and not finding a country of so great fertility and
temperature like unto this, wherein was all things necessary for the life of
man, without comparison: they were compelled with the abundance thereof for to
inhabit therein, understanding that if they should search throughout all the
world they should not find the like: and I think they were not deceived,
according as now it is to be seen, and what may be considered in the process of
this chapter, of such fruits as the earth does yield. And although there is
declared here of such as shall suffice in this work, yet is there left behind
a great number more: of whose properties, as well of herbs and beasts, which
of their particulars may be made a great volume, and I do believe that in time
there will be one set forth.

The great travel and continual labor of the inhabitants of this country,
is a great help unto the goodness and fertility thereof, and is so much that
they do neither spare nor leave mountains nor valleys, neither rivers, but
they do sow and plant all such things as they perceive that the place will
yield, according unto the goodness thereof: as orchards with fruit, great
fields of wheat, barlie, rice, flax and hemp, with many other things: all
which traueile unto them is very easy, remembering with what great liberty
they do enjoy their goods, and the great and infinite number of people that
there is, as well for handie crafts as for to till and cultiuate the ground.
In all this mighty country they do not suffer vacabunds nor idle people, but
all such (over and above that they are greeuouslie punished) they are holden
for infamous: neither do they consent nor permit any of them that are
naturally borne there, to go out of their countries into other strange
countries, neither have they any wars at this present: which was the thing that
in times past did consume much of their people. The king does content himself
only with his own kingdom, (as one that is held the wisest in all the
world.) Beside all this they are naturally inclined to eat and drink well and
to make much of themselves, in apparel, and to have their houses well
furnished with household stuff: and to the augmenting hereof, they do put
themselves in great labor and travail, and are great dealers and trafickers:
al which with the fertility of the country above said, is the occasion that
justly it may have the name to be the most fertilest in all the whole world.

This country does yield all kind of herbs, as does Spain, and of many kinds
mo: also all manner of fruits, like as in Spain, with diverse other sorts: the
names whereof are not yet known, for that they do differ very much from ours,
but yet the one and the other are of a marvelous excellent taste, as they do
say. They have three sorts of Orenges, the one very sweet which does exceed
sugar in their sweetness: the other sort not so sweet as the first: the third
sort are somewhat sower, but very delightful in the taste. Also they have a
kind of plummes that they do call Lechias, Excellent ^lummes.
that are of an exceeding gallant taste, and never hurts any body although
they should eat a great number of them. It yeldeth great abundance of great
melons, and of an excellent savor and taste, and very big. Also a kind of
russet appels that be very great, of a good taste. I do not here declare of
other fruits, nor of their names, because I will not seem tedious unto the
reader, nor spend the time herein, but will treat of other things of more
importance.

In all parts of this kingdom, there is great store of sugar, Excellent white
sugar good cheap*
which is the occasion that it is so good cheap: for you shall have a quintall
of very excellent white and good sugar, when it is most dearest, for the value
of six ryals of plate. There is great abundance of honey, for that their
delight is in hiues, Honey and wax.
by reason whereof not only honey, but wax is very good cheap: and there is
so great quantity thereof, that you may lade ships, yea fleetes thereof.
Excellent good silk.
They do make great store of silk and excellent good, and give it very
perfect colors, which does exceed very much the silk of Granada, and is one
of the greatest trades that is in all that kingdom.

The veluets, damaskes, sattens, and other sorts of webs which is there made,
is of so small price, that it is a wonder to speak it, in especial unto them
that do know how their prises be in Spain and in Italy: They do sell none of
their silks there by the yard, neither any other kind of websterie, though it
be lynnen: but by the weight, wherein there is least deceit. They have great
store of flax, Great store of flax and hemp.
wherewith the common people do apparel themselves: also hemp for the
cawlking of their ships, and to make ropes and hasers. And on their dry and
tough lands, although they be stony, they gather great stoore of cotton
wool. They do sow wheat barlie, rye and oats* and many other kinds of
grain: Cotto^, wool, wheat and barlie, rye, oats.
and the one and the other do yield great increase. In the marrish grounds,
(of which there be many) by reason of moist and great abundance of rivers that
be in this country, they do sow rice, Great abundance of rice.
which is a common victual or mantiniment unto all people of the kingdom, and
unto them that dwell near them: and they do gather so great abundance, that
when it is most dearest you shall have a haneg for a ryall of plate: of the
which and of all other grains aforesaid, the country was wont to yield three
and four times in the year there increase.

On their high grounds that are not good to be sown, there is great store of
pine trees which yield fruit very sauorie: chestnuts greater and of better
taste then commonly you shall ^inde in Spain: Chestnuts.
and yet betwixt these trees they do sow Maiz, which is the ordinary food of
the Indians of Mexico, and Peru, and great store of Panizo, so that they do no
leave one foot of ground vnsowen. And of truth almost in all the whole
country you shall not find any ground, that is barren or without profit,
what by the natural virtue of the country, and also by the manuring and
helping of it.

CHAP. IIII. Here I do proceed in the fertiltie of this kingdom, and of such
things as it does yield.
BEsides the fertility of this country beforesaide, all the fields be very
fair to behold, and yield marvelous odoriferous smelles, by reason of the
great quantity of sweet flowers of diverse sorts. It is also garnished with
the green trees that he planted by the riues sides, and brooks: whereof there
is great quantity. And there is planted there, orchards and gardens, with
banketing houses of great pleasure: the which they do use very much for their
recreation and avoiding the troubles of mind. All kind of beasts.
The Loytias or Gentlemen do use to plant great forests and thick woods,
whereas do breed many wild boores, bucks, hares and conyes, and diverse other
beasts: of whose skins they make very excellent furs, Excellent furs. Musk.
but in especial of Martas Ceuellinas, of which there is a great number. There
is great abundance of musk, the which they do make of a little beast that
does feed of nothing else but of a root which is of a marvelous smell, that
is called Camarus, as big as a man's finger. They do take them and beat them
with blows till they be bruised all to pieces: then they do put them in a place
whereas they may soonest putri^ie, but ff^st they do bind very fast such parts,
whereas the blood may run out of their bruised bones all to pieces remaining
within them. Then after when they think they be putrified, then they do cut
out small pieces with skin and all, and tie them up like ^als or cods, which
the Portugals (who does by them) do call Papos: And this is the finest that is
brought out of all Indies (i^ there be no deceit used in it) for many times
they will put amongst it small pieces of lead, and other things of weight.
There is also great store of kyne, Great store of buffes. Dear, hogs and
goats.
that are so little worth, that you may buy a very good one for eight ^ials of
plate: and beefes that are bought for half the money: one whole venison is
bought for two rials* great store of hogs, whose flesh is as wholesome and good
as our mutton in Spain. There is great abundance of goats, and of other
beasts that are to be eaten: which is the occasion that they are of little
value. Great store of wildfoule*
The flying fowls that do breed about the lakes and rivers, are of so great
quantity, that there is spent daily in small villages in that country many
thousands, and the greatest sort of them are Teales. The fashion how they do
breed and bring them up shall be declared in a chapter particularly: for that
which is said shall not seem impossible. They be sold by weight, Foul so^de by
weight.
and likewise capons and hens, and for so small value, that two pounds of their
flesh being plucked, is worth ordinarily two Foys, which is a kind of money
like unto the quartes of Spain: hogs flesh, two pounds for a Foy and a half,
A penie*
which is 6. marauadiz. Likewise all other victuals after the same rate, as it
does plainly appear by the relation made by the friars.

There are also many herbs for medicines, Reubarbe and other medicinal herbs.

Four hundred of Nutmegs for six pence.

Cloves six pound for 3* pence: the like of pepper.

Sinamom 25. pound for two shilings*


as very fine Reubarbe, and of great quantity: and wood called Palo de china:
great store of Nutmegs, with the which they may lade fleetes, and of so low a
price that you may buy four hundredth for a ryall of plate: and cloves, six
pound for half a ryall of plate: and the like in pepper. Synamom, one roue
which is 25. pound, for four ryals of plate, and better cheap. I do leave to
speak of many other herbs medicinable and profitable for the use of man: for
that if I should write the particular virtue of every of them, it would
require a great volume. Of fish, both swimming and shell fish of all sorts,
that they have with them is to be wondered at: not only upon the sea coasts,
but also in the remote places of that kingdom, by reason of the great rivers,
which be nauigable unto such places. Mines of gold and silver and other
metals. Iron and steel 4. shilling a quintal Silver is more worth then gold.
Great store of pearls.
Besides all this it is very rich of mines of gold and silver, and other
metals, the which (gold and silver excepted) they do sell it so good cheap
that a quintal of Copper, iron or steel is to be bought for eight rials of
plate. Gold is better cheap there then it is in Europe, but silver is more
worth. There is found great store of pearls in all this kingdom: but the
most part of them are not round, by the which you may gather and understand
the goodness and fertility of the same. And that the first that did discover
and inhabit that kingdom, were not deceived for that they found all things
necessary unto the preserving of the life of man, and that in abundance: for
the which with just reason, the inhabitants may think themselves to possess
the best and fertilest kingdom in all the whole world.

CHAP. V. Of the antiquity of this kingdom.
AS before is said, this kingdom is of so ancient antiquity that there is
opinion, that the first that did inhabit this country, were the Neuewes of
Noe. But the light which is found in the histories of China, is that from the
time of Vitey, who was their first king, and did reduce their kingdom unto an
empire, and has and does endure unto the king that now rayneth: as you shall
understand in the place where we shall make mention of the kings of that
country, whereas you shall understand by just computation, that unto this day,
there has reyned natural and usurped to the number of 243. kings. 243. kings.
The son does succeed the father in the kingdom, and for want of a son,
the next kinsman does succeed: and for that they do take (after the use of the
emperors of Turkey) so many wives as pleases them: it seldom falls out to
lack heirs, for that the first son that is borne of either of his wives is
right heir unto the kingdom: and the rest of his sons he does appoint them
cities where as they do dwell privately: and there they are provided of all
things necessary for them, conformable unto their degrees, with express
commission vpon'paine of death, never to go out of them, neither to return
unto the court, except they be sent for by the king. So after this conclusion,
all those that are kins^olke unto the king, are resident and kept in a mighty
and populous city, called Causi, The mighty city of Causie.
whereas those whom the king and his counsel do think and s^e to be men of
great wisdom, or given to martial affairs, they do command that they
never go forth of their houses, to avoid occasions of suspicion whereby might
grow alterations and treasons against the king. The dwelling places of these
provinces, are mighty and of a huge bigness* for that within the compass of
them, they have all manner of contentment necessary for them: as gardens,
orchards, fishing ponds of diverse sorts, parkes and groves, in the which are
all kind of flying fowls, fish and beasts, as are to be found in the
mountains and rivers. And it is walled round about with a stone wall, so that
every house of these seems to be a town. They give themselves much unto
music, wherewith they do pass away the time. And for that they are given to
pleasure and ease, they are commonly corpulent and fat, very fair
conditioned and quiet, liberal unto strangers. These princes in what place so
ever they are: the governors of the cities are bound to visit them every
festival day. Likewise if they do pass on horseback by their doors, they
must alight and walk on foot while they have passed it: and if they be borne
in a little chair, likewise to come out of the same, and to walk on foot with
silence, till they be past. And for that they shall not plead ignorance, the
gates of these princes houses are all painted red: so that they being brought
up from their youth, in this straight close and idle life, it is not unto them
tedious, but does rather rejoice in the same.

CHAP. VI. The bigness of this kingdom of China, and of such measures as they
do use in travail.
THis mighty kingdom which we commonly call China, without knowing any cause
or foundation wherefore we should so call it. Those countries near joining unto
the same, do call it Sangley: and they in their natural toonge do call it
Taybiner, the which is to be understood, nothing but a kingdom: and is the
most biggest and populous that is mentioned in all the world, as it shall be
apparent in the discourse of this history, and in the wonderful things that
shall be treated of in the next chapter following. All the which is taken out of
the books and hystories of the said Chinos, whereas they do make mention of
the mightiness thereof, and of the 15. provinces that are comprehended in the
same: The which books and hystories were brought unto the city of Manilla,
printed and set forth in China, and were translated into the spanish tongue, by
interpreters of the said nations. And for that they were baptized and became
Christians: they remain as dwellers amongst us in these Islands, the better
to observe and keep the laws of baptism, and to fly the pain and
punishment the which they should receive for doing the same: for that they
turned Christians and received the faith without the license of the king and
counsel, which is forbidden upon pain of death, and is executed with great
violence, and without remission. This mighty kingdom is in circuit or
compass about 69516. Die, which is a kind of measure that they do use: which
being reduced into the spanish account, is almost 3000. leagues, The China is
in compass 3000. leagues and 1800. ^eagues long.
and in length 1800. leagues, this is to be understood the whole 15. provinces:
the which are garnished with many cities and towns, besides a great number of
villages, as you may plainly see in the chapter following. By the said book
it is found that the Chinos have amongst them, but only three kind of measures:
the which in their language are called Lii, Pu, and Icham, which is as much to
say, or in effect, as a forlong, league, or journey: the measure which is called
Lii, has so much space as a man's voice in a plain ground may be heard in a
quiet day, halowing or whoping with all the force and strength he may: and ten
of these Liis makes a Pu, which is a great spanish league: and ten Pus makes
a days journey, which is called Icham, which makes 12. long leagues. By the
which account it is found that this kingdom has the number of leagues as
a^ore is said: Yet by the account of other books, they do find it bigger and
of more leagues. Yet friar Martin de Herrada, provincial of the austen friars
in the Islands Philippinas, who is an excellent Geometrician and Cosmographer,
did cast the account with great diligence* by their own descriptions, and does
find it to amount unto the sum aforesaid, to be 1800. leagues long, and 3000.
leagues in compass, beginning at the province of Olam, which is that toward
the South, and nearest unto Malacia, and so along the country toward the
North east, for the space of 600. leagues.

CHAP. VII. Of the 15. provinces, that are in this kingdom.
THis mighty kingdom is divided into fifteen provinces that every one of
them is bigger then the greatest kingdom that we do vnd^rstand to be in all
Europe. Some do esteem those cities to be metropolitans, where as is
resident, the governors, presidents, or viz Rees, which in their natural tongue
are called Cochin: of the provinces, two of them which are called Tolanchia,
and Paguia, are governed by the king in person, with his royal counsel. The
occasion why the king is always resident or abiding in one of these two
provinces, which are two of the mightiest, and most popularst of people, is not
for that in them he is most at his content, or receive more pleasure in them
then in any of the other: but only for that they do con^ine upon the kingdom
of Tartaria, with whom in times past they had ordinary and continual wars: and
for that the king might with more ease put remedy in such harms received, and
defend with better opportunity the rage of his enemy, he did ordain and
situate his palace and court in them two. And for that it has been of
antiquity many years past, it has remained hitherto, and appears to
continue still the habitation of the kings of that kingdom, as by desert for
the excellency of the clime, and abundance of all things necessary.

The names of the fifteen provinces are as follows: Pag^ia, Foquiem, Olam,
Sinsay, Sisuam, Tolanchia, Cansay, Oquiam, Aucheo, Honan, Xanton, Quiche^,
Chequeam, Susuam, and Saxij. Almost all these provinces, but in particular
ten of them which are along the sea costs, are full of deep rivers of
sweet water and nauigable, upon whose branches are situated many cities and
towns, whereof you may not only have the number of them, but also their
names: for that these Chinos are so curious people, that in their books are
named besides the cities and towns, the banketing houses and houses of
pleasure, which the gentlemen have for their recreation. And for that it will
be more trouble then profit to enlarge any further in this matter, I will
refer it unto the next chapter, where I will entreat of the cities and towns,
that either of these provinces has, and pass over all the rest, as not
necessary: for our intent is to set forth the bigness of this kingdom.

CHAP. VIII. Of the cities and towns that every one of these provinces has in
himself.
THese fifteen provinces, which with better truth might be called kingdoms,
according unto the greatness of them as you may perceive by the number of cities
and towns that each of them has, besides villages, the which if I should add
hereunto, would be an infinite number.

The number of cities and towns that every province has. First* the province
of Paguia, where as ordinarily the king and his counsel is resident, has 47.
cities and 150. towns, Canton has 37. cities and 190. towns. Foquien has
33. cities and 99. towns. Olam has 90. cities and 130. towns. Synsay has
38. cities and 124. towns. Sisuan has 44. cities and 150. towns. Tolanchia
has 51. cities and 123. towns. Cansay has 24. cities and 112. towns. Ochian
has 19. cities and 74. towns. Aucheo has 25. cities and 29. towns. Honan
has 20. cities and 102. towns. Xaton has 37. cities and 78. towns. Quicheu
has 45. cities and 113. towns. Chequeam has 39. cities and 95. towns.
Susuan has 42. cities and 105. towns.
By which account appears to be 591. cities and 1593. towns, beside villages
and houses of pleasure, which are an infinite number: by the which you may
consider, that this kingdom does deserve to be called great, and compared with
the best and principal^t, that is hea^d of in all the whole world. The Chinos
do use in their pronunciation to term their cities with this sylable, Fu,
that is as much to say, city, as Taybin fu, Canton fu, and their towns with
this sylable Cheu, They have some villages that are so great; that it lacks
but only the name of a town. All their cities for the most part are situated
by the rivers sides: such as are nauigable, the cities are moted round about,
which make them to be very strong, not only the cities but towns are walled
round about with high and strong walls of stone, one faddome high, and all the
rest is of brick, but of so hard a substance that it is not to be broken
almost with pickaxes. Some cities has their walls so broad, that 4. and 6. men
may walk side by side on them: they are garnished with many bulworks and
towers, a small distance the one from the other, with their battlements and
fair galleries, where as many times their vizroyes does go to recreate
themselves with the gallant sight of the mountains and rivers, with their
fields so odoriferous. There is betwixt the walls of their cities and the mote
of the same a broad space, that six horsemen may ride together, the like space
is within, betwixt the walls and the houses, whereas they may walk without
impediment. Their walls are kept in such good reparation, by reason of their
great care and diligence, that they seem to be but new made, and yet in some
cities there is found mention of two thousand years since the first
foundation. In every city the king does ordain a Justice, and gives him
great rents only to visit them, and make them to be renewed and repaired where
as is requisite, and is done upon the kings cost: for out of his rents in such
cities and towns is given them all that is needful to be asked. The high
ways in all this kingdom are made and kept plain with great care and
diligence, and the entering into the cities and towns are very sumptuous and
with great majesty, they have three or four gates bound with iron very
strong. Their streets very well paued, and so broad that 15. horsemen may
ride together in them, and so straight, that although they be very long, yet
you may discover the end: On both the sides are portals, under which be their
shops full of all sorts of merchandises very curious, and of all occupations
that you will desire: In the streets a good space the one from the other, are
made many triumphall arkes of extreme beauty: They are made of masons work,
very curiously painted after the fashion of the old antiquity of Rome: All
their houses ordinarily have three doors, that in the midst is great, the
other be lesser, but of a marvelous gallant propotion: The king is always
resident in the city of Suntien, The mighty city called Suntien, or Quinsay.
which in their language is as much to say, the city of heaven. Of which city
the Chinos do declare many things which seems to be true, for that if you do
talk with many of them, and at sundry times and places, yet do they not
vary the one from the other: and according to their report, it should be
greatest in all the world, in these days. They who do make it to be least, do
affirm, that to go from gate to gate leaving the suburbs, had need of a
summers day and a good horse to do it: it is also called Quinsay, as Marcus
Paulus does call it.

CHAP. IX. Of the wonderful buildings in this kingdom, and of mighty wall or
circuit in the same of 500. leagues long.
IN this kingdom in all places there be men excellent in architecture: and the
necessaries that they have to build with is the best that is in the world. For
as it is said in the chapter past, they have a kind of white earth of the
which they make brickes, of so great hardness and strength, that for to break
them, you must have pickaxes, and use much strength: and this is the cause that
in all the kingdom there is mighty buildings and very curious. Putting apart
the kings palace where he is resident in Taybin, (for of that you shall have
a particular chapter:) in all such cities that be the heads of the provinces,
is resident a vizroy or governor, and dwells in the house that (in every
such city) the king has ordained on his proper cost: all the which to
conclude are* superbious and admirable, and wrought by marvelous art, and are
as big as a great village, by reason that they have within them great
gardens, water ponds and woods compassed about: in the which (as it is declared
in the 4. chapter) is great quantity of hunt and flying fowls. Their houses
commonly be very gallant, and after the manner of Rome, and generally at the
doors and gates of them are planted trees in gallant order: the which makes a
gallant shadow and seems well in the streets. All these houses are within as
white as milk, in such sort that it seems to be burnished paper. The
floares are paued with square stones very broad and smooth: their seelings are
of an excellent kind of timber, very well wrought and painted, that it seems
like damask and of the color of gold, that shows very well: every one of
them has three courts and gardens full of flowers and herbs, for their
recreation. And there is none of them but has his fish poole furnished,
although it be but small. The one side of their courts is wrought very
gallant: like as it is in counting houses, upon the which they have many idols
carved, and wrought of diverse kinds ofmettals: the other three parts or angles
of their courts, are painted with diverse things of very great curiosity. But
above all things they are marvelous clean, not only in their houses, but
also in their streets: in the which commonly they have three or four
necessary or common places of ease, very curiously ordained and placed, for
that the people being troubled with their common necessity shall not foul the
streets, and therefore they have this provision: the like is used in all ways
throughout the kingdom. Some cities there be, whose streets be nauigable, as
in Bruxels in Flanders, Mexico in the Indians, and as in Venice in Italy:
which is the occasion that they are better served and provided, for that their
barks and boats do enter laden with all kind of victuals hard to their
doors.

The highwayes throughout all this kingdom, are the best and gallantest paued,
that ever has been discovered: they are very plain, yea unto the
mountains, and they are cut by force of labor and pickaxes, and maintained
with brick and stone, the which by report of them which has seen it, is one
of the worthiest things that is in all the realm. There are many mighty
bridges, and of a wonderful making, and some wrought upon boats, as it is in
Syuill: but in especial upon such rivers as are broad and deep. In the city
of Fucheo, there is a tower right against the house of the kings chief
receiver, and it is affirmed by those that have seen it, to surmount any
building that has been amongst the Romans: the which is raised and founded
upon forty pillars, and every pillar is of one stone, so big and so high
that it is strange to tell them, and doubtful to the hearers to believe it:
for which cause I think it best not to declare it in particular, as I do in
all things where as I do find it difficult to be believed, and where I have
no certain author to verify the truth.

There is in this kingdom a defense or wall that is five hundred leagues long,
A wall of 500 leagues long.
and begins at the city Ochyoy which is upon the high mountains, and
runs from the West unto East. The king of that country which made it was
called Tzintzon, and it was for his defense against the Tartaries, with whom
he had wars: so that the wall does shut up all the frontier of Tartaria. But
you must understand that four hundred leagues of the said wall is natural
of it self, for that they be high and mighty rocks very nigh together: but
the other hundred leagues is comprehended the spaces or distance that is
betwixt the rocks, the which he caused to be made by men's hands of very
strong work of stone, and is of seven fathom broad at the foot of it, and
seven fathom high. It begins at the parts of the sea, in the province of
Canton, and stretches forth by that of Paguia and Causay, and does firnish in
the province of Susuan. This king for to finish this wonderful work, did take
of every three men one thorough his kingdom, and of ^iue two: who for that
they travailed in their labor so long a journey, and into different clymes,
(although that out of those provinces that were nearest, there came great store
of people) yet did they almost all perish that followed that work.

The making of this superbious and mighty work, was the occasion that his
whole kingdom did rise up against the king, and did kill him, after that he
had reigned forty years, and also a son of his that was called Aguitzi. The
report of this wall is held to be of a very truth, for that it is affirmed by
all the Chinos that do traficke to the Islands Philippinas and to Canton, and
Machao, and be all confirmable in their declaration as witnesses, because they
have seen it: and it is the farthest parts of all the kingdom, whereas none
of us unto this day has been.

CHAP. X. Of the dispositions, countenance, with apparel and other exercises
of the people of this country.
BOth men and women of this country are of a good disposition of their bodies,
well proportioned and gallant men, somewhat tall: they are all for the most
part broad faced, little eyes and ^lat noses, and without bearde save only
upon the ball of the chinne: but yet there be some that have great eyes and
goodly beardes, and their faces well proporcioned, yet of these sorts (in
respect of the others) are very few: and it is to be believed that these
kind of people do proceed of some strange nation, who in times past when it
was lawful to deal out of that country, did join one with another.

Those of the province of Canton (which is a whot country) be brown of color
like to the Moors: but those that be farther within the country be like unto
Almaines, Italians and Spanyardes, white and read, and somewhat swart. All of
the^ do suffer their nails of their left hand to grow very long, but the
right hand they do cut: they have long hair, and esteem it very much and
maintain it with curiosity: of both they make a superstition, for that they
say thereby they shall be carried into heaven. They do bind their hair up to
the crown of their head, in calls of gold very curious and with pinnes of
the same.

The garments which the nobles and principals do use, be of silk of different
colors, of the which they have excellent good and very persite: the common
and poor people do apparel themselves with another kind of silk more
courser, and with linen, serge and cotton: of all the which there is great
abundance. And for that the country for the most part is temperate, they may
suffer this kind of apparel, which is the heauiest that they do use: for in
all the whole kingdom they have no cloth, Great abundance of wool and good
cheap.
neither do they suffer it to be made, although they have great abundance of
woolles, and very good cheap: they do use their coats according unto our old
use of antiquity, with long skirts, and full of plaites, and a flappe over the
breast to be made fast under the left side, the sleeves very big and wide:
upon their coats they do use cassockes or long garments according unto the
possibility of either of them, made according as we do use, but only their
sleeves are more wider. They of royal blood and such as are constituted unto
dignity, do differ in their apparel from the other ordinary Gentlemen: for
that the first have their garments laid on with gold and silver down to the
waste, and the others alonely garnished on the edges, or hem: they do use hose
very well made and stitched, Shoes and bus kines of velvet.

Great abundance of Marters furs.


shoes and buskins of velvet, very curious. In the winter (although it be not
very cold,) they have their garments furred with beasts skins, but in
especial with Martas Ceuellinas, of the which they have great abundance (as
aforesaid) and generally they do use them at all times about their necks. They
that be not married do differ from them that be married, in that they do
kirrle their hair on their foreheade, and wear higher hattes. Their women do
apparel themselves very curious^ie, much after the fashion of Spaine^ they
use many jewels of gold and precious stones: their gowns have wide sleeves,
that wherewith they do apparel themselves is of cloth of gold and silver and
diverse sorts of silks, whereof they have great plenty, as aforesaid, and
excellent good, and good cheap: and the poor folks do apparel themselves
with velvet, unshorn velvet and serge. They have very fair hair, and do
comb it with great care and diligence, as do the women of Genouay, and do
bind it about their head with a broad ^ilke lace, set full of pearls and
precious stones, and they say it does become them very well: they do use to
paint themselves, and in some place in excess.

Amongst them they account it for gentilitie and a gallant thing to have little
feet, An il use and custom.
and therefore from their youth they do swadell and bind them very straight,
and do suffer it with patience: for that she who has the least feet is
accounted the gallantest dame. They say that the men has induced them unto
this custom, for to bind their feet so hard, that almost they do loose the
form of them, and remain half lame, so that their going is very ill, and
with great travel: which is the occasion that they go but little abroad, and
few times do rise up from their work that they do: and was invented only
for the same intent. A good custom to avoid inconveniences.
This custom has endured many years, and will endure many more, for that it
is stablished for a law: and that woman which does break it, and not use it
with her children, shall be counted as evil, yea shall be punished for the same.
They are very secreat and honest, in such sort that you shall not see at any
time a woman at her window nor at her doors: and if her husband do inuit any
person to dinner, she is never seen nor eats not at the table, except the
gest be a kinsman or a very friend: when they go abroad to visit their
father, mother, or any other kinsfolks, they are carried in a little chair by
four men, the which is made close, and with lattises round about made of
gold wyre and with silver, and curteines of silk: that although they do see
them that be in the street, yet they cannot be seen: they have many servants
waiting on them. So that it is a great marvel when that you shall meet a
principal woman in the street, yea you will think that there are none in the
city, their keeping in is such: the lamenes of their feet is a great help
thereunto, The women as well as the men be ingenious, Ingenious people.
they do use drawn works and carved works, excellent painters of flowers,
birds and beasts, as it is to be seen upon beds and bords that is brought
from thence. I did see my self, one that was brought unto Lysborne in the
year 1582. by captain Ribera, chief sergant of Manilla, that it was to be
wondered at the excellency thereof: it caused the kings majesty to have
admyration, and he is a person that little wondreth at things. All the people
did wonder at it: yea the famous imbroderers did marvel at the curiousness
thereof. They are great inuenters of things, that although they have amongst
them many coches and wagons that go with sails, Wago^s with sails.
and made with such industry and policy that they do govern that with great
ease: this is credibly informed by many that have seen it: besides that,
there be many in the Indies, and in Portugal that have seen them painted upon
clothes, and on their earthen vessel that is brought from thence to be sold:
so that it is a sign that their painting has some foundation. In their bying
and selling they are very subtle, in such sort that they will depart a hair.
Such merchants as do keep shoppes (of whom in every city there is a great
number) they have a table or sign hanging at their door, whereon is written
all such merchandise as is within to be sold. Cloth of gold tissue and silk.
That which is commonly sold in their shops is cloth of gold and silver, cloth
of tissue, silks of diverse sorts and excellent colors: others there be of
poorer sort that sells serges, pieces of cotton, linen and fustian of all
colors: yet both the one and the other is very good cheap, for that there is
great abundance, and many workmen that do make it. The Apothecarie that
sells simples, has the like table: Por^^an.
there be also shops full of earthen vessels of diverse making: read, green,
yellow and gilt: it is so good cheap that for four rials of plate they give
fifty pieces: they make them of very strong earth, the which they do break
all to pieces and grind it, and put it into sesternes with water, made of lime
and stone, and after that they have well tumbled and tossed it in the water: of
the cream that is upon it they make the finest sort of them, and the lower
they go, spending that substance, that is the courser: they make them after the
form and fashion as they do here, and afterward they do gild them, and make
them of what color they please, the which will never be lost: then they put
them into their killes and burn them. This has been seen and is of a truth,
as appears in a book set forth in the Italian toonge, by Duardo Banbosa,
that they do make them of periwinkle shelles of the sea: the which they do
grind and put them under the ground to refine them, whereas they lie 100.
years: and many other things he does treat of to this effect. But if that were
true, they should not make so great a number of them as is made in that
kingdom, and is brought into Portugal, and carried into the Peru, and Noua
Espania, and into other parts of the world: which is a sufficient proof for
that which is said. And the Chinos do agree to this to be true. The finest sort
of this is never carried out of the country, for that it is spent in the
service of the king, and his governors, and is so fine and clear, that it
seems to be of fine and perfect cristall: that which is made in the province
of Saxii is the best and finest. All occupations be in streets by themselves.
Artificers and mechanical officers do dwell in streets appointed, whereas
none do dwell amongst them, but such as be of the same occupation or art: in
such sort that if you do come at the beginning of the street, look what craft
or art they are there, it is to be understood that all that street are of that
occupation. It is ordained by a law and statute, that the son shall inherit
his fathers occupation, The son inherits his fathers occupation.
and shall not use any other without license of the Justice: if one of them be
very rich and will not work, yet he cannot let but have in his shop men that
must work of his occupation. Therefore they that do use it, by reason that
they are brought up in it from their youth, they are famous and very curious
in that which they do work, as it is plainly seen in that which is brought
from thence to Manilla, and into the Indies, and unto Portugal: Their current
money of that kingdom is made of gold and silver, without any sign or print,
but goes by weight: so that all men carries a balances with them, and little
pieces of silver and gold, for to buy such things as they have need of. And
for things of a greater quantity they have bigger balances in their houses
and waights that are sealed, for to give to every man that which is theirs: for
therein the justices have great care. In the government of Chincheo they have
copper money coined, but it is nothing worth out of that province.

The history of the mighty kingdom of China, wherein shall be declared, of the
religion that is amongst the people, and of their idols that they do worship,
and of other things touching that they do use above nature. The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the number of gods that they do worship, and of some tokens and
paintings that is found amongst them that do represent a mystery of our
Christian religion.
IN the two provinces, Paguina an Tolanchia, whereas we have said, the king of
the country is ordinarily resident, for that they do bound upon Tartary, with
whom they have had continual wars: and again the most principal and
politic people be in those places, over and above all the other.

Amongst the figures of all their idols that they have, the Chinos do say that
there is one of a strange and marvelous making, A strange image.
unto whom they do great reverence: they do paint him a body with three
heads, that does continually look the one on the other: and they say that it
does signify, that all three be of one good will and essence, and that which
pleases the one pleases the other: and to the contrary, that which is
grievous and displeases the one, is grievous and displeases the other two: A
mystery of the trinity.
the which being interpreted christianly, may be understood to be the mystery
of the holy trinity, that we that are christians do worship, and is part of
our faith: the which with other things seems somewhat to be respondent to our
holy sacred and christian religion* S. Thomas preached in this kingdom.
so that of very truth we may presume that saint Thomas the Apostle did preach
in this kingdom, who as it is declared in the lesson on his day. After that he
had received the holy ghost, and preached the holy gospel unto the Parthes,
Medes, Persas, Brachmanes and other nations, he went into the Iudias, The
martyrdom of saint Thomas.
whereas he was martyred in the city of Calamina, for his faith and holy
gospel that he preached.

It is verified that when this glorious apostle did pass into the Indies, he
traveled through this kingdom of China, where as it appears he did preach
the holy gospel and mystery aforesaid, of the holy trinity: whose picture in
the manner aforesaid does endure unto this day, although those people, by the
great and long blindness which they are in with their errors and idolatry,
do not perfectly know what that figure with three heads does represent or
signify. The better for to believe that which is said, or at least to
understand that it is so, is that it is found in the writings of the
Armenians, that amongst them are in reputation and of great authority: and
there it says that this glorious apostle did pass through this kingdom of
China, when he went into the Indies, where he was martyred, and that he did
preach there the holy gospel, although it did profit very little, for that
the people were out of order, and occupied in their wars: and therefore this
Apostle did pass into the Indies, and left some of the country (although but
a few) baptized and instructed, that when it should please God, they might have
occasion to persevere in that which was taught them.

They have also amongst them (as it is said) certain pictures after the
fashion and with the ensigns of the twelve apostles, which is a help to the
verifying of that aforesaid: although if you do ask of the people who they
are, they do answer that they were men, and great philosophers that did live
virtuously, and therefore they are made angels in heaven. They do also use
amongst them the picture of a woman very fair with a man child in her arms,
whereof they say she was delivered and yet remained a virgin, and was
daughter unto a mighty king: they do reverence her very much, and do make
prayer unto her: more then this, they cannot say of this mystery, but that she
lived a holy life and never sinned.

Friar Gaspar de la Cruz a Portugal of the order of saint Dominicke, was in
the city of Canton, where he did write many things of this kingdom, and with
great attention, whom I do follow in many things in the process of this
history, and he says, that he being upon a small Island that was in the
midst of a mighty river, there was a house in manner of a monastery of
religious people of that country, and being in it, he saw certain curious
things of great antiquity: amongst them he saw a chapel like unto an oratorie
or place of prayer, very well made, and curiously dressed: it had certain
stairs to mount into it, and compassed about with gilte grates, and was made
fast: and looking upon the altar, the which was covered with a cloth very
rich: he saw in the midedst of the same an image of a woman of a marvelous
perfection, with a child having his arms about her neck, and there was
burning before her a lamp: he being amassed at this sight, he did demand the
signification: but there was none that could declare more thereof then that
which is said before. Of this which has been said, it is easily to be believed
how that the apostle S. Thomas did preach in this kingdom, for that it is
seen, these people have conserved these traditions many years past, and do
conserve the same: which is a sign and token that they had some notice of the
true God, whose shadows they do represent. There is amongst them many errors,
and without any foundation, and is not of them to be seen nor perceived til
such time as by faith they shall know the right God: as may be seen in the
chapters, where we shall speak of these matters.

CHAP. II. I do prosecute the religion they have, and of the Idols they do
worship.
Over and above that which is sai^e, these Idolaters and blind people (being
men so prudent and wise in the government of their common wealth, and so
subtle and ingenious in all arts) yet they do use many other things of so
great blindness and so impertinent, that it does make them to wonder, which
attentively do fall in the consideration: yet is it not much to be meruailed
at, considering that they are without the clear light of the true Christian
religion, without the which the subtilest and delicatest understandings are
lost and overthrown. Generally amongst them they do understand that the
heaven is the creator of all things visible and invisible: and therefore they
do make a show of it in the first caract or letter of the cross row, and that
the heaven has a governor to rule all such things as are comprehended there
above: whom they call Laocon Tzautey, which is to be understood in their
language: the governor of the great and mighty God, this they do worship as
the principal, next unto the sun. They say that this governor was not
begotten, but is eternal, and has no body, but is a spirit. Likewise they do
say that with this there is another of the same nature, whom they call Causay,
and is like wise a spirit, and unto this is given power of the lower heaven, in
whose power depends the life and death of man. This Causay has three
subjects whom he does command, and they say they be likewise spirits, and
they do aid and help him in things touching his government. They are called
Tauquam, Teyquam, Tzuiquam, either of them has distinct power the one over the
other: they say that Tauquam has charge over the rain, to provoke water for
the earth, and Teyquam over humane nature, to bring forth mankind: over
wars, sowing the ground and fruits. And Tzuiquam over the seas and all
nauigators. They do sacrifice unto them, and do crave of them such things as
they have under their charge and government: for the which they do offer them
victuals, sweet smells, frontals and carpets, for their altars: likewise they
promise many vows and represent plays and comedies before their Idols, the
which they do very naturally.

Besides this, they have for saints, such men as have surmounted other in
wisdom, in valor, in industry, or in leading a solitary or asper life: or
such as have lived without doing evil to any. And in their language they call
them Pausaos, which be such as we do call holy men.

They likewise do sacrifice unto the devil, not as though they were ignorant
that he is evil, or condemned, but that he should do them no harm, neither
on their bodies nor goods. They have many strange gods, of so great a number,
that alonely for to name them, is requisite a large history, and not to be
brief as is pretended in this book: And therefore I will make mention but of
their principals, whom (besides those which I have named) they have in great
reverence.

The first of these they do call Sichia, who came from the kingdom of
Tranthlyco which is toward the west: this was the first inuenter of such
religious people, as they have in their country both men and women, and
generally does live without marrying in perpetual closeness. And all such as
do immitate this profession do wear no hair, which number is great, as
hereafter you shall understand: and they greatly observe that order left unto
them.

The next is called Quanina, and was daughter unto the king Tzonton, who had
three daughters, two of them were married, and the third which was Quanina, he
would also have married, but she would never consent thereunto: saying, that
she had made a vow to heaven to live chaste, whereat the king her father was
very wroth, and put her into a place like unto a monastery, whereas she was
made to carry wood and water, and to work and make clean an orcharde that
was there. The Chinos do tell many tales of this maid, for to be laughed at:
saying, that the apes came from the mountains for to help her, and how that
saints did bring her water: and the birds of the air with their bylles did
make clean her orchard, and that the great beasts came out of the mountains
and brought her wood. Her father perceiving that, imagining that she did it by
witchcraft, or by some art of the devil, (as it might well be) commanded to
set fire on that house whereas she was: then she seeing that for her cause that
house was set on fire, she would have destroyed her self with a silver pin,
which she had to trim up her hair, but upon a sudden at that instant there
fell a great shower of rain and did put out the fire, and she departed from
thence and hid her self in the mountains, whereas she lived in great penance
and led a holy life. And her father in recompense of the great sin and evil
he committed against her, was turned to a lepar, and full of worms, in such
sort that there was no physician that could cure him: by reason whereof he was
constrained to repair unto his daughter to seek cure, (which being advised of
the same by revelation of a divine spirit) then her father being certified
thereof, did crave pardon at her hands, and did repent him very much of that
which he had done, and did worship unto her, the which she seeing, resisted
her father therein, and put a saint before him, that he should worship it and
not her, and therewith she straight ways returned unto the mountains,
whereas she died in great religion. This they have amongst them for a great
saint, and do pray unto her to get pardon for their sins of the heaven, for
that they do believe that she is there.

Besides this, they have another saint which they call Neoma, and was borne in
a town called Cuchi, in the province of Ochiam. This they say was daughter
unto a principal man of that Town, and would never marry, but left her own
natural soil and went unto a little Island, which is right over against Ingoa,
whereas she lived a very straight life, and showed many false miracles^ The
occasion why they have her in reputation of a saint, is. There was a certain
Captain of the king of China, whose name was Compo: he was sent unto a
kingdom not far from thence to make war against the king, It so chanced
that he with his navy came to an anchor at Buym, and being ready to depart,
he would have wayed his ankers, but by no means he could not move them:
being greatly amazed thereat, and looking forth he saw this Neoma sitting on
them. Then the Captain came unto her and told her with great humility that
he was going to wars by commandment of the king. And that if so be she were
holy, that she would give him counsel what were best for him to do, to whom
she answered and said, that if he would have the victory over them that he
went to conquer, that he should carry her with him. He did perform that which
she said and carried her with him unto that kingdom, whose inhabitants were
great Magicians, and threw oil into the sea, and made it seem that their
ships were all on fire. This Neoma did work by the same art, and did undo
that which the other did practice or imagine, in such sort, that their magic
did profitte them nothing, neither could they do any harm unto them of
China. The which being perceived by them of y^ kingdom, they did yield
themselves to be subjects and vassales unto the king of China. The Captain
believed this to be a miracle, yet notwithstanding he did conjure her (as one
of good discretion) for that things might fall out to the contrary, and the
better to certify his opinion, whereby he might the better give relation
thereof unto the king, A false miracle.
he said. Lady turn me this rod the which I have in my hand dry, to become
green and flourishing, and if you can so do, I will worship you for a saint.
Then she at that instant did not only make it green, but also to have an
odoriferous smell. The which rod he put upon the poope of his ship for a
remembrance, and for that he had a very prosperous and good viage, he did
attribute it unto her. So that unto this day, they have her in reputation of a
saint, and carry her picture upon the poope of their ships, and such as be
traueilers to the sea do offer unto her sacrifices.

These aforesaid they do esteem for their principal saints, yet besides all
these they have an infinite number of carved idols, which they do place upon
alters in their tempels: the quantity of them is such (that in my presence it
was affirmed by friar Geronimo Martin, he that entered into China, and is a man
of great credit worthy to give credit unto, that amongst many other things,
he was in one of their temples in the city of Vcheo, where as he did count
one hundred and twelve idols: and besides this they have many in the high
ways and streets, and upon their principal gates of the city, the which
they have in small veneration, as you shall perceive in this chapter following:
whereby it is plainly to be seen, in what subjection they are unto errors
and Idolatry, such as do lack the truth of true Christian religion.

CHAP. III. How little they do esteem their Idols whom they worship.
THese miserable Idolaters do so little esteem their Idols, that it is a
great hope and confidence, that at what time so ever the gospel shall have any
entry into that country, straightwayes they will leave off all their
superstitions: in particular in casting of lots, which is a thing much used
throughout all that kingdom: also this will be a great help thereunto, for
that they are generally men of good understanding, and ducible and subject unto
reason, in so ample sort (as is declared by that religious dominicke aforesaid)
he being in Canton in a temple whereas they were sacrificing unto their Idols,
being moved with great zeal to the honor of God, did throw certain of them
down to the ground. When these Idolaters did see his boldness which seemed
unto them to be without reason: they laid hands on him with an infernal
fury, with determination for to kill him: then he did request of them that
before they did execute it, that they would hear what he would say: the which
his petition seemed unto the principals that were there to be just, and
commanded all the people to withdraw themselves, and to hear what he would
say. Then he with the spirit that God did put in him, said, that they should
advertise themselves, for that God our Lord and creator of heaven and earth,
had given unto them so good understandings, and did equal them unto the
politikest nations in all the world: that they should not employ it unto evil,
neither subject themselves to worship unto stones and blocks of wood which have
no discourse of reason, more then is given them by the workmen that did make
them, and it were more reason the idols should reverence and worship men,
because they have their similitude and likeness: with these words and other
such like in effect, they were all quieted, and did not only approve his
saying to be true, but did give him great thanks, excusing themselves: saying,
that until that time there was none that ever did give them to understand so
much, neither how they did evil in doing their sacrifices, and in token of
gratefulnes (leaving their idols on the ground, and some broken all to pieces)
they did bear him company unto his lodging. Hereby you may understand with
what facility, by the help of almighty God, they may be reduced unto our
catholic faith: opening (by the light of the gospel) the door which the
devil has kept shut by false delusions so long time, although the king with
all his governors and ministers has great care that in all that kingdom there
be none to induce novelties, neither to admit strangers or any new doctrine
without license of the said king, and of his roial counsel upon pain of death,
the which is executed with great rigor. They are people very ducible and apt to
be taught, and easy to be turned from their idolatry, superstition and
false gods: the which they have in small veneratio^ as aforesaid. With great
humility they do receive and approve corrections of their weakness, and do know
the vauntage that is betwixt the gospel and their rites and vanities, and do
receive the same with a very good will, as it has been and is seen in many
Chinos that have received baptism in the City of Manila, upon one of the
Islands Philippinas, whereas they do dwell, and leave their own natural
country for to enjoy that which they understand to be for the salvation of
their souls. So that those who have received baptism are become very good
Christians.

CHAP. IIII. Of lots which they do use when they will do any thing of
importance, and how they do invoke or call the devil.
THe people of this country do not alonely use superstitions, but they are
also great Augurisers or tellers of fortunes, and do believe in auguries, as a
thing most certain and infallible, but in especial by certain lots which
they do use at all times, They cast lottes.
when they begin any journey, or for to do any thing of importance, as to
marie a son, a daughter, or lend any money, or buy any lands, or deal with
merchandise, or any other thing whose end is incertaine or doubtful. In all
these matters they do use lottes, the which they do make of two sticks, flat on
the one side, and round on the other, and being tied together with a small
threede, throw them before their Idols. But before they do throw them, they
do use great ceremonies in talk, and use amorous and gentle words, desiring
them to give them good fortune. For by them they do understand the success to
be good or evil in their journey, or any other thing that they do take in
hand. Likewise they do promise them, if they do give them good fortune, to
offer unto them, victuales, frontalles, or some other thing of price. This
being done they throw down their lots, and if it so fall out that the flat
side be upper, or one flat side and the other round, they have it for an evil
sign or token. Then they return unto their Idols, and say unto them many
injurious words, calling them dogs, infamous, villains, and other names like
in effect. After they have uttered unto them all injuries at their pleasure,
then they begin again to fawn upon them, and entreat them with mild and
sweet words, craving pardon of that which is past, and promising to give them
more gifts then before they did, if their lot do fall out well. Then in the like
manner as before, they do proceed, and throw the lots before the idols: but if
it fall not out according unto their expectation, then they return again with
vituperous and vile words: but if to their desire, then with great praises and
promises. But when that in matters of great importance, it is long before their
lots do fall well: then they take them and throw them to the ground and
tread upon them, or else throw them into the sea, or into the fire, They
throw their gods under their feet.
whereas they let them burn a while: and sometimes they do whippe them until
such time as the lottes do fall as they would have them, which is the round
side upwards, and is a token of good success unto that, for which they do cast
their lottes. Then if the lottes do fall out unto their content, they do make
unto them great feasts with music and songs of great praise, and do offer
unto them geese, duckes, and boiled rise. But if the thing whereon they do
cast their lottes be of importance, then they do offer unto them a hogs
head boiled, dressed with herbs and flowers, the which is esteemed above all
other things, and therewith a great pot with wine. Of all that they do offer,
they do cut off their bills, and the claws of the fowls, and the hogs
snowte, and do throw upon it grains of rise, A hogs head for a sacrifice.
and sprinkling it it with wine, they set it in dishes upon the altar, and
there they do eat and drink making great feast and cheer before their idols.

Another kind of lots they do use, Another kind of lots.
in putting a great number of little sticks into a pot, and upon every one of
them is written a letter: and after that they have tumbled and tossed them
together in the pot: they cause a child to put in his hand and take out one,
and when they have seen the letter, they seek in a book which they have for
that purpose: the leaf that begins with that letter, and look what they
do find written therein, they do interpret of it conformable unto the thing
that they cast their lots for.

Generally in all this country when they find themselves in any trouble,
Invocation to the devil.
they do invoke and call upon the devil with whom they do ordinarily talk
(even as we do call upon God in our need) of him they do demand what way and
order they might take to clear themselves thereof, as they did in the presence
of friar Pedro de Alfaro, of the order of saint Francis, in the year of our
Lord 1580. at such time as he came from China, as may be seen in his
relation. The order that they have in inuocating or calling on the devil, is
as follows. They cause a man to lie upon the ground, his face downwards then
another begins to read upon a book singing, and part of them that are
present do answer unto him: the rest do make a sound with little bells, and
tabers: then within a little while after, the man that lies on the ground,
begins to make visages and iestures: which is a certain token that the
devil is entered within him: then do they ask of him what they do desire to
know: then he that is possessed does answer, yet for the most part they be
lies that he does speak: The devil tells lies.
although he do keep it close, yet does he give diverse reasons unto that
which he does answer, for that always they do answer either by word or
by letters, which is the remedy they have, when that the devil will not
answer by word. And when that he does answer by letters, then do they
spread a red mantle or couerlet upon the ground, and throw thereon a certain
quantity of rice dispersed equally in every place upon the couerlet: then do
they cause a man that cannot write to stand there with a stick in his hand,
then those that are present do begin to sing and to make a sound as at the
first invocation: and within a little while the devil does enter into him that
has the stick, and causes him to write upon the rice, then do they translate
the letters that are there formed with the stick, and being joined altogether,
they find answer of that they do demand: although for the most part it
falls out as aforesaid, as unto people that do communicate with the father
of all lying, and so do their answeares fall out false and full of leasings. If
that at any time he do tell them the truth, it is not for that he does it by
nature or with his will: but to induce them under the color of a truth to
persevere in their errors, and they do give credit unto a thousand lies: in
this sort do they invoke the devil, and it is so ordinary a thing
throughout all the kingdom, that there is nothing more used nor known.

CHAP V. Of the opinion they have of the beginning of the world, and of the
creation of man.
ALthough the Chinos be generally very ingenious, and of a clear
understanding, yet in their own respect, they say that all other nations in
the world be blind, except the Spaniards whom they have known but of late
time: they have amongst them both natural and moral philosophy, the which is
read publicly amongst them, and also astrology.

But now touching the beginning of the world, and the creation of man: they
have many errors, whereof some of them shall be declared in this chapter, taken
out of their own books, and specially out of one that is entitled the
beginning of the world.

They say that at the beginning, the heaven, the earth, and the water were a
mass or lump joined in one. And that there is one resident in heaven, whom
they call by name Tayn, he by his great science did separate heaven and earth,
the one from the other, so that the heaven remained hie in the state that it
is, and the earth following his natural inclination, as grave and heavy, did
remain whereas it is. They say that this Tayn did create a man of nothing, who
they call Pauzon, Strange opinions.
and likewise a woman, who they call Pauzona. This Pauzon by the power that was
given him by Tayn, did create of nothing another man who they call Tanhom, with
thirteen other brothers. This Tanhom was a man of great science, in so ample
sort, that he did give name unto all created things, and did know by the
assignement and doctrine of Tayn, the virtue of them all, and to apply them to
heal all manner of diseases and sicknesses: this Tanhom and his brethren, but
especially the eldest, who was called Teyencom, he had twelve: his first
begotten, called Tuhucom had nine, so had all the rest very many. They do
believe that the lineage and generation of these did endure for more then ninty
thousand years. And in the end and conclusion of them, did end all human
nature: for that it was the will of Tayn, who did first create the man and
woman of nothing, for to be revenged on certain injuries that they did unto
him, and for every one that he had showed unto them, they did almost know so
much as himself, and would not acknowledge any superiority, as they did
promise him, at such time as he did give unto him the secreat of all his
science. At that time did the heaven fall down, then did Tayn raise it up
again, and created another man upon the earth named Lotzitzam, he had two
horns, out of the which proceeded a very sweet savor: the which sweet smell
did bring forth both men and women. This Lotzitzam vanished away, Marvelous
barieties.
and left behind him in the world many men and women, of whom did proceed all
nations that now are in it. The first that this Lotzitzam brought forth was
called Alazan, and lived nine hundred years: then did the heaven create
another man called Atzion, whose mother called Lutim was with child with him,
only in seeing a lions head in the air: he was borne in Truchin in the
province of Santon, and lived eight hundred years: at this time was the world
replenished with much people, and did feed on nothing but on wild herbs and
raw things: then was there borne into the world one called Vsao, who gave them
industry to make and do many things, as to use the trees to make defense to
save them from wild beasts, which did them much harm, and to kill them, and
make garments of their skins. After him came one called Huntzui, The first
invention of ^^re.
who did invent the use of fire, and instructed them what they should do, and
how to roast and boil their victuals, and how to barter and sell one thing for
another. They did understand one another in their contradictions by knots made
upon cords, for that they had not the use of letters nor any mention thereof.
After that they say, that a certain woman, called Hantzibon was delivered of a
son named Ocheutey, who was the inuentor of many things and ordained marriage,
and to play on many and diverse instruments. They do affirm that he came from
heaven by miracle for to do good upon the earth: Strange opinions.
for that his mother going by the way did see the print of a man's foot, and
putting her foot on it, she was straight ways environed with a lightning,
with whom she was conceived, and with child with this son. This Ocheutey had a
son called Ezoulom who was the inuenter of physic and astrology, but in
especial matters touching law and judgment. The invention of plough and
spade*
He showed them how to till the land, and invented the plough and spade: of
this man they do tell many wonderful and marvelous things, but amongst
them all, they say that he did eat of seven several kinds of herbs that
were poison, and did him no harm: he lived 400. hundred years: his son was
called Vitey, the first king they had amongst them, The first king of China.
he reduced all things to be under government, and to have it by succession,
as shall be declared in the chapter, whereas I will treat of the king of this
mighty kingdom that now lives. These and many other varieties and toys they
say of the beginning of the world: whereby may be understood, how little men
may do without the favor of God, and the light of the catholic faith, yea
though they be of the most subtilest and finest wit that may be immagined.

CHAP VI. How they hold for a certainty, that the soul is immotall, and that
he shall have another life: in the which it shall be punished or rewarded
according unto the works which he does in this world, and how they pray for
the dead.
BY that aforesaid, it appears to be of a truth that the apostle S. Thomas
did preach in China, and we may presume that all which we have seen does
remain printed in their hearts from his doctrine, and bears a similitude of
the truth, and a conformity with the things of our catholic religion. Now
touching this that we will treat of in this chapter, of the immortality that
they believe of the soul, and of the reward or punishment which they shall
have in the other life, according unto the works done in company with the
body: which appears to be the occasion that they do not live so evil as
they might, not having the knowledge of this truth.

I do hope by the power of his divine majesty, that they will easily be
brought unto the true knowledge of the gospel. They say and do affirm it of a
truth, The soul is immortal.
that the soul had his first beginning from the heaven, and shall never have
end: for that the heaven has given it an eternal essence. And for the time
that it is within the body that God has ordained, if it do live according to
such laws as they have without doing evil, or deceit unto his neighbor: the^
it shall be carried unto heaven, whereas it shall live eternally with great joy, and
shall be made an angel: and to the contrary, if it live ill, shall go with the
devils into dark dungeons and prisons, whereas they shall suffer with them
torments which never shall have end. They do confess, that there is a place
whither such souls as shall be made angels do go to make themselves clean of
al such evil as did cleave unto them, being in the body: and for that it
should be speedelier done, the good deeds which are done by their parents and
friends do help them very much. So that it is very much used throughout all the kingdom to make orations, and prayers for the dead, for the which they
have a day appointed in the month of August. They do not make their offerings
in their temples, but in their houses: the which they do in this manner
following. The day appointed, all such as do bear them company until their
sacrifices are concluded for the dead: which are such as we do call here
religious men, every one has his companion and walks the streets, and does
report the days and houses where they will be, for that it cannot be done
altogether. So when they come unto the house whereas they must do their
offices: they enter in, and do prepare that every one do make oration and
sacrifice according to their fashion for the dead of that house: understanding
that by their help they shall be made clean from their evils, which is an
impediment that they cannot be angels nor enjoy the benefit which is ordained
for them in heaven. One of these that is like unto a priest, does bring with
him a taber, and other two little bords, and another a little bell. The^ they
do make an altar, Strange ob sequies.
whereon they do set such idols as the dead had for their saints living: then do
they perfume them with franke^sence and storax, and other sweet smells: then do
they put 5. or 6 tables full of victuals for the dead and for the saints: then
straightwayes at the sound of the taber, little bords and bells (which is a
thing more apt for to dance by, as by report of them that have heard it) they
begin to sing certain songs which they have for that purpose, then do the
nouices go up unto the altar, and do offer in written paper those Orations
which they did sing to the sound of those instruments, This being done, they
sit down and begin anew to sing as before. They make their sacrifices in the
night.
In the end of their prayers and songs, he who does this office, does sing a
prayer, and in the end thereof (with a little board that he has in his hand for
the purpose) he strikes a blow upon the table, then the other do answer in
the same tune, declining their heads, and do take certain painted papers,
and guilt papers, and do burn them before the altar. In this sort they are
all the night, which is the time that ordinarily they do make their sacrifices:
the which being done, the priests and those that be in the house, do eat the
victuals that was set upon the tables, wherein they do spend the residue of
the night till it be day. They say that in doing this they do purify and make
clean the souls that they may go and become angels. Great superstition.
The common people do believe of truth that the soul that lives not well,
before they go into hell (which shall not be before the end of the world,
according as they do think in their error) in recompense of their evil life,
the heavens do put them into the bodies of buffes and other beasts: and those
which live well, into the bodies of kings and lords, whereas they are very much
made of and well served. These and a thousand toies in like sort, making that
the soul does move out of one into another, as certain old philosophers did
affirm it to be, who were as blind and as far from the truth as they.

CHAP. VII. Of their temples, and of certain manner of religious people both
men and women, and of their superiors.
THere are found in this kingdom many moral things, the which do touch very
much our religion, which gives us to understand that they are people of great
understanding, in especial in natural things, and that it should be of a
certainty, that the holy apostle of whom we have spoken, did leave amongst them
by his preachings occasion for to learn many things that do show unto virtue:
one of the which is, that there is found amongst them many monasteries, in
their cities and towns, and also in the fields, wherein are many men and
women that do live in great closenes, and obedience: after the fashion of other
religious monasteries. They have amongst the^ (that is known) only four
orders, every one of the^ has their general, who dwells ordinarily in the
city of Suntien, or Taybin, whereas is the king and his counsel. These their
generals they do call in their language Tricon, who do provide for every
province a provincial to assist and visit all the conuents, correcting and
amending such faults as is found, according unto the institution and manner of
living. This provincial does ordain in every convent one, which is like unto
the prior or guardian whom all the rest do reverence and obey. This general is
for ever till he do die, except they do find in him such faults that he does
deserve to be deprived: yet they do not elect their prouincials as we do use,
but it is done by the king and his counsel, always choosing (...) that is
known to be of a good life and fame: so that favor carries nothing away.
This general is apparelled all in silk, Gallant colors for religious men.
in that color that his profession does use: either black, yeallow, white or
russet, which are the four colors that the four orders do use: he never
goes forth of his house, but is carried in a little chair of Iuorie or
gold, by four or six men of his habit. When any of the convent does talk
unto him, it is on their knees: they have also amongst them a seal of their
monastery, for the dispatching of such business as touches their religion.
These have great rentes given them by the king for the sustayning of themselves
and their servants. All their conuents has great rentes in general: part given
them by the king, and part of charity, given them in those cities or towns
whereas they have their houses, the which are many and very huge. They do
ask their charity in the streets, singing with the sound of two little
^ords, and other instruments. Every one of them when they do beg, does carry
in their hands a thing, wherein are written certain prayers, that they say is
for the sins of the people: and all that is given them in charity they lay it
upon the said thing, wherewith they do understand (in their blind opinion)
that their spirit is clear of all sin. In general their beards and heads are
shaven, and they wear one sole vesture, without making any difference,
according unto the color of their religion. They do eat altogether, and have
their sels according to the use of our friars, their vestures or apparel is
ordinary of serge of the said four colors. They have beads to pray on as the
papists use, although in another order: they do assist al burials for to have
charity: they do arise two hours before day to pray, as our papists do their
mattins, and do continue in the same until the day do break: they do pray
all in one voice, singing in very good order and attention, and all the time
of their praying they do ring belles, whereof they have in that kingdom the
best and of the gallantest sound that is in all the world, by reason that they
are made almost all of steel, Gallant bells.
they pray unto the heaven, whom they take for their God, and unto Sinquian,
who they say was the inuenter of that their manner of life, and became a saint.
They may leave their order at all times at their pleasure, giving their
general to understand thereof.

But in the time that they are in that order they cannot marrye, neither deal
with any women upon pain to be punished asperly. At such time as one does
put himself in religion, the father or next kinsman of him that takes the
order, does inuit all them of the convent, and does make them a great and
solemn banquet, yet you must understand that the eldest son of any man cannot
put himself in any monastery, but is prohibited by the laws of the country,
The eldest son is prohibited to take orders.
for that the eldest son is bound to sustain his father in his old age.
When that any of these religious men do die, they do wash him, and shave him,
before they do bury him, and do all wear mourning apparel for him. The
religious man or woman, that is once punished for any fault, cannot afterward
turn and receive the habit at any time. They have a certain mark given unto
them in token of their fault, and that is a bord^ put about their neck, so
that it is seen of all people. Every morning and evening they do offer unto
their Idolles, frankensence, benjamin, wood of aguila and cayolaque the which
is marvelous sweet, and other gummes of sweet and odoriferous smells. When that
they will lanch any ship into the water, after that it is made, then these
religious men, all apparelled with rich roabes of silk, do go to make
sacrifices upon the poopes of them, whereas they have their oratories, and there
they do offer painted papers of diverse figures, the which they do cut in
pieces before their idols, with certain ceremonies and songs well consorted,
and ringing of little belles, they do reverence unto the devil. And they do
paint him in the fore castle, for that he shall do no harm unto the ships:
that being done, they do eat and drink till they can no more. And with this
they think it is sufficient for the ship, that all such viages as she shall
make shall succeed well, the which they have amongst them for a thing most
certain: and if they did not bless them in this order, all things would fall
out to the contrary.

CHAP. VIII. The order that they have in burying of the dead, and the mourning
apparel they have.
IT seems unto me not far from our purpose, to declare in this place, how
they use in this kingdom to bury the dead, and it is surely a thing to be
noted: the manner is as follows. When that any one does die, at the very
instant yt he yields up ye ghost, they do wash his body all over from top to
toe, A straung kindof burial.
then do they apparel him with the best apparel that he had, all perfumed
with sweet smells. The^ after he is apparelled, they do set him in ye best
chaier that he has, then comes unto him his father and mother, brethren and
sisters, and children, who kneeling before him, they do take their leave of
him, shedding of many tears, and making of great moan every one of the^ by
themselves. Then after them in order comes all his kinsfolks and friends,
and last of all his servants (if ^e had any,) who in like case do as the other
before. This being done, they do put him into a coffin or chest made of very
sweet wood, (in that country you have very much) they do make it very close,
to avoid the evil smell. Then do they put him on a table with two banks, in a
chamber very gallantly dressed and hanged with the best clothes that can be
gotten, covering him with a white sheet hanging down to the ground, whereon
is painted the dead man or woman, as natural as possible may be. But first in
the chamber whereas the bead body is or at the entry, they set a table with
candles on it, and full of bread and fruits of diverse sorts. And in this order
they keep him above ground 15. days, in yt which time every night comes
thither their priests and religious men, whereas they sing prayers and offer
sacrifices, with other ceremonies: they bring with them many painted papers,
and do burn them in the presence of the dead body, with a thousand
superstitions and witchcraftes: and they do hang upon cords (which they have
for the same purpose) of the same papers before him, and many times do shake
them and make a great noise, with the which they say it does send the soul
straight unto heaven. In the end of the 15. days, all which time the tables
are continually furnished with victuals and wine, which the priests, their
kinsfolks and friends, that do come to visit the^ do eat. These ceremonies
being ended, they take the coffin with the dead body, and carry him into the
fields, accompanied with all his kinsfolks and friends, and with their priests
and religious men carrying candles in their hands, whereas ordinarily they do
bury the^ on a mountain, in sepultures that for the same purpose in their
life time they caused to be made of stone and masons work: that being done,
straight ways hand by ye sepulture, they do plant a pine tree, in ye which
place there be many of them, and they be never cut down except they be
overthrown with the weather, and after they be fallen they let them lie till
they consume of themselves, for that they be sanctified. The people yt do bear
him company to the grave, do go in very good order like a procession, and have
with them many instruments, which never leave playing till such time as the
dead is put into the sepulcher. And that burial which has most priests and
music is most sumptuous, wherein they were wont to spend great riches. They
sing to the sound of the instruments many orations unto their Idols: and in the
end they do burn upon the sepulcher many papers, whereon is painted, slaves,
horse, gold, silver, silks, and many other things, the which they say, that
the dead body does possess in the other world whether he goes to dwell. At
such time as they do put him into ye grave, they do make great bankets and
sports with great pastime, saying of a truth, that look what soever they do at
that time, the angels and saints that are in heaven do the like unto the soul
of the dead that is there buried. Their parents, familiars and servants, in all
this time do wear mourning apparel, the which is very asper, for that their
apparel is made of a very course wolle, and wear it next unto their skins,
and girt unto them with cords, and on their heads bunnets of the same cloth,
with verges broad like unto a hat hanging down to their eyes: for father or
mother they do wear it a hole year, and some two years, and if his son be a
governor (with license of the king) he does withdraw himself many times,
leaving the office he has, the which they esteem a great point of honor, and
have it in great account, and such as are not so much in aliance do apparel
the^ in died linen certain months. Likewise their parents and friends,
although these do wear it but for the time of the burial.

CHAP. IX. Of their ceremonies that they use in the celebrating the marriages.
THe people of this kingdom have a particular care to give state unto their
children in time, before that they be overcome or drowned in vices or
lascivious living. The which care is the occasion, that in this country being
so great, there is less vice used than in any other smaller countries: whose
over much care does cause them many times to procure to marry their children
being very young: yea and to make consort before they be borne with signs
and tokens, making their writings and bands for the performance of the same in
public order. In all this kingdom, yea and in the Islands Philippinas, it is a
customable use, that the husband does give dowry unto the wife with whom he
does marry, and at such time as they do join in matrimony, the father of
the bride does make a great feast in his own house, and does inuit to the
same, the father and mother, kinsfolks and friends of his son in law. And
the next day following, the father of the bridegroom, or his next parent, does
the like unto the kinsfolks of the bride. These bankets being finished, the
husband does give unto his wife her dowry in the presence of them all, and
she does give it unto her father or mother (if she have them) for the pains
they took in the bringing her up. Whereby it is to be understood, that in
this kingdom, and in those that do confine on it, They that have most
daughters are most richest.
those that have most daughters are most richest, so that with the dowries
their daughters do give them, they may well sustain themselves in their
necessity, and when they die, they do give it that daughter that did give it
them, that it may remain for their children, or otherwise use it at their
wills. A man may marry with so many wives as he can sustain, so it be not
with his sister or brothers daughter, They may marry with many wives.
and if any do marry in these two degrees, they are punished very rigorously.
Of all their wives, the first is their legitimate wife, and all the rest are
accounted but as lemanes or concubines. These married men, do live and keep
house with his first wife, and the rest he does put in other houses, or if he
be a merchant, then he does repart them in such villages or towns, whereas he
does deal in, who are unto him as servants in respect of the first. When the
father does die, the eldest son by his first wife does inherit the most part
of all his goods, and the rest is reparted in equal parts amongst the other
children, both of his first wife and of all the other wives. For lack of a
son by his first wife, the first borne of the other wives does inherit the
most part: so that few times or never there is none that dies without heirs,
either by his first wife, or by the others. And if it so fall out that any of
these his wives do commit adultery (the which seeldome chances, by reason of
their keeping in, and great honesty, Honest women.
as also it is great infamy unto the man that does offer any such thing) then
may the husband finding them together, kill them: but after that first fury
being past, he cannot but complain of the adulterers unto the Justice, and
although it be proved very apparent, yet can they give them no more
punishment but beat them cruelly upon their thyghes, as is the custom and
law of the country, as shall be declared unto you in his place. Then may the
husband afterward sell his wife for a ^laue, and make money of her for the
dowry he gave her: notwithstanding, there be amongst them that for interest
will dissemble the matter, yea and will seek oportunities and occasion. Yet if
such be spied or known they are righteously punished. They say in the
provinces that be near unto Tartaria, and in the self same Tartaria they do
use a custom and manner of marriage very strange, that is: the vizroyes or
governors do limit and appoint a time when that all men and women shall meet
together such as will marie, or receive the order of religion.

The time being accomplished, all such as would be married do meet together in
a city of that province appointed for that purpose: and when they come
thither, they do present themselves before 12. ancient and principal men
appointed there by the king for the same purpose, who do take a note of their
names both of men and women and of what state and degree they are, A straung
kind of marriage.
and of their substance for to dowry their wives with whom they shall be
married. Then do they number all the men and women that be there, and if they
do find more men than women, or to the contrary, more women than men: then
they cast lots, and do leave the number that does so bear in register til the
next year, yt they may be the first that shall be married. Then six of those
ancient men, do put the men in three parts, the rich they put in one part
without any consideration of gentilitie or beauty, and those that are rich in
a mean, in an other part, and the poor in the third part. In the mean time
that these six men be occupied in the reparting of the men, the other* six
do repart the women in three parts, to say in this manner, the most fairest in
one part, and them not so fair in an other, and the fowlest in an other. This
division being made, the^ do they marry them in this order: unto the rich men
they do give the fairest, and they do give for them the prise that is
appointed by the Judges, and unto them that are not so rich they do give them
that are not so fair, without paying for them any thing at all: and unto the
poor men they give the fowlest, with all that which the rich men do pay for
the fair women, dividing it into equal parts. Sure it is a notable thing if
it be true. This being done, they are all married in one day, and helped
(although peradventure not all content) the marriages being done there is
great feasts made, in such houses as the king has ordained in every city
for the same purpose, the which are furnished with beds, and all other
necessaries belonging thereunto, for that the new married people may be served
of all that is needful for the time that the feast do endure. This solemnity
being finished, which they say does endure fifty days: these new married
people do go unto their own houses. You must understand that this custom
of marriage is ordained for the common and poor people, and not for Lords nor
gentlemen, who are not bound to obey this ordinance, but to marry whereas
they like best, every one to seek and marry with his equal, or else by an
order which the king has set down unto the viceroyes and governors, what to
be done therein.

When that the king of China is married, then does he choose thirty
concubines, the principallest persons in all his kingdom, the which he does
keep and maintain within his palace so long as he does live. But after that
he is dead and his funeral ended, as is accustomed: then does the heir or
successor of the kingdom apparel these thirty women marvelous gorgeously
with many iewelles, then does he cause them to set in an Estrado, or rich
pallet gallantly dressed and furnished in one of the three halles (as shall be
declared in the second chapter of the third book) with their faces covered, in
such sort as they may not be seen nor known: and being set in this order,
then does there enter in thirty gentlemen of the principallest of the
kingdom, (those whom the king left named in his testament) the which goes by
antiquity, or according unto order set by the king: and either of them does
take one of these Ladies by the hand, and look how they found the^, so they
do carry them with their faces covered till they bring them home to their
houses, whereas they have them for their wives, and do maintain and keep them
all the days of their lives: toward the mainteyning of them the king does
leave in his testament great reueneues, and the successor in the kingdom does
accomplish and perform the same with great diligence and care. In old time
when that the kings of China would marry any of his children or kinsfolks,
he did make in his palace a great and solemn banquet, to the which he did
inuit all the principallest Lords and gentlemen of his court, commanding to
bring with them their sons and daughters, who did accomplish the same,
striving who should apparel their children most richest and most gallantest.
The banquet being done, the young princes do go whereas are these young Ladies,
every one placed in order according to their age, and there he does choose his
wife according to his own will or desire, and where he likes best. Likewise
the infants or kings daughters do the like in choosing their husbands amongst
the young lords and gentlemen. But at this time, this custom is left off, for
that the princes and gentlemen do marry with their kinsfolks, so that it be
not in the first or second degree: yet many times they do not keep the second.

CHAP. X. How that in all this mighty kingdom there is no poor folks walking
in the streets nor in the temples a begging, and the order that the king has
given for the maintayning of them that cannot work.
Many things of great government has been and shall be declared in this
history worthy to be considered: and in my opinion, this is not the least
that is contained in this chapter, which is such order as the king and his
counsel has given that the poor may not go a begging in the streets, nor in
the temples whereas they make orations unto their Idols: for the avoiding
thereof the king has set down an order, A good order to avoid idle people.
upon great and grievous penalty to be executed upon the said poor, if they
do beg or crave in the streets, and a greater penalty upon the citizens or
towns men, if they do give unto any such that beggeth, but must incontinent go
and complain on them to the Justice: who is one that is called the Justice of
the poor ordained to punish such as do break the law, and is one of the
principallest of the city or town, and has no other charge but only this.
And for that the towns be great and many and so full of people, and an
infinite number of villages, whereas it cannot be chosen but there is many
borne lame, and other misfortunes, so that he is not idle but always occupied
in giving order to remedy the necessities of the poor without breaking of the
law. This Judge the first day that he does enter into his office, I would the
like were with us.
he commands that whatsoever children be borne a creeple in any part of his
members, or by sickness be taken lame, or by any other misfortune, that
incontinent their fathers or mothers do give the Judge to understand thereof
that he may provide for all things necessary, according unto the ordinance and
will of the king and his counsel, the which is, the man child or woman child,
being brought before him, and seen the default or lack that it has, if it be
so that with the same it may exercise any occupation, they give and limit a
time unto the parents, for to teach the child that occupation ordained by the
Judge, and it is such, as with their lamenes they may use without any
impediment, the which is accomplished without fail: but if it so be that his
lamenes is such, that it is impossible to learn or exercise any occupation,
this Judge of the poor does command the father to sustain and maintain him
in his own house all the days of his life, if that he has wherewithal: if
not, or that he is fatherless, then the next rich kinsman must maintain it:
if he has none such, then does all his parents and kinsfolks contribute and
pay their parts, or give of such things as they have in their houses. But if
it has no parents, or they be so poor, that they cannot contribute nor
supply any part thereof: then does the king maintain them in very ample manner
of his own costs in hospitalles, very sumptuous, that he has in every
city throughout his kingdom for the same effect and purpose: in the same
hospitalles are likewise maintained, all such needy and old men, A very good
order.
as have spent all their youth in the wars, and are not able to maintain
themselves: so that to the one and the other is ministered all that is needful
and necessary, and that with great diligence and care: and for the better
accomplishing of the same, the Judge does put very good order, and does
appoint one of the principallest of the city or town, to be the
administrator, without whose license. There is not one within that hospital
that can go forth of the limittes: for that license is not granted unto any,
neither do they demand it, for that there they are provided of all things
necessary so long as they do live, as well for apparel as for victualles.
Besides all this, the old folks and poor men within the hospital, do bring
up hens, chickens, and hogs for their own recreation and profit, wherein
they do delight themselves. The Judge does visit often times the
administrator by him appointed. Likewise the Judge is visited by an other that
comes from the court, by the appointment of the king and the counsel to the
same effect: and to visit all such hospitalles as be in the provinces limited
in his commission, and if they do find any that has not executed his office
in right and justice, then they do displace them, A mirror for us to look
upon.
and punish them very rigorously: by reason whereof all such officers have
great care of their charges and live uprightly, having before their eyes the
straight account which they must give, and the cruel reward if to the
contrary. The blind folks in this country are not accounted in the number
of those that of necessity are to be maintained by their kinsfolks, or by
the king: for they are constrained to work, as to grind with a querne wheat
or rice, or to blow smythes bellows, or such like occupations, that they have
no need of their sight. And if it be a blind woman, when the comes unto age,
she does use the office of women of love, of which sor^e there are a great
number in public places, as shall be declared in the Chapter for that
purpose. These have women that do tend upon them, and do paint and trim them
up, and they are such that with pure age did leave that office. So by this
order in all this kingdom, although it be great, and the people infinite: yet
there is no poor that do perish nor beg in the streets, as was apparent
unto the austen and barefoote friars, and the rest that went with them into
that country.

The third book and history of the great and mighty kingdom of China, in
the which is contained many notable things worthy to be considered of
touching moral and pollitike matters.
CHAP. I. How many kings has been in this kingdom and their names.
IN the fourth Chapter of the first book, I did promise, particularly to
declare, how many kings have been in this kingdom, and their names. Now to
accomplish the same, I will begin and declare the succession of them from
Vitey, Vitey the first king of China.
(who was the first that did reduce the kingdom to one empire government) unto
him that does reign at this day, remitting that which shall lack unto the
Chapter aforesaid: whereas shall be found the number of the kings, and how
many years since the first beginning of this kingdom, and the manner of the
succession.

This Vitey was the first king of China (as it appears by their histories,
where as they do make particular mention.) But amongst other things that
they do declare of the kings person, they do say that he was in height so much
as seven mesures, which is accustomed in China: and every measure is two
thirdes of a Spanish vare, Which is four yeardes quarter and half.
which is by good account four vares and two terses in length: he was six
palms broad in the shoulders, and was as valiant in his deeds as in bigness
of his body: he had a Captain called Lincheon, who was not only valiant, but
politic and of great wisdom, by reason whereof with his valor and strength
he did subject unto Vitey, all the whole country that he does now possess,
and caused all people to fear him. They do attribute that this Vitey, did
first invent the use of garments for to wear, The first invention of garments
and dying o^ colors.
and the dying of all manner of colors, of making of ships: he likewise
invented the saw^ to saw timber, but above all things he was a great
Architector, and an inuenter of buildinges, whereof he made very many and
very sumptuous, which do endure unto this day in the remembrance of his
name: he did also invent the wheel to turn silk, the which is used to this
day in all the kingdom: he was the first that did use to wear gold, pearls
and precious stones for iewelles, and to wear cloth of gold, silver and silk
in apparel: he did repart all the people of the country into cities, towns
and villages: and did ordain occupations, and commanded that no man should
use any other but that which his father did use, without his particular
license, or the gouerners of his kingdom. And that should not be granted
without great occasion for the same.

All of one occupation were put in streets by themselves, the which order is
used unto this day throughout all the kingdom: so that if you do desire to
know what occupation is in any street, it is sufficient to see the first
house thereof, although it be very long: for it is very certain that they be
all of one occupation and not mingled with any other. Amongst all other things
he ordained one thing of great consideration, that was, No women to be idle.
no woman to be idle but to work, either in her husbands occupation, or in
sowing or spinning. This was a law so general amongst them, that the Queen
her self did observe and keep it.

They say that he was a great Astrologician, and had growing in the court of
his palace a certain herb, the which did make a manner of demonstration
when that any did pass by it, A strange kind of h^^rb.
whereby it did show if any were evil intentioned against the king. Many
other things they do declare which I let pass because I would not be tedious
unto the reader, referring the dreams and fondness of these Idolaters, unto
the judgment of your discretion: for unto the discreet is sufficient to touch
of every thing a little. He had four wives, and by them five and twenty
sons, he reigned a hundredth years: there was betwixt this king, and he which
did build the great wall (that was spoken of in the ninth chapter of the first
book) one hundredth and sixteen kings, all of the lynage of this Vitey. All
the which did reign, as appears by their histories, two thousand two
hundredth and fifty seven years. I do not here declare their names, because I
would not be tedious, although they be particularly named in their histories:
but here I will set down them that I find necessary to be spoken of for the
succession unto him that now reygneth. The last king of the lynage of this
worthy Vitey, was called Tzintzon: this did make the mighty and great wall
aforesaid: finding himself to be greatly troubled with the king of Tartarie,
who did make war upon him in many places of his kingdom: he did ordain the
making thereof, and for the furnishing of the same, he did take the third man
of the country to the work: and for that many people did die in this tedious
work, by reason they went so far from their own houses, and in diverse
climes clean contrary unto that where as they were bred and borne: it grew
that the king was hated and abhorred of all people, in such sort that they did
conspire his death, which in effect they did accomplish and slew him, after he
had reigned forty years: and also his son and heir who was called Aguizi.
After the death of this Tzintzon and his son, they did ordain for their
king, one that was called Auchosau, a man of great valor and wisdom, he
reigned twelve years: a son of his did succeed him in the kingdom, called
Futey, and he reigned seven years. After the death of this king, who died very
young: his wife did reign and govern, and was of his own lineage: she did
maruelously govern that kingdom for the space of 18* years, and for that
she had no issue natural of her body, a son of her husbands yt he had by
an other wife did succeed in the kingdom, and reigned three and twenty
years: a son of his did succeed him, called Cuntey, and reigned 16. years
and eight months: a son of his called Guntey, did reign 54. years: a son
of his did succeed him called Guntey, and reigned thirteen years: his son
called Ochantey, did succeed him and reigned 25. years and three months: his
son called Coantey succeeded him and reigned 13. years and two months. After
him reigned his son Tzentzey, 26. years and 4. months: then succeeded his
son called Anthey, and reigned no more but 6. years, his son Pintatey, did
inherit and reigned 5. years: this Pintatey when he died was not married, and
therefore a brother of his did succeed him called Tzintzumy, and reigned but
3. years and 7. months: after him succeeded a younger brother called Huy
hannon, and reigned six years: his son called Cubum did succeed him and
reigned 32. years: his son Bemthey, did inherit and reigned 18. years: after
him his son Vnthey, and reigned 13. years: O they succeed him and reigned 17.
years, his son called Yanthey reigned but 8. months, and left a son
called Antey, who reigned 19. years, whose eldest son called Tantey, died
incontinent after his father, and reigned only 3. months, and his brother
called Chytey reigned one year, his son called Linthey reigned 22. years, his
son called Yanthey did succeed him, and reigned 31. years. This Yanthey
(the history says) was a man of small wisdom which was the occasion that
he was abhorred and hated of those of his kingdom. A Nephew of his called
Laupy did rebel against him, he had two sociates for to help him, gentlemen
of the court, they were two brethren and very valiant, the one was called
Quathy, the other Tzunthey, these two did procure to make Laupy king. His uncle
the king understood thereof, and was of so little valor and discretion, that he
could not, neither durst he put remedy in the same: which caused commotions
and common rumors amongst the people. But in especial there was four tyrants
joined in one, and all at one time, they were called, Cincoan, Sosoc, Guansian
and Guanser. Against these Laupy did make war under color to help his
uncle, but after a while, that the war endured, he concluded and made peace
with Cincoan, and he married* with one of his daughters, who straight ways
made war against the other three tyrants with the help of his father in
law. At this time this mighty kingdom was divided in three parts and
began the tyranny as you shall understand: the one and principal part fell
unto Laupy by the death of his uncle, the other to Sosoc, and the other unto
Cincoan his father in law. In this sort remained the kingdom in division a
while, til such time as Cuythey son unto Laupy did reign in his fathers
steed. Then did there a tyrant rise up against him called Chimbutey and slew
him: he by his great valor did bring the kingdom all in one as before, after
that it had bin in division 41. years, and reigned after that alone 25.
years: his son named Fontey, did succeed him and reigned 17. years. And to
make short of this lineage, there was 15. kings, and reigned 176. years,
against the last of them who was called Quioutey* there did arise against him
tyrannously Tzobu. Of this lineage* there was eight kings, who reigned 62.
years: against the last of them called Sutey, there arose one called Cotey, of
whose lynage there was five kings, and reigned twenty four years, the last of
them called Otey, was slain by Dian* There was of this lynage four kings that
reigned 56. years: against the last of them rose up Tym, and there was of his
race, five kings: and reigned one and 30. years: against the last of this
house rose up Tzuyn. And there was of this lineage three kings, and reigned
seven and thirty years, against the last of these rose up Touco. This and all
the rest of his lynage did govern marvelous well: which was the occasion that
they endured the longer time. There was of them one and twenty kings, and
reigned 294. years: the last of them called Troncon, did marry with one that
had been his fathers wife, called Bausa* a very fair woman: he took her
out of a monastery where she was a Nun, only to marry with her: she used
such policy that he was slain, and did govern the kingdom after alone one
and forty years. The history says that she was dishonest, and that with
extremity, and used the company of the best and principallest of the realm,
and not content with that, she married with one of base lynage, one fit for her
purpose, because she was so vicious. They say that before she did marry, she
caused to be slain the sons she had by her first husband, for that she had
a desire that a nephew of hers should succeed her in the kingdom. Then those
of the kingdom perceiving her intent, and weary of her, by reason of her ill
living, sent out to seek a bastard son of her husbands, who was fled
away, and with a common consent, they raised him for king. He was called
Tautzon, he caused cruel and rigorous Justice to be done upon his stepmother,
as was reason for her euilles, and an example to all those of the kingdom, who
by a president of her ill living began to straggle: there was of his lynage
seven kings, that reigned 130. years: against the last called Concham arose
Dian, of this lineage there were but two kings and reigned eighteen years.
Against the second and last arose Outon, and was of his lineage three kings and
reigned but fifteen years: against the last there arose Outzim of this there
was but two kings and reigned nine years and three months, there arose
against the last Tozo: he and his son reigned four years: with the son of
this one Auchin did fight and slew him in the combat, and succeeded him in the
kingdom: he with other two of his lynage reigned ten years, against the
last of these arose up one of the lynage of Vitey the first king, and slew
him, he was called Zaytzon, there was of this lynage seventeen kings and
reigned with all peace and quietness, three hundred and twenty years: the
last of this lynage was called Tepyna, with whom did fight the gran Tartaro
called Vzon, who entered into China with a mighty army, and got all the
kingdom, and it was possessed with nine Tartare kings, the which reigned 93.
years, and entreated the inhabitants with great tyranny and servitude: the
last of these was called Tzintzoum, this was more cruel unto the Chinos then
any of the rest, which was the occasion that all the kingdom did join
together in one, and did elect a king, called Gombu, a man of great valor, and
of the lynage of ancient kings past, who by his great worthiness, and
joining much people together, did so much that he did drive all the Tartaros
out of the kingdom, with the death of many thousands of them, who obstinately
and without Justice, did with all tyranny keep that kingdom in possession:
there was of this lynage twelve kings with this that now reigns: the eleven
kings past reigned two hundredth years: he that now possesses the kingdom is
called Boneg, who by the death of his elder brother that died by a fall he had
from his horse, did inherit the kingdom: he is of 23. years of age (as they
say) and has his mother alive, of whom as yet there is nothing written: so
that I can write nothing in particular, but that they say, he is a gallant
gentleman, and well-beloved of his subjects, and a great friend unto Justice. He
is married with a cosen of his, and has one son.

Those of his lineage has got of the Tartares many countries since they were
driven out of China, the which are on the other side of the mighty wall. God
for his mercies sake bring them to the knowledge of his holy law, and
accomplish a prophecy that they have amongst them, by the which they are given
to understand that they shall be ruled and brought in subjection by men with
great eyes and long beards, a nation that shall come from countries far off,
by whom they shall be commanded, which signifies to be Christians. The king of
this country is had in so great reputation amongst his subjects, that in all
the provinces where he is not resident, in the chief cities whereas are the
vizroyes or governors, they have a table of gold in the which is portred the
king that now reigns, and covered with a curtin of cloth of gold very
rich, and thither goes every day the Loytias, which are the gentlemen, men
of law, and ministers of Justice, and do by duty reverence unto it, as
though* the king were personally present. This table and picture is discovered
the first day of their feasts which they do celebrate, and is at the new
moon of every month, on the which day all people do repair and do reverence
unto the picture, with the same respect as they would do if he were present:
they do call the king, Lord of the world, and son of heaven.

CHAP. II. Of the court and palace of the king, and of the city where as he
is resident: and how that in all the kingdom there is not one that is Lord
over subjects by property.
THe habitation of this king, and almost of al his predecessors has bin and is
commonly in the city of Taybin or Suntien: the occasion is (as they say) for
that it is nearest unto the Trtarians, with whom continually they have had
wars, that they might the better put remedy in any necessity that should
happen, or paraduenture for that the temperature or clime of that place is more
healthful then the other provinces, or the dwelling to be of more pleasure, as
it is given to understand by that word Suntien, which in their language is as
much to say the celestial city. it is of such bigness, A city of a days
journey long.
that for to cross it over from gate to gate, a man must traueile one whole
day and have a good horse, and put good diligence, or else he shall come short:
this is besides the subburbes, which is as much more ground. Amongst the Chinos
is found no variety in the declaration of this mig^tie city, and of the great
riches that is in it, which is a sign to be of a truth, for that they agree
all in one. There is so much people in it, what of citizens and courtiers, that
it is affirmed yt upon any urgent occasion, there may be joined together two
hundredth thousand men, and the half of them to be horsemen. At the entering
into this city, toward the orient, is situated the mighty and sumptuous
palace of the king, where he remains ordinarily, although he has other
two: the one in the midst of the city, and the other at the end toward the
West. This first palace they do testify is of such huge bigness and so much
curiosity, that it is requisite to have four days at the least to view and
see it all. First it is compassed about with seven walls very huge: and the
space that is betwixt one wall and another, does contain ten thousand
soldiers which do watch and guard the kings house daily: there is within this
palace three score and nineteen halles of a marvelous rich and and curious
making, wherein there are many women that do serve the king in the place of
pages and squires: but the principallest to be seen in this palace is four
halles very rich, whereas the king gives audience unto such ambassadors as
come unto him from other kingdoms, or provinces, or unto his own people, when
they call any court of parliament (which is very seldom) for that he is not
seen by his commons out of his own house but by great chance, and yet when
they do see him, for the most part it is by a glass window. Four curious
halles.
The first of these hals is made al of metal very curiously wrought with
many figures: and the second haththe seeling and the floor wrought in the
order of masons work, all of silver of great valor: the third is of fine
gold wrought and inamiled very curiously. The fourth is of so great riches,
that it much exceeds all the other three: for that in it is represented the
power and riches of that mighty kingdom: and therefore in their language they
do call it the hall of the kings treasure, and they do affirm that it deserves
to have that name: for that there is in it the greatest treasure that any king
has in all the world, besides many jewels of an inestimable price, and a
chair (wherein he does sit) of great majesty, made of Iuory, set full of
precious stones, and carbuncles of a great price, that in the darkest time of
the night, the hall is of so great clearenesse, as though there were in it
many torches or lights: the walls are set full of stones of diverse sorts very
rich and of great virtue wrought very curiously: and to declare it in few
words, it is the richest and principalst thing to be seen in all the kingdom,
for therein is the principallest thereof. In these four halles are heard such
ambassadors as are sent from other countries, according unto the estate and
quality of the king, and provinces from whence they come: so that according as
they are esteemed, so are they entertained into one of these four hals. If
that from whence they come is from a king of small power, he has audience in
the first hall: if he be of a reasonable power, in the second hal, and in this
order in the rest. Within this mighty palace, the king has all that any
humane understanding can desire or ask (touching this life) in pleasures for
to recreate his person, and for their queen: for that never (or by great
chance) they go forth of the same: and it has been a customable use amongst
the kings of that country: that it is as a thing inherited by succession never
to go forth. They say, their reason why they do keep themselves so close and
not to go abroad, is to conserve the mighty estate of their estade, and also
to avoid for being slain by treason (as many times it falls so out) for
which occasion you have had kings, that in all the time of their reign have
not gone out of their palace, but only the day of their oath and crownation:
and besides this their close keeping, yet have they ten thousand men
continually (as aforesaid) in guard of the palace both day and night, besides
others that are in the courts, stairs and halles, and other places. Within
the gates and walls of this mighty palace they have gardines, orchards, woods
and groves, whereas is all manner of hunt, and foul and great pondes full of
fish. And to conclude, they have all manner of pleasures and delites, that may
be invented or had in any banketting house in the field. In all this kingdom,
there is not one that is lord over any subject or vassales (as they of Turkey)
neither have they any jurisdiction proper: but that which is his patrimony and
moueables, or that which the king does give them in recompense of good service
or government, or for any other particular respect: all the which does end
with the person, and is returned again unto the king, except he will give it
into the son of him that is dead, in courtesy more then by obligation or
duty: giving to understand that it is to avoid inconveniences, and occasions
of treasons, which might grow if that there were any lords that were rich, or
of power, and not for covetousness or any other intent. Those whom he does put
in authority, whether they are vizroyes, governors, or captain generals, or
whatsoever they be, he gives unto them large wages, sufficient to sustain
them in their office, in so ample sort, that it is rather overplus unto them
then lack, for that he will not that their necessity compel them to take
presents or bribes, which thing does blind them, that they cannot do justice
uprightly: Punished for taking bribes
and unto him that does receive or take any such (although it be but of small
prise) he is cruelly punished.

CHAP. III. The number of such subjects as do pay unto the king tribute in all
these fifteen provinces.
Understanding the greatness of this kingdom of China, and the infinite
number of people that is therein, it is an easy thing to be believed: the
number that every province has of such as do pay tribute, as is taken out of
the book that the officers have, whereby they do recover that tribute: and it
is affirmed, that there are as many more, such as are free and and do pay no
tribute. The Loytians and ministers of justice, all sorts of soldiers both by
sea and land (which is an infinite number) are free and do pay nothing, the
number as follows.

The province of Paguia has two millions seven hundred and four thousand that
does pay tribute to the king.

The province of Santon 3. millions and 700. thousand tributers.

The province of Foquien, two millions four hundred and seven thousand
tributers.

The province of Olam, two millions two hundred and four thousand tributers.

The province of Sinsay, three millions three hundred and four score thousand.

The province of Susuan, two millions and fifty thousand.

The province of Tolanchia, there where as the king is resident, and is the
biggest of them al: six millions fourscore and ten thousand.

The province of Causay, two millions three hundred and five thousand.

The province of Oquiam, three millions and eight hundred thousand.

The province of Aucheo, two millions eight hundred and four thousand.

The province of Gonan, one million and two hundred thousand.

The province of Xanton, one million nine hundred forty and four thousand.

The province of Quicheu, two millions thirty and four thousand.

The province of Chequeam, two millions two hundred and fortiefoure thousand.

The province of Sancii, which is the least of all the provinces, has one
million six hundred threescore and twelve thousand tributers.

By this account it is found, that the tribute payers are very many: and it is
approved in many places of this history, whereas they do treat of the
greatness of this kingdom, that it is the mightiest and biggest that is to be
read of in all the world. God for his mercies sake, bring them to the knowledge
of his law, and take them out from the tyranny of the devil, wherein they
are wrapped.

CHAP. IIII. The tribute that the king has in these fifteen provinces,
according unto the truest relation.
ALthough this kingdom is great and very rich, yet there is none that does pay
so little tribute ordinarily unto their king as they do: neither amongst
Christians, Moors nor gentiles that we know. The extraordinary and personal
service is very much, that in some respect we may say that they are more
slaves then free men, for that they do not possess one foot of land but they
pay tribute: in respect whereof, as also for the great misusing of them by
their governors, will be a great part and occasion to inuit them to receive
the law of the gospel, and that with great facility to enjoy the the
liberty of the same.

The ordinary tribute that every one does pay that does keep house, is two
Mases every year, which is as much as two spanish rials of plate. This tribute
is very little, yet the Loytians (which is a great part of the kingdom) do
pay none, neither their governors nor ministers, captains nor soldiers: the
multitude of the people is so great, and the kingdom so big, that alonely
that which they give for expenses of the king and his court is wonderful,
with customs, duties, portages and other rents: not accounting that which is
paid unto garrisons and soldiers of that kingdom, neither in that which is
spent in repairing of walls of particular cities, and in men of war at sea,
and camps by land: to governors and justices, which does not enter into this
account.

The rent which remains unto the king ordinarily is this that follows, The
rent of the king.
and is taken with great regard out of the book of his excheker. Yet the
Chinos do say that it is much less the^ that they do pay at this time: for
that this is of old antiquity when as the tributes were less: the tributes as
follows.

Of pure gold from seventeen to two and twenty killates they give him four
millions, Puregold.
and two hundred fiftiesixe thousand and nine hundred Taes: every one is worth
ten rials and four and twenty marauadies spanish money.

Of fine silver, Fine silver.
three millions one hundred fifty three thousand two hundred and nineteen Taes.

Pearls.
The mines of pearls, whereof you have many in this kingdom (although they are
not very round) is worth unto him commonly two millions six hundred and
thirty thousand Taes

Precious stones.
Ofprecious stones of all sorts, as they come from the mines, one million four
hundred three score and ten thousand Taes.

Musk and amber.
Of musk and amber, one million and thirty five thousand Taes.

Of earthen dishes and vessel fourscore thousand taes. Besides all this the
king does put forth very much ground to his subjects, and they do pay him with
part of the croppe that they gather, or with the cattle that they bring up on
ye same ground. The quantity that they pay him is as follows.

Rice.
Of clean rice (which is a common victual throughout all the kingdom, and of
the countries adjoining to them) they pay him threescore millions, one hundred
three score and eleven thousand eight hundred thirty and two hanegges.

Barley.
Of barley twenty nine millions, three hundred four score and eleven thousand
nine hundred fourscore and two hanegges.

Wheat.
Of wheat like unto that in Spain, thirty three millions one hundred twenty
thousand and two hundred hanegges.

Salt.
Of salt twenty five millions three hundred and forty thousand four hundred
hanegges, which is made in his own salt pits, and is of a great rent.

Mayz.
Of wheat called Mayz, twenty millions two hundred and fifty thousand hanegs.

Millo.
Of Millio twenty four millions of hanegges.

Panizo.
Of Panizo, fourteen millions and two hundred thousand hanegges.

Other grain
Of other different grain and seeds, forty millions and two thousand hanegges.

Pieces of silk.
They do pay him in pieces of silk of fourteen vares long, the piece, two
hundred five thousand and five hundred ninety pieces.

Raw silk. Cotton wool.
Of raw silk in bundles, five hundred and forty thousand pounds. Of cotton
wool, three hundred thousand pounds.

Mantels.
Of mantles wrought of all colors, eight hundred thousand and four hundred
mantles of Chimantas. Made of raw silk that waieth twelve pound a piece,
three hundred thousand six hundred and eighty of them. Ofmantles made of
cotton, of forty vares, six hundred seventy eight thousand, eight hundred and
seventy. Of Chimantas of cotton three hundred and four thousand six hundred
forty and eight. All this aforesaid is for expenses of the court, which is
great. The Chinos yt come unto the Philippinas do affirm the same, and do not
differ in the report, which is a sign to be true: likewise they do receive of
it in his tresurie, whereas is many millions, and cannot be otherwise,
considering his great rents.

CHAP. V. Of the men of war that are in the fifteen provinces, as well footmen
as horsemen, and of the great care they have in the guard of the kingdom.
Look what care and diligence this mighty king has, that justice should be
ministered with right and equity: so likewise (yea and much more) he has
touching matters that may prevent wars, which be offered, by princes adjacent
unto him, or any other whatsoever. But in especial with the Tartarians with
whom they have had continual wars many year. (Although at this day) that the
Tartarians do fear him very much: in such sort as he thinks it best to
keep him for his friend, and does acknowledge unto him a certain manner of
vassalage. And although at this present, and long time since he has bin and is
without any occasion of wars, that should come upon a sudden: yet has he the
selfsame care and diligence of prevention, as though he had many and grievous
enemies to defend himself from, or to offend them: as you shall perceive in
this that follows. For besides that he has in every province his president
and counsel of war, captain general, and others ordinary to take up people,
and ordain their camps and squadrons as well by sea as by land, to serve at
all assaies when that occasion shall serve. So likewise he has in every city
captains and soldiers for their particular guard and defense, Great care for
to defend their country.
and do range and watch to set their guard in order both day and night, as
though their enemies were at the gates. This military order they do use and
maintain, in such sort that no nation known may be compared unto them.
Although speaking generally, (according unto the relation of certain spanish
soldiers that were there, and did many times see them) there be other nations
that do exceed them both in valiantness, courage, and worthiness of mind.

They have at the gates of all their cities, their squadrons, who let the
entry and going out of any whatsoever, except he have license of the justice
of that city or town, brought them in writing: the which gates they do shut
and open by order and license of their captains, which is sent unto them every
day, written in whited tables, and their fine unto it. These gates are the
force of all the city, and thereon is planted all the artilerie they have:
nigh unto the which gate, is ordinarily the house whereas they are sounded or
made. At night when they do shut their gates, they do glue papers upon the
ioinings of them: then they do seal the papers, with the seal that the
governor or judge of that city does wear on his finger, the which is done
by himself, or by some other in whom he has great confidence and trust: and
they cannot open them again in the morning until such time as it be seen
and acknowledged, that it has not been touched since the night that it was
put on. So that if any have any journey to ride very early in the morning, he
must go forth of the city over night, before the gates be shut, and remain in
the suburbs: for out of the city it is not possible to go until the gates
be open, which is not till the sun be up ordinarily.

They do not use any castles nor forts, but great bulwarks and gun banks,
whereas they have continual watch, and do change by quarters according as we
do use: and the officers with a great number of soldiers do range throughout
the city, and bulworkes: and commonly the captains be natural of those
provinces, whereas they have their charge given them: in consideration that the
love they have to their country, do bind them to fight to the death for the
defense thereof. And for that there should be more quietness and rest in the
cities, it is not permitted that any do wear weapons, defensiues, nor
offensiues, but only such soldiers as have the kings pay: neither do they
consent they should have them in their houses, neither use any in travail by
sea nor land. Besides all this, the king has in the city of Taybin and
Suntiem, (whereas he is resident) and in such cities lying there about, a
great number both of horsemen and footmen, always in a readiness for to go
with him into any place, for the safegarde of his person in time of necessity.

The soldiers of this kingdom are in two sorts and manners: the one sort are
such as be and are naturals of the city whereas they have their charge, and
these be called in their language Cum: in this place the son does succeed the
father, and for lack of an heir, the king does provide one in the dead man's
place. Every one of them has his name written upon the post of his door, and
the place appointed whither he shall go when occasion shall serve, (enemies
being against that city or town.) The other sort of soldiers are strangers,
and are consorted for years or months to serve. These be they that
ordinarily make their watches, musters, and join companies for the receipt of
the captains: these be called in their language Pon. These go from one place
unto another, whereas they are commanded to go. One captain and ancient has
charge of a thousand, and a meaner captain with his ancient a hundredth, that
do depend upon the other. So that for to know the number of people that is in
a great camp, it is done with great ease, in accounting the ensigns of a
thousand men, which are easily known. Every chief or petie captain of these,
has his house upon the city wall, and his name put on it, and there he
dwells so long as the wars indureth. These captains every month do
exercise their soldiers in marching and putting them in order: sometime with
quick speed, and other times more slower, and to give assalt and retire as they
are taught by the sound of the drum: this they do use continually in the time
of peace, as well as in the time of war: Also how to use their weapons, which
are ordinary, hargabuses, pikes, targets, faunchers, brushebilles, holbards,
dagars and armor. The horsemen do use in the wars to carry four swords
hanging at their saddell bows, and do fight with two at once, with great
dexterity and gallant to behold. These do accustom to go into the wars
accompanied with many servants, and familiar friends on foot, all well armed
after the gallantest manner that possible they may, These footmen be
marvelous full of policy and ingenious in warlike or martial affairs: and
although they have some valor for to assalt and abide the enemy, yet do they
profit themselves of policies, devises and instruments of fire, and of fire
works. Thus do they use as well by land in their wars, as by sea many homes of
fire, full of old iron, and arrows made with powder and fire work, with the
which they do much harm and destroy their enemies. The horsemen do fight with
bows and arrows, and lances, and with two swords (as I have said before)
and some with hargabuses. They cannot govern their horses very well, for that
they have but one piece of iron that is cross in their mouths that serves
for a bridle: and for to make them stay, they pull but one rain, and with
clapping their hands together and making of a noise before them. Uerie ill
horsemen.
They have very ill saddels, so that they be al very ill horsemen. The like
provision has the king for the sea: he has great fleetes of ships, furnished
with captains and men, that do scour and defend the costs of the country
with great diligence and watchings. The soldiers as well by land as by sea are
paid with great liberality, and those that do advantage themselves in valor,
are very much esteemed, and have great preferment and rewards. When these
Chinos do take any prisoner in the wars, they do not kill him, nor give him
more punishment, but to serve as a soldier in that country in the farthest
parts from their natural: the king paying him his wages as other soldiers are
paid. These for that they may be known do wear read bonnets, but in their
other apparel they do differ nothing from the Chinos. Likewise such as be
condemned by justice for criminal offenses, to serve in any frontier (as is
used much amongst them) they also wear read caps or bonnets: and so it is
declared in their sentence, that they do condemn them to the red bonnet.

CHAP. VI. More of the men of war which are in all these fifteen provinces, and
how many there be in every one of them as well horsemen as footmen.
IN the chapter past you do understand what care these Chinos have in the time
of peace as well as in war, for to defend their cities: and what
preparations they have generally throughout all the country. Now lacks to let
you know particularly the number that every province has in it self, the
better to understand the mightiness thereof. They have in every province in
their chief or metropolitan city, a counsel of war, with a president and
four counsailers: all the which are such as have bin brought up from their
youth in the wars, with experience of the use of armor and weapon: so that
unto them is given the charge for the defense of their province.

These counselors do ordain captains, and provide other officers and all
necessaries for the wars, and send them unto such cities and towns, whereas
they see it is needful. And for that in the accomplishing thereof there shall be
no lack, the treasurer is commanded to deliver unto them, whatsoever they do
ask, without any delay.

The number of the soldiers that every province had in the year 1577. The
number of soldiers in all China.
at such time as friar Martin de Herrada and his company entered into China
(having no wars but great peace and quietness) is as follows.

The province of Paguia, whereas ordinarily the king is resident, has two
millions and one hundred and fifty thousand footmen, and four hundred
thousand horsemen.

The province of Santon has one hundred and twenty thousand footmen, and
forty thousand horsemen.

The province of Foquieu has eight and fifty thousand and nine hundred
footmen, and twenty two thousand four hundred horsemen.

The province of Olam has three score and sixteen thousand footmen, and
twenty five thousand five hundred horsemen.

The province of Cinsay has eighty thousand three hundred footmen, but of
horsemen very few or none, for that this province and the other that follow,
are all mountains, and full of rocks and stones.

The province of Oquiam has twenty thousand and six hundred footmen, and
no horsemen, for the reason aforesaid.

The province of Susuan four score and six thousand footmen, and four and
thirty thousand and five hundred horsemen.

The province of Tolanchia, which is that which does border upon the
Tartarians, with whom the kings of China have had wars (as aforesaid) has two
millions and eight hundred thousand footmen, and two hundred and ninty thousand
horsemen, and are the most famous and best in all the whole kingdom: for that
they are brought up in the use of armor from their youth: and many times
exercised the same in times past, when they had their ordinary war with their
borderers the Tartarians.

The province of Causay has fifty thousand footmen, and twenty thousand two
hundred and fifty horsemen.

The province of Aucheo, (there whereas the friars were) has four score and
six thousand footmen, and forty eight thousand horsemen.

The province of Gonan forty four thousand footmen, and fourteen thousand
five hundred horsemen.

The province of Xanton has fifty two thousand footmen, and eighteen
thousand nine hundred horsemen.

The province of Quincheu has forty eight thousand and seven hundred
footmen, and fifteen thousand three hundred horsemen.

The province of Chequeam thirty four thousand footmen, and thirteen thousand
horsemen.

The province of Saucii, which is least of them all has forty thousand
footmen, and six thousand horsemen. All these people aforesaid, every
province is bound (by an order set down in parliament) to have in a readiness,
the which is an easy thing to be done: The soldier is roially paid
the one is for that the king does pay them royally, the other for that they
do dwell in their own natural countries and houses, whereas they do enjoy their
patrimonies and goods: leaving it unto their sons, who do inherit the same
and his office as aforesaid. In the time of wars they are bound to assist the
place that has most necessity. By this account it plainly appears that all
these provinces (which may better be called kingdoms) considering their
greatness) have five millions and eight hundred forty six thousand and five
hundred footmen, The number of footmen and horsemen.
and nine hundred forty eight thousand three hundred and fifty horsemen. All
the which, if in valor and valiantnes might be equalled unto our nations in
Europe, they were sufficient to conquer ye whole world. And although they are
more in number and equal in policies, yet in their valiantness and courage
they are far behind. Their horse for the most part are little, but great
traueilers: Yet they say, within the country there are very great and
excellent good horse. I do not here declare the industry that might (with the
favor of God) be used to win and overcome this people, for that the place
serves not for it: and I have given large notice thereof, unto whom I am
bound. And again my profession is more to be a means unto peace, then to
procure any wars: and if that which is my desire might be done, it is, that
with the word of God which is the sword that cutteth the hearts of men,
wherewith I hope in the Lord to see it.

CHAP. VII. Of a law amongst the Chinos, that they cannot make any wars out of
their own country, neither go forth of the same, neither can any stranger
come in without license of the king.
ALthough in many things that have bin seen in this kingdom is showed and
declared the sharp and ripe wits of these men, and with what wisdom and
prudence they do govern their countries: yet wherein they do most manifest
the same (in my judgment) is in that which shall be declared in this chapter.
They without all doubt seem to exceed the Greeks Carthagenians and Romans,
of whom the old ancient histories have signified to us, and also of those later
times: who for to conquer strange countries did separate themselves so far
from their natural, that they lost their own countries at home. But these of
this kingdom being forewarned (as ye proverb says:) Felix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum, By the hurt of another etc. they have found by
experience yt to go forth of their own kingdom to conquer others, is the
spoil and loss of much people, and expenses of great treasures, besides the
travail and care which continually they have to sustain that which is got,
with fear to be lost again: so that in the mean time whilst they were
occupied in strange conquests, their enemies the Tartarians and other kings
borderers unto them did trouble and invade them doing great damage and harm.
And more considering that they do possess one of the greatest and best
kingdoms of the world, as well for riches as for fertilty: by reason whereof,
and by the great abundance of things that the country does yield: many strange
nations do profit themselves from them, and they have need of none other
nation, for that they have sufficient of all things necessary to the
mainteining of humane life. They have no need of other nations.
In consideration whereof they called a general court of parliament, whether
came all vizroyes and governors and other principal men of all the fifteen
provinces: and there they did communicate, to put remedy in this great
inconvenience in the best manner possible. Then after they had well considered
of the same with great care and diligence, taking the judgment particular of
every one, and in general by common consent they found it requisite for their
quietness and profit, and a thing most convenient for the common wealth to
leave al yt they had got and gained out of their own kingdom: but specially
such countries as were far off. And from that day forwards not to make any
wars in any place: for that from thence did proceed a known damage and a
doubtful profit: and being altogether conformable, they did request the king
that was at that present that he would call home al such people, as he had in
other kingdoms bordering there about under his obedience, persuading him that
in so doing, he should remain a mighty prince, more richer, more in quiet and
in more security. Then the king perceiving the request and petition of his
kingdom and subjects, and being fully satisfied that this persuasion was
requisite to be put in execution: he straightwayes set it a work, and
commanded upon great penalties, that al his subjects and vassals natural that
were in any strange countries, that in a time limited, they should return home
to their own country and houses: and likewise to the governors of the same
countries, that they should in his name abandon and leave the dominion and
possession that he had of them: excepting such as would of their own good will
acknowledge vassalage, and give him tribute, and remain friends, as unto this
day the Lechios and other nations do. This law was then established and is
inuiolablie kept to this day: in the which it is first commanded that none
whatsoever upon pain of death, shall make or begin war in any part without
his license. Straight laws.
Also on the said penalty, that no subject of his shall nauigate by sea out of
the kingdom without the said license. Also that whosoever will go from one
province to another within the said kingdom, to traficke in buying and
selling, shall give suerties to return again in a certain time limited, upon
pain to be disnaturalled of the country. Likewise that no stranger whatsoever
shall come in by sea nor by land, without his express license, or of the
governors of such ports or places whereas they shall come or ariue. And this
license must be given with great consideration, aduising the king thereof. Al
which laws have been so inuiolablie kept and observed, that it has been the
occasion that this mighty kingdom has not come to notice and knowledge but
of late years. All the which that is said, seems to be true, for that it is
clearly found in their histories and books of nauigations of old antiquity:
whereas it is plainly seen that they did come with their shipping unto the
Indies, having conquered all that is from China, unto the farthest part thereof.
Of all the which they endured possessers in great quietness, till such time as
they ordained the law of abandoning, of their own good will, as aforesaid. So
that at this day there is great memory of them in the islands Philippinas, and
on the cost of Coromande, which is the cost against the kingdom of Norsinga
toward the sea of Cengala: whereas is a town called unto this day the soil
of the Chinos, for that they did reedifie and make the same. The like notice
and memory is there in the kingdom of Calicut, whereas be many trees and fruits,
that the naturals of that country do say, were brought thither by the Chinos,
when that they were lords and governors of that country. Likewise in those
days they were of Malaca, Siam and Chapaa, and other of their borderers: Also
it is to be believed of ye Islands of Iapon, for that there are many tokens of
the Chinos unto this day, and the naturals of the country are much after the
fashion of the Chinos, and many particular things that do give us to
understand: and some laws that are observed and kept in China. But now in
these days the governors of the sea ports do dispense with the law, that
forbids ye going out of the kingdom, by certain gifts which is given the^
by merchants, to give them secret license, that they may go and traficke in
Islands bordering there about, as unto the Philippinas, whither come every year
many ships lade^ with merchandise of great riches, of the which is brought many
times into Spain. Likewise they do travail unto other parts and places,
whereas they understand they may profit themselves. Yet they do not give any
such license until they have given suerties to return within one whole year.

The desire of gain has caused them to traueile to Mexico, whither came the
year past in anno 1585. three merchants of China, with very curious things,
and never stayed till they came into Spain and into other kingdoms further
off. Likewise the said judge and governors do give license unto strangers (in
the order aforesaid) for to enter into their ports to buy and sell, but first
upon examination and charge, that they should have a great care not to demand
any license but to the same intent. Then have they their license with a time
limited, and with condition that they shall not procure to go about their
cities, neither to see the secrets thereof. And this is given in writing upon a
whited table, which is set upon the fore parts of their ships, that when they
come to an anchor in any port it may be seen of the keepers and guards that
they sink them not, but let them peaceably to enter and to traficke in buying
and selling, paying their ordinary customs due unto the king.

In every port there is a scriuener or notarie, put there by the gouerners,
that does set down in memory the day and hour that any ship does enter
in, in order: that whether he be a stranger or natural to take in his lading
and dispatch, according unto the old custom of those ports, the which is
inuiolably kept: which is the occasion that they do lade and dispatch in so
short time, and with so great quietness, as though there were but one ship,
although many times you shall see in one port two thousand ships small and
great. In this sort with a bought license did the Portugals traficke from the
Indies in Canton a province of this kingdom, and in other parts of that
kingdom, as they themselves have declared, and likewise the Chinos.

CHAP. VIII. Of the kings royal counsel, and the order they have to know
every month what does pass in all the kingdom.
THe king has in the city of Taybin, whereas he is resident a royal counsel
of twelve counselors, and a president: chosen men throughout all the kingdom,
and such as have had experience in government many years.

For to be one of the counsel, it is the highest and supremest dignity that a
man can come unto: for that (as aforesaid) in all this kingdom, there is
neither Prince, Duke, Marquess, Earl nor Lord, that has any subjects but
the king only, and the prince his son. These counselors, and the governors
of these provinces by them appointed be such personages, that they are
respected and esteemed for the time of their continuance in the same
estimation, as is the other, where as they have these titles.

For to be one of this counsel, it is not sufficient that they be expert and
learned in the laws of the country, Councellers must be expert in sciences.
and in moral and natural Philosophy, and commenced in the same: but they
must be also expert in Astrology and judgments. For they say, he that must be
of this supreme counsel, by whom is governed all these fifteen provinces: it
is requisite that they know all this that is said, for to prognosticate what
shall succeed and happen, the better to provide for all necessities that shall
come. These twelve do sit in counsel ordinarily in the kings palace, for
the which there is a hall appointed marvelous richly trimmed: and in the same
thirteen chayres, six of them of gold, and six of silver: both the one and
the other of great price, wrought with great curiosity: yet the thirtenth is
more richer, for that it is of gold and set full of precious stones of great
value, and that is placed in the midst of them under a canopie or cloth of
estate, of cloth of gold: in the which is imbrodered the kings arms, and is
as it is said, certain serpents wrought with gold wire: in this chair the
president does sit when the king is not in presence: but if he be there (as
seeldome he is) then does the president sit in the first and highest of the
chaires on the right hand, which be of gold: in the which, and in the other of
silver, they be placed according unto their antiquity: in this sort, that if
the president do die, then do the most ancient proceed and inherit his
room, and in his chair does the fifth person rise on the side of the golden
chaires: and so from the fourth unto the fifth: and in this order all the rest
arise in the chaires of silver, passing into the other chaires of gold. This
may the president do, preferring every one in order (if any do die) without
the consent of the king. And if any of these chaires be void, then does the
counsel choose an other by voices: the which is done by vprightnes, and he
which has the most is preferred: but the chiefest in this preferment is merit
and sufficiency. If he that is choosen be absent in any government, then do
they send for him: but if he be present in the city, then do they carry
him before the king: giving him to understand of their election, in whose power
it is to accept, or to make it void: which never does happen. Then the king
himself on his own hands, according unto their custom, does make him swear
a solemn oath that he shall do upright justice according unto the laws of the
country: and that he shall likewise do vprighly in the choosing of viceroyes
and governors or any other Justices, and not be led with affections nor
passions, neither receive any bribes himself, nor any other for him: with many
other things in this order and effect: and above all things he shall not be
partaker, neither consent to any treason at any time against the king: but
rather if that he do understand of any such directly or indirectly: he
shall straight ways give the king to understand thereof or his counsel of
all that he does know or understand, always favoring with his industry
and force* the preservation of peace and life of the king.

This oath of homage being done, they do carry him unto the chair which is
on the left hand in the hall, and do give him the possession with great
solemnity: for the which, certain days after there is great feasts in the
city as well by them of the counsel as by the citizens and courtiers: during
the which time, the merchants do leave their contractions and trafickes, and
handicraft men their occupations.

If any occasion be requisi^e to talk with the king there is none that
speaks with him but the president, and if it so fall out that he be sick,
then the most ancient and uppermost in the golden chayres does talk with him
at all times when need requires: but when he talks with him he is on his
knees, and his eyes inclyned to the ground, and never moves although the
talk endures two hours. He is paid with the same money that all viceroyes,
governors, justices and captains of the kingdom are. when they will talk
with the president it is in the self same order.

In this royal counsel every month they do know all things that do
happen in all the kingdom worthy to be advised of, and this is without
falt: for that those which do govern the provinces have express
commandment to send notice unto the court of all things that do happen in
any of their provinces, touching wars, the estate of the country* the
kings rents, or any other thing: the which is accomplished with so great care,
that although it be a province distant five hundred leagues from the court:
yet the post does not miss his day appointed. And those which do first come,
do tarry till the last or furthest off do come, and then upon the day
appointed they do all together give their relations. Those which are far off
for to be at the court so soon and at the instant as those which are nigh at
hand do send posts daily, that the one may overtake the other. They do run
post after the use of Italy and Spain with a horn, but they were wont to have
a collar of belles, the better to be heard: so yt the postmasters when they do
hear the horn or bells, do straight ways bridle their horse to be in a
readiness. Likewise, if their journey be to pass by water (as many times it
happens) then ye boat-men do make their barks ready.

Then when the counsel has taken relation of all the posts in effect, the
president incontinent does give a straight account thereof unto the king: then
he or the counsel by his order (if any such need requires) do put remedy
for that that is needful for the time. And if it be requisite to send any
Justice about the same, he is straight ways appointed, and dispatched and sent
in all haste and with great secrecy: and this Justice does make inquiries in
such sort that it is not known, no not in the city where the fault is
committed.

And for that, touching this matter it shall be spoken of more at large in
chapters following, I will conclude with this: that this king will have such
dominion over his kingdom and subjects, that although it be great with so
many Provinces, Cities and Towns, yet not one Uiceroy, Governor nor Justice
can put any man unto death, without his sentence be first confirmed by the
king and his royal counsel, except it be in the wars actually, for that
there in the delaying thereof may grow some peril: therefore they do permit
the captain general or his lieftenant to behead or hang what so ever soldier
that shall offend or do any ill thing, this may they do without consentment
of the king or his counsel, only with the consentment of the kings
Treasorer, or of the general of the field: the which be both of them grave
personages, and they must be both conformable in their judgments or else they
cannot execute death.

CHAP. IX. Ofsuch presidents and ministers as the king does put in every
prouice, and the order that they have in their gouenment.
YOu do understand how the two provinces. Paguia and Tolanchia are governed by
the supreme counsel of the king: and such ministers as they do send to
govern. The other thirteen provinces that do remain, have either of them a
vizroy or governor, Every province has his viceroy.
whom the common people do call Insuanto: who is continually resident, and does
dwell in the metropolitan city, whereof the province does commonly bear the
name. And although all the kings officers and Justices of what sort of
administration they are, be generally called by the name of Loytia: yet every
one has a special and a particular name besides, according unto his office
that he does execute: of the which and of their proper names I will give you to
understand, for that it does differ from our purpose. The vizeroy that is in
every province principal and supreme magistrate in place of the king, they do
call him Comou. The second in dignity is the governor of all the province,
and he is called Insuanto, who has very little less majesty than the
viceroy: then the Corregidor or governor that is resident in any city: where
as is neither viceroy nor governor, is called Tutuan, all of this degree. Of
any thing that is of importance of what city so ever they be, they do give
relation thereof unto the higher governor called Insuanto, and likewise this
Insuanto unto the viceroy or Common, whose charge is to give the king to
understand thereof or his royal counsel, by the posts that we have spoken of
before. The third in dignity is called Ponchasi, this is the president or
counsel of the kings revenues, who has under him a counsel and many
ministers and officers, as sargents and others which do recover the rents in
every province. This state does give account of all his office unto the
Tutuan: after that he has paid all kind of wages and charges ordinary and
extraordinary, due to any officer of the kings in all that province.

The fourth degree or dignity is called Totoc, Captain general.
and this is captain general of all soldiers as well footmen as horsemen.
The fifth is called Auchasi, he is president and governor over Justices both
criminal and civil: and does determine with his counsel all matters in
difference, whatsoever that do appeal unto him from other meaner Justices.
The sixth is called Aytao: this is general puruier and president of the
counsel of war: whose office is to provide soldiers when that it is
requisite or necessity demands, and to provide ships, munitions and
victuals for any fleet that shall pass by sea: as that be requisite by land,
and for the suppliment of garrisons in cities and coasts. To this is given the
charge to examine such strangers that do come to any province, to know of
whence they are, and wherefore they do come, and of all other things, that
after being known, to give the viceroy to understand thereof, and of all
things needful.

These six offices or charge are of great authority and they that have the
execution thereof are had in great reverence: every one of them has in
society or counsel, ten, which are men chosen of great experience and
diligence, and they do help him in the exhibition and dispatch of matters
touching that office. When they are in place of counsel, which is in the
palace of the viceroy (whereas every office has his place appointed,
garnished in very good order) their sociates are divided in two parts, five of
them do sit on the right hand of the president, and five on the left hand:
those which do sit on the right hand are the most auncientes and have the more
pre-eminence, and do differ from the other that be on the left hand in this
thing only, for that they do wear wastes or girdels imbossed with gold, and
yealow hattes: and they on the left hand have their girdels imbossed with
silver, and wear blewe hats: the which girdels, with gold and silver, and hats
yealow and blewe, there is none that is permitted to wear but only the
counselors. Likewise these and the presidents do wear the kings arms on
their breasts and backs, imbrodered with gold without the which, they can
not go forth to any place where they must be seen: neither sit in Justice
to determine any thing whatsoever. If they do, they are not only
disobedient, but are severely punished at the time of their visitation.

If the President of any of these counsels do die, then one of the auncientest
of the counselors does succeed him in the office, observing in all things
the order, as I have said in the Chapter past of the royal counsel. A very
good property of Justices.
All these Justices generally have a marvelous moral virtue, and that is,
they be all very patient in hearing any complaynt, although it be declared with
choler, and proud speech. It is the first thing that is taught them in their
schools, they are very well nourtered, and courteous in their speeches,
although it be with them that they have condemned by law. If that upon any
necessity they must go into any part of the province to make any information
of importance, then is appointed one of the counsel, and he goes alone, but
he has with him the authority of them all.

Besides these six Counselors or Judges aforesaid, there be others of less
dignity (although greatly respected, as all ministers of Justice be in this
kingdom) and they are called as follows: Cautoc, this is the chief
auncient-bearer, Pochim, the second treasourer: Pochinsi, he that keeps the
seal royal: Autzatzi, he is as the mayor or bailife of any city or town.
There be also other three officers which are called Guytay, Tzia, Tontay, these
do keep court and have audience in their houses once a week: and when they
do open their doors, there is shot off four pieces of artilerie, to give all
men to understand that they are in place ready to hear, and to do Justice.
If they do find any that is culpable or faulty, they do straight ways send
them with a Sargent unto the ordinary Justice of the City, which is called
Zompau, with a bill or note in the which is signified the punishment that he
must have.

Every ordinary Justice has committed to his charge, a thousand soldiers.
He can not exceed his limit nor jurisdiction, neither can any other have to
do in his charge. A very good order.
Every night they do range their circuit, and do cause that every one may
be quiet in his house, and to put out their candelles and lights in time, to
avoid fires, which has happened amongst them very great, by reason that
their houses are so near one to an other, and all the upper parts of their
houses wrought with timber, according unto the use of Byskaye: and all such as
they do find with light after the hour limited, they are punished very
asperly. From these there is no appellation but unto such Justices as are sent
from the court: and besides them unto none but unto (...) that do come
ordinarily, who do undo and make satisfaction of all griefs or wrongs done
by the other, and these are called in their language Gomdim, which is as much
to say, a righter of all grief: this man is respected more than all the rest.

Besides all these there be other particular officers, which be called Tompo:
these have the charge to see the provision of victualles, and to put a price on
them, an other is called Tibuco, he that does arest and punish vagabundes and
idle persons. Quinche is the chief Sargent, Chomcan, is the keeper of the
prison: this is one that they have in great reverence, for that he has a
privilege above all the rest: that after he has done his duty upon his knees
at his first entry, he may tell his tale on foot, and so can not the rest
do, but kneeling.

When that these governors or Justices do newly come into these Provinces or
Cities, ordained and sent by the supreme counsel: they do send two or three
days before they come themselves their letters patentes and provisions: the
which being seen and obeyed, there goes forth to receive him all the Loytias
and men of war with their soldiers and ensigns military, and other officers
making great feasts and pastimes.

Likewise the citizens at this time do hang their streets with clothes of
silk and other things very richly, and trimmed with flowers, bearing him
company unto his lodging with much music and sound of instruments.

Above all these dignities and offices there is one which is called Quinchay,
which is to be understood in their language (the golden seal) this goes not
from the court, but upon weighty matters and of great importance touching the
quietness of all the kingdom. The order they have in the choice of these
Justices and officers, and of other matters touching good government, shall be
declared unto you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. X. Here is prosecuted the manner how they do choose their governors and
Justices, and how they do execute the same.
ALl such officers as I have declared unto you in the Chapter past, the king
does ordain them by consent of his counsel, who do inform themselves with
a particular diligence of the quality and behavior of the person that shall
be elected. The principal matter that they do advertise themselves, is: that
the viceroy, governor or counselor, be not a natural of that country that
he is provided for: and that for to prevent the inconvenience that might happen
in the executing of good Justice: A very good consideration
which many times chances, either for the love of his friends and
kinsfolks, or else for the hate he has to his enemies. All such as are
provided in these offices, after that they do depart from the court whereas the
charge is given them, til they come to the province, city or town, whereas
they shall remain in Justice, they do spend nothing on their own horses,
for that in all places whereas they do travail or come, the king has houses
appointed, whereas they are received and lodged, and served of all things
necessary, as well for horses for themselves, as horses for them that come
with him: likewise of barks and boats, if that his journey be by water, all
is of free cost: it is all appointed what they shall have to eat, which is
conformable unto the quality of his person, and the office he has in charge.
And when they do come unto such houses as are appointed by the king to receive
and cherish them: they of the house do ask him if he will have his pittance or
ordinary in money, or in victualles: who if he have any kinsfolks or friends
in that place that will inuit him, then does he demand it in money, and
keep it to himself. These houses are maruelously well provided of beds, and
all other things necessary: for that the Ponchas, who is president of the
kings revenues, has a particular care to see all these things well
furnished, by a commandment from the king and the supreme counsel. When they
do come unto the city or town whereas they take the charge of government,
after they have given the intertainment unto them with feasts and pastime as is
declared in the Chapter past, then do they bring him and lodge him in the kings
house, and do provide him of servants and all things necessary that belongs
unto him, and ministers needful for the execution of justice, who likewise
have their abiding in the same house, as sergeants and notaries, and other
ministers of less authority. The king does pay them all sufficient wages, for
that it is forbidden upon great penalties, to take bribes or any other thing of
any clyent. Likewise ye Judges be straightly charged and commanded, and that is
one of the chiefest articles that is given them from the counsel, not to
consent to be visited of any clyents in their houses, neither can they
pronounce any sentence but in the place of public audience, and in the
presence of all the officers, and it must be done in such sort that all men
that are in place of audience may hear it, and is done in this sort
following: The Judge does set himself in the seat of justice, then do the
porters put themselves at the entering or doors of the hall: who do name with a
loud and high voice the person that does enter in to demand justice, and the
effect of that he does (...). Then the plaintiff does kneel down somewhat a
far off from the Judge, and does with a loud voice declare his grief or
demand, or else in writing. If it be in writing, then one of the scriueners or
notaries does take the petition and does read it, the which being understood by
ye Judge, he does straightwaies provide upon the same that which is agreeable
unto justice, and does firm the petition with his own firm with red ink, and
commands what is needful to be done. These Judges are straightly charged and
commanded by the kings authority, that they must go fasting into ye hal of
audience, or judgment hall, without drinking of anywine, and they must give no
sentence with wine, and that is such a custom amongst them, that whosoever
does break it is severely punished. By way of physic they do permit before
they do go to give any sentence to comfort themselves with some conserues or
such like. But wine in no manner of wise, although they be sick of any
infirmity, and the lack thereof to be hurtful unto them, for they esteem it
a less evil to leave of the hearing of any matter, then to give any sentence
after that they have eaten or drunk. These matters being executed in public
(which is maruelously observed and kept) it is not possible yt any of the
officers should take any bribes, but it must be discovered by one of them: and
for that they are used with great rigor in their residence, every one is
afraid of his companion, and are one to an other (in this case) great enemies.
The sergeants and notaries and the other officers are marvelous precise in the
executing of their office: if that any do not his duty in his office, they
take him and put a little banner in his hand, and he remains with the same,
kneeling on his knees till the court of audience be ended. Then do the Judge
command the bedelles to give him so many whippes as he does deserve for the
neglecting of his office. This same is little esteemed amongst them, for that
it is a common thing used amongst them, when that any of these Judges will go
abroad into the City (as seeldome times they do for the reserving of their
authority) they are accompanied with the officers and ministers of justice,
and that in so good order, that the first two do carry silver mases, after
the manner as they do in Rome carry the mases before the Cardinals. They
do carry them upon long rods, which does signify that in the name of the
king they are in those offices: then after them follows other two, and they
do carry each of them in his hand a long cane and very straight, which does
signify the upright justice that ought to be done, and is done by that Judge
that there is goes: then follows them other two, and they do trayle each of
them a cane upon the ground with long red laces, and at the ends, tassels,
which does signify the instruments wherewith they do whippe the faulty or
malefactors: then follows them other two with tables, like unto white
targets, in the which is written the name of the Judge, with his title and
office. The rest, which be many in number, do accompany him to do him worship
and honor. Those two that we spoke of before, that do carry the ma^es, do cry
out and make a noise unto the people to apart themselves, and to make room
that the Judge may pass: the which is straightwayes accomplished, for that by
experience they know that he that does neglect the same, is incontinent
punished in the street without remission: and the respect they have unto him
is such, that not one of what state or degree soever he be, that dare move
himself at such time as he does pass by, neither cross the streets (except
it be some superior Judge, unto whom the inferiors does the like reverence).
If any man do offend therein, he is then straightwaies punished. In all matters
of law as civil as criminal, the Judges do nothing but by writing, and do
pronounce the sentences, and examine witnesses in public, before all the rest
of the officers, because no subtilty nor falsehood shall be used in their
demaundes, neither in their writings, to set down other then the truth. Every
witness is examined by himself, and if he do double in his declaration, then
do they join together, and make their demand from one to an other, til by
their striving they may come to a better knowledge of the truth. But when by
these means they cannot bring it to light, then do they give them torment,
for to make them confess: (believing that without it such persons as have
experience and knowledge will tell the truth.)

In matters of great importance, and such as do touch grave personages, the
Judge will not trust the scriuener or notarie to write any information: but
they with their own hands will write the declaration of any witness, and
will consider very much of that which is declared. This great diligence is the
occasion that few times there is any that does complain of any ill justice
done, the which is a great and notable virtue: and ought to be imitated of all
good Justices, for to avoid many inconveniences which do happen for the not
using the same, the which these Gentiles have great care to perform: who
beside the prosecution of right Justice, without respect or exception of any
person, do use certain preuentions worthy to be suffered.

First these Judges in all cities and towns of their jurisdiction, do number
the households, and do repart them in ten and ten households, and upon the
tenth house they do hang a table or sign whereon is written the names of those
ten householders with a commandment in the which generally they are commanded
and every one by him self particular, yt having any knowledge or notice that
any of those ten householders have committed any trespass or fault against any
of the rest, or against himself, that is hurtful unto his neighbors or to
the commonaltie, to go straight way and give the justice to understand thereof,
that the fault may be punished with a mendment unto the offender, and an
example to al other. And unto him that does know any such offense and will not
declare it, is allotted the same punishment yt the offender should have, An
occasion of amity betwixt neighbors.
which is the occasion that one neighbor has a care of an other, and lives
under fear, least they should give occasion to be complained of. And again,
that their enemies may not this way take any advantage. When that any of these
ten neighbors does remove into an other street or into any other city or
town to dwell, or will make any long journey, he is bound to ring a bell, or
play on a coper kettle amongst all the neighbors for the space of ten days
before he does remove or depart, and to advise them all of his departure, and
whether: for that if he do owe any thing, or any thing be lent, that they may
come and demand it before their departure, because that none shall loose yt
which is theirs. And if it so fall out that any shall depart without using this
diligence, the Justice does compel the rest of his neighbors yt are written
on the sign, to pay his debt, because they did not advise the Justice or his
creditors before his departure. Such as do owe money or debts and will not
pay: (proouing the debt they do execute their goods:) if they have none, they
put them in prison, and limit a time for him to pay the same. But if it pass,
and the debt not paid nor his creditor contented: For the first time they do
whippe them moderately, and do appoint him the second time limited, for to pay
ye same: if he do then miss, they do whip him more cruelly, and do appoint
him on other time, and so do prosecute the same till he die with punishments,
which is ye occasion yt every one does pay that he owes, or procure amongst
his friends to pay, or else give himself for a slave unto his creditor, to
shun the trouble of the prison, and the pain of whippings, which is a thing
not to be suffered.

These Judges do use two manner of torments, to make them to confess the truth,
when by fair means they can not, or by policy, the which first is procured
with great care and diligence: the one is on their feet, and the other on
their hands, and is so terrible that it cannot be suffered, but of force they
do confess that which the Judge does pretend to know: yet do they execute
none of them except first they have good information, or at the least,
Semiplena, or else so many indicions that it is a sufficient information for
the same. The torments on the hands is given with two sticks as big as two
fingers, and a span long, turned round, and full of hooles in all places,
wherein are put cords to pull in and out: their fingers of both their hands are
put into the cords, Cruel torments.
and little and little they do pinch them till in the end they do break them
at the iointes with an incredible pain unto them that do suffer it, and yt
causes them to give great shrikes and groans that will move any man to
compassion. And if it so come to pass that by this cruel torment they will
not confess, and that the Judge do understand by witness and by indicions
that he is faulty and culpable, then does he command to give him the
torment of the feet, which is a great deal more cruel than that of the
hands, and is in this sort: they take two pieces of wood four square of
four spannes long and one spanne broad, and are joined together with a ginne,
and hooles boored thorough, A more cruel^ torment.
and put thorough them cords, and in the midst of these bordes they do put
the whole foot, and strain the cords, and with a mallet they do stryke upon
the cords wherewith they do break all the bones, and cause them to suffer
more pain and grief than with the torment of the hands. At the executing of
these torments, the supreme Judges are always present, the which seeldome
times does happen: for that such as be culpable will sooner confess than
suffer those torments, desiring rather to die some other death that is not so
cruel, than to suffer the pains of this torment.

The prisons that they have are no less cruel and rigorous as you shall
understand in a chapter by it self hereafter.

CHAP. XI. Of the visiters that the king does send every year to visit the
in^^rior Judges of his provinces, and of the punishing of such as they do find
culpable.
IT is to be woondred at the great and vigilant care that this heathen prince
has, in that his ministers and Judges as well viceroyes, A great care to do
true Justice.
governors* presidents as any other officers should execute their offices well
and uprightly, as they ought to do: for in the end of three years that their
government does endure, they do take of the^ in residence, straight account by
the Judges thereof who be called Chaenes. Likewise they do dispatch every
year in great secrecy into every province, other Judges and visitors that be
called Leachis, the which are persons of great confidence, and proved by
experience of long time to be of good life, good customs, and have done good
service in the administering of justice uprightly. These as they travail do
inquire in every city and town that they come in, (not being known, and in
very ^^cret manner) all griefs and injustice that is done in that province:
which is the occasion that every one does live (as the proverb says) with
their face discovered. These do carry from the king so great authority in
their commissions given them, that without returning to the court, if they
find any delict culpable they may apprehend the Judges and punish them,
suspend, and repriue, and do any thing touching their commission at their own
pleasure, so that it be not to take away the life of any man. This (as it is
said) none can do without the consent of the king.

And because they should execute their office the better in this visitation,
and with Justice and equity, they do make them to swear to be loyal,
Ceremonies in performing of their oath.
true and secret. The which oath, is executed in this order: they do give him
to drink three times of a certain beuerage which they do use, and that is
the confirming of their oath. And for that their departure should be with more
secrecy, the counsel does command their secretaries to make their
provisions* leaving in blank a space for his name that shall have the provision,
and for the name of the province, whether he shall go, declaring nothing but
that which is their ordinary, that wheresoever the Loytia or Judge (being so
dispatched) shall come, that they shall obey him as the king himself. But when
soever it is in secret determined who shall go, ^hen does the president of the
counsel command the provision to be sealed, then he himself does write his
name in, and the province whether he does go. And therewithal he does
depart from the court in great secrecy, and unknown of any who it is, nor
whether he does go, nor wherefore.

Then when he does come to the province, city or town, whether he is sent, he
does with like secrecy make his inquiry how the viceroy or governor does
use himself in his government, and how all other officers do execute their
offices, without knowing from whence he came, nor whether he will, neither what
he does pretend. So after that he has passed thoroughout all the province,
and is fully certified of all his desire, then does he go unto the chief or
metropolitan city, whereas are resident all those Judges against whom he
has made his visitation, and there he does remain and abide till such time
as the Tutam or viceroy does make a general counsel, which is once a month at
the least: and at such time as they are in their counsel hall, (and
peradventure without thought of any such Judge that should come) then this
Uisitor does go unto the door, and says unto the porter, go and tell them
of the council, that here is a Ui^itor that must, and will come in, to notify
unto them a commandment from the king: then the viceroy (understanding by
these words what he might be) does command the doors to be open, and does
himself and the rest that are with him, rise up from their seats, and does
go and receive him as their superior Judge: who does enter with his provision
open in his hands (which does not cause a small fear amongst them all, but
in especial unto such as their own conscience does accuse them): he does
read his provision in the presence of them all, and at the instant of the
conclusion, the viceroy does arise from his place, and does unto him great
reverence and complementes, and so do all the rest, acknowledging their duties.

Then does this Uisitor place himself in the principallest seat of counsel,
and makes his oration as the common use is amongst them, wherein he does give
them to understand the cause of his coming, and with what care and diligence
he did use in his visitation to search out the truth of matters: after which,
with well pondred words, he does laud and praise all such as have well
executed their offices, and according thereunto he does straight ways place
them in their counsels in the higher seats, and promising them to give the
king and his counsel large account of their good service, that they might be
rewarded according as they do deserve. Likewise he does sharply reprehende all
such as have neglected their bounden duties. Then does he read there before
them all, the sentence pronounced against them, declaring in sum, all such
things wherein he has found them culpable, which has caused him to pronounce
that sentence against them, the which, although it be never so rigorous, it is
forthwith executed without any replication or appellation: for from these
visitors there is no appellation.

All such as shall be punished or reprehended, they do first take away from them
the ensigns of Justice, which be as I have told you, the girdle, bonnet, or
narrow brimd hat: with the which they can neither punish nor hurt him: and if
that any will absolutely do it, he shall for the same be deprived of his office*
and loose his head. So being clear of these things, then do they execute the
rigor of the sentence pronounced against the malefactor. But if there be any
doubt in the sentence given, then does he straight ways (upon the same doubt)
ordain nine Judges to sit upon it, admonishing them (with the present before
their eyes) to use well their offices, wherewith he does charge them in the
name of the king. Many times these visitors do carry power for to reward all
such as do well execute their offices, in giving the^ rooms and offices of
greater honor: so that the present and known reward which is done unto the
good, and the rigorous punishment for the malefactors, is the occasion that
this mighty kingdom is one of the best ruled and governed, of any that is at
this time known in all the world: waying the government of the one, (as in
many places of this history it is expressed) and join it unto the long and
great experience which we have had in the other, and then you will say as I
say. Many times these visitors do visit the colleges and schools, such as the
king has ordained of his own cost in every province, (as in the process of
this book you shall understand) and do examine the schoollers of the same,
animating them to promotion all such as do profit themselves in their
studies: and do whip and put in prison, yea and thrust them out of the schools
all such as are to the contrary. Of all the which and of their commencing and
rewards, which is given unto such as they do find sufficient, shall be at
large declared unto you in a particular chapter for the same.

CHAP. XII. Of their prisons they do use, and the order they have in the
executing of justice upon the culpable.
Even as the judges and ministers are severe and cruel in punishing, even so
they are in putting them in prisons, the which are as terrible and as cruel,
with the which they do keep in peace and justice this mighty kingdom: and
as there is much people, so have they many prisons and very great. There are
in every principal city throughout al these provinces, thirteen prisons
enclosed and compassed about with high walls, Thirteen prisons in every great
city.
and of so great largeness within, that besides the lodgings of the keeper and
his officers, and for a garrison of soldiers that are there continually: there
are fish ponds, gardeines and courts, whereas the prisoners do walk and
recreate themselves all the day, such as are in for small matters. Likewise
there are victualling houses and shops, Uictualing houses in the prisons and
shops.
whereas is sold all manner of such things as the prisoners do make for to
sustain themselves: which if they did not use, their whole substance were not
sufficient for their maintenance, the time is so long that they lie there,
although it be for a small matter: the occasion is for that the judges take
deliberation in their sentences: and again their cities are great and full of
other matters. Likewise they are slow in the execution of any sentence. So
that many times it does fall out, that men being condemned to die, do remain
so long in prison after their condemnation, that they die with pure age, or
some other sickness or infirmity, or by the cruelty of the straight and
asper prison. Of these thirteen prisons aforesaid: always four of them are
occupied with prisoners condemned unto death, and in every one of them there
is a captain over one hundred soldiers which are reparted, and does keep
watch and ward day and night: every one of these condemned prisoners has a
board tied about his neck that hangs down unto his knees, a third of a yard
broad: it is made white with a certain whiting, and written upon it the
occasion wherefore he was condemned to die. The keeper of the prison has a
book, wherein is written all the names of them that are condemned, and the
occasion whe^fore: for to be accountable of them at all times when they shall be
demanded of him by the judges or vizroies. They are shakled and manakled, and
put in wards that do answer into the court, whereas the officers of the prison
do make them to lie with their face downewarde upon a floor made of bords for
the same purpose, and do draw over them iron chains, drawn through great iron
rings that are placed betwixt prisoner and prisoner, wherewith they are so
strait crushed that they cannot move nor turn them from one side to another:
also they do lay on them a certain covering of timber, wherein remains no
more space of hollownesse, then their bodies does make: thus are they used that
are condemned to death. This prison is so painful and grievous, that many do
despair and kill themselves, because they cannot suffer it. In the day time
they do take them forth and take off their manacles, that they may work for to
sustain themselves* all such as have nothing to maintain themselves, nor any
other that will help them, them the king does give a pittance of rice to
sustain them. Likewise they do work what they may to better the same.

There is never no execution done upon such as are condemned to die, but at the
coming of the visiters or judges of residence, whom they do call Chenes and
Leuchis, the which do^ make their visitation in secret (as you do understand
in the chapter where I spoke of them) These do visit the prisoners and
demand a note of the names of all them that are condemned, and the cause
wherefore: and although that some of their sentences are confirmed by the king
and his counsel, yet they will see them again in the presence of these judges
that did condemn them, or such as did govern in their absence, for to be
informed of them the faults of every one: whereby he may see and understand
whether his sentence of condemnation be done with justice or not. This
diligence being done, they do choose out among them fifty condemned men, such
whose faults are most odious, and command the iayler to put all things in
order for to do execution on them: the which being done, they do examine them
a new, and look upon the causes and faults, to see if by any means they can
save them. And if they do find in any of them any jot of discharge, they do
apart them from the rest, and straightwayes command three pieces of ordinance
to be shot off, which is to give warning to bring forth them that shall be
executed. Then again, when they do bring them forth, they do a new enter in
counsel, to see if they can save any of them: and when not, they command other
three pieces of ordinance to be shot off, to cause them to be brought out into
the field, and yet before they do break up their counsel, they do turn and
see once again all their faults, to see if that by any means possible there
might be some remedy to save them. If they do find any, or any suspect of
indicion, they do return out of the field that person, and send him again to
the prison. Some do return with an evil will, for that they had rather die
at once, then for to suffer the straightnes and cruelty of the prison: In the
mean time while they are perusing their causes, and concluding the same, they
do cause these condemned prisoners to sit upon heaps of ashes, and do give them
to eat. So when all yt these diligences are concluded, and they can find no
remedy to save any of them according unto justice, they do command three
pieces of artilery more be shot off, then do they execute justice according
unto their sentence given them.

The deaths that they do execute is hanging, setting upon stakes, quartering
and burning: but there is none that is burned, but such as are traitors to the
king. When the last three of artilerie is shot off, then the belles do ring,
and a great rumor is in the city, for that this execution is done but
seldom. The day of execution all their shops are shut in, and there is none
that does work until sun be set, which is after that the executed men are
buried, the which is done with the company of much people. The next day after
this is done, the visitors do make the second visitation, which is of the
thieves (a thing very much abhorred amongst them: and such as they do find
culpable, he is whipped throughout the common streets with great shame, with
a board hanging about his neck (as aforesaid) whereon is written his fault:
and therewith they are carried throughout the streets three or four days.
They do beat them on the calves of their legs, with a broad and thick cane
of four fingers broad, and as thick as a man's finger, the which they do lay
in water before, the more for to torment them: they are bound with their hands
behind them, and their faces downwards to the earth: two hangmen do execute
this whipping of them, the one at one leg and the other at the other, and it
is done with so great cruelty, that after they have given six blows, they
cannot stand upon their feet: and many times it chances that with fifty
blows they die. The most part of these thieves do die in the punishments, and
many times there is whipped together of thieves two hundred. So that with these
and others that are punished in the prisons (is of a very truth) that there do
die every year in one of these principal cities of the province, more then
six thousand persons. At these punishments the judges are always in
presence, and for that they should not be moved to compassion, in the mean
time that execution is done, they do occupy themselves in banquettings or
other pastimes. Adultery is death.
Adulteries are death, and such as do consent to be coockoldes (which is never
found but amongst them of the basest sort) are punished with exemplar
punishments, ordained for the same.

CHAP. XIII. Of the characters and letters that the Chinos do use, and of the
colleges and schools that are in this kingdom, and of other curious things.
IT is not from our purpose (now after that we have told you of the government
of this mighty kingdom) to give you to understand how that there be great and
famous philosophers, as well natural^ ^s moral, and other things of great
policy and curiosity: to tell you now of their characters, and the manner they
have in writing: and then of the colleges and schools. Now unto the first:
You shall find very few in this kingdom but can both write and read, yet
have they not the Alphabet of letters as we have, but all that they do write
is by figures, and they are long in learning of it, and with great difficulty,
for that almost every word has his character. They do signify the heaven,
which they do call Guant, by one carracter alone, which is this: the king whom
they do call Bontax by this and by consequent the earth, Six thosand
characters in writing.
the sea, and the rest of the elements. They do use more then six thousand
characters different the one from the other: and they do write them very
swiftly (as it has been seen many times at the Philippinas, by many Chinos
that are there, and come thither daily) it is a kind of language that is
better understood in writing then in speaking (as the Hebrew toongue) by reason
of the certain distinction of points that is in every character differing the
one from the other which in speaking cannot be distinguished so easily. Their
order of writing is clean contrary unto ours, for that they do begin their
lines from above downwards, but in very good order: Likewise they begin their
lines at the right hand and write toward the left, contrary unto us. They
keep the very same order in their printing as you shall understand: and as
may be seen this day at Rome in the Library of the sacred Palace. And
likewise in that which king Philip has caused to be erected in the monastery
of saint Laurence the royal, and also in other places: in this order as I have
said, and of their characters to the which I refer me, it is an admirable
thing to consider how that in that kingdom they do speak many languages,
the one differing from the other: yet generally in writing they do understand
one the other, and in speaking not. The occasion is, for ye one figure or
character unto them all does signify one thing, although in the pronouncing
there is difference in the vowels. The character that does signify a city is
this and in their language some do call it Leombi, and others Fu, yet both the
one and the other do understand it to be city, the like is in all other
names. And in this order do communicate with the^ the Iapones, Lechios those
of Samatra, and those of the kingdom of Quachinchina and other borderers unto
them: whereas in their speech or language, there is no more understanding then
is betwixt Greeks and Tuskanes.

The king has in every city colleges or schools at his own cost, in the
which they do learn to write, read and count, as well as to study, natural
or moral philosophy, Astrology, laws of the country, or any other curious
science. They that do teach in these schools be such persons as excel in
every faculty, such as may be found none better, but specially in writing
and reading: for that there is none, although he be never so poor, but does
learn to write and read, because amongst them, he is accounted infamous that
cannot do both. Unto higher studies come a great number of students, and do
travail all they may possibly to profit, for that it is the best course and
surest way to obtain the name of a Loytia, or gentleman, or other dignity: as
more plainly shall be showed you in the chapter following, where the order
how they do give them the title Loytia shall be spoken off: and is amongst
us after the fashion of proceeding or commencing doctor.

Unto the Colleges, as well Majors as Minors, the king does send every year
Uis^ters, for to see and understand how the students do profit: and what
the masters be, with other matters touching their good government. In their
vsitation they do honor in words those whom they find of ability,
animating them to persevere in the same: and do put in prison and punish such
as they know to have ability, and do not profit themselves thereof: and
such as have none, nor will not learn, they put out of the Colleges that
others may occupy their places that better will employ themselves. Paper made
of the filme of canes.
They have great abundance of paper, the which is made of the filme of canes,
and with great facility: it is very good cheap: their printed books are
made thereof: the most part of it can be written but on the one side, for that
it is so thin: Pens made of canes.
they do not write with pens as we do, made of quilles, but with pens
made of canes, and at the end like a fine brush, like unto a painters pensill:
and although this be their order, yet have they amongst them excellent
Scriueners, that grow thereby to be very rich. When they write letters unto
any principal person, they gilde the margent of the paper, and limb it, and
they put the letter written into a purse made of the same paper all guilt and
painted, the which they shut and seal, so that the letter is only contained
therein.

This they do use very much, that although one go to visit another in
person, yet they do carry a letter written in their sleeves, and possible
there shall not be written in the same ten letters, and that signifies that
they do come to kiss their hands: these things are to be sold at the
bookebinders of all sorts, as well for principal persons and men of
authority, as for others of meaner estate, for to desire, reprehend, or
discommende: and to conclu^e, for all things that they will desire or have
need of: yea if it be to defy any body, so that the buyer has no more to
do, but to close it up and seal it, so send it whither his pleasure is.
These and many other curiosities they do use as you have heard and shall
hear in the discourse of this small history: or at the least somewhat
touched, for that the brevity that I do pretend and will use, will not permit
that I should enter so far for to declare at large, but to be brief in that
I shall declare.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the examination of such whom they prefer to the degree of
Loytia, which is with us the degree of a doctor: and how they do commence
them, and how they do bear him company.
THese Uisitours of whom we have spoken, the king and his counsel do send
them to vi^ite his provinces: and amongst the greatest things that are given
them in charge, is the visitation of the Colleges and schools which the king
has in all the principal cities as is said, the which visitour has a
particular authority for to commence or graduate such students as have
finished their course, and are of ability and sufficiency to perform the
same. They do make them Gentlemen, if they be capable of any charge of
justice or government. And for that the use of their ceremonies is a thing
worthy to be known, I will here declare the same order which Friar Martin
de Herrada, and his companions did see in the city of Aucheo, at the time of
their commencement.

At such time as the visitor has concluded the visitation of his province, and
has punished the malifactours, and rewarded the good: in the metropolitan
cities, he does straight ways cause proclamation to be made that all
students and scholars that do find themselves sufficient, and have a courage
to be examined to take the degree of Loytia, the which although amongst them is
understood to be made a gentleman, yet amongst us is a doctor.

The day appointed being come, they are all presented before the visitour, who
takes all their names in a scrowle, and appoints another day for their
examination. This day for honor of the feast, the visitor does inuit all the
learned Loytias that are in the city, who jointly with him do make the
examination with great rigor, always putting forwards and preferring those
that are skillful in the laws of the country, by which they do govern all
other faculties whatsoever, and that they be therewithal good, and virtuous.
And all those that they do find with these properties, they do write their
names in an other scrowle, and do appoint the day of commencement, the which
is done with great ceremonies and much people, in whose presence, the visitor
in the name of the king, does give unto them the ensigns of degree and
dignity to be a Loytia, that is a waste or girdle bossed with gold or silver,
and a hat with certain things on it, as shall be showed you in the chapter
following: which is a sign and token that does make the difference from the
vulgar people: without the which none can show himself in public.

And although al be called Loytias, I mean, those that come to it by letters
or learning, and others by the wars, and others by a gift of the king, yet
they differ the one from the other in estimation. For that those of the royal
counsel, viceroyes, governors, and visitors, are made Loytias by disputation
in learning. And the general Captains, Majors, Bailifes and Testators, are a
gift of the kings in recompense of some good service that they have done.
These have no more pre-eminence, but only that they have the benefit of their
privileges, and have the dignity of that vocation, but these are never
preferred to greater honors, as the other Loytias are, of these you have in
every city very many.

There be others likewise of great estimation, and are put in the second
degree, and are those that are made by desert in the wars, and are elect and
chosen by the generals, by authority of the king for some act or worthy deed
done in the wars by force of arms or such like, approved by witness of great
credit: unto whom besides the title and honor given unto them, they do give
them great livings, for that no valiant or worthy deed but is had in
estimation, and gratified with great liberality, Any good thing gratified.
which is the occasion that those which are mean soldiers, are animated to
imitate those that be most principal and valiant. According unto my promise I
will here with as much brevity as may be, declare unto you the order of their
commencements, and how they do accompany them after that they are made
Loytias, for that it is a thing worth the hearing.

The day appointed being come, for to commence or give degrees, all the Loytias
with the visitor, do enter into the royal hall, whereas they were examined,
al richly apparelled, The order of their commencement in schools.
and being assembled, then do enter in all those that shall receive degrees,
galantly apparelled without any upper garment, and before every one of them,
go the Padrines, and after them the Graduates with garments very finely made,
riding on Gennets very sumptuously covered with cloth of gold and silk, that
do carry the ensigns that shall be given unto him, the which he does demand
of the visitor kneeling upon his knees with great humility. Who first swear
them, that in all offices committed unto them, they shall with all care and
diligence do justice equally unto all men, and that they shall not receive
^anie bribes or presents whatsoever: that they shall be true and loyal unto
the king, and that they shall not conspire in any confederacy or treason
against him, and many other things: which ceremonies he stands long about.

This oath being taken, the visitor, who presents the kings person, does put
on them the ensigns aforesaid, with the faculty belonging thereunto, and
then he and all the Loytias embrace them presently. This done, they depart
out of the hal in very decent order, at which instant all the belles in the
city are rong, and great store of ordinance and artilerie discharged, which
continues a good space. Then they carry these new Loytias throughout the
city, accompanied with a multitude of people in manner following.

There go first before them, many soldiers, marching in good order with
drommes and trompets and other musical instruments very melodious: after them
are borne many Maces, then follow all the Loytias, some on horseback and some
are carried in litter chaires, in most gallant order, after which follow the
Padrines. Then the new commenced Loytias, with out any upper garment as before
is said, all mounted upon white horses very richly covered with cloth of
Gol^e: having every one of them a tippet of taffeta upon his shoulder, and on
his head a hat with two small tippets hanging down behind, much after the
fashion of those that hang on the bishops miter, this is permitted unto none,
but unto those of their orders abouesaide: upon their hats they have two
branches of gold or of silver and guilt, made like unto a bunch of feathers:
Before every one of them are carried six frames, covered with ^atten, and
every one is carried by four men: in these frames are written in letters of
gold, their disputation, faculty and title given them for the same, and their
arms, with many other things, which I omit for brevity sake, because this
marching and passing holds eight hours together. The Citizens there keep
this day festival, and do ordeine many dances and sportes. And the better
sort do celebrate three or four days after, banqueting the new made
Loytia, and giving him joy of his new preferment, every man seeking his good
will and favor. From this day forwards he is of ability to take upon him
any office and government whatsoever: and therefore straight ways he goes
unto the court, to procure the same, and carries with him the ensigns of his
commencement, and is apparelled so that he may be known, wherefore they do
him great honor in the way as he goes, and lodge him in such houses as the
king has appointed in every town for such as they be. When he comes to the
court, he goes and does his duty unto the president and unto the rest of
the royal counsel, who every one a part, do give him joy of his new
dignity, and with many words of great courtesy and praise, promise him, as
occasion shall serve to provide him a place, as they by their examination do
understand his ability, and again as they see his discreet dealing and care
in such matters as they do give him in charge, so will they prefer him to
better dignity and honor. So the next day following they register him in
their book of memory, which is always in the counsel chamber: and they
remain there waiting and serving them until they have provided them of some
government (which is not long after, for that the kingdom is great with many
provinces and Cities, as by this history you shall understand.

CHAP. XV. How that with them they have had the use of Artilery long time
before us in these parts of Europe.
AMongst many things worthy to be considered (which have been and shall be
declared in this history, and amongst many other which of purpose I omit,
because I would not be tedious unto the reader, no one thing did cause so much
admiracion unto the Portugals, when that they did first traficke in Canton,
neither unto our Spaniards, who long time after went unto the Philippinas: as
to find in this kingdom Artilerie. And we find by good account taken out of
their histories, that they had the use thereof long time before us in Europe.
It is said that the first beginning was in the year 1330. by the industry of
an Almane, yet how he was called there is no history that does make mention:
The first inuenting of armor.
but the Chinos say and it is evidently seen, that this Almaine does not
deserve the name of the first inuentor, but of the discouerer, for that they
were the first inuentors, and from them has the use thereof been transported
unto other kingdoms, where it is now used. The Chinos say that their first
king called Vitey, did first invent the same, and that he was taught the manner
how to make them by a spirit that came out of the earth, for to defend
himself and his kingdom from the Tartares that did much molest him with
wars: for according unto the tokens given him, (as it does appear in their
histories) and the industry for the same, it appears that it was some spirit
enemy unto mankind, only for to destroy them, as in these days the
experience thereof is apparent unto us. All the which carries a similitude of
the truth, for that this king was a great sorcerer and inchanter, as you may
well understand by the herb that he had growing in ye court of his palace,
whereof before I have told you. And if this be not credible because so many
years are past since this kings reign, yet it is of truth, Artilerie 1300.
years before us.
yt when these Chinos went to the kingdom of Pergu, and to conquest ye east
Indies more then 1500. years since, they carried with them ye like instruments
of war, which did serve them in their conquest: the which conquest being
ended, they left behind them certain pieces of artilerie, which were found
afterward by the Portugals, whereon were graven the arms of China, and in what
year they were made, agreeing just with the time, of the conquest.

Such Artilerie as the Friar Gerrada, and his companions did see at their being
there, they say it was of antiquity, and very ill wrought, and was for the
most part pieces to shoot stones, or murderers: but it was given them to
understand that in other provinces of the kingdom, there be that be very
curiously wrought and fair: which may be of such which the Captain Artieda
did see: who in a letter that he wrote unto king Phillip, giving him to
understand of the secreats of this country, amongst which he said, the
Chinos do use all armor as we do, and the artilerie which they have is
excellent good. I am of that opinion, for that I have seen vessels there of
huge greatness, and better made then ours, and more stronger.

In every City they have certain houses where they make their ordinance, and
artilerie continually: they do not plant them on Castles (for that they have
not the use of them in all the kingdom) but upon the gates of their cities,
which has mighty great and thick walls, and deep ditches, which they do
fill with water out of the next river at all times when need requires, which
they account the greatest strength in all the kingdom. At every gate of the
City there is a Captain with many soldiers, that keeps watch and ward,
night and day, to suffer no stranger to enter in without especial license of
the governor of the City or town. By this that I have alredie said, as
seems unto me, is apparantlie showed and declared the antiquity of
Artilerie in this kingdom: and how that they there were the first inuenters
thereof. Likewise it does plainly appear that there was the first invention
of printing, a thing as strange as the other, whose antiquity in that
kingdom, shall be showed in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XVI. Of the antiquity and manner of printing of books, used in this
kingdom, long before the use in our Europe.
THe admirable invention, and the subtle ingenie of printing is such, that for
lack of the use thereof, should have been forgotten the worthiness of many
excellent men, and of their deeds done in the happy days and times long
past: and many in these our days would not trouble themselves so much as
they do, in learning to get honor and promotion, or in feats of wars, if
that their fame should no longer continue in writing then their lives on the
earth. Leaving apart the wonderful effects of this subtle invention, least
speaking thereof I should be over tedious, I will here only go about to
prove that which this Chapter does propounde, with some ensamples, whereof
many are found in their histories, and likewise in ours. It does plainly
appear by the vulgar opinion, that the invention of printing did begin in
Europe in the year 1458. the which was attributed unto Toscan called John
Cutembergo: and it was said of truth, that the first mould wherewith they do
print was made in Maguncia, from whence an Almaine called Conrado did bring the
same invention into Italy: And the first book that was printed, was that
which saint Austine did write, entitled De ciuitate Dei: wherein many authors
agree. But the Chinos do affirm, that the first beginning was in their
country, and the inuentour was a man, whom they reverence for a saint:
whereby it is evident that many years after that they had the use thereof, it
was brought into Almaine by the way of Ruscia and Moscouia, from whence, as it
is certain, they may come by land, and that some merchants that came from
thence into this kingdom, by the red sea, and from Arabia Felix, might bring
some ^ooks, from whence this John Cutembergo, whom the histories does make
author) had his first foundation. The which being of a truth, as they hau^
authority for the same, it does plainly appear that this invention came
from them unto us: and for the better credit hereof, at this day there are
found amongst them many books printed 500. years before the invention began
in Almanie: of the which I have one, and I have seen others, as well in Spain
and in Italy as in the Indies. The Friar Herrada and his companions, when they
came from the China unto the Philippinas did bring with them many printed
books of diverse matters, which they did buy in the City of Aucheo, the which
were printed in diverse places of the kingdom. Yet the most part of them were
printed in the province of Ochian, whereas is the best print: and as they did
report they would have brought a great number more, if that the vizroy had not
disturbed them, for they have great libraries, and very good cheap, but he
suspected that those books might be a mean to give them to understand the
secrets of their kingdom, the which they do endeavor to keep close from
strangers. The vizroy used a policy, and sent them word, how that he was
certified, that they went about buying of books for to carry them into their
country, and how they should not spend their many on them, for he would
give them for nothing so many books as they would have, which afterward he
did not perform, possible for the reason aforesaid, or else he did forget his
promise,

At such time as this commandment came unto them, they had bought a good
number, out of the which are taken the most things that we have put in this
small history, for to give a brief notice of them, and of that kingdom till
such time as by a true certificate the experience of many shall cause more
credit thereunto: for that unto this day, by reason of the small notice we
have, we cannot with so great authority make it so credible, as we hope that
time hereafter will do. The which has moved me, yea and constrained me to
leave to entreat of many things, which in those parts are to be credited, yea
and are most true: and for the same I have been blamed and reprehended by such
as have had perfect notice thereof.

And now for that I will not go from my purpose, you shall understand in the
Chapter following* whereof these books that they brought do entreat, that the
better you may give credit unto the curiosity and policy of that kingdom,
as in many places I have declared and hereafter will declare.

CHAP. XVII. The substance and manner of those books that Friar Herrada and
his companions brought from China.
THey brought with them a great number of books as we have said, that did
entreat of diverse matters, as you shall perceive in the sequel.

Of the description of all the whole kingdom of China, and the placing of the
15. provinces, and the length and breadth of every one of them, and of other
kingdoms bordering upon them.

Of all tributes and rentes belonging unto the king, and of all the orders of
his royal palace, and of his ordinary pensions that he gives, and the
names of all officers in his house, and how far every office does extend.

How many tributaries every province has, and the number of such as are free
from tribute, and the order and time, how and when they are to be recovered.

For the making of ships of all sorts, and the order of navigations, with the
altitudes of every port, and the quantity of every one in particular.

Of the antiquity of this kingdom of China, and of the beginning of the
world, and in what time, and for whom it began.

Of the kings that have reigned in this kingdom, and the order of their
succession, and government, with their lives and customs.

Of the ceremonies they use in doing sacrifice unto their idols (which they
hold as gods) and the names of them: of their beginnings, and at what time they
should make their sacrifices.

Their opinions of the immortality of the soul, of the heaven, of hell, of
the manner of their funerals, and of their mourning apparel that every one is
bound to wear, according as he is alianced unto the dead.

Of the laws of the kingdom, and when and by whom they were made: and the
punishment executed on those which violate the same, with many other matters
touching their good government and policy.

Many Herbals or books of herbs for physicians, showing how they should be
applied to heal infirmities.

Many other books of physic and medicine, compiled by authors of that
kingdom, of antiquity and of late days, containing in them the manner how to
use the sick, and to heal them of their sickness, and to make preservatives
against all sicknesses and infirmities.

Of the properties of stones and metals, and of things natural that have
virtue of themselves, and wherefore pearls, gold, and silver, and other
metals may serve for the vtility of man, comparing with the one and the other
the utility of every thing.

Of the number, and moouings of the heavens: of the planets and stars, and of
their operations and particular influences.

Of such kingdoms and nations as they have notice off, and of particular
things that are in them.

Of the life and behavior of such men, whom they hold for saints, where they
lead their lives, and where they died and were buried.

The order how to play at the tables, and at the chests, and how to make
sports of legerdemaine and puppets.

Of music and songs, and who were the inuentors thereof.

Of the Mathematical sciences, and of Arithmeticke, and rules how to use the
same.

Of the effects that the children do make in their mothers wombs, and how
they are every month sustained, and of the good and bad times of their birth.

Of Architecture, and all manner of buildings, with the breadth and length that
every edifice ought to have for his proportion.

Of the properties of good and bad ground, and tokens how to know them, and
what seed they will bear every year.

Of Astrology natural, and Iudiciarie, and rules to learn the same, and to
cast figures to make conjectures.

Of Chiromancia and Phisiognomia, and other signs and tokens, and what every
one does signify.

The order how to write letters, and how to give every one his title,
according to the dignity of his person.

How to bring up horses and to teach them to run and travail.

How to divine upon dreams, and cast lottes when they begin any journey, or
take any thing in hand, whose end is doubtful.

Of apparel worn in all the kingdom, beginning with the King, and of the
ensigns or coats of arms, of such as do govern.

How to make armor, and instruments of war, and how to firm a squadron.

These books and many others that the Friars brought, out of the which (as
before said) have been taken all such things as have been and shall be
declared in this history, interpreted by persons naturally borne in China, and
brought up in Philippinas with the Spaniardes that dwell there, who affirm
that they have seen great libraries in Cities where they abode but especially
in Auchea and Chincheo.

CHAP. XVIII. The order that these Chinos observe in making bankets, and in
celebrating their festival days.
FOr that in some parts of this history we have touched the bankets that the
Chinos do make, it shall not be amiss to declare here the order they use
therein, for that they are curious, and differ very much from our order and
use in their banqueting, the which we have perceived as well by their feeding
as by many other things.

Amongst these Chinos, more than amongst any other people of the world, are
used bankets and feasts, for they are rich and without care, and also without
the light of heaven, albeit they do confess and believe the immortality of
the soul, and the reward or punishment in an other world, according unto
their works in this life (as we have said,) all that ever they can, they do
give themselves unto the contentment of the flesh, and unto all manner pastimes,
wherein they live most delicately, and in very good order. Their custom is,
although they have a hundred guestes, yet every one must sit and eat at a
table by himself. Their tables be very fine, gilt and painted full of birds
and beasts, and other varieties very pleasant unto the eye. They do not use
to put table clothes on them: but only a forefront of damask, or some other
silk on every one of them, which hangs down to the ground, and on the
four corners they do set many little baskettes curiously wrought with
gold and silver wire, full of flowers and knackes of sugar, made with great
curiosity, as Elefantes, grayhoundes, hares, and all other kind of beasts
and fowls, gylt and painted: in the midst of the table they do set the
victualles in marvelous good order, as ^lesh of diverse sorts, foul, and
fishes: of the which they make diverse manners of brothes passing well dressed,
and are served in fine earthen dishes of great curiosity and of silver,
(although these they use very seeldome, except for the viceroyes:) they have
no need of table clothes nor napkins, for they eat so delicately, that they
do not touch the meat with their hands, but with little forkes of gold or
silver, with the which they eat so cleanly, that although it be very small
that they eat, yet will they let nothing fall: they drink often, but a little
at a time, and therefore they use very little cups.

At these bankettes and feasts, there are present always women gesters, who
do play and sing, using many pretty gestes to cause delight, and make mirth
to the guestes: besides these they have diverse sorts of men with other
instruments, as tomblers and players, who do represent their Comedies very
perfectly and naturally: in these bankets they spend the greatest part of the
day, by reason of so many diversities of meats that they serve in. They pass
many times a hundredth sundry dishes, when that the estate of the person that
is invited, or of him that makes the banquet does require. As may show the
report of the Augustine Friars in the beginning of the second part of this
history: where one does tell of bankets that were made him by the Insuanto, a
Governor of the province of Chincheo, and the Uiceroy of Aucheo, and of the
gallant devises they had to drive away the time so long as the banquet lasted.
Unto every one of their guestes they do set a table, every table standing
one along by an other, making a difference of the number of them according unto
the quality of the persons: upon the first table (where sits he that is
invited) they set the victual^es ready dressed, sweet meats, or marchpanes,
which is the last service: and on the rest, although they be twenty, they set
great store of diverse kinds of meats, all raw, as capons, duckes, teales,
hens, pieces of salt and martlemas biefe, gammons of bacon, and many other
things. All these do remain upon the tables till the banquet be ended, and
the guestes departed: then do the servants of him that made the banquet, take
all these raw meats, and carry them before their guestes till they come unto
their houses or lodges, where they do leave it with great ceremonies. When
they do make any banquet to a viceroy or to any Ambassador, it is with so great
cost and sumptuousnes that they spend a great substance therein. These bankets
do commonly endure twenty days together, continuing until the last day as
royally and as plentifully as at the first day.

They do celebrate all their festiual days in the night* which is ordinarily
their new moons, and they do solemnise them with much music, and new
inventions. But more particularly they do celebrate the first day of the
year, which is after their account, the first day of the month of March: on
this day they apparel themselves very costlye and sumptuously, both men and
women, and do adorn themselves with all their iewelles and new toys, and
do hang their houses and doors, with carpettes and clothes of silk and cloth
of gold, and dress them up trim with Roses, and other flowers, for at
that time there is great store in that Country: likewise they do set at all
their doors great trees, on the which they do hang many lights, and all the
triumphall arckes that be in the streets (which be very many as we have
said) are decked with bows this day: wherein they put many lights, and set
full of canapies of cloth of gold, damask, and many other sundry sorts of
sil^es.

Their Priests do assist them in these ^eastes very richly apparelled, and
do offer sacrifice upon their altars unto the heaven, and unto their idolles,
and they sing many songs.

This day does all people generally sport themselves with great singing and
sounding of instruments, in the which they are very cunning. Such instruments
as the Augustine friars did see, were lutes, gytternes, vyalles, rebbukes,
wayghtes, virginalles, harpes and flutes, and other instruments which we do
use, although they do differ something in the fashion of them, but yet easy
to be known. They do tune their voices unto their instruments with great
admiration: they have all commonly very good voices. In these feasts they do
make many representations of great pastime according unto nature, with
vestimentes that they have for the purpose. All the days that these feasts do
endure, their tables be full of diverse sorts of meats, as well of fish as of
flesh, and of all sorts of fruits, and excellent good wine, the which they
make of the palm tree with certain mixtures, which makes it have an
excellent good taste. All the day they and their Priests do eat and drink so
much till they can no more. They have it for a thing most certain amongst
them, that look how they are in disposition that day, so shall they pass the
whole year, either sorrowful or merry. I omit the feasts which they make at
marriages, and at any good success, though they be in great number and very
sumptuous, because I would not be tedious: in all things they covet to avoid
melancholy.

CHAP. XIX. How they salute one an other in this country, and of some part of
their ceremonies.
THere is no nation in all the world, be it never so barbarous that has been
found out until this day, without a manner of courtesy, or some ceremony of
salutatio^ in their meetinges and visitinges, or when they do assemble in any
particular business: whereof we have large notice by ancient histories, and
sufficient experience in that we have seen and understood in these kingdoms
and provinces which in our days has been discovered: although herein (as I
am fully persuaded) those of this kingdom do exceed all nations of the world
(as is affirmed by them that have had the experience) for they have so many
ceremonies and vsages of courtesy and civility amongst them, that they have
books to teach them only how they should behave themselves in making
difference of persons. Of all the which, such as shall seem expedient to give
notice of, I will declare in this chapter, using therein the brevity that this
history requires.

They esteem it a great discourtes^e, not to salute one an other when they see
or meet one an other, although the acquaintance betwixt them be but small.

The salutation that the common people do use, is when they do meet the one
with the other, to shut the left hand, and to cover it with the right, joining
therewith their breasts together, with much bowing their heads downewardes,
signifying, that love and amity is as firm between them as their hands are
fast. And that their friendship is not alonely in the ceremony but also in
the heart: the which they give them to understand by words, at the same
time. But amongst Courtyers and Gentlemen they use an other manner of
courtesy, which seems unto them of much more curiosity, that is: at such
time as they do meet, they make a little stay, then they cast abroad their
arms, and claspe their fingers together remaining in compass, humbling
themselves many times and contending one with an other about their parting for
to prosecute his way, and the higher estate they are of, the more is their
contention. When that any mean person does meet with a principal man, who
for dignity or for any other occasion does acknowledge superiority, straight
ways he does stay with great silence, declining his head till such time as
he is past by, although the most part of them does it more for fear than for
courtesy: for that experience has taught them, that he that does it not, is
straightwayes punished and whipped cruelly.

When that any of these comes to speak with any Loytia, at the entering in at
the hall whereas he is, ^hee kneeleth down, declyning his head and looking
upon the ground: and on this sort he goes upon his knees till he come into
the midst of the hall, and there he stays and declares his petition by
word of mouth with an humble and meek voice, or else presents it by
writing: and having received answer, he does return on his knees
backwardes without turning his back to the Loytia until he be quite out of
the hall. And if they which do meet or visit one an other be equal in
dignity, they show great courtesy on both sides, contending who shall surpass
in courtesy and words: wherein they are very ceremonious. When one does go
to visit an other, he that is visited, after the visitation done, does bring
the other unto the street door. This custom is used most amongst the common
people being equal in degree, or differing little. Likewise they use one thing
very strange, and never heard of amongst other nations, that is: if that one
do come out of the country to visit an other that is in the city or town
(although he be a nigh kinsman and long time acquainted) if that knocking at
the door or in the street he do meet with him whom he does come to
visit (he being not well apparelled) although he speak unto him, A strange
kind of courtesy.
yet will he not make any answer nor any resemblance that ever he saw or
knew him before: but straightwayes returns home to his house in all ha^te
possible, and does apparel him self with the best apparel that he has, and
then he goes forth and receives his guest and friend, dissembling as though
he had not before meet nor seen him.

This Ceremony amongst them is infalliblie kept, for that it is amongst them
an ancient tradition and founded upon their religion. They give great
intertainement unto their guestes, and make them straightwayes a beuer or
collation with many sorts of conserues and fruits, and good wine, and an
other kind of drink that is generally used thorough out the whole kingdom,
and is made of diverse physical herbs good to comfort the heart, the which
they warm when they drink thereof.

These Ceremonies they use when that one neighbor does visit an other. But
when that one of the Town does meet with a stranger that he does know and
has been in the town certain days, and he not seen him: then he of the
town does ask of the other if that he has eaten any thing, if he answer
no: he does by and by without any delay, carry him to the next victualling
house, whereas he does banquet him deliciously: for in every town, there is
good opportunity for the same, by reason that in the market places and
streets, and in the suburbs there is great store of victualling houses, that
do keep tabling very orde^ly, and for little cost: for there (as we have
said) all kind of victualles are very good cheap. But if the stranger does
answer that he has eaten, then does the Citizen or townesman, carry him to
an other kind of victtualing houses, where are to be had all sorts of
conserues and iunkettes, fruits and marchpanes, and there does he make him a
banquet with great love and good will. Of the women as well strangers as
towneborne, or of what degree soever, they have great respect, but especially
of the married women: unto whom if any man give an ill or dishonest word, he
is accounted infamous: and likewise if he do not offer to them courtesy, and
give them place or way when they pass the streets, which is seeldome seen.
But when they do pass, they behave themselves so discreetly that they give no
occasion that any should misuse them: toward strangers they use very great
courtesy: but especially the principallest: as you shall perceive in the
relation of the second part of this history, where it shall be declared by
experience.

CHAP. XX. Of the great closeness that the women of this kingdom do live in,
and with what condition they permit common women.
THe principal intent that this king and his governors have, as is gathered by
their laws, is to preserve their common weal from vices: for the which he
does set down great penalties, and executes the same without any remission,
and least any should offend they use great vigilancie: and do judge that the
liberty and dishonestie of the women is most prejudicial thereunto, and is
the occasion that their common wealth falls to decay, being never so well
governed: therefore they have ordained many preservatives and remedies by their
laws and customs to prevent the same, which is the only occasion (that
although it is so long since this kingdom first began, and again being so
great as you may understand,) yet in this one point there is less
inconvenience or prejudice than in any other country of less antiquity and
fewer people. So that a dishonest woman is known by name, although it be in a
great city, the which is seldom seen, and a rare thing. And the best way
they have to prevent this, is: that all people that have daughters are
commanded by express order, that they shall bring them up (after they have
the use of reason) in their own houses very close, and not be seen, but
always to do something to avoid idleness, for that it is the mother of all
vices, whereby it may take no roo^e in them. This law does comprehend
married women, and is kept in such sort, that the wives of the viceroyes and
governors do observe it, yea they say that the Queens themselves do observe
it: and that they are always spinning gold, silk or flax, or doing some
other exercise with their hands, esteeming all idle persons worthy to be
hated and contemned: so that the children being brought up in this manner,
seeing the good example of their mothers, is the occasion that this virtuous
exercise worthy to be imitated, is converted unto a daily and perpetual
custom, in such sort, that they think it a perpetual torment to command
them to be idle. These ordinary and voluntary exercises have the women of
this kingdom in such sort, that it is news and a strange thing to meet a
woman in the streets of any city or town, neither at the windows, which is
a sign that they live honest. If it so fall out that of force they must go
abroad, as to the burial of parents and kinsfolks, or to visit any one being
sick, or upon any like occasion, then are they carried in litt^r chaires where
they are seen of none, as we told you before: but other superfluous
visitations or meetings of gossips are not there used. Albeit tendering the
conservation of this honest crewe, and to eschew greater evils in the common
wealth, they permit common women as a necessary thing: yet they do allow them
in such sort, that their evil example may not be hurtful unto the honest
state of the^ which live chaste. And therefore they do build for them houses out
of the cities and towns in the suburbs, giving them straight commandment
there to remain in the said houses, and not to s^raggle and go abroad at all.
And whilst they live there they are prohibited upon pain of death to enter
into the gates of the City or any part thereof.

Such women as do use this faculty, are nothing esteemed amongst them, for
they are for the most part of the basest sort: as strangers, slaves, or such as
have been bought of their mothers being yoonge, which is a kind of perpetual
bondage, yea a great cruelty which is used amongst them there, and yet
suffered amongst them. You shall understand that such as are poor widows,
and driven by necessity, cannot sustain themselves, they may for the
supplying of their want, sell their children and bind them to perpetual
servitude, the which is permitted in such sort, that there are amongst them
rich merchants that deal in no other thing: and all the maiden children that
they buy so* be brought up with great care, and taught to play and sing, and
other things appertaining unto pleasure. Then after, when they are of years,
they carry them unto the houses aforesaid ordained for common women. The first
day that they do dedicate her to this ill office, before she is put into this
common house, they carry her before a judge, which the king has ordained for
every house appertaining to any city or town, appointed to be their
keeper, and see that there be no evil rule kept amongst them: and this judge
does place her in the house himself, and from that day forwards her master
has no more to do with her, but to go every month unto the judge to recover
his tribute, which is a certain sum set down by the judge, by agreement
made between them both, and he appoints besides this the time when he shall
be paid for her, and for that was spent in her bringing up and teaching.

These women be very much haunted, and pass away the time marvelous
pleasantly by reason of their singing and playing, which they do with great
cunning: and according unto the report of the Chinos, they apparel themselves
with great curiosity, and paint themselves. They have amongst them many blind
women, that are free and not bond: these are trimmed, dressed and painted by
others that have their sight, and such as have spent all their youth in these
houses, can not go forth so long as they live, as is commanded by a law
public, least by their dishonest demeanure they should be an occasion of some
harm and an evil example to others. Whatsoever pro^ite does remain unto
these women when they have paid their master they give unto the Judge their
superior, who does keep it faithfully and carefully, and gives a good
account thereof every year unto the Uisitors. And afterward when these
women wax old, it is repa^ed unto them again by order of the said Judge. But
it is bestowed in such sort, that they shall not lack: neither have urgent
necessity. But if it so fall out that they should lack, they will give them a
stipend to maintain them, only for to dress and trim the blind women, or
else they will put them into the kings hospital, a place ordained for such as
can not help themselves.

The men children which they buy, and are sold to supply their necessity, in
the order aforesaid, of the women, they put to learn some occupation, and
after that they are expert therein, they do serve a master in the same trade
for a certain time: the which being expired, their masters are not only bound
to give them their liberty, but also to provide them of wives and to marry
them, providing also for them houses, and necessaries wherewith they may get
their living. Which if they do not of their own free will, they are compelled
by Justice to do, whether they will or no. And they for a token of
gratefulness must come unto their masters the first day of the year, and
other days appointed and bring him some present. The children of these be all
free, and subject to no bondage for the benefit ^oone unto their father for
their bringing up.

CHAP. XXI. The fashion of their ships, as well of those that pass the seas, as
of those that do road rivers, which are many and great: and how they do
provide themselves of fish for all the year.
THere is in this kingdom a great number of ships and barks, with the which
they sail all a long their coasts, and unto Islands near hand, and into
their rivers, the which do run clean through the most part of all their
provinces: and there dwells so much people upon these rivers in ships and
barks, that it seems to be some great City, there is so many of the^, that
they do esteem that there is almost as many people that dwell upon the water,
as upon the land.

They make them slightly and with small cost, for they have in all parts of
this country great abundance of timber, iron, and other things necessary
for this use: but in especial a kind of glue, wherewith they do ^awbe and
trim their ships, that is much more tougher and stronger then the pitch
which we use, which after it is laid on, sticks fast and makes their
shipping as hard as stones: the abundance whereof, and the great number of
shipwrightes, and again for that there is not on the land room enough for
the people to inhabit, being so many in number, causes them to build so great
a number of ships and barks. They use their ships and barks of many
fashions, every one has his proper name. Such ships as they have to sail long
voiages be called, Iuncos but for the war they make huge and mighty vessels,
with high castles, both on the prowe and stern, much after the fashion of them
that come out of the Eastern seas, and unto those with which the Portingales
sail into the east India. They have these in so great number, yt a general
may join together in 4. days an army of more than 600. Those which they do
commonly use for burden and to lade, are made much after ye same fashion and
greatness, and small difference there is between them, but that they are lower
both before and at the stern. There is an other sort of lesser vessels, and
are much like unto p^nases, and have four great ores on each side, whereat row
six men at every ore and four at the least. These are excellent good to row
in and out over their hard havens, or into any place where is little water, they
do call the^ Bancoens. There is an other sort that is more broad than these,
which they call Lanteas, and carry eight ores on a side, with six men at
every ore. Of these two last sorts of vessels pirates and rouers at the sea do
commonly use (for in those seas there be very many) for that they be very
nimble to fly and to give assalt as occasion does serve. They have an other
sort of vessels yt are long like unto a galley, but more square being very
broad and need little water: they do use the^ likewise to transport
merchandise from one place to an other: they are swift and run up the rivers
with small force of the arms. Many other sorts of barks they have, besides the
aforesaid, some with galleries and windows painted and gylt, but chiefly those
which the Uiceroyes and Governors do make for their recreation. Of those
sorts of shipping before said, which they call Iuncos, the king has in all his
provinces great armies, and in them soldiers with their Captains to defend
the coasts, that as well all ships of their own Country, as those that do
come from other places to traficke with them, may go and come in safety, and
not be spoiled and robbed of the roauers that be there abouts. In the rivers
there are pynases well equipped appointed for the same purpose. And the king
does out of his rentes pay all these ordinary soldiers, and that with great
liberality.

The pitch wherewith they do trim their ships (as we have said) is found
in that kingdom in great abundance, it is called in their language, Iapez:
and is made of lyme, oil of fish, and a paste which they call Vname: it is
very strong and suffers no worms, which is the occasion that one of their
ships does twice out last one of ours: yet does it hinder much their
sailing. The pumpes which they have in their ships are much differing from
ours, and are far better: they make them of many pieces, with a wheel to
draw water, which wheel is set along the ships sides within, wherewith they
do easily cleanse their ships, for that one man alone going in the wheel,
does in a quarter of an hour, cleanse a great ship, although she leake very
much.

Many men be borne and brought up in these ships and barks (as is
aforesaid) and never in all their lives have been on land, and do know
none other occupation wherewith to live, but that which they do inherit of
their fathers, which is to go in one of these ships or barks, carrying and
recarrying of merchandise from place to place, or to ferrie people over the
rivers. They have in them their wives and their children, and have like
neighborhood amongst the^ on the rivers, as in their cities and towns, of whom
they stand in little need for they do bring up within their ships all things
necessary for their sustenance, as hens, duckes, pigeons, and other fowls
good to be eaten: and if they do lack any thing, they have it in victualing
houses and shops which they have amongst the^ on the same rivers in great
abundance: and of other superfluous things such as may be found in a city,
they are well furnished: as of many sorts of silks, amber and musk, and other
things more curious then needful. They have also in their ships, pots with
little orange trees and other fruits, and gardins with flowers, and other
herbs for their recreation, and in the wide ships pooles of water, wherein
they have great store of fish alive, and yet do daily fish for more with
nets. This kingdom is the best provided of fish of any that is known, by
reason of the great number of these barks, as also because they have many
fisher men at Sea and in the rivers, that continually fish with nets, and
other engines for the same purpose: and do carry the same fish (in infinite
number) alive into their pooles five hundredth leagues up into the land by the
rivers, which they do with great ease in shifting the water every day, and
do feed them with things fit for the nature of the fish.

The chief and principallest time of fishing in this country, is in three
months of the year, which is, February, March, and April, at such time as
are the spring tides, which do bring the fish out of the main sea into the
rivers, and there they do spawne and leave their young: then these fisher men,
who do live by that faculty, do take them, and put them into their pondes,
and feed and nourish them in the ships till they come to bigness to be sold.

Unto these fishermen repair many barks, from diverse parts of the Country
to buy their fish, and do bring with them wicker baskets lyned with a
certain thick paper for that purpose, and anointed with oil, so that the
water can not go out: wherein they do put their fish, and do shift them
every day, and feed them as aforesaid. All people do buy of this fish,
although they be very small and lean, and do put them in their pondes which
every one has in his house (as common use in all that country is) whereas in
a small time they wax great, fit to be eaten. They do feed them with a
paste made of cowes doung, buffes doung, and pigins doong.

Likewise they do throw of these small fishes into the mo^tes of their
Cities, which is the occasion that they are so full of fish. But all that
breed in them do appertain unto the Governors or Judges of the cities, so
that none without their express commandment dare fish for them. These
Governors and Judges do use much to recreate themselves upon the rivers, and
have for the same purpose barks made close, and chambers in them very
curiously wrought, with windows and galleries likewise hanged with rich
clothes, and many other things for their contentment and pleasure.

CHAP. XXII. A curious order that these Chinos have to bring up ducks in great
abundance, and with small cost: and of a pleasant and ingenious order of
fishing which they use.
THe great number of people that is in this country, and not permitting any
idle people to live therein, is the occasion that it does stir up the wits of
poor men (being constrained thereunto by necessity, the inuenter of many
things) to seek new inventions to get their living, to relieve and supply
their necessities. So that many of this kingdom, seeing the whole country so
thoroughly inhabited and tilled, that there is not one foot without an owner,
they do take them unto the rivers, (which are very great) and there they do
make their dwellinges in ships and barks (as is aforesaid,) where they have
their whole families under board to defend them from the sun and rain, and
inclinations of the heavens. There they do use the occupation that they do
know, or that which they did inherit of their father, and many mysteries to
live by, very strange: whereof the most principal is to bring up in some of
their barks so great quantity of duckes, that they sustain a great part of
the country therewith, and the use thereof is as follows.

They have cages made of canes so big as the upper most hold of the bark,
in the which may be four thousand duckes at once. They have in certain places
of these cages made nestes where these duckes do almost every day lay eggs,
the which they take: and if it be in the summer they do put them in buffes
doong, or in the doong of those duckes, which is very warm, where they leave
them so many days, as experience has taught them, that they will come forth.
Then they do take them out of the doong, and do break them one by one and
take a little ducklin, the which they do with so great cunning* that almost
none of the^ does perish, which is yt which causes great admiration unto some
that go to see it: although they be but few, for that it is an ancient
custom used of long time in that country. And for to have the fruition of
this benefit all the year, in the winter they must use an artificial help
to give a little warmenes unto the doong for the bringing forth of their eggs,
they do use the^ an other invention as ingenious as the first, and that is
this: they take a great number of canes tied one by another, whereon they do
lay the doong, then upon that they do lay their eggs, and do cover them
very well with the same: this being done they put under the canes, straw, or
some other like thing, and set it on fire, but in such sort that it does not
burn, but keeps a natural heat, all the time till they think that they are
ready to be taken out. Then do they take and break them, as aforesaid, so
that their pultrie does increase in such number as though they were antes.
Then do they put the^ into an other cage for the same purpose, whereas be old
duckes brought up for no other purpose, but to cover the little ones under
their wings and keep them warm: and there they do feed them every day till
such time as they can feed themselves, and go abroad into the fields to
profit themselves in the company of the old duckes. Many times they have in
number above twenty thousand, yet do they maintain them with a small-cost, and
it is in this order: every morning they do give them a small quantity of
boiled rice, then do they open a door of the cage, which is toward the
river, and do put a bridge of canes that does reach unto the water: then do
they come forth with so great haste one upon an other, that it is a pastime to
see them. All the day after they do pass the time upon the water, and in the
fields of rice upon the land, whereas they do feed: the owners of the rice do
give unto the owners of the duckes somewhat to let their duckes go into their
fields, for that they do destroy all the grass and other weeds in it. And hurt
nothing of the rice.

When that the evening draws on, then they of the bark do make a sound with
a taber or such like, yt which being heard of his duckes, they throw
themselves with great speed into the water, and swim straight unto their
own bark, whereas their bridge is ready put for them, and every flock does
know his own bark by the sound without missing at any time, although there
be many flocks together. For every bark does use a different sound the one
from the other, to the which the duckes are used, and their ears full thereof,
so that they never fail their own bark.

This manner of living is greatly used in all that country and very
profitable, for that it is a victual most used amongst them, and is esteemed
as a thing of great sustentation and of small price, by reason that at al times
there is breeding of them and of small cost.

Likewise in this Country they do use a kind of fishing, that is of no less
industry, then the bringing up of these duckes, and a thing to be seen. The
king has in every City founded upon the rivers, houses, wherein every
year is brought up many Cormorantes, or sea Ravens, with whom they do fish,
in those months that the fish does spawne and that is in this manner
following. They take the Cormorantes out of their cages, and carry them unto
the river side, whereas they have many barks ordained for their fishing, and
they are half full of water. Then they take their Cormorantes, and with a
cord, they do bind their mawes, in such sort, that no fish can fall into it:
then they do cast them into the river to fish, the which they do with such good
will and covetousness, that it is a wonder to see, they throw themselves
into the water with great swiftness, and diue, whereas they do fill their
throat with fish. Then they come forth and with the like have they go unto
the barks that are half full of water, and the fish which they have taken they
put in that water which is put there for that purpose that the fish may not
die, the which being done they return again unto their fishing as they did
before.

In this order they do endure their fishing four hours together, in such
sort, that the one does not trouble the other, and when yt their boats with
water are full of fish, then do they unbind them, and turn them again into the
river for to fish for themselves, for they have need thereof, for that always
the day before that they will fish, they keep the^ from their ordinary
victualles, which is a little Millio that they may ye better do their office. So
after a while that they have filled their bellies and recreated themselves,
they take them out of the water and carry them unto the ordinary places,
whereas they art kept, and every third day during the time of this fishing,
they do take them forth for the same exercise, which for them is so great
pastime, that they would it should endure all the year.

In these three months they do take so much fish, that they do provide the
whole kingdom for all the year: as in the chapter past it has been told
you, which is the occasion that they are as well provided of fish, as of any
other thing: so that if they please, they may eat every day fresh fish,
although they are far from the sea.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the courtesy that the king of this mighty kingdom does unto
the Ambassadors that come to him from any other king, prince, or comonaltie.
WE should in the chapter following entreat of the embassage that king Philip
of Spain, with the Christian zeal that he had, to send unto the king of this
kingdom, who being moved by certain causes and reasons, did refer it till
a better occasion, and we do believe that it will be offered shortly. Therefore
now it shall not be from our purpose to declare in this chapter the honor and
courtesy that this king does unto the ambassadors of kings, princes, or any
other province that does come unto him in what sort so ever it be, and for that
it is of great curiosity, it shall be necessary to declare it with the
circumstance wherewith it is done.

All such as do enter into this kingdom, with the title of ambassador, be it
from a king, that is a friend or enemy: they are respected, entreated and made
of, with so great care and diligence, as though they came themselves in person
that do send them: Unto whom, besides the observing the law of nations which
is observed and kept among all kings in the world, in especial that their
persons shall not receive neither incur any danger, although their embassage
brings discontent, or harm unto the king, besides all the which there is
granted unto them great and particular privileges. When that he does enter
into the kingdom by any of the provinces whatsoever. The judge or governor of
the first town does in person go forth to meet and receive him, and give him
his welcome, with great complement of words and c^remonies: all the Loytias,
Captains, soldiers and the inhabitants of the town, do accompany the judge
or governor, when that they go to receive him. But at his disembarking to come
a shore they will not suffer him to set his feet upon the ground (although it
be but a little way that he should go) but has at the waters side in a
readiness eight men, with a chair made of yuorie, or of some other precious
thing, with the curteines of velu^t, damask, or cloth of gold: which for the
like opportunity, they have in every city or principal town appointed by
the king, wherein they do carry him to his lodging. Likewise they have in
every city and great town throughout all the kingdom, a principal house,
and sufficient for to lodge such like personages. It is also used to lodge such
judges as are sent by the king to execute his commandment when they pass by
any of such cities or towns. There is in every one of these houses a
Lieutenant, and he has in it marvelous and excellent household stuff, as
hangings, beds, servants, and all other necessaries, not (...) to lodge one
ambassador, but many if they should there meet, and not one to disturb an
other. So as aforesaid, they do bear him company (either on horseback, or
in a chair, which is the ordinary carriage amongst them) till he come unto
this house, whereas they do leave him with much courtesy and many ceremonies,
alonelie with them that wait upon him and serve him. And also a Captain with
a thousand or two thousand soldiers for to guard him continually, and to
bear him company till he return again out of the kingdom. Then the next
day following the judge or governor that did receive him does go and visit
him. And after that they have demanded of him such ordinary things, as is
used in such like visitations: then do they learn of his estate, and of the
prince that has sent him, and in sum, the effect of his coming and
embassage: then do they straightwayes at the hour dispatch a post unto the
governor or vizroy of the province, who is always resident in the chief or
metropolitan City thereof, and he at the same instant does dispatch another
post with that message unto the king and his roial counsel. And he does send
order unto the ambassador, either to stay, or a safe conduct for him to go unto
the place whereas he is. Likewise he sends order unto the judge, how he
shall entreat that ambassador, which is given according unto the relation sent
him, wherein he did understand the state of the king and prince that sent
him. Likewise the number of soldiers yt shall bear him company, and of all
other things needful for him in his journey: all the which is set down in
order, and in particular, as what they shall give every man to eat for him and
his servants, and in what towns, and how he shall be lodged. His safe
conduct is brought him, written upon a whited table (after the fashion as we
have told you here before in many places) and is with great l^tters, wherein
is contained from what king that ambassador is sent. This table is borne
always before him, wheresoever he does go. But that pasport, which is sent
him afterward from the royal council, with faculty, that he may go unto
the court, is after another sort: for that it is written in parchment and
gallantly lymned, and with the kings seal of Gold hanging at it, which is
never given but at such like occasion* or for some provision given to a vizroy.

Look what is spent upon this ambassador in all his journey, and upon them
that do bear him company for all necessaries, is upon the kings cost and
charges, and is paid by the kings treasurers in every place where as they
do go. Generally in all parts, they do make him great feasts and banquets
with pastimes and presents, that day that he does enter into the City of
Ta^bin, or Paquin whereas the king is.

There goes forth to meet him without the city, all the Gentlemen of the
court, with the royal council and president, who according unto the saying of
the Chinos, goes forth with little less majesty and company then the king:
who, if the ambassador be from a king that is mighty, they give him the
right hand, if not they give him the left hand: and in this sort they go either
tal^ing with himself, or by interpreters demanding of him of his health, and
of his travail in coming, and other things till he come into the court of
the palace, whereas he is lodged* and there they do leave him, with some to
bear him company, and he does return unto his house with all this company
aforesaid. But when they do depart from him they do give him power in the name
of the king, to make a certain number of Loytias, and to set at liberty a
certain number of prisoners, such as are condemned to die, and other good
deeds particular.

Those that do enter in this kingdom with the title of an ambassador, they
cannot do him any grief, for any delight or evil that he does, although they
can make good proof thereof. And for that it is of a truth: you shall
understand the proof by experience. There was sent unto this king, one
Bartholmew Perez a Portugal and his company, by order of the vizroy of the
India with an embassage from the king Don Manuel of Portugal, and they were
accused before the vizroy of the province of Canton, by the ambassadors of the
king of Malaca that were there present, who were bound unto the court to treat
of matters of their king: they did testify that the embassage that the
Portugal did bring was false, and they were spies sent from the vizroy of the
India for to view the fortresses of the city, that they might come afterward
and take it, as they had done in many places of the India: they perseuering
still in the evil and mischievous intent, did will the vizroy to apprehend
them, and to punish them as such spies did deserve, off^ing themselves to give
good information for the same.

Who after that he had well considered thereof, and consulted with the Loytias
of the city, and with his counsailors, they commanded that they should be
apprehended, and put in strait prison, whereas their declarations were taken
with great care deceit and policy: and by reason that in them they found
contrarieties: some for fear confessed much more then that which was demanded:
and other said that it was of truth, so that by their confessions according
unto the laws of the country, they were condemned to die, and sent their
judgment unto the royal council for to confirm the same, with intent and
great desire for to execute the same. The which being seen by the royal
council, and considering with what title they entered into that kingdom, did
not only make void the sentence and would not confirm the same, but did
send commandment unto the vizroy to set them at liberty, and to return
freely back again unto the India from whence they came, and that he should
furnish them with all things necessary in abundance, til they were entered
into the same, although in this time the ambassadors of the king of Malaca, who
were in the court, did still persevere in their malicious intent.

In which commandment, although it were true, all that which the foresaid
ambassadors did testify, and that they for fear of death did confess it, yet
it is sufficient that they entered into this kingdom the title of ambassador,
whereby they should receive any harm. But now let us return t^ our purpose.
So after this ambassador has refreshed himself of his iourny, and received
many banquets and orations of the Gentlemen of the court: upon a day appointed
he goes to speak with the king, accompanied with all the Gentlemen of the
court, and with the president of the council, who does give him audi^nce in
one of the three rich hals aforesaid, at all times as his business does
require. So when that all his business is dispatched, and gratified with many
gifts, he returns back again from whence he came, and look with what
courtesy they did receive him at his coming, the like they do unto him at his
return.

But if an ambassador do come from any common wealth of the said kingdom,
they do not give him the intertainement abouesaid, but clean contrary
thereunto, for that he does enter into the city, accompanied only with the
justice, whose charge it is to lodge him in such houses as the king has
ordained to the same effect: and to give him all that is necessary, taking of
him the sum and effect wherefore he does come: and he does give relation
thereof unto the president of the council, and the president does give the
king to understand thereof: then do they appoint the day of audience, with this
condition, that when he does go thither, he must go on foot, or else on
horseback without a bridle, with only a halter on his horse head, in token of
humility, and acknowledging to be a subject. The day of his audience, he
comes forth observing the order and condition aforesaid, accompanied with the
justice. And when he does come into a great place, which is right against the
palace of the king, he staieth there till an officer of the king does come
unto him (who is master of the ceremonies) and he does cause him to proceed
forwards, and does show him the place whereas he must first kneel down, with
his hands joined together in token of adoration or worship: and all the time
of this ceremony, his eyes must be fixed on that part where as they say the
king is. In this sort he goes onwards his way, making in it other five
adorations like unto the first, until such time as he do come into the first
hall of the palace which is at the stairs head, whereas the president is set
with great majesty, and does represent the kings person: who after that he
has heard the effect of his embassage, does send them away without
answering one word at that time: but after that he has given the king to
understand, he does send him answer by that justice, who has the charge
to lodge him, and to provide him of all things necessary for the time that he
is in the court.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the embassage that the king of Spain did send unto the king
of this kingdom, and the occasions that did move him thereunto, as also
wherefore it was declared.
FOr to conclude this small history, in the which I have declared in sum,
all such things as I have understood of this kingdom of China unto this, I
mean such as I might well set forth, leuing a great number more, (of the which
I have particular note: some for that they are unknown, and others for that
they will cause admyration, because they have not been seen. And according
unto the counsel of the wise, they should not be entreated of, until that
time that experience does make them more credible. And again, I do hold it
for a less evil, to be reprehended, for brevity (as some have been) then to
be prolix and tedious in the declaring, although it be hurtful unto this
work, from the which I do take away much that I might put in. Now letting
all pass, I will in this last chapter declare, of the letter present, and
embassage, wherewith the king of Spain did send me in the year of our Lord
one thousand one hundred and fourscore: for that in company of other
religious men of my order, I should pass from his mighty kingdom of Mexico
to China, and to present it unto the king of that country in his name: of all
the which I will declare that which I do understand and know, not exceeding
the limits of fidelity, by reason that the embassage was not ended, nor no
conclusion in effect of that which was pretended, but do hope in the divine
majesty, and with the care and diligence that is put therein by the king of
Spain, shortly to have a conclusion of that they desire, for the which the
letter and the rest was sent.

Being considered of by the Spaniards (such as were dwellers in the Islands
Philippinas, which by another name are called the Islands of the Ponent or West)
the things of great valor and riches, as of gold and silks and many other
things which is brought from the kingdom of China, and out of their ports,
and how those which brought it, did sell it for a small quantity in respect as
they did esteem it, and being certified by the said Chinos of many other
things which were in the firm land, whereof some of them have been made
mention in this history: being moved with the converting of these souls, and
with the profit that might come of traficke that they might have with the
Chinos: it was concluded by the governor and principals of the City of
Manila, with the judgment of the provincial of the order of saint Augustine,
and of many other religious men that were both grave and wise, such as were the
first, that in those parts did preach the Gospel, and did baptize a great
number of the dwellers therein, and did many other things, of the which I
might say much, if it were to my purpose, and that my part were not therein: so
that I say it was concluded amongst them to send unto the Catholic king grave
personages, unto whom entire credit might be given, for to give relation what
they understood of that kingdom, and also of the evident necessity (that all
those Islands that were his) had for their conservation to hold to friends the
Chinos their borderers, whereof might grow unto them great benefits and
profits: and likewise to request him (if it were his pleasure) to send an
ambassador to ye king of that kingdom the better to confirm their friendship
and to carry with him some things which be used in his country, which would
be marvelous well esteemed of the Chinos, and be a way unto the preaching of
the gospel, and be a beginning that a farther contraction may grow betwixt
the Christians and the Chinos, of the which shall follow the aforesaid profit
unto other countries, by the great quantity of things, as well of riches as of
other curiosities that shall be brought from thence. After they had well
considered with great deliberation, who should be the person that they should
send upon so long a journey, for to request his majesty of the aforesaid: in
the end they did agree upon, for to desire the provincial of the Augustine
friars, who was called Friar Dilho de Herrera, a man of great learning and of
great experience touching matters of those Islands, for that he was one of the
first discouerers of them: they requested him for the love of God, and the good
service to his majesty, and the benefit that might come thereby unto these
Islands that he would take upon him to go with this petition, for they were
fully persuaded for that he had travailed so many places of those Islands, as
also for his office and vocation, there was none that better could put in
effect their desire, and persuade with his majesty the great importance of
that embassage: and many other things necessary touching the government of
those Islands. This determination was liked well of them all, and that they had
chosen well in sending of the provincial, who incontinent departed from the
Islands in a ship that was pepared for Noua Hispania, which was in the year
of Christ 1573. At his inbarking, he was accompanied with the governor, and
all those of that city, of whom he was maruellouslie well beloved for his
holiness and good condition. Desiring him with all diligence to procure to
return, with as much breuity as was possible, unto those islands, whereas they
so much loved him, and had need of his presence.

He did promise them to make all the speed possible, and in payment of the
travel that he did take upon him, for the benifite and profit, he requested
them all that they would pray unto God to give a good voyage: they promised him
to do it, the which they did perform with particular care. Then did the
master command to weigh ankers, and to set sail, which was in the month of
November the same year: and with reasonable whether they arrived at the new
Spain, and came unto the city of Mexico, and from thence they went and
embarked themselves in the North seas, who with prosperous winds the xiii, day
of August, the year following they arrived in San. Lucar debarameda in Spain,
and carried me in his company. From thence the day following we departed from
Syuel, from whence we departed forthwith toward Madrid, whereas his majesty
was at that present, and we came thither the fifteenth day of September in anno
1574. the same week that they had news of the loss of the Goleta. We went
straightwayes to kiss the kings hands, and carried the letters which we brought
from his governor and city: by whom both we and the letters were received with
his accustomed benignity, and did hear the petition with great satisfaction,
for that the desire was holy and profitable, and told us that he would command
his counsel to understand in the same with a particular consideration, and
with so much brevity as the thing required: and gave us thanks for the great
travel and long journey, which we took upon us in his service, for to give
him notice of the discovering of this great kingdom, and of other things
touching the Islands Philippinas. He straightwayes commanded that we should be
provided for of all things necessary for our sustentation, for the time that
we should there remain: and that we should go and give account of all things,
(for the which we came thither) unto the counsel of the Indies: who was Don
Iuan de Obando, unto whom his majesty did recommend the consideration to be
done with great care, and to consult upon the same. After that they had comuned
with the royal counsel of the Indies touching that which should be requisite
and convenient: which was done as it appeared in effect, for that they gave us
faculty in a few days after, of all things that was requested from the said
Islands, except that which did touch the embassage unto the (...) of China, as a
thing of greater importance, and requested lon^^r time to consider of the same:
so that they did refer it till they ^^d a better occasion. So that with this
resolution and with forty religious men, and many commissions from his
majesty touching the good government of that new kingdom, we departed from
Syuell in the month of January, the year following in 1575. whereas I
remained by his order and for certain respects. But the aforesaid Provincial
did imbarke himself with his forty religious persons, and departed in the
month of July with a fair wind and merry passage, till they came unto new
Spain, and from thence into the South sea, until they came in sight of the
Islands: whereas the wether did alter, and they were forced by the fury thereof
to ariue at an Island inhabited with Genti^es, by whom they were all slain,
and none escaped but only an Indian natural of the Islands, which we carried
from thence in our company for Spain. He afterward came unto Manilla and
gave them to understand how they were all slain, and how the Gentiles did
tear all the papers and commissions in pieces, and of all that happened to
them.

This being known by the governor, and by the rest that dwelt in the Islands
(after that they had done the rytes, with the funeral griefs, as justice
required in such a case) they finding themselves in the same necessity, that
before they were in by reason of the loss of the aforesaid Provincial and his
companions, and also of the letters and provisions sent from his majesty: they
forthwith in the same determination, did write new letters, in requesting that
which in part the king had granted, (although they had no knowledge thereof)
they did also therein write touching the embassage that they did request for
the king of China, adding thereunto new occasions, whereby they should be moved
to do them so much favor as to send the ambassador before requested: which was
a thing of great importan^s for all those Islands. When that these letters came
in conformity with the others before sent, the king did ordain for governor
of those Islands, a Gentleman, who was called Don Gonsalo de Mercado, y
Ronquillo, a man of great valor and discretion, one that had served the king as
well in the Peru. as in Mexico, with great fidelity: who understanding the
earnest request wher^with those of the Islands did ask the embassage, and how
much it did import to have it (as a man then elected for governor of those
Islands, and a matter that touched him very much,) did put the king and his
counsel in memory of the same: and in conclusion they answered that he
should forthwith depart with the soldiers that were provided for those parts,
for that it was convenient so to be done by reason of great necessity that
they had of them in the said Islands: and as for the embassage, for that there
was no such great necessity nor haste, it should be entreated of at more
leisure, when that the counsel will advertise themselves of all that shall be
convenient touching that matter, and that they would consult and confer with
his majesty, that he may as the right owner of them, command that which should
be to the service of God and his benefit. So with this answer the said
governor departed. It happened that in the month of August, in the year
following, before that this governor was arrived at the Islands, there came new
letters from thence, of supplications, requesting with greater instance, that
which before at other times they had requested, sending with their petition the
whole relation of the entry of Friar Martin de Herrada, provincial of the
Augustine Friars and his companions, into the kingdom of China, and of such
things as they had seen and heard of (as may be seen at large in the said
declaration, which is in the second part of this book.) This being seen by
his majesty, he was resolved to send the embassage which so many times they
have requested: this chanced at that time that he began to go upon Portugal,
a time of trouble, but yet a great token that it was the will of God, in whose
hands (as the wise man says) are the hearts of kings. For the appointment of
one for to go on this embassage, the king did remit it unto his roial counsel
of the Indies, whose president was Don Antonio de Padilla y meneses, who had
communicated with me diverse times, touching matters of that kingdom and of
Mexico, whereas I was always resident ever since I was seventeen years of
age, and by reason of matters that was committed unto me, out of that country,
was the occasion that I did use to visit him the oftener: the which large
conversation and the good will that he did bear me, did persuade him that I
could put in execution the embassage of his majesty, for that his will was
that some religious person should do it: and they being fully persuaded that my
good will and desire was for the salvation of those souls, and in all respects
willing to serve his majesty: all the which with the knowledge that I had of
that large navigations, and the quality of that country and people, was a
great help to the accomplishing in effect the will of his majesty and desire
of those that dwelt in Philippina.

So after this charge being committed unto me, and his majesty read^e to
depart on his voyage for Portugal as aforesaid, he did remit my dispatch unto
the lords of the royal counsel, who were at that time, the Liceneiado gasca
de salaca^ and doctor Gomez de Santisteuan, the Licenciado Espadero. The
Licenciado don Diego de Zuniga, the doctor Vaillo, the Licenciado, Euao, the
Licenciado Gedeon de Hinonsosa. By whose commandment I depart from the court
unto Syuell, where as order was given, that all such things should be provided
that I should carry unto the king. Whereas I was, procuring the same certain
days: and for that they were many the which I should carry* it was not
possible by any means that they should be made ready against the departure of
the fleet. Then the Licenciado Gasca de Salacar aforesaid, who was at that
present resident in the co^tractation house of Syuel gave his majesty to
understand thereof, who was at Badaioz, occupied in matters touching the
kingdom of Portugal, as aforesaid, and requested him to give order what his
pleasure was to be done therein: who commanded that the fleet should depart,
and that I should stay till such time as all things were made and concluded
that I should carry with me for the king of China, as in ample manner as he
had commanded. And when that all things were in good order, that they should
cause ^ s^ippe or galeon to be made ready, wherein I should make my voyage,
^or to overtake or meet at the new Spain such ships as every year does
depart for the Islands Philippinas, which is at Christmas time, this
commandment was delayed until the beginning of Lent, as well for that the
things were many that should be made, and could not be dispatched in the
time, as also for a general sickness that was amongst them in Spain, called
the Cattarre or murre. Then after that all things were in order by the
commandment of the Licenciado Gasca, he delivered unto me the kings letter,
and all other things. The which for that they were many, and again I have
been tedious in this Chapter, I do not declare it, for that the prudent
lector, may of himself conceive, if he do weigh the magnanimity of the
Catholic king that does send them, and the mightiness and richness of him
to whom it is sent, of the which we have declared enough in this small
history, I would I could particularly declare it unto you, as also the copy
of the letter that his majesty did send unto that Heathen or Gentile king, a
thing worthy of the author: but for that it came not to effect, neither had I
any license of him that all o^elye might grant it: and again in place whereas
I could not ask it, therefore I dare not, for that I will not exceed the
limits of fidelity, which I owe unto my prince. But it is sufficient that the
letter, and the present sent by his majesty unto the king of that country,
was to no other intent, but to procure him and all his subjects to acknowledge
the true God, and to exhort them to receive our catholic faith, and to give
them to understand the error wherein they are, and how ignorant they are of the
knowledge of the true God, the creator of h^au^n and earth, and of all the
creatures of the world visible and inuis^ble, savior and redeemer of all such
as with a true knowledge do believe in him and obey his holy law, declared by
his word, and confirmed by his divine tokens, and other things in effect.

So being dispatched, I prosecuted my iourny, and order till I came unto the
kingdom of Mexico, whereas I found a certain inconvenience, touching a matter
needful in that voyage, whereof his majesty, in the commission he gave me,
willed me to be well ^duertised, and if it were needful to give him notice
thereof before I did pass any farther.

The vizroy of that kingdom, who was the Earl of Coruma, thought it good that
I should return unto Lysborne, whereas the king was at that instant, and to
give him to understand of the difficulty that was found, in a meeting that the
vizroy had caused to be made of the most grauest personages of all that
kingdom, about the prosecuting of that embassage.

With this resolution I departed from that kingdom and returned for Spain,
and left the present in Mexico in the power of the kings officers, till such
time as order was given what should be done therewith.

I found his majesty in Lisborne, whereas I did deliver him the letters that
were written touching the same matter, and did declare unto him my judgment
touching the meeting aforesaid: who incontinent did take the ^harge upon him to
seek occasion for to put in effect his most christ^an intent and z^ale, the
which I do believe he has procured, and will by all ways possible: and that
very shortly we shall see in that kingd^me planted the Catholic faith, and
their false idolatry banished. And I hope in God it will be very shortly, for
that there be within that kingdom religious men of the order of saint
Augustine, and barefoote friars of saint Francis: and of the order of Jesus or
Jesuits, who are called there the fathers of Saint Paul: of whom there is
plac^d five or six in the city of Xauquin, whereas the vizroy does dwell, and
has erected a covent in that city ever since the year 1583. with a Church,
whereas they do say mass ordinarily. And it is said of a truth that they have
got license of the said vizroy for to pass freely thorough out all the whole
kingdom of China* But if it be so, you must think that he did it after that
he had consulted with the king, and done by his authority: otherwise I am
persuaded he durst not grant any such lice^se.

At this present does there go out of Spain by the order and commandment of
his majesty, and his royal counsel of the Indies, a company of religious
men, of the order of saint Dominicke for to aid and help the rest that are
there to conclude this enterprise, from whom can proceed nothing but that which
tends to great effect: by reason of their great zeal and learning, and the
better if that they do ioy^e together in charity, as servants to one Lord and
master: and as they which are bound^ to do all one work. By which means,
with the favor and help of Almighty God, putting to their diligence and
industry they shall easily conquest their hearts and good wills, and shall
frustrate the devil, from the possession that so long time he has possessed
in that kingdom, and r^duce them to their true Lord by creation and
redemption. It will not be a small help, the many and evident tokens which
the Chinos do give of desire of their salvation. For as it is said, that they
have read in their books, that from the Occident shall come the true and
per^ite law to di^ect them to heaven, where they shall be angel^. And they seeing
that those religious people which are come into their kingdom, do come from
the Occident, they are persuaded without doubt, that the law that they do
declare unto them, is the truth: by which means shall redowne unto them great
goodness. They are greatly aff^ctioned unto the commandments of the Catholic
faith, and unto the catechism, which is translated into their language, and is
abroad in many parts of that kingdom, which is the occasion (as the fathers
of the company that are in the city Xuquien does write) that many principal
persons are converted unto the catholic faith, and others being helped by the
heavens, and encited by the ensample of them, do demand the holy baptism:
which is left undone because they will not cause any uproar in the country.
And again, when they shall better conceive thereof, they may receive it with
more firm faith.

God for his mercy cause to go forwards, and with his divine favor, this good
work, for his honor and glory, and exalting his holy faith: and that so
great and infinite a number of souls redeemed by his precious blood might be
saved, and to put in the heart of christian kings to proceed forwards in that
which he has begun: putting always in their breasts a greater augmentation to
the concluding of the same, and to put apart from him all such persuasions as
should cause him to leave it off, which the devil will procure by all the
ways and means that he may. But against God and his divine will, there is
neither power nor wisdom.

The end of the first part.
The second part of the history of the mighty kingdom of China, that is
divided into three parts. The first contains such things as the fathers,
friar Martin de Herrada provincial of the order of Saint Augustine in the
Islands Phlipinas, and his companion friar Geronimo Martin, and other soldiers
that went with them, did see and had intelligence of in that kingdom. The
second contains the miraculous voyage that was made by friar Pedro de Alfaro
of the order of S. Francis, and his companions unto the said kingdom. The
third contains a brief declaration by the said friar, and of friar Martin
Ignacio, that went out of Spain unto China, and returned into Spain again by
the Oriental India, after that he had compassed the world. Wherein is
contained many notable things that he did see and had intelligence of in the
voyage.

The Argument of the first part.
Wherein is declared the cause that moved Friar Martin de Herrada, and Friar
Geronimo Martin, and such soldiers as went in their company, for to pass
from the Islands Phillipinas, unto the kingdom of China, in the year 1577 and
of the entry they made therein, and what they did see there for the space of
four months and sixtee^e days that they remained: and of what they
understood, and of al things that happened unto them, till they returned again
unto the Islands from whence they went: all the which are notable and strange.

CHAP. I. The Spaniardes depart from Mexico unto the Islands Philippinas,
where they had intelligence of the mighty kingdom of China.
Governing in the kingdom of Mexico, don Luys de Velasco, who was viceroye, and
lieftenant in that place for the Catholic king don Phillip king of Spain, was
commanded by his majesty to prepare a great army in the south sea, and to
levy ^ouldiers necessary for the same, and to send them to discover the
Islands of the west, those which that famous captain Magallanes did give notice
of, when he did compass the world in the ship called the Victory.

The viceroy with great care and diligence did perform the kings
commandment. This fleet and army being prepared ready (which was not
without great cost) he caused them to depart out of the port at Christmas time
in the year of 1564. and sent for general of the same fleet and for governor
of that country which they should discover, the worthy Miguel Lopez de
Legaspi, who afte^warde died in the said Island with the title of Adelantado, a
year after that the fathers Friar Martin de Herrada and Friar Geronimo Marin
and their companies did enter into China.

So after that our Spaniardes had discovered the said Islands, and some of
them populared to the use of his Majesty, but in especial that of Manilla
which is five hun^red leagues in circuit: in the which is situated the city of
Luson, and is also called Manilla, and as the metropolitan of all the Island,
whereas the governors have ordained their place of abiding ever since the
first discovery. They have also founded in that city a cathedral Church, and
erected a bishopric.

And for Bishops of the same, his majesty did ordain the most reverend friar
don Domingo de Salazar of the ord^r of preachers, in whom was comprehended some
holiness, good life and learning, as was requisite and necessary for that
province: and was consecrated in Madrid the year of 1579.

At this present there be three monasteries of religious men in that Island, the
one of the order of S. Austen, and were the first that by the commandment of
his majesty did enter into this Islands, preaching the law of the gospel,
which was great profit unto those souls, yet great travail unto them, and
cost many of them their lives in doing it: the other monastery is of
barefoote Friars of the order of S. Francis, of the province of S. Joseph, who
have been great examples, with great profit unto them of those ports. The
third are of the order of S. Dominicke or preachers, who have done their duty
in all things so well as the other. These three orders were alonely in those
Islands for certain years, till now of late time have gone thither Jesuits,
which have bin a great aid and help unto their religion.

When these Spaniardes were come unto these Islands, they had straightwaies
notice of the mighty kingdom of China* as well by the relation of them of the
Islands (who told unto them the maruels thereof) as also within a few days
after, they did see and understand, by ships that came into those ports with
merchants that brought merchandise and other things of great curiosity from
that kingdom, and did particularly declare the mightiness and riches thereof:
all which have been declared unto you in the first three books of this
history. This being known unto the religious people of S. Austin, who at
that time were alone in those Islands: but in especial unto the provincial,
Friar Martin de Herrada, a man of great valor, and well learned in all
sciences: who seeing y^ great capacity or towardness which the Chinos had
more then those of the Islands in all things, but in especial in their
gallantnesse, discretion and wit: he straightwaies had a great desire to go
thither with his fellow to preach the gospel unto those people, of so good a
capacity to receive the same: who with a pretended purpose to put it in ure
and effect, he began with great care and study to learn that language, the
which he learned in few days: and did make thereof a dictionarie. The^
afterward they did give great intertainme^t and presents unto the merchants
that came from China for to procure them to carry the^ thither, and many other
things, the which did show their holie-zeale: yea they did offer themselves to
be slaves unto the merchants, thinking by y^ means to enter in to preach: but
yet none of these diligences did take effect, till such time as the divine
majesty did discover a better way, as shall be declared unto you in this chapter
following.

CHAP. II. A rouer of this kingdom of China called Limahon, does make himself
strong at the sea, and does overcome an other rouer of the same country called
Vintoquiam.
THe Spaniards did enjoy their new habitation of Manilla in great quietness,
v^ide of all care of any accide^t that might disquiet the^, or any strange
treasons of enemies for to offend them, for that those Islands were in great
quietness, and in obedience unto the Christian king Don Phillip, and in
continual traficke with the Chinos, which seemed unto them a sufficient
security, for the continuance of the qui^tnesse they lived in. And again, for
that they understood that they had a law amongst them (as has bin told you in
this history) yt it was forbidden to make any wars out of their own country.
But being in this security and quietness, unlooked for, they were beset with a
mighty and great Armada or fleet of ships, by the rouer Limahon, of whose
vocation th^re are continually on y^ coast, the one by reason that ye country
is full of people, whereas of necessity must be many idle persons: and the
other and principal occasion, by reason of the great tyranny yt the gouernor^
do* use unto the subjects. This Limahon came upon the^ with intent to do the^
harm as you shall understand. This rouer was borne in the city of Trucheo in
the province of Cuytan, Where Limahon was born^.
which the Portingals do call Catim. He was of mean parentage, and brought up in
his youth in liberty and vice, he was by nature warlike and evil inclin^d. He
would learn no o^cupation, but all given to rob in the high ways, and
became so ^xp^rt that many came unto him and followed that trade. He made
himself Captain over the^ which were more then two thousand, and were so strong
yt they were feared in all that province where as they were. This being known
unto the king and to his council, they did straight way command the viceroy of
the province where as the rouer was, that with all the haste possible he should
gather together all the garrisons of his Frontyers, to apprehende and take him,
and if it were possible to carrye him alive unto the City of Taybin, if not
his head. The Uiceroy incontinent did gather together people necessary and in
great haste to follow him.

The which being known unto Limahon the rouer, who saw, that with the people
he had, he was not able to make resistance against so great a number as they
were, and the eminent danger that was therein, he called together his
companies, and went from thence unto a port of the sea, that was a few leagues
from that place: and did it so quickly and in such secret, that before the
people that dwelt therein, could make any defense (for that they were not
accustomed to any such assaults, but lived in great quietness) they were
lords of the port and of all such ships as were there: into the which they
embarked themselves straightwaies, wayed anchor and departed to the sea, whereas
they thought to be in more security than on the land (as it was true.) Then
he seeing himself lord of all those seas, began to rob and spoil all
ships that he could take as well strangers as of the natural people: by
which means in a small time he was provided of mariners and other things
which before he lacked, requisite for that new occupation. He sacked, robbed
and spoiled all the towns that were upon the coast, and did very much harm.
So he finding himself very strong with forty ships well armed, of those he
had out of the port, and other that he had taken at the sea, with much people
such as were without shame, their hands imbrued with robberies and killing of
men, he imagined with himself to attempt greater matters, and di^ put it in
execution: he assaulted great towns, and did a thousand cruelties: in such
sort, that on all that coast whereas he was known, he was much feared, yea
and in other places farther off, his fame was so published abroad. So he
following this trade and exercise, he chanced to meet with an other roouer as
himself, called, Vintoquian, likewise naturally borne in China, who was in a
port void of any care or mistrust, whereas Limahon finding opportunity, with
greater courage did fight with the ships of the other: that although they
were threescore ships great and small, One rouer robbed an other.
and good soldiers therein, he did overcome them, and took five and fifty
of their ships, so that Vintoquian escaped with five ships. Then Limahon seeing
himself with a fleet of nintie five ships well armed and with many stout
people in them, knowing that if they were taken, they should be all executed to
death: they therefore setting all fear a part, gave themselves to attempt new
inventions of evil* not only in robbing of great Cities, but also in
destroying of them.

CHAP. III. The king of China does arm a fleet of ships against the rouer
Lymahon* who withdraws himself to Tonzuacaotican, whereas he has notice of
the Philippinas.
THe complayntes increased every day more and more unto the king and his
counsel, of the evils done unto the Chinos by this rouer Lymahon. For the
which commandment was given straightwaies unto the Uiceroy of that province
(whereas he used to execute his evil) that with great expedition he might be
taken (for to cut off this inconvenience, One hundred and thirty great ships
of war with forty thousand men.
) who in few days did set forth to sea, one hundred and thirty great ships
well appointed, with forty thousand men in them, and one made general over
them all, a gentle man called Omoncon, for to go seek and fo^lowe this Rouer
with express commandment to apprehende o^ kill him, although to the executing
of the same he put both ships and men in danger. They do more est^eme hono^
than loss of ships or men.


Of all this provision, Lymahon had advertisement by some secret friends, who
seeing that his enemies were many, and he not able to counteruaile them,
neither in ships nor men, determined not to abide the coming, but to retire
and depart from that coast: so in flying he came unto an Island in secret
called Tonznacaotican, which was forty leagues from the firm land, and is in
the right way of navigations to the Islands Philippinas.

In this Island was Lymahon retired with his army a certain time, and durst
not return to the firm land, for that he knew that the kings fleet did lie
upon the coast to defend the fame. And although he did send forth some ships
a robbing, yet did they not do any thing of importance, but rather cam^ flying
away from the mighty power of the kings. From this Island they did goefoorth
with some of their ships robbing and spoiling al such as they met with
marchandice and other things that they carried from one Island to an other, and
from the Island unto the firm, and coming from thence amongst them all they
caused to take two ships of China which came from Manilla, and were bound to
their own country. And having then in their power they searched them under
hatches, and found that they had rich things of gold, and spanish ryalles,
which they had in truck of their marchandice the which they carried to the
Islands. They informed themselves in all points of the state and fertility of
that country, but in particular of the Spaniardes, and how many there were of
the^ in the city of Manilla, who were not at that present above seventy
persons, for that the rest were separated in the discovering and populing of
other Islands newly found, and understanding that these few did live without any
suspicion of enemies and had never a fort nor bulwark, and the ordinance which
they had (although it was very good) yet was it not in order to defend
themselves nor offend their enemies, he determined to go thither with all his
fleet and people, for to destroy and kill them, and to make himself lord of
the said Island of Manilla and other adjacent there nigh the same. And there
he thought himself to be in security from the power of the king, which went
seeking of him. And so as he was determined, he put it in ure with as much
expedition as was possible.

CHAP. IIII. This rouer Limahon goes to the Islands Philippinas, and comes to
the city of Manilla.
THis Rouer Limahon determining to go and to take the Islands Philippinas, and
to make himself lord and king over them all, but first to kill the Spaniardes,
which he thought easily to be done, for that there was so few. And there he
pretended to live in security without fear that before he had of the kings
great fleet, for that it was so far distant from the firm land. So with
this determination he departed from those Islands whereas he was retired, and
went to sea, and sailing toward the Islands Philippinas they passed in sight
of the Islands of the Illocos, which had a town called Fernandina, which was
new founded by the Captain John de Salzedo, who at that instant was in the
same for lieutenant to the governor. Four leagues from the same they met with
a small galley, which the said John de Salzedo had sent for victuals. There was
in her but 25. soldiers besides ye rouers, so that with the one and the other
they were but a few in number, for that as they thought they did travail in
places of great security, and without any suspicion to m^ete enemies. So soon
as Limahon had discovered the galley, he cast about toward her, and with
great ease did take her, and did burn and kill all that was in her, and
pardoned one of them.

This being done, he did prosecute his voyage according unto his determination,
and passed alongest, but not in such secret but that he was discovered by the
dwellers of the town of Fernandina, who gave notice thereof unto the
lieutenant of the governor aforesaid, as a wonder to see so many ships
together, and a thing never seen before at those Islands. Likewise it caused
admiration unto him, and made him to think and to imagine with great care what
it might be, he saw that they did bear with the city of Manilla, and
thought with himself, that so great a fleet as that was could not go to the
place which they bare in with, for any goodness toward the dwellers therein,
who were void of all care, and a small number of people as aforesaid.
Wherewith he determined with himself with so great speed as it was possible,
to join together such Spaniards as were there, which were to ye number of
fifty four* and to depart and procure (although they did put themselves in
danger of inconvenience) to get the forehande of them, to advertise them of
Manilla, and to aid and help them to put their artilerie in order, and all
other things necessary for their defense.

This determination the Captain did put in ure very speedily, which was the
occasion that the city and all those that were in it, was not destroyed and
slain: yet they could not eschew all the harm, for that the ships that
carried them were small, and a few rouers and not very expert, for that the
suddenness of their departure would not afforde better choice, as also they
went from one place to an other procuring of victuals: all which was the
occasion that they did not come thither in such time as they desired, and as
was convenient.

This Lymahon was well provided of provision and al other things necessary,
and having the wind fair, he was always in the fore front, and came in the
sight of Manilla upon saint Andros eve, in the year 1574. whereas he came to
an anchor that night with all his whole fleet. And he seeing that the end of
his pretense consisted in expedition before that they should be seen of those
of the city, or discovered by them on the coasts. The nights at that time
being very dark, which was a great help unto them: he choose four hundred of
his best soldiers* such as he was fully persuaded of their valor and stout
courage, and put them in small vessels, and charged those that went with them
for Captains, to make such expedition that they might come unto the City
before it was day, and the first thing that they did was to set fire on the
City, and not to let escape one man living therein, promising them that at the
break of the day he would bewith them to give them aid and succor if need
did require, which they did. But for that nothing is done without the will and
permission of God, it went not with Limahon and his four hundred soldiers
according as he did make reckoning: for that all that night the wind was of
the shoore, and the more the night came on, the more the wind increased, which
was such a contradiction unto their expectation, that they could not by night
disembarke themselves, although they did procure by all means possible by
policy and force for to do it, Which of certainty and without all doubt, if
this had not b^ene (at great ease) they had brought to a conclusion their evil
pretense, with the spoil and loss of the city and all that dwelt therein:
for their pretense was for to destroy and beat it down, as it might well
appear by the commandment he gave unto his Captains.

CHAP. V. Limahon does send 400. soldiers before for to burn the city of
Manilla, and they were resisted by other men.
FOr all the contradiction of the wind this same night the four hundred
Chinos did put themselves within a league of ^he city, upon S. Andrews day at
eight of the clock in the morning, whereas they left their boats and went a
land, and in great haste began to march forwards in battle a raye divided
in two parts, with two hundred hargabuses before and immediately after them
other two hundred pickemen: and by reason that they were many and the Country
very plain, they were straightwayes discovered by some of the City, who
entered in with a great noise, crying, arm, arm, arm, the enemies come. The
which advice did little profit, for that there was none that would believe
them: but believed that it was some false larum done by the people of the
country for to mock them. But in conclusion the enemies were come unto the
house of the General of the field, who was called Martin de Goyti, which was
the first house in all the City that ways which the enemies came. And before
that the Spaniardes and soldiers that were within the Town could be fully
persuaded the rumor to be true, the enemies had set fire upon his house, and
slew him and all that were within, that none escaped but only the goodwife of
the house, whom they left naked and very sore wounded, believing that she had
been dead: but afterward she recovered and was healed of her wounds. In
the mean time that they were occupied in their first cruelty, they of the
City were fully resolved of the truth, although all of them, with this
success unlooked for, were as people amassed and from themselves: yet in the
end they sounded to armor, and did provide to save their lives. Some soldiers
went forth upon the sands, but in ill order as the time did permit, and
slew all the Chinos that they did meet, and none escaped: which was the
occasion that the rest did join themselves together, and put th^mselues in
order to make some resistance against their enemies, who with great fury
entered into the City, burning and destroying all before them, and crying
victory.

This is the proper resistance of the Spani^rdes when they do find thems^lues
in such like perilles: and this was done with such great courage, A good
praise of others.
that it was sufficient to stay the fury of those which unto that time had
the victory, and to make them to retire, although there was great difference
in number, betwixt the one and the other.

The Chinos in retyring lost some of their soldiers, but unto the Spaniardes
no great harm, and in this their defense, did notable a^tes. This being
considered of the Chinos, and that their boats were far off, for that time
would not give them place to bring them any nearer, they did resolve themselves
to leave assault in the state that it was in, and put them selves in covert,
and there to refresh themselves of the travail past, and afterward to return
with their general Captain Lymahon, to prosecute their intent, which they
thought to be comprehended with great ease. So when they came unto their
boats to avoyde any danger that might happen, they embarked themselves and
retur^ed unto their fleet whereas they left them. And not l^ng after they were
departed, they might see them row with great fury toward their ships, and
when they came unto their Captain Limahon, they did advertise him in
particular of all that had happened, and how that by reason of the contrary
wind, they could not come thither in time as he had commanded them, and
according unto their desire, which was the occasion that they could not bring
to pass their pretense, and that by reason of his absence they had referred
it, till a better occasion did serve. Their Captain did comfort them, and gave
them great thanks, for that which they had done, promising them in short time
to bring to effect their evil intent: and straight way commanded to ^eigh
anchor, and to enter into a port called Cabi^e, which is but two leagues from
the City of Manilla Thither they of the city might plainly see them to enter.

CHAP. VI. The governor of Manilla purposes himself to abide the assault of
the Chinos, to whom they gave the repulse: then Limahon returned and planted
himself upon the plain nigh the river Pagansinan.
AT this time, by the order of his Ma^^^^ie was elected for Governor of these
Islands Philippinas, Guido de Labaca^es, after the death of Miguel Lopez de
Legaspi, who understanding the great fleet and power of Lymahon the Ro^er, and
the small resistance and defense that was in the City of Manilla, with as much
speed as was possible he did call together all their Captains and dwellers
therein: and with a general consent they did determine to make some defense
for to resist them as well as they could (for the time that the enemy did
remain in the port aforesaid): for to the con^rarie the Spaniardes should
loose great credit, if that they should forsake and leave the town, so long
as their lives did endure. For in no other place in all the Islands th^re
about, they could have any security. With this determination they put this
work in execution, and spared no person of what quality and degree so ever he
was, but that his hand was to help all that was possible, the which endured
two days and two nights, for so long the Rouer kept his ships and came not
abroad: for these worthy soldiers understood, that remaining with their
lives their labor and travail would soon be eased.

In which time of their continual labor, they made a fort with pipes and
bordes filled with sand and other necessaries thereto belonging, such as the
time would permit them: they put in carriages, four excellent pieces of
artilerie that were in the city. All the which being put in order, they
gathered together all the people of the city into that little fort, which they
made by the providence of God our Lord, as you may believe, for that it was
not his pleasure that so many souls as were in those Islands baptized and
sealed with the light and knowledge of his holy faith, should return again to
be overcome with the devil: out of whose power he brought them by his
infinite goodness and mercy: neither would he that the friendship should be
lost that these Islands had with the mighty kingdom of China. By which means
we may conjecture that the divine power had ordained the remedy of salvation
for all that country. The night before the enemy did give assault unto the
City, came thither the Captain John de Salzedo lieutenant unto the Governor
of the Towns of Fernandina, who as aforesaid, came with purpose to aid and
help the Spaniardes that were then in Manilla. Whose coming, without all
doubt with his companions, was the principal remedy, as well unto the City,
as unto all those that were within it: for considering that they were but few,
and the great pains they took in making the last resistance, and the labor
and travail they had in the ordayning of the fort for their defense with other
necessaries against that which was to come, joining therewith the fear that
was amongst them of the assalt past: surely they had need of such a succor as
this was: and surely by the opinion of all men, it was a miracle of God, done
to bring them thither. So with the coming of this Captain with his people,
they all recovered new courage, with great hope valiantly to resist their
enemies: for the which incontinent they did put all things in good order, for
that the Rouer the morning following, before the break of the day* (which was
the second day after he gave the first assalt) was with all his fleet right
against the port, and did put a land six hundredth soldiers, who at that
instant did s^t upon the City, the which at their pleasure they did sack and
burn (for that it was left alone without people, as aforesaid by the order
and commandment of the governor, which for their more security were retired
into the fort.)

So having fired the City, they did assalt the fort with great cruelty, as
men fleshed with the last slaughter, thinking that their resistance was but
small. But it fell not out as they did believe, for that all those that were
within were of so valiant courage, that who so ever of their enemies that were
so bold as to enter into their fort, did pay for their boldness with the
loss of their lives. Which being seen by the Chinos they did retire, having
continued in the fight almost all the day, with the loss of two hundredth men,
that were slain in the assalt, and many other hurt, and of the Spaniardes were
slain but only two, the one was the Ancient bearer, called Samho Hortiz, and
the other was the Bayliefe of the City called Francisco de Leon. All which
being considered by Lymahon the Rouer, who being politic and wise, and saw
that it was loss of time and men, to go forwards with his pretense against
the valiantness of the Spaniardes, (which was clean contrary unto that
which had proved unto that day) he thought it the best way to embarke himself
and to set sail, and go unto the port of Cabite from whence he came. But
first he gathered together all his dead people, and after did bury them at
the Island aforesaid, where as he stayed two days for the same purpose.

That being done, he straightwayes departed from thence and returned the same
way that he came, till they arrived in a mighty river, forty leagues from the
City of Manilla, that is called Pangasinan, the which place or soil did like
him very well, and where he thought he might be sure from them, who by the
commandment of the king went for to seek him.

There he determined to remain, and to make him self lord over all that
country, the which he did with little travail, and built himself a fort one
league within the river, where as he remained certain days, receiving tribute
of the inhabitants there abouts, as though he were their true and natural
lord: and at times went forth with his ships robbing and spoiling all that he
met upon the coast. And spread abroad that he had taken to him self the
Islands Philippinas, and how that all the Spaniardes that were in them, were
either slain or fled away: wherewith he put all the Cities and Towns
bordering there aboutes in great fear, and also how that he had settled himself
upon this mighty river Pangasinan, whereas they did receive him for their
lord, and so they did obey him, and paid him tribute.

CHAP. VII. The General of the field called Salzedo, does set upon Limahon,
he does burn his fleet, and besiege his fort three months, from whence this
Rouer does escape with great industry.
THe Governor understanding by the Ilanders, and of those that dwelt in the
City of Manilla, of the fame that the Rouer Limahon did publish abroad in all
places where as he went, how that he had overthrown and slain the
Spaniardes: and being of them well considered, that if in time they did not
prevent the same, it might be the occasion of some great evil, that
afterward they should not so easily remedy as presently they might: and
those which were their friends and subjects in all those Islands, giving
credit unto that which the Rouer declared, might be an occasion that they
should rebel against them, by reason that the natural people were many and
they but a few: for that unto that time they had sustained themselves only by
the fame to be invincible. With this consideration they entered into counsel,
and did determine to join together all the people they could, and being in
good order, to follow and seek the Rouer, for that they understood of
necessity he must abide and repair himself in some place nigh there aboutes,
for that he durst not go unto China for fear that he had of the kings fleet,
and fearing that they should use such policies as he has used, they might
come on him unawares, and destroy him as he had done others. And seeming unto
them (that although they could not destroy him altogether) yet at the least
theyshould be revenged of the harm that they had received, and thereby to give
to understand that the fame yt he has given out of himself was a lie, and
should be an occasion for to remain in their old security, and also had in
better estimation and opinion of the dwellers there abouts, as also to cause
great friendship with the king of China, for that it is against a traitor and
one that has offended him.

This determination they put in ure and effect according as the time would
permit: in which time they had certain news how that the Rouer was in the
river of Pagansinan, and there did pretend to remain. These news were very
joyful unto the Spaniardes. Then the Governors commanded to be called
together all people bordering there abouts, and to come unto the City where as
he was. Likewise at that time he did give advice unto such as were Lords and
Governors of the Islands called Pintados, commanding them to come thither,
with such ships and people as they could spare as well Spaniardes as the
natural people of the country. All this was accomplished and done with great
speed, the people of the country came thither with great good will* but in
especial those of the Islands of the Pintados. After the death of Martin de
Goyti, who was slain in the first assault of the Chinos as aforesaid in the
City of Manilla, the Governor did ordain in his room for general of the
fiel^, in the name of his majesty, John de Salzedo, who with all this people,
and with those that were in the city went forth (leaving the governor no more
aid the^ that which was sufficient for the defense of the city and the fort
that they had new made, which was very s^rong) and carried in his company two
hundred and fifty spanish soldiers, and two thousand five hundred Indians
their friends. All which went with great good will and courage, to be revenged
on the injury received, or to die in the quarrel. All which people were
embarked in small ships and two foygattes that came from the Islands there
borderers, for that the shortness of time would not permit them to provide
bigger shipping, neither should they have found the^ as they would, for that at
such time as the inhabitants therabouts did see the rouer in ass^lt against the
city, they did set fire on a small galley and other big ships that were in
the same port, and did rise against the Spaniards, believing that it had not
been possible for them to escape so great and mighty a power: although since
the first entry of the Spaniardes in those Islands they were very subject.
The General of the field with the people aforesaid, did depart from Manilla
the three and twentieth day of March Anno 1575, and arrived at the mouth of the
river Pagansinan upon tenable wednesday in the morning next following without
being discovered of any, for that it was done with great advice, as a thing
that did import very much. Then straightwaies at that instant the general did
put a land all his people and four peeees of artilerie, leaving the mouth of
the river shut up with his shipping in chayning the one to the other, in such
sort that none could enter in neither yet go forth to give any advice unto
the Rouer of his ariuall: he commanded some to go and discover the fleet of
the enemy, and the place whereas he was fortified, and charged them very
much to do it in such secret sort, that they were not espied: for therein
consisted all their whole work. The Captains did as they were commanded, and
found the Rouer void of all care or suspicion to receive there any harm, as
he found them in the City of Manilla when he did assault them.

This security that he thought himself in did proceed from the news that
he had from his friends at the China, that although they did provide to send
against him, yet could they not so quickly have any knowledge where he was,
neither find out the place of his abiding: and again he knew that the
Spaniards of the Philippinas remained without ships, for that they had burnt
them as you have heard, and that they had more need to repair themselves of
their ill entreaty the year past, then to seek any reuengement of their
injuries received.

The General of the field being fully satisfied of his negligence and void
of care, and given to understand of the secretest way that was to go unto the
fort whereas the Rouer was: he commanded the Captain Gabriell de Ribera, that
straightwayes he should depart by land, and that upon a sudden, he should
strike alarm upon the enemy, with the greatest tumult that was possible.
Likewise he commanded the Captains Pedro de Caves and Lorenso Chacon, that
either of them with forty soldiers should go up the river in small ships
and light, and to measure the time in such sort, that as well those that went
by land, as those that went by water, should at one instant come upon the
fort, and to give alarm both together, the better to go thorough with their
pretense: and he himself did remain with all the rest of the people, to watch
occasion and time for to aid and succor them if need required. This their
purpose came so well to pass, that both the one and the other came to good
effect: for those that went by water, did set fire on all the fleet^ of the
enemy: and those that went by land at that instant had taken and set si^s on
a trench made of timber, that Lymahon had caused to be made for the defense of
his people and the fort: and with that fury they slew more then one hundredth
Chinos, and took prisoners seventy women which they found in the same
trench, but when that Lymahon understood the rumor, he took himself
straightwayes to his fort which he had made for to defend himself from the
kings navy, if they should happen to find him out: and there to save his
life upon that extremity, he commanded some of his soldiers to go forth
and to skirmish with the Spaniardes who were very weary with the travail of
all that day, and with the anguish of the great heat, with the burning of the
ships, and the trench which was intolerable, for that they all burned together.

The Captains seeing this, and that their people were out of order, neither
could they bring them into any, for that they were also weary (although ye
general of the field did succor the^ in time, the which did profit them much)
yet did they sound a retraite and did withdraw themselves with the loss of
five Spaniards and thirty of the Indians their friends, and never a one more
hurt. Then the next day following the General of the field did bring his
soldiers into a square battle, and began to march toward the fort, with
courage to assalt it if occasion did serve thereunto: he did pitch his camp
within two hundredth paces of the fort, and found that the enemy did all that
night fortify himself very well, and in such sort that it was perilous to
assalt him, for that he had placed upon his fort three pieces of artilerie, and
many bases, besides others ingins of fire work. Seeing this, and that his
pieces of artilerie that he brought were very small for to batter, and little
store of munition for that they had spent all at the assalt which the rouer did
give them at Manilla, the General of the field, and the captains concluded
amongst themselves, that seeing the enemy had no ships to escape by water,
neither had he any great store of victuals for that all was burnt in the
ships, it was the best and most surest way to besiege the fort, and to remain
there in quiet until that hunger did constrain them either to yield or come
to some conclusion* which rather they will then to perish with hunger.

This determination was liked well of them all, although it fell out clean
contrary unto their expectation, for that in the space of three months that
siege endured, this Limahon did so much that within the fort he made certain
small barks, and trimmed them in the best manner he could, wherewith in one
night he and all his people escaped, as shall be told you: a thing that
seemed impossible, and caused great admiration amongst the Spaniards, and more
for that his departure was such that he was not discovered, neither by them on
the water nor on the land. What happened in these three months, I do not
here declare, although some attempts were notable, for that my intent is to
declare what was the occasion that those religious men and their consorts did
enter into the kingdom of China, and to declare of that which they said they
had seen: for the which I have made relation of the coming of Limahon, and of
all the rest which you have heard.

CHAP. VIII. Omoncon captain of the king of China comes to seek Limahon, and
does meet with Spaniards.
IN the mean time that the siege endured at the fort, as you have understood,
there went and came certain vessels which brought victuals and other
necessaries from the city of Manilla, which was but forty leagues from the
mouth of that river of Pagasinan, as has been told you. It happened upon a
day that a ship of Myguel de Loarcha, wherein was Friar Martin de Herrada
Provincial of the Augustine Friars, who was come unto the river Pagansinan for
to see the General of the field, and in the same ship returned unto Manilla
to hold Capitulo, or court in the said Island and port of Buliano. Seven
leagues after they were out of the mouth of Pagasinan, they met with a ship
of Sangleyes, who made for the port, and thinking them to be enemies, they
bore with them (having another ship that followed them for their defense) and
had no more in them but the said provincial and five Spaniards besides the
mariners. This ship of Sangley seeing that he did bear with them, would
have fled, but the wind would not permit him, for that it was to him
contrary, which was the occasion that the two ships wherein the Spaniards
were, for that they did both sail and row, in a small time came within Cannon
shot. In one of the ships there was a Chino called Sinsay, one that had been
many times at Manilla with merchandise, and was a very friend and known of
the Spaniards, and understood their language, who knowing that ship to be of
China, and not to be a rouer, did request our people not to shoot, neither to
do them any harm until such time as they were informed what they were in
that same ship.

This Sinsay went straight ways into the fore ships, and demanded what they
were, and from whence they came: and bing well informed, he understood that he
was one of the ships of war that was sent out by the king of China, to seek
the rouer Limahon, who leaving the rest of the fleet behind, came forth to
seek in those Islands to see if he could discover him to be any of them: and
the better to be informed thereof, they were bound into the port of Buliano,
from whence they came with their two ships: from whom they would have
fled, thinking they had been some of the rouers ships. Being fully
persuaded the one of the other, they joined together with great peace and
friendship: the Spaniards straightwayes entered into their boat and went unto
the ship of the Chinos, and carried with them the aforesaid Sinsay for to be
their interpreter, and ^o speak unto the Chinos. In the said ship came a
man of great authority who was called Omoncon, The captain general of the
king of China.
who brought a commission from their king, and showed it unto the Spaniards and
unto the father Provincial: in the which the king and his council did pardon
all those soldiers that were with Limahon, if that forthwith they would leave
him and return unto the kings part: and likewise did promise great gifts and
favor unto him that did either take or kill the aforesaid rouer. Then did
Sinsay declare unto him of the coming of the rouer unto the Islands, and all
that happened in the siege of the City, as aforesaid: and how they had him
besieged in the river of Pagansinan, from whence it was not possible for him to
escape.

The captain Omoncon rejoiced very much of these news, and made many signs of
great content, and did embrace the Spaniards many times, and gave other tokens
whereby he di^ manifest the great pleasure he received, and would therewith
straight-waies depart unto the rest of the fleet. And for that they looked
every day for the death or imprisonment of the rouer, the better to inform
himself: he determined (for that it was so nigh hand) to go and see the
General of the field in Pagansinan, and carry with him Sinsay one that was
known both of the one and the other: by whose means they might treat of such
things that best accomplished the confirmation of the peace and friendship
betwixt the Chinos and the Spaniards, as also of the death or imprisonment of
Limahon. With this resolution* the one departed unto Pagansinan whereas they
arrived the same day, and the others unto Manilla whether they went for victuals.

CHAP. IX. Omoncon is well received of the General of the field, and lodged in
Manilla with the governor, whereas they do conclude the going of the fathers
of Saint Augustine to China.
WHen that the General of the field understood wherefore the coming of Omoncon
was, he did entertain him with great courtesy: and after that he had given
him to understand in what extremity he had brought the rouer (which was a
thing impossible for him to escape, except it were with wings) he did counsel
him, that for the time till he brought his purpose to effect (which could not
be long) that he would go unto Manilla, which was not far from thence, and
there to recreate and sport himself with the governor and other Spaniards that
were there, for that he alone was sufficient to accomplish his pretense,
without the coming thither of the kings fleet, neither for to remove out of
the port whereas they were in security. And for his going thither he should
have a ship of his the which did row, and was for to bring victuals and other
provision, and he should go in the company of the Captain Pedro de Chaues
that was bound unto Manilla, and promised him that within few days he would
give him the Rouer alive or dead, which unto the judgment of all men could
not be long.

Omoncon considering that this offer might come well to pass, did put it
straightwayes in ure, and did imbarke himself in the company of ye captain,
and sent his ship wherein he came alone by sea, because it was big and drew much
water: the which was constrained to turn back again into the part from
whence he went, by reason of stormy winds and wether, and was no impediment
in the other with Ores, for that he went along the shoore and was shrouded
with the land from the force of the wind, so that in few days they arrived in
the port of the city of Manilla, whereas they were well received and feasted
of the governor. Omoncon remained there certain days, after the which he
seeing that the siege did long endure, and that his staying might cause
suspicion of his death: and again, that the whole fleet did tarry his
coming to his intelligence of the rouer, being fully persuaded and certain
that he could not escape the Spaniards hand: they had him in such a straight,
and that they would without all doubt send him unto the king alive or dead (as
they promised him) he was determined to return unto China with the good news
that he had understood, with a determinate intent, to r^turne again and carry
the rouer after that they had him prisoner. With this resolution in the end of
certain days he went unto the governor* certifying him of his pretense,
whereby he might give him license to put it in execution. The governor did like
well of his pretense, and did promise him the same the which the general of the
field did offer unto him: and which was, so soon as the rouer should be taken
prisoner or slain, to send him unto the king without any delay, or else to
put him whereas he should be forth coming, and to give them advertisement to
send for him, or come himself: and did offer him more, that for his voyage he
should be provided forthwith of all things necessary, without lacking of any
thing. Omoncon did give him great thanks for the same, and in recompense
thereof did promise unto the governor, for that he understood and had
intelligence of the fathers of S. Augustine, that his honor, and his
antecessor, and the Adelan^ado Miguel Lopez de Legaspi, had desired many times
to s^^d unto the kingdom of China some relig^ous men, to entreat of the
preaching of the Gospel, and to see the wonders of that kingdom, and how that
they never could put this their desire in execution, for that those Chinos
which came thither although they did offer them whatsoever they would demand,
fearing the punishment that should be executed on them according unto the laws
of the kingdom: Omoncon promises to carry the friars unto China.
he did promise him that he would carry them with him unto China, such
religious men as his honor would command, and some soldiers such as would go
with them: hoping with the good news that he carried, to run in no danger
of the Law, neither the vizroy of Aucheo to think evil thereof, and for a
more security that they should not be evil entreated, he would leave with
him pledges to their content.

The governor rejoiced very much at this his offer, for that it was the thing
that he and all those of the Islands most desired of long time since, and did
straightwayes accept his offer: saying that he did clearly dis^harge him of
his pledges, for that he was fully satisfied of his valor and worthiness, and
that he would not do the thing that should not be decent unto his person and
office. The governor being very joyful of these news, did therewith send for
the provincial of the Augustine friars, who was elected but few days past:
his name was Friar Alonso de Aluarado, a man of a sincere life, and one of them
that was sent by the Emperor in the discovery of the new Guinea, unto whom
he declared the offer that the Captain Omoncon had made unto him: whereat he
rejoiced so much that being an old man, he would himself have gone thither:
to which the governor would not consent in respect of his age, and other
particularities: but entered in counsel who were best to go, and to find one
that were fit to execute that which they had pretended (which was as we have
said, A good pretense.
to bring in and plant in that kingdom the holy Catholic faith:) they
determined that there should go but two religious men, by reason that at that
time there was but a ^ewe of them, and two soldiers in their company. The
Friars names that went to China.
The religious men should be Friar Martin de Herrada of Pamplona, who left
off the dignity of Provincial, and was a man of great learning and of a holy
life: and for the same effect had learned the China tongue, and many times for
to put his desire in execution did offer himself to be slave unto the
merchants of China, only for to carry him thither: and in company with him
should go Friar Hieronimo Martin, who also was very well learned, and of the
City of Mexico: the soldiers that were appointed to bear them company,
were called Pedro Sarmiento chief sargeant of the City of Manilla of
Vilorado, and Miguel de Loarcha, both principal men, and good Christians, as
was convenient for that which they took in hand. These fathers did carry them
for this purpose, that if they did remain there with the king preaching of the
Gospel, then they should return with the news thereof to give the Governor
to understand of all that they had seen, and happened unto them: and likewise
unto the king of Spain, if need did so require.

This offer of the captain Omoncon, and the appointment which was made by the
governor and the provincial, was known throughout all the City, and after
that they had made great reioycings and feasts for the same, it was approved of
all men, that those that were named, were principal persons, as aforesaid, and
were fully certified, that there should nothing be neglected of that they did
command them: neither let pass any occasion, for that it was that which they
did all desire, but in particular, for the ^eruice and honor of God, and for
the benefit and profit that should redowne unto them all by the mutual
contractation betwixt the one nation and the other: and also give the king to
understand of so good news as this is. The Gouern^^ did straightwayes call
those persons that were named and appointed to come before the captain
Omoncon, and told them what was determined: the which they did accept with
great joy, and gave great thanks, and the governor in token of gratitude, did
give unto the Captain Omoncon in the presence of them all, a gallant chain of
gold, A token that fine cloth is esteemed.
and a rich robe of crimson in grain: a thing that he esteemed very much,
and much more esteemed in China, for that it is a thing that they have not
there. Besides this, they did ordain a reasonable present for to send unto
the governor of Chincheo, he that dispatched Omoncon by the commandment of the
king to go and seek the rouer: also another present for the vizroy of the
province of Ochian, who was at that present in the city of Aucheo.

And for that Sinsay should not find himself agreeued (who was a merchant
well known amongst them, and perhaps might be the occasion of some ^uill
and disturbance of their pretense) they gave unto him also another chain of
gold, as well for this, as also for that he was ever a sure and perfect
friend unto the Spaniards. Then straightwayes by the commandment of the
Governor there were brought together all such Chinos as were captive and taken
from Limahon out of the fort aforesaid, at Pagansinan, and gave them unto
Omoncon to carry them free with him: and gave likewise commandment that the
General of the field, and all such Captains and soldiers that were at the
siege of the forte, should give unto him all such as did there r^maine:
binding himself to pay unto the soldiers, to whom they did appertain, all
whatsoever they should be valued to be worth: all the which being done, he
commanded to be put in a readiness all that was necessary for the voyage and
that in ample manner, the which was done in a short time.

CHAP. X. Omoncon departs with certificate, in what perplexity he left
Limahon the rouer, and does carry with him the Fathers of S. Augustine.
THe twelfth day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1575. being sunday in the
morning: the aforesaid Governor and all that were in the city did join and
go together unto the monastery of saint Augustine, where was devout prayers
made unto the holy ghost, and after they had all of them requested of God so to
direct the voyage, that it might be to the honor and glory of his divine
majesty, and to the salvation of the souls of that kingdom, whom lucyfer
has so long possessed, Omoncon and Synsay did take their leave of the
Governor, and of the rest, giving them thanks for their good entertainment
that they made them, and did promise them in recompense thereof to be always
their assured friends, as shall appear by his works: and to carry them, whom
he did request of his own good will, with security as unto himself, and that
he would first suffer wrong himself, before any should be done unto those
whom he had on his charge. The Governor and all the rest did thankfully accept
his new offer, giving him to understand that they were fully persuaded that his
word and deed should be all one, and therewith they took their leave of them
and of the religious men with the two soldiers their companions, not lacking
tears to be shed on both parts.

Then did they al imbarke themselves in a ship of the Islands which was made
ready for the same effect, and went out of the port in the company of another
ship with merchants of China that were at Manilla, into the which Sinsay put
himself with all their victuals, for to carry it until they came unto the
port of Buliano, whereas was the great ship of Omoncon, wherein they should
make their voyage: which was that which was forced to return back again by
reason of foul wether: they aryued at the same port the sunday following, for
that the wind was somewhat contrary, and had lost the ship that carried
their victuals: but after found her at an anchor in the port, for that she was
the bigger ship and sailed better: they found also in her, two Spanish
soldiers, whom the general of the field had sent from Pagansinan, for that
from the place whereas he was, he did see the said ship to enter into the
port, with commandment for to carry them unto him. This did cause unto the
religious men and soldiers a suspicion that the general of the field would
procure to stay them until such time as he did see the end of the siege of
the fort, which every day was looked when they would yield: for that they
should carry with them Limahon the rouer a live or dead. Upon the which
almost every one gave his judgment, that it were better to depart without
obeying his commandment, neither to take their leave of him, but to prosecute
their voyage so much desired, for they thought every hour of their staying to
be a whole year: fearing that every thing would be an impediment to
disturb their intent and purpose: but better persuading themselves, knowing
the good condition and great Christianity of the general of the field, whom
Friar Martin had always in place of his son, for that he was Neuew unto the
Adelantado Legaspi, the first governor and discouerer of the said Philippinas
whom he brought with him from Mexico being but a child: they were agreed to go
unto him, and show their obedience, and to take their leave of him and of all
the rest of their friends that were in the camp. So with this determination
they put their ship into the river Pagansinan which was but seven leagues
from the said port. They had not sailed three leagues but a contrary wind so
charged them, that they were constrained to return into the port from whence
they came, and there concluded amongst themselves to send Pedro Sarmiento in
the bark, wherein came the two soldiers aforesaid, for that it was little and
went with Oars, they might with less danger enter into the river of
Pagansinan, rowing under the sho^re: and that he in the name of them all
should confer with the general of the field, and so take his leave of him
and of all the rest of their friends, whom they did request that they would
not forget them in their prayers, to commend them unto God to be their aider
and helper in this their pretense, so much desired of them all: and gave him
great charge to bring with him the interpreter that they should carry with
them, which was a boy of China that was baptized in Manilla, and could speak
Spanish very well: he was named Gernando. This Pedro Sarmiento came thither,
and did accomplish all that was commended unto him very faithfully: but the
General of the field was not therewith satisfied, neither the Captains and
soldiers that were with him, for that the father friars were very well beloved
of them, for they deserved it: so they d^termined to send for them, and to
request them to come thither and see them being so nigh as they we^e. They
being understood by the Friars (not without the suspicion aforesaid) and seeing
that they could not excuse to go unto them to accomplish their commandment and
gentle request: they departed out of Buliano with a fair wind, for that the
storm was done, although the sea was a little troubled: and therewith they
arrived at Pagansinan whereas they were well received of the general of the
field, and of all the rest with great joy and pleasure. Their suspicion fell
out clean contrary as they thought, for that the General of the field
would not stay them, but did dispatch them with all speed possible, and did
deliver unto them at the instant all such captives as the governor had
commanded, and the soldiers that had them did with a very good will deliver
them, seeing to what intent it did extend, and also the interpreter with all
other things that was necessary and requisite for the voyage: and writ a
letter unto Omoncon who remained in Buliano, that he would favor and cherish
them as he did not think to the contrary: and did ratify that which the
governor had promised him, for to send the rouer alive or dead, after they
had ended their siege by one means or other. He also requested of Friar Martin
de Herrada that he would carry with him one Nicholas de Cuenca a soldier of
his company for to buy for him certain things in China, who did accept the
same with a very good will, and promised to entreat him as one of his own, and
have him in as great regard: and therewith they departed and w^nt unto the port
of Buliano from whence they came, taking their leave of the general of the
field, and of all the rest of the camp, with no less ^^ares then when they
departed from Manilla. He sent to bear them company til they came unto the
port, the sergeant mayor, who carried with him a letter unto the captain
Omoncon, and a present of victuals and other things: and other two letters, the
one for the governor of Chincheo and the other for the vizroy of the province
of Ochian, wherein he does give them to understand how that he has burnt all the fleet of Limahon, and slain many of his companions, and how that he has
besieged him so straightly that it is not possible for him to escape, neither
endure long without yielding of himself: and then either alive or dead he would
send him, as the governor of Manilla had writ and promised. These two letters
were accompanied with two presents wherein was a basen and an ewre of silver,
and certain robes of spani^h cloth, the which the Chinos do esteem very
much, as also other things of great value that they have not in their country:
and craving pardon because he did not send more. The occasion was for that he
was in that place, and all his goods in the city of Manilla. The same day
with a fair wind they came unto the port Buliano, whereas they found Omoncon
abiding their coming, and received all such things as the sergeant mayor did
carry him in the name of the general of the field, and rendered unto him great
thanks, and made a new promise to accomplish that offer made unto the governor.

CHAP. XI. The Spaniards do depart with the captain Omoncon from the port of
Buliano, and ariue at the firm land of China.
THe desire was so much of this father friar Martin de Herrada to be in China,
as well for to preach in it the holy gospel, as also for to see the wonders
that have been reported to be in that country: that although he was
dispatched by the governor and general of the field, yet he thought that
their voyage would be interrupted: and therefore to see himself free from this
fear and suspicion, so soon as he came unto the port of Buliano to the
captain Omoncon, he requested him with great vehemency, that he would
straightwayes set sail, for that the wind served well for their purpose. Then
Omoncon, who desired no other thing, but thought every hour that he tarried to
be a whole year, commanded forthwith the mariners to make all things in a
readiness to set sail, and to bring home all their ankers, and ride apicke,
r^die to depart after midnight: the which was done as he had commanded. So
upon a sunday at the break of day, being 25. of June, they took a Spaniard
soldier into their company, who was called John de Triana, and used him in
their service, for that he was a mariner. So at the same time after they had
prayed unto God to direct their voyage, They departed toward China.
they set sail with a prosperous wind: there was with the Friars, soldiers
and men of service, twenty persons besides the Chinos that were captives, and
the people of the Captain Omoncon. They were not so soon off from the cost,
but the wind abated and they remained becalmed certain days: but afterward
they had a lusty gale, that carried them forwards. The Chino^ do govern
their ships by a compass divided into twelve parts, Their compasses divided
into 12. parts.
and do use no sea cards, but a brief description or Ruter wherewith they
do nauigate or sail: and commonly for the most part they never go out of the
sight of land. They marvelled very much when that it was told them, that
coming from Mexico unto Philippinas, they were three months at the sea and
never saw land. So it pleased God, that although it was very calm and little
wind stirring, that we made but little way, yet upon the sunday following,
which was the third of July, we had sight of the land of China: so that we
found all our voyage from the port of Buliano, from whence we departed, unto
the firm land to be one hundred and forty leagues, and twenty leagues before
they came in the sight thereof, they had sounding at three score and ten, and
fourscore fathom, and so waxed less and less until they came to the land:
which is the best and surest token they have to be nigh the land. In all the
time of their voyage the Captain Omoncon with his company showed such great
courtesy and friendship to our men, as though they had been the owners of the
said ship: and at such time as they did imbarke themselves he gave his own
cabin yt was in the stern to ye friars, and unto Pedro Sarmiento and to Miguel
de Loarcha, he gave another cabin that was very good, and commanded his company
in the ship that they should respect them more then himself: the which was in
such sort, that on a day at the beginning of their voyage, the fathers found
them making of sacrifice unto their Idols, and told them that all which they
did was a kind of mockage, and that they should worship but only one God:
and willed them to do so no more. Who only in respect of them did leave it
off, and not use it after in all the voyage: whereas before they did use it
every day many times. They leave the worshipping of one Idol to worship
another.
Besides this, they would worship the images that the Friars did carry with
them, and kneel upon their knees with great show of devotion: who now having
sight of the firm land, in so short time, and passed that small gulf so
quietly, which was wont to be very perilous and full of storms: they did
attribute it unto the orations of the Friars, their companions and soldiers.
The like courtesy was showed unto them by Sinsay, who was the second person in
the ship, and he that did best understand that Navigations and voyage. So as
they drew nearer the land, they might discover from the sea a very gallant
and well towred City, that was called Tituhul, whereas the king has
continually in garrison ten thousand soldiers, and is under the government
of the province of Chincheo. So the next day following, we came unto a watch
tower, which was situated upon a rock at the entry into a bay, who had
discovered our ship, and knew the standart or flagge to be the kings: and
made a sign unto seven ships which were on the other side of the point,
which was part of a company ordained for to keep and defend the cost, which
were more then four hundred. Straightwayes the Captain of the seven ships
came forth to know what we were: and what chanced shall be told you in this
chapter following.

CHAP. XII. The Captain Omoncon is come to the province of Chincheo, but
before he does come unto an anchor, he does pass some trouble with another
Captain of the sea.
THis Captain Omoncon, when he saw that the ships did make toward him, he
cast about his ship and passed along by the watch tower, making his way
toward the town, where he was a natural subject and nigh at hand, being but
two leagues from the point: which being perceived bythe general of that bay
which was in a r^dinesse, who imagined by his working that it should be some
ship of evil demeanor and their enemies, without any delation he issued
forth from behind the point, with three ships that did row with Oars very
swift: and gave them chase, cutting them off from their pretense: and when he
came nigh unto them, he shot at them to make them to amain: the which Omoncon
would not do, for that he supposed (as afterward he did confess) that he
should be some man of little estimation, and not the general of the cost. But
as he drew nigher unto him, he did know him by the flagge he bare on the
stern, in the foist wherein he was himself with his soldiers, and
straightwayes caused to amain his sails, and tarried for him. The general
did the like, and stayed behind, sending a boat for to bring the captain
unto him and to declare what he was, and from whence he came. Omoncon did
forthwith imbarke himself into his boat without any resistance, but rather
with fear that he should be punished for that he did fly from him. The
general when he saw him, did straightwayes know him, (and in that the fathers
did understand by signs) he was very glad of his coming, and gave him good
entertainment.

This general was a goodly man of person, and was very well apparelled, and
did sit in a chair in the stern of his ship, the which was all covered to
keep away the sun: he commanded the captain Omoncon to sit down by him
upon the hatches, without chair or any other thing, who did obey him, although
first he did refuse it with great modesty, as not worthy to have that
honor, which was not esteemed a little. After that he was set, he gave him to
understand in effect of all his voyage and success, and in what extremity he
left Limahon, and also how that he carried with him the Friars and other
Spaniards, which went to carry the news, and to entreat of peace with the
vizroy of Aucheo: unto whom, and unto the governor of Chincheo he carried
presents, sent from the governor and general of the field of the Islands
Philippinas. When the general had heard this relation, he commanded the ^oate
to return and to bring them before him, that he might see what manner of men
they were of person and the use of the apparel: and likewise to satisfy
himself of other desires that came into his mind by that which Omoncon had
said of them. The fathers and their companions did obey the commandment, and
did imbarke themselves in the boat^ (although it were with some fear) and came
unto the ship whereas the general received them with great courtesy after
his fashion, and showed them a good countenance, and tokens that he very much
rejoiced to see them and the use of their apparel they ware. But after a while
he commanded that they should be put under hatches, which was the occasion
to augment the fear they conceived when they were sent for: and the more when
they saw that they were commanded to be shut up in a cabin, with the
interpreter that they brought with them.

This being done, they were in great care how they might understand the
Generals pretense: and at a close door that was before the cabin whereas they
were, upon a sudden they might see that all those that were in the ship did
arm themselves in great haste, and the captain Omoncon amongst them: then
they heard bases and hargubus shot, with a great noise of people, which did
very much alter them: in such sort that they looked every moment when they
should come and cut of their heads. Whilst that our people were in this agony
and great fear, Omoncon considered of them and of the charge that he had to
bring them thither: therewith he sent one of his servants to give them to
understand of all that they had heard and seen, wherewith they did quiet
themselves, and put away all the fear that they had conceived with their
sudden putting down in the cabine, and the shooting off of those pieces. The
which the better to give you to understand, I will first declare unto you the
occasion (and then after the rest.) Limahon had not so soon taken his course
toward the Islands, but straightwaies it was known in the kingdom of China:
And the vizroy of Ochian by the order that he had from the royal counsel, did
command all governors of such cities that were nigh unto the coast, to dispatch
away shipping for to go follow and seek him, with advertisement that he who
did accomplish this diligence with the first, should be very well rewarded and
esteemed, for that they feared that if the rouer should join with ye Castillas
(for so they do call the Spaniards in that country, They call the Spaniards
Castillias.
of whom they have had great notice) might thereby grow some great harm and
inconvenience, which afterward could not be well remedied: which was the
occasion that they made the more haste, for that if it were possible to take
him, or else to spoil his shiping before that he should come unto the said
Islands. In accomplishing of this commandment the governor of Chincheo did
provide shipping and did send the Captain Omoncon with them: but yet he could
not provide them of soldiers and other necessaries till certain days after
that he was gone forth: so he went till he came and met with the Spaniards,
nigh unto Buliano (as aforesaid). About the same time the general of the bay
that was there to defend the cost, did dispatch another ship for to enquire and
know where the rouer was, and to bring relation thereof, that straightwayes they
might go and assalt him with all the whole army. This ship was the fathers of
Sinsay, he that was friend unto the Castillas, who came in company with the
Friars from the Islands (as it is said,) and he went in the said ship for Pilot:
who although he went out of the port with great speed, yet with greater have
he returned again without mastes or yardes, for that they lost them in a
great storm and torment that took them in the gulf, whereas they thought to
have been lost. At the same time that the Friars departed from Buliano to
Pagansinan, being requested to come thither by the master of the field (as
aforesaid) there was in the same port a ship of China that came unto the Islands
to traficke and being well informed of all things, as well in what extremity
the Spaniards had the rouer, as also of ye going of Omoncon, and how that he
carried unto the firm land the foresaid Friars and their companions. The
said ship departed in a morning very secretly, ten days before that Omoncon
did make sail, and came to the firm land the said ten days before, and gave
notice thereof unto the governor of all that they had understood, as well by
relation as by sight: and how that there came with Omoncon and the Spaniards,
Sinsay, who was he that in all things touching Limahon was the dooer, and that
whatsoever shall happen good in this relation, they ought to give the praise
and thanks unto him, and not unto Omoncon. This he spoke for the good affection
he had unto Sinsay by way of friendship, for that he was of the same
profession, a merchant.

The Governor of the bay being very desirous to have the reward and thanks
of the king, with occasion to say that the son of him whom he sent to follow
and seek Limahon was the chief and principal means of that good success.
Straight ways so soon as he heard the news of the ship that arrived there
ten days before (as aforesaid) he commanded six ships to go forth of
the baye to the sea, with order and commission to bring the ship to an anchor in
the said bay, and not to suffer him to go into any other place: and otherwise
they could not, at least ways they would bring with them Sinsay, for that they
would send him post unto the Uiceroy, for to declare unto him all that had
passed particularly. These six ships came very nigh unto that wherein was the
General aforesaid, at such time as our Spaniardes were with the General, and
they never could perceive it, for that there were many in the baye, some going
and some coming: but when that he had discovered them, then he caused our
people to be put under hatches because they should not be seen, and commanded
those that were in the ship to arm themselves for their defense if need
required. In the mean time that they made resistance with this ship, one of
the six ships did board that ship wherein came Omoncon, pretending to take
her, and believed to do it with great ^ase. But it happened unto them clean
contrary, for that the soldiers that were within did defend their ship
valiantly. Sinsay with a very good will would have suffered the ship wherein
his father came to have carried away the other, if the soldiers of Omoncon
would have consented thereunto. They did not only miss of their purpose, but
also many of them were hurt in the attempting to enter the ship: the said ship
did fall aborde there whereas was their captain Omoncon, who at that instant
did call our Spaniardes in his ship, out of the generalles ship whereas
they were: which was dooone with such speed, that it was accomplished before
any of the other ships could come unto them, although they did procure it. Then
did Omoncon arm himself to the war, for to defend himself, his ship, and
all that were therein, or to die there. The Friars and their companions when
they understood the cause of their strife and fighting, partly by suspicion in
that they had seen, as by that which Omoncon did send them word, did offer
themselves unto him, promising him to die with him i^ need did so require, and
requested him to appoint them what they should do, and they would accomplish it
with a very good will. At this time all the ships were about that of Omoncon,
who was not idle, but put forth his artilerie for their defense, asking powder
of the Spaniardes, for that they had little left: the General did not depart
from the ship from the time that the Spaniardes went unto him, neither did
he remove out of his chair, although all the rest that were in the ship were
armed.

At this time the Captain of the six ships of Chincheo did put himself in
a boat and came toward the ship of Omoncon for to have commoned with him,
but he would not suffer them to come nigh, but shot at them, and caused them to
depart against their wills, and called them all to naught from the poope of
his ship, with many reproachful words, saying that they came to steal the
honor that he with so great travail and peril had gotten. Then the general
seeing that he could not go thorough with his purpose he determined to leave
him, and therewith to cast about with his ships, and returned into the port
of the baye from whence they came. This brought in his ship a son of
Sinsay, to give occasion unto his father for to come unto him, and likewise his
own father, whom they did straightwayes put in prison and his wife and
mother: which is a thing commonly used in that country, the children to pay
for their parents* and to the contrary the parents for the children.

Sinsay who feared the same, would not go unto his own house till such time
as he did carry commandment from the Uiceroy, for to deliver out of prison
those that were put there without desert: the which was granted by the Uiceroy,
with other favors, and great honor as shall be declared unto you.

CHAP. XIII. Omoncon does disembarke himself with our Spaniardes in the port
of Tanfuso, and are very well received by the Justice, and made very much of
by the order of the Insuanto of that province.
WIthin a little while after that the Captain of the six ships departed for
Chincheo, Omoncon and his company arrived at the port of Tanfuso hard by, upon
wednesday in the evening, being the fifth day of July. This Tanfuso is a gallant
and fresh town of four thousand householders, and has continually a thousand
soldiers in garrison, and compassed about with a great and strong wall, and
the gates fortified with plates of iron, the foundations of all the houses are
of lime and stone, and the walls of lime and earth, and some of brick: their
houses within very fairly wrought with great courts, their streets fair and
broad all paued. Before that Omoncon did come unto an anchor, they saw all the
soldiers and the people of the town were gathered together upon the rocks
that were joining unto the port, all armed ready unto the battle, amongst
whom there was a principal captain, and three more of his companions, that
were sent him by the Governor of Chincheo, whom they do call in their language
Insuanto, who had understanding of the coming of Omoncon and his company by
the ship (aforesaid) he sent the^ thither before, that in his name should
entertain them and cherish them all that was possible. When the ship entered
into the port Omoncon did salute the town with certain pieces of artilery and
discharged all his hargubushes six times about, and therwithal took in their
sail, and let anchor fall. Then straightwaies the captain who^ the Insuanto
had sent, came abord the ship, who had express commission, not to leave the
company of our people after that they were disembarked till such time as they
came whereas he was, but to bear them company, and to provide them of all
things necessary: the which he did accomplish.

All these captains and ministers of the king do wear certain ensigns for
to be known from the common people, who are not permitted to wear any such,
and they can not go abroad in public without the same, neither will they if
they might, for that by them they are obeyed and reverenced, as well in the
streets as in any other place where they come: all such generally be called
Loytias, which is as much to say in our language (Gentlemen): Ensigns to know
the Justices.
the particular ensigns which they do use, be broad wastes or girdles
embossed after diverse manners: some of gold and silver, some of the shell of
a Turtuga or Turtell, and of a sweet wood, and other some of Iuerie, the
higher estates has them embrodered with pearls and precious stones, and their
bunnets with two long ears, and their buskins made of satin and unshorn
velvet, as we have declared more at large in the first three books.

Then after, so soon as they were come to an anchor in the port, the Justice
did send them a license in writing for to come forth of the ship, as a thing
necessary, for that without it the waiters or guardes of the water side, will
not suffer them to put foot a land. This license was written upon a board
whited, and firmed by the Justice, whose charge it is to give the license. Then
when they came a shoore, there were the soldiers that were appointed by the
Insuanto in a readiness to bear them company, ^e first lan^ing of the Friars.
and did direct and lead them unto the kings houses of the said City: the
like has every City almost thoroughout all the kingdom, and there they did
lodge them. These houses are very great and very well wrought and gallant, with
fair courts below, and galleries above: they had in them stanges or pondes
of water full of fish of sundry sorts.

The Insuanto had given order unto the Justice of Tansuso, wherein he had
ordained what he should give them to eat* and all other things that should be
done particularly by it self without lacking ofany thing, and appointed the
Captain that he with his soldiers should not depart from them not a jot, but
always to bear them company whethersoeuer they went, and not to depart till
he had farther order from him: in accomplishing whereof they remained with them
that night in the kings house. The Justice of the city when that he had lodged
them, went himself in person to the waters side, and caused all their stuff
to be unladen out of the ship, and caused it to be carried with great care and
diligence unto the Friars, whereas they were.

The people of the city did press very much to see these strangers, so that
with the press as also with the great heat they were marueilously afflicted:
which being perceived by the Justice, he gave order that they might be eased
of that trouble, and caused sergeants to keep the door, and their yeomen to
make resistance against the people. Yet notwithstanding, though they did not
trouble them so much they ranged round about the house, and clymed upon the
walls to procure to see them, as a rare thing, for that they came from
countries so far off, and apparelled very different from that they do use,
or otherwise have seen. So when that the night was come, the Justice of the
city did make them a banquet according unto the fashion of the country: and it
was in this manner following.

They were carried into a hall that was very curiously wrought, wherein were
many torches and wax candles light, and in the midst thereof was set for
every one of the guests a table by himself, as is the use and fashion of that
country, The use of their bankets
(which more at large shall be de^lared) every table had his covering of damask
or satin very well made, the tables were gallantly painted, without any table
clothes, neither do they use any, for they have no need of them, for that they
do eat all their victualles with two little sticks made of gold and silver,
and of a marvelous odiferous wood, and of the length of little forkes as they
do use in Italy, with the which they do feed themselves so clenly, that
although their victuals be never so small, yet do they let nothing fall,
neither foul their hands nor faces: they were set down at these tables in
very good order, and in gallant chayres, in such sort that although they were
every one at his table by himself, yet they might see and talk one with an
other, they were served with diverse sorts of cates, and very well dressed
both of flesh and fish, as gamons of bacon, capons, geese, whole hens, and
pieces of beef, and at the last many little baskets full of sweet meats made
of sugar, and marchpanes all wrought very curiously. They gave them wine of an
indifferent color and taste, made of the palm tree, Wine of a palm tree.
(whereof there is no other used in all that country) our Spaniardes did use
it, as that which was made of grapes. All the time that the supper endured,
there was in the hall great store of music of diverse instruments, whereon
they played with great consort, some one time and some an other. The
instruments which they commonly do use are hoybuckes, cornets, trompets, lutes,
such as be used in Spain, although in the fashion there is some difference.
There was at this banquet (which endured a great while) the captain that was
ordained for their guard, and the captain Omoncon and Sinsay. When supper was
done, they were carried into very fair chambers, whereas were fair beds,
where they slept and eased themselves.

The next day following in the morning, was brought unto them their ordinary
victualles, and that in abundance, as we^l of flesh as of fish, fruits and
wine, to be dressed unto their own content, and according unto their manner:
they would take nothing for the same, for so they were commanded by the
Insuantes. This was brought unto them every day so long as they were there,
and in the way when as they went unto Chincheo. The same day arrived a Captain
of forty ships in the same port, and so soon as he was a shore, he went
straightwayes unto the palace for to see the strangers: who being advertised
of his coming, came forth and received him at the palace gate, where as was
used betwixt them great courtesy. The Captain came with great majesty, with
his guarde of Soldiers and mase bearers before him, with great music of
hoybuckes, trumpets and drommes, and two whiffelers, or typp staves, that made
room putting the people aside: also there came with him two executors of
Justice or hangmen, having each of them in their hands a set made of canes,
which is an instrument wherewith they do whippe and punish offenders, and is
so cruel that who soever does receive sixty strokes with the same, although
he be a very stout man and strong hearted yet it will kill him, for that he
is not able to abide it. They do beat them upon the ^highes and calves of
the legs, causing the offender or patient to lie down upon his breast or
stomach and command their heads and legs to be holden. The Judges,
Captains, and Loytias have ordinarily these officers before them, for to beat
such as will not go out of the way when as they do pass the streets, and
such as will not alight from their horse, or come out of their close chayres
when they do meet with them. When this Captain came unto the Palace gate,
whereas the father Friars and their companions did receive him, he was brought
on the shoulders of eight men very richly apparelled, and he in a chair
wrought of Iuorie and gold, who stayed not till they came into the inner
chamber, whereas he did a light from the chair, and went straight under a
cloth of estate, that was there ordinarily for the same purpose, and a table
before him: there he sat down, and straightwaies arose up, and standing he
did receive the strange guests, who did courtesy unto him according unto their
fashion, which is to join their hands together, and to stoop with them and
their heads down to the ground: he gratified them again, with bowing his
head a little, and that with great gravity. Within a little while after he
spoke unto them with great majesty, bidding them welcome into his kingdom,
being glad of their coming, saying that himself was come to see and cherish
the^ for that they should receive no discontent, as ye proof shall show. These
speeches being finished, there was brought forth certain pieces of black
silk of twelve vares long a piece. And his officers did put on the Friars
shoulders each of them two, which was for either shoulder one, and was brought
about their bodies and girt therewith: the like was done in order unto the
spanish soldiers and unto Omoncon and Sinsay and to their interpreter. But
unto Omoncon and Sinsay was given unto either of them a branch or nosegay made
of silver which was set upon their heads, which is accustomable honor that is
done unto such as have done some great enterprise, or such like.

After that this ceremony was done, they played upon the instruments before
said which came with the Captain. In the mean time of their music, there
was brought forth great store of conserues, marchpanes and things made of
sugar, and excellent good wine: and so being on foot standing, he caused them
to eat, and he himself from the chair whereas he sat did give them to
drink every one in order, without rising up, which is a ceremony and token
of great favor, and of love.

This being done, he arose from the chair under the cloth of state, and went
and sat down in that which was brought on men's backs, and with declining of
his head a little he departed out of the hall and out of the house, and went
unto his own house, whereas by the counsel of Omoncon and Sinsay within an
hour after they should go and visit him, the which they did: he received
them marueilously well and with great courtesy: who marvelled at his great
majesty and authority, for that Omoncon and Sinsay when they did talk with
him were upon their knees, and so did all the rest: yet that which they did see
afterward done unto the Insuanto and viceroy, was much more.

He gave them again in his own house a gallant banquet, of diverse sorts of
conserues and fruits, and excellent wine of the palm tree, and did talk and
reason with them in good sort, and was more familiar than at his first
visitation, demanding of them many things in particular, and beholding their
apparayle and garments, with show of great content and rejoicing.

CHAP. XIIII. The Spaniardes depart from Tansuso to visit the Governor of
Chincheo, who awaited their coming: where they saw notable things by the way.
AFter that the fathers with their companions had remained two days in the
port of Tansuso, whereas they were marueilously well entertained and feasted at
the commandment given by the Insuanto, as you have heard, the third day they
departed in the morning toward Chincheo, whether they were commanded to be
carried with great speed and good intertainement.

At their going forth of the town they were accompanied with a great number
of soldiers, both hargubushes and pikes, and before them a great noise of
trompets, drommes, and hoybuckes, till such time as they came unto the rivers
side, whereas was a brygandine provided and made ready in all points to
carry them up the river: all the streets alongest whereas they went, there
followed them so much people that it was innumerable, and all to see them. So
when they were embarked, the which was done with great speed to avoid the
press of the people, there came unto them the Captain of the ^ortie ships, of
whom we made mention in the Chapter past, with three byrgandines, one wherein
he was himself, and was marvelously well trimmed: and in the other two were
soldiers that did bear him company. As soon as he came unto them, he
straight ways entered into the brygandine whereas the religious men were with
three Spaniardes, and brought with him great store of conserues, and made them
a gallant banquet, the which did endure so long as he was with them, which was
the space of rowing of two long leagues, in which time their pleasure was such
that they thought it but a quarter of a league. From thence he departed from
them and returned, but left many things behind him for their comfort in their
journey, and made great offers, with an outward show, that it was a grief
unto him to depart from out of their company.

All alongest the ryuers whereas they went, was seated with villages very
gallant and fresh, both on the one side and on the other. Some of them did
content our people very much, who asked the names how they were called, and
the Captains answered them and said, that those were villages that did not
deserve the honor of a name, but when you do come there whereas the king is,
you shall see Cities, that it shall be a worthy thing to know their names,
the which towns have three and four thousand soldiers, such as in Europe
are esteemed for reasonable Cities.

At the end of the two leagues, there whereas the Captain did leave the
company of our Spaniardes in the river, they came unto a great baye, whereas
was at an anchor a fleet of more then a hundredth and fifty ships men of
war, whose General was this Captain, whom we have spoken of, that did bear
the Friars and the rest company. At such time as the fleet did discover them,
they began to salute them, as well with great pieces of artilerie, as with
hargubushes, and other kind of pastimes, which commonly they do use at such
times: and that is done by the commandment of their General.

At such time as they had made an end of shooting and other pastimes, then did
he take his leave of them with the ceremony aforesaid, and went out of the
brygandine whereas the Friars were and went into his own, which carried him
unto the Admiral wherein he embarked himself. Our Spaniardes after his
departure did travail up the river more than three leagues, having continually
both on the one side and on the other very many and fair towns, and full of
people. In the end of the three leagues they went a land half a league from
the Town of Tangoa, whereas straightwayes all such things as they carried with
them were taken upon men's backs, and carried it unto the town before them,
whereas they were tarying their coming, for to give them great entertaynement.
At their going a shore, they found prepared for the two religious men little
chayres to carry them upon men's backs, and for the soldiers and the rest of
their companions, was ordained horse. The fathers did refuse to be carried, and
would have gone a foot, for that the way was but short and pleasant, full of
green trees, and again for humility, refusing to be carried in so rich
chaires and upon men's backs of so good a vocation as they seemed to be. But
Omoncon and the other Captain would not consent thereunto, saying, that it was
the order given by the Insuanto, and that they could not by any means break
but perform in all points, or else to be cruelly punished for the same, I
mean such captains as had the charge for to guard and bear them company:
and that no excuse could serve the^, and again that it was convenient so to be
done, for yt from that time the Chinos should respect them and understand that
they were principal persons, for yt they were carried upon men's backs, as
they do their Loytias. The fathers obeyed their reasons, and entered into the
chayres and were carried with eight men a piece, and the other their companions
with four men a piece, according unto the order given by the governor. Those
that carried the chaires, did it with so good a will, yt there was striving who
should first lay hands to them. This town of Tangoa has three thousand
soldiers, and is called in their language Coan: at the entering in, it has
many gardens and orchards and a street where through they carried the
Spaniards unto their lodging, they affirmed it to be half a league long, and
all the street whereas they went, it was full of bordes and stalles where on
was laid all kind of marchandice very curious, and things to be eaten, as
fresh fish and salt fish of diverse sorts, and great abundance of ^oule, and
flesh of al sorts, fruits and green herbs in such quantity that it was
sufficient to serve such a City as Siuell is. The press of people was so much
in the streets, that although there were many typstaues, and soldiers that did
make way whereas they went, yet could they not pass but with great difficulty.
So they were brought unto the kings house, which was very great, marueilously
well wrought with stone and brick, and many halles, pa^lers, and chambers, but
none above but all below. So soon as they were afoote, there was brought from
the Captain or Justice of the town, whom they do call Ticoan, a message,
bidding them welcome, and therewith a present which was great store of capons,
hens, teales, ducks, geese, flesh of four or five sorts, fresh fish, wine, and
fruits of diverse sorts, and of so great quantity that it was sufficient for
two hundredth men. All the which they would have given for a little cool air,
by reason that it was then very hot wether, and again the great number of
people yt came thither to see them did augment it the more. So in the evening
the two spanish soldiers went forth into the streets to walk abroad, and left
the two Friars within their lodging, unto who^ afterward they did give
intelligence of all things that they had seen, which did cause great
admiration: the wall of the town was very broad, and wrought with lyme and
stone, full of loope holes and watch towers. And as they passed through the
streets there came forth of a house a very honest man as it seemed, who was
very well apparelled and stayed them for that in the same house there were
certain dames principal personages, that did see them a far off, and not
content therewith, they did request them with great courtesy for to enter into
the house that they might the better see the^: the which they did straightwaies
accomplish, and entering in, they were brought into a court, whereas was set
chayres for them to sit down, and the Ladies were there a little from them
beholding them with great honesty and gravity. Then a little after they sent
them a banquet with marchpanes and sweet meats made of sugar, which they did
eat without any curiosity and drunk after the same. The banquet being done,
they made signs and tokens unto the^, that they received great content with
their sight, and that they might depart when yt their peasure was, the which
they did after yt they had made great courtesies with thanks for their
friendship received of both parts. So after they had taken their leave they
went to see a house of pleasure yt was hard by ye town wall, wrought upon the
water, with very fair galleries and open lodges for to banquet in, made of
masons work, and therein many tables finely painted, and round about it
sesterns of water wherein was store of fish, and joining unto the^ tables of
very fair alabaster, all of one stone, and the least of them was of eight
spannes long: and round about them were brooks of running water, that gave a
pleasant sound in the mean time they were banketting, and nigh thereunto
many gardynes full of all sorts of flowers. And a little from that place they
saw a bridge all of Masons work, and the stones very well wrought and of a
mighty biggnesse, they measured some of them, that were twenty and two and
twenty foot long, and five foot broad, and seemed unto them that it was a
thing impossible to be laid there by man's hands. Of this bigness, yea and
bigger they did see laid upon many other bridges, in the discourse of their
voyage going to Chincheo and Au^heo. In this town they tarried and rested
themselves all that night, marueiling very much at that which they had seen.
The next day in the morning when they were up and ready, they found in the
house all things in a readiness and in very good order, for their departure,
as well their little chayres, and horse, as for men to carry their stuff and
apparel, which did not a little make them to marvel, how that every one of
the^ with a waster upon their shoulders, did divide their burden in two parts,
six roues before and six roues behind, and did travail with the same with
so great ease and swiftnes that the horse could not endure with them. They went
unto the Ticoan his house, he who sent them the present over night, to give him
thanks for his courtesy, and to take their leave of him. They found him with
great majesty, but yet gave them great and good entertainment, and craved
pardon at their hands, if that he did not give them the entertainment and
courtesy as they deserved. He did likewise put upon each of them two pieces of
silk, in the same order as the governor of Tansuso did. So when they had
surrendered unto him thanks, they took their leave and departed from Chincheo
whereas was the Insuanto or governor, by whose order was showed unto them all
the courtesy as you have heard.

CHAP. XV. The Spaniardes do prosecute their journey to Chincheo, and sees
many notable things by the way.
FRom this town of Tangoa unto Chincheo is thirteen leagues, and so plain
way that it gives great content to travail it: in all the way they could not
see one spanne of ground but was tilled and occupied. The like they do say is
of all the ground that is in the whole kingdom: it is full of people, and the
towns one so near to an other, that almost you can not judge them to be
many towns but one, for that there was but a quarter of a league distant one
town from an other, and it was told unto them that in all the Provinces of
the kingdom, it is populared in the same order. All their ground they till is
watered, which is the occasion of the frutefulnesse thereof, so that they do
gather fruit all the year long, and our Spaniardes did see in all places
whereas they came, that they were gathering of rice, some new sprung up, some
with ears, and some ripe. They do plough and till their ground with kine,
Bufalos, and bulls, which are very tame, and although they be great, yet be
their horns but of a spanne long and turning backwards to the tail, in such
sort that they can not do any hurt or harm with them: they do govern them
with a cord that is made fast to a ring that is in their nose, and in like
sort do they govern the Bufanos. They do feed them commonly in the fields
of rice, for that they have no other grasinges, and all the time that they are
feeding a boy does ride on every one of them to disturb them, that they do
no harm therein. But to eat the weeds and grass that do grow in the rice.
In this province and all the rest of the fifteen in that kingdom, they gather
much wheat, and excellent good barley, peese, Borona, Millo, Frysoles,
Lantesas, Chiches, and other kinds of grains and seeds, whereof is great
abundance and good cheap. But the chiefest thing that they do gather and a
victual that is most used amongst them and the borderers there aboutes is
rice.

All the hie ways are covered with the shadow of very fair orchardes which
do garnish it very much, and they are planted in very good order: and
amongst them there are shoppes, whereas is sold all manner of fruits, to the
comfort of all such as do travail by the way, which is an infinite number,
some on foot, some on horseback and others in little chayres. Their waters by
the hie ways are very good and light, although the wether at that time was
very hot, especially at noone time, yet was the water of their wells and
fountaynes very cool. The same day when they had trauayled half way, they
saw a far off coming marching toward them in very good order, a squadron
of soldiers, which at the first caused them to marvel, and to be a fraide,
till such time as they drew nigher, it was told unto them, that it was the
Captain of the guard unto the Insuanto or Governor of Chincheo, who came by
his order to receive them with four hundred soldiers very well armed with
pickes and hargubushes, and well apparelled. So soon as the Captain came unto
them, he was mounted on a bay horse, but of small stature, as they for the most
part be in all that province, he alighted and came unto the fathers, and his
companions (who likewise did alight from their little chayres) and did salute
the one the other with great courtesy. And the Captain told them, how that
the Governor did send him with those soldiers for to receive him and to
bear him company, and how that he was in the City tarrying their coming
with great desire to see them, and commanded that with all speed possible
they should shorten the way.

The Captain came very well apparelled with a chain of gold about his
neck, a man of a good audacitie and understanding. Hard unto his stirryp he
had a page that went with him and carried a great Tira sol, A thing to keep
away the sun.
made of silk that did shadow him all over. The bunnet that this Captain did
wear, was like unto them that before they had seen others wear: he had
before him great music of trompets and hoybukes whereon they played in great
concord. This Captain with his four hundredth soldiers did continually guard
them, till they came unto the City of Chincheo, and never departed from them a
jot: the which was done more for pomp, and to show their majesty then of
necessity: for that although the people are infinite and without number, The
people of the country wear no weapons, but the soldiers.
yet do they wear no weapons, for that they are commanded by the law of the
country to the contrary upon pain of death, of what state or degree so ever
he be, but only the soldiers such as are in every town for the guard
thereof, and the garrisons that the king has continually ready to come forth
when that any occasion shall serve.

In this hie way continually there went and came many pack horses, laden with
m^rchandice and other things, but the most part of them were Mules. The hie
ways are very broad, that twenty men may ride together on a rank and one
not hinder an other, and are all paued with great stones: and they say that the
ways thoroughout all the other Provinces be in the same order, and was done by
a king of that country, who spent upon the same a great part of his treasure.
And it seems to be true, for that our Spaniards traueling in that country
over high and mighty mountains, yet did they find the ways plain, in such
sort as has been told you.

CHAP. XVI. Our Spaniardes arrived at the City of Chincheo, whereas they were
received and lodged, and what they saw in that City.
Upon a Saturday being the eleventh of July came our Spaniards unto the city
of Chincheo four hours before it was night. This city is of the common sort
in that kingdom, and may have seventy thousand housholdes. It is of great
traficke and well provided of all things, Chincheo has seventy thousand
households.
for that the sea is but two leagues from it: it has a mighty river running
alongest by it down into the sea, by which is brought by water and carried
down all kind of marchandice. There is a bridge over the said river, which
is supposed to be the fairest that is in all the world: it has a draw
bridge to serve in time of wars or for any other necessity: the bridge is
eight hundredth paces long, and all wrought with stones of two and twenty foot
long, and five foot broad, a thing greatly to be marueiled at: at the entry
thereof there were many armed soldiers ready to fight, who when they came
within hargubush shoot did salute them in very good order. There was nigh
unto the said bridge in the river riding at an anchor more than a thousand
ships of all sorts, A thousand ships in one river.
and so great a number of boats and barks that all the river was covered, and
every one full of people that had entered into them for to see the Castillas,
for so they did call the Spaniardes in that country, for the streets in the
suburbs nor in the City could not hold them, the number was so great, yet
their streets are as broad as our ordinary streets in any City in all
Spain.

This City is compassed with a strong wall, made of stone, and is seven fadam
hie, and four fadam broad, and upon the gates many towers wherein is placed
their artilerie, They have no use of castles.
which is all their strength, for that they do not use in their kingdom
strong castles as they do in Europe. The houses of the City are all built
after one sort and fashion, but fair, and not very hie, Earth quaks in this
country.
by reason of the earth quakes which are ordinarily in that country.

All the streets (but especially that wherein they passed at their coming
thither) have on the one side and on the other, sheddes, Rich marchandice.
under the which are shoppes, full of rich marchandice and of great value and
very curious. They have in equal distance the one from the other, many
triumphant arches which do set out the streets very much, and is used in
every principal street thorough out all the kingdom, Triumphant arches.
in the which they have excellent market places, whereas is to be bought all
things that you will desire to be eaten, as well of fish as of flesh,
fruits, herbs, comfits, conserues, and all things so good cheap, that it is
almost bought for nothing. Their victualles are very good and of great
substance, their hogs flesh whereon they do feed much, is so wholesome and
good as the mutton in Spain. The fruits that we did see, some were like unto
them we have in Spain, and others never the like seen by us before, but of an
excellent taste and savor. But in especial one kind of fruit which is
bigger than a musk million, but of the same fashion, but of marvelous
excellent and precious victual and pleasant to be eaten, a kind of plummes
that is of a gallant taste, and never hurts any body although they eat
never so many, a thing proved by our Spaniardes many times. The street that
they came in at, was so full of people, that if a grain of wheat had been
thrown amongst them, it would scarce have fallen to the ground. And although
they were carried in little chayres upon men's backs, and the Captain (of
whom we speak of) before them making way: yet were they a great while before
they could pass the street, and be brought unto a great house, which was a
covent, wherein dwelt religious men of that country, thither they were brought
and lodged, being very weary of the press of people that did trouble them
very much with desire to take their ease.

CHAP. XVII. The governor of Chincheo does call the Spaniards before him, and
shows unto them the ceremonies that they must use to have aundience.
THe same day that they came into the city (as aforesaid) was a good while
before night, with more desire to take rest and ease themselves of their
journey, and of the travel they had in the streets, by reason of the great
number of people that came to see them, then to make any visitation that night:
but the Insuanto or governor of the city did send and commanded that
forthwith they should go unto his house, for that he had great desire to see
them: the which they did more for necessity of the time, then for any good
will. They went forth from their lodging on foot, whether it was for that the
governors house was near hand, or else peradventure at his commandment,
which they could not well understand, but did as the captain that guarded
them did command. In the midst of the street, whereas was no less number of
people then in the other, whereby they entered into the City, they met with a
Loytia that came to entertain them with great majesty, and had carried before
him many banners, mase bearers and tipstaues, and others which carried settes
or whips, which they did traile after them made fast unto long sticks, which
were the executioners, the which do go always making of way, parting the
people before the Loytias, as you have heard. The majesty and company
wherewith he came was so great, that they verily did believe him to be the
Insuanto: but being certified, they understood that it was one of his
counsailers that came from the governors home to his own house, which was in
the same street whereas he met with them. This counsailor was carried in a
chair of Iuory, garnished with gold and with curtines of cloth of gold, and
on them the kings arms, which are certain serpents knotted together (as has
been told you.) But when he came right against the spaniards, without any
staying he made a sign with his head, and commanded that they should return
back again unto his house, which was hard by: the captains did straightways
obey his commandment, and returned with them. The counsailor entered into his
house, which was very fair, he had in it a fair court, and therein a gallant
fountain and a garden. After him entered the spaniards all alone, the rest
remained without in the street at the Loytias commandment, he entertained them
with very good words of semblance, and said in conclusion that they were
welcome into that kingdom, with many other words of courtesy: unto the which
they answered with the same courtesy, with signs and by their interpreter that
they carried with them. This Loytia commanded a banquet to be brought forth,
and wine to drink, he began first both to eat and drink. Then he commanded
to call in the captain, unto whom was given the charge to bear them
company, and did chide with him very sharply and severely, because he did
carry them on foot (they could not understand whether it were done for a
policy, or of a truth, although the effects wherewith he did chide seemed
of a truth) he straightwayes commanded two rich Chayres to be brought
forth for to carry the Fathers, and to give unto their companions horses: the
which being done, he willed them to go and visit the governor, who did tarry
their coming: and that another time at more leisure he would see and visit
them.

They followed their way all along the street, which seemed unto them to be
more fairer then the other wherein they entered, and of more fairer houses and
triumphant arkes: and also the shoppes that were on the one side and on the
other, to be better furnished with richer things then the others, in so ample
sort, that what therewith, as also the great number of people which they saw,
they were so amassed, that they were as people from themselves, thinking it to
be a dream. To conclude, after they had gone a good while in that street,
delighting their eyes with new things never seen of them before: they came
into a great place, whereas were many soldiers in good order with their
hargabushes, pickes and other armor in a readiness, apparelled all in a
liuerie of silk, with their ancients displayed. At the end of this place, was
there a very fair and sumpteous palace, the gate was wrought of masons work
of stone, very great and full of figures or personages, and above it a great
window with an iron grate al guilt: they were carried within the gates, the
soldiers and the people which were without number, remained without and could
not be avoided but with great difficulty. When they were within the first
court, there came forth a man very well apparelled and of authority, and made
signs with his hand unto them that brought the Spaniards, that they should
carry them into a hal that was upon the right hand, the which was
straightwayes done. The hall was very great and fair, and at the end thereof
there was an altar, whereon was many Idols, and all did differ the one from the
other in their fashion: the altar was rich and very curiously trimm^d with
burning lamps: the altar cloth was of cloth of gold, and the fruntlet of the
same.

After a while that they had been there whereas the Idols were: there came a
servant from the governor and said unto them in his behalf, that they should
send unto him the interpreter, for that he would talk with him, and tell
him some things that they ought to observe, if they would have any audience of
him: they straightwayes commanded him to go. And the governor said unto him
that he should advise the fathers and the rest of his companions, that if they
would talk and treat of such business as they came for* that it must be done
with the same ceremony and respect, as the Nobles of that province do use to
talk with him: which is upon their knees (as afterward they did see many
times used) if not that they should depart unto the house whereas they were
lodged, and there to tarry the order that should be sent from the vizroy of
Aucheo.

The Spaniards when they heard this message, there was amongst them diverse
judgments and opinions, striving amongst themselves a good while, but yet in
conclusion, the religious Fathers, whom the governor of the Islands had
ordained and sent as principalles in this matter, and whose judgment they
should follow, said that they ought to accept the condition, seeing that by
no other means they could not come unto that they pretended: and not to leave
it it off for matters of small importance, for that therein they make no
offense unto GOD, and it may be a mean unto the converting of that mighty
kingdom, whom the devil makes reckoning to be his own, and not now to
leave it off, but rather to procure all means that may be, as they had begun
to do, and seeing that it is no offense unto God, as aforesaid, neither sent
as ambassadors from the king of Spain, I do not know to the contrary, but
that we may consent unto the will of the Insuant, and in especial being a
thing so commonly used in that country. This opinion and judgment was
followed, although the soldiers that were with them were of a contrary
opinion: so they sent answer unto the governor with the said interpreter, that
they will observe their accustomed ceremonies, and will do all that he will
command them according unto the custom of the country: otherwise they could
not be permitted to entreat of such things, wherefore they came thither, from
far countries and with so great travel.

CHAP. XVIII. The Spaniards have a loving and favorable audience of the
governor of Chincheo, to whom they do give the letters they brought from the
Islands Philippinas.
WHen that the Insuanto understood that the spaniards would enter with the
reverence accustomed, and in such order as was declared unto them, he
straightwaies commanded that they should come into the hall whereas he was,
which was a thing to be seen, as well for the bigness, as for the riches that
was in it, the which I do let pass because I would not be tedious. The
spaniards were carried forth out of that hall whereas they were first, and
after that they had passed the court whereas they came in, they entered into
another hall as big as the first: whereas were many soldiers with their
weapons in their hands in very good order, and richly apparelled, and next
unto them were many tipstaues and sergeants, with different ensigns or badges,
all apparelled with long robes of silk, guarded and embroidered with gold, and
every one of them had a helm on his head, some of silver and other some of
tynne guilt over, which was a gallant thing to see: all had long hair and dyed
yealow, which hong down behind their ears upon their backs: they were
placed in very good order, and made a lane that the Spaniards might pass
thorough: then they came into a gallerie, which was joining unto the chamber
where the governor was, and there they heard such a noise of instruments of
diverse sorts, which endured a good while, and was of so great melody, that it
seemed unto them that they never before heard the like: which caused unto them
great admiration to see so great majesty amongst Gentiles. Great mai^stie.
When the music was ended they entered into the hall aforesaid, and had not
gone many steps, when as they met with the counsailer that met with them in the
street aforesaid, and with him other two of his companions all on foot and
bare headed before the governor, and their ensigns of majesty left off: which
is generally used in all the kingdom, the inferior to make any show when
that he is before his superior. Then they made signs unto them for to kneel
down, for that the Insuanto was nigh at hand in a rich tower, under a canapie
of great riches, and did represent so great majesty as the king himself: he
did entertain them with tokens of great love, and humanity, and told them by
their interpreter, that they were very well welcome, and that he did greatly
rejoice to see them, with many other words of great favor. This governor was a
man of goodly person, well favored, and of a merry countenance, more then any
that they had seen in all that country. He caused to be put upon the
shoulders of the fathers and of the soldiers that were with him, every one of
them two pieces of silk, which was crossed about them like skarfes, and
likewise to either of them a branch of silver: the like courtesy he did unto
the captain Omoncon, and unto Sinsay, and commanded to give unto all their
servants every one of them a mantle of cotton painted. This ceremony is used
in that kingdom unto al captains and other men that have done some valiant
exploit, (as we have told you before.) This being done, the fathers did give
unto him the letters which they carried from the governor and general of the
field, and a note of the present that was sent him: craving pardon for that it
was so small, but time and opportunity would not serve as then to send unto him
a thing of greater price and valor: certifying him, that if the friendship
which they pretended did go forwards, and come to be established, that then all
things should be amended and amplified. He answered unto their profers with
words of great favor, and made signs unto them to arise, and to go and take
their rests, there whereas they were lodged: the which they did, and sound all
things in very good order and well furnished, as well of beds as of all
other ne^essaries, which was done by the commandment of the governor. Before
they departed out of the palace, the captain of the guard did carry them
unto his lodging, which was within the court, and there he made them a banquet
with conserues, and fruits in abundance: the which being done, he and other
Gentlemen of the palace did bear them company until they came to their
lodgings, which they greatly desired, for that they were weary of their journey,
and also with the trouble of the great press of people that pressed on the^ in
the streets and otherwise for to see them: the which captain of the guard did
appoint a company of soldiers for to guard the^ both night and day, the which
was done more for majesty then for necessity or security of their persons.
They had a steward appointed to provide them and all their company of all
things necessary, and that in abundance, and not to take of them any thing,
which was given by particular commandment by the governor.

CHAP. XIX. The Spaniards are visited by the principals of Chincheo, the
governor did send for Pedro de Sarmiento and Myguel de loarcha, and gives them
particular audience, and does well inform himself of all things touching
Limahon the rouer.
THe next day following, which was sunday the twelfth of July, many of the
Gentlemen of the city did go unto the Spaniards to visit them, using many
ceremonies according to their custom with favorable words, promising to
perform it in deeds, when as need did so require: and such as could not go
themselves did send their servants, bidding them welcome and to know of their
good healthes, and how they did like of their cities and country. The
Spaniards did make answer, and gratified them all, as well those that came in
person, as the other that sent their servants: in the which visitation they
spent all the whole day, having great admyration to see the good behauior,
nurture, and gallant demeanure of those Gentlemen, and the great discreation
they had in the demanding of any thing they would know, as also in their
answers made to our requests. The next day the Insuanto sent a commandment
wherein he willed the two fathers to remain in their lodgings and take their
case: but the two soldiers Pedro Sarmiento, and Miguel de Loarcha should come
and speak with him, and that they should bring with them their interpreter,
for that he had one there with him (who was a Chino, and understood the
language of the Philippinas, but so badly, that they could not by his
interpretation talk of any matter of importance. So when they came thither,
they were brought whereas he was, but with less ceremony then on the first
day: but yet they found him with the like majesty as before. He asked of them
how the fathers did, and they themselves, and if they were refreshed of the
travel in the journey, and how they did like of the country, and other
things, which did demonstrate great aff^bilitie. Being by them satisfied of
his demands, he requested them to declare unto him the whole circumstance of
the coming of Limahon the rouer, unto the Islands, and how the Spaniards dealt
with him: that although he had been informed pa^ticularly in all things, by
the Captain Omoncon and Sinsay, yet he was in a jealousy that they told him
not the tr^eth. He was nothing deceived in that he suspected,) for after that
our soldiers had made a true relation of the coming of the rouer unto
Manilla, and of all the rest as you have heard in the discourse thereof in this
book, he found that they differed very much, the one from the other, for that
they did attribute it wholly unto themselves to get honor and benefit: but
the Insuanto like a wise man straightwayes understood their pretense. But when
that he perceived that Limahon was neither dead nor prisoner, but only
besieged, he offered unto them that if they would return again unto
Pagansinan upon him whereas he was, he would give unto them five hundred ships
of war, with people suf^^cient to serve both by sea and land, He offered
500. ships of war,
and more if they would request. They answered him, that all such cost and
labor were but in vain, for that the general of the field who has him in
siege, with the people and ships that he has, are sufficient to end that
enterprise, and to send him hither alive or dead, and that long before that
their fleet should come thither. And besides this, their Islands were poor of
victuals, and could not sustain so great an army many days. Being satisfied
with these reasons, he gave place that the interpreter which they brought
should come in where as they were, for he remained at the door without, for
that he would be fully certified to avoid the suspicious doubt he had before he
come in presence, yet he did help them very much. So when their interpreter was
come in, the Spaniards seeing good occasion and opportunity for to declare that
which passed the day before, betwixt them and the fathers, touching the
speaking unto him on their knees: and seeing as it seemed unto the^ that he was
at that time in a good mind for to hear them, Note the spaniards ^nsolencie.
they did utter unto him all the whole contention (after that they had declared
many reasons of great consideration, to give them to understand that it was not
convenient to do it, but especially to religious men, who were there as
principals over the rest, unto whom the king of Spain (their lord) himself
does stand on foot, when as they do entreat of any matter, although it be but
of small importance: for that they are priests and ministers of God, whom he
does worship and reverence.

The Insuanto with a merry countenance did answer them, that unto that time he
understood no more of them, then in that he was informed by the captain
Omoncon, and did not acknowledge them to be any other but Castillas: without
knowin^ wherefore they came, nor from whom, for lack of the lett^^^ sent from
their governor, and general of the field the first time that he spoke with
them: neither had he any knowledge of the custom of their country: yet
notwithstanding, that which has passed here, without any exception of person,
if they would take it in good part, in that which is to come shall be amended:
and from that day forwards, at al times whenever it were their pleasure to
come of themselves, or at such time as they were sent for, for to talk with
him as they do use in Castilla or Spain, unto such of their dignity and
vocation, the which he granted with a very good will: a^though he not grant
unto any that pre-eminence, no not unto a vizroy, except he were an ambassador
sent from some king. With this resolution, and with many other good words they
took their leave of him, and went joyful and content unto their lodgings,
whereas they sound the friars weary with entertaining of such as did visit
them, and with great desire to see them, to know wherefore the Insuanto did
send for them, with whom they had been so long time. But after that that they
understood the effect of the whole, and how that the governor did permit that
they should talk with him after their own fashion, they were maruellously
glad thereof, and had a very good hope to conclude their pretense, wherefore
they went, and praised God for the good success of that which they pretended.

CHAP. XX. The governor does banquet the Spaniards, and afterward make all
things in a readiness for to go unto Aucheo* whereas the vizroy tarieth their
coming.
THe next day following, the governor called a Gentleman of his house unto him,
and commanded him to go and visit the Spaniards, and to inform himself of
them if that that they lacked any thing, as well in their victuals as in their
lodgings, and to know if they did require any thing particular to themselves to
advise him thereof, and he would furnish them forthwith for the love that he
bare unto them, for their good contractation, and for the great service that
they had done unto the king, in the business of Limahon. And also that he
should in his name inuit them for the next day following to dine with him in
his house. This Gentleman went unto them and accomplished his message: and the
Spaniards answered, kissing his hand for the great care he had of them:
saying that they were furnished in all things abundantly (as in truth they
were) and how they were maruellously well lodged, cheered, and lacked nothing:
and that the great care he had of them was agreeable unto the hope they had of
his good presence and gentleness: accepting the inuiting for the next day, the
which was given them, and accomplished in this form following.

The next day when they went unto the palace which was at dinner time, they
were carried into a hall that was below in the second court, whereas were many
chaires of velvet and tables that were painted with their frontals before: they
had no table clothes on them, for that they do not use any in that country,
as has been told you in the first part of this history, neither is it
needful for their manner of feeding. In the first chaires they caused the
Friars to sit down, every one at a table by himself, and each of them other
six tables, placed in order, compassing ^ounde like a circle: then were the
Spanish soldiers set in the same manner, and each of them had five tables, and
next unto them the captain of the guard b^longing unto the governor, and two
other Captains: and every one of them had three tables. For that it is the
custom of that country to make a difference in the quality of the guestes,
by the n^mber of the tables. All these were placed in circle or compass (as
aforesaid) that they might see one another. In the midest betwixt them there
was a round compass, whereas was represented a comedy with much pastime, and
endured all the dinnner time, and a good while after. There was also great
store of very good and excellent music, accompanied with gallant voices,
also iesters, with puppets and other things of great pastime, to drive the
time away.

On the first table was set to every one of the guestes, little baskets wrought
with gold and silver wyre, full of sweet meats made of sugar, as Marchpanes,
Castles, Pitchers, Pots, Dishes, Dogs, Bulls, Elephants, and other things
very curious, and all guilt: besides this there were many dishes full of
flesh, as Capons, Hens, Geese, Teales, gamons of Bacon, pieces of Beef, and
other sorts of flesh wherewith all the tables were replenished, saving that
whereat they did sit to dine, which was replenished with victuals that was
dressed (for all the other was raw) and was of so great abundance, that there
was at times more then fifty dishes, and they were served with great
curiosity. They had wine of diverse sorts, and of that which they do make in
that country of the Palm tree, but of so great excellency, that they found
no lack of that which was made of Grapes. The dinner endured four hours, and
according unto the abundance and diversity they had in victuals, it might
have endured eight hours, for it was in so good order that it might have been
given unto any prince in the world.

Their servants and slaves that they brought with them at the same time, did
dine in another hal nigh unto the same, with so great abundance as their
masters. When dinner was done, the governor commanded the people to come unto
him, with whom he did talk and common with great friendship, and good
conversation, and would not consent that they should kneel down, neither to
be bare headed. So after that he had made unto them tokens of friendship,
and detained them a while, in demanding of many things, lastly he told them
that there was an order come from the vizroy of Aucheo, that they should go
thither with great speed, so that it did require that they should depart the
next day following, for the which they were very glad and joyful, for that
they had great desire the one to see the other: and again with him they might
treat and common tguching their coming into that country, and for what
intent: and for all other things needful, for that he was a man fit for their
purpose, and one well-beloved of the king. So he took his leave of us with
great friendship and courtesy: who did surrender the same after our custom,
putting of our cappes, and making reverence, for the which he made show that
it greatly contented him.

At their going forth out of the hall, they found the captain that did dine
with them, and with him many other Gentlemen that tarried their coming for to
bear them company unto their lodging: going before them many servants, that
did carry the raw meat, that was upon the other tables over and above that
which they did eat on, the which was done for great maie^tie, and a ceremony
very much used in that kingdom, so many times as they do make any banquet.

So when they came unto their lodging they found that the Insuanto had sent
them a very good present, in the which was for every one of them four pieces
of silk, and counting chestes with other things, and certain painted mantels
for the servants and slaves. So after they had taken their leave of the
captains and Gentlemen that did bear them company home, they began with
great joy to put all things in order for their journey the next day following.

CHAP. XXI. The Spaniards depart from the City of Chincheo, and comes to
that of Aucheo, whereas the vizroy did tarry their coming.
THe next day in the morning before that the Spaniards were stirring, there was
within the house all things necessary for their journey, as well of litter
chaires, as of horses and men for to carry them, and their stuff, the which
they did with so good a will (as aforesaid) that they did fall out and strive
amongst themselves, who should be the first that should receive their burden.
So all things being in good order, they departed, having in their company the
same captain and soldiers, that unto that time had been their guard, until
they came unto the city of Aucheo, whereas the vizroy was. This journey was
unto them joyful, as well for to entreat of matters touching their coming,
and to be resolved what they should do, as also to depart out of Chincheo,
whereas they passed much trouble, by reason of the great number of people that
came for to see them, who never would be satisfied: and yt was in such
extremity, that some days at ten of the clock in the night, the street
round about their lodging were full of people, and only to see them, which
caused great trouble and heat with their rumor and press amongst them. This
day by reason they understood that they should depart, the prease and multitude
of the people was so great, that although they had tip staves before them, to
beat the people away and to make room, yet was it almost night before they
could get out of the city: so that they were constrained to remain in a town
there hard by all that night, where as by the commandment of the governor
they were very well lodged, and their supper made ready in very good order,
as it was in seven days together, till such time as they came unto Aucheo
without taking for the same or for any other thing necessary for their
sustentation, any price or value. There went continually before them a Post
with a provision from the governor, written in a great board wherein was
declared who they were, and from whence they came, and commanding that there
should be provided for them all things necessary in abundance, upon the
kings cost, which was the occasion that so much people came for to see them,
that in the high ways they were many times disturbed: so with great trouble,
the third day they came unto a city which was called Megoa, which was
sometimes the head government, the which was offortie thousand households, but
a great part thereof was dispeopled: the occasion thereof they told us, (and
was) that about thirty years past, the Iapones, who brought for their guides
three Chinos, who do now dwell in Manilla, and are become Christians, and
came upon that city, (to revenge themselves of an injury that was done unto
them) the which they put in execution with so great secrecy and policy, that
they made themselves lords of the city without any danger or hurt unto
themselves: for that fifty Iapones, men fit for that purpose, did apparel
themselves in Chinos apparel without being known, and came unto a gate of the
City, whereas the soldiers that had the charge thereof were void of all
suspicion of any enemies that would come, which was the occasion that their
armor and weapon was not all in a readiness. And within a little while after
that, followed two thousand that did disembarke themselves in a secreat and
unknown place, and came in very secret order, because they would not be
discovered, and did beset that gate of the city, whereas their companions
were, which they sent before: who so soon as they saw them nigh at hand,
drew out their weapons the which they carried hid under their apparel, and set
upon the soldiers (that were void of fear and unarmed) with so great fury
and force, that they being amassed were easily slain, so that they were lords
of the gate, whereas they left very good guard, and followed their victory,
and made themselves lords of the City, without any danger unto their
persons, and did possess the same certain days, and did sack the same in
spite of them all, with great harm and loss unto the inhabitants thereof,
until such time as the vizroy of Aucheo did l^uie an army together of three
score and ten thousand men, and went upon them with courage for to be
revenged on the injury received, with the death of all the Iapones: but they
seeing that they could not defend themselves against so many, in one night
they left the City and went unto their ships, whereas they had left them in
very good order, and carried with them the spoil of the City, leaving it
beaten down and dispopulared the greater part thereof: in which sort the
Spaniards found it, and the injury received so fresh in their minds as though
it had been done the day before.

In this City they were lodged in the kings house, the which was of very
great and fair buildings: there was given them to dine and suppe in very good
order, and with abundance. So soon as they came thither, the Friars remained
in their lodgings, but Pedro Sarmiento and Miguel de Loarcha went to visit the
governor, using the spanish courtesy with him: and he received them with great
joy and courtesy. After they had taken their leave and returned unto their
lodgings, the governor sent to visit them El Tyu, who is the auncientest of
his counsel, who was with them a good while very friendly, and offered his
service in all things that were needful, and so departed to his house
maruellously well accompanied.

The governor sent unto the two soldiers that went to visit him, e^h of them
two pieces of silk.

At their departure from this City, traveling toward Aucheo, they passed
over a mighty great river, by a bridge all made of stone: the goodliest and
greatest that ever they had seen, whose greatness did cause wonderful
admiration, so that they stayed and did measure it from one end to another,
that it might be put amongst the wonders of that country, which they took a
note of. They found that it was one thousand and three hundred foot long, and
that the least stone wherewith it was built, was ofseuenteene foot, and many
of two and twenty foot long, and eight foot broad, and seemed unto them a
thing impossible to be brought thither by man's art, for that all round about so
far as they could see, was plain ground without any mountains: by which
they judged them to be brought from far. When they were passed that bridge,
they traveled all the rest of the day till night upon a causie that was very
broad and plain, and on both sides many victualling houses, and the fields
sowed with Rice, wheat, and other seeds: and so full of people as in the
streets of a good town or city.

So when they came into the suburbs of the city of Aucheo, they found order
and commandment from the vizroy, what should be done, as more at large shall be
declared unto you in the chapter following.

CHAP. XXII. The entry of the Spaniards into the City of Aucheo, and how the
vizroy did entertain and receive them.
AFter they had traveled more then half a league in the suburbs of the city
of Aucheo, they met with a post that came from the vizroy: who brought order
that they should reremaine in a house that was appointed for them in the said
suburbs, and there to be lodged for that night, for that it was late, and they
could not come unto the house appointed in the city for them, or else
peradventure to give content unto many that had great desire to see those
strangers, for that they must pass thorough the City, and better to be
seen in the day then in the night. So soon as they were alighted, there came
a gentleman to visit them, sent from the vizroy to bid them welcome, and to
know how they did with their journey, and also to see that they were well
provided for that night of all things necessary, and that in abundance. After
all the which being done, he told them that the viceroy did very much rejoice
of their coming, and for that it was late, and the City far off, it was his
pleasure that they should be lodged that night in the suburbs until the
next day, then will he give order, that they may enter into the City with the
authority convenient unto their persons. After this Gentleman came other
Captains to visit them, and brought with them great store of conserues, wine,
and fruit: which is a common custom amongst them, when that they go in the
like visitation, and it is carried by their servants in little baskets very
curiously wrought, or else in barrels made of earth all guilt. Within two
hours after their coming thither, there came another messenger from the
vizroy with many men laden with Capons, Hens, Geese, Teales, gamons of Bacon
and conserues of diverse sorts, and of great abundance, sufficient for one
hundredth men to sup that night, and for their dinner the next day.

The next day in the morning very early, there came much people unto their
lodging, sent by the vizroy, and brought with them two rich Chaires for to
carry the fathers in, and the curtines tied up, that they might the better be
seen, and for their companions very good horses, sadled after the fashion
which they do use. They forthwith made haste for to depart, and although they
made great speed, yet were they a good hour and a half before they could
come unto the gates of the City, and seemed unto them that they had traveled
two leagues in the suburbs: the which was so well peopled, so fair houses,
and many shoppes full of merchandise, that if it had not been told them, they
would not have believed it to be the suburbs, but the city it self.

Before they came unto the gates, they passed a mighty river three times over
bridges that were great and very fair, and the river so deep, that great
ships came up the same, but their mastes stooping down, to pass under the
bridges. This City is the richest and the best provided that is in all the
kingdom: it is the head City of all the Province, very rich and fertile,
and many towns belonging unto it, and but eight leagues from the sea, and
has mighty rivers, wherein great ships come up to it as aforesaid. At the
enterie of the City, they found many Gentlemen that were there at the gate
tarrying their coming: who after they had saluted the one the other after
their fashions, without any staying they traveled forwards on, thorough a
great and broad street that went directly unto the vizroy his palace: upon
both sides of the street, from the gate forwards was placed one by another
full of soldiers with their officers and ancient, every one with his weapon
in his hands, as pickes, hargabuses, swords and target, all apparelled in one
liuerie of silk, and a bunch of feathers upon their crestes. They all stood
still and kept their places, and would not consent that any should cross the
way in the street, whereas they went accompanied with the Gentlemen.

They had no leisure to tell the soldiers, but they saw that from the gate
until they came unto the vizroyes palace on both sides, which was a good way
to beefull of them, and all richly apparelled and of one color. The people
that were at the windows and in the street, betwixt the houses and the
soldiers were so great a number that it seemed to be doomes day, and that all
the people in the world were there joined together in that street.

So when they came unto the palace which was two hours after day, the
Gentlemen that were their guides did cause the Spaniardes to enter into a room
which was hard by, till such time as the gate was open, for that it is open but
once a day, and so continue no longer time then the audience endures, which is
done by the Uiceroy once every day, and that is but a small time. But first
before he does enter into audience, there is shot off four pieces of
artilerie, with a great noise of trompettes drommes and waits. And there is no
day that passes without audience, as our people did see by experience so long
as they were there, and were likewise informed of others. The hour being come,
and the ceremony done as aforesaid, the gates were opened, and there was in
the court many soldiers, apparelled in the same liuerie that those were of in
the street. From the midst amongst them came forth a gentleman who was as it
was told them, the Captain of the guard of the viceroy, who came with great
gravity and authority toward the place whereas our people were, and after
they had saluted the one the other, he made signs unto them that they should
go toward the gates of the palace. When they were within the first court,
the which was great and wrought with mighty pillars, there was a great number
of soldiers, and many sergeants that entered into an other great court, and
mounted up a pair of stayres that was on the one side, whereas all the people
were with great silence, saving the captain of the guard, who went with our
people till they came to the gates of the hall, whereas was the viceroy, at
which gate he stayed with his head discovered, and made signs unto ours that
they should do the like, and to tarry there till such time as he had advised
the viceroy of their coming, and he to command them to enter.

CHAP. XXIII. The Spaniardes have audience of the Viceroy of Aucheo, and are
visited of some of the principal officers, who declare unto them certain
things of that city.
THen straightwayes came forth of the hall a man apparelled in a long robe, of
good personage, and asked of the Spaniards if they would speak with the
viceroy, and they answered, yea: then asked he again from who^ they came and by
whom they were sent, they answered, yt they were sent by the governor of
Philippinas, who was servant unto the mightiest king in all Christendom. When
he had this answer he returned again into the hall, and within a little while
after he came forth, and bad the^ come in, but gave them to understand, that in
entering into the hall whereas the viceroy was, yt they should kneel down, and
talk with him in that order till he commanded to the contrary, if they would
use this ceremony, that then they should come in, if not that they should
return back again. They who were certified thereof by the governor of
Chincheo did not stand therein, but said yt they would observe ^he order given
unto them. Therewith he went in, who seemed to be the master of ceremonies,
making a sign that they should follow after him, and do that which he willed
them to do.

At the entering in at the door they stayed a little, and then kneeled down
right oueragainst there whereas the Uiceroye sat in a chair very high like
unto a throne, with a table before him, and was in so dark a place that almost
they could not see his face very well. On the one side of him there were some
like unto Heraldes of arms, with sc^pters in their hands, and on the other
side two men of a gallant comeliness armed with Corselets made of skales of
gold down to the cafe of their legs, with bows in their hands of gold,
and quiuers at their backs of the same. Both the one and the other were upon
their knees. There was upon the table before him, paper and all things
necessary to write: which is an ordinary use amongst them at all times, when
there is any public audience, and on the one side of the board a Lion made of
black wood, which was (as after they understood) the arms of that province.
So straightwayes he made signs unto them to draw near, which they did, and
kneeled down a little from the table which was whereas the master of
ceremonies did will them. In this sort they began to talk with him by their
interpreter, and told them the occasion of their coming into that City and
kingdom, and from whom and unto whom they were sent. But he made signs unto
them that they should arise, the which they did with a very good will* and did
persevere in their intent. But the Uiceroye did cut them off before they could
make an end, and asked if they had brought any letter from their king, unto
the king his Lord, whom they would go to see and talk with: but when they
answered no, he straightwayes took his leave of them, saying that they were
welcome, and that they should depart unto their lodginges and to take their
ease, for that afterward they should have occasion to declare their minds
unto him, and he would give them their answer, for that the king was far
of, and it requires a long time to come whereas he is, but he would write unto
him, and according unto his commandment he would make them answer. And
therewith he took the letter, and the memorial of the present, and commanded
in his presence, to put about the necks of the Friars in manner of a scarf to
either of them six pieces of silk, and unto the soldiers their companions,
and unto Omoncon and Sinsay each of them four pieces, and to every one of
their servants two a piece, and to give unto the two Friars and the soldiers,
Omoncon and Sinsay, every one of them two branches of silver, which is a thing
used in that country, unto them that have done some worthy deed, as has
been told you before.

So with the silk about their necks and with the branches in their hands,
they returned out of the hall and down the stairs the way they came, and so
through the court into the streets* from whence they saw them shut the court
gate with so great a noise as when they did open it. From thence at the request
of Omoncon and Sinsay they went unto the house of Totoc who is the Captain
general of all the men of war and unto the house of Cagnito^ who is ye
chief standerd bearer: their houses were nigh the one the other, very fair
and great. They found the^ with as great majesty as the viceroy, and in the
same order, with a table before them, and had on each side of the^ armed
soldiers, kneeling on their knees. Yet did they not use our men with the
courtesy that the viceroy used, to cause them to stand up, which was the
occasion, that straightwayes they made a show that they would depart and be
gone, complaining of Omoncon and Sinsay for that they did carry them thither,
and told them with anger that the governor of Manilla did entreat them in a
different sort, who was there resident for the mightiest prince in all the
world, and they but easy merchants, neither was their going thither to be
equalled, unto the benefit that they cam^ thither for. This discontent the
which they received was the occasion that they would not go to make any more
visitations, although the said Omoncon and Sinsay for their own interest,
would have carried them to the houses of other officers and gentlemen of the
court. But they made signs unto those that were their guides, to direct their
way unto their lodgings for that they would go to eat somewhat, and to take
their ease, the which was ordained in a great house of the kings, there
whereas ordinarily the Judges do sit to hear matters of Justice.

So at their coming thither they found all their stuff in good order, and
their dinner marvelous well provided, and the whole house hanged and trimmed
as though it had been for the kings own person, with many waiting men and
soldiers those which did guard them both day and night, and hanging at the
door two tables or bordes (commanded by the viceroy) whereon was written who
they were, that were there lodged, and from whence they came, and wherefore,
and that none whosoever, should be so hardy as to offer them any wrong or
disturbance, upon pain to be for the same offense severely punished. In this
house they were more in quiet, than in any other place whereas they had been,
A city of three hundred thousand households.
neither did the people give them so much trouble, by reason of the great care
which the Judges had in putting order for the same, by the commandment of the
viceroy, yet was it the greatest town and most populed of all that province
(although in other provinces there be that be much bigger) and is affirmed that
the City of Taybin or Suntiem (there whereas the king and his court is
resident) has three hundredth thousand households, A city bigger the^ the
other, and requires three days to go from one gate to an other.

Seventy leagues compass.


and yet there is a bigger City in the kingdom called, Lanchin, which
requires three days to go from one gate to an other, and is in compass more
then seventy leagues, the which is not far distant from Canton, that which the
Portingalles has great notice of. But of certain there is very much spoken of
the mightiness of this City, and I my self have heard reported and affirmed
to be of a truth, by men of authority that have been in the City of
Canton, religious Friars of the order of Jesus or Jesuits to whom ought to be
given credit.

This City of Aucheo has a very fair and strong wall made of stone which is
five fadam high, and four fadam broad, The wall of the City is five fadam
high and four^ broad.
the which was measured many times by our people, for that they had a gate out
of their lodging that did open to the same. This wall is all covered over with
tiles to defend the rain water for hurting of it, which could not to the
contrary but receive damage, for that there is no lyme used in the whole wall.
They have not one castle in all this City, neither is there any used in all
that kingdom, for all their force and strength is in their gates the which be
made very strong, with a double wall within very broad, betwixt the which are
continually many soldiers such as do keep watch and ward both day and night.

Upon these gates they have much ordinance, but very ill wrought (I mean such
as were seen by our men) yet they do say that in other places they have
excellent good and very curiously wrought. The whole wall is full of
bartilmentes, and thereon written the names of such soldiers as are bound to
repair thither in the time of necessity. At every hundredth paces they have
lodginges the which are very huge and great: there whereas in the time of
necessity do remain and dwell their Captains, so long as their troubles do
endure, all the wall is fortified with two great mots or ditches the one within
and the other without, The city double mooted.
the which they do fill at all times when they please, by sluices which they
have from the river for the same purpose, and do serve of water almost all the
houses in the City, whereas they have their stanges for the most part full of
fish This mighty City is situated in a great plain and compassed round about
with mighty rocks and mountains, which is the occasion that it is not so
healthful, and the inhabitants say, that it is by reason of the mountains,
and many times it is overflowed in the winter by spring tides from the river.
And in that year that this does happen it does destroy and ruinate a great
part of the city, as it was at that time when our people did see it, for yt in
the winter before they were troubled with these great tides, which did them
much harm.

Now to return to our purpose, you shall understand that in the kings house
aforesaid, our people remained all the time that they were in this City,
whereas they were made much of, and visited by the principal of the same, but
in especial of the viceroy, who the very same day di^ send to inuit them for
the next day following, who made unto them a famous banquet, as you shall
understand in this chapter following.

CHAP. XXIIII. The viceroy does banquet our people in his own house two days
one after the other.
THe next day after that our people came into the City, the Uiceroy did send
to inuit them to dinner to his own house, whereas he made them a great banquet
in the form following. At their coming unto the palace there came forth a
great number of Gentlemen, servants unto the viceroy, to bid them welcome,
with great store of music and tokens of mirth. Being entered into the first
court, they brought them into a mighty hall that was marueilously well
trimmed, wherein was a great number of tables set in such order as they were in
the banquet that was made them by the governor of Chincheo, (as has been
told you) although in the number and furniture did far excel the other. But
before they did sit down, there came unto them two captains principal men,
unto who^ the viceroy had committed the charge of the banquet, to do all things
in his name, for that it is a custom in that kingdom, that noble me^ must not
be present in their bankets they make. So the charge was given unto them, to
make the^ be merry, and to bid his guests welcome. When they came unto them they
used great courtesy, and passed away the time in gall^nt discourses, till it
was time to go to dinner, and that they began to bring in their victuals. A
strange ^eremonie.
Then before they did sit down, the captains did take each of them a cup in
his hand, in manner of a Sorlue as they do use, and being full of wine, they
went together whereas they might discover the heaven and offered it unto the
sun, and unto the saints of heaven, adding thereunto many words of prayers:
but principally they did request that the coming of their new guestes might
be profitable unto them all, and that the friendship which they did pretend to
establish, might be for good both unto the one and to the other. This their
oration and prayer being done they did spill out the wine making a great
courtesy, then were they straightwayes filled again, and making reverence
unto their guestes every one by himself, they set the cups down upon the
tables whereas the fathers should dine whereas they were set every one by
himself. This being done, the first service was set upon the bordes, and the
Captains were set at other tables, which were not so many in number, nor so
well furnished nor dressed as the other: the dinner was famous and of many
diversities of meats, exceeding very much that which was made them by the
Governor of Aucheo.

The time which the banquet endured (which was very late) there was great store
of music of diverse instruments, as of vials, gitterns, and rebuckes, and
with them many iesters did make them merry at their dinner. The which being
done, the said Captains did bear their guests company out of the palace,
whereas they did anew inuit them to dinner for the next day in the same h^ll:
they obeying their request did come, whereas was made unto them a banquet more
famous than the first.

This day at the banquet was present the Totoc, he whom they visited the first
day, came in his own house, and found with so great majesty. Likewise there
dyned with them the Captains that were at the first banquet. Comedies used
amongst them.
In this second banquet they had as the day before, very much music, and a
Comedy that endured long, with many pretty and merry iestes: there was also
a tombler, Tomblers.
who did his feats very artificially, as well in vauting in the air, as
upon a staff that two men did hold on their shoulders. Before the comedy did
begin, was told them by their interpreter the signific^tion thereof, that
the better they might content themselves in the conceiving, whose argument was,
that in times past, The argument of the^^ comedy.
there was in that country many mighty and valiant men. But amongst them
all, there was in particular three brethren that did exceed all the rest that
ever were in mightiness and valiantness. The one of them was a white man, the
other was ruddish or hie colored and (...) third black. The ruddish being
more ingenious, and of better industry, did procure ^o make his white brother
king, the which judgment was agreeable unto the rest. Then they altogether did
take away the kingdom from him that did at that time reign, who was called
Laupicono, an effeminate man and very vicious. This they did represent very
gallantly with garments very meet for those personages.

The banquet and play being finished, according as they did the day before, the
Captains did bear them company till they were out of the palace, and from
thence they went unto their lodgings, with their ordinary company appointed
by the viceroy, which was that Captain that we have spoken of, with his
soldiers, who neither night nor day does not depart from their guard.

CHAP. XXV. The Spaniards do carry their present unto the viceroy, who having
received it by the hands of Omoncon does seal it and send it unto the king:
our men be forbidden to go forth of their houses to see any thing in the
City: and it does entreat of other particular things.
THe same night our men did common amongst themselves, to see if it were good
presently to give order to put in ure the thing they came for: seeing that they
might treat thereof with the Uiceroy, he being a man that showed unto them so
much favor and good will. So in conclusion they were all resolved that
straightwayes the next day in the morning, should go unto him Michaell de
Loarcha, and Peter Sarmiento, and carry unto him the present which they
brought, and to have with them to bear them company Omoncon and Sinsay, and
being presented, to request that he would appoint a day when they might go
and talk with him about principal matters.

This accord they put in execution according unto their determination, and the
two soldiers went and carried the present as it was agreed. So they came unto
the palace, and having tarried till such time as they opened the gates of the
audience, (which was with the ceremony spoken of in the 22. chapter) it was
told unto the viceroy that the Castillos were there and had brought a present,
who incontinent said that as then he ^ould not talk with them: but that the
captain Omoncon and Sinsay should enter in with the present, and that they
should return unto their lodginges, for that he had a care to call them when
that opportunity did serve to entreat of all things to their pleasure. They did
as they were ^ommaunded, and those who carried the present in, did afterward
give our people to understand all that had passed with them, saying that in
opening the present, there was a note thereof taken before a notarie, and
straightwayes commanded to be put in again where it was taken out before the
said notarie and other witnesses, the which being done he sealed it up, and
sent it unto the City of Taybin unto the king and his counsel, and therewith
that which the Governor of Chincheo did send him, as shall be told you: for
that they have a rigorous law in that kingdom, that does prohibit all such
as have any office of government, to receive any present of what quality so
ever it be, without license of the king or of his counsel, upon pain to be
deprived of bearing any office all the days of their lives, and to be
banished and condemned to wear red bonnets (as we have declared the effect
thereof.)

This is conformable unto that which the governor of Chincheo did, in the
presence of our people, at such time as they went to take their leave of him,
for to go unto Aucheo, which was, that in their presence they commanded to
take forth all that they brought him in present, and showing it unto them
piece by piece. He asked if it were that which they had brought, and they
answered that it was the same (although it was with troubled minds) believing
that it was to check them because it was so small in respect of their
mightiness: he asked them if there lacked any thing, they answered no, then
straightwayes he commanded to put it again whereas it was taken out in their
presence, and before a notarie and witnesses: the which being done, was mailed
and sealed and so sent unto the viceroy of Aucheo in their company, and said
that he could not receive it without the license aforesaid.

So our soldiers seeing that they could not be suffered to enter in with the
present, they took it for a great discourtesie and disfavor, and therewith
departed unto their lodging, to give the fathers to understand thereof, who
liked not well thereof, but yet they concluded amongst themselves to suffer
for a while, and to commit unto God the direction thereof, as it best may be
for his holy service.

The next day following, the viceroy did send to visit them, and to ask of
them a sword, a hargubush and a ^laske: for that he would cause others to be
made by them, the which they did send, and afterward understood, that they
had counterfeited the same although not in so perfect manner.

Then after a time our people seeing, that their being in that city seemed to
be long and like to be longer, they did procure to drive away the time in the
best manner they could, and went abroad into the city and did by either of
them that which they thought best. All things good cheap.
Whereof they found great abundance, and of so small price, that they bought it
almost for nothing.

They bought many books that did entreat of diverse matters, which they
brought with them to the Islands (as appears more at large in the chapter for
the same.)

The next day they went to see the gates of the City, and all such curious
things as were to be seen so far as they could learn or understand, which
were many. But amongst them all they saw a sumptuous temple of their Idolles,
111. Idols in one chapel.
in whose chief chapel they counted one hundred and eleven Idols, besides a
great number more that were in other particular chapels, all were of carved
work, very well proportioned and gilted: but in especial three of them that
were placed in the midst of all the rest, the one had three heads proceeding
out of one body, the one looking on the other in full face. The second was the
form of a woman with a child in her arms, the third of a man apparelled
after the form and fashion that the Christians do paint the Apostles. Of all
the rest some had four arms, and some had six, and other eight, and other
some marvelous deformed monsters. Before them they had burning lamps, and many
sweet parfumes and smelles, but in especial before the three above specified.

But when that the viceroy did understand that our people did go viewing the
City gates and temples (and perceives that they that gave him the notice did
suspect it that it was to some ill intent) therewith he straightwayes commanded
that they should not go ^oorth out of their lodging without ^is license: and
likewise commanded the Captain that was their guard not to consent thereunto
as he had done, and likewise that none should carry them any thing for to
sell, for he that did it should be punished with whipping. Yet notwithstanding,
they had every day very sufficient necessaries for their personages in such
ample wise, that there did always remain, and not lack.

In this closeness and keeping in, they suffered many days with much
sadness, and oppressed with melancholic humors, to see that their purpose
wherefore they went thither seemed to be long, and every day was worse and
worse. Yet no^withstanding they did pass it over in the best wise they could,
in committing it with hearty zeal unto God, for whose honor and glory they
did attempt that voyage, and prayed unto him for to move their hearts to
consent that the religious fathers might remain in that country, for to
learn the language (as they had begun many days before) by which means their
souls might be saved, and clearly delivered from the tyranny of the devil,
who of truth had them in possession. So after many days that they had remained
in that close estate as aforesaid, they determined for to go and talk with
the viceroy, and to be fully resolved either to tarry or return from whence
they came. They straightwayes did put it in ure, and what ensued thereof you
shall understand in the chapter following.

CHAP. XXVI. The Spaniardes talk with the Viceroy, and not being suffered,
they do write to him a letter, and he does answer it by word of mouth, with
other particular matters.
IT has been declared unto you, that the same day yt the Spaniardes did talk
with the viceroy, he asked them if they had brought any letter for their king,
they answered no: he told them that he would write unto the court, and having
answer, they should be fully satisfied of their pretense and demand.

But they seeing that his answer was long a coming and great delay made
therein, and that they had them as half prisoners, they determined to go and
speak with the viceroy, to be fully satisfied of his determinate will and
pretense, and to have some order either to go unto the court, or to remain in
that city, or else to return unto the Islands, and there to tarry the time
till it pleased God to open a gate in that kingdom, wherein might enter his
holy gospel.

With this their pretended purpose, they did persuade with their captain to
permit them so much liberty as for to go and speak with the viceroy, who for
that he bare them love and good will did consent thereunto. So they went, but
when they came thither they that kept the gates would not consent yt they
should enter, which was the occasion that they returned unto their lodgings
very sad and sorrowful, and almost without any hope to bring their matter to
pass, for the which they went thither, for that it seemed unto them although
they did plainly declare unto them their pretense, yet did they work in such
order for to cause them to depart. In this order they remained in the city
certain days, and for to conclude either to stay there or depart the
kingdom, they were resolute, and determined to write a letter unto the
viceroy, and therein to give him to understand particularly, that their coming
thither into ye country was to entreat that betwixt the^ and the Castillos
there should be peace and friendship, and being concluded that their soldiers
should with that news, depart unto the Islands from whence they came, to give
the governor to understand thereof, and they to remain in that country
preaching ye holy gospel. They could find none that would write this letter
for them, although they would have paid them very well for their pains. Till
in the end, by great request and prayings the captain Omoncon did write it for
them* and straightwaies departed unto the city of Ampin that was not far
off, making an excuse for to go and see the visitor of the province whom they
do call Sadin: he would very feign have carried with him two of our people, yt
he might have seen them, but none would go with him. This journey which
Omoncon made, he did it to put away the suspicion they might conceive, that he
did write the letter, if that peradventure the viceroy would take it in ill
part.

People in great subiec^ion.
Their letter being written, they found great difficulty in the sending the
same, for that there was n^ne that would carry it, neither would they consent
that our men should enter into the palace to deliver it. But in conclusion,
what with requests and gifts they persuaded their Captain of their guard to
carry it, who did deliver the same unto the viceroye, in name of the
Castillos, saying that he took it of them to bring it unto him, for that they
did certify him, that it was a thing that did import very much. Having read
the letter, he answered that he would give the king to understand thereof, as
he said at the first time. And in that touching the Friars remaining in that
country to preach, at that time he could make them no answer, for that in
such matters it was first requisite to have the good will of the Royal
Counsel* Yet would he make answer unto the letter they brought from the
Governor of Manilla, and that they might depart, and return again at such
time as they brought Limahon, prisoner or dead, the which being done, then
shall the friendship be concluded which they do pretend, and to remain and
preach at their will. With this answer they remained without all hope to
remain there, and did incontinent prepare themselves for to depart from
Manilla, and bought many books to carry with them, wherein was comprehended
all the secrets of that kingdom. By reason whereof they might give large
notice unto the royal majesty of king Phillip. The which being understood by
the Uiceroy, who had set spies to watch their doings, did send them word that
they should not trouble themselves in the buying of books, for that he would
give them freely all such books as they would desire to have: the which
afterward he did not accomplish: whether it was for forgetfulness or other
occasion, as we have more at large declared unto you, we know not: yet did the
Uiceroy send and demanded to see some of those books that the Friars had
bought, who after that he had seen them, did return them again, and requested
of them some writing of their own hands, who did accomplish his request, and
sent them written in spanish and in their own language, the Lords prayer, the
aue maria, and the ten commandments, who according unto the relation of him
that did carry the same, said, that after he had read it, he made shows
that he received great content therewith, and said that all which was there
written was good.

In the time that they stayed in this City, amongst all other things that they
understood, to drive away the time was one, it was given them to understand
that in one of the prisons, there was a Portingale prisoner, who was taken in a
ship of the Iapones with others of his nation, who were all dead in the
prison, and none left alive but he alone. Our people being very desirous for
to see him, and to learn of him some secrets of that country, for that he had
been there a great while, they did procure to talk with him, asking license
of the supreme Judge and lieutenant unto the viceroy, who did not only refuse
to grant it them, but did make diligent inquiry who they were that did give
them to understand thereof, for to punish them, which without all doubt,
should be executed with sharp and severe punishment. Yet our people would
never tell them of whom they had it, although it was demanded of them diverse
times, and with great entreaty. They had so great desire to know it, that they
did use all means possible as it appeared in the boldness of their demandes.

CHAP. XXVII. There came news unto Aucheo that there was a rouer upon the
coast of Chincheo, which did much harm, and had sacked a town. The viceroy
does suspect him to be Limahon, and how that our people with Omoncon and
Sinsay, had not declared unto him the truth.
THe Spaniards remained in the City of Aucheo twenty days, in the order as
has been told you, without any hope, that the religious fathers should remain
in that country for to preach the holy gospel, which was the principal
occasion of their going into that kingdom. Upon a sudden there came news
unto the city that the rouer Limahon was upon the coast of Chincheo using his
old accustomed cruelties, and how that he had spoiled and robbed a town upon
the sea coast. This news was throughout all the city, and appeared to be
true, touching the effect of the dead: yet false touching the person, for that
the rouer was called Taocay an enemy and contrary unto Limahon: but a friend
unto Vintoquian, of whom we have spoken of. But thereupon the viceroy and all
them of the city were conformable in the suspicion that they had received,
which was that our people, Suspicion of evil.
were come into that kingdom upon some evil pretense, and to see the secrets
thereof, to some evil end, which was the occasion yt from that time forwards
they showed them not so good countenance as they did before.

These news was not so soon come, but straightwayes the viceroy did send for
Omoncon (who was then returned from his visiting) and Sinsay unto whom he had
done courtesy, and given them the title of Loytias and captains, and he did
reprehende them very sharply for that they had brought over people thither,
and said that they had told him a lie, in saying that Limahon was besieged,
in such sort that he could not escape, neither had the Castillos burnt his
ships, and how that all was but a made matter amongst themselves, and how
that the Captains which they brought, and said that they had taken from
Limahon, they had robbed from other places, with other words in the same
order, and said that the Spaniardes were spies that came to discover the
secrets and strength of the kingdom, and how that they had brought them
thither by force of gifts that they had given them.

They answered him with great humility in saying that in all that which they
had said they did speak the truth, and that it should appear at such time as
the news of the rouer should be better known, the which if it shall appear
to be contrary, they were there ready for to suffer whatsoever punishment yt
should be given them. The viceroy being somewhat satisfied with this their
justification, bad them to depart, remitting all things unto time for the true
declaration thereof. Then Omoncon and Sinsay came straightwayes to give ye
Spaniards to understand of all that had passed with the viceroy, and what they
understood of him, which caused in the^ so great fear, yt for the time which
it endured (which was till such time as they understood the truth as
aforesaid) they paid very well for their feasts and bankets the which they
had made them. All this happened in the time that Omoncon and Sinsay were at
variance, and spoke many injurious words the one of ye other, discovering their
intents and devises, whereby it plainly appeared that in all yt which they had
told unto the viceroy, they lied, but in especial Omoncon. Sinsay did
dissemble, for he said and told unto all people, that by his order and
industry, our people did fire the ships of Lymahon, and besieged him, with
other speeches in the like sort, yet twenty days before his coming thither,
all was ended and done, as appeared. The occasion of their enimitie and
falling out, was for that the viceroy had given unto Omoncon a title and charge
of more honor then unto Sinsay having made betwixt them a consort that the
reward or dignity should be equally divided betwixt them, and that the one
should speak of the other the best they could, because the viceroy should do
them friendship. This condition and consort (as appears) was evil performed
by Omoncon being addicted unto self love, and seemed unto him that Sinsay did
not deserve so much as he did, for that he was a base man, and of the sea, and
he of the more nobility, and had the office of a captain. All this which I
have said, was the occasion yt the truth came to light betwixt them, and to
cause the viceroye to suspect, that as they lied in this, they might also fable
in the burning of the ships and besieging of Limahon.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Governors of ^^e province do assemble together, to entreat
of the Spaniardes business, and are resolved, that they should return unto the
Islands. They do see many curious things before their departure.
WIth this grief and care remained the Spaniards certain days kept close in
their lodgings, and were not visited so often as they were when they first came
thither, which did augment very much their fear, till such time as they
understood that the viceroy either of his own good will, or else by some
particular order from the king and his counsel, had called together all the
governors of that province of Aucheo to entreat of matters touching Limaho^,
as also in particular, why and wherefore the Spaniards came thither, and to
resolve themselves wholly in all things requisite for the same. So when that
they were all come together, which was in a short time, and amongst them the
Governor of Chincheo, who by an other name was called Insuanto, they had
particular meetings together with the Uiceroye, in the which they were all
agreed to have a general meeting, whereunto should be called the Castillos,
and to demand of them in public audience the cause of their coming (although
notwithstanding they had given to understand thereof unto the Insuanto and
vizroy) and being heard, to give them their answer according as they had
determined: for the which upon a day appointed they met all together (but not
the vizroy) in the house of the Cagontoc, and commanded to come before them the
Castillas, who did accomplish their request with a great good will, for that
they understood that they were called to entreat of their matter, either to
tarry or depart. So when they came thither, they were commanded to enter into a
mighty hall, whereas they were all set in very rich chaires with great
gravity and majesty. The Insuanto seemed to be the chiefest amongst them,
but whether it was for that he was the principallest next unto the vizroy (or
as it was told them) for that it was he that sent Omoncon in the chase of the
rouer Limahon they knew not, but so soon as they were entered into the hall,
they were commanded to draw nigh, there, whereas they were all placed, without
bidding them to sit down, neither did they use any particular circumstances or
courtesy.

The Insuanto took upon him the charge, and demanded of the Spaniards (by
means of the interpreter) what was the occasion of their coming into that
country, and to declare their pretense, for that they would give unto them the
resolute will of the vizroy, at whose commandment they were called and there
assembled together. The Spaniards answered unto their request and said that
their coming thither was to treat with them peace and friendship, by the order
of the governor of ye Philippinas, who had his authority from the king of
Spain, with a particular charge ever since the said Islands were discovered,
who in all things that possible has been, have showed themselves not only
in words but in deeds, as unto this day the governor does accomplish the
same, in ransoming all such Chinos as they can find, or come unto their
powers, and send them home free into their country with gifts, and not in
this only, but in other matters, which is not unknown unto them: and more,
that which lastly had happened in the destruction of the fleet, and the
besieging of the rouer Limahon, with which news they came ^hither to entreat
and conclude between them and the Castillias a perpetual friendship: this was
the principal occasion of their coming, the which if they could bring it to
pass (as a thing that did accomplish both the one and the other) they would
with ye same news send word with the soldiers (who came with them for the same
effect) unto the governor of Manilla, who sent us thither for that he might
send the good success thereof to the king of Spain, and there to remain in
such place as they would appoint them to study the learning of the language,
and to preach and declare to them ye holy gospel, which was the right way unto
the salvation of their soul. Unto all the which they gave attentive ear,
although with little desire to see the experience, as appeared, for that the
chiefest matter in effect, they did let pass, and asked of them in what order
they left the rouer Limahon, and whether he might escape or not, and other
questions touching the same matter which endured a good while without touching
of any other matter in effect. The Spaniards answered as they thought, and
supposed, that at that time it could not be, but that he was either taken
prisoner or slain.

Then did the Insuanto conclude his speech in saying unto them that they should
return unto their own country to the Islands, and at such time as they did
bring Limahon, they would conclude all things touching the friendship they
requested, as also for the preaching of the gospel.

So with this last resolution they took their leave and went unto their
lodging with pretense not to speak more of that matter, for that they saw it
booted not: after they had given their censure: and again, as they understood
it was by special order from the king and his counsel, and therewith they
began to put all things in good order for their departure, the which they
greatly desired, for that they saw little fruit to proceed of their great
labor and travel, as also to see themselves clear of that manner of prison
in the which they were, not to go forth of their lodgings without express
license.

So from that day forwards they did procure with all haste for to depart, and
gave the vizroy to understand thereof, who answered them and said, that they
should comfort themselves and receive joy and pleasure, and that he would
dispatch them, so soon as the visitor of that province was come to Aucheo,
which would be within ten days, for that he had written unto him, that he
should not dispatch them until his coming, for that he would see them.

From that day forwards he commanded that sometimes they should let them to
go forth abroad to recreate themselves, and that they should show unto them
some particular pleasure or friendship. So one of them was carried to see the
mustering of their men of war, which they have in a common custom throughout
all the kingdom to do it the first day of ^he new moon, and is sure a thing
to be seen: and they do it in the field which is joining unto the walls of the
city, in this manner following.

There were joined together little more or less then 20. thousand soldiers,
pickemen and hargabus shot, The use of their mustering.
who were so expert, that at the sound of the drum or trumpet, they
straightwayes put themselves in battle array, and at another sound in a
squadron, and at another the shot do divide themselves from the rest, and
discharge their pieces with very gallant and good order, and with a trice put
themselves again into their places or standings: this being done, the pick
men came forth and gave the assalt altogether with so good order and consort,
that it seemed unto the Spaniards that they did exceed all the warlike orders
used in all the world: and if it were so that their stoma^ks and hardiness
were equal unto their dexterity and number of people, it were an easy thing
for them to conquer the dominion of all the world. If it so chance that any
soldier should lack in his office, and not repair to his place appointed,
Soldiers are punished.
he is straightwayes punished very cruelly, which is the occasion that every
one of them has a care unto his charge. Their mustering is one throughout the
whole kingdom.


This their mus^^r endured four hours, and it was certifi^d unto the
Spainiards that the same day and hour it is done in oll cities and towns
throughout all the whole kingdom, although they are without suspection of
enemies.

Five and twenty days after that the Insuanto had given the resolute answer
unto the Spaniards, came the visitor thither: and the whole city went forth to
receive him, who entered in with so great majesty, that if they had not known
who he was, they could not have been persuaded but that he had been the king.

So the next day following the Spaniards went to visit him, for duties sake,
as also for that he had a desire to see them They found him in his lodging,
where he began to make visitation of the city.

In their courts were an infinite number of people which came thither with
petitions and complaints, but in the halles within, there was none but his
servants and sergeants. When that any came for to present his petition, the
porter that was at the entry made a great noise in manner of an.o. est. for
that it was a good way from the place whereas the visitor did sit, then comes
forth straightwayes one of his pages, and takes the petition and carries it
in unto him. At this time it was told him how that the Castillas were there:
he commanded that they should enter, and talked with them a few words, but
with great courtesy, and all was touching the imprisonment of Limahon without
making any mention of their departure or tarrying. So after a while that he had
beholded them and their apparel, he took his leave of them, saying, that by
reason of the great business he had in that visitation, he could not show
them any courtesy, neither to understand of them what their request and desire
was, but gave them great thanks for their courtesy showed, in that they would
come to visit him. He was set in the same visitation after the same manner
and order as they found the governor of Chincheo, and the vizroy, with a table
before him, with paper, ynke, and other things ready to write, the which
according as it was given them to understand, is a common use in all ye
kingdom, used with all Judges, whether it be for sentence of death, or other
matters of justice, as has been told you many times before.

Three days after the visitor was come thither, the Insuanto departed for his
own house, with order that with all speed possible he should ordain ships
wherein the Castillias should return unto the Philippinas.

Likewise the same day, all those that were there assembled by the order of the
vizroy departed unto their own houses. And the Spaniards were commanded for to
s^ay until the full of the moon, which should be the twentieth of August, and
that day they should take their leave of them: for on that day amongst them it
is holden for good to begin any thing whatsoever. Superstition.
Wherein they do use great superstition, and do make many banquets, as upon
newyeares day, as has been told diffusedly.

The day before ye departure of ye Spaniards, there came some in behalf of the
vizroy to inuit them, and made them banquet in the order and fashion as at the
first: although this (for that it was at their departure) was more sumptuous,
wherein was represented a comedy which was very excellent and good, whose
argument was first declared unto them as follows.

There was a young man newly married, and there chanced difference betwixt him
and his wife, he determined to go unto certain wars, the which was ordained
in a country not far from that whereas he dwelled: whose acts and deeds was
therein so valorous, that the king did show him great favor, and being fully
certified of his worthiness, he sent him for chief Captain of the most
importunate enterprises that might be offered, who did accomplish his charge
with conclusion thereof with great content and satisfaction to the king and his
counsailers: for the which he made him his captain general, and in his
absence did commit unto his charge his whole camp, with the same authority
that he had himself.

The wars being done, and he having a desire to return unto his own
country and house, there was given unto him three cart loads of gold, and
many jewels of an inestimable price, with the which he entered into his own
country with great honor and riches, whereas they received him with great
honor.

All the which they did represent so naturally, and with so good apparel and
personages, that it seemed a thing to pass in act. There was not in this
banquet the vizroy, but those captains which were there the first time: and
another captain unto whom was given the charge to bring the Spaniards unto
Manilla, who was called Chautalay, a principal Captain of that province.

So when the banquet was ended, they were carried with great company from the
hall whereas the banquet was made, unto the house of the Cogontoc, who was the
kings tresuror and dwelt there hard by, of whom they were maruellously well
received, with loving words and great courtesy: in saying that he hoped very
shortly to see them again, at such time as they shall return with Limahon,
and that as then their friendship should be fully concluded, and would entreat
with them in particular of other matters. This being done he gave unto them a
present for to carry unto the governor of Manilla in recompense of that which
was sent unto the vizroy: the present was forty pieces of silk and twenty
pieces of Burato a litter chair and guilt, and two Quitasoles of silk, and a
horse. Likewise he sent the like present unto the general of the field, and
to either of them a letter in particular: these things were put in chestes
which were very fair and guilt. Besides this he gave other forty pieces of
silk of all colors for to be part^d amongst the Captains and other officers
that were at the siege of Limahon with three hundred black mantles and as many
Quitasoles to be parted amongst the soldiers. Besides all these, he gave unto
the friars each of them eight pieces of silk, and unto the soldiers their
companions four pieces of each of them, To keep away the sun.
and to every one his horse and a Quitasol of silk, their h^rse were very
good to travel by the way: this being done the Cogontoc took his leave of
them, and willed them to go and take leave and license of the vizroy and the
visitor, that they might depart, for that all things were in a readiness for
their voyage: the which commandment they did straightwayes accomplish, being
very well content and satisfied of the great favors and courtesies, the which
they received both of the one and the other: Likewise of the Totoc who is
captain general, whom they also did visit and took their leave. These
visitations and leave taking being done, they returned unto their lodging with
great desire for to took their ease, whereas they remained til the next day
following, wherein they departed unto the port of Tansuso, after they had
remained in Aucheo seven and forty days.

CHAP. XXIX. The Spaniards depart from Aucheo, and come unto Chincheo, whereas
the Insuanto was: he commanded the^ to depart unto the port of Tansuso, whither
he went himself for to dispatch them: at whose departure, he shows great
favor and makes them great feasts.
THe Spaniards departed from the City of Aucheo upon a Tewsday, being the 23.
of August in the sight of all the people of the City, who came forth to see
them with so great press and thronge, as they did when they first came thither
into the country: they were al carried in litter chaires, yea their very
slaves, for that it was so commanded by the vizroy: the Friars were carried by
eight men a piece, and the soldiers by four men a piece, and all their
servants and slaves were carried by two men a piece. Look so many men as was to
carry them, there went so many more to help them when they waxed weary,
besides four and twenty that carried their stuff. There went always before
the^ a harbinger for to provide their lodgings, and with him went a paimaster,
whose charge was to ordain and provide men for to carry their litter chaires,
and to give them for their travel that which is accustomed, and to pay all
costs and charges spent by the Spaniard. After that they departed from Aucheo
they made of two days journey one, which was ye occasion that they came to
Chincheo in four days. At their entering into the city they found a servant
of the Insuanto, with order and commandment, that they should proceed forwards
on their journey, and not to stay in the city, but to go unto the port of
Tansuso, whither he will come the next day following. They obayed his
commandment, and made so much haste yt in two days they came unto the village
of Tangoa, whereas they had bin before, and particular mention made thereof. In
the same village they were lodged, well entertained and had great good cheer:
from thence they went in one day to Tansuso, which was ye first port whereas
they did disembarke themselves, when as they came from the Islands unto that
firm land: the Justice of the town did lodge them in ye same house whereas
they were first lodged, and did provide for them of all things necessary and
needful, and that in abundance, til ye coming of the Insuanto, which was
within four days after, for that he could not come any sooner (although his
desire was) for that it was very foul weather.

The next day after his coming thither which was ye third of September, he
sent and commanded the Spaniards that they should imbarke themselves, for that
it was that day the conjunction of the moon (although at that time ye ships
were not fu^ly in a redines.) They obayed his commandment, and the Insuanto
himself went to the water side, in whose presence came thither certain
religious men of their manner, and after their fashion they made sacrifice with
certain Orations and prayers, in the which they craved of the heavens to give
good and fair weather, and a sure voyage and favorable seas unto al those that
sail in those ships.

This ceremony being done (which is a thing very much used in that country)
the Spaniards went unto the Insuanto, who was there with great company and
majesty: he entertained them very friendly and with cheerful words making
an outward show that he bare them great love, and that their departure was
unto him a great grief. Then he requested them to give him a remembrance of
such things as was necessary and needful for their provision for the sea,
for that he would give order for the providing of the same, the which he did,
and was with so great abundance that they had for the voyage, and remained a
great deal to spare. He then commanded to be brought thither cates to eat,
and drink, and gave it them with his own hands, as well the one as the other:
he himself did eat and drink with them, which is the greatest favor that
can be showed amongst them.

The banquet being ended, he commanded them in his presence to go abord their
ships, because that was a luckie day, and also to accomplish that which the
vizroy had commanded, which was that they should not depart from thence, until
they had first seen them embarked. The Spaniards obeyed the commandment, and
took their leave of the Insuanto with great courtesy and reverence, and with
outward shows that they remained indebted for the great courtesy and good will
that they had received: and therewith they departed to the waters side, toward
the boat which was tarrying for them.

As they passed by the religious men (that before we spoke of) they saw a great
table set, S^range sacrifices.
and upon it a whole Ox with his throat cut, and hard by the same a Hog and
a Goat, and other things to be eaten: the which they had ordained for to
make sacrifice, which they do use in the like affairs.

They being embarked in the boat, they were carried aborde the Admiral, which
was the ship appointed for them to go in: then presently they began to
stir the ship, from one place unto another with certain boats and cables
which they had there ready for the same purpose. The ship did not so soon
begin to move, but the religious men a shore did begin their sacrifice, the
which did endure until night, ending their feasts and triumphs in putting
forth of the city, and upon their gates many cressets and lights. The
soldiers shot off all their hargabushes, and the ships that were in the port
shot off all their artilerie, and on the shore a great noise of droms and bells:
all the which being ended and done, the Spaniards went a shore again unto
their lodging: but first the Insuanto was departed unto his own house, with
all the company that he brought with him.

The next day the said Insuanto did inuit them unto a banquet, which was as
famous as any which had been made them unto that time. He was at the banquet
himself, and the Captain general of all that province. There was abundance
of meats and many pretty devises to pass away the time, which made the
banquet to endure more then four hours: the which being done, there was
brought forth the present which the Insuanto did send unto the governor of
Manilla in return of that which was sent to him. The present was fourteen
pieces of silk for the governor of Manilla, and ten pieces for the general
of the field: he also commanded to be given unto the Friars each of them four
pieces, and unto the soldiers each of them two pieces, and unto their servants
and slaves certain painted mantels, and there with he took his leave of them
very friendly, and gave unto them letters, the which he had wrote unto the
governor, and unto the general of the field, answer unto those, the which they
had wrote unto him, and said that all things necessary for their departure was
in a readiness, with victuals for ten months put a board their ships, so that
when as wind and wether did serve they might depart. Also that if in their
voyage it should so fall out, that any of the Chinos that went in their
ships, should do unto them any evil, either abr^de or at the Islands: that
the governor thereof should punish them at his pleasure, and how that the vizroy
will think well thereof: in conclusion he said unto them, that he hoped to
see them there again very shortly, and to return again with Limahon, and
then he would supply the wantes which now they lacked. The Spaniards did
kiss his hands, and said, that they had received in courtesy more then they
deserved, and that in all things, there did abound and not lack, that they
remained greatly indetted unto him for their friendship, and would give their
king notice thereof, that whenever occasion should be offered, to repay
them with the like: and therewith the Insuanto departed to his own house,
leaving in the company of the Spaniards five captains, those which should go
with them in their company to sea, and also Omoncon and Sinsay, who were that
day in the banquet, with the habit and ensign of Loytias, for that the day
before it was given unto them by the Insuanto.

Upon Wednesday which was the fourteenth of September the wind came fair,
wherewith they hoised up their sails and went to sea: at their departure there
was at the waters side the Insuanto and the Justice of Chincheo to see them
sail, the which Insuanto had conceived so great love and friendship of the
Castillas, that when he saw them depart, he shed great abundance of tears,
as was affirmed by diverse Chinos that saw it, to which the Spaniards gave
credit unto, for that they knew him to be a marvelous loving person, and
human, of a good condition, and of a gallant personage, and did exceed all
other that they had seen in all the time of their being in that province.

CHAP. XXX. The Spaniardes depart from the port of Tansuso toward the Islands
Philippinas, and every day they do harbor themselves in Islands by the way,
declaring what they saw in them.
BEing departed out of the port as aforsaide, the Spaniards divided themselves
into two ships, to wit, the two Friars and Michael de Loarcha, Omoncon and
three other captains in one shippp. And Peter Sarmiento, Nicholas de Quenca
and John* de Triana, Sinsay and all their soldiers in another ship, with eight
other ships of war which went with them for their safeguard: they sailed
forwards directing their course toward a small Island that was not far off,
with determination there to take water for their ships, for that it had in it
many rivers of very sweet water. Within a small space they arrived there, and it
had a very fair and sure port, wherein might ride in security a great Navy of
ships. All Thursday they were there recreating and sporting themselves, for
that it was a pleasant Island, and full of fresh rivers. Upon Friday being the
sixteenth of September, the day being somewhat spent, they made sail and took
port four leagues from that place in another Island called Laulo, for to put
themselves in a new course different and contrary unto that which they brought
when as they came unto that kingdom, for that the Chinos had by experience
proved, that in those months the winds were more favorable then in other
months, and for the most part North and Northeast winds: all that night they
remained in that Island, and the next day following they sailed unto another
Island which was called Chautubo, not far distant from that of Laulo. This
Island was full of little towns, one of them was called Gautin which had five
fortes of towers made of lime and stone, very thick and strongly wrought:
they were all four square, and six fatham high, and were made of purpose for
to receive into them all the people of those little towns to defend themselves
from rouers and thieves that daily come on that coast. These fortes were made
with battlements as we do use with space betwixt them: and for that the form
and fashion of their building did like them very well, they were desirous to
see that if within them there were any curious matter to be seen, wherewith
they bent their artilerie toward them, and went a shoore. But when they which
had the gard^ and keeping off did see them coming, they did shut the gates,
and would not consent that they should satisfy their desire, for any
entreating or promises that they could make.

They very much noted, that although this Island were rockie and sandy, yet
was it tilled and sowed full of Rice, Wheat, and other seeds and grain.
There was in it great store of Kine and Horse, Mine kine and horse.
and they understood that they were governed, not by one particular man, to
whom they were subject, neither by any other amongst themselves, nor of China,
but in common: yet notwithstanding they lived in great peace and quietness,
for that every one did content himself with his own. Upon sunday in the
afternoon they departed from this Island, and sailed their course all that
night, and the next morning they arrived at another Island called Corchu, which
was twenty leagues from the port of Tansuso from whence they departed. The
Spaniards seeing what leisure they took in this their voyage, they requested
the Captains to command the mariners that they should not enter into so
many ports or harbors, for that they had no certainty of the weather, and not
to detract the time, but to take opportunity before that contrary weather do
come: for to sail in that order it seemed more for recreation then to achiue
or obtain a voyage. The Captains answered, and requested them to have
patience, for that in making their iournies as they did, they do accomplish
and follow the order set down by the vizroy and Insuanto, who did expressly
command them with great charge for to direct their Navigations by those Islands
with great deliberation and consideration, because they might in safety and
health ariue at Manilla.

The same day the North wind began to blow very strongly: in such sort,
that they thought it not good to go forth of that harbor (as well for that
aforesaid, The Chinos are fearful of the sea.
to be commanded to the contrary) as also for that the Chinos are very
searefull of the sea, and men that are not accustomed to ingulfe themselves too
far, neither to pass any storms.

Near unto this Island there was another somewhat bigger, which is called
Ancon, wholly dispeopled and without any dwellers, yet a better country and
more profitable for to sow and reap then that of Corchu. The Spaniards being
at an anchor there, understood by the Chinos that in times past it was very well
inhabited, unto the which arrived a great fleet belonging to the king of China,
and by a great storm were all cast away upon the same: the which loss and
destruction being understood by another general that had the guard of that
cost, suspecting that the dwellers thereof had done that slaughter, he came to
the shore and slew many of the inhabitants, and carried all the rest in their
ships unto the firm land, who afterward would never return thither again,
although they gave them license after that they understood the truth of that
success: so that unto that time it remained dispeopled and full of wild
swine, of the brood that remained there at such time as they were slain and
carried away as you have heard.

This Island and the rest adjoining thereunto (which are very many) have very
excellent and sure ports and havens, with great store of fish. These Islands
endured until they came unto a little gulf, which is five and forty leagues
over, and is sailed in one day, and at the end thereof is the port of Cabite,
which before we have spoken off, and is near unto Manilla.

So when that wind and weather served their turn, they departed from the
Island of Ancon, and sailed til they came unto another Island called Plon,
whereas they understood by a ship that was there a fishing, how that the
rouer Limahon was escaped, whereas he was besieged at Pagansinan: the manner and
form of the policy he used therein shall be told you in the chapter following.

CHAP. XXXI. They have news how that the rouer Limahon was escaped, and how
that he was in an Island there hard by: some gave judgment to go and set upon
him, but they resolved themselves to the contrary, and follow the voyage to
Manilla.
BEing at an anchor in the Island of Plon, tarrying for a wind to follow their
voyage, with great desire to come thither whereas they might understand what
had happened unto Limahon, at the same time entered into the said harbor a
ship with fishermen, they believing that he had been one of the Islands,
they went unto him and asked of whence they were, and from whence they came,
and what news they could say of Limahon (who was known unto them all, either
by some harm that they had received, or else by report of others that had
received hurt.) These fishermen gave them particular and whole relation, by the
which they understood that Limahon was fled and not perceived by the
Spaniards: he escaped in certain barks, the which he caused to be made very
secretly within his forte, of such timber and bords as remained of his ships
that were burnt, the which was brought in by night by his soldiers, on that
side of the fort which was next unto the river, and were not discovered by the
Castillas, which which were put there with all care and diligence to keep the
mouth that no succor might come in to help them. And toward the land there
whereas he might escape, they were with out all suspection (they were so
strong) and did not mistrust that any such thing should be put in ure, as
afterward did fall out, the which was executed with so great policy and craft,
that when they came to understand it, the rouer was clean gone, and in
sauegard, caulking his barks at the Island of Tocaotican, the better for to
escape and save himself, and they said that it was but eight days past that
he fled.

With this news they all received great alteration, but in especial* Omoncon
and Sinsay, who returned unto the Spaniards and said, that the escaping of the
rouer is not without some mystery, and that it could not be done without the
will and knowledge of the Spaniards, and that the rouer had given unto the
general of the field some great gifts for to let him go, for that otherwise
it were a thing impossible for him to escape, being besieged as he was,
although the Spaniards had slept: the Spaniards did give their discharge in
such prouable manner, that the captains of China were satisfied of the false
opinion they had received, as afterward they were fully persuaded when they
came to the city of Manilla and heard the general of the field and other
captains and soldiers that were at the siege. This Island of Tocaotican
whereas the rouer was mending and caulking of his barks, was distant from the
Island of Plon, whereas the Spaniards were, only twelve leagues, and being by
sea it seemed to be less, for that very plainly you might see the one Island
from the other. The which with the great cholor that Omoncon and Sinsay had for
the escaping of the rouer, as also with the fear they received in that which
might happen unto them by reason hereof at their return unto China, which at
the least might be to take away (to their great shame) the titles of Loytias,
which was given them in that respect, did cause their stomakes and minds to
rise, and to seek occasion to go and fight with him, for that it seemed unto
them they should get victory with great ease, for that he was unprovided and
wearied with the long time of his siege. Being in this determination there came
unto them the Captain that was appointed general over them, and said that
the vizroy of Aucheo and the governor of Chincheo had sent them only to carry
those Spaniards unto Manilla, and to bring with him alive or dead the rouer
Limahon, if they would give him unto them, and that he would not digress
from this order by no manner of m^anes, neither could they, if that they were
so disposed, for that the ships were pestered with the horses: and again,
their people they had brought with them* was more for to sail and govern
their ships then for the sight. Moreover the sight would be very dangerous
for that it was evident that the rouer and his companions, would rather ^e al
slain then to yield themselves in any respect, and for to put such an
enterprise in effect, it were requisite to have both ships and men, and not to
go so unprovided and pestred as they were. All which reasons being considered,
they were all conformable unto the opinion of the General, and determined that
so soon as wind and weather did serve, to set sail and to pass the gulf
for to go unto Manilla, whither as they were bound, and not to come unto the
Island of Tocaotican whereas the rouer was.

So after they had remained three weeks in that harbor detained with a
mighty North wind, that never calmed night nor day in all that time. The
eleventh day of October two hours before day, they set sail and went to sea.
By reason of this great wind there was not one ship of all th^se that were in
the port of Plon could go forth to give any notice unto the rouer, of the
going of the Spaniards, neither of the captains of China. Sixteen leagues
from the port, sailing toward the South, they discovered a mighty Island very
high land, which was called Tangarruan, and was of three score leagues about,
all inhabited with people like unto those of the Islands Philippinas: they
passed hard by it in the night, with a s^iffe Norwe^t wind, which was the
occasion that the ship wherein the Friars went, was constrained to go to sea,
and the other nine which were in their company for their safegarde, shrouded
themselves hard under the Island, by reason whereof they were so far separated
the one from the other, that in the morning they could not see them. They were
in great danger, because that night there was a great storm of wind, in the
which they lost the rudder of their ship, and almost without any hope to
escape the fury thereof.

Being in this extremity, they commended themselves with contrite hearts unto
almighty God, and put their ship before the sea, until such time as they
had supplied their rudder, the which they did, although with great travel and
labor: then straightwayes it was the will of God that this contrary wind was
somewhat calmed and his fury abated, and a prosperous wind favored them, so
that upon sunday in the morning being the seventeenth day of October they
discovered the Island of Manilla of them greatly desired, yet could they not
reach unto it until saint Simon and Iudes day: by reason that they returned
back unto the ri^er of Pagansinan to seek the other nine ships, for that it
was concluded amongst them, that if it should so fall out, they to be separated
in any storm, that they should come unto that river, and to meet together as
they did.

So they departed from thence unto the port of Buliano, and not entering therein,
the captain Omoncon did set a man on shore, one that could speak the language
of that Island, and gave him charge to inform himself of all that had happened
with the rouer Limahon, for at that time he could not believe that which had
been told him. Until such time as he returned the ships being without at
the sea, did play under fore sails, who did declare unto them the very same
thing, the which was told them at the Island of Plon without faultring any
point: the which caused Omoncon and Sinsay to receive much more grief then
they did, when they heard the first news, for as then they were doubtful of
the truth. The Spaniards as then suspected that they would have returned unto
the firm land, and not have gone unto Manilla, but to have left them there
all alone upon that Island. But it fell not out as they suspected: For although
that Omoncon and Sinsay did make an outward show to do it, and said that they
would send the Spaniards in a ship, for that as then they were out of all
danger, and in sight of Manilla: yet was the General of a contrary opinion,
and said, that for no manner of occasion that might happen he would not differ
one point from the order which was given unto him, and therewith they sailed
toward the Island that they so long desired to see, and came thither the
twenty eight day of October, ss aforesaid.

So that from the port of Tansuso which is the first port of China till they
came unto the Island of Manilla they were five and forty days, and is not in
all full two hundred leagues, From the Philippinas to the China is two hundred
leagues.
which may be made with reasonable wether in ten days at the most.

CHAP. XXXII. The captains Chinos arrived with the Spaniardes at the city of
Manilla, the Governor and those of the city do receive them with great joy
and triumphs, and after they had remained there certain days, they returned
unto the firm land, being instructed and satisfied of many things touching our
holy catholic faith, with great desire to receive the same.
AFter that it was known unto the Governor of the city of Manilla and unto
the general of the field as also unto the rest of the captains and soldiers
of the ariuall of the Spaniardes, whom they with great care desired to hear
of, as well for the particular love they dear unto them as also for to
understand and hear the news from that mighty kingdom of China, to be
declared by witnesses of so great faith and credit. They altogether went
forth to receive them with great joy and pleasure, and likewise all such
captains and soldiers as came in their company.

They were straightwaies conueighed unto their lodginges to rest themselves of
their long journey which they had by sea, for it was requisite and needful:
for the which afterward there was great feasts and bankets, which was made
by the Governor, the general of the field and other particular persons unto
the Chinos, in recompense of that which was done unto the Spaniards in their
country.

All which feasts did give them little content when as they did remember the
flying and escape of the Rouer, but in especial Omoncon and Sinsay, who
continually and every moment did call upon the general of their fleet to make
haste and to shorten the time that they might depart from the firm land, where
giving notice unto the Governor of Chincheo of the estate of Limahon, he might
give order that before he had reedified and repaired himself they might take
him (which is a thing most desired in all that kingdom). The general was
very glad, and rejoiced of their good intertainement, and answered unto
Omoncon and Sinsay, saying that by reason of the great storm and foul weather
past, their ships had great need of reparation, and likewise the mariners to
ease themselves, the which being done he would with all his heart depart.

The general of the field was very sorrowful and much grieved for that the
Rouer Limahon was so escaped, and the more when he understood that he was
suspected that he did consent unto his departure: for which occasion, if that
the Captains had not been very much wearied with the long siege, and evil
weather which happened in that time, without all doubt he would have followed
him, and never to have left him till he had taken or slain him.

Although they were fully persuaded that Limahon was so terrified with the
great peril and danger in the which he was, and again with so small number of
people, that rather he would desire to put himself in security then to
offend or do any harm, neither to put himself in any place whereas he
might receive damage of any of them to whom he had done so open wrong (who
were so much desirous to be revenged) who for to prevent all that might happen
(as after we understood) having made ready his barks and boats which he
ordained in his fort, and put in them victualles for their journey, he departed
with his small number of people, unto an Island farre^off and unknown, there
whereas he understood that none would go to seek him, and there he remained
a time whereas he fell sick of a melancholicke infirmity which grew by an
imagination that he had, to remember in what state he was at that time, and
how he had seen himself at other times feared throughout all the kingdom of
China, which was an imagination sufficient for to bring him to his end: his
companions were dispersed abroad, so that we never heard more of them.

Now returning to our purpose, after that the China Captains had recreated
them selves with the feasts and sportes that was made unto them, and taken
recreation many days, and tarryed hoping that the weather would prove fayrer
to prepare themselves to depart. In the same time they did entreat of many
things in particular touching Christian religion, whereof with great care they
did inform themselves of our religious men, and told them some secret things
that were unknown unto them of their country, for that they were strangers.

So when as time and weather did serve, they did take their leave, with many
signs and tokens of grief for to depart and leave the conversation of so good
companions, and did promise unto them to procure all that was possible that the
friendship begun betwixt them and the Chinos, should continue and persevere,
for that it was a thing that did content them all.

Their general himself did take this particular charge unto himself, with a
determinate purpose for to declare in effect to the Governor of Aucheo (whose
private servant he was) the good meaning of the Castillos, and what principal
people they were, and the ceremonies they used, with the which he was
marueilously in love. Likewise he would give him to understand of the flying
of the Rouer Limahon, how and in what manner and order it was, and how that the
general of the field and the other captains were in no fault thereof. This he
would do in respect that if it should so fall out that Omoncon and Sinsay for
their own credit should declare any thing against the Spaniardes that was not
true, that they might not be believed.

Besides all this he told the Governor certain things in secret, how they
might with great ease purchase the friendship they pretended. And amongst them
all, one was, that he should make a supplication unto the catholic king, in
requesting him to write a letter unto their king, and send him Ambassador, and
such as should give unto them the light of the Catholic and Christian faith,
with the which diligence ^here was no doubt, that not only the friendship
betwixt the kings and their subjects should be established, but also the
king and all his kingdom would receive the Catholic faith, The papists and
^h^ Infidels ^eremoni^s much alike*
for that there are many ceremonies used amongst them which do much resemble
those of our Christian religion, and again in their living morally, they do
observe in many things the ten commandementes of Gods law, of the which in
particular he did inform himself, so that the greatest difficulty was in the
entering in of the preaching of the holy gospel, and being by this means over
come, in a short time all the whole kingdom would turn Christians. And
considering that in their worshipping, as they do worship all things in the
second essence, with great facility they would change their adoration and
give it unto the first, as most worthy, and unto whom it is their duties. The
general did add more thereunto, and said that he was so much aff^ctioned
unto the faith of the Christians, that if it were not that he should be
banished and loose his country, house and lands, without all doubt he would
have been baptized: the which he could not do without loosing of all, for that
they have a law in their country, the which is observed and kept inuiolably,
by the which it is forbidden that none whatsoever, can receive any strange
religion differing from theirs upon pain of death, without the consent of the
king and his counsel.

This law was made to take away novelties, and to live all in one uniformity
of religion, with one manner of rites and ceremonies.

This only was the occasion that certain merchants of China being affectioned
unto the law of the gospel, were baptized at the Philippinas, and there do
dwell at this day in the city of Manilla amongst the Spaniardes, and are
become very good Christians.

So with these offers and with promises to be great friends unto the
Spaniardes, the General departed from Manilla to go unto the firm land, and
with him the other Captains Omoncon and Sinsay with great hope that very
shortly they should be all of one faith. So the one took their leave of the
other with reasons of great affection and tokens of great love signifying that
in any thing that should be offered they should find them friendly.

They being departed, the Spaniardes remained very careful in praying unto
the divine majesty, desiring of him to direct all things in this their
request, that it might be to his holy service, and also to inspire the
catholic majesty of king Phillip their Lord for to send his Ambassador unto
the king of China, offering his friendship, and to admonish him to receive the
faith of Christ, the which according unto the report of the Austen Friars that
entered into that country (of whom we have made mention many times in this
book with their companions) and also the General of China told them that
there was no other means but only that for to bring their purpose to effect.

This counsel with all the speed possible they put in ure, and sent unto his
majesty one of purpose, and in the name of all them of those Islands to
request him, and to declare how much it did import. They sent unto him this
relation with many particular persons for to move his most Christian mind,
for to send an Ambassador, as in effect he did, in that sort as has been
told you in the last Chapter of the third Book of this history, whereas it
is declared in particular, and in what estate it does remain unto this day.
God for his mercies sake direct all things, that it may be to his service and
glory, and the salvation of so many souls.

The end of the first book of the second part.
The second book of the second part of the history of the mighty kingdom of
China, In the which is contained the voyage that was into that kingdom in the
year 1576. by the fathers Friar Peter de Alfaro Costodio in the Islands
Philippinas of the order of saint Francis of the province of S. Joseph, and
other three religious men of the same order, and their miraculous entering into
that kingdom, and what happened unto them for the space of seven months that
they there remained, and what they did see and understand of: all the which are
notable and very rare.
CHAP. I. The Friars of Saint Francis came unto the Islands Philippinas, and
procured to pass unto the firm land of the kingdom of China, with zeal to
preach the holy gospel.
THe day of the visitation of our Lady in the year 1578. there came out of
Spain to the City of Manilla in the Islands Philippinas, the father Friar
Peter de Alfaro, who, went for Costodio of that province and fourteen more
other religious persons of the same order in his company, and were sent by the
king of Spain and his royal Counsel of the Indias, for to be ayders and
helpers of the Austen Friars, who until that time had been there alone in
those Islands, occupied in the converting of the people in that country, and
were the first ministers of the gospel, preaching the same with great zeal,
unto the profit of their souls: of the which people, those Friars had
baptized (when the others arrived) more then one hundred thousand, and the rest
prepared and cathecised to receive the like. Because that at the first occasion
that might be given, they might enter into the kingdom of China to preach the
holy gospel. The which Friars when that they had been there the space of one
year occupying themselves in the same exercise in preaching and converting the
people of that country. In the same time they were given to understand by the
relation of the self same Austen Friars, as also by many merchants of China,
which came unto them with marchandice, of things to be wondered at of that
mighty kingdom, and of the infinite number of souls which the devil had
deceived and brought unto his service with false Idolatry. The which being by
them well understood, they did burn with great zeal and desire of their
salvation, and to go and preach the gospel, although it were to put their
persons in whatsoever hazard or danger.

So with this their great desire, they did many and diverse times communicate
with the governor that was there at that time for his majesty, who was called
the Doctor Francisco de Sandi, desiring his favor and license for to go unto
China in the company of certain merchants of that country, that were at that
present in the port with their ships, offering themselves to get their good
will, although it were to offer themselves to be slaves or otherwise
whatsoever. And seeing that at all such times when as they did entreat of that
matter, they found him but luke warm, and that he did (as it were) but to
detract the time, and feed them with hope. then they calling to mind, that the
chiefest intent and cause of their coming out of Spain, was to enter into
that kingdom, caused a new desire to grow in them, what with the
contractation they had with the said Chinos, as well in conversation as in
talk, and finding them to be a people of great ability and discretion, and of
very good judgments, the which did greatly content their desire, they did
persuade themselves that it was an easy matter to make them to understand the
things appertayning unto God. So that they determined to put other remedies in
practice, because that which they required with the good will of the Governor,
seemed to be a large and long matter. So it happened that upon a time
entreating of this matter, and having requested of God with great instance for
to direct them the ready way which was best for his service, and for the
profit of those souls, there came to the Islands Philippinas a Chino, who
according as they did understand, was one of the priests and religious men of
that kingdom (of the which priests there are a great number in every town)
this priest went diverse times unto the monastery of the Friars, and did
common with them of the creation of the world and other things which did open
the way that they might declare unto him things appertayning unto God, unto
the which he did harken with great good will. And after that he had declared
unto them in particular the mightiness and secrets of this mighty kingdom
of China (whose conversion they so greatly desired) he very inquisitiuely asked
of them matters touching the Christian faith, of whom within a few days
after he desired to be baptized, for that he would be a Christian, being
instructed before in many matters touching our catholic faith.

Our religious men did accomplish his desire, the which was an incredible joy
unto all the dwellers of the City, and a content unto himself.

So after that he was made a Christian he remained in the monastery amongst
the other, but yet would he never eat any other thing but cold herbs: The
Spaniards rise at they midnight mattens and whip themselves.
and he seeing that all the religious men did arise up at midnight to mattens
and discipline themselves, spending the greatest part of the night in prayer
before the holy sacrament, he did not fail one point, but did imitate them in
all their doings, with outward shows of a very good will. All the which did
incyte the Friar Costodio and all the rest of his companions to put in execution
their great desire they had, according as it has been told you. Whereupon he
went once again unto the governor to entreat him by fair means that which
before they had comoned with him of* and that he would procure some order or
means, that those religious men might go to the kingdom of China to preach
the law of God, offering himself to be one of them, with protestation that if
he would not give them leave, they would procure to go without it, with that
authority the which he had of God and of his superiors, for to teach and
instruct these poor Infidels their neighbors: and this should be done with the
first opportunity they might find or have.

But neither this, nor yet the example of that good Chino, which was new
christened was sufficient to persuade the governor to consent unto their
request, but peseuering in his first opinion, he answered and said, that it was
too timely, and that the friendship which they had with ye Chinos, as yet was
very small. And how that the fathers of S. Austen had many times attempted the
entry into that kingdom, and yet never could obtain their desire. And how
that the Chinos that did carry them did deceive them, and left them in
certain Islands, till such time as they heard farther news of the Rouer
Limahon, and of the return of the Captain Omoncon, who did carry them with
the good news of the straight siege in the which they had the rouer: and yet
for all that they commanded them to return from Aucheo, without giving them
any license to remain in the country to preach the holy gospel, and now to
attempt the same, was but to give occasion unto the Chinos every day to mock
and make a jest of the Spaniardes, and willed them to stay till such time, as
it were the will of God to give way unto the same, which could not be long.

This Friar Costodio understanding the answer of the Governor, perseuering
still in his first opinion, and did not go about to seek any means to
accomplish their desire for the entering into the firm land, he straightwayes
began secretly to procure by all means possible to attempt and accomplish
that journey, although it were without the order and consent of the Governor
(when that it might not be done otherwise) the which incontinent they began
to put in ure, for that the Friar Costodio and Friar Steven Ortiz (who was a
religious man that for the great desire he had, did learn the China tongue,
and at that time did speak it resonablie) they both together did give to
understand of their desire and pretense unto a devout soldier of their
religion and one that they made great account of, who was called John Dias
Pardo, who often times had made manifest unto them and said, thae he had a
great desire to do some especial service unto God, although it were to
hazard his life in the same, who at that instant did accomplish his desire,
and did promise them to bear them company unto the death.

So with this conformity they went straightwayes altogether to speak with a
Captain of China that was in the same port in a ship of his own, who many
times did repair unto their covent, to ask of them things appertayning unto
God, and the heavens, with show of a very good understanding, who unto their
judgment did consent and accept all with great pleasure and delight.

Unto this captain they did give to understand the effect of all their
desire, requesting him of his aid and help in the prosecuting of the same.
Who straightwayes did offer himself to accomplish their request and to carry
them unto China, so as they would then give him some thing for to bestow
amongst his mariners. The soldier John Diaz Pardo did promise to give them
all that they would ask, and gave them in earnest certain ryalles of plate.
And for that all things should be done in good order, and in such sort that
the Governor nor any other should have any suspicion or knowledge, it was
ordained amongst them that the Captain of China should with all speed
dispatch himself and depart to the port of Bindoro, which is twenty leagues
from the city of Manilla and there to tarry for them, and to carry in his
company the Chino that was new baptized as aforesaid.

The captain made haste* dispatched himself and departed unto the port
appointed, and within a few days after the father Costodio and his company
with the soldier his friend did follow the^. But when they came thither they
found the captain Chino in an other mind, in such sort, that neither gifts nor
fair entreaty was sufficient to perswad him, to perform that which he had
promised in Manilla, but returned unto them their earnest before received,
affirming that for any thing in all ye world he would not carry them, for that
he know very well, if he should so do, it would cost him his life and goods.

The new baptized religious Chino seeing that, wept bitterly, with
coffeehouse to see how the devil had changed the mind of the Captain, for
that in that kingdom the holy gospel should not be preached. The father
Costodio did resolve himselue to return unto Manilla and there to abide a
better opportunity, as in effect they did, whereas they remained certain
days, till such time it happened as follows.

Upon a day the Governor sent and called unto him the father Costodio, and
requested of him, that he would let him have some Friar for to send unto the
river of Cagayan, whether not long before he had sent certain Spaniards for to
inhabit.

The friar Costodio promised him one, and that he should go with him in
company till he came to the province of Illocos whether he went, and that from
thence he would dispatch him unto the river of Cagayan, according unto his
worships commandment, requesting of him to have in his company to keep watch
and ward in that journey the ensign Francisco de Duennas and John Diaz Pardo
the soldier his friend as aforesaid, with pretense to depart from thence unto
China, as in effect they did, as shall be told you. The governor being very
willing for to pleasure him, did grant his request. So with great speed he
departed, and carried with him the foresaid soldiers, and for companion a
religious man called Friar Austin de Tordesillas (he who afterward did put in
memory all things yt passed with them in China) out of the which has been
taken this small relation. So when they came unto the Illocos, they found friar
John Baptista and friar Sebastian of S. Francis, of his own order, occupied in
the teaching and instructing the people of that province, which was the fourth
day of June. The next day following they called a counsel, where it was
concluded that all those that were there present would venture themselves for
to go unto China, to convert those Gentiles or else to die in the quarrel. And
the better to bring their purpose to pass, they thought it good to speak unto
an other soldier that was there with the^ called Pedro de villa Roel, not
telling unto him their pretense because they would not be discovered (but asked
him in this manner) if he would bear him company and the other two soldiers,
who altogether went about a business of great honor and service of God, and the
benefit and saving of many souls, and that he would declare unto them whether
he would go or not, without asking whether nor from wh^t place, for that as
then they could not give him to understand, till time did serve. His answer
was, that straightwaies he would bear them company, and would never leave
them to death.

So forthwith they all together with singular joy went to the ship wherein the
father Costodio and his companion with the other two soldiers came in from
Manilla to ye place with a reasonable Frigate, although but with few mariners,
and they not very expert. So being altogether in the ship, with all such
things as they could get together in that small time for their provision in
that journey, they made all things in a readiness to set sail the same day
which was the twelfth day of the say^ month of June. So after they had said
mass and commended themselves unto God, requesting him ^o direct their voyage
that it might be to his glory and service, they set sail upon a friday in
the morning, with intent to go forth of that port, but they could not by no
means possible, for that the sea went very lofty upon the bar, and
contending with the sea for to get forth they were in great danger to have
been cast away, which was the occasion that with great sorrow they returned
into the port, whereas they remained all day.

CHAP. II. The Friars and their companions depart from the port of Illocos,
after they had committed unto God the direction of their voyage. They pass
great dangers and troubles, and do overcome them all with the confidence they
have in God, and came unto the kingdom of China miraculously.
SO the next day after they had committed themselves to God with great
devotion* they embarked themselves and made sail, and by the will of God they
went out of the harbor although with great danger, and they carried with them
an other bark a stern their ship, in the which they did determine for to set
a land such Indians as they carried with them from the Esquipazon, to help
them out of the harbor. the which they did not for fear they should be
drowned. So when they were out of that river, they sailed toward the little
Island, that was but one league from that place, and there they put the Indians
a shore, and with the^ a young man a Spaniard that they brought from Manilla to
serve them. So those which should go on that voyage remained there the same
night, who were the friar Costodio, friar Peter de Alfaro borne in Siuel, friar
John Baptista, borne in Pe^aro in Italy, friar Sebastian de san Francisco of
the city of Boecia, and friar Augustine de Tordesillas, of the same town
whereof he has his name, all these four were priests of the mass.

The Friar Costodio would with a very good will have carried more of them, but
he durst not for two causes, the one for that he would not have been
discovered, and the other (which was the principal occasion) because he would
not leave that province of the Illocos without such as should instruct them,
whereas were many baptized: for which respect, he left some behind him, which
afterward he would have been very glad that they had been in his company.
There were three Spaniards soldiers that did bear them company, the one was
called the ancient, Francisco de Duennas, of Velez Malaga, the other John Diaz
Pardo of Saint Lucas de Barameda the third Pedro de Villa-roel of the City of
Mexico. Besides these they had a boy of China, who could speak the spanish
tongue, and was one of them that were taken at the siege of Limahon the Rouer,
and other four Indians of Manilla.

They departed from this little Island, upon a monday the first quarter in the
morning, which was the fifteen day of the said month of June, and sailed that
way, so nigh as they could guess to be the way unto China, without pilot or any
other certainty, more then that which God did show and put into their minds,
with their great desire, which seemed unto them to comprehend and bring it to
pass. This day the wind was contrary and against them, which was the
occasions that they sailed but little. Toward the evening the wind changed
and blewe at the north (the which wind upon that coast is very dangerous)
which made them greatly afraid: yet was that fear driven away by an other
fear much greater then that, which was that they should be discovered, and
that they should be pursued by the commandment of the governor of Manilla:
for which occasion whereas they should have shrouded themselves under the land,
they wrought contrary, and cast about unto the sea in great danger to have
been cast away, but it was the will of God that when as night came the wind
did calm (which commonly falls out to the contrary) but the sea remained
very rough and lofty that they thought verily to have been drowned with the
fury thereof, for it tossed the Frigatta in such sort that it seemed a whole
legion of devils had taken hold on both sides of the ship forcing the one
against the other, that it rolled in such sort that many times the half deck
was in the water, so that the mariners could not stand upon their feet, They
were in great peril
but were driven to sustain themselves by the ropes and cavels. But the
religious men trusting in God, whose zeal had caused them this great trouble,
did pray and desire him with many tears that he would deliver them out of the
same danger: and not to give place unto the devil for to disturb them of
their voyage and enterprise.

The Friars used certain coniurations for that S. Antonie was a sleep.
Those their orations and prayers did so much prevail, with certain
coniurations which they made against the devils (who^ they thought they did see
visibly) that after midnight the north wind ceased, and began to blow at the
north east, with the which the sea began to wax calm, so yt they might make
their way to be east northeast, for that they had intelligence, that that
course was the shortest cut to the firm land. This wind which was so
favorable unto the^, did increase so much in two hours, that the sea waxed
lofty, and caused them to forget the sorrow past, and constrained them (for
that the ship was but small) to cut their mast over board, and to put
themselves unto the courtesy of the sea, with little hope to escape the
danger. But our Lord, whose zeal did move them to attempt that journey, did
direct their voyage in such sort that the next day ^ollowing it came to be
calm, in such sort that they might set up a new mast in the place of that
which was cut over board in the storm, and therewith to nauigate forwards
with their begun voyage. So upon the friday following at the break of the
day they saw land, and thinking that it had been the firm land. of China,
they gave thanks unto God, and rejoiced, in such sort that they had clean
forgotten the troubles of the storms and foul weather passed, so they made
toward it, and came thither about noone, but when they were a shore, they
found that it was but a small Island and situated four leagues from the firm
land, and for that it was so nigh, a far off it seemed to be all one thing.
But when they came unto this Island they did discover many ships, which were so
many in number that it seemed all the sea to be covered with the^. The friars,
with the great desire they had for to know in what port they were, they
commanded to govern their ship toward whereas they were, who when they saw
them and could not know the^, by the strangenes of their ship and sails they
did fly from them all that ever they could. The which ou^ men perceiving and
could not imagine the cause thereof, they were very much agreeued and
sorrowful, and the more for that they could not learn nor understand where
they were. But seeing nigh unto them to the lewarde three ships, they made
toward them, and when they were somewhat nigh they put themselves as the
others did. In this sort they spent all the rest of the day in going from one
port to an other, unto those ships for to infirm themselves where they were,
but all this diligence prevailed them nothing at all till it was almost sun
set, they entered with their frigate into a gut under the shore, whereas fell
from a high rock which was more than one hundredth fatham by estimation a
streme of water which was as big as the bodies of two men together.

In this gut there was three other ships and they came to an anchor in the
midst amongst them, the which being done they asked of them what country
that was, but they answered nothing, nor made any semblance, but looked the one
upon the other, and in beholding of the Spaniards they gave great laughters. In
this gut they remained all that night almost amassed to see how those people
were as though they were enchanted, and they without any light of their desire,
which was to know where they were. So ye next day following (which was saturday)
very early in the morning they set sail and went amongst a great sort of
Islands always bearing unto them, which they thought to be the firm land,
being greatly amarueiled to see the infinite number of ships both great and
small that they saw: some were a fishing, and some under sail, and other some
ryding at an anchor. The same day about noone there happened unto them a strange
and miraculous thing, and it was, that passing through a straight that was but
a quarter of a league of breadth which was betwixt the firm land and a small
Island, in the which was continually four score ships of war, set there
for watch and ward, they passed thorough the thickest of them and were never
seen, for if they had, without all doubt they had sonke them, or slain
them, their order and commission is so straight given them by their generalles
of the sea, in the which they are commanded, that whatsoever kind of people of
strange nations that they do meet upon the coast for to kill them or sink
them, except they do bring license from some governor of such Cities as be upon
the coast, for that such as do mean to have trafick^ do send to demand the
same, leaving their ships a great way at sea.

This law for to watch and ward was made and ordained (as they do say) in
respect of the Iapones who did enter into certain of their ports, dissembling
themselves to be Chinos, being apparelled as they were and speaking their
language, they did unto them great and strange hurtes and damages, as is
declared in the book before this. So when they were passed this straight they
sailed almost six leagues forwards into a very fair and great bay,
following other ships that went before them, for that it seemed that they
would enter into some port, and there they might inform themselves where they
were, which was the thing that they most desired. When they had sailed about
two leagues in this bay they ouertooke one of the three ships and asked of
the people that were within her (by the interpreter they had with them) whether
they sailed and what land that was which they saw before them. Then the
principal that was in that ship* did put himself into his boat, the which he
had at stern, and came unto the ship where the Spaniardes were, the better to
understand what they did demand, for they before by reason that they were
somewhat far off the one from the other, could not understand the Spaniards
demand but by signs. So when that he understood their request he answered
them that it was the country of China, and how that he came laden with salt
from the city of Chincheo, and went to make sale thereof unto the city of
Canton, which was so nigh hand that they might ariue there before night. But
when that he was entered into the spanish ship and saw the friars and the rest
that were in their company and saw that their apparel and speech was strange
unto him, he asked of them what they were and from whence they came, and
whether they went (and when ye he understood yt they were Castillos, and of the
Islands Philippinas and came from the said Islands, and were bound unto China,
with intent to preach the holy gospel) he asked the^ whose license they had,
to conduct them unto the firm land. But when he understood that they had
none, he asked them how they passed and escaped the fleet of ships that was
in the straight aforesaid. The Spaniards answered that they found no
impediment nor let. So he being greatly amazed as well of the one as of the
other, entered into his own boat, and with great fury departed from their
ship, and went into his own, but at his departure the Spaniards did request
him, that he would conduct them unto the city, who gave them to understand
by signs that he would, although he feared the rigorous punishment that in
that kingdom is executed upon all such as do bring into the same any man of
a strange nation (as has been told you in the first part of this history.)
So he fearing that if he should enter with him into the port, the fault
would be imputed unto him, therefore at such time as he came within half a
league of the rivers mouth, he cast about his ship and sailed to sea, and
went so far that in a short time the Spaniards had lost the sight of them,
who when they saw that they had no guide, they followed the course of another
ship that they had discovered before the other did cast about to sea, for
which occasion the other two ships that we spoke off before were departed. So
a little before the sunne-set they discovered the mouth and entry of a great
and mighty broad river, out of the which came two great streams or arms, and
in them many ships entering in and going forth, and considering how they had
the wind which served them well, they entered into the same, but when they had
sailed forwards a quarter of a league, they discovered so great a multitude of
barks, that it seemed unto them a grove, or some inhabited place, and as we
drew nigh unto them, they not knowing our ship, all began to fly and run
away with so great noise, as though they should have been all set on fire or
smoke in that place. The Spaniards seeing that they were the occasion of this
fear amongst them, they withdrew themselves into the midst of the river*
whereas they struck sail and came to an anchor, and there they did ride all
that night, and it was in such a place that none of all the other barks and
boats came nigh them by a great way.

The next day following which was sunday, the one and twentieth day of June they
weighed anchor, and went under their foresaile up that arm of the river, the
which within a little while they had sailed, did join with the other arm
aforesaid and was in that place of so great wideness that it seemed to be a
sea, there sailed in and out many ships, barks and boats of whom the
Spaniards demanded how far the port was off from that place, but they
answered nothing at all, but with great laughter and wonder to see the
Spaniards and their kind of attire, they departed. But when they had sailed two
leagues up the river, they discovered a high tower and very fair under the
which were at an anchor a great number of ships, thither they sailed right on.
So when as they came right over against the tower, they saw on shore a great
mighty crane to discharge merchandise withal, whereat lay many ships: but when
they came to the point, fearing that some ordinance would be shot at them, they
struck all their sails according unto the use and custom in ye ports of
Spain. They after a while that they had remained in that sort, and saw that
neither the tower nor ye ships did make any motion toward them, they turned
and hoised up again their sails and went whereas all the ships were, and when
they came amongst them, they let fall their anchor whereas they did ride looking
when they would come to demand of them any thing.

CHAP. III. The Friars and their companions came unto the City of Canton,
they went on shore, and praised God for that it had pleased him to let the^ see
their desire fulfilled. There comes a Justice to visit them, and has with
them great communication.
THe Spaniards seeing that they were there at an anchor a good while, and that
there was none that came unto them to demand any question, they hoised out
their boat, and went in it on shore, whereas they al kneeled down upon their
knees, and with great devotion did say Te Deum laudamus, giving thanks to God
for that he had so myraculously brought them into ye kingdom of China, of them
so much desired, without any Pilot or other humane industry: the which being
done, they began to walk along by the crane aforesaid, nigh unto the which
were certain houses whereas were kept ropes and tackling belonging unto the
ships: so they proceeded forwards with intent to seek the gates of the
City, the which after they had gone the space of four hargabus shot, they
found the gate which was very great and sumptuous of a strong and gallant
edifice. The people of the country seeing them at their coming a shore how
they did kneel down, and how that their manner of attire was different from
the people of the same, and not knowing from whence they did come, did cause in
them great admiration, and to join together a great troop of people, and
followed them with great desire to see the end of their enterprise.

This great multitude of people was the occasion that they entered in at the
gates of the City, without being discovered of the guards and ports that were
put there for that purpose, neither were they disturbed of the entry, by reason
of the great throng of people, and strangeness of the matter. So after they
had gone a while in the street (the people increasing more and more to see
them) they stayed in the porch of a great house, there where as the justices of
the sea, or water bailies do keep their courts of audience: and in the mean
time that they remained there, which was a pretty while, the guardes of the
gate understood that amongst ye press and throng of the people, did enter
certain strangers contrary to the precept given them upon great penalties:
they straightway with great fear that their oversight should be discovered,
ran and laid hands upon ye Spaniards and carried them back again, and put
them out of the gate of the city, without doing any evil or harm unto their
persons, and willed them to stay there in that place till such time as they had
given ye governor of the City to understand thereof, and he to send the^
license that they may enter in again. So after a good while that they had
remained there whereas the guards had set them, there came unto the^ a man, who
was a Chino called Canguin, and could speak Portugal: who knowing them to be
Christians by their faces and attire, did ask them in the Portingal tongue what
they sought? ye Spaniards answered him, that their coming into that kingdom
was for to show and declare to them the way to heaven, and to give the^ to
understand and know ye true God, the creator of heaven and earth: and that they
would very feign talk with the governor to entreat thereof. This Chino by and
by brought to the^ a man that could speak very good Portuges, who as after they
did understand both he his wife and children were christened, and although they
were borne in China, yet did they dwell 3. years with Portugals that were
inhabited in Machao which is twenty leagues from that city of Canton. This
did demand the same question of them that the other did, and wherefore they
came into that country? they answered him the same as they did the other: he
replied and asked them who was the Pilot that brought them thither? they
answered, the will of God, they not knowing how, nor from whence. But after
they had sailed at the sea certain days, they came unto that place, that
according as it was given them to understand, is the city of Canton, of the
which they have heard declared many strange things: the Chino asked how the
guardes of the sea and ships that were in the straight aforesaid did let them
pass: they answered that they saw no guards, nor any other that did trouble
them their passage. This last answer did cause the Christian Chino greatly to
admire, who being moved with a good zeal, said unto them, that they should
return again unto the ship, and not to come forth until such time as he
had given advice of their coming unto the Mandelines of the sea, which be
certain judges appointed to give advice of all such matters to the governor,
that he may command what is to be done therein.

So the Spaniards returned unto the ship whereas they remained a good while,
and passed great heat, for that it does exceed in that port. So after a
while they saw come unto a house which was near unto the gate of the City,
a man of great authority, who was brought in a litter Chair, and much people
came with him: he stayed at that house, and from thence sent to call unto him
the religious men, and all the rest that came in their company: before them all
came one that carried a table all whited, and thereon was written certain
great letters with black ynke, the which (as after they understood) was the
license that the governor of the city gave them for to come a shoore, without
the which there is no stranger permitted. The fathers did straightwayes obey
it, and came forth of their ship with more company then they desired (of
such as came to see them) who were so many in number, that although the
sergeants and officers of the judge that sent for them, did beat them for to
make way, yet was it a good while before they could come unto the house
whereas the judge was, although the way was but short. So when they approached
nigh one of ^he sergeants bad them kneel down before the judge, the which they
did with great humility without any replication. He was set in a very rich
Chair with so great majesty that they were greatly astonyed to see it, and
the more when that they understood by the christian Chino that he was not the
governor, neither of the supreme judges: he was apparelled in a robe of silk,
close from above down to the foot, with the sleeves very wide, and a girdle
imbossed, and on his head a bonnet full brooches, such as bishops do use on
their mytres. Before him was set a table, whereon was paper and ink: and on
the one side and the other two ranks of men, as though they were to guard him,
yet without weapons. They had al of them in their hands long canes of four
fingers broad, with the which (as after they did understand) they do beat such
as are offe^ders, upon the calves of their legs with great cruelty, as has
been told you in the first books of this history. All these had upon their
heads a manner of helmet made of black leather, and on them great plumes of
Pecocks feathers, with brooches made of metal, a thing used to be worn in
that country of such as are executioners or ministers of justice.

The judge bad the interpreter to ask them of what nation they were, and what
they sought in that country, and who was their guide to bring them into that
port: the which being understood by the religious men, answered that they were
Spaniards, and subject unto the king Philip of Spain, and came thither to
preach the holy gospel, Mark the Friars con^fession of Images.
and to teach them to know the true God, creator of the heaven and earth, and
to leave off the worshipping of their Idols (who have no more power of
themselves, then that which is given them by him that does make them): the
which worship is known and received by his holy law, and declared by the
mouth of his only begotten son, and confirmed with divine tokens from heaven,
in whose guarde does consist the salvation of all souls. And to the last,
touching who was their guide unto that kingdom: they answered, that it was
God, unto whose will all creature are subject, as unto the true creator: all
the which (as afterward it did appear) the interpreter did not truly
interpret of the interpretation of the Spaniards: understanding that if he
should truly interpret what they said, the Judge would forthwith send them
away, which would be the occasion that he should get nothing of them. So that he
made his interpretation as it best seemed for his purpose, fearing (as after he
did confess) that if he shu^d decla^e the truth of that which the Spaniards
had said, it would have been very odious to the Judge, and afterward both unto
them and to himself might be the occasion of some great evil: but to
conclude, he answered and told the Judge that they were certain religious men
who lived in common, a sharp and asper life, much after the manner of those of
that kingdom: and that going from the Island of Luzon unto the Islands of the
Illocos, in a great storm and tempest that chanced them, the ship wherein they
were was cast away, and al their people cast away, saving they, who escaped by
using great diligence* and put themselves in that small ship which came in
company with another greater ship, without Pilot or mariner, for that they
were almost all drowned, and setting sail in the best manner they could or
knew, being helped and constrained by necessity, they let their ship sail,
and go whither as fortune did carry them. So after many dangers and storms at
the sea, according to the will of the heavens they came unto this port, whose
name as yet they knew not. The Judge asked them where they had that Chino that
they brought in their company for an interpreter. They answered that he was in
Luzon and captive unto a Spaniard: they took him and set him free, and he
understanding that they were bound unto the firm land of China which was his
natural country, he requested them to carry him thither, the which they did
with a very good will, for that they had need of him to utter their desire, if
need did so require. All the which the other interpreter fearing, that if he
should tell unto ye Judge how that he was captive unto the Christians, he
would be offended, and therefore he did falsify the same and said, that
coming unto an Island to take in fresh water, they found the boy there, where
he was captive eight years before, and came thither forced with a great
storm, in the which was drowned a merchants ship that was bound to Luzon,
and he alone escaped by swimming, and so he came aborde the ship, in the
which were the fathers, not knowing whither they went. All these untruths he
did invent for to dissemble and go forwards with his knauish pretense, and
would not declare the true intent of the Friars: the which he had decreed with
himself how to do before the Judge did send to call them. Moreover the Judge
did ask them what they brought in their small ship, they answered that they
brought nothing but one chest and two little fardels of books, and an ornament
for to say mass. This did the interpreter declare truly unto the Judge, for
that experience might be made thereof. So the Judge forthwith commanded that it
should be brought before him, the which being done, he caused it to be undone,
and he perused every thing by it self, the which being strange unto him, for
that he never saw the like: he made signs unto them that he received great
contentment in the seeing of the^, but specially of the Images they brought:
but that which did best please him, was an Ara or sopre-altar of a black
stone, the which did shine so bright that they might see themselves therein, as
well as in a glass. These Friars did bring the same with them out of the
kingdom of Mexico, whereas you have great abundance, but specially in the
province of Mechuacan. So after that he had seen all, and saw that it was
dry, without any sign or token that it had been in the sea, he called to
remembrance the words of the interpreter in the name of the fathers, touching
the storm wherein their ship was cast away, and how that they escaped by
swimming, and put themselves in that small ship in the which they came: and
considering of the same, it seemed unto him that they did fable in that which
they had said: so that he did reply and asked if it were true that which they
had before declared, and how it should be that their books and other things
were not wet at the sea, which was an evident token and plainly to be
understood that they had fabled and told lies, and so he believed they did in
all the rest. The interpreter fearing least by that argument his falshod would
be discovered, he fell in talk a while with the Friars, asking and answering
things very different to that which ye Judge had commanded him. The^ he with a
strange and sharp boldness answered to ye difficulty proponed by ye Judge, and
said, That as all merchants at such time as their ships are ready to sink
and to be lost, they do procure first to save such things as are of most
estimation, forgetting all the rest: even so these religious men did procure
with great care and diligence to save those books and that ornament, which is
all their treasure, and yet for all their diligences done they lost a great
number mo. All these fables and lies, after many days the religious fathers
came to have the knowledge of.

The Judge did ask them if they brought any armor or weapons in their ship,
they answered that they were no men to bring them, neither according unto their
profession they could not wear nor use them, for that they were religious,
and professed other matters contrary unto the use of armor or weapon, promising
and auowing unto God perpetual poverty and chastity, and unto their superior
prelates obedience all the days of their lives. The Judge returned and asked
them if they had any money, and where withal they did eat and apparel
themselves, and bought those books and ornaments: they answered, that all that
which they had was given them by secular Christians for Gods sake, whom they
did serve, for that they should pray for them and for the salvation of their
souls.

The Judge when he heard this, was greatly astonished for that the interpreter
did declare the truth, and made signs that he received grief and had pity
on them, although he gave not full credit to that which he heard, but said
that he would go aborde their ship to see if they did say the truth, in not
bringing any armor or weapon, neither silver nor merchandise. This did he
straightwayes put in ure, and commanded them that brought him in the litter
Chair, upon their shoulders to go thitherward: all those people did bear him
company, as also a great number that were there joined together to hear the
examination of those strangers, and also the Spaniards he commanded to go next
unto him.

So when that he was in their ship set in his Chair, his ministers began
to search the ship in all places, both above and below, and could find
nothing but a little Rice, which was left of tha^ which they brought with them:
they gave ye Judge to understand thereof, who looking upon the Spaniards,
said, that all they that were in the ship might hear him: these do speak
the truth, and they do seem unto me to be good people, and without any
superstition: and without all doubt they do come and will be after the manner
of our religious men, according as is to be seen in the uniformity of their
aprarell, as also in their heads and beardes. Then he began to demand of
them certain things, more of curiosity then of suspection: who answered him,
casting up their eyes unto heaven (for that their talk was thereof) and they
saw that the Judge did greatly rejoice and had pleasure therein, for that it
seemed that they had the heavens for their God, as they have, by reason they
did so much look upwards. After this the Judge came forth of the ship, but
the religious men remained behind at his commandment with his companions: and
likewise he commanded certain of those officers that came with him to
remain about their ship at the waters side, for their guard, more for that
none should do to them any harm, then for any evil suspicion they had of
them.

All that day that the Spaniards were in their ship, the country men came down
to the water side to see them, and that in so great number, that they did
wonder to see them, and on the other side they greatly rejoiced to see so many
souls there joined together, hoping that when it should be the will and
pleasure of GOD, to give them opportunity, to baptize them all.

The next day following in the morning, they saw another Mandelin or Judge
coming toward their ship, accompanied with much people, and with little
less majesty then the other had, who entered into their ship, and commanded
to search both above and below to see whether they brought any armor, weapon,
or any other kind of merchandise, and seeing that they could find nothing
else but their books and their ornament aforesaid, he commanded it to be
brought before him, who did peruse the same, piece by piece with great
admiration, and showed great contentment that he received to see their books
and Images: although that which did most content him was to see the Ara of
black stone, as was said before. Then he commanded one of the Fathers for to
read in one of the said books, and for to write, the which was done before
him with so great facility, that the Judge received great contentment to see
it. Then he asked them if that with the said letters they could write any
other language that were different unto theirs. The Fathers answered yea, that
they could write any language: and for a plainer proof, they wrote on a piece
of paper certain reasons in the Judges language, the which did cause him
greatly to marvel, and said (turning his face to some of them that came with
him) these men are not barbarous nor of any evil condition so far as I can
see.

With this he departed out of their ship, and went to give the governor (who
sent him) to understand of that he had seen and could understand of the
Spaniards in this his visitation, who straightwayes did send them a license
upon a table, that they should come on shore, and be suffered to enter into
the city freely at their will.

CHAP. IIII. The Spaniards go forth of their ship, and go into the City, unto
the christened Chinos house, and are carried before another superior Judge in
common audience, and many other pass with them.
SO soon as they had their license, they went forth of their ship and entered
in at the gate of the City, although with great trouble, by reason of the
great number of people that came to see them, as a thing never seen before:
then they went to the christened Chinos house, he that served for their
interpreter, who made very much of them, and giving them to understand that
he had made a true report of all that they had commanded him, and did offer
himself, to do so much with the Justices that he would procure to get license
of the governor for them to remain in the country, and to give them a house
wherein to remain and dwell: and did admonish them that at that time they
should not deal for to make the Chinos Christians, until such time as they
were better known, and could speak the language, and then should they do it
with a great deal more ease. All these promises, with the falsifying of that
the Spaniards spoke before to the Judges, was to content the Friars (as in
discourse of time they did understand) and only to get money from them, for
that it seemed unto him, that it could not be but that they should have good
stoore, for that they came from a rich country, whereas it was: and again to
come about business of so great importance, about the which they should
remain there a long time (as aforesaid) as they afterward did more at large
understand. If that interpreter had declared in fidelity all that which they
had spoken, without al doubt they would not have suffered them to have come on
shore, else have put them in some prison, for that they came on land without
license, and to have showed them the most favor, they would have caused them
to return from whence they came, whereas the guardes of the straight (of whom
we have spoken off before) would either in secret or public sink them at
the sea, for that they were all greatly in hatred against them: the reason was
that the Aytao, who is (as is declared in the first book of this history) the
president of the counsel of war* and had understanding how that they passed
thorough the fleet and were not seen, which was a thing that they all wondered
at.

This Aytao did forthwith make secret information of the same, and found it to
be true, whereupon he did Judge the Captains to perpetual prison, where
they were well whipped, and did secrest all their goods: for the which all
their kin^folkes and the rest of the guards had great indignation against the
Spaniards, and would with great ease have been revenged on them, but that
they did fear the punishment that should be done on them, after that it
should be known. In the which they do execute their justice in this
kingdom more then in any place in all the world.

In the house of this Christened Chino they dined that day as they did many
more afterward, but every night they returned to their fregat to bed: for that
they durst not leave their things alone, neither to lie out of their ship,
for that one of the Judges had so commanded.

CHAP. V. The Spaniards are called before a Judge, who does examine them, and
offer them great favor: he does write unto the vizroy, giving credit unto the
persons, who sends commission unto a Judge called Aytao, for to examine their
cause: the chief captain of Machao does accuse them, in saying that they
were spies, and does entreat of other strange matters.
Upon Saint John baptist day they were called before a Judge, who (as after
this did understand) was a superior unto the other past: but when they came
whereas he was in place of audience, his ministers did straight ways command
them to kneel down at such time as they came in sight of the Judge, which was
unto the religious men no small torment. He demanded of them the same that the
others did, and they answered in brief, that they came to preach the holy
Gospel, and requested him to give them license to execute the same, and to
remain in that City of Canton for to learn the China tongue, whereby they
might give them to understand and know the truth of the heaven. The
interpreter did falsify their words, as he had done unto the other Judges,
and said no more, but for so much that fortune and foul weather had driven
them into that port, they would live amongst them, although it were to serve
them as slaves, for that if they would return unto the Island of Luzon, or by
another name called Manilla, they could not, for that they knew not the way,
neither had they any Pilot to conduct them.

The Judge had pity on them, and commanded that such things as they had in
their ship should be brought on land, for that he would see them: amongst
the which, the thing which caused him most to marvel at, was when he saw the
Images, and Ara (or Alter stone) of black Jasper stone (of the which we have
made large mention:) he requested of the Spaniards that they would give them
two Images, which when they had given them, they made show to esteem greatly
of the present, for that they were things that they have not amongst them. He
talked with them very friendly, and caused them to arise from the ground
whereas they did kneel, and to show them the more favor, he caused to be
given them to drink in his presence a certain beurage which they do use, made
of certain herbs, and use it for a comfortable thing for the heart, and is
commonly used amongst the^, although they are not dry: and amongst the Chinos
is a show of particular favor.

This Judge did more understand the intent of the Spaniards then any of the
other past, for their interpreter had told unto him that they would remain
in the country for to cure sick persons and to bury the dead, the which they
could do excellent well. When the Judge heard these words, he gave with his
hand a great stroke upon the table that was before him, and said with shows
of great wonder unto other inferior Judges that were with him: Oh what good
people are these as it seems: it would be unto me a great joy, if that I
could of mine own authority accomplish that which they do desire, but our
laws do forbid the same, and that with great rigor. All this did their
interpreter tell them afterward. At this time there entered into the place of
audience whereas they were, a man of China, one of the common sort, al imbrewed
with blood, crying out and making a great noise, without any consort, who
prostrating himself upon the ground did complain of other Chinos with whom he
had fallen out, and was beaten and buffeted in cruel sort.

The Judge when he saw him, did straight ways command his officers to bring
the offenders before him, The Chinos most upright in all their judgments and
in execution of justice
the which was done with a trice, and they returned with the plaintiff,
bringing three other Chinos bound together by the arms, and as it seemed they
were men of base sort. The Judge incontinent made information wholly of all
that passed, and condemned them without writing any letter, in twenty sotes or
strokes a piece: the officers forthwith took the^ with so great cruelty as
though they had bin devils, and threw them upon the ground with their bellies
downwards to execute the sentence given by the Judge, and when they had pulled
off their hose, they began to whippe them upon the calves of their legs with
a sot made of canes, in manner as has been told you before. The religious
people who were present all this while: and taking pity on these condemned
men, fell down at the feet of the Judge, and by signs and tokens did crave
of him for the love of God, that his sentence might not be executed: who
straightwayes commanded the executioners to cease, condiscending unto the
petition of the Friars, and did pardon the offenders fifteen sottes or strokes
of the twenty, wherein they were condemned.

The Judge did very much wonder at the poverty of these religious men, and at
the sharp and asper apparel that they wear: but the chiefest thing that he
did marvel at, was when that he understood how they had passed the fleet of
ships that were put in the straight for to defend and keep the coast, and
were never seen, which seemed unto him a thing impossible, except it were by
permission of the heaven.

So when this examination and talk was finished, he commande^ them to return
unto their ship, promising them for to write unto the vizroy (who was thirty
leagues from that place) and to give him to understand that they were men
without any suspection, and that he might well give them license for to come to
his presence: upon which relation he would command what should be done,
either to tarry or to go unto him.

Within few days after they understood that the Judge had accomplished his
promise, for that the vizroy had committed the matter unto another Judge called
Aytao, whose office is for to examine and inquire the causes of strangers: the
words of the commission were as follows.

I am written unto from Canton how that there are come thither certain men
apparelled very sharp and asper, The vizroies commission.
after the fashion of our religious men in the wilderness, who bring no
weapons, neither any other thing that might seem to pretend any evil intent:
and for that they are thy charge, examine them with care and diligence, and
provide to do therein that which shall be most requisite and convenient:
giving us to understand the large and true relation of that which shall happen.

The very same day of Saint John, the Spaniards being very merry and
unmindful of any thing, for that they had all that day received the Sacrament:
there came unto them abord their ship or frigate the interpreters, and did
evidently declare their evil purpose and intent (saying) that it was apparent
what they had done for them, and in what peril they did every day put
themselves in for their matters, and that it was reason that they should pay
them for the same, and if not, they would not help the^ any more, neither
interpret or take pains in their business: certifying them that if they did
fail to satisfy them, that they should not find any that would do it with
so great good will and diligence (as they should find by experience) and how
that they had been put in prison if they had not been, for entering into that
kingdom without license: and for that they enterpreted for them with great
courtesy and favor they had also been commanded to return back again from
whence they came, which by their means, was the cause that the Judges did
entreat them so friendly as they did. The Father Costodio when he understood
their intent, and did evidently see that it was wholly grounded upon gain:
considering also the urgent necessity that they had of them, and not
satisfying them, it was difficult to find any for to help them in that their
necessity: of two evils he chose the best, and delivered unto them a pawn for
their contentment, one of the two Challices they brought with them, A sacred
thing no doubt of it.
giving them great charge to use and keep it as a sacred thing, and dedicated
for to consecrate the blood of Christ. The principal interpreter did take it
with great content, and presently gave it a new master in selling it unto a
goldsmiths for as much as it was worth, who did melt it, and made things
thereof according to his trade: yet they not being content therewith, and that
it seemed unto them that those fathers could not but bring with them much
riches, they inquired of the China boy whom they brought to be their
interpreter, with fair words to know if they had any g^lde or silver, or
precious stones, or any other thing of valor: but when they understood that
they brought none of those things but only their books and some other
ornaments to say mass, they straightwayes imagined in their minds and that
with great care and diligence, to procure some way to get from them the other
Challice which they had seen: and the better to put it in execution, they
repeated again unto the Friars that which before has been told you,
augmenting thereunto many words and reasons, affirming that they had spent
upon them in giving them to eat twelve Taes more then ye Challice which they
had given them did weigh or amount to, which was twelve ducats of Spain:
having before given them to understand at such time as they did eat, that they
did it of alms and for Gods sake, and with so great content, that many times
it happened when they saw that the Spaniards would not eat any dainty thing,
but would feed and content themselves with base victuals) he would say unto
them, that they should eat without any grief or care, that when it should so
fall out that his substance did sail him, he would then pawn one of his
sons to buy victuals.

The father Costodio plainly seeing and understanding that their intent and
purpose was wholly grounded for to get from him ye other challice, he answered
that he had not for to give them, and how that he had given the other challice
in pawn of that which they had spent in victuals, and for their travel that
they had taken for them. The interpreter did reply, saying, that if they had
nothing, that they should seek it, seeing that they ought it for their
victuals which they had eaten, and that it was the use of that country, that
when any man did owe any thing, and has not for to pay the same, for to sell
their children, or else to become slaves unto their creditor they demanded the
other Challice that remained, for that the other which they had given the^ did
weigh but sixteen Taes, which was but a small matter in respect of their
desert, only for their travel in their enterpretations. This Friar Costodio
did pacify them in the best manner he could, promising to pay both the one
and the other, having opportunity for the same, and that they would procure it
with as great care as was possible: and requesting him for to keep the
Challice (that he had given him in pawn) in great veneration, for that he did
esteem it, much more for the consecration and dedication unto the divine
Colto, then for the value of that it wayed: and more promised him upon his word
to write unto the Portugals that were in Machao, signifying unto the^ their
necessity, and to demand their alms and charity, and look whatsoever they
did send them, being little or much, should be given him. Then the interpreter
who had his eyes fixed upon gain, said, that they should forthwith write,
and that he would give him a messenger for to carry the letter, and to bring
answer of the same, as he had done the like not many days before. The
Father Costodio did write unto the Bishop that was in Machao, giving him to
understand of his coming, and of his companions unto the City of Canton,
and how that his coming thither was only to procure for to preach the holy
Gospel, and for to convert and turn to God those blind Idolaters. The which
letter being received by the bishop, he made answer, praising their intent and
purpose, animating them with godly words of exhortation, and therewith did
send and demand the copy of such authortie as they brought from the holy
father touching that the which they pretended. This he did for that all the
said country unto the land of Iapon was committed unto him by the holy
father.

Unto this letter the father Costodio answered, that having opportunity he
would obey his commandment, and show unto him the faculty he brought, and
also would him self in person go thither for to kiss his hands, and to
satisfy all the inhabitants of that town (for that it was given him to
understand that they reported evil of them, and said that they were
vacabondes and lost men, and not true religious men, neither sacerdotes nor
priests, and how that they had requested certain Chinos, which at that time
came unto Machao, that at their return again unto Canton, they should tell
the Judges and advertise them with good aduisement, how that there were
cer^^ine Castillos come into their City, whom they did certainly know not to
be of their nation but of an other, and subjects unto a different and strange
king, whom they did believe to come thither for some ill intent and purpose in
counterfeit attire, and came for spies from the Castillos of Luzon, and that
they did believe that after them did come some army to do hurt in some part of
that country, and that they should prevent it in time, for that if so be that
any thing should happen, the fault should not be imputed unto them.

All this the Portingales did (as afterward they did plainly understand) for
fear that the Castillos should take from them their contractation and gain
which they had in that city: by which occasion their intent did so proceed
forward, that they did certify the Chinos, that the chief Captain of Machao
(who was put there by the king of Portingall) had presented a petition unto a
City that was joining to Canton, aduertising the Judges of that before spoken
of, and protesting that i^ any harm or damage should come to that country in
admitting the Castillos, that it should not be imputed unto them.

But the Judge understanding their evil intent, and that their accusations
were more upon malice and envy, then of any truth, he answered unto the
same, that he was particularly informed of those religious persons, against
whom they did complain, how that they were men of whom they needed not to
fear, and without any suspicion, as it did plainly appear when they did
visit their ship wherein they came, where they found nothing, but only a few
books, and some other things, which did more signify devotion than to make
any war. This Judge (notwithstanding the answer he made) for that afterward
the chief captain should not raise up some invention, took the original
petition, and sent it with great security unto ye viceroy of the province of
Aucheo, that he might see and peruse it: who when that he had easily perceived
it, and understood the intent of him that presented the same, and the
innocence of them that were therein complained of, he sent and commanded the
governor of Canton for to give them good intertainment, and not to permit any
harm or hurt to be done unto the^, and that he should send them unto the city
of Aucheo, for that he would see them, for that it was told him that they
seemed to be holy men, and although that they had their apparel in tho same
form, of the Austin friars (whom he had seen) yet their garments were of an
other color and more asper.

The chief captain seeing that his intent fell not out well with the Judges
of China, he commanded to be proclaimed public in Machao that none should
write unto them, nor communicate with them upon pain of banishment and to pay
two thousand ducats. All this was not sufficient for to cool the minds of
some devout persons of the religion of the glorious saint Francis, but were
rather incyted to offer their favor and help, seeing they had need thereof,
but in particular the bishop did help them always with his alms, and also an
honorable priest called Andres Cotino, who making small account of the
proclamation did write unto them diverse times, although secretly, and sent
their letters with alms, and many exhortations to proceed forward with their
holy zeal and intent. Besides this they sent unto the^ a spaniard called Pedro
Quintero who had dw^lt there many years amongst the Portingals, and having
opportunity they sent him many times with comfortable things and letters, but
not signed, for if happily they should be met with all, they might deny them
to be theirs.

Now returning to our purpose, the interpreter with desire to be paid of that
which he said he had spent and laid out, did bring the messenger that he
promised them to go unto Machao to carry their letters unto such religious men
as they knew: in the which he craved their alms and help for to pay their
interpreter, and praying them for the love of God to send them likewise so
much as should redeem their challice (who at this time knew not how it was
sold and broken).

This messenger went with all diligence and secrecy, and returned with the
like, and brought with him that which they sent for, and other iunkets of great
content, the which came in very good season, for that one of the said friars
called friar Sebastian of S. Francis was very sick of a strong ague, whereof in
few days after he died, very well and with a strange desire to suffer
martyrdom for Gods sake. When this messenger came, there was come thither the
Aytao who is Judge of the strangers and was without the city, unto whom was
co^mited the examination of the Spaniards, who after that he had concluded
other matters commanded them to be brought before him with great love and
gen^lenesse, for so the viceroy of Aucheo had commanded him.

CHAP. VI. The Spaniards seeing themselves in great necessity, having not to
maintain themselves, they go into the streets to ask alms, the governor
understanding thereof commands to give them a stipend out of the kings
treasure, the interpreter goes forwards with his covetousness and deceit: they
be carried before the Judges of the city, with who^ they do entreat of diverse
matters: they do advise the the viceroy of al, who commands to send the^ to
Aucheo.
BEcause they would not see themselves in the like danger with the interpreter,
as yt which was past, they would not go any more to eat at his house, but
rather to give an example unto those of the city, they went forth every day
by two and two to ask alms: and although they were infidels, yet they gave
them with great contentment and joy, because it was a rare thing in that
kingdom to see them beg in the streets, by reason (as has been told you)
that they have no poor folk, neither are they permitted if there be any to
ask in ye streets nor in their temples. When that the Governor understood
thereof, and how that they did it for pure necessity, and had no other ways
to maintain themselves, he commanded to be given them every day a certain
stipend upon the kings cost, the which was with so great abundance, that
mainteining the soldiers that came with them and all the rest, yet had they to
spare, for that their stipende was given the^ in money, which was six Mayesses
of silver, whereof they had to spare, for that all things in that country is
so good cheap, (as has been told you in many places.)

Their interpreter seeing the good news that was brought from Machao for the
Spaniardes, by a bill that a certain devout man had sent him in secret,
whereupon would be given unto him all that was needful, with protestation to
pay all that should be given unto them although it should amount unto a great
sum (with the which he wrote a letter unto the Friar Costodio of great
comfort, in strengthening him and all the rest to persevere in their intent
which God had put in their minds for the salvation of those souls) the
Interpreter (I say) began to imagine, that for to profit himself it was
convenient for to delate and detract the departure of the Spaniardes, and did
exact upon them every day in the buying of their victuals, the half of the
money that was given them.

So upon a day he came very much out of order and feigned that the Aytao had
commanded that they should forthwith depart out of the kingdom: but yet
notwithstanding he would present a petition in their name, saying, that for as
much as time did not serve them to nauigate, neither was their ship in plight
for to make their journey, that it would please them to get them a house
whereas they might remain three or four months, in the which time they
might provide them of all things necessary for their voyage, and possible it
may so fall out that in this time, they seeing their manner of living to be
good, and to show good examples they may let them to remain in the country
liberally and to learn the language, and then begin to preach and declare
the right way unto heaven. All this he spoke with great dissimulation, for to
profit himself, for he knew very well that the Aytao had willed him to tell
them, that they could not remain in that country with the pretense they had,
for that there was a law ordained to the contrary, without express license
from the king, the which will last of all be granted unto the Spaniardes or
Portingals, for that there is a prophecy amongst the^, spoken by the mouth of
the devil, and esteemed amongst them for a very truth, for that other things
which he spoke when that was spoken has been verified, in the which he does
pronounce, A prophecy.
that a time shall come, that they shall be subject unto a nation whose men
shall have great beardes and long noses, and sharp broad eyes (as we would
say cats eyes (in the which they do differ from them. For it is a great
marvel to find a man amongst them, with more then twenty hears in his
beard, little more or less, flat noses, and their eyes very little, so that
when they will mock a man, or do him any injury by word, they will call him,
cats eyes.

Now for that the desire of the Spaniardes was nothing else but to remain in
that country, for to bring to effect their good zeal, they did gratify the
interpreter for the great favor he showed them, and did earnestly entreat him
for to present the petition, thinking thereby their desire should be
understood, and Gods cause justified, so that they first would enter into them
by the way of preaching. He presented the petition when that all the Judges
were together, who had great pity and compassion over the Spaniardes, and
willed that they should come before them, for that they would see and
understand the root and foundation of their will. They obeyed their
commandment with great joy, and when they were come into the hall, one of the
Judges, who was superior over all the rest, and a man of great authority, did
ask of them by way of the interpreter, what was their pretense in that they
did ask a house to dwell in, the Friar Costodio did answer, that he did
desire it for to learn the language well, by which means they might the
better learn them to know the true God, and to set them in the true way to go
and glory with him, because it was his office and his profession.

The Interpreter told all this truly, the which few times before he had
done, as has been told you. Then the Judge in name of all the rest, said,
that in that their demand they could not grant, neither had they any such
authority to give license. This being spoken, the Interpreter replied, without
tarrying to hear what the Spaniardes would say, and said, that at least ways
they would give them license to remain there till such time as the Portingals
did come thither for to lade their marchandice, which would be within few
days, with whom they would go, for that they were all of one law and faith.
The Judge did again ask the^ if that the Portingals and Spaniards were al
one. The father Costodio answered, that in religion and laws there was no
difference, but the one were subjects to one king and the other to another,
although they were kinsmen and tha^ very nigh. This last petition seemed to the
Judge to be more reasonable and just than the first, and that they might grant
it the^ with less difficulty, although he answered them and said, that he
could not grant it unto them, but he would write unto the viceroy for to grant
it them. For that the Portugals would be there at the farthest within four or
five months, and that in the mean time he would give them a provision that
they may go freely abroad, and none to hurt nor harm them.

So the next day following which was the second of August he did accomplish his
word and promise and sent unto the viceroy their petition, and therewithal his
judgment and of all the rest that were there with him, what they thought
touching that matter. The answer stayed many days after and came not, but in
the end there came a commandment from the viceroy unto the governor of
Canton, in the which he willed that the Spaniards should be sent unto Aucheo
whereas he was, and that there should be carried with them all such things as
they brought with them, which was their books and ornaments. The Judge did
straightwaies send and gave them to understand of this new order, because they
should make themselves ready for to travail: the which they did with great
joy and diligence, as you shall understand in the chapter following.

CHAP. VII. The Spaniardes take their journey toward Aucheo, and declare what
happened in the way thitherwarde.
THe next day following, which was the sixteenth day of August, the Spaniards
departed from Canton toward Aucheo to see the viceroy, with great hope and
confidence that he would give them license for yt which they pretended. But at
their departure they would have left there two Indians for to keep their ship
or frigate: but the Judges that were present, said, that it was not needful
for them to have any such care, for that they would take the care upon them to
see all things in good order. So presently they sent certain writing in
papers, and commanded them to be glewed upon the hatches of their ship in
such sort that they could not be open, but they must be perceived. Then
presently was brought for the Spaniardes four barks very gallant and wide
with very fair galleries and windows, and being embarked, they charged them
very much to make all haste possible to accomplish the commandment of the
viceroy, and sent with them convenient persons for to be their guides, and to
give them all things necessary for their journey. They traueiled continually
in a mighty river against the current, in the which they did see many things
worthy to be noted for the space of four days that their journey endured.

There was alongest the river side many Cities and towns very great, which
were so many in number that they could not make any memory of them, by reason
that they passed many of them by night. To observe the tides, and to avoid the
heat, which was great upon the water. Alongest the river side (whereas it was
not inhabited) was full of corn fields, whereas they saw them go to plough
with many Bufalos much different unto the use of Spain, for that one alonely
buffe did draw the plough, with one upon his back, who did govern and guide
him with great ease whether he would they should go, with a cord made fast to
a ring at his nose which served in steed of a bridle.

They saw also flocks of geese, in the which were more then ^^entie thousand,
with whom they did weed and took away the grass which did grow amongst the
rice, and other grain and seeds, driving them in the midst of their
fields, and it seemed that they had the use of reason, considering how they
did separate and make a distinction betwixt the good seed and the bad, and the
great care they had to feed and do no harm, neither to pluck up the good
plant, which was a thing that they wondered at above all the rest. All the
country is very populous, and the towns one so near an other, that it may
better be said, to be all one town and not many, and might with more
property be called the City of China, and not the kingdom of China. In all
the whole country there is not one foot of ground unoccupied, by reason of the
great abundance of peopeople that there is, and they permit amongst them no
idle people (as more at large it has been declared unto you) and the country
being fertile, is the occasion that they have all things in great abundance
and at a low price.

Now to return to their voyage the which they made very well and with great
recreation as well in the towns along the river side, as upon the river,
whereas they were cherished with great care: in the end of four days, which
was the twentieth day of August, they entered into the suburbs of the City of
Aucheo, but so late that they were constrained to remain there till the next
day: whereas they found all things necessary and in good order, as well for
their bedding as for their supper, to pass away the night. The next day very
early in the morning he that was their conduct and guide made great haste, for
to go and see what the viceroy would command.

They travailed through a great and long street, which seemed unto them to be
more than a league, and thought that they had gone through the city. So when
they had passed that street they came unto the gate of the city, and there
they understood that the rest which they had gone and passed was the suburbs.
The mightiness of this city, and the great admiration they had, with the
multitude of people, and a wonderful great bridge the which they passed, with
many other things of the which they made mention, we do let pass, for that it
is declared unto you more at large in the relation given by the Augustine friars
in the book before this, at their entry into the said city.

So when they came to the palace of the viceroy, he was not stirring, neither
was the gate open, for as it has been told you, it is open but once a day.
Their guide seeing that it would be somewhat long before that they would open
it, he carried the Spaniardes into a court of an other house, which was joining
unto that of the viceroy.

In the mean while they were there, came all the Judges to sit in audience,
but when they understood of the coming of the strangers, they commanded that
they should be brought before them: who greatly marueiled at the aspernesse of
their apparel, and not at any other thing, for that they had seen there
before the Austin friars. Straightwayes the gate of the palace was open with
great noise of artilerie and musical instruments, as trumpets, bagpipes,
sackebuttes and hoybukes, with such a noise that it seemed the whole city
would sincke. At the entry in the first court, there were many soldiers
armed, and had hargubushes and lances, and in a very good order. In an other
court more within, which was very great, and railed round about with timber,
painted black and blew, which a far off seemed to be iron, and was in height a
man's stature, there they saw also many other soldiers, placed in the same
order, and in liuerie as the others were, but they seemed to be men of a
gallanter disposition. When they came into this court, there was brought unto
them a commandment from the viceroy, in the which they were commanded to
return and come thither again in the after noone, for that he could not
speak with the^ before, by reason of certain business he had with the Lords
of the counsel, which could not be deferred. With this answer they departed
out of the palace, and returned again in the after noone, as they were
commanded, and into the same court aforesaid, out of ye which they were
carried into a mighty great hall, very richly hanged and adorned, at the end
thereof was three doors, that in the midst was great, but the other two but
small, the which did correspond unto other three doors, that were in an other
hall more within, wherein was the viceroy, right over against the door in the
midst, in at yt which there is none permitted to enter nor go forth. He was
set in a marvelous rich chair wrought with iuorie and gold, under a canopie
or cloth of state all of cloth of gold, and in the midst was embrodered the
kings arms, which were (as we have said) cer^aine serpents woond in a knot
together. He had also before him a table whereon were two candles burning, for
yt it was somewhat late, and a standish with paper. Right before the viceroy
the wall was very white, whereon was painted a fearce dragon, who did throw
out fire at his mouth, nose, and eyes, a picture (as was given them to
understand) that all the Judges of that country commonly has it painted
before their tribunal seats whereas they sit in Justice, and is there to the
intent to signify unto the Justice, the fearcenesse that he should have
sitting in that seat to do Justice uprightly without fear or respect to any.
The order they have in giving audience is with the ceremonies in all points as
it has been showed you in the relation of the fathers of S. Augustine. All
people when they talk with the viceroy are kneeling on their knees, although
they be Judges or Loytias, as the Friars did see them many times.

This day they seeing that the Spaniardes remained looking always when they
should be commanded to enter in: the viceroy gave audience unto ye scriueners
or notaries, to certify him self if they did their offices well, and
commanded fifty of them at that present to be sotted or beaten for that they
were found culpable in their detayning of matters, and others the like for that
they had received gifts and bribes of their clyents* the which is prohibited
and forbidden under greeueous penalties, for that the king does give unto the^
all sufficient stipend for their maintenance, for that they should not incroch
nor demand any thing of their clyentes. The sets or stripes which were given
them were with great cruelty, and executed with certain ca^es, and in that
order as in other places it has been told you. The viceroyes guard were in
number more than two thousand men, placed all on a rank, all apparelled in one
livery of silk, and on their heads helmets of iron very bright and glystering,
and every one his plume of feathers. These soldiers made a lane from the gate
of the hall there whereas the viceroy was, unto the principal gate of the
palace whereas they did first enter. Those which were in the hals and upon the
stairs had swords girt unto the^ and they in the courts had lances, and
betwixt every one of them a hargubusher. All this guard (as was given them to
understand) were Tartaros and not Chinos: but the reason wherefore they could
not learn, although they did inquire it with diligence.

CHAP. VIII. The Spaniards are brought before the viceroy: he asks of them
certain questions, and does remit them unto the Timpintao his deputy, who
receives them well, and gives them good speeches.
AT that present came forth a servant of the viceroyes, a man of authority,
and made sign unto the Spaniards to enter into the hall instructing them that
at the first entry they should kneel down on their knees: the which they did
presently, from that place unto the seat of the viceroy was more tha^ a
hundredth foot in length: yet did the viceroy himself make signs with his hand
that one of the religious men should come nearer him, the which the father
Costodio did, and kneeled down again when he drew nigh unto the table that
was before him. The viceroy did consider and behold him a good while, and that
with great gravity and majesty, and then asked him of whence he was, and what
he came to seek in that kingdom, into the which none might come upon pain of
death, without express license of some of the Judges along the sea coast.
The father Costodio answered, that he and the rest of his companions were
Spaniards and that they were come into that kingdom, moved with the zeal of
God, for the salvation of their souls, and for to preach the holy gospel, and
show the^ the way unto heaven. Having declared the interpreter this (although
they did not understand whither he did use fidelity in the declaration or not,
but rather by that, which the viceroydid forthwith demand, it is to be
believed, that he did it with falsehood as he had done many times before) for ye
without replying unto that which he had said of the preaching of ye gospel, he
asked them what marchandice they brought with the^: the said father answered,
that they brought none, for yt they were not men that did deal in any
marchandice, but in declaring of things appertaining to heaven, and to direct
their souls to that place. Hearing this answer (or that which the interpreter
would imagine to be better for his purpose) the viceroy did bid them depart,
and commanded them to return again ye next day and to bring with them their
Images, and the other things whereof he was certified from Canton, that were
found in their frigate, for that he would see it all They did accomplish his
commandment, and returned the next day in the morning at such time as it was
told them that the palace gates would be opened: the which was done in the
same manner and order as the day before, with the noise of music and
artillery as aforesaid. So when that the viceroy was given to understand how
that the Castillos were come, he commanded that one of them with alonely the
interpreter should enter there whereas he was, and to bring in such things as
he had commanded to be brought. the which was presently accomplished. He
straightwaies began to look upon the images every one by it self, and the
books: and made a stay betwixt every one, to consider well thereof, and made
a show of great content he received in the sight of the^. Although above all
the rest, the Ara of black Jasper did most content him, and caused a
marvelous strangeness in the rest of the Judges that had seen it. All this
while was the father Costodio upon his knees, and the interpreter by him, and
he never asked of the^ any question, neither did they say any thing. They that
did bring those things unto him for to see them, seemed to be principal and
ancient men, who when they gave it him into his hands they did it kneeling.

So after that he had seen them al at his pleasure, he commanded to put them
again in the place that they were taken out, and made sign unto the father
Coistodio and to the interpret^r yt they should depart and to carry with the^
al those things which they had brought. One of the ancient men that were with
him, did go forth with the Spaniards, and told them when they came into the
second hall, that the viceroy did rejoice much to see the^, and all those which
they brought, and said that they should repair unto ye Timpintao, who was his
deputy, and he would dispatch al such matters as were asked of the viceroy by
petition following the same till it was concluded, and that he would consult
with the viceroy, who would set down such orders as should be observed. They
straightwaies did put in execution this order, and coming unto the house of
the deputy unto the viceroy, the which was very great and fair, they found
that he had a guard very little less then yt of the viceroy, and almost with
as great majesty. So after they had remained in the court a good while,
abiding his co^ma^dement (to whom it was given to understand yt the viceroy had
sent them unto him) he commanded them to ascend into the place whereas he was,
which was into a hall very well dressed, in the which was almost al such things
as they had seen in the hall of the viceroy, and he himself in the same
manner sat in a rich chair, with a table before him. He commanded to take out
those things which they brought in their chestes, and did behold them with
great consideration piece by piece, as the viceroy had done, and rejoicing much
to see the Images, he did demand of them with curiosity the signification of
some of them, but in especial a crucifixe, that after that he had considered
with great attention, he asked what man was that, which was upon the cross,
and what those letters did signify that were tituled over his head. But when
the father Costodio had declared it unto him, he began to laugh thereat, as
though he had heard some foolish fable. He came and feeled the habites of our
religious men, and made signs of great wonder to see the aspernesse thereof.

The father Costodio seeing his affability, and as it seemed by outward show
that he did very much pity them, he requested to help and favor him with the
viceroy, and that he would ask license that they might remain and dwell in
that country, in any place where his pleasure was to appoint, for yt they were
men without any hurt, and would put all their care and diligence to do works
of charity, and to procure ye men might go to enjoy the happy estate to the
which they were borne.

The interpreter dealt here in his office with as great fidelity as at other
times, in saying that which the fathers did request of him, was that he should
be a means unto the viceroy that he would let them to remain in that country
two or three months, for that as the^ it was an ill time to nauigate the sea,
and that without great danger of their lives they could not return unto the
Islands Philippinas. The Judge answered that they should not fear, but remain
with content, for yt he would procure that there should be given the^ a house
for those three or four months, with a commandment that none whatsoever
should do them any harm. The Interpreter told them yt the deputy to the
viceroy was very glad yt they would remain in that country, for yt they
seemed unto him men of good example and necessary in their common weal, and
that they might freely learn the language (as they said) for to show and
instruct them the way unto heaven. The Spaniards having heard this, if made
them very much to marvel, and from that time forwards they had good hope to
prosecute that which they did pretend. So with this and with great spiritual
and corporal joy they took their leave of the Judge, and went unto their
lodging, whereas they gave thanks unto God, for the good directing of their
business, and did pray unto him to help the^, that they might see a final
conclusion of their desire. All this falsenes that the interpreter did use, was
by the divine permission (as afterward they did gather) when that by himself
they were put out of all doubt, and did declare what he did pretend by the way
and order he took. For without all doubt, if that the Judges had plainly
understood that they would have there remained, they would not have suffered
them to have entered and seen the country. And the viceroy being advertised
thereof, would have caused them to depart in that troublesome wether, whereas
possible they should have been all drowned, for that the months of July,
August and September, in that country are ordinarily full of storms and
tempests.

CHAP. IX. The Spaniards remained certain days in Aucheo: they go to visit
the beauty of that city, but in especial the captain general of the sea,
who was so affectioned unto the Ara of black stone they brought, that he did
with all care and diligence procure it of gift.
ALl the time that they remained in Aucheo, they did occupy themselves in
visiting of the principals of yt court, amongst whom he that did most rejoice
to see them was the captain general of the men of war of that province, who
after that he had entreated them very friendly and lovingly, he desired them
that they would return the next day to visit him, and to bring with them the
Ara of black stone, which they had showed unto the viceroy, that he might see
it, for that he had praised it very much: and to bring also of their painted
Images. They did obey his commandment, and came unto him when that he was at
dinner with great majesty. Then so soon as he had dined he commanded that
they should enter into the hal there where he was. The interpreter when he drew
nigh unto him did kneel down, and made signs unto the Spaniards to follow him
and do the like, but the captain commanded them to arise and to cover their
heads, and did very much behold the Ara or (altar stone) making a show of
great admiration to behold it: he demanded of the Friars many things of great
curiosity, and asked them if they would sell him that stone, and he would give
them for it what they would demand. The father Costodio answered saying, that
they sold nothing, and much less that, for that it was consecrated and
dedicated to the divine colto (or sacrifice.) The Captain replied and said,
that if they would not sell it, that they should give it him, and he would be
grateful unto them in some other thing, that they should think well of.

The father Costodio answered that by no manner of means he could not do it,
for that upon the same they did celebrate and say mass, at such time as they
did sacrifice unto the true God. At that instant the captain did put his
hands upon it to feel it, and the father Costodio made signs unto him to
take away his hands, for that he sinned greatly therein. Then he seeing that
they would not give it him, he took his leave, saying, that they should leave
it there with him, for that he would look upon it more at leisure, promising
to return it them again afterward. The father Costodio did consent
thereunto, but first he requested him, not to touch it with his hands.

So after that he had satisfied himself in the beholding of it, his affection
was then much more to remain therewith: and for to accomplish the same, not
failing of his word and promise that he had made, he devised with himself a
certain slight and policy, and sent for the father Costodio, who came unto
him with great content, thinking verily that he would have returned their Ara.
When he came unto him, he did intertaine him very joyfully and said that he
was upon his journey to certain wars by the commandment of the king, and that
amongst those servants that he carried with him for his service, there were two
christened Chinos, which had been captives unto the Portugales of the city of
Machao, from whence they ran away, of whom he had had understanding in all
things of the ceremonies of the Christians, and that their coming thither was
to baptize such as would receive the same: and he being fully certified in
many things touching the same he liked well thereof and gave great content,
and hoped to be one of them that first should receive the faith when the king
should grant license for the same.

All this (as it seemed was that they should let him have the Ara, unto the
which he was so affectioned, as aforesaid. But the father Costodio used the
matter in such sort that he got it out of his fingers, which was no small
matter. Within a few days after, the Captain being ready to imbarke himself
for to make his journey, he sent unto the Spaniardes that two of them should
come unto him, and that they should bring with them the black stone, for there
were certain friends of his that would see it.

The father Costodio did straightwayes accomplish his commandment and carried
with him the Ara (or altar stone) for that he durst not do otherwise, yet they
did believe that in giving him some pretty or curious thing, they should
content him and quiet his mind: they carried also with them the Image of Marie
Magdalen made of feathers, which was more worthy than the Ara, (setting a
part the consecration). So when the religious fathers came whereas he was, he
went forth to meet them more then ten paces, with signification of great
joy: and carrying them aside, he said unto them once again, that the captives
had told him so many things of their virtuous manner of living, and of other
things touching the heaven: that he had great affection unto them, and desired
that they might remain in the country for to baptize the inhabitants thereof,
and that he would be the first: but the cause wherefore he did delay the time is
for to eschew the pains yt is pronounced against all those that do receive any
law or strange ceremony without particular license of the king. And for that
he went in have to go and inhabit a certain province, and that he was ready
to depart: in ye which so soon as it was possible, he would do so much yt al
they should become Christians: and for as much as he told him that the black
stone (unto the which he was affectioned) was consecrated, that he would let
him have it to carry with him, that he might put it in the first church that
the baptized should edify being made christians: the which would be very
shortly, for yt he was determined before many days to send to Machao for two
friars such as were there, to be fully informed of them in things touching the
Christian faith. Then the father Costodio said, if that which he had spoken
came from his heart, that he would forth with depart and go with him and all
his company.

The Captain answered that as then he could not do it, till such time as the
Church was built, and license had for the same of the king or vizroy, the which
at that time he could not demand, for the great have that he had to depart.
The father Costodio replied and said, that his church being built, he would
promise him of his word to send it him, and not to give it to any other, and
in pledge and token of the same, he should carry with him the Image of Marie
Magdalene made of feathers. The captain received the same with great content:
greatly maruelling at the subtle and fine work, wherewith it was wrought:
and after did so much, that almost perforce he remained also with the Ara: and
commanded to be brought forth two rich pieces of Damask, and to give them
unto the Father Costodio for to make an ornament in truck and full satisfaction
for the same: but the father Costodio would not receive them, but was very
much grieved to see how that he did remain therewith, and with the Image of
feathers. The Captain did contend with him for to take the Damask, but he
would not.

Afterward they understood that that the interpreter was bribed by a servant of
the Captains, for to alter the friars words and to offer the captain the Ara,
and any thing else that he would desire. For to the contrary he durst not by
any means to take it against the will of the fathers. To conclude he did
imbarke himself upon his voyage, and carried with him the Ara, and the image
with great joy to himself: but unto the fathers and their companions
discomfort and sorrow, for that they had lost the two things that they so much
esteemed. The captain at his departure did use great things and courtesy,
taking his leave of them, with signs, that signified he bare them great love
and good will, and that it grieved him to depart, and could not carry them with
him as they requested.

The interpreter did comfort the Spaniardes, and said that they should not be
sorrowful that the captain had taken those two pieces, for that he was a
mighty prince, and that he would favor and help them with the vizroy, and
that he was certain that he would accomplish that which he promised, that is
to become a christian, for that he did bear great good will and affection unto
them: in the which the interpreter did not lie, for that it was told them by
the servants of the Captain, that were christened, a I told you before.

The Friar Costodio remained so sad and sorrowful for the carrying away of the
Ara and Madlin of feathers, as though he had lost a great treasure: and being
desirous to recover them again, he did recommend the same unto S. Antonio de
Padua, who for things that were lost, they knew by experience to be the
only saint for advocate, and did promise (the better to obtain their desire)
for to celebrate unto him certain masses, when they should come into place fit
for the same.

Straightwayes it so fell out that the chief and principal interpreter did
fall out with the other that did help him, about certain pro^ite that was
coming to him, and did threaten him that he would tell the governor, how that
they had given him much silver for to conclude the matter about the Ara, for
that the fathers had given it them more by force then any good will. The
interpreter fearing that he should be for the same grievously punished, and
finding himself culpable in ye things that the other threatened him for, he
went unto the captain, who was embarked and ready to depart, tarrying only
for wether, and told him the falling out in all points as it passed, and of
his threatenings: who likewise fearing what might succeed or happen, if it
should come to the understanding of the Aytao of the city of Canton, as
could not be by any means excused: he called unto him one of his servants
and commanded him to take the Ara and the Image, and to carry them unto the
Fathers, who accomplished his command, and they received them with great
comfort, and gave great thanks unto God for the same, and S. Antonio de Padua:
by whose intercession they believed that they were restored.

CHAP. X. The Timpintao does call the Spaniards before him, and dispatcheth
them for to go to Canton: they took their leave of him, and goes from Aucheo:
and at their coming to Canton, they are commanded to make themselves ready
to depart the kingdom.
THe next day following which was the third day of September, the Timpintao
did send to call the Spaniards before him: who as we have said was deputy
unto the vizroy, and he gave them certain dispatches, in saying, that there
was in them all that they did ask, and gave commandment to the governor of
Canton that he should not neglect, but accomplish al things therein
comprehended, so that they might depart when they pleased. When he took his
leave of them, he did entreat them very courteously with words of great
courtesy. The Spaniards departed his presence with incredible joy: believing
that he had agreed and granted all that they did ask, and to remain in the
country to preach, so that the next day following they made all things in a
readiness to take their voyage, the which they finished in short time, by
reason of their great contentment they had with themselves, as also for the
good intertainement and good cheer they had by the way, which was made and
given them by the commandment of the Timpintao.

So when they came unto Canton, they went straightwayes to visit the
governor, and to give him the dispatches which they brought, who after that he
had read the same, he bad them welcome, and said that he was very glad that
the vizroy had showed them so much favor, and that the same was committed to
his charge, for the execution of his commission, that they should persuade
themselves that he would perform it according unto his commandment, without
failing any thing. And for to begin the same, he showed unto them a house
of the kings which should be for their dwelling, which was in the suburbs half
fallen down, and there they were lodged, with a commandment that they should
not go forth, neither enter into the city without particular license. Here
they remained many days being deceived of their purpose, and marvelled very
much that the governor would not give them license for to reedifie a monastery,
neither for to enter into the city for to give order in that which they
believed was granted them by the vizroy, til such time as they understood what
was done by their interpreters, and relation given by the Chino boy which came
with them from the Philippinas, who declared to the^ the truth in all things: how
ye the interpreters had never told the Judges how that they would remain in the
country, neither made any mention thereof, but that they came thither as lost
men, and that their request was to remain in the country til it were fair
wether, or the coming of the Portugal ships. And this was that which the
vizroy and his deputy had granted, and no other thing. But when the father
Costodio and his companions (who verily believing that their desire would take
effect) understood the craft and wile of the interpreters, and the great
fashood that they had used, they were very sad, and began amongst
themselves to remedy the same: so they determined to seek a new interpreter,
one that should faithfulle and truly declare their will unto the governor, And
although they did find some that could do it, for that they did reasonably
understand the Portugal tongue, yet there were none that would accept it,
for any request or gifts that they did promise them. The Father Costodio
seeing this, and that the time appointed did pass away without doing of any
thing, one day he and the rest of his companions did join together, and
entered in counsel to see what was best to be done, according unto the
necessity in the which they were driven. There was amongst them diverse
opinions, for that of the father Costodio and of another religious man was,
that they would go unto Machao, which was not far off, and there would
administer the sacraments, and preach the holy Gospel unto the christened
Chinos and to learn the China language, and to tarry there and abide the
first occasion that should be offered, or else they themselves to procure it,
for having the language it were an easy thing to do it: and they should not
have need of any interpreter, neither fear to be deceived as they had been
before. And besides this, they put the Portugals out of all doubt of the false
opinion that the Captain general had published abroad of them, and of other
matters of like effect and purpose. The other two religious men and soulders
were of a contrary opinion: which was, that they should return unto the
Islands Philippinas, and not unto Machao, and said, that they had departed
without license of the governor, and did adventure themselves into the harm
and damage that might happen unto them by that enterprise, and all for to plant
the faith of Christ in that kingdom. And now seeing that by the just judgment
of God we cannot put it in execution, we are greatly bound to return again
unto him, of whom we doubt not but with ease to get our pardon for the error
passed, representing the zeal we had to the honor of God, and the salvation
of so many souls, who did incite us to give that great enterprise: with the
which we shall remain blameless with them that had given wrong judgment of
us, and accomplish our bounden duty and obedience which we do owe unto the
governor. And in going unto Machao we shall run in great danger to be holden
and judged for traitors to the king: and the intent wherewith we went unto
China, every one will construe and interpret thereon at his pleasure.

The resolution of these contrary opinions, was by a common consent delated
certain days, in the which they prayed unto God to put into their hearts,
that which was best for his divine service. So in the end the father Costodio,
and the religious man, who was of his opinion, did determine to go forwards
with their pretense, and to go unto Machao, as aforesaid, and the rest to
return unto the Islands with the first opportunity they might find: but when
it should come to effect, one of the religious Friars that should have gone
unto Manilla was dead of an infirmity that chanced him. They stayed there
longer then they did think they should, by reason that ye Judges of the City
were occupied with the examinations of students the which is accustomed every
three years, and is in that manner and order, as has been told you in the
proper chapter for the same: the which examinations endured more then five and
forty days with great feasts and banquets, without meddling in any other
particular business.

CHAP. XI. The Father Costodio sends a messenger unto Machao he he writes
unto the bishop and unto a priest for to bestow their alms on them for their
departure. The captain general does understand thereof, and commands them
not to aid nor succor the Spaniards, and other matters appertaining unto them.
IN the mean time of this their examination, the father Costodio did send a
messenger unto the bishop of Machao, declaring unto him his determination, and
he also did write unto the devout priest, of whom we have made mention before:
and craved of them their alms wherewith they might make provision for them
that would depart for the Islands Philippinas, and how that he and his companyon
would go and see his lordship. This was not done so secretly, but it came unto
the understanding and knowledge of the captain general of the Portugals, who
with great choler went and demanded the letters of the priest, those that were
given him by the Chino: threatening him that if he did not, he would punish
him with great rigor, and banish him out of the country as a suspected person.
He answered him, that of truth he had received certain letters, but that at
the very instant he sent them unto the Bishop unto whom they were directed:
about the which there was great hold and keep, until it came to effect that
the captain did lay hold upon the priest for to apprehende him: but when the
bishop understood thereof, he with all speed possible went to remedy the
danger that might ensue, and to take him out of his power.

The captain seeing that he could not persevere with his intent and purpose,
he made many notifications unto the bishop, requiring that he would not permit
that any letters should be received from those religious Spaniards, for that
he knew by very certain relation that they were spies, and no friars, and if
so be that any damage should happen unto them, by their order, that he would
lay the whole fault upon him as a consenter and a helper. The bishop
answered that he was fully persuaded and certified that they were true
religious men, and servants of God, and that he with a very good will would
take upon him the burden of any damage that should happen to the country by
their means, or unto the king of Portugal. With this the captain was
somewhat quieted, but not so much, but that continually he did not let to
imagine new matters against the poor fathers, to have occasion to apprehend
them, and imagined in his mind for to write a letter unto the interpreters, in
the which he did offer them great quantities of money, if that they would do so
much as give order that the Judges would send the religious men and Spanish
soldiers that were in Canton unto the City of Machao, aduertising them how
and which way they should use the matter to put it in effect, and was, that he
should tell the Judges, that the first time when as they went to speak with
the governor, whereas they did ask and say that they would depart for the
Islands Philippinas, that they did interpret it contrary, for that their demand
was for to go unto Machao.

The interpreters straightwayes (with the desire of gain) did take the charge
upon them, and did use the matter in such sort that the Judges did send them
unto Machao, whether it were with or against their wills. But God, who would
not permit those his servants and Christians to be deceived, remedied the
same at such time as it should have been put in execution, in the manner as
you shall understand in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XII. A Portugal of the City of Macheo does discover the evil intent
of the captain general: he gives the Spaniards warning thereof by a letter
without seal, by the which they remedy the danger that was so nigh at hand:
they are called before the Aytao of the City, and he declares unto them such
matters as have passed with him, and the license that was granted for some of
them to go unto Machao, and the other unto Luzon.
BEing understood by a Portugal a good Christian of the town of Machao, of
such things as the captain general did imagine against the poor religious
fathers that were in Canton, and their companions the soldiers, of whose holy
zeal, he was fully certified, and being grieved at the very soul that one
Christian should hurt and harm another: and more in the disturbing of the
salvation of souls, he determined with himself to give them advice thereof
with all speed that was possible, as in effect he did by sending them a letter
without any name: wherein he gave them to understand that the Captain
general by means of the interpreters, did pretend that they should be sent
thither whereas he might apprehend them, and send them unto the king of
Portugal, or else to do some hurt unto their person, with some false
information, and willed them to be well advised, and to keep themselves from
the deceit ordained.

The letter being seen, and well advised of all that was therein contained:
they determined to give notice thereof unto a Chino, a very friend of theirs,
and perfect in the Portugal tongue: whom diverse times they proved by
experience, and found him a very honest man, and one that had done them
friendship: who promised them that before many hours, he would bring al
things to light, and to know whether that were true or not.

So with this desire he went there whereas the Judge did sit in audience, and
was there as one that knew nothing, until such time as he saw come thither one
of the interpreters with a petition in his hand, and presented it unto the
supreme Judge, who was the Aytao, the which being read by a scriuener, he
provided that all things should be granted and done, that was therein
contained. This petition the Chino aforesaid saw, and after that the
interpreter was departed with contentment, and found that in the same petition
he did request (in the name of the Spaniards) of the Judge to give them leave
for to go unto Machao, which was more for their purpose then to go unto the
Islands Philippinas, which was granted by the judge, and lacking nothing but to
seal or sign the petition, but was delated until the evening, by reason of
certain business that chanced at that present: but sure it was the ordinance
of God, for that if it had been signed, they must needs of force have
accomplished the same, without any replication. So with this certainty he went
straightwayes unto the Spaniards, to whom the interpreter had told that by
petition he had asked license for them to go to the Islands Philippinas from
whence they came, but the Judge would not grant unto that, but for to go unto
Machao, which was nearer hand, who commanded them to accomplish the same
without any replication, upon pain that they should be carried thither
perforce.

The Spaniards asked council of the Chino their friend, what means might be
taken to avoid the danger that the interpreter had begun to bring them in, and
was alredie gone to conclude the same. The Chino said that he was fully
persuaded that the Aytao loved them well, and that he understood he did them
great favor and courtesy to grant unto the petition the which the interpreter
did present in their name. But notwithstanding for so much as it was not
signed, there was remedy to be had: if that they would present another which
he would give them, and go presently unto the Aytao and present the same, and
say when they give it him, that they would go unto Luzon and not unto Machao,
and that he himself would go with them for the good will he bare unto them, if
it were not for the great pain that is put upon all them, whosoever that
shall speak for any stranger, without license of the Justice, or is called and
ordained for the same. So they being fully persuaded in this conclusion, with
the petition made and all ready, there entered in at the gate whereas they were,
a servant to the Aytao, who in the behalf of his master, came to call the
Spaniards to come before him, for that he would see and talk with them before
their departure. They straightwayes went forth in his company, and came unto
the gates of the city, after they had gone a good ways in the suburbs: and
there they were stayed till such time as another came and brought their
license, written upon a table (in such sort as in other places it has been
told you.) So when they had passed the gate, they passed thorough a long
street, in the which they saw so great riches, and of so great curiosity, that
the father Costodio with great admiration said, I have been in the
principallest cities of all Flanders and Italy, and in all them I have not
seen so great curiosity and riches, as in this street alone: and according
unto the report of them all, he had great reason to marvel thereat. So they
coming unto the end of this street, and in sight of another gate, they saw
that the soldiers which kept and guarded the same, did shut them in their
presence with great have, and let fall a percullis of iron before the gate, and
demanded to see their license at a window out of the said percullis: and when
they had it, although they saw with them the servant of the Aytao and the
interpreter, yet would they not open the gate until such time as it was
acknowledged and new firmed by another Judge, the which being done, they
presently did open the gates and did conduct them unto the house of one which
is to be compared to a Judge of the court, and called in their language
Tequisi, that he might go with them to the Aytao, for so it was commanded and
ordained. Unto this Tequisi they gave their petition that they had made,
without giving the interpreter to understand thereof, requesting him by signs
and some words which they had learned of the language that he would give it to
the Aytao, and to procure that he might accept and grant that which by ye same
they did demand: but when they gave it him, it caused great alteration in the
interpreter, for that they told the Judge yt he was a thief and a traitor, and
how that he had sold them to the captain general of Machao, and how that he
had presented a petition in their name: how that they would go thither, and
not to the Island of Luzon, where all their desire is to return, and this has
he done by gifts that the said captain general has promised to give him, if
that he do accomplish his desire. The Tequisi when he heard this, he forthwith
departed with us from his own house, toward the house of the Aytao which was
hard by, and as he went by the way he read their petition, and saw that it was
different to that which the interpreter had given before unto the Aytao, he
being present: whereat he made a s^ay and began to consider of the same, as
also of that which the Spaniards had said unto him, at such time as they gave
him their petition, for by the signs and tokens they made, as by their
semblant in speech, it seemed to him, that they were maruellously indigned
against the interpreter, but he did not well understand them, for that they
could not plainly declare it in their language, till such time as he found the
contrariety that was in the petitions and the turbation of ye interpreter,
whom presently he called unto him, and asked him what the matter was: he
trembling for fear, answered and said that he understood that the father
Costodio (whom all the rest do obey as their head, and with whom he alonely
did comunicate) that it was his pleasure, and gave order to go unto Machao, and
that he was certain that all the rest were of that opinion, wherein he
thought he had done well, and therefore he presented that petition in asking
license, whereby they might do it liberally, with this discharge: and again
the Spaniards seeing how he was terrified, and how that he requested them so
humbly they would not proceed any farther with their complaint, wherewith the
Tequisi was satisfied, who said unto the Spaniards being in the gallerie of the
Aytao his house, that they should tarry there, and he entered in with the
petition in his hand. So within a while after they were commanded to enter into
the hall there whereas the Judges were, and had seen the petition and comoned
about the same. And at their entering into the hall whereas the Aytao was, there
were signs made unto them that they should kneel down, the which they did
almost twenty paces before they came to the table that was before him: he had
in hand the petition that Tequisi had given unto him, and although that he had
read it before, yet did he return and looked again upon it, and asked which
were they that would go unto Machao. The father Costodio signified himself and
friar John Baptista his companion, and said, that they for that they were old
and timorous of the sea, they would go thither for that it was nearer hand,
and how that the rest that were not of such years, neither so timorous, they
would return unto the Island of Luzon from whence they came, and there dwell
with other of their brethren and friends that were there. The interpreter whose
evil conscience did accuse him, for the evils which he had done, was so
timorous, that all men might see plainly his default, and without al doubt the
Justices are so right in executing the same, that if their complaint had gone
forwards, they would have punished him and his companion and that very cruelly:
but the religious Friars would not consent that the soldiers should declare
against them although their will was good, but thought it a sufficient
punishment to see in what affliction the poor men were in, and took pity on
them.

The Aytao was desirous to see their Images and book which was the chiefest
occasion wherefore he sent to call them, and when he saw them he received
great content, and called the Fa- Costodio to come nigh unto him, and asked the
signification of some of them, such as seemed unto him most strangest, and
being satisfied thereof, he commanded the Friar Costodio to read on one of
these books, he harkening unto it with great attention, and as one amassed to
see those letters, and the form of them so far different unto theirs, which
are all in manner of caractes, as has been told you. So after that they had
passed away the time a while in this, he said, that those which would go
unto Machao should put themselves on the one side, and they that would go
unto Luzon on the other: the which being done he took his leave of them
very lovingly, and said that he would give them the license which they did
ask at all times whenever they would, and although he could not grant it
them without first to consult with the vizroy of Aucheo, yet he would do it
within ten days, and then those which would go unto Macheo might presently
depart, and those which would go unto Luzo, he would send them unto Chincheo,
that from thence the governor should cause them to be sent in the first
passage that goes with merchandice.

This Aytao was very peaceable and human, who having compassion on the
Spaniards, for that they seemed unto him to be good men: he commanded to be
given to them over and above the kings alowance, a Hog and Rice and other
kind of victuals. So here with they went unto their lodgings with content, and
also the interpreter, who thought that he was newborn again that day.

CHAP. XIII. The Spaniards remain certain days in Canton, whither came
certain Portugals from Machao: at the first they feared them, but afterward
they were assured by the contractation they had the one with the other, that
they were friends: the vizroy of Aucheo comes to Canton, and dispatcheth the
Spaniards, and gives them good provision and intertainment.
AFter that the ten days were past appointed by the Aytao, and some more, and
seeing that no more mention was made of them, but as though they had never
seen the^, they were very sorrowful, and in jealousy that the captain general
of Machao aforesaid had knowledge how that his craft and subtlety was
discovered, and thereupon to begin and frame some other: procuring for an
instrument in the performing of the same, some Judge or some other person of
power and authority. So they being with this care and discontent: there came
unto the city of Canton four Portugals to buy and sell merchandice, with a
safe conduct which they had for ye same, which was ye occasion yt their sorrow
and trouble increased, suspecting what might happen conformable to ye advise
which they had from thence: but for yt they did common and visit the^ many times
with intent to discover their minds the one unto the other, they presently did
forget the evil suspection that they had of them, and not only that, but they
did give them great alms and charity, helping and aiding them in all things,
as it was meet and reason amongst Christians. So being void of their first
care, they put all their diligence and care in their departure: and seeing that
there was no mention made thereof by reason that the Judges were occupied in
mustering the soldiers of that circuit in a great and mighty field whereas
they were trained up in Military exercises, some shooting in bows, some with
hargabushes, tossing the pike, running of horses, and many other exercises mo:
and after that they had many different proofs, as well of things past, as at
that present, they ordained Captains, such as were advanced above all the
rest, and most worthy: all which being finished, the Spaniards determined to
put the Aytao in remembrance of his promise, and the better yt they might do
it, and with most brevity, they ordained a petition, and went with the same
unto the house of the Aytao, therewith to ask license to put it in ure. The
first Judge they met withal was the Tequisi aforesaid, who made signs that
they should come unto him, and asked of them what they would have. The father
Costodio answered, nothing but only to present that petition unto the Aytao,
to put him in mind of their departure, the Tequisi did take the petition,
promising them to give it unto him presently, the which he did accomplish in a
short space. So being read by the Aytao, he made answer by the same petition,
that he had a particular care of them, and tarried only for order from the
vizroy, which could not tarry long: the receiving whereof he would advertise
them, the which he did accomplish in few days, which came with great content
unto the Spaniards, for that he commanded that they should be sent away in
very good order, and to give them all that was needful for their journey, and
that in abundance. The same day that this commission came, there came also
news that the vizroy would come unto the city of Canton* and that within few
days he would be there: the which did so much trouble the Aytao and the rest
of the Judges, that day and night they never rested, but were occupied in the
preparing al things necessary to receive him, which were so many and with so
great majesty as though the king in person should come thither: with great and
mighty triumphall arkes, rich hangings, with other things, the which I do not
here make mention of, although they were very curious, because I would not be
tedious, for that I have a great desire to conclude this little history: and
if I should declare all that passed therein, it were requisite for the same
alone to make a great volume.

Four days after the coming of the vizroy, by his order, there was given
both to the one and to the other a provision, in the which he commanded all
Judges and governors to receive the Spaniards into their jurisdictions, whereas
they should pass and not to permit any to do them harm or injury, but to give
them free passage with security till such time as they should come to ye place
appointed in ye said provision, which was unto Machao and unto Luzon: and
jointly therewith he commanded two captains to bear them company til such
time as they had brought them out of all danger. And to give unto them that
went unto Machao (which was three days journey) sufficient provision requisite
for five days: and to them that went to Luzon, their provision for forty
days, although the voyage is to be made in fifteen days, and in twenty
days at the most. He also commanded them that had the charge to carry them,
that they should have a special care unto their healthes, in traveling not
too fast but little and little. Likewise the Aytao gave order unto the
interpreters for to sell the frigate, in the which the fathers came thither, and
to give unto them the price that should be made thereof, to bestow it at
their pleasure: the which they did* but kept still the half of that which they
sold it ^or^ and with manyother things m^, which by the commandment of the
vizroy was given them for their journey, and thought it well bestowed on them,
for to see themselves free of their lyings and crafts. At the departure of the
Father Costodio, one of the soldiers mind was altered, who was called Pedro de
Villa roel and was very desirous to go with him unto Machao, the which h^e did
accomplish by apparelling himself in the habit of a Portugal, because he had
no license to go otherwise. So all things being in a readiness for their
journey, they took their leave the one of the other in shedding many tears
with the grief of mind.

The Father Costodio and his companions came safely and in health to Machao in
four days, as himself did afterward write thereof, and were very well
received of the Bishop, and of all the rest: and within few days after they
gave them a place for to build a monastery, wherein he and his companion might
live, and all such as should take the habit of that order. They came thither
the fifteenth of November.

And those which went unto Luzon departed out of the city of Canton in a
great bark, of the which there are many in all that kingdom, very well tilted
and dressed, with many rooms and galeries and painted windows, as has been
told you: in the which they were very much made of by the patron of the said
bark and of the passengers, which were many, and went unto diverse parts with
merchandice: some things that they saw by the way till they came unto Chincheo
shall be told you in the chapter following.

CHAP. XIIII. They that were determined to go unto Luzon, do depart for the
city of Chincheo: in which voyage they see many rivers and towns: and other
particular things.
THe Spaniards depart out of the river of Canton, and after they had sailed by
sea ye space of three leagues, they entered into another mighty river, in ye
which they traveled four days. And sure the great number of cities and
towns that they saw along the rivers side is incredible, and so nigh the one
unto the other, that they seemed to be al one so in the end of four days they
landed at one of the cities, where came so much people to see those strangers,
that it seemed all the kingdom were there assembled together, and were so many
in number, that before they could get to ye Inn whereas they should be lodged,
there passed more then four hours, and was in distance but a quarter of a
league: but when they came thither they were very faint with the great thrust
and throng of the people. They stayed in this City one day, and the next day
very early in the morning was brought unto them horse, for to travel by land
other two days, ye which was almost continually in villages and towns, and
the third day they were embarked in a small bark, wherein they passed a river
which had but little water, ye space of two hours, the^ after they were shipped
in a bigger bark, and entered into another river, which seemed to be an arm of
the sea, in the which they sailed five days, and saw sailing up and down the
said river so many barks and boats, that it made them to be greatly amassed.
These rivers were as well replenished of cities and towns, as the other river
whereof we have spoken. Al which is a help to believe that which has been
said of the mightiness, and the great number of people that are in that mighty
kingdom. Concluding this river they entered into another, but not so broad as
the last, but a swifter current, and beset with mighty trees both on the one
side and the other, and were so thick that almost they could not see the sun
thorough them: and although the country very asper there along the rivers
side, yet was there many walled cities, and an infinite number of towns and
vilages, in such sort that the suburbs did almost join the one unto the other.
So when they were disembarked out of this river, they traveled by land other
four days, and greatly marvelled to see the great fertility of the country,
and many other things more, which they do pass over, for that in the relation
of ye Augustine friars it has been declared unto you. In the end of those
four days they came to a city ten leagues from Chi^cheo, and were lodged in
the suburbs of the same, whether resorted so much people to see them, that
although they did shut ye gates to defend themselves from the prease, yet could
they not be disturbed of the entry, for yt they broke the gates, and climed up
the walls and windows to see them. The host of the house where as they were
lodged, when he saw that the people did spoil and distroy his house, he
requested the Spaniards to go forth into a green field which was there hard
by, placed amongst a company of Orchards, the which they did to satisfy him,
and also to satisfy the multitude of people that were come thither only to see
them. The noise of the people was so great, that the governor feared there had
bin some other matter, and commanded a Judge to go and examine the cause and
know the truth: but when that he was certified thereof, he commanded the
Spaniards to come unto his house, for that he was desirous and would see them.
They presently did accomplish his commandment, and went their way, and as they
passed thorough the street, there were certain representing a comedy, but so
soon as the people that were there did see the Spaniardes they left the
players all alone and followed them. They entered into the governors house, and
found him with great majesty of servants and soldiers of his guard: he
entertained them with great love, and asked them who they were, and from whence
they came. The interpreter presently showed the provision they brought from the
viceroy, which was in sum, their license given by him for them to go unto
Chincheo, and that none should disturb them in their journey. But to aid and
give them all favor possible and that which was needful for their journey.
And when that he had read the same, he said that thereby he did understand
that which he desired to know, and how that the viceroy did command all
governors, and him as one of them, they should offer to do all that lay in
them: the which he did accomplish and showed them great favor and friendship.

The dext day following, they departed out of this city by land, being given
unto them by the governor, very good provision for the way. The same day they
came unto a town that was very fresh, and five leagues from the place they
departed, there they determined to tarry all that night, fearing ye passage
through a city which was but a league before, suspecting that they should be
as much troubled with the people as they were in the other city the day
before. And although this was but a small town, yet was there so great a
concourse of people that came from the villages there abouts, that it caused
them to depart the next morning more early than they thought, and all the night
they could not sleep, because of the great noise of the people.

So within a while after they departed from that town, they came unto the
city aforesaid, the which for situation and gallant buildings, was the
fairest in all that province. Through the midst thereof ran a mighty river,
over the which were many bridges very great and most fair. Here were they so
oppressed with much people that came to see them, that they were detayned in
the press a good while before they could enter into the city: and after they
were within they were compassed about in such sort, that they could not go to
seek to eat, but were constrained to enter into a bark and go down the
river and shroud themselves amongst a company of trees, and although they did
use this policy. Yet the number of people were so great that leapt into the
same bark that they were ready to sink, till such time as they that had
entered the bark, to avoid that peril, returned and lept a shoore, leaving
them all alone with the barkemen and mariners that did row, who went to seek
and bring them to eat, and they remained in the bark all that night.

So the next day in the morning, before the people could come to disturb them,
they rowed toward the great and huge city of Chincheo, and entered into the
same upon a sunday in the morning being the sixth day of December.

They remained still in the bark for their own quietness and security, and
sent their interpreter with their provision unto the Governor, that he might
ordain at his pleasure that which was therein commanded. The Governor when he
had received commission he said unto the interpreter that he should tell the
Spaniards that he was very glad that they were come thither in safety and in
good health, and that he should receive great joy to see them, and to show
them the courtesy that was commanded him by the viceroy, in their provision or
commission. But by reason that the great number of people that would come to
see them, should not be troublesome unto the^, he would pass over h^s content
in seeing them, and for their better commodity they shall depart in the same
bark wherein they came, unto the port of Aytim, whereas were certain ships that
were bound unto Luzon, and that he would command they should be received into
the said ships, and to be carried with as much speed as was poss^ble: and for
the accomplishing of the same he kept the commission of the viceroy, and gave
an other commission unto the governor of the port whether as he sent them, in
the which he commanded to be accomplished all that he had promised.

The Spaniards, although they would very gladly have seen the city of
Chincheo and the mightiness thereof, yet did they accomplish that which the
governor did command without any reply, for that they considered that it
should come then better to pass. So they came unto the said port the next day
following in the morning, whereas they did remain in the bark, doing as they
did at Chincheo, and sent their interpreter with the commission unto the
governor, who presently after he had read the same, sent and commanded that the
Spaniards should come a shore and come and see him: who did accomplish the same
although with no less trouble than in other places, by reason of the people
that came to see them. The governor entertained them with great love and fair
words, and before they departed from him, he sent to call a captain of one of
the ships yt was there bound unto Luzon and asked of him when he would depart
from that place, who answered within ten days: then the governor commanded
that he should carry them in his ship and to give them the best intertainment
that was possible, who promised him to accomplish the same, and therewith he
took his leave of them, and sent them with the said captain, who offered them
all the favor and friendship that was requisite. He presently carried them
unto his ship, who after he had showed the^ the whole commodity thereof, he
made the^ a colation or banquet with great friendship.

They remained in this port more than fifteen days, whereas they suffered very
much cold and seeing that the ship wherein they were appointed to go, was not
ready, neither any order for them to depart in many days, considering the
great desire they had to be amongst their own nation, and to take their ease,
and having knowledge of an other ship that was ready and would depart, they
altogether went unto the governor (who was set in audience) and said unto him
with a loud voice (as is used in all that country) yt the captain whom he had
commanded to carry them unto Luzon, was not ready to depart, neither any
sign that he would in many days, and that he would give them license and
command a captain of an other ship that was there ready to depart, and went
unto the same Island of Luzon, that he might carry the^, because they were so
ill at ease, and suffered so much cold that they felt great grief.

When the Governor heard this he was very angry, and with great choler he
commanded one of his officers that was there with him, to go presently and
bring before him that captain unto whom he had committed the carriage of the
Spaniards: yt which was accomplished and that in so short time, that it caused
great wonder: who when he came before the governor, had so great fear, that he
knew not whether he was in heaven or in earth. The governor straighwaies asked
him what was the occasion that he did not depart within the ten days as he
had said.

The Captain answered, that they had had no wether, neither at that present
wherewith they might nauigate. He asked him again and said, seeing that the
weather and time would not serve, how is it that there is an other ship ready
to depart. The captain at this demand did faulter in his speech, and answered
frivolous words, wherefore the Governor commanded that he should be whipped in
his presence, for the lie which he had told, and as they were pulling off his
apparel for to execute the commandment, the Spaniards having pity and
compassion of him, for that he seemed to be an honest man, they fell all upon
their knees at the governors feet, and requested him to pardon his offense,
who did presently consent thereunto with a good will, and commanded to let him
alone, but he spoke unto him very sharp words, such as so far forth as the
Spaniardes could perceive by the semblance both of the one and of the other,
that was as much grief unto him as though he had been whipped. Then presently
he commanded to call the captain of that ship that was ready to depart, and
delivered unto him the commission that he had given unto the other, with a
great penalty, and charged him to carry the Spaniards unto the Island of
Luzon, and charged him to bring a testimonial from thence, how that he had
carried them in very good order and in saftie and left them at the place that
they desired. This Captain understanding what had passed with the other, and
because he would not see himself in the like perplexity, did accept the
commandment, and thought the time long of his departure from thence, and did
promise them more than they did demand, and made have to depart ^ut of the
haven, because he would not be called back again.

CHAP. XV. The Spaniardes depart from China and go to Luzon, they do pass some
storms at the sea: the mariners do call upon the devil, by lots: the
religious men do reprehend them: in the end they come to their desired port,
whereas they are received with much joy.
THe second day of January departed out of the port of Aytim with a prosperous
wind the ship wherein was embarked the Spaniardes, and two other which were
their safe conduct: but by reason it was winter, the fair wind endured but a
while, yet came they that day unto the Island of Amoy, which was six leagues
from the firm land, and there they stayed one day. The next day following
they went to sea, to prosecute their voyage, whereas they were taken with so
terrible and foul weather, that the ship did drive they knew not whither, and
many times in danger to be drowned. This storm endured four days although
more stronger at one time than at an other: in the which storm was separated
the three ships the one from the other, in such sort that every one took his
way, procuring to save themselves, as commonly in such cases is used, without
having any care the one of the other, and God was so pleased that the ship
wherein the Spaniards were, and one of the other two entered into a sure port,
although with great trouble and with so great a leake, that they could scarce
keep her above water: but in especial that which came in their safe conduct.
And afterward they understood that the other ship had taken port fifty
leagues from that place with the like peril and danger. In this port they
remained certain days trimming their ships and tarrying for a fair wind. So
they departed from thence the three and twenty day of January and to their
judgments with a settled and good wind, with the which they sailed five
days, in the end whereof they discovered the Island of Luzon, with a singular
joy unto them all, for the which the Spaniards gave thanks unto God, by whose
favor they had escaped the storm past.

But it so fell out, as they were going alongest the coast of the Island for to
enter into the port of Manilla, and being within five leagues of the entry
thereof, upon a soddaine there arose the north wind with so great fury, and
caused so great a sea, that they found themselves in a great deal more danger
than in the other storm past, in such sort that they sponed before the wind
with their foresayle half mast hie, shaking it self all to pieces, and in
every minute of an hour ready to be drowned. The Chinos for that they are
superstitious and witches, began to invoke and call upon the devil, for to
bring them out of that trouble (which is a thing commonly used amongst them,
at all times when they find themselves in the like perplexity) also they do
request of him to show them what they should do to bring themselves out of
trouble.

But when the Spaniards understood their dealinges, they did disturb them
that they should not persevere in their lottes and inuocations, and began to
conjure the diuelles, which was the occasion that they would not answer unto
the invocation of the Chinos, who did call them after diverse manners (as has
been declared in the first part of this history) yet they heard a devil
say, that they should not blame them because they did not answer unto their
demand, for they could not do it for that they were disturbed by the
coniuration of those sp^nish Fathers which they carried with them in their
ship.

So presently when the night was come God was so pleased that the storm
ceased, and became in few hours very calm, although it endured but a while,
for as they began to set sail to nauigate toward the port, and almost at
the point to enter into the same a new storm seized on them, and with so
great force, that they were constrained to return unto the sea, for fear to
be broken in pieces upon the shore.

At this time they wanted both water and victualles which was unto them a new
torment, and they were brought into so great extremity, that for ninety and
six persons that were in the ship, there was not left victuals for two days.

The Chinos began a new to invoke the devils by writing, which is a way
that they never let but do answer them, as they did at this instant, and were
not disturbed by the coniurations of the fathers, yet notwithstanding they lied
in their answer, for that they said that within three days they should be
within the city of Manilla, and after it was more then four days.

In conclusion having by the favor of almighty God overcome all their
trauayles by the sea, and the necessity of the lack of water and victualles,
they arrived at the desired port the second day of February Anno 1580. whereas
they were received by the governor and of all the rest with great joy, in
pardoning them the offense they had committed in going without license, and
showed unto them particular favors, and were very sorrowful that the father
Costodio and his companions remained in Machao, for that he was well-beloved of
all, and that with great desert, for his understanding, learning, and holy
life. Who within few days after did write a letter unto the rest of the
religious men in Manilla aduertising them how that in a short time they came
unto Machao in good health, and how that the bishop and the Captain general
with all the rest of the town were very glad and joyful of their coming,
and fully resolved to the contrary of the false opinion that they had
conceived of them, and that he was in g^^at hope to see his desire
accomplished, for that he was daily in place whereas they did see and common with
the Chinos, whom, so soon as he can speak ye language, he does pretend to
instruct them in ma^ters touching the faith. Also he wrote, that he understood
by good original or information (although it was committed in secret) that the
kingdom or province of Cochin China, which is four days journey from Machao,
whereas the Portingals has contraction, and port for all their ships that come
from the Indias, has sent unto the bishop of Machao, and does demand of him
priests for to baptize them, with such determination and good will to be
christians, that in some ports they have already timber cut down for to
edify churches. This you may believe for that the bishop himself has told
him, and in the latter end of his letter was written as follows. They have
invited me to this enterprise, and (for to put my self therein) I would gladly
have with me many companions, which is the treasure that we go to seek. It is
a firm land, there whereas God has prepared a great harvest. They are
politic people and more easy to be converted then the Chinos, for that the
devil has not put so many disturbances against the gospel of Christ, as in
China, although it does join upon it, and once entering the faith therein, with
the favor of God, their great and difficult doings which now they have among
them will be broken with great ease, for they are not so many nor so great,
whereby we should be discomforted to see the^ overcome, and principally they
being men of so good wisdom and understanding, as we have seen by experience
in the time that we have been amongst them, and so full of mercy and pity,
that although we entered into the land without license, and for doing of the
same we ran in great danger of our own lives, they did entreat us well,
and gave us all that was needful, and also did suffer us to preach, if we
could the language: the which with the favor of God we will quickly learn,
for that we are whereas continually we do common and talk with the Chinos,
we do very earnestly commit it unto our Lord to direct and guide the same,
that his holy name may be exalted, and the souls of these blind Gentiles may
know and believe, and believing may be saved.

This was the substance of the letter, with the which it seems unto unto me
great reason to conclude this second relation. And to begin the third, the
which I do believe will be pleasant to the reader, and is entitled, A
Commentary of the new world, in the which is contained many curious matters,
as you shall perceive after the reading thereof, and is declared in substance
and effect by the relation of the father, that did pass and see them all, who
was named friar Martin Ignacio, a religious man of the order of S. Francis, who
after that he had compassed the whole world, came hither to Rome with Martin
Simion bishop of the Island of Pepper in the oriental or east Indias, with whom
I have had communication diverse times, and is a Chalde borne, and of the city
of Niniuie in Babylon, and made bishop by the patriarch of Babylon.

The end of this book.
A Commentary or short discourse of all such notable things as be betwixt
Spain till you come unto the kingdom of China, and from China unto Spain,
returning by the Oriental or east Indias, after that they had almost compassed
the whole world. Wherein is contained all the rites, ceremonies and customs of
the people, the riches, fertility and strength of many kingdoms: and the
description of them.
Made and set forth by the Author of this book as well by that which he has
seen, as also by true relation that he had of the religious and barefoot
Friars of the order of Saint Francis, who travailed the same the year 1584.
CHAP. I. A Commentary of the new world.
SAint Lucas de Barrameda, and the City of Cadiz from whence ordinarily goes
forth all such fleetes and ships that go unto the occident or west Indias,
are distant the one from the other only five leagues, and in thirty seven
degrees of altitude: from whence unto the Islands called the Canarias is two
hundred and thirty leagues, Canarias.
and always do Rut to the southwest, and is ordinarily sailed in eight or ten
days. The seas are rough: which causes great waves, for which cause it is
called the gulf of the Ieguas.

These Islands which in ancient time were called Fortunadas, Fortunadas.
are at this day called by the Spaniards ye Canarias, which is derived of Canes
or dogs, for that there was in them at such time as the Spaniardes did discover
them, great quantity of dogs, very big fierce and brave. There are of them
seven Islands which are called Gran Canaria, Tenerife, Palma, Gomera, Yerro,
Lancarote, and Forte Ventura, and are in altitude twenty eight degrees, The
names of the Canarias.
lacking very little, and have in them many particular things, of which I will
declare some of them in brief.

In the Island of Tenerife, at the farther part thereof toward the north west,
there is a mountain called El Pico de Tereyra, which unto the judgment of the^
who have seen it, is the highest in all the world, and is plainly seen
before you come to it three score leagues: so that a ship going from Spain
unto those Islands does discover that mountain first. None can ascend or go
up that mountain but in the months of July and August, for that all other
months of the year there is very much snow on it, Much snow.
although in all those Islands it does never snow, and to mount the height
thereof is three days work, on the top of the same there is a round and
plain place, and being thereon at such tune as it is fair weather and the
seas calm and in quiet, you may see all the seven Islands, and every one of
them will seem but a small thing in respect, yet some of them are distant from
that more than fifty leagues, and it has as much more in compass as that. In
the two months aforesaid they do gather in the top thereof all the
brimstone that is brought from that Island unto Spain which is much in
quantity. Great quantity of brimstone.
This mountain belongs to the duke of Maqueda by particular gift of the king.

In one of these seven Islands aforesaid, called the Hierco there is a
continual wonder, which in my judgment is one of the greatest in all the
world, and worthy to be known amongst all me^, whereby they may exalt the
mighty providence of God, and give him thanks for the same. This Island being
the greatest amongst the seven, is a country very asper and unfruitful and
so dry, Thedropping from a tree does seruethe whole Island with water.
that there is no water to be found in all the Island, but on the sea side, and
that in few places, but very far distant from the inhabitance of that
Island. But there natural necessity is remedied by the divine providence of
heaven (as aforesaid) and by a strange means, which is, there is a great and
mighty tree (unknown, and the like has not been seen in any part of all
the whole world) whose leaves are narrow and long, and are continually green
like Iuie, upon the which tree is seen continually a small cloud, which never
augmenteth nor diminishes, with the occasion that the leaves continually
without ceasing, does distill drops of water, very clear and fine, which does
fall into certain ses^ernes, which the inhabitants of the towns have made
for the conservation thereof, to remedy their necessities, and to sustain
thereby not only themselves, but also their cattle and beasts, and is
sufficient for them all: yet do they not know the original and beginning of
this continual and strange miracle.

One hundredth leagues distant from these Islands toward the right hand, there
is an other thing of little less admiration then the other yt we have spoken
of, which is: that many times there is seen an Island, which they call S.
Borandon. Many being lost at the sea have chanced upon the same Island, and do
say that it is a very fresh and gallant Island, with great abundance of trees
and sustinence, and inhabited with Christian people, yet can they not say of
what nation or language. The Spaniards many times have gone with intent to
seek it, but never could find it, Opinions of this Island.
which is ye occasion that there be diverse opinions touching the same. Some do
say that it is an enchanted Island, and is seen but certain days assigned or
appointed: and others say that there is no other let or impediment for the
finding thereof, but because it is so little, and is continually covered with
great clouds, and that there runs from it rivers which have so great a
current that it makes it difficult to come unto it. My opinion is (if it be
any thing worth) yt being true, that which so many have spoken of this Island
according unto the common opinion which they have in all the seven Islands of
Canaria, it can not be without some great mystery: for he which can cause it
to be all in a cloud, and the swift current of the rivers to be an impediment
to the finding thereof, can find remedy for the inhabitants to come forth (if
it be so for them yt be without at the sea not to go into it) yet can it not
be, for the^ within the Island, but at some time there should have some come
soorth by chance, and have bin seen of some there abouts, and declared unto
the^ ye secret of ye mystery: from whence I do gather, that either this Island
is imagined or inchaunted, or else there is in it other some great mystery,
for the which to give credit unto it, or to vary from the truth, it shall be
wisdom not to proceed any further, but to conclude in yt which touches ye
Islands of Canarias aforesaid*

The clyme and temperature of them all is excellent good, and has abundance of
al necessary sustenance for man's life. There is gathered in them very much
wheat, and other seeds, and wine: there is also made very much sugar: there
is nourished and brought up great store of cattle and that very good. But in
especial Camelles, Camelles.
whereof there is great store. Also all kind of sustenance is better cheap
there then in Spain.

All these Islands are inhabited with Spaniardes whereas they do live very
pleasantly, amongst whom, at this day, there be some that be natural of the
Guanchas aforesaid, who be very much Spaniarde like. The principal of all
these seven Islands is the Gran Canaria, in the which is a bishop and a
Cathedral Church, and counsel of the inquisition and royal audience, from
the which depends the government of all the other six Islands.

CHAP. II. They do depart from the Islands of Canaria for the Island of Santo
Domingo otherwise called Hispaniola, and do declare of certain things in the
way thitherward.
AFt^r that the fleetes or ships had taken refreshing in the Islands of
Canarias aforesaid, they departed from thence sailing by the same Rutter,
until they come unto an Island called the Desseada which is fifteen degrees
from the Equinoctial, The Island called Desseada.
eight hundredth and thirty leagues from the Canarias: all which is sailed
without seeing any other land, they are sailing of the same ordinarily eight
and twenty and thirty days.

This Island Desseado, was called by that name, by reason that the gul^e is
great, and so many days sailing, that when they do see it, is that after that
they have very much desired the same (so that Desseado is as much to say, as
desired. This Island has nigh and about it many other Islands, one of the which
is that which is called La Dominica, The Island Dominica.
which is peopled and inhabited by certain Indians who are called Caribes, by
such as do nauigate that way, which are a kind of people that do eat human
flesh: they are very expert archers, and very cruel: they do anoint their
arrows with a deadly earth, and so full of poison, that the wound the which is
made therewith can not be healed by any human remedy. This Island is in
fifteen degrees. It is very little and not of much people, yet
notwithstanding it has been the death of many Spaniardes both men and women:
such as have come thither in ships, not knowing the danger thereof, have
gone a shore for fresh water, or else to wash their lynnen, and upon a
soddaine un looked for, have been be set by the Indios, who have slain them,
and after eaten them: and they say that it is very sweet flesh and sauorie, so
that it be not of a Friar, for of friars by no means they will eat, nor would
not after that happened unto them as hereafter follows.

There was a ship that was bound unto the firm land, and did arrive at that
Island, in the which went two religious Friars of the order of Saint Francis,
and having no care as aforesaid, but very desirous to be a land, they went a
shore without any fear or suspicion of any harm that might happen unto them,
and being at a river side sporting themselves with great recreation, by reason
of the freshness thereof, easing themselves of the long and painful
navigations which they had coming from the Islands of the Canarias unto that
place, when the Caribes did see them without any fear, upon a soddaine they
descended from a mountain, and did kill them all, without leaving any person
alive. Many days they made great feasts and bankets, eating of those bodies
which they had slain, some sodde and some roasted, as their pleasure was. So
on a day they would amongst them eat one of the fathers, who was very fair
and white, They which did eatefriers flesh did die mad.
but all that did eat of him in a little space did swell marueilously, and did
die mad, with great gaspings that it was wonderful to see: so that from
that time, they remain as warned never for to eat any more of the like flesh.

Of these evils they have committed an infinite number, and have at this day
with them many Spaniardes both men and women, whose lives they pardoned for to
serve their uses, or euilles because they were very young, of the which they
say that some have fled away. They go naked like unto the Indians, and do
speak their language, and are almost converted unto their nature. This great
inconvenience might be remedied, if that it did please his majesty to command
some general that were bound unto the firm land, or unto the new Spain, to
make abode there a few days, and to root ^ut and make clean that Island of
so evil and wicked people which were a good deed, and they do well deserve
it, and to give liberty unto the poor Christians that are there captive a
great company of them. And it is said of a truth that some of them be of good
calling. There can none go a land on this Island but straightwayes they are
discovered by such ordinary spies as they do put to watch. And if they do see
that those which do come a land are many in number, and that they can not hurt
them, they do remain in the highest part of the mountain, or else amongst
the thickest of woods and bushes, till such time as the ships do depart,
which is so soon as they have taken fresh water or fire wood. They are great
traitors, and when they see opportunity they give the assalt, in the manner as
has been told you, and do very much harm.

Nigh unto this Island Dominica toward the northwest is the Island of S. John
de Puerto rico the which is in eighteen degrees: it is forty and six leagues
long and five and twenty leagues broad, and in compass about an hundred and
fifty leagues. Much kine, sugar, and ginger: wheat and gold.
There is in it great store of kyne, very much sugar, and ginger, and yields
very much wheat. It is a land of very much gold, and is not labored nor
taken out of the earth for lack of people, it has very good havens and
ports toward the south, and toward the north only one, the which is sure
and good, in respect whereof the Spaniardes did give the name unto the whole
Island, Puerto rico, taking the name of the port or haven. In it there is four
towns of Spaniardes, a bishop and a cathedral church, and he that is prelat
at this day, is the reverend father don friar Diego de Salamanca of the order
of S. Austin.

When the Spaniardes went first unto this Island, according unto ye report of
the reverend father de Las Casas bishop of Chiapa, Of six hundred thousand
Indians there remains none
was in the year 1509. This Island was so full of trees and fruit that they
gave it the name of the Guertas, and there were in it six hundredth thousand
Indios of the which at this day there remains not one.

From this Island unto the Island of Santo Domingo, is four score leagues, I
say from one port unto an other and from point to point but twelve leagues.
They do ordinarily go from one port to an other in three days, but to
return they are more than a month, for because the wind is contrary.

CHAP. III. Of the Island of Santo Domingo called Hispaniola and of their
properties.
THe Island Hispaniola, The Island Hispaniola or Santo Domingo.
which by an other name is called Santo domingo by reason that it was
discovered as that day, it is in eighteen degrees, and was the first that was
discovered in the Indias, by the captain Christopher Colon, worthy of
immortal memory, it was inhabited in the year of 1492. This Island is in
compass more than six hundredth leagues, it is divided into five kingdoms,
the one of the^ is now called the Vega, which at the time that it was
discovered was called Neagua, it has four score leagues in compass, and
stretches all of them from the north unto the south out of the which sea, as
does testify the reverend of Ciapa in his book, does enter only into the
kingdom, Mighty rivers in spain.
thirty thousand rivers and running brooks, twelve of them as great, as Ebro,
Duero, and Guadalquiuir in Spain. The foresaid bishop does also speak of an
other marvel, which is, that the most part of these rivers, those which do
distill and run from the mountains which is toward the west, are very rich of
gold, and some of it very fine, as is that which is taken out of the mines of
Cibao, which is very well known in that kingdom, and also in spain, by
reason of the great perfection thereof: out of ye which mine ha^h been taken
out a piece of virgin gold so big as a twopennie wheaten loaf, A piece of
virgin gold so big as a two penny wheaten loaf.
and did weigh three thousand and six hundred Castillianos, the which was
sonke and lost in the sea, in carrying of it into Spain, as does testify the
aforesaid reverend bishop. In this Island there is greater quantity of cattle
than in the other Island of Puerto rico, and there is made much sugar,
Cannafistola.
and gathered much ginger, and Cannafistula and also many sorts of fruits,
such as is in Spain, as others different of the country, and that in
abundance: there are also great store of hogs whose flesh is as wholesome and
as sauorie as is mutton in Spain, and is very good cheap: a heyfor is bought
for eight ryalles of plate, and all other things of that country after the
rate, although that the marchandice of Spain is very dear. It is a country
of very much gold, if there were people for to take it out: Gold and pearls.
and many pearls. In all this Island they gather no wheat, but in the
bishopric of Palensuela, although in many other places the ground would yield
it very well, if they would sow it. But nature, which was wont to supply
necessities, does accomplish the lack of wheat to give them in steed
thereof a root, which does grow in that Island in great quantity and
abundance, and does serve them for bread, as it did unto the natural people
of that country, Bread of a root called Casaue.
when the Spaniards went thither. It is white, and is called Casaue, the which
being grinded and brought into meal they do make bread thereof for their
sustinence, the which although it is not so good as that which is made of wheat
meal, yet may they pass therewith and sustain themselves.

This country is very hot, by reason whereof their victuals are of small
substance. The principal city of that Island is called Santo Domingo, (for
the reason abouesaid) in the which is an archbishop and a royal audience, or
chauncerie: this City is built on the sea side, and has to it a great river,
the which does serve them for their port or hauen^, and is very secure. There
is in it three monasteries of religious friars and two of Nuns.

In this Island (as says the reverend bishop of Chiapa in his book) there
were when as the Spaniards came first thither three millions of men natural
Indians, of the which at this day there is not two hundred left, Of three
millions of men not two hundred left.
and yet the most part of them be sons unto Spaniardes, and black mores
borne of the Indians women. All their sugar milles and other places are
inhabited with negros, of the which there may be in that Island about twelve
thousand. It is a wholesome country unto the^ that dwell therein. The sea is full
of whales, and that in abundance, which are seen by such as do come in their
ships, and many times they are in fear of them. But above all other there is
an infinite number of great fishes called Tiburones, Tiburones.
and are in great skule: they are marueilously affected unto human flesh, and
will follow a ship five hundred leagues, without leaving of it one day. Many
times they have taken of the fishes and do find in their bellies all such
filth as has been thrown out of their ship in many days sailing, and
whole sheep heads with horns and all: If they chance to find a man in the
waters side he will eat him all: if not, all that he does fasten on, he does
sheare it clean away, be it a leg or an arm, or half his body, as many
times it has been seen, and they do it very quickly, for that they have
many rows of teeth in their heads, which be as sharp as Rasers.

CHAP. IIII. Of the way and the Islands that are betwixt this Island of Santo
Domingo, and the kingdom of Mexico.
THe first Island that is after you are departed from Santo Domingo, is that
which ordinarily is called Nauala, The Island of Nauala.
the which is one hundred and twelve leagues from ye city of Santo domingo,
and is seventeen degrees, and is but a small Island: The Island of Iamayca
and nigh unto that is another which is called Iamayca of fifty leagues in
Longitude, and fourteen in Latitude: there was wont to be about them many
Vracanes, Uracans.
which are spowts of water, with many blustering winds. This word Vracan in the
Indian tongue of those Islands, is as much to say, as the joining of all the
four principal winds together, the one forcing against the other: the which
ordinarily does blow upon this cost, in the months of August, September
and October, by reason whereof such fleetes as are bound unto the Indies do
procure to pass that coast, before these three months or after, for that by
experience they have lost many ships in those times. From this Island they go
unto the Island of Cuba, The Island of Cuba, an^ the port Hauana,
which is in twenty degrees, in the which is the port of Hauana, which is
called the Cape of San Anton: they do put two hundredth and five and twenty
leagues of Longitude, and of Latitude six and thirty, it is inhabited with
Spaniards, who converted all the rest unto the faith of Christ: there is in it
a bishop, and monasteries of religious Friars.

When that any ships do go unto Noua Espania, they have sight of them, and
likewise when they do return, all those which do come from the Peru do enter
into the foresaid port of the Hauana, which is a very good port and sure, and
there is to be had all kind of provision necessary and belonging unto the
fleetes and ships, some which the Island does yield it self, and other some
brought from other places: but in particular, there is great store of very good
timber, as well for the repairing of ships as for other things, with the which
they do ordinarily balest their ships that come for Spain. The kings majesty
has in this a governor and a captain with very good soldiers for the defense
thereof, and of a fort which is in the same harbor, the best that is in all the
Islands.

This Island of Cuba was discovered in the year 1511. and was in it (being of
the bigness aforesaid) a great number of natural people, and now but a very
few: it has a river wherein is very much gold, according unto the opinion of
the natural people, and was told by the fathers unto their children, the which
was cast into that river by the natural people in this order following.

There was a Casique called Hatuey, who for fear that he had of the
Spaniards, came from the Island Hispaniola, unto this Island with many of his
people, and brought al their riches with much gold amongst them, who by the
relation of other Indians of Santo Domingo (whereas he had been king) understood
that the Spanyardes were coming unto that Island, whereupon he gathered
together all his people and many of that Island, and made a parley unto them,
saying: It is said of a certeintie, that the Christians do come into this
Island, and you do well understand by experience, what they have done by the
people of the kingdom of Aytim (which was the Island Hispaniola) the like will
they do here by us, but do you know wherefore they do it: they answered and
said, because they were of their own nature cruel. The Casique said no, that
they did it not therefore, The Spani^rds God is ^old.
but because they had a God whom they did worship, and because they will have
him from us, they do kill us: and in saying these words he took forth a basket
with gold and jewels which he brought thither in secret, and showed it unto
the^ saying, this is their God that I spoke off, let us make unto them Ateytos,
the which are sports and dances, and possible we shall please them, and then
will they command their people not to do us any harm. For ye accomplishing and
furnishing of the same, every one of them brought that which they had in their
houses, and made thereof a great mountain of wheat, and danced round about
the same till they were werie: then the Casique said, The Indians throw all
their gold and jewels into the river
I have thought with my self whilst we were dancing, that howsoever it be,
these that do come will kill us: for whether we do keep our treasure or give it
unto them, with covetousness to seek more from us we shall die: therefore let
us throw it into this river, the which they did with a common consent and good
will.

From their point or cape of Sant Anton, The port of saint John de Lua.
they sail to the port of San Iuan de Lua which is on the firm land of
Mexico, two hundredth and thirty leagues from the said point: in all that bay
there is great fishing, but in especial of one kind of fish which is called
Mero, the which are so easy to be taken, that in one day they may lade not
ships but whole fleetes, and many times it happens that they bring so many
to their ships that that they throw them again into the sea, for lack of salt
to salt them with. The Island of Campeche
They pass in sight of an Island called Campeche the which is a gallant and
fresh country, and nigh unto the kingdom of Mexico: in it is great store of
victuals, but specially honey and wax, Honey and wax^
and is three hundredth leagues compass: all the people of that Island are
converted unto the law of our Lord Jesus Christ. There is in it a bishop and a
cathedral Church, a governor for his majesty, and monasteries of Friars.
Within few days after they depart from this Island and come unto the port of
saint John de Lua, in the which by reason that it has many flats, it is
requisite to be careful for to enter into it: his majesty has in it a fort
which is good and strong. Five leagues from this port is the City of the Vera
Cruz whereas is the whole trade and traficke, The City of Vera Cruz,
and there is resident the kings officers: it is a hot country by reason that
it is in nineteen degrees, but well replenished of all kind of victuals: it
was wont to be unwholesome, but now they say it is not so much, they know not
what should be the occasion, whether it be by the moouings of the heavens,
or by the good government and discretion of them that do dwell in it. This
city is from the city of Mexico, ye which is metropolita^ of all that kingdom
and by whom all the rest is governed, seventy leagues, al ye way inhabited and
full of towns both of Indians Spaniards, and so great store of provision yt it
seems to be ye land of promission. It is mauellous temperate, in such sort
that almost throughout all the whole year, it is neither whot nor cold neither
does night exceed the day, nor the day the night, but a very little, by
reason that it is almost under the Equinoctial line. The mightiness of this
kingdom, and some particularities, you shall understand of in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. V. Of the bigness of the kingdom of Mexico, and of some particular and
notable things that are in it.
The kingdom of Mexico.
THis kingdom of Mexico is the firm land: on the one side it has the North
sea, and on the other side the South sea: it is not possible to declare the
breadth and length thereof, for that unto this day it is not all discovered.
Every day they do find and discover new countries, as in the year of
fourscore and three you may perceive by the entry which was made by Antonio de
Espeio, who with his companions did discover a country, in the which they
found fifteen provinces, al full of towns which were full of houses of four
and five stories high, the which they did name Nueuo Mexico, for that it does
resemble the old Mexico in many things. New Mexico
It is toward the North, and they do believe that that way, by inhabited
place, they may come unto that country which is called of the Labrador (of
which shall be spoken more at large hereafter.)

This kingdom toward the Orient does join unto the country of Peru, Peru.
Nombre de Dios. Acapulo. Panama.

The straites of Magellanes.


and so running by the North sea, and reaches unto Nombre de Dios, which is a
port of the said kingdom, and from thence unto Acapulco, which is a port in
the kingdom of Mexico: and in the South sea it reaches unto Panama, a port of
the said Peru, and in the same sea it extends nigh unto the straights of
Magellanes, and not far from the river of Plata and Brasill.

To conclude, this kingdom is so great that unto this day they cannot find the
end thereof: but every day does discover new countries, whereas all the Indians
that they do find are very easy to be reduced unto the Catholic faith, for
that they are people very docible, ingenious, and of a good understanding.
There is amongst them diverse languages, and very different climes, although
all generally do understand the Mexican tongue, which is most common. There
are many provinces inhabited by Indians and Spaniards, that every one of them
is as big as a reasonable kingdom, yet the greatest and most principal is
that of Mexico, whereas are many Indians and Spaniards which do exceed all the
rest in number: the names of them are Honduras, Guatimala, Campeche, Chiapa,
Guaiaca, Mechuacan, Nueua galicia, Nueua Viscaya, Guadiana and others mo, which
I leave out because I would not be tedious: in all the which, they have either
a royal audience and governors, or other Justices all Spaniards.

The natural people whereof, never since they were converted have been found
in any heresy, nor in any thing contrary unto the Romish faith. All these
provinces are subject and do acknowledge that of Mexico as the principal:
there whereas his majesty has his vizroy, an inquisition, an archbishop and a
royal audience or court of Chancerie.

This City of Mexico is one of the best that is in all the whole world, and
is situated upon water after the manner and fashion of Uenice in Italy: in all
this kingdom almost you cannot know when it is winter, or when it is summer,
for that in all the whole year, there is small difference betwixt the days and
the nights, by reason of the temperature of the country, the fields are
green almost all the whole year, and trees bear fruit also almost all the
whole year: for when it is winter in Europa, then do their fall dewes from
heaven which does cause all things to budde and flower, and in the summer it
does ordinarily rain, but especially in the months of June, July, It rayneth
almost every day.
August and September in the which months it is a marvel when it raineth not
every day, and it is to be wondered at, for that almost it never rayneth but
from noone forwards, and never passes midnight, so that it never troubles
them that do travel by the way, for that they may begin their journey at
midnight, and travel until the next day at noone. It raineth unreasonably and
with so great fury and force, that the time that it does endure, it is
requisite to fly from the showers, for that many times they are so hurtful
that one sole shower takes away the life of a man.

Almost all the whole year in this kingdom they do sow and gather as well
whea^e (whereof they have great abundance) as Maiz, which is the ordinary
sustentation of all the Indians, black moors and horse, The best horses in all
the world.
of the which they have great abundance very gallant and good, both to ye eye,
and indeed, as in any kingdom in all the whole world that is known unto this
day. The brood of them was carried out of Spain thither, when first they did
discover that country, and for that effect were chosen the best that could be
found: and for that they do eat all the whole year green grass and Maiz,
which is wheat of ye Indians, is the occasion that they do deserve to have the
praise above all other. In fine, this kingdom is one of ye fertilest of
victuals of all that ever we have heard off, and of riches, for that there is in
it an infinite number of silver mines, An infinite number of silver mines.
out of the which is taken great abundance, as it is to be seen every year
when as the ships do come unto Syuell. It is under the Torrida Zona, yet
notwithstanding it is of the temperature as I have said, contrary unto the
opinion of ancient Philosophers, who said that it was not inhabited. But now to
excuse them, it shall not be from our purpose to declare the cause wherefore
they were deceived, and is, that in the four months aforesaid, wherein the
sun has his most force, it does continually rain, which is the occasion
that the country is so temperate: and besides this, God does provide that it is
visited with fresh winds, which come both out from the South and North sea,
and is so ordinary a thing, that it is a marvel to see it calm, by reason
whereof the whole kingdom is of that property, and although the sun be very
strong and causes great heat: yet putting himself under any shadow,
although it be but little, they straightwayes feel a fresh and comfortable
wind, by reason of the temperature of the heaven in the manner aforesaid.

The inhabitants of this kingdom throughout all the whole year, need not to
augment nor diminish their apparel, neither their beds. Also the air and
clime is so wholesome, that you may lie and sleep in the fields without any
thing upon you, as in any house be it never so well hanged and close.

All that is discovered of this kingdom (except it be the land of the
Chichimecos, which is a kind of Indians that lives as the Alarbes do in Africa
without any house or town) all the rest I say are in peace and quietness
baptized and doctrined, and furnished with many monasteries of diverse orders of
religious men, as of the order of S. Dominicke, of S. Francis of S. Austen, and
of Jesuits, besides a great number of priests that are reparted in all parts of
that kingdom, so that the one and the other are continually occupied in
doctrining of the natural people and other Spaniards that are in that
kingdom, of whom, although they be but a few in respect of the Indians, yet
do they surmount in number more then fifty thousand. In the principal city
of this kingdom, An University in Mexico*
which is that of Mexico as aforesaid, there is a university, and in it be
many schools, whereas is red any faculty, as is in Salamanca, and that by men
of great sufficiency, whose travel is gratified with great rentes and honor.
There be also in it many great hospitals as well of Spaniards as of Indians,
whereas the sick men are cured with great charity and comfort, for that every
one of them have great rents and revenues. I do not entreat of the Churches and
monasteries both of Friars and Nuns which are in that city, nor of other
particular things, for that thereof there is written a large history, and my
intent is to declare by way of a comentary that which the said father Costodio
and Friar Martin Ignacio did common with me by word of mouth, and that I saw
written and understood of him at his return from traveling almost the whole
world, and of other things that I my self have experimented in certain parts
of it: so that this my discourse may more properly be called an Epitome or
Itinerario then a history. In this kingdom there are bred and brought up more
cattle then in any other parts known in all the world, as well for the good
climate and temperature of the heaven, as also for the fertility of the
country. The kine and sheep many times bring forth twice a year, and the
goats ordinarily thrice a year: so that because they have many fields in that
country, and much people that do give themselves unto that kind of g^ttings
(as grasiers) is the occasion that there is so great abundance, and sold for a
small price, and many times it happens that the bringers up of them do kill
ten thousand head of them only to profit themselves with the skins, in
sending of them into Spain, and leave the flesh in the fields to feed the
fowls of the air, without making any more account thereof.

There is great abundance of many sorts of fruits, some of them very
different from those which are gathered in our Europa, and the most part of
them: but amongst all notable things which are to be considered off in that
kingdom (which are many) one of them is a plant called Mag^ey, and an
ordinary thing in all those provinces and towns, of the which they make so
many things for the service and utility of them that do dwell therein, A strange
kind of tree.
that it is hard to be believed of them that have not seen it (although in all
places you have many witnesses to it). They take out of this plant wine, which
is that which the Indians do drink ordinarily, and the Negros: also excellent
good vinegar, honey, a kind of thride or yarne, wherewith they do make
mantels to apparel the naturals, and for to sow the same apparel: the leaf
have certain pricks whereof they do make needels wherewith they sow their
apparel, their shoes and slippers. The leaves of that plaint over and above
that, they are medicinal, they do serve to cover there in the place of tyles,
and being dipped in the water, they make thereof a certain thing like hemp
which serves for many things, and make thereof repasse, and the trunk of
this plant is so big and strong, that it serves for ioystes and beams
whereon they do build their houses, which commonly is covered with straw, or
else with broad leaves of trees, as is that of this plant. All this although it
seems much, yet in respect it is nothing considering ye great profit that is
made of this plant, as shall be declared unto you, when we come to entreat of the
Islands Philippinas, where as there is great abundance of them, as I refer it
unto the judgment of the reader.

CHAP. VI. This Chapter does prosecute in the things of the kingdom of Mexico.
THe Indians of this kingdom are marvelous ingenious and do see nothing but
they imitate the same, Properties of the Indians.
whereof comes that they are very good singers and plaiers upon all sorts of
instruments, yet their voices do heal them nothing. They are very much
affectioned unto matters touching ceremonies of the Church, and given unto the
divine culto, and therein they do very much exceed the Spaniards. In every
town there are singers appointed, which repair every day unto the Church to
celebrate the offices unto our Lady, the which they do with great consort and
devotion. Touching the dressing and adorning of a church with flowers and other
curiosities, they are marvelous politic: they are reasonable good painters in
some places: they make images of the feathers of small birds which they call
in their language Cinsones, which have no feet, and feed of nothing else, but
of the dew that falls from heaven, and is a thing greatly to be seen, and
was wont in Spain to cause great admiration, but in especial unto such as
were famous painters, Pictures made of feathers.
to see with what curiosity and subtlety they did make their pictures, in
applying every color of the feathers in his place. They are people of great
charity, but in especial unto the Ecclesiasticals: which is the occasion that
one of them may travel from sea to sea (which is more then five hundred
leagues) without the spending of one riall of plate in victuals, or in any
other thing, for that the naturals do give it them with great good will and
affection, for the which in all their common places of resort, which is an Inn
for strangers: they have men appointed for to provide for all Ecclesiastical
men that do travel, of all that they have need, and likewise unto the common
people for their money. They do not only receive great content with them, but
they themselves do go and request them to come unto their towns, at the
entry whereof they make them great entertainment: they go all forth of the
town both small and great in procession, and many times more then half a
league, with the sound of trumpets, flutes and hoybuckes. The principallest
amongst them go forth with bows and nosegayes in their hands, of the which
they do make a present unto such religious as they do receive: and sometimes
they cast them more flowers then they would willingly they should. Generally,
they do reverence all Ecclesiasticals, but in particular, those of such
religious houses, which in that kingdom were the first that did convert them,
and baptize them, and they do it in such sort, that if the religious man will
for any offense punish or whippe any of them, they do it with such facility,
as a master of a school does beat his scholars that he does learn.

This great reverence and subjection, was planted amongst them by the worthy
captain Hernando Cortes, Hernando Cortes.
marquis del Valle, he who in the name of the Emperor Charles the fifth of
famous memory, did get and made conquest of that mighty kingdom. He who
amongst other virtues that be spoken of him (and do endure unto this day in
the memory of the natural people of that country, and as I do believe his
soul is mounted many degrees in glory for the same) he had one that
surmounted the other in excellency, which was, that he had great reverence and
respect unto priests, but in especial unto religious men, and his will was
that the same should be used amongst the Indians: at all times when he did
talk with any religious person, he did it with so great humility and respect,
as the servant unto his master. If he did at any time meet with any of them in
the street, he being on foot, a good space before he came unto them, he
would put off his cappe, and when he came unto them he would kiss their
hands: and if he were on horseback, he had the like prevention, and would
alight and do the like. By whose example, the natural people of that country
do remain with the same custom, and is observed and kept in all that
country unto this day, and with so great devotion, that in what town so ever
that any Ecclesiastical, or religious man does enter, the first that does see
them before they enter therein, do run unto the Church and ring the bell,
which is a token known amongst them all, that a religious man is coming, so
that forthwith all the women go forth into the street whereas they do pass,
with their children in their arms, and bring them before the religious men,
that they should bless them, although he be on horseback, and do pass a long
through the town.

In all this country there is great abundance of victuals and fruit, that the
money being of so small estimation (by reason they have so much) a ryall of
plate is no more worth there then a Quartillo in Spain: you shall buy there a
very ^^ire heafor for twelve rials of plate, and fifty thousand if you will
at the same price, and a calfe for six or eight rials of plate, a whole sheep
for four rials, and two hens, such as you have in Spain for one riall, and
of Ginny hens, otherwise called Turkey cocks, and in Spanish Pauos, you
shall have an hundred thousand (if you please) for a riall and a half of
plate a piece, and after this rate all other sorts of victuals whatsoever you
will buy, although they be never so good: wine and oil is very dear, for that
it is brought out of Spain, not for that the country will not yield thereof,
and that in great abundance (as has been seen by experience, but they will
not consent to it for diverse respects. Medicinal herbs.
There be thorough out all the whole kingdom many herbs that are medicinal,
and the Indians very much experimented in them, and do always cure with them,
in such sort that almost there is no infirmity but they have a remedy for the
same, and do minister it, by reason whereof they do live very healthful, and
do die very seldom, but of leanenes, or when the radical moistness is
consumed. They use little lettings of blood, They use no compounds.
and less of compounded purgations, for that they have amongst them other
simples which they bring out of the field, wherewith they do euacuate their
humors, applying them unto the pacient. They be for little travel, and do
pass with little meat, and very seldom sleep but on a matte upon the
ground, but the most part in the fields in the open air, which as we have
said hurts not, neither themselves nor yet the Spaniards. But now to speak
in few words that which requires a great discourse and many words, and yet
notwithstanding not express well that which might be said of this mighty
kingdom: I will conclude in comparing it unto the most greatest and richest of
all that is now known in all the world, except that of China, of the which in
this history has been mentioned so many things, and shall be more spoken
off, when as we shall come to entreat of it, for that we will entreat of the
new Mexico, as I have promised in the fifth Chapter, and because it is a new
thing, I do believe it will be of great content.

CHAP. VII. Of the new Mexico, and the discovering thereof, and what they do
know of it.
IN the said Chapter I said that in the year 1583. there was discovered
fifteen provinces, New Mexico
the which the discouerers thereof do call the new Mexico upon the firm
land of Nueua Espania, and I did promise to give notice of the discovering
thereof, the which I will do with as much brevity as is possible, for that if
I should difusely declare all that they did see and know, it were requisite
to make of it a new history: the substance thereof is, that in the year of
our Lord 1581 having notice there of a religious man, of the order of saint
Francis, who was called Friar Austen Ruyz, who dwelt in the valley of saint
Bartholmew, by the relation of certain Indians called Conchos, who did
communicate with others their neighbors called Pasaguates, who said that
toward the parts of the North (traveling continually by land) there were
certain Islands very great, and never known nor discovered by the Spaniards,
who being removed with great zeal of chariti^, for the salvation of those
souls, did ask license of the Count of Corunnia, Uizroy of the said Nueua
Espania, and of his own superious for to go together, and to procure to learn
their language: and knowing it necessary to baptize and preach unto them the
holy Evangelist, having obtained the license of the aforesaid persons, taking
with him other two companions of the same order, with eight other soldiers,
who of their own good will would bear them company, he departed to put in
execution his Christian zeal and intent: who after a few days that they had
traveled, they came into a province which was called of ye Tiguas, distant
from the mines of saint Bartholmew (from whence they began their journey) two
hundred and fifty leagues toward the North, The province of Tiguas
in the which by a certain occasion the natural people thereof did kill one
of the Friars companions: who, as also the soldiers that went with him, seeing
and perceiving the success, and likewise fearing that thereof might happen
some other greater danger, they determined with a common consent to return
unto the mines from whence they departed, with consideration, that the company
which went with him were very few to make resistance against such successes as
might happen, being so far distant from the dwellings of the Spaniards, and
from their necessary succor. The two religious men which remained did not
only refuse their determination, but rather seeing good occasion to put their
good desire in execution, and so much ripe Mies, or dainties for the Lords
table, and seeing they could not persuade ye soldiers to proceed forwards in
the discovering thereof: they alone remained in the said province with their
Indian boys, and a Mestizo that they carried with them, thinking that although
they did remain alone, yet were they there in security, by reason of the
great affability and love wherewith the natural people did entreat them.

So when the eight soldiers came unto the place that they desired, they
straight ways sent the news of all that happened unto the City of Mexico,
unto the vizroy, which is distant from the mines of Saint Barbora one hundred
and three score leagues. But the Friars of S. Francis were very much agreeued,
for the remaining there of their brethren, and fearing least they should be
slain for that they were there alone, they began to move the hearts and minds
of other soldiers, that were in the company of another religious Friar of that
order, called Friar Bernardino Beltran, for to return to the said province, to
deliver the aforesaid two religious men out of danger, and from thence to
prosecute and go forwards with their enterprise begun.

At this time there were at the said mines by a certain occasion, an
inhabitant of the City of Mexico called Antonio de Espeio, a very rich man of
great courage and industry, and very zealous in the service of the majesty
of king Philip: he was naturally borne of Cordoua, who when that he understood
the great desire of the said Friars, and how much it did import, did offer
himself to go on that iournay, and to spend thereon part of his substance,
besides the venturing of his life. So license being granted unto him to
prosecute the same by some that did represent the kings person, and was
procured by the said Friars, there was appointed and given him for captain
John de Ontiueros (who was chief bayley for his majesty, in the towns which
are called the four Cienegas which are in the government of the new Biscay,
seventy leagues from the aforesaid mines of S. Barbora) and he to go with him,
and gather together men and soldiers, such as he could, for to accompany him,
and help to follow their Christian intent.

The said Antonio de Espeio was so earnest in this matter, that in a few days
he had joined together soldiers, and made provision necessary for the
journey, and spent therein a great part of his substance, and departed
altogether from the valley of saint Bartholmew the tenth of November 1582. and
carry with him (for whatsoever should happen) one hundred and fifteen horses
and mutes, great stoare of weapons and munition, with victuals and certain
people of service in this journey necessary. He directed his journey toward
the North, and at two days journey they came whereas were a great company of
Indians, The province of Conchas.
of those which be called Conchos: they were in raches and in houses made of
straw, who when they understood of their coming, by relation of long time
before, they went forth and entertained them with shows of great joy. The
feeding of these people and of all the rest of that province, Great store of
Conies, Hares and venison.
the which is great, is of Conyes ^lesh, Hares and venison, of ye which they
have great abundance. They have great store of Maiz, which is wheat of the
Indians, pompines and mellons very good and in abundance. They have many
rivers full of fish very good and of diverse sorts: they go almost al naked, and
the weapons that they do use, are bows and arrows, and live under the
government and lorship of Caciques, as they of Mexico: they found no Idols
amongst them, neither could they understand that they did worship any thing,
for the which they did easily consent that the Spaniards should set up
crosses, and were very well content therewith, after that that they were
informed by the Spaniards the signification thereof, the which was done by
interpreters that they carried with them, and by whose means they understood
of other inhabitances, whether as ye said Conchos did conduct the^, and did
bear the^ company more then four and twenty leagues: all which way was
inhabited with people of their own nation, and in all places whereas they came,
they were received with peace, by advice that was given by the Caciques from
one town to another. So having passed the four and twenty leagues aforesaid,
they came unto another nation of Indians called Passaguates, Passaguates.
who live after the manner and fashion of the other aforesaid Conchos their
borderers, who did unto them as the others did, conducting them forward other
four days journey, with advice of the Caciques as before. The Spaniards found
in this journey many mines of silver (according to the judgment of them that
understand that faculty) and of very rich metal. Mines of silver.
One journey from this they came to another nation called the Tobosos, Tobosos
who when they discovered the Spaniards, they fled unto the mountains and left
their towns and houses void: but more after they understood, yt certain years
past, there came unto that place certain soldiers for to seek mines, and
carried with them captive certain of the natural people of that country, for
which occasion they remain as scared and fearful. The captain forthwith gave
order, that they should be called back again, with assurance that there should
be no hurt done to them, and did so much that many of the^ returned* of whom
they made much on* and gave them gifts, declaring unto them by the
interpreter, that they came not thither to do hurt to any, with the which they
all returned and were in quiet, and consented that they should set up crosses,
and declare the mystery of them, and they made show that they were content
therewith, and did accompany them, as the other their borderers did, until they
had brought them into the inhabitance of another different nation, which was
distant from them twelve leagues. They use bows and arrows, and do go naked.

CHAP. VIII. Here he does prosecute the discovering of the new Mexico
THe nation that the said Tobosos did conduct them to are called Iumanos,
Iumanos*
who by another name are called by the Spaniards Patara Bueyes, their province
is very and full of towns with much people: their houses made of lime and stone,
and their towns traced in very good order: all the men and women have their
faces raced, and their legs and arms: they are corpulent people and more
decent then any that they had seen until that time: they have great store of
provision, and hunt, both of beasts and fowls: great store of fish, by reason
of mighty rivers that comes from the North, and some of them as big as
Guadalquiuiz ye which does enter into ye North sea: they have many lakes of
salt water which in certain times of ye year do congeale, and they do make
thereof good salt. Good salt.
They are warlike people, and made show thereof presently, for the first night
yt the Spaniards had placed themselves, with their arrows they slew five
horse, and hurt as many more, and would have left not one alive, if they had
not been defended by the guarde. When they had done this mischief, they left
the town, and went to a mountain which was hard by, whether as presently in
the morning went their captain with other five soldiers well armed with an
interpreter called Peter, a natural Indian borne, and with fair words and
persuasions, he quieted them, and made peace, and caused them to descend into
their town and houses and persuaded them to give advice unto their neighbors,
that they were men that would hurt no body, neither came they thither to take
away their goods, the which he obtained easily by wisdom, and in giving unto
the Caciques certain glass beads and hearts which they carried for that
purpose, and other trifles: so with this and with the good intretement done
unto them, there went many of them in the company of the Spaniardes many days
always traueling along the river side aforesaid, where as were many towns
of Indians of this nation, the which endured twelve days journey: in all the
which the Caciques gave advice from one town to another, out of the which they
came forth and entertained the Spaniards without their bows and arrows, and
brought with them victuals and other provision and gifts, but in especial
hides and shamway skins very well dressed, so that those of Flanders do nothing
exceed them. These people are all clothed, and they found that they had some
light of ye holy faith, for that they made sign unto God, looking up unto
heaven, and they do call him in their language Apalito, and do acknowledge him
for Lord, by whose mighty hand and mercy they confess to have received life,
and to be a natural man, and al temporal goods. There came many of them with
their wives and children to the religious Friar (that came with the captain
and soldiers, of whom we have spoken off) for to cross and bless the^, of
whom being demanded, from whence and of whom they had ye knowledge of God: they
answered that of three christians and one Negro that passed that way, and
remained there certain days amongst them, who according to the signs and
tokens they gave them, should be Aluar Nunnez Cabesa de Vaca and Dorantes, and
Castillo Maldonado and one Negro, the which escaped out of ye fleet wherewith
Panfilo de Naruaz entered into Florida, and after that they had bin many days
captive and slaves, they escaped and came unto these towns, whereas God by them
did show many miracles in healing (by the only touching with their hands)
many diseases and sick persons, by reason thereof they left great fame in all
that country. All this Province remained in peace and quietness, by which
demonstration they did accompany and served the Spaniardes certain days
traveling alongest the river side aforesaid.

Within few days after they came unto a great inhabitation of Indians, where
they came forth to receive them, by news that they had of their neighbors,
and brought with the^ many curious things made of feathers of different
colors and many mantles made of cotton, barred with blewe and white, like unto
them that are brought from China, to truck for other things. All of them as
well the men as women and children were clothed with shamway skins, very good
and well dressed, yet could the Spaniardes never understand what nation they
were, for lack of an interpreter that understood their language they dealt
with them by signs, and they showed unto the^ certain stones of rich metal,
and being demanded if they had of the same in their country: they answered by
the same signs, that five days journey from thence toward the north west,
there was great quantity thereof, and how that they would conduct them
thither, and show it unto them, as afterward they did perform, and did
bear them company two and twenty leagues, the which was all inhabited with
people of the same country.

So following the said river, they came unto an other inhabitance of much more
people than the other past, of whom they were well received, and welcomed with
many presents, especially of fish, for that they have great store by reason of
certain great lakes not far from thence, wherein is bred great abundance.
They were amongst these people three days, in the which both day and night
they made before them many dances according unto their fashion, with a
particular signification of great joy. They knew not how this nation was
called, for lack of an interpreter: But yet they understood that it extended
very far, and was very great. Amongst this nation they found an Indian, a
Concho by nation, who told, and made signs that fifteen iourneyes from
thence toward the north west, there was a lake which was very broad, and
nigh unto it very great towns and in the^ houses of three and four stories
high, the people well apparelled, and the country full of victuals and
provision, who did offer himself to bring them thither, whereat the Spaniards
rejoiced, but left to give the enterprise, only for that they would accomplish
their intent and begone voyage, which was to go to the north to give aid unto
the two religious men aforesaid. The chief and principal thing that they
noted in this province, was, that it was of a good temperature, and a rich
country, great store of hunt, both of foot and wing, many rich metals and
other particular things of profit.

From this province they followed their journey for the space of 15. days,
without meeting any people: they traveled amongst high and mighty pine trees
like those of Spain, at the end whereof, after they had traueiled to their
judgments four score leagues* they came unto a small village of very few
people, very poor, and their houses made of straw: they had great quantity of
dear skins as well dressed as those yt are brought out of Flanders, great
store of excellent white and good salt. They gave them good intertainment for
the space of two days yt they remained there, after the which they did bear
the^ company 12. leagues, unto certain great habitations, always traveling
along the river side toward the north as aforesaid, till such time as they
came unto the country which is called the new Mexico. All along this river
side was planted full of white salow trees, and in some place, it was four
leagues broad. Likewise there was many walnut trees, and pear trees like unto
those in Spain.

In the end of two days travail amongst these trees, they came unto ten
towns the which were situated along this river side on both parts, besides
others that appeared, but farther distant. It seemed unto them to have much
people, and as appeared to be more than ten thousand souls.

In this Province they did receive them courteously, and carried them unto
their towns whereas they gave them great store of provision and hens of the
country, with many other things, and that with a great good will. In these
towns were houses of four stories high, very well wrought and gallant
chambers, Houses of 4. tories high.
and most of them had steuues or hot houses for the winter. They are all
apparelled with cotton and of deares skins. the manner and apparel both of
the men and of the women, is much like unto the Indians, of the kingdom of
Mexico. But that which did cause them most for to wonder, was, to see both men
and women to wear both boots and shoes of very good lether, with three
sooles of neates leather: a thing which they have not seen but only there.
The women go without any thing upon their heads, but their hair trimly kembed
and dressed. Every one of these towns had Caciques by whom they were
governed, as amongst the Indians in Mexico with sergeantes and officers to
execute their commandment, who go through the streets of the town, and
declare with a loud voice the will of the Caciques, the which is straight
ways put in ure.

In this province the Spaniardes sound many Idolles that they worshipped, They
worship the devil
and in every house they had a temple wherein they do worship the devil,
whereas ordinarily they do carry him to eat. Likewise as amongst Christians in
the high ways they do put crosses, so have they chappelles, whereas they say,
the devil does recreate and rest himself, when as he trauelleth from one
town to an other: the which chappelles are maruellously well trimmed and
painted.

In all their tyllages and ploughed grounds, of the which they have many and
very great: they have on the one side of them, a portall or shed built upon
four pillars, whereas the laborers do eat and pass away the heat of the
day, and are people very much given to labor, and do continually occupy
themselves therein: it is a country full of mountains and woods of pine
trees. Their weapons are strong bows and arrows with their heads or points
made of flint stone, wherewith they will pierce and pass a shirt of mayle or
plate coat. They use also Macans the which is a staff of half a yeard long
made of flint and very smoth, wherewith they may cut a man a sunder in the
midst, they use also bucklers and targets made of raw hides.

CHAP. IX. Still does he prosecute the new Mexico, and declares of such
things as were there seen.
SO after they had been four days in this province, they departed, and not
far distant from the same, they came unto an other, which was called the
province of the Tiguas, in the which they found sixteen towns, in the one of
the same called Poala, they understood that the Indians had slain the two
Friars Francisco Lopez and Friar Augustine, whom they went to seek: and with
them three boys and a Mestizo. But when they of this town and their
neighbors understood, being pricked in conscience, and fearing that the
Spaniards came to plague them, and to be revenged for the death of the said
fathers, they durst not abide, but left their houses void, and fled unto the
mountains that were nighest hand, from whence they could never cause them to
descend, neither by gifts nor policy. They found in their houses great
store of victualles and an infinite number of hens of the country, diverse
sorts of metals, and some of them seemed to be very good: they could not
perfectly understand the number of people that were in that country, for that
they were fled unto the mountains, as aforesaid.

Being fully certified of the death of them that they went to seek for, they
entered into counsel to determine whether they should return unto new Bizcaya,
from whence they came, or to proceed forward: in the which there were diverse
opinions. But by reason that they understood there, that toward the port of
the orient from that place, and not far distant from that province, there
were very great towns and rich, and finding themselves so nigh them, the
captain Antonio de Espero with the consent of the religious Friar aforesaid
called Bernardino Beltran, and the most part of his soldiers and companions,
determined to proceed forwards in the discovery thereof, till such time as
they did see to what end it would come. that they might the better give perfect
and just notice thereof unto his majesty, as witnesses that had seen it.

So being in conformity they determined, they remaining there sentenela, or
royal company, the captain with other two companions with him should go
forwards in the demand of their desire, which forthwith they put in
execution. So at the end of two days of their travail, they came unto a
province, where they discovered aleuen towns, and much people in them, which
in their judgment did pass forty thousand souls. It was a country very
well replenished and fertile, whose confines are joined unto the land of the
Cibola, whereas is great store of kyne, of whose skins they do apparel
themselves and with cotton, having the use of government amongst the^, as
their neighbors have: there are signs and tokens of many rich mines, and
found in their houses certain mettalles, these Indians do worship Idols: they
received the Spaniardes with peace, and gave them to eat. Seeing this and the
disposition of the country they returned unto their sentenela from whence they
departed, to give notice unto their companions of all that has been said.

So when they were come unto their companions aforesaid, they had notice and
understanding of an other province called the Quires, which was up the river on
the north, six leagues distant. So they departed thitherwardes, and when they
came within a league of the place: there came forth in peace a great company
of Indians, and requested that they would go with them unto their towns: the
which they did, and were very well entertained and had great cheer. In this
province they saw but only five towns, in the which there was a great number
of people, which unto their judgment did pass fifteen thousand souls, and
do worship Idolles as their n^ighbours do. They found in one of these towns
a Pie in a cage, as is the use in Spain, and Tirasoles as those which are
brought from China, and painted on them the sun and the moon with many
stars: and taking the altitude thereof, they found it to be in seven and
thirty degrees and a half under the north poole.

They departed from this province, and traveling by the same course or Rutter,
fourteen leagues from thence, they came to an other province called the
Cunames, whereas they discovered other five towns: and that which was the
principal and biggest of them, is called Cia, which was of such huge bigness
yt it had in it eight places: their houses be plastered with lyme, and painted
with diverse colors, much better than they had seen in any province past. It
seemed that the people that were there did pass in number twenty thousand
souls: they gave presents unto the Spaniardes with many curious mantelles,
and of victualles to eat maruellously well dressed, and judged the people to
be more curious and of more estimation of themselves, than any that thitherto
they had seen, and of greater government. They showed unto them rich
metalles, and the mountains that were hard by, ich metals.
whereas they did take it out. Here they had notice of an other province which
was toward the north west, and determined to go thither.

So after they departed from thence, and had travailed six leagues, they came
to ye said province, which was called Arneias, in the which was seven great
towns, and in the^ according to their judgment, thirty thousand souls: they
said that one of these seven towns was very great and fair, the which they
would not go to see, for yt it was situated behind a mountain, as also they
feared some evil success, if that they should be divided the one from the
other. They are people after ye fashion of the other province their neighbors,
with as much provision and as well governed. Fifteen leagues from this
province, traveling continually toward ye northwest, they came to a great
town called Acoma: it had in it more than six thousand souls: it was
situated and placed upon a high rock, the which was more than fifty fadam in
height, and had no other entry but by a pair of stairs, the which was made
and cut out of the same rock, a thing the which did cause great admiration
unto the Spaniardes: all the water that they had in this town was in cesterns.
The principallest hereof came with peace for to see the Spaniards, and brought
the^ many mantles, and shamwayes very well dressed, and great quantity of
provision, they have their corn fields two leagues from that place, and for to
water them they take water out of a small river there hard by. Upon the said
river side they saw many fields with roses, like unto those that are in Spain:
there are many mountains which show to have metals, although they went not
up to see it, for that the Indians be many, and very warrelike people. The
Spaniards remained in this place three days, in one of the which the natural
people thereof did make unto them a solemn dance, and came forth in the same
with gallant apparel and with marvelous ingenious pastimes with the which
they rejoiced exceedingly. So four and twenty leagues from this place, they
came unto a province called in their natural language Zuny, and the Spaniards
do call it Cibola, there is in it a great number of Indians. In the which was
Francisco Vazquez Coronado, and left there erected many crosses and many other
signs and tokens of christendom, which continually did remain standing. They
found there three christened Indians, which were left there at that time, whose
names were, Andres de Cuyoacon, Gasper de Mexico, and Antonio de Guadalaiara,
who had almost forgotten their own language, and could speak very well that of
this country: yet with a little use after they had talked with the^ they did
easily understand them. Of these they understood that three score iourneyes
from thence was there a lake very great about the which was situated many
excellent good towns, and that the natural people thereof had very much gold,
and it seemed to be true for that they did all wear braslets and eareringes of
the same. The foresaid Francisco Vazques Coronado having certain intelligence
of the same he departed from this province of Cibola, and went that way: and
having traveled twelve iourneyes, his water did fail him, so yt he determined
to return back again as he did, with pretense to return an other time, when
better opportunity should be had: the which afterward he did not put in
execution, for that by death all his determinations and prete^ces were cut off.

CHAP. X. Still does he prosecute the discovery of the new Mexico.
Upon the news of this great riches aforesaid, the said captain Antonio de
Espeio, determined to go thither, where were of his opinion the most part of
his companions: but ye religious friar was of the contrary opinion, and said
that it was high time to return unto new Bizcaya from whence they came, for to
give notice of all that they had seen, the which they did put in execution
within few days after, the most part of them: and left the captain with
alonely nine companions that would follow him. Who after that he had fully
certified himself of the riches above said, and of the great quantity of good
metals, that were there. He departed out of this province with his companions,
and traveled toward the northwest.

So after that they had traveled eight and twenty leagues, they came into an
other province the which was very great, in the which to their judgment were
more tha^ fifty thousand souls: whose inhabitants, when they understood of
their coming they sent the^ a messenger, which said, yt if they would not be
slain of them, yt they should not approach any nearer unto their towns.

Unto the which the said captain answered, that they came not thither to do
them any harm as they should well perceive, and also did request them that
they would not disturb them in the prosecuting of their pretense, and gave
unto the messenger certain things such as they carried with them, who did
praise so much the Spaniards, that he did appease the troubled minds of the
Indians, in such sort, that they did of their own good will grant them license
for to enter into their towns. The which they did with one hundredth and fifty
Indians their friends, of the Province of Cibola aforesaid, and with the three
Indians of Mexico, of whom we made mention.

Before they came unto the first town by a league, there went forth to meet
and receive the Spaniards more than two thousand Indians laden with victualles
and provision, unto whom our Captain did give things of small price: yet it
seemed unto them to be of great estimation more than gold. So when they came
nigher unto the town called Zaguato, there came forth to receive them a great
number of Indians, and amongst them their Caciques, and made a great show of
mirth and joy, and threw upon the ground much flower of Maiz that their horse
might tread upon it. With these feasts, joy and pleasure, they entered into the
town, whereas they were very well received, lodged, and made much of: the
which the captain did partly recompense, in giving unto all the principallest
amongst them, hattes, and glass beads, and many other things more, which
they carried with them to serve the like opportunity.

The Caciques did forthwith dispatch and send advice unto all those of that
province, giving them to understand of the coming of their new guestes, and
how that they were very courteous men, and did no harm. Which was occasion
sufficient to cause them all to come laden with presents unto the Spaniardes,
and did request them for to go unto their towns to sport and recreate
themselves: the which they did, but always with great care and respect of what
so ever might happen. For the which the captain did use a policy with them,
which was, that he told unto the Caciques, that for so much as his horse were
very fierce and furious, and that they had told them that they would kill
them, therefore for to shun the damage and harm that might happen unto the
Indians, it were requisite to make a fort with lyme and stone, to put them in.
The Caciques did give such credit unto his words that in a few hours they had
joined together so much people, that they made a fort according as the
Spaniardes did request, and that with an incredible brevity. Besides this when
the captain said yt he would depart, they brought unto him a present of forty
thousand ma^tles of cotton, some white, and some painted: and a great quantity
of hand towels with tassels at the corners, and many other things, and amongst
them rich metals, which showed to have much silver. Amongst these Indians they
had great notice and knowledge of the lake aforesaid, and they were conformable
unto the other, in that touching the great riches and abundance of gold.

The captain having great confidence in this people and of their good
dispositions, he determined after certain days yt he had bin there, to leave
five of his companions and the rest of the Indians his friends, that they might
return unto the province of Zuny with all their bagage: and he himself with
the other four that remained, would go more at quiet to discover certain very
rich mines, of the which he had true notice. So according unto his
determination he departed with the guides he had, and having traveled toward
the northwest five and forty leagues, he came unto the said mines, and took
out of the same with his own hands rich metals, and very much silver: Rich
metals.
the mines had a great and broad vein, it was upon a rock whereas they might
go up to it with great ease, for that there was a way open to yt effect: nigh
thereunto were certain towns of Indians amongst the mountains, who showed
friendship unto them, and came forth to receive them with crosses in their
hands, and other signs and tokens of peace: nigh unto the same they saw two
reasonable rivers, upon whose hankes there were many vines full of excellent
good grapes, great walnut trees, and very much flax, like unto that of Spain,
and it was told them by signs, that on the other side of the said mountains
there was a river of 8. leagues broad But they could not understand how nigh it
was, yet did they make demonstration, that it did run his course toward the
north sea, and upon both sides thereof was situated many towns, and of so huge
bigness, that in comparison those wherein they were, were but suburbs in
respect.

So after the Captain had taken all this relation he departed toward the
province of Zuny, whither he had commanded his other companions to go, and at
their coming thither in health, which was by an other excellent way, he found
therewith his other five companions: the father Friar Bernardino with the
soldiers that were determined to return back again (as aforesaid) for as
yet they were not departed from thence for certain occasions. Unto whom the
naturals of the country had given good intertaynement and all things
necessary, and that in abundance: and afterward did the like unto the said
Captain and unto them that came with him, and went forth to receive him with
demonstration of great joy, and gave them great store of provision for their
journey pretended, requesting him to return again with brevity, and to bring
with him many Castillas (for so they do call the Spaniardes) and they would
give them all to eat: for the which (the better to accomplish the same) they
had sowed that year more wheat and other grain, then they had done in any
other year past.

At this present the said religious Friar and the rest of the soldiers did
ratify their first determination aforesaid, and concluded to return unto the
Province from whence they came, with the pretense before spoken of, and there
joined with him in that journey, Gregorio Hernandez, who was standert bearer in
that attempt.

So when they were departed the captain who remained but with eight soldiers,
did fully resolve himself to prosecute his begun pretense, and to take his
course up along the north river: which being but in execution, and having
traveled about 60. leagues toward the province of Quires aforesaid, 12.
leagues from thence toward the orient, they came unto a province called
Gubates, whereas the Indians received them with peace, and gave the^ great
store of provision* and also notice* that not far from thence there were
certain rich mines, the which they found, and took out of them glystering
metale and very good, with the which they returned to the town from whence
they departed.

They judged this province to have nigh upon five and twenty thousand souls,
all well apparelled with painted mantles of cotton, and shamwayes skins very
well dressed. There are many mountains and woods of pine ceder trees, and
their houses of four and five stories hie. Here had they notice of an other
province that was but one days journey from thence which was called of the
Tamos, in the which was more tha^ forty thousand souls, but when they came
thither the inhabitants would not give them any victuals, neither permit the^
to enter into their towns* for the which, to avoid the danger wherein they
were, being but a few soldiers (as aforesaid) and some of them sick, they
determined to depart thence toward the country of christians, the which they
put in execution the beginning of July in the year 1583. and were conducted by
an Indian that went with them, who carried them by a contrary way and
different from that they came, down alongest the river side, which they called
of the Vacas. By reason that there was great store of kine all alongest the
same. By the which they traveled one hundred and twenty leagues. From thence
they came unto the river of the Conchas there whereas they first entered, and
from thence unto the vale of S. Bartolmew from whence they departed to begin
this discovery. And when they came thither they understood that many days
before were arrived there in health, friar Bernardino Beltran and his
companions, and were gonefrom thence unto the village of Guadiana. In this
town the captain Antonio de Espeio made a certain and true information of
all this aforesaid, the which presently he sent unto the Earl of Corunnia,
viceroy of that kingdom: and he sent it unto his majesty, and unto the Lords
of the royal counsel of the Indians, that therein they might ordain that
which seemed them best, the which they have done with great care. I beseech the
Lord God if it be his pleasure that it may go forwards in such order, that so
many souls redeemed by his precious blood be not condemned: whose wits and
understanding do far exceed those of Mexico and Peru, as by ye information of
those yt have dealt with the^ appears, whereby we may presume that with great
facility they will embrace the law of the gospel, and leave the Idolatry
that the most part of them do use, which God for his mercies sake permit, so it
may be for his glory, and exalting of the catholic faith

I have bin tedious in this relation, more than a commentary does require, but
I have done it by reason it is a new thing and little abroad as yet, and it
seems to me not to give discontent unto the reader. And now me thinks it
shall be well that I do return unto my matter first begun, and to proceed
and go forwards in the voyage and description of the new world, returning
unto the city of Mexico, there where as I did digress for to declare the
discovery of the new Mexico,

CHAP. XI. Departing from the city of Mexico, they go unto the port of
Acapulco in the south sea, whereas they do imbarke themselves from the Islands
Philippinas, they pass by the Islands of thieves, and do declare the rites and
condition of that people.
FRom the city of Mexico they go to imbarke themselves or take shipping at the
port of Acapulco which is in the south sea, and is elevated from the poole
nineteen degrees, and ninety leagues from the city of Mexico: in all which way
there be many towns inhabited with Indians and Spaniards.

Being departed from this port they sail toward the south west, till they
come into twelve degrees and a half, to seek prosperous wind to serve their
turn, which the mariners do call Brizas, and are northerly winds, which are
there of such continuance and so favorable, that being in the months of
November, December, and January, they have no need to touch their sails,
which is the occasion that they do make their voyages with so great ease. So
that for that, and for the few storms that happened in that passage, they do
call it the mar de Damas (which is the sea of Ladies). The sea of Ladies.
They sail always toward the west, following the sun when as she departs
from our hemispherie. In this south sea they sail forty days without seeing
any land: at the end whereof they came to the Islands of Velas, which by an
other name are called de los Ladrones: there are seven or eight of them, they
do lie north and south, and are inhabited with much people, in the order as you
shall understand.

These Islands are in 12. degrees, but there are different opinions of the
leagues yt are betwixt the port of Acapulco and those Islands, for unto this day
there is none that has understood the cert^^ntie thereof, for that their
navigations lies from the east unto the west, whose degrees there have bin none
yt ^uer could measure. Some say, this journey has a thousand and seven
hundred leagues, others a thousand and eight hundred, but the opinions of the
first we understand to be most certain.

All these Islands are inhabited with white people of comely faces, like unto
those of Europa, but not of their bodies, White people as big as giants.
for that they are as big as giants, and of so great force and strength: for
one of them has taken two Spaniardes of a good stature, the one by one foot
and the other by the other with his hands, and has lifted them both from the
ground with so great ease, as though they had bin two children. They go naked
from top to too, as well women as men, yet some of them were wont to wear an
aporne made of a deares skin before them of half a yeard long, for honesties
sake, but they are but a few in number, in respect of those yt wear nothing
before them. The weapons which they do use be s^inges, and darts hardened in
the fire, and are with both the one and the other very expert throwers.

They do maintain themselves with fish which they do take on the coast, and of
wild beasts which they do kill in the mountains, in ouertaking of them by
swiftness of foot.

In these Islands there is one the strangest custom that ever has bin heard of
or seen in all the whole world, which is, that unto the young men there is a
time limited for them to marry in (according unto their custom) in all which
time, they may freely enter into the houses ofsuch as are married, and be there
with their wives, without being punished for ye same, although their proper
husbands should see them: they do carry in their hands a staff or rod,
and when they do enter into the married man's house they do leave it standing
at the door, in such sort, that if any do come after, they may plainly see it:
which is a token, that although it be her proper husband, he cannot enter in
till it be taken away. The which custom is observed and kept with so great
rigor and force, that whosoever is against this law, all the rest do kill him.

In all these Islands there is not as yet known neither king nor lord, whom the
rest should obey, without king or governor,
which is the occasion that every one do live as he list and at his pleasure.
These Islands were wont to have war the one with the other, when occasion
did force them: as it happened at such time as the Spaniardes were there in the
port of the said Island: there came abord their ships to the number of two
hundred small barks or botes in the which came many of the inhabitants
thereof, to sell unto them of the ships, hens, and nuts called cocos, patatas,
and other things of that Island, and to buy other such things as our people did
carry with them, but in especial iron (unto the which they are very much
affectionated) and unto things of crystal and such like of small estimation.
But there grew a great contention amongst them, which people of what Island
should first come unto the ships, and was in such order that they fell unto
blows, and wounded the one the other maruellously more liker beasts than men:
of the which there were many slain in the presence of the Spaniards, and would
never leave off their contention a good while, till in the end by way of peace
they consented a conclusion amongst themselves, but with a great noise, which
was, that those of one Island should go to the larbord of the ship, and those of
the other Island should go to the starbord, with the which they were pacified,
and did buy and sell at their pleasure. But at their departure from our people,
in recompense of their good intertainment they threw into the ship of their
darts hardened with fire, with the which they did hurt many of the^ that were
above hatches: yet went they not away scotfree, for that our people with their
hargabushes did pay them in ready money their bold attempt.

Iron more esteemed than silver or gold.
These people do more esteem iron than silver or gold, and gave for it fruits
nnames patatas, fish, rise, ginger, hens, and many gallant mattes very well
wrought, and all almost for nothing.

Th^se Islands are very fertile and healthful, and very easy to be
conquered unto the faith of Christ. If that at such time as the ships do pass
that way unto Manilla they would leave there some religious men, with soldiers
to guard them till the next year, and might be done with small cost. It is
not as yet known what ceremonies and rites they do observe, for that there is
none that do understand their language, neither has any been on those
Islands, but only as they have passed by, which is the occasion that they
cannot be understood. The language which they do use, to any man's judgment is
easy to be learned, for that their pronunciation is very plain, they call
ginger asno, and for to say (take away your hargabush) they say arrepeque. The
pronunciation of their words is neither in the nose nor in the throat. It is
understood that they be all Gentiles, by certain signs and tokens that our
people have seen them do, and that they do worship Idols, and the devil,
unto whom they do sacrifice such as they do take in the wars of their
borderers. It is thought that they do descend of the tartares, by some
particularities that is found amongst the^, the which do draw very nigh unto
some that they do use.

These Islands are south and north with the land of Labrador, which is nigh
unto the new found land, and not far distant from the Island of Iapon. It is
known for a truth that they do deal with the Tartares, and that they do buy
iron for to sell it unto them. The Spaniards did give name unto these Islands
as they passed by, the Islands of Ladrones (which is of thieves) for that they
are very bold and subtle in their s^ealinges, in the which faculty, the
Egyptians that are in our Europa may go to school with them for the very
faculty thereof. I will declare unto you one thing that happened in the
presence of many Spaniardes, the which did cause them greatly to marvel,
which is, there was a mariner commanded by the captain of the ship, to keep
the sterneborde side, and not to suffer any of them to enter therein, and being
as one amassed to see so many Canoas that came thither, (the which be small
barks or botes made all of one piece) one of them diued down under the water,
till he came there whereas the mariner was (unmindful of any such matter
should happen) and upon a soddaine without seeing the other, he snatched his
sword out of his hand, and went under the water again therewith, the mariner
made a noise and declared the knauerie that ye Ilander had done unto him.
whereupon there were certain soldiers yt made their hargubushes ready to shoot
at him when he appeared from under ye water. This Ilander perceiving it, came
forth and swimmed above the water, showing his hands, and made signs yt he
had nothing in the^, which was the occasion that they did not shoot at him.

So after a while that he had been there resting of himself, he returned and
diued under the water again, and swam so far as he thought that the bullet
of the hargubush could not reach to hurt him, and finding himself in
security, he took the sword from betwixt his legs whereas he did carry it
in secret, and began to flourish with the same, mocking our people whom he had
so easily deceived.

This kind of stealing, and many others which they had done and that with great
subtlety, is the occasion that they bear the names of thieves, and all the
Islands whereas they do dwell do bear the name thereof, the which they will
easily pardon, if they might ordinarily find, where as they might execute
their inclination.

CHAP. XII. They depart from the Islands of the Ladrones, and come unto them of
Luzon, or Philippinas by an other name, and do declare the particular thoughts
of those Islands.
FRom this Island of Ladrones nauigating toward ye west, almost two hundred
leagues, till they came to a mouth called of the holy ghost, Archipelago.
they straightwaies do enter into the Archipelago, (which is an infinite
number of Islands) almost all inhabited with their own natural people. But many
conquered by the Spaniardes, either by force of war or friendship. Four score
leagues from this is the city of Manilla, The Island of Luzon, and city of
Manilla.
which is upon the Island of Luzon, there whereas ordinarily dwells the
governor of all those Islands, and the officers of his majesty, therein is a
bishop and a cathedral church. This city stands in fourteen degrees and a
quarter, and round about the same there are so many Islands, that unto this day
there is none that ever could number them: they do extend all of them northwest
and southwest, and north and south, in so much that the one part stretches
unto the straight of Sincapura which is five and twenty leagues from Malaca,
and the other part unto the Malucos, and other Islands, whereas they gather a
great number of cloves, pepper, and ginger, of the which there are great
mountains full. The first that discovered these Islands were Spaniards, Geeat
mountains of pepper, cloves, and ginger.
which came to the^ in the company of ye famous Magellanes, and made no
conquest of the^, for that they knew better to nauigate then to conquer, by
reason whereof, after they had discovered and passed the straight (which unto
this day bears the title of his name) and came unto the Island of Zubu,
whereas they did baptize certain of the inhabitance, and afterward in a
banquet, the same Ilanders did kill him, and other forty of his companions,
which was the occasion that Sebastian de Guetaria, a natural Biskin borne, for
to escape with his life, did put himself in a ship that remained of the
voyage (which afterward was named the victory) and in her and with a few
people that helped him, with the favor of God he came unto Siuell, having
compassed the whole world, from the Orient unto the Ponient, a thing which
caused unto all men great admiration, but in particular unto the Emperor
Charles the fifth of famous memory, who after he had given many gifts and
favors unto the said Sebastian de Guetaria, he gave order that a new army
should be made ready, and to return again in demand of the said Islands, and
to discover that new world.

So when all things were in a readiness for to depart on their voyage (the
which was done with great brevity) they ordained for general of all that
sleete one Villa Lobos, commanding him to go by the Nueua Espania. This Villa
Lobos, arrived at the Islands of Malucas, and at those of Terrenate and at other
Islands joining unto them, the which Islands were laid to gage by the aforesaid
Emperor unto the crown of Portugal.

In these Islands they had great wars by means of the Portugals, and seeing
themselves with little help and small resistance, for to go forwards with
their conquest, they left it off, and went to the most part of them with the
aforesaid Portugals unto the India of Portugal, from whence afterward they
sent them as prisoners unto the said king of Portugal, as offenders, that had
entered his Islands without his license: who did not only leave to do them any
harm, but did entreat them very well and sent them unto their own country of
Spain, and gave them al things necessary for their journey, and that in
abundance.

Then certain years after, Don Philip king of Spain being very willing that
the discovering should go forwards, which the Emperor his father had so
earnestly procured, sent and commanded Don Luys de Velasco, who was his vizroy
of the Nuoua Espania, that he would ordain an army, and people for to return
and discover the said Islands, and to send in the said fleet for governor of
all that should be discovered Miguel Lopez de Legaspi, who did accomplish all
that his majesty had commanded, and made the discovery thereof in such order,
as the first relation of the entry of the fathers of the order of Saint Austen
into the China does more at large appear.

Of ancient time these Islands were subject unto the king of China, until such
time as he did deliver them up of his own free will, for such reasons as were
spoken off in the first part of this history: and that was the occasion that
when ye Spaniards came unto them, they were without Lord or head, or any
other to whom they should show duty, but he which had most power and
people did most command: so that this (and that there were so many of equal
power) was the occasion that civil wars continued, without any respect of
nature, kindred, or any other duty, but like unto brute beasts, killing,
spoiling and captiuing one another, the which was a great help^ unto the
Spaniards for to subject that country with so great ease unto the king, and
called them the Islands Philippinas in respect of his name. They did use amongst
them to make captives and slaves such as they did take in unlawful wars, and
for trifling matters, the which God did remedy by the going thither of the
Spaniards: for you should have a man with forty or fifty other friends in his
company, or servants, that upon a sudden would go and set upon a small village
of poor people and unprovided, and take and bind them all, and carry them
away for slaves without any occasion or reason, and make the^ to serve them all
the days of their life, or else sell them to other Islands. And if it so
chanced that one did lend unto another a basket or two of Rice (the which
might be worth a ryall of plate) with condition to return it again within
ten days: if the debtor did not pay it the same day, the next day following he
should pay it dooble, and afterward to double it every day so long as he did
keep it, which in conclusion the debt would grow to be so great, that to pay
the same, he is forced to yield himself for captive and slave.

But unto all such as were captiued in this order, or in such like, the king of
Spain has commanded to give liberty, yet this just commandment is not in
every point fulfilled and accomplished, because such as should execute the same
have interest therein. All these Islands were Gentiles and Idolaters, but now
there is amongst them many thousands baptized, unto whom the king has showed
great mercy, in sending unto the^ the remedy for their souls in so good
time: for if the Spaniards had stayed any more years, they had been all
Moors at this day, for that there were come unto the Island of Barneo some of
that sect that did teach them, and lacked little, for to worship that false
prophet Mahomet, whose false, perverse and corrupt memory, was with the Gospel
of Christ easily rooted out.

In all these Islands they did worship the sun and moon, and other second
causes, figures of men and women, which are called in their language Maganitos,
at whose feasts (which they do make very sumptuous, with great ceremonies and
superstition) they do call Magaduras. But amongst them all, they have in most
veneration an Idol, whom they called Batala, the which reverence they had for
a tradition, yet can they not say what should be the occasion that he should
deserve more then any of the rest, to be had in so great estimation. In
certain Islands not far off, called the Illocos, The diue^^ was worshipped*
they did worship the devil, and made unto him many sacrifices, in recompense,
of a great quantity of gold he had given unto them, but now by the goodness
of God, and the great diligence put and done by the fathers of the order of
saint Austen (who were the first that passed into those parts, and lived
worthily) and also by the friars of saint Francis, which went thither ten
years after, all these Islands or the most part of them are baptized, and under
the ensign of Jesus Christ: and the rest which do remain and are not, is more
for lack of ministers and preachers, then for any obstinacy of their parts.
There is now gone thither certain fathers of the order called Jesuits, who
will be a help unto them with their accustomed zeal and labor. And now
goes thither many other religious men, very well learned and apostolic, of
the order of saint Dominicke, who will do their endeavor to conu^rt them unto
Christ, as it behooves Christians to do.

CHAP. XIII. Here is declared of some notable things that are, and have been
seen in these Islands Philippinas.
THey of these Islands were accustomed to celebrate their feasts aforesaid,
and to make sacrifices unto their Idols, by the order of certain women which
were witches, Vitches.
whom they do call in their language Holgoi, yt were had in as great
estimation amongst the^, as be the priests amongst Christians. These did talk
ordinarily with the devil, and many times in public, and do devilish
witchcrafts both in words and deeds: into whom it is to be believed that the
devil did enter, for that straightwayes they did answer unto all things that
were demanded of them, although for the most part they would tell a lie, or
else such words that might be given diverse interpretations of, and of diverse
understandings. They did also use to cast lottes, in such sort as has been
declared in the first part of this history: they were great Agorismers or
obseruers of times: in so much that if they begin any journey, and at the
beginning they meet with a Cayman or lyzarde, or any other savage worm, they
know it to be a sign of evil fortune, whereupon they would straightwayes
leave off their journey, although it did import them very much, and return
unto their houses, saying, that the heaven will not that they should go
forwards on that journey: but all these lies and falsenes which been taught
them, and they persuaded to by the devil, is overthrown and taken away by the
law of the Gospel (as aforesaid) and have now amongst them many monasteries
full of religious men, of the order of saint Austen, saint Francis, and of
Jesuits. According unto the common opinion, at this day there is converted and
baptized more then four hundred thousand souls, which is a great number: yet
in respect of the quantity that are not as yet converted, there are but a few.
It is left undone (as aforesaid) for want of ministers, for that, although his
majesty does ordinarily send thither without any respect of the great charge in
doing the same, yet by reason that there are so many Islands, and every day
they do discover more and more, and being so far off, they cannot come unto
them all, as necessity requires. Such as are baptized, do receive the faith
with great firmness, and are good Christians, and would be better, if that
they were helped with good ensamples: as those which have been there so long
time are bound to do: that the lack thereof does cause some of the
inhabitants so much to abhor them, that they would not see them once painted
upon a wall. For proof whereof (and for to move such as have power and
authority to put remedy in the same, I will declare unto you here a strange
case, the which Royally did pass of a truth in one of these Islands, and is
very well known amongst them: that is, there chanced to die an Ilander, a
principal man amongst them, a few days after that he was baptized, being very
contrite for his sins the which he had done against God before he was
baptized, and after he died. So after by the divine permission of God he
appeared unto many of that Islands whom he did persuade forthwith to receive the
baptism, with reasons of great efficacy, and declared unto them (as one that
had experienced the same) the reward of that good deed which without all
doubt should be given unto them, if they would receive the same, and live
after conformable, and according unto the commandments of Christ* for the
which he told them and said that forthwith so soon as he was dead, he was
carried by the Angels into glory, there whereas all things were of delight,
pleasure, and content, and did communicate only in the sight of God, and that
there was none that entered therein, neither could enter, except he were
baptized, according unto the preaching of the Spaniards, of whom and of others
that were like unto them, there was an infinite number. Therefore if so be that
they would go and enjoy of those benefits and delights* it is necessary that
first they should be baptized, and afterward to observe and keep the
commandments that be preached unto them by the fathers, that are amongst the
Castillas, and therewith he vanished away, The Indians would not go into heaven
because there were spanish soldiers.
and they remained treating amongst themselves concerning that which they had
heard, and was the occasion that some of them forthwith received the baptism,
and that others did delay it, saying, that because there were Spaniard
soldiers in glory, they would not go thither, because they would not be in
their company.

All this hurt is done by one perverse or impious man, and with one evil
ensample, the which amongst many good, as you have in those parts: but in
especial amongst them in particular, it ought to be reprehended and punished
severely with rigor.

These Islands at the first discovery of them, had the fame to be Mal Sanos, or
unwholesome, but since experience has showed and proved it to the contrary:
It is a country marvelous fertile, and yields very much Rice, wheat,
goats, hens, dear, buffes, kine, and great stoare of hogs, whose flesh is
so sauorie as the mutton they have in Spain: there be also many cattes that
yield siuet, great stoare of fruits which be very good and sauorie: Siuit.
Honey.
great abundance of Honey, and fish, and all sold at so small a price, that
almost it is sold for nothing. Sinamum.
Also there is great stoare of Synamom, but no Oil of Olives, but that which
is carried thither out of the Nuoua Espania: Linseed Oil.
they have much Oil of Algongoli and of Flax s^ede, the which they do spend
ordinarily in that country, so that the Oil of Olives is not missed with them.

Cloves. Saffron. Pepper. Nutmegs. Cotton and Silk. Powder. Saltpeter. Iron.
Steel. Quicksiluer. Brass. Copper.
There is great stoare of Cloves, Saffron, Pepper, Nutmegges and many other
drugges: great stoare of cotton and silk of all colors, the which is brought
unto them by merchants of China, every year a great quantity, from whence
comes more then twenty ships laden with pieces of silks of all colors,
and with earthen vessel, powder, saltpeter, Iron, steel, and much
quicke-siluer, brass, copper, wheat flower, walnuts, biscuit, dates, linen
cloth, counting chestes very gallantly wrought, calls of networke, Buratos,
Espumillas, basens and ewres made of tin, parchment lace, silk fringe, and
also of gold, the which is spunne and twisted after a fashion never s^ene in
all Christendom, and many other things of great curiosity, and all this
aforesaid is sold very good cheap. Likewise such things as the Islands do
yield, are sold very good cheap, for you shall have four roues of wine which
comes of the Palm tree for four rials of plate (the which for lack of that
made of grapes is very good) twelve haneges of Rice for eight rials of plate,
three hens for one rial, a whole hog for eighteen rials, a whole buffe for
four rials, a dear for t^o rials, and yet it must be both great and good,
fo^re roues of sugar for six rials, a ^otiia of Oil made of Algongoli for
three rials, two baskets of saffron for two rials: six pounds of pepper or
cloves for one riall, two hundred nutmegs for one rial, a roue of synamum six
for rials, a kintal of iron or steel for ten rials, thirty dishes of very
fine earth four rials, and all other things after this rate.

But amongst all other notable things that these Spaniards have seen, in
those Islands, and in the kingdom of China, and other places whereas they
passed: there is one thing which has caused them most to marvel at, and to
have it most in memory, which is a tree, ordinarily called Palma de Cocos, but
does differ from that which bears the dates, and with great reason, for that
it is a plant so full of mystery and profit, that there has come a ship unto
these Islands, and the said ship, and all that was in her to be sold, with
ropes, cords, masts, sails, and nails were made of this tree, and the
merchandice that she brought was mantels made of the rind of the said tree,
with great subtlety and fine works. Likewise all the victuals that was in the
said ship for the sustentation of thirty me^ that came in her, yea their water
was of the same tree.

The merchants that came in this ship did certify of a truth, in all the Island
of Maldiuia from whence they came, they have no other sustainment, but only
that which this tree yields: they do make houses hereof, and tyles for to
cover the same, the fruit does yield a Meollio or curnell, which is very sauory
and healthful, the savor thereof is much like to green hasell nuts, and if
you do cut the branch there whereas the Coco comes forth is the principal
fruit, and every one of them has ordinarily a pint of water, the which is
very sweet and delicate all the said substance does return into the trunk of
the tree, whereas they do bore a hole, and thereat they do draw out all that
water, which is much: and mingling it with other things they make thereof good
wine, the which is drunk in all those Islands and in the kingdom of China. Of
the same water they make vinegar, and of the Meollio kernel aforesaid, oil
very medicinal, milk like unto Almon milk: honey and sugar very sauorie.
These and many other virtues has this palm, whereof I have declared part, for
that they are notable, and do cause admiration unto all men that pass into
those parts: I do leave to declare the rest because I would not be tedious.
Nigh to ye city of Manilla, on the other side of the river there is a town
of Chinos that be baptized, such as have remained there to dwell to enjoy the
liberty of the gospel. There are amongst them many handicrafts men, as
shoomakers, tailors, goldsmiths, blacksmiths, and other officers, and some
merchants.

CHAP. XIIII. The barefoote Friars depart from the Island of Luzon, unto China,
and is declared such as was there seen.
FOr that the principal intent of these religious men when they went out of
Spain, was for to go unto the mighty kingdom of China for to preach the holy
gospel, and did persevere continually with that desire, they would never
entreat of any other thing, but only to put it in execution: and for the
accomplishing of the same, they sought many means and ways, sometimes in
requesting the governor of his aid and help to procure the same, for that it
was an easy thing to be performed, having continually ships of the merchants
of China in the port of Manilla.

The governor did drive them off with many reasons, but principally he laid
before them that rigorous law, which they knew was established against such as
did enter into that kingdom without particular license, yet notwithstanding
all this was not sufficient to abate the loving desire of those Friars, which
was only settled in their minds for to go and preach the holy gospel in that
kingdom by one means or other, although it were to put their lives in hazard:
and for the prosecuting hereof, the comissary of those Islands, who was Friar
Geronimo de Burgos did elect six religious men for the same purpose: amongst
them was the father Ignatio, of whom I (as I have said) understood by writing
and relation, many things, the which is declared in these Itinerario or
comentarie: so that there was with him seven religious men, all servants of
God, and very desirous of the salvation of souls, which was the occasion that
they put themselves in so long and tedious a journey, leaving their own
country and quietness. These seven with the good will of the governor Don
Gonsalo Ronquillo, and of the bishop, whom they did overcome and win with
requests and perseverance, and carried in their company a Spaniard their
friend, called John De Feria, of Andolozia, and other two soldiers that went
with pretense to become friars, one Portugal and six Indian Ilanders: all the
which the eight day after Corpus Christi, which was the one and twenty day of
June, in anno 1582. they departed from the port of Cabite, whereas they did
imbarke themselves in a bark of the said John De Feria, and making sail at
five of the clock in the afternoon, in the morning betimes they found
themselves twenty leagues overthwart the port that is called Del Frail,
whereas they determined to go to sea, leaving the coast of the Island of
Manilla, which lies North and South with China: from the which City which is
(as I have said) in fourteen degrees and a half, unto the Cape of Boxeador
which is in nineteen, it is one hundredth leagues sailing, and from this Cape
to the firm land of China, they count it scarce fourscore leagues. And God
was so pleased, although they had two days calm, the seventh day, which was
the day before the apostle saint Peter and saint Paul, at eight of the clock
in the morning, they discovered the firm land of China: then straightwaies
upon the sight thereof, the comissarie commanded to bring forth the habites
which he carried ready made for to put upon the Friars, for that when the
Chinos should see that they were all Friars, they should be void of all
suspicion, to think them to be spies, as they thought when the first Friars
went thither (as has been told you,) and not contented herewith, he threw
all the soldiers apparel into the sea, and one hargabus of John De Feria,
with the Flaske wherein he carried his powder, and all other things such as he
thought would be a hurt and hindrance unto them, if it should so fall out that
they should err out of the port whereas the Portugals do use, and fall upon
the coast, as afterward it fell so out, they left nothing but a match which
they forgot, which lacked very little to have cost them full dear. But when
they had sight of the land, they did not well know it, for that they had
never seen it before, and were also ignorant of the ports, although they were
very near to ye bay of Canton, they took their course unto the Northwest,
whereas they should have gone to the Southwest, which was ye occasion yt they
came unto the province of Chincheo. This day at five a clock in the afternoon
they discovered a port that was not far from them, whither they sailed and
entered in, and came to an anchor on the outmost side, yet with great fear and
dread, for that they knew not the secu^itie thereof, neither the trouble that
might happen.

They were not so soon at an anchor, but they saw come forth of the said port
many barks, both small and great, and in them many soldiers with hargabusses,
lances, swords and targets, and in their soreshippe some small pieces of
ordinance. And when they came nigh unto the bark wherein the Spaniards were,
within musket shot, they stayed and discharged great stoare of hargabus shot.
But they who carried no armor to offend others, neither to defend themselves,
the answer that they gave unto the shot, was making of many signs of peace,
calling them with their hands to come nearer unto them, that they might see
and understand that they came not thither with any pretense to do harm: Yet
all was not sufficient to cause them to leave off their shooting, neither to
come any nearer unto their bark. At this present there was amongst the
soldiers one Chino that had been at Luzon, and did know the Spani^rds, being
of God inspired: he made signs unto the rest, to leave off their shooting,
which presently they did: and he came with his Brigantine unto their bark,
and after him all the rest: who when they saw that they had neither armor nor
weapon, neither will to fly from them, they entered into the bark, and with
their naked swords in their hands flourishing with them over the heads of the
Spaniards, with a great noise and tumult, they carried them into the port,
which was called Capsonson, whereas was a general of a great army of ships
that were at an anchor in the said port, who straightwaies commanded that there
should be carried on board his admiral four of the Spaniards, the which they
understood was done to take their lives from them: for the which, by reason
they did not name any person, four religious men did offer themselves to go,
and after they had confessed themselves, they took their leave of their
companions, and carried every one of them a cross in his hand, and his
breuiarie, without any other thing else.

So when they came before the captain, they found him more meeker and milder
then they thought to have done (surely a work done by God in recompense of the
great peril that those his servants did put themselves in to do his service
and commandment). He asked of them, from whence they came, and wherefore, with
many other questions in effect: but when that he was certified of the truth,
he commanded them to return again unto their bark, without doing unto them
any other harm, yet with a strait precept that they should not go forth
without his express license.

So with this commandment they remained in their bark three days, guarded
with many barks and soldiers: and the last of them, the Captain sent for two
of the religious men, and when they came before him, he commanded them to be
carried before a Justice, a friend of his there hard by. These Justices did
talk with them with so great gravity, and signs of cruelty, that every time
they came before them, they thought verily that forthwith they would command
them to be carried to be executed: and without all doubt, either they had will
to do it, or else to put them in great fear of death, for that it was plainly
seen in diverse things they commanded: but especially in one day there came
unto them a Judge, with many armed men, and compassed their bark round about
with a great number of Brigandines, with plain signs to give the^ assalt, or
else to sink them: but within a little while they were all in quiet, and the
Judge entered into a ship that was thereby at anchor, and being set in a rich
chair, guarded with many soldiers about him, he commanded the rest that were
in the Brigandines forthwith to go to visit and search their bark, and sent
with them an interpreter, one of Chincheo, who did a little understand the
Portugal tongue. These soldiers carried in their hands black banners, and
other heavy and sorrowful signs (which is used in that kingdom, when at any
time they do execute any person.) So after they had made their v^sitation,
although they found in their bark not any prohibited thing, but one^y the
match which I have spoken off* they commanded that they should for^h^ith he
embarked two and two into the Brigandines whereas the armed soldiers were, who
did direct their foreshippes toward a tower, which was a prison, wherein was
put all such sheeues as, were taken upon the coast, out of the which there
comes none ^^rth but unto execution. But when the Indians of the Islands saw
it, they wept bitterly, which moved the Spaniards unto great compassion,
although they were themselves in the same trance and peril, and as nigh their
death, and made no other reckoning insomuch that two of the religious men
seeing them so nigh ^he tower (although when as they were far off, they made
show as though they cared not for it) yet at that time they were so far from
all reason and understanding, that al ye night one of them knew not what he
did, without any knowledge of the people wherein he was, but lay as a dead man:
and the other with pure imagination and melancholic humor fell into a great
infirmity, whereof within a few days after he died in the city of Canton:
but in conclusion the stowtest of them all had fear enough, and would have
given his life for a small matter, for that he was without all hope^, and
thought verily that they carried them unto execution: which was the occasion
that a Spaniard, one of them that went with pretense to be a friar, and the
habit on, having in his power ^ thousand and six hundred rials of plate, he
threw them into the sea, saying, seeing that I am going to dye, I will that it
be in the habit of saint Francis, with the poverty in which the glorious saint
lived and died, for to follow him in his steps aright. With this fear
aforesaid they were carried toward the tower: but when they came nigh to it,
there followed after the soldiers that carried them a skiffe, with many oars,
in great have, and called a loud unto the^ saying, yt the captain general
commanded yt they should bring back again those prisoners to his ship, the
which forthwith they accomplished: and after he had demanded of them certain
questions, he commanded to carry them to the said tower, the which was done, as
they could perceive, for to put them in more fear. So after they had feared
and scared them with this rigorous te^tation. The said captain himself went
into one of ye Brigandines, and went with them on land, whereas presently when
he came on shore, he carried the Spaniards into a temple of their Idols, unto
whom he did his accustomed reverence, yet the religious men, although they
were with great fear of death as before said, they would not imitate him, but
turned their faces from their Idols, and did spit at them, giving the captain
to understand by signs, that he should not worship them, for that they had
no more goodness in them, then was given by man, so that by good reason, to
the contrary, those Idols should give reverence unto men because they made
them, and to whom they ought to give their true worship, is unto the true God,
the creator of heaven and earth.

By this act it is plainly to be seen the gift of strength, the which the
holy Ghost does give unto his baptized Christians as in these religious men,
that were at deaths door, yet had they strength and spirit for to resist and
reprehende them that could take away their lives. The captain although he made
a show that he was offended with that which he had seen them do, yet he did
them no harm, but presently brought them out of the temple, and commanded the
soldiers to remain there and guard them all that night: the which they passed
lying upon the ground, and yet thought themselves happy, and gave thanks to
God for that he had delivered them from the death that was so nigh unto them.

CHAP. XV. Here he does prosecute in things which the said fathers did see,
and understand, the second time they entered into the kingdom of China, and of
the troubles they passed.
THe next day in the morning the Priest of the Idols did open the temple,
whereas presently they put in the Spanish religious men, who saw him and his
ministers lighting of little candels, and making perfumes unto their Idols,
with many superstitious ceremonies, the which being done, they cast certain
lottes (a thing much used amongst them) as they understood it was done for to
consult with the devil (who was within those Idols) to know what they should do
with them, yet this they could not perfectly understand, but straightwaies they
were carried out of the temple, and brought by the soldiers before a judge,
who was the chief and principal of all the sea of that province, and was six
leagues from the place in a City called Quixue: the way thither was very
plain and broad, and paued, and upon both sides there were fields both of
corn and flowers. So with the help of God, the Spaniards came before the
presence of this general in eight days, although it was with great travel, by
reason they had neither force nor strength for to travel, for that they had
lost it with the heavy and sorrowful news as aforesaid.

Yet notwithstanding at their coming to the city Quixue, the soldiers had
them in continual guard and keeping, till the next day following, then they
were carried before the general, where he was in a very great and fair house,
the which had two cou^ts, one of them was next unto the door of the street,
and the other was toward the farther parts of the house, both of them were
railed round about in manner of grates: they were planted full of diverse sorts
of great trees, wherein did feed a great number of dear and other wild
beasts, but yet as tame as sheep. Right over against the inward court there
was a gallerie, whereon was many soulidiers which did guarde and kee^e the
person of the general, who was in a mighty great and gallant hall, set in an
Iuorie chair with great majesty. Before they entered into the second court,
there was discharged within, both artilerie and habagus shot, and played upon a
drum, which was as big as those which they use in Spain: that being done,
there was a great sound of hoybuckes and trumpets, and of many other
instruments: the which being done, they straightwayes opened the gates of the
innermost court, whereas the gallerie was aforesaid, from whence they might
see the throne whereas the general was set. There was before him a table
whereon was paper and other necessaries for to write (a thing commonly used in
all that country:) the soldiers that were his guarde were, all in one liuerie
of silk, and were in so gallant consort, and had so great silence, which made
the Spaniards greatly to marvel: The first order was of the hargabushes, and
the second were pikes, and betwixt the one and the other, was placed a sword
and a target, there might be about four hundred soldiers. Behind them were
placed the officers of justice or executioners, with their instruments for to
whippe and punish offenders: and in the midst of them were the scriueners and
proctors.

About thirty paces more or less from the chair where the general was set,
was placed certain Gentlemen, and to the number, of a dosen pages bare headed,
very gallantly apparelled in silk and gold. In the midst amongst these
soldiers were the Spaniards carried, and before them such tokens and shows,
as they do use when as they do present before the Judges such as be
condemned unto death. A good way before they came nigh unto the place whereas
the general was, they caused them to kneel down: at which instant there was
brought forth certain Chinos that were prisoners to be judged, and so soon
as their indictment was read, and judgment given, the executioners did execute
the rigor of the sentence in the presence of the Spaniards, first pulling off
their apparel, and then making fast their hands and feet very fast with
cords, in such sort, that they shriked that the noise reached unto heavens:
they kept them so bound until they saw farther what the Judge would
command. who when he had heard his indictment, if he would that he should
be whipped, he strikes a blow with his hand upon the table that is before
him: then the executioners do strike five blows upon the calves of the
legs of the offender with a broad cane, in the order as has been said, and
is so cruel that none can suffer fifty of them but he dies. The blow being
given upon the table by the general, straightwayes one of the proctors makes
a cry or noise, where at presently comes the executioner for to execute his
office. And if the offender does deserve more, then the Judge does strike
another blow upon the table: then is there given him other five blows, and
in this sort does the Judge so many times as his offense does deserve. At
the lamentations and shrikes that these miserable offenders do give, the
Judges show no more sign of pity then if they were stricken upon a stone.
So the audience being concluded and done with the naturals of the country,
the general commanded that the Spanyardes should come a little nearer, and
looked and searched their garments and all the rest, as also their Breuiarios
and books: that being done, they were informed by those that brought them, how
and in what order they were apprehended, and of all other things touching
their coming into that kingdom: understanding thereof, he commanded them to
be carried unto prison, where they were put in sure hold, and with great watch
and guard for certain days, in the which time they passed incredible trouble,
as well of hunger as of thirst and heat, which was the occasion that the most
part of them fell sick of agues, and of the laske.

So after these days that they were in prison, they were carried once again
to the audience, and many other more were brought forth to be visited, all
people believing that the Spaniards should no more return, but be executed,
for the which they received great content, to be cleared by one death, of so
many as daily they had before their eyes. In the conclusion of this audience
the general did decree, that they should be carried by sea unto the City of
Canton, whereas was the vizroy of that province, and he to command them to be
executed or punished according as he thought best, according unto the penalty
put upon whatsoever stranger that should enter into that kingdom without
license (as they did enter). But when they saw that they were carried out of
the prison unto the sea, they verelie believed that it was to drown them
therein, for the which (having a new confessed themselves, and commended
themselves unto God) they did animate one another, with the representation of
the reward which was prepared for them: but when they came unto the bar
whereas they should imbarke themselves, upon a sudden the sea began to
wax very lofty and troublesome, that it seemed almost a miracle, and it
increased in such sort, that the soldiers and mariners said, that never before
they had seen the like torment, the which endured the space of ten days:
the which was the occasion that they did not imbarke themselves, and that the
general did change his pretense, and determined that they should be carried
by land unto the great City of Saucheo Fu, the which was presently put in
ure: they were many days on this journey, with fifty soldiers that did
guarde them: in the which they saw so many curious things, and of so great
riches, that they judged it to be the best country in all the world.

So when they came unto the city, with so small trouble and werinesse, by
reason of their long journey and evil intreatings by the soldiers, they were
presently carried (as might be said) from Herod to Pylate, and escaped not
one day, but they were carried to the public audience, or else before some
particular Judge. This city was very fresh both within and without, and full
of many orchards, whereas were an infinite number of fruit, with gardens,
stanges of water, and other things of great recreation. This city is three
times so big as Siuell, and compassed about with a mighty strong wall, their
houses are very great and well wrought, their streets are exceeding fair,
broad and long and so straight that from the one end unto the other they may
see a man. In equal distance the one from the other, there are built many
triumphall arkes: (which is an ordinary and common thing used in the cities of
that kingdom) upon their gates there are little towers, whereon is planted all
the artilerie that they have for the defense of the city (as has been said)
all the which is environed and compassed about with a river which is great and
fair, on the which is ordinarily sailing an infinite number of barks and
brigandines, and is of so great depth, they may come and lie hard unto the
wall, yea ships of great burden. On the one side of the city there is a little
Island of great recreation, unto the which they do pass by a very fair bridge,
the one half made of stone and the other of timber, and is of so great a
length, that on the part that is made of stone, the father friar Ignacio did
tell thirty Innes or victualing houses whereas was to be bought, not only flesh
and fish, but also great store of marchandice, of great estimation and valor,
as amber, musk e, pieces of silk and cloth of gold.

CHAP. XVI. The Spaniardes are sent unto the city of Hucheofu, and do declare
what happened there unto them.
FRom the city of Saucheofu they were sent unto Hucheofu the which is more
principal and great than the first, always having with them in company and
guard the number of soldiers aforesaid: sometimes they travailed by land and
sometimes by water, whereas they saw so many rich things, which in respect to
them, all that they had seen unto that time was nothing. Of the which,
although I have had particular relation of many of them, I leave off here the
declaring thereof, for that of an Itinerario or commentary I will not make a
history. But principally for that many of them do seem to be incredible, and
will be more unto those that have not had any notice of the mightiness of this
kingdom.

In the discourse of this their journey, the cities and towns they saw, were
many and very big, and all compassed with strong walls: and at one of them
there was a mighty river, on the which was edified more than five hundredth
engynes or wheels, and they were made with so much art, that alonely with the
violence of the stream of the river, that does force them, they water all the
grounds there abouts for the space of two leagues and more, without any other
help or human force.

In this city they were certain days in visiting, and complementes, after
the which they were commanded to go unto Canton, of the which in the two
relations before, is made particular mention. So when they came unto the City
they were carried unto the prison of the Thequixi, which is whereas are put
such as are condemned to die, the which they plainly perceived. There they
remained very many days, and the most part of them were carried unto the
tribunal seat of the Judges, in company with others that were condemned to
die.

At this time there was in the city, the Tutan, who was the viceroye of the
province: and the Chacu, who is the general visitor, and that was at such time
as was done great Justice for to clear the prisons, whereas were thousands
of men, and some that had been there more than ten years. There was some
day at that time that in the presence of our people, were brought forth to be
judged two thousand prisoners, some to the death, and others to be whipped, and
other to be banished with other kind of penalties, according unto the
disposition and rigor of their laws. That day wherein they make capital
audience, they use particular ceremonies, as shooting of certain pieces of
artilerie, and to shut the gates of the city, not permitting any to enter in,
neither go forth, till such time as that act and Justice be finished, and many
other things as has been declared in the first part of this history.

The Spaniards being in the city at this time of so great calamity, it so
fell out that the same time there was a gentleman of Portingall called Arias
Gonsalo de Miranda, chief captain of the city of Machao (very devout unto
religious men, and a friend unto Spaniardes) who understanding the great
trouble and danger wherein they were, he took order by all means possible to
set them at liberty, and had so great care therein, that he went through with
his intent, in such sort that they were delivered out of prison, and from the
great fear in which they were, and all by the intercession of this gentleman,
who did use so good persuasions for the love he did bears unto them, that he
made void the evil opinion they had against them, and with compulsion to
revoke the rigorous sentence of death pronounced against them. I do not here in
particular treat of such things as happened unto these religious men the
servants of God, as well in the prison, as on their journey, for that they were
many, and to declare them, is requisite a long time, and to make a new history.

And although in the books before, have been declared the riches of that
kingdom, and all things in particular, yet for the better certification, I
thought it good (and not without purpose) to declare in the chapter following,
some of th^se which the father friar Martin Ignatio did communicate with me,
using in the treating thereof so much brevity that it shall seem rather an
Epilogo, then a new relation. And for a more verification of the truth, whereby
better credit may be given thereunto, seeing that the persons who did see it
do agree in that which shall be here declared, and again, for that the said
father and his companions did see more things than the others, whose relations
be already set down. The occasion wherefore they put confidence in them, and
to let them see and understand many secrets, was for that they were sentenced
and condemned to die: for without all doubt if they had understood that they
should have returned out of the kingdom, they should never have seen them, for
they have great care that any other nations should know their secrets, their
manner of gouern^ment and living.

CHAP. XVII. Here it does entreat of the mightiness, goodness, riches, and
fortitude of the kingdom of China.
THis kingdom is under the tropike of Capricorn, and stretched forth on the
sea coast, south west and northeast, more than five hundredth leagues: it has
on the parts south west the kingdom of Cochinchina, and on the north east, it
does confine on Tartaria, a kingdom which does compass the most part of the
land, on the other part to the northwest, there is an other mighty kingdom
of white people, which is beyond the kingdom of Persia, it is called Catay:
there be in it Christians, and the king thereof is called Manuell. It is said
of a truth that from the furthest part of this kingdom unto Jerusalem is six
months travail by land, Six months travail from Jerusalem unto China.
the which they understood by certain Indians which came from that kingdom
by Persia, whose testimonials were made in Jerusalem six months before,
wherein was declared how that they had traveled by Arabia felix, and passed
the red sea. The other fourth part of this kingdom is compassed with a very
asper and high mountain, which is five hundredth leagues upon a right line: but
nature had left certain places open toward the northwest, which might be
fourscore leagues little more or less, toward the sea of Iapon which is
toward the Septentrion. The great riches of this country, and the great
number of people that be therein, did supply the same (as in the first part of
this history is more at large declared). And for that the king of this
country seeing himself oppressed and troubled by the mighty Tartaro and
seemed that easily he might defend himself from him, in shutting up of those
gates which nature had left open betwixt the mountains, he did shut it up with
the death of many thousand of people, for that he used therein great
tyranny, which afterward was the occasion of his own death.

This mountain, with the supply by man is the famous wall of the kingdom of
China, that is of five hundred leagues long, yet you must understand it in the
manner aforesaid, the better to give credit thereunto, for alonely f^ure
score leagues were made by man's hands with great industry, and there is upon
it an infinite number of bulwarks, which makes it the more fayrer and
stronger: But yet not so strong as is the other four hundredth and twenty
leagues which were made by nature.

Nigh unto the same there is a great desert full of ditches and lakes of water,
Great ditches and lakes.
which is the occasion that this kingdom has been conserved for more than
two thousand years, as does appear by their own histories, which they hold
to be very true.

All is imparted into fifteen provinces with that of Aynao, and every one of
them has a principal City of the which it bears the name. In the midst
of this kingdom there is a great lake, A mighty lake.
out of the which proceeds many great and mighty rivers, which run through
all the kingdom, and are so big that there sayleth up and down in them
barks, sregats, brigandines, and many other vessels of an other kind of
making. This great abundance of water is the occasion that it is so sertile,
and so well provided of all things, and again the most part of their cities
and towns are situated on the rivers side, so that by them the one province
does communicate with an other, carrying the one unto the other, great store of
marchandice and other things of great curiosity, and is done with little
cost, for that all things are done very good cheap.

This sea cost of this kingdom is the biggest and the best that is known in
all the world, there is upon it five provinces which be these, of Canton,
Chincheo, Liampon, Nanquin and that of Paquian, which is the furthest toward
the northwest, in the which is resident the king and his counsel with all his
court ordinarily, and the most part of the men of war that it has, for that
this province does confine upon the Tartaros their enemies. Some will say, that
the kings ordinary dwelling there, is for that it is the best and most
fertilest of all the kingdom. But I believe (according to the saying of some
of the Chinos) that he does it not but because it is so nigh unto Tartaria, and
to find himself there, whereas he may supply all necessities which might
happen upon a soddaine by his enemies. In these rivers there are certain
Islands, the which are very profitable unto all the kingdom, for that there is
nourished and brought up in them great store of dear, hogs and other beasts,
which is the occasion that the cities are so well provided and served.

But one of the things which causes most admiration to the^ that go to this
kingdom, is to see so infinite a number of ships, and barks that be in every
port thereof, and are so many, that there has been a man in the city of
Machao that has laid a wager, More ships in one port than in all Spain.
that alonely in the river of Canton, there be more ships and vessels than in
all the cost of Spain.

One thing I may affirm, that I have heard declared by persons of great
credit, that have been in that kingdom (but in especial of the father
Ignacio whom I do follow in this Itinerario) that it is an easy thing in any
one of these five provinces that be upon the sea cost, to join together a
thousand ships of war and all of them (as they say in Spain) dedicated for
that purpose. The occasion why there be so many, is already declared in his
proper chapter. There are diverse opinions touching the greatness of this
kingdom: but the most are conformable with the father friar, Martin de
Herrada, who like a good Geomatrician and Mathematician went nighest the
prick. This opinion is declared in the first part of this history, whereunto
I refer me, and in that which touches in particular, things of that kingdom,
for that it is there declared at large as it was taken out of their books. But
one thing I cannot let pass but declare, for that it seems worthy to make
thereof a particular memory: and I understood it, by the mouth of the said
father Ignacio, which is that he does affirm it to be certain true and
approved, They never had the plague.
that every day in the year one with an other (besides wars and the plague,
the which in this countrio they remember not to have any, neither do they find
written in their histories for 2000. years, neither by famine nor any other
accidental occasions to consume the people) yet does there die many thousands
of people both small and great, in all the fifteen provinces of this kingdom:
which is no small grief unto the^, who with a christian zeal does consider
this heavy tribute of so many souls that the devil does recover eueri^ day,
and carry them unto his mansion or dwelling.

All this kingdom is so fertile, as well for the ordinary watring as also for
the temperature of the heaven, that almost all the whole year they do gather
fruits, but in especial of wheat and rice: so that both the one and the other
are very good cheap, that our people in the discourse of their travail or
pilgrymage did buy one pyco of rice or of wheat meal, which is five rou^s of
Spain for one ryall and a half, and according unto this rate, al other
things bear their prices, as has been before declared. They say that in
this country there be many elephants, lions, tygres, ownses, and other brute
breasts, of the which these friars saw very few alive, but many skins of
them, which is a sign that it is of truth. There are many beasts whereof come
the musk, the which are, of the tygres and like unto a little dog, the which
they do kill and put them under the ground certain days, and after that it is
putrified and rotten, the flesh and blood is converted into that sweet powder.
There be also many cyuet cats and little worth, a great number of horse. and
although those which the said friars did see were little, yet is it a common
voice and fame that in some of the fifteen provinces there are very good: but
they were not there, so that they can not say they had seen the^. But the
hens, geese, duckes, and other poultrie that are in all parts of this kingdom
are without number, which is the occasion that they are of small estimation:
the abundance of fish ia no less, as well of the sea as of the rivers, in the
which they are conformable. All they that do declare of the things of this
country, and the small price that it is sold for, is such, that the said
Friar does affirm, and others that have bin in that kingdom, that for the
value of six marauadies (which is a penny) may four companions eat very well
of flesh, fish, rice, and fruits, and drink good wine of that country.

In all this kingdom there are many mines both of gold and silver, and all
very rich: Mines of gold and silver.
but the king will not let them be labored but with great lymitation (saying)
that which is in those mines be in his house, and that they should procure to
bring it from other kingdoms: yet notwithstanding the abundance is so great
both of the one and the other, and so common, that there is no man, although he
be of an occupation, but he has in his house things both of gold and silver,
and other very rich jewels. They do esteem for his value more the silver than
the gold: Silver for his value more esteeme^ than gold.
and they say the cause is, for that the prices of gold are variable, as in
Italy: but the silver is always at one s^aye and price.

There are great store of pearls, but in especial in the Island of Aynao, and
great abundance of quickesiluer, copper, iron, steel, laton, tyn, lead, salt
peter, brimstone, and other things which were wont to beautify a kingdom,
but above all, there is very much musk and amber gryce. Amber gryce


The king of this kingdom, besides the great rent the which he has, it is
said that he has great treasories in all the principal cities, those which
are the head cities of the provinces, for the confirmance thereof, it was
affirmed unto the said friar for a very certainty, that in the city of
Canton, all the money that has entered into the same for ye space of five
hundred years (as well by way of the Portingals, as by those of the kingdom of
Cyan, Wonderful treasure*
and others their borderers, and all the tributes of that province) is
altogether in the kings treasure house of that city, which amounts unto by
good account, many more millions than may be well numbered for to give credit
thereunto. It is as common for the people of this country to wear silk, as
in Europe to wear lynnen, yea they do make their shoes thereof, some of
satin, and many times of cloth of gold, of very gallant colors: the cause
is by reason of the great abundance that they have thereof, and is of so great
quantity that it is carried from the City of Canton unto the Protingall
Indians more than three thousand kintals every year, besides a great quantity
which is carried unto Iapon, and ordinarily more than ^ifteene ships laden for
the Islands of Luzon. Fleetes may be laden with silk.
The Sianes and other nations do also carry away a great quantity: and
although there are carried away ordinarily as before said, yet there remains
so great quantity in that kingdom, that many fleetes may be laden therewith.

There is also great store of ^laxe, cotton, and other kind of webstrie, and
also good cheap, that the aforesaid Friar does affirm, that he has seen
sold a canga, which is fifteen fadam for four ryals of plate. The fine
earthen dishes that are in this country, cannot be declared without many
words. But that which is brought from thence into Spain is very course,
although unto them that has not seen the finer sort, it seems excellent
good: but they have such with them, that a cubba^d thereof amongst us would be
esteemed as though it were of gold. The finest cannot be brought forth of the
kingdom upon pain of death, neither can any have the use thereof, but only
the Loytias, Sugar. ho ny and wax.
which be there gentlemen (as has been told you). There is great quantity of
sugar, honey, and wax, and very good cheap as aforesaid. And in conclusion
I say, that they live with so great abundance, that all things do flow so that
they lack nothing necessary for their bodies: but for their souls which is
the principallest, they do lack (as you have understood in the discourse of
this history) God remedy the same at his pleasure.

The rent which the king of this kingdom has, is declared unto you in a
proper chapter of it self, so that in this I will declare that which the said
friar told me, A river that yields a million and a half every year in sal^.
and is only of one river, which is called the river of the salt, and is in
the province of Canton, and is worth unto him every year a million and a
half. And although the ordinary rent the which he has every year, does
exceed the greatest king that is now known in all the world in quantity:
yet in his treasories which be gathered together and kept (if it be true that
the Chinos do say) in every principal city of these fifteen provinces, is
more than a great number of kings together have or can procure, no nor come
nigh unto it by a great deal.

All the cities and towns of this kingdom are walled about with stone walls,
and at every fifteen paces a bulwark, All cities are walled.
and without the wall commonly all of them have a river or else a great deep
moote, wherein they may bring water at all times, with the which they are very
strong: they do use no fortes, neither have they any, but only over the gates
of the Cities, towers (as has been declared) and in them is put all the
artilerie the which is for the defense of that city or town.

They use many sorts of weapons, They use hargabushes, bows, and lances.
but in especial hargabushes, bows, lances of three or four manners, swords
like unto faunchers, and with them targets. All the soldiers when they go to
fight, they wear long garments down to their knees, very well stuffed with
cotton wool, England, France, Spain and the Turk has not so many soldiers
as this kingdom.
the which does resist the thrust of a lance, or a stabbe: all such soldiers
as have the kings ryall pay wear in token thereof red and yellowe hats, of the
which there is so great a number, as well horsemen as foot men, that almost it
is impossible to number them. And it is a common opinion of all them that have
bin in this kingdom, and have seen them, that all Spain, France, and the
great Turk has not so many as this kingdom has. They have amongst them
captains of ten soldiers, Captains of few and many soldiers.
some of a hundredth soldiers, some of a thousand, of ten thousand, of twenty
thousand, and in this sort to a hundred thousand. The number of soldiers yt
these captains do lead, are known by certain ensigns that they bear. They
muster and make show of their people every new moon, and the same day they do
pay the^ royally, and their pay must be in silver and in no other money. It is
said by such as have seen this pay, but especially the aforesaid father,
friar Ignacio, that they give them a piece of silver, which may weigh so much
as a ryall and half of Spain, and is as much worth there as four crowns
amongst us, in respect of the value of all things. But both in the one and in
the other kingdom, that day that they do receive their pay, every one must make
a show of some act in arms, the which is done in the presence of viewers or
mustermasters: and such as are found that do not his exercise with dexterity,
they are reprehended and cruelly punished: they do skirmish with great
consort, and in that which touches obedience to their captains, and unto the
ensigns the which they do use in their wars, they may compare with all nations
of the world.

CHAP. XVIII. This chapter does treat of certain rites and ceremonies, and
other signs and tokens which be found, and do show that they have had notice
of the holy law of the gospel.
SUch ceremonies as unto this day have bin seen amongst the people of this
kingdom, are gentilicas, without any mixture with the Moors nor with any other
sect: yet there is found amongst the^, that is a sufficient i^dition, that they
have had in some time past, some particular notice of the evangelical law, as
is plainly seen by certain pictures which have been found and seen amongst
them, whereof we have made particular mention, the which they believe was
known by the preaching of the Apostle S. Thomas, who passed through this
kingdom when as he went unto the Indians, and from thence to the city of
Salamina, Salamina where S. Thomas was martred.
which in their language is called Malipur, whereas he was martyred for the
name and faith of Jesus Christ: of who^ at this day they do remember in that
kingdom, by the tradition of their antecessors, who said, that many years
past there was in that kingdom a man that did preach unto them a new law.
whereby they might go unto heaven: who after that he had preached certain
days, and saw little fruit thereof (for that they were all occupied in civil
wars) he departed from thence unto the Indians. But first he left certain
disciples behind him that were baptized and well instructed in matters of faith
that they might preach unto them when as occasion did serve for the same. In
many places they do worship the devil, only for yt he should do them no harm,
and so the said friar did tell me, for that he^ was diverse times in presence
when as they did obsequies of certain Chinos that lay a dying: and he saw that
they had painted before ye dead man, a furious devil, having in his left hand
the sun, and in his right hand a dagger, with the which he made a show as
though he would strike him. This picture was put before him at the point that
he should yield up the ghost, strengthening him, that he should put great
trust thereon.

And as the friar did demand of them what reason they had to do the same: some
of them answered, and said, because the devil should do no harm unto the
dead man in the other world they put his picture before him, that he might
know him, and take him for his friend.

That which is understood of these Chinos is, that although they have amongst
them many errors of the Gentiles, yet with great ease they would be reduced
unto our faith, if they might have liberty for to preach, and they to receive
it.

When as the sun and the moon is in eclypse, they believe verily, that the
prince of the heaven will destroy them, and for very fear they put them
selves in that color: the people generally do worship unto them, and
believe verily that the sun is a man and the moon a woman. And therefore,
when as they begin to be eclypsed, they make great sacrifices and
inuocations unto the prince before said, d^siring him not to kill nor destroy
them, for the great necessity they have of them. All generally believe the
immortality of the soul, and that in the other world they shall be rewarded
or punished, according as they lived in this world in company of ye body. And
therefore they do use to make in the fields sepulchers wherein they command
themselves to be buried after they be dead.

When they should be buried, they command to kill all their servants, or their
wives, those that best he loved in his life, saying yt they do it, that they
should go with them to serve them in the other world, whereas they believe they
shall live eternally and die no more. They put with them into their sepulchers
things to be eaten, and great riches, believing that they do carry the same
into the other world, and there to serve their necessities. In this error were
the Indians of the Peru of old antiquity, as ye Spaniards have seen by
experience. There is in this kingdom many universities, and colleges, wherein
is taught philosophy, both natural and moral, and the laws of the country,
for to learn to govern by the^, unto the which the king does send ordinarily
visitors to see and understand, the order that is amongst them, and to reward
or punish the students according unto the desert of either of them. They are
greatly ashamed when they see any evil thing committed, although they be not
punished for the same, and a^^ people that do permit with ease correction, as
the father Ignacio and his companions did see by experience, who going always
as condemned men to die, yet at all times when they did see them do reverence
unto their Idols or unto the devil or any other evil thing, they did
reprehend the^ with great liberty who did not only seek to hurt the^ for the
same, but did greatly rejoice to hear their reasons wherewith they did
prohibit or forbid them. The said friar did tell me, that one day passing by
an hermitage, whereas dwelled an hermit, who had upon the altar in the same,
an Idol for his saint: before whom was there a Chino a principal man,
worshipping the same, the said father without any fear went unto him, and
began to reprehende him, and to spit at the Idol, and caused him therewith to
leave off his worshipping, whereof he was greatly amassed both he and all the
rest of his company, to see with what boldness it was done, and no harm done
unto him for the same, either they supposed that ye Chino did think him to be
a mad man or else (which is most to be believed) yt God did work with his
servant whereby he would give him his reward for thatwhich he had done, in
returning for his honor, in mittigating the fury of that man, and to give him
understanding, yt he was reprehended with reason. There are many Chinos
converted to the faith as well in the Islands Philippinas, as in the city of
Machao, and they baptize of them daily, who giuetokens and outward shows to
be good christians, and say that the greatest difficulty for to convert all
the whole kingdom, will be in them that do govern in the same, for they had
need of a particular aid and help of the mercy of God, to bring them unto
the faith: for that they are had in reverence and obeyed as Gods upon the
earth. Besides this they do give themselves to all delights, Given to
delights.
that any human creature can imagine, for that they put all their felicity
therein, and do it with so great extremity, that it is supposed there is no
people in all the world, that may be compared unto them.

For besides that they are always carried in little chayres, and upon men's
shoulders, which are covered with silk and gold, yet are they given much unto
bankets wherein they have so many different sorts of meats, as their
appetites do require. And it is greatly to be maruailed at, Their women are
chaste, but their men are vicious.
that the women of this kingdom are marvelous chaste and secret as any
whatsoever, and to the contrary the men are as vicious, but in especial the
Lords and Governors: and for that our faith do reprehend with rigor and terror
the excess of these things, it is to be believed that it will be a great
impediment to the entry of the gospel amongst them: yet God may so touch
them, and in such sort, that there will be no difficulty. Amongst the common
people there will be no such impediment, but rather they will embrace with
great content our holy law, for yt it will be an occasion to clear and set
them at liberty from the tyranny of the devil, and from their Judges and
Lords, who do entreat them as slaves. This is the opinion of all them that
have entered into this kingdom, and have entreated of this matter with the
Chinos. They have amongst them some good things, and worthy to be imitated
and followed, of the which I will here set down two, which are things of great
purpose to my judgment. The one is, that unto none they do give the office to
govern, by no manner of ways nor means, although they be suborned by
friendship: but only by his own merits, and sufficient ability. The
second, that none can be viceroy, governor, nor Judge of a province or city
in the which he is natural borne, the which they say is done to take away the
occasion of doing any injustice, being carried away or led by parents or
friendship. All other things of this kingdom I do remit unto that which
has bin before declared, for to pass unto the rest, the which in this
Itinerario is promised to be mentioned and declared.

CHAP. XIX. This chapter does treat of the Islands of Iapon, and of other
things in that kingdom.
THe Islands of Iapon are many, and altogether make a mighty kingdom, yt is
divided amongst many lords: it is distant from the firm land of China, Iapon
is 300 leagues from China.
three hundred leagues, and in the midst betwixt both kingdoms is the
province of Lanquin, which is one of the fifteen before named, although going
from Machao a city of the Portingals, and joining unto Canton, which is of the
proper China, they do make it but 250 leagues, traveling toward the north,
and commonly they do account the same leagues from the Islands of Luzon or
Philippinas, unto the said Islands of Iapon: whereunto they may go by noua
hispania, for yt it is the better and surer navigations, and shorter voyage, for
according unto the reckoning of the pylots that do nauigate those seas, they
make it no more the^ 1750. leagues, which is not half of that which the
Portingals make in their navigations.

These Islands are many (as before said) yet are they populared with much people,
who in their bodies and faces differ very little from the Chinos, although not
so politic: by the which it seemed to be true, yt which is found written in
the histories of the kingdom of China, saying that these Iapones in old time
were Chinas, and that they came from that mighty kingdom unto these Islands,
whereas they do now devil for this occasion following. A kinsman of a king of
China, a man of great countenance and valor, having conceived within his
breast, for to kill the king, and thereby to make himself lord of the
country, the better to put this in execution, he gave to understand of his
evil intent unto others of his friends, requesting their favor to execute ye
same, promising that he would do his best. This being done, and having them
always for his especial friends, unto whom it seemed no difficult thing, and
again moved with ambition, they did promise him: and for the better
confirmation thereof, they began to prepare soldiers and to have the^ ready
against ye day appointed. And for yt this their pretense could not be brought
to effect with such secrecy as the matter required, their treason came to be
discovered unto the king, at such good opportunity yt he might very well seek
remedy for his own safegar^ at his pleasure, unlooked for of his kinsman, and
the rest of his followers, who were all taken with great ease. Then was it
determined, by those of the royal council, that all the traitors should have
their throts ^ut according unto the laws of the country: but when their
sentence was carried unto the king to be confirmed, (he understanding yt they
much repented, and were sorry for their sin and treason that they had pretended
against him) he determined to remedy the same with less damage, fearing what
might happen by their deaths, so yt he commanded they should not die, The first
inhabiting of the Iapon.
but be banished for ever out of the kingdom, with precise band, yt they their
wives, and children, and all that should come of them, should for ever live on
those Islands that are now called Iapon, which were at yt time desert and
without people. This sentence was executed, and the offenders did accept the
same for mercy. So they were carried to ye said Islands, whereas when they saw
themselves out of their natural country, and without any possibility ever to
return again, they ordained their common wealth as a thing to last for ever:
directing all their laws which were for their conservation and government
contrary unto the Chinos from whence they came. But in particular they made
one, wherein they did prohibit for ever, their descendents to have any
frindship with the Chinos, and did admonish them to do them all the evil that
was possible, which is observed and kept unto this day inviolable, showing
themselves their contraries in all they may, even in their apparel, speech,
and customs: for the which there is no nation so abhorred of the Chinos, as is
the Iapones, so that they are paid their hatred with the like. And although at
that time the said Iapones were subjects and tributaries unto the king of
China, and so continued long time after, now at this day they are not, but do
all harm that may be unto those of that kingdom.

They have much silver, but not so fine as that is of our Indians, likewise
great abundance of rice and flesh, and in some parts wheat* and although they
have all this, with many fruits, and herbs, and other things which be their
ordinary victuals: yet are they not so well provided as are their co^fines or
neighbors, and no default in the land, for that it is very good and
fruitful. But that the natural people do give themselves very little unto
the tilling and sowing thereof, for that they are more affectioned unto the
wars, then unto that: and this is the reason that many times they do lack
provision and victuals, which is the very same reason that the natural people
and others do report of them. In the Iapones are 66. kingdoms.
There be in these Islands three score and six kingdoms or provinces, and many
kings, although it may be better said, rulers or principals, such as the
Spaniardes found in the Islands of Luzo^* for which cause, although they be
called kings, yet are they not, neither in their co^tractation nor rent, for
they have very little in respect of the multitude of people. The king
Nobunanga who died in the year 1583. was the most principal and greatest Lord
amongst them all, as well of people, as of riches: who was slain by a captain
of his, and punished by God by this means for his luciferine pride, for that
it did far exceed that of Nabuchadonozor, and was come unto that point that
he would have been worshipped for a God: for the which he commanded to make a
sumptuous temple, and to put in it things that did well declare and show his
folly: of the which that you may see how far it did extend, I will declare
here only that which he did promise unto them that did visit his temple.

A luciferine pride.
First the rich men that came unto the said temple, and did worship his
picture, should be more richer: and those that were poor should obtain great
riches: and both the one and the other, that had no successors to inherit
their goods, should also obtain them, and also long life for to enjoy the
same, with great peace and quietness.

The second, that their life should be prolonged to 80. years.

The third, that they should be hole of all their infirmities and diseases,
and shall obtain full accomplishment of all their desires with health and
tranquillity. And the last he commanded that every month they should celebrate
a feast for his birth day, and therein to visit his temple, with certification
that all those that did believe in him, and in that which he promised, should
without all doubt see it accomplished, and those which in this life were
faulty and did not do in effect his commandment, in the other they should
go the way to perdition. And the better to accomplish this his will, he
commanded to be put in this temple, all the Idols in his kingdoms that were
most worshipped, such as to whom frequented most pilgrims: the which being
done, he presently forbad rhat not one of them all should be worshipped, but he
only that was the true Fotoque and universal God, the author and creator of
nature.

This foolishness did this proud king a little before his miserable death, and
many other more, that I do leave out for fear that I should be too tedious in
this Itinerario. There did succeed this proud king in the kingdom his son
called Vozequixama, who for that he is very young, at this day it is governed by
a worthy captain called Faxiuandono.

All men that are borne in this land are naturally inclined to wars and
robberies, and it is used ordinarily amongst themselves, always he that has
most power and strength, does carry away the best part, and yet he does enjoy
it with little security, for that as the proverb says (he finds a last for
his shoo, or the length of his foot is found) and another comes (when he
thinks least off) and carries away their spoil with victory, revenging
injuries the one for the other, without being requested thereunto: which is the
occasion that they are never without civil wars, and that seems to be the
influence of the clime of that land. This and the continual exercise in arms,
and in robberies has given them the name of warriers, and do terrify all
their borderers and neighbors.

They use many weapons, but especially hargabusses, swords and lances, and are
very expert in them. On the firm land of China they have done many sudden
robberies and thefts, and have gone thorough therewith at their pleasure: and
would have done the like at the Islands of Luzon, and used for the same all
means possible, but yet it fell out contrary unto their meanings, and returned
their backs full evil against their wills, with their hands upon their own
heads.

On a time they came unto the Illocos, who with the favor of the Spaniards
(whose vassals they are) did desende themselves worthily: that the Iapones
thought it best to return unto their houses and to leave their begun pretense,
with determination never to put themselves in the like peril, for that they
had lost many of their company. Not many years since there happened unto them
the like disgrace in China, there went ten thousand of them to rob and
steal, and at their going on land, they did sack a city with little hurt,
and small resistance, who with the content of that pray, forgot themselves and
did not prevent the harm that might chance unto them: the Chinos being
offended did compass them about in such sort, that when the Iapones remembered,
themselves, they were in that case that they were constrained to yield unto
their enemies, who at their wills did repay themselves very well of the
injury received, and a very good warning unto all those that shall hear
thereof, to sly from putting themselves into the like trance: so the Chinos
were very well revenged of the injury by them received.

The faith of Christ is very well planted in some of these Islands, by the good
diligence and travel of the fathers and Jesuits, but in particular, by that
which was done by master Francisco Xabier, one of the ten companions of the
father Ignacio de Loyola founder of the said religion: he traveled with
great zeal, in the converting of the said Islands, and that which was a great
help unto the same, was his holy doctrine and apostolic life, as unto this
day the Iapones do confess, attributing unto him (next unto God) the
goodness that has come unto them by receiving the baptism, whom the fathers
of that company have followed in all points, such as remained after his
death, as also such as have gone thither since that time.

So that unto them may be attributed the thanks for the mollifying of such
adamantine hearts, as are those of ye natural people of these Islands, whose
wits (although they be good and subtle) are naturally known to be inclined
unto wars, robberies and doing of evil: and at this day, being Christians,
they do follow their evil inclinations, yet notwithstanding, by the good
doctrine and ensample of the said fathers, they are much better Christians
then those of the Oriental or East Indians.

I do not set down here the number of those that are baptized in these Islands,
for that there are therein diverse opinions, as also for that the fathers of the
name of Jesus or Jesuits do distinctly declare in their letters. The Portugals
say that in respect of the number of people that are to be converted, the
number that are baptized are very few, and that there are many that are not,
for lack of ministers and preachers: the which may easily be remedied, in
commanding to go thither, more religious men of other orders, for to aid and
help the said Jesuits, the which should be unto them a particular content
and comfort as I do believe, as has been seen by experience in all parts
of the Indians, whereas have come religious men unto places of their doctrine,
for that the quantity of people is so great that are in these Islands, that
although there should go thither many laborers of the Gospel, and all the
orders of religious men, the one should not be a let or hinderance unto the
other, and they should all of them find enough to occupy themselves,
especially if that the successor of Nobunanga were converted with his
subjects. All the men of these Islands are well set and well proportioned, and
go well apparelled, although not in so good order as those of China: they live
very healthfully and long, by reason that they do use very few diversities
of meats: they do not suffer amongst them any Physicians, and do not cure
themselves, but with simples.

They have amongst them many priests of their Idols, whom they do call Bonsos,
of the which there be great couents. Likewise they have amongst them, great
witches, who do ordinarily talk with the devil, Many w^^ches,
and are not a small impediment for the^ to receive the law of God in that
kingdom. The women or wives of these Iapones do keep themselves very close,
and very seldom go forth of their houses, in the which they do resemble those
of China much (as has been said) yet have they many wives, for that by their
laws it is lawful for them to have as they please, and can sustain, yet are
they so prudent, that they do restrain themselves, and live in great peace.
Both men-seruants and women-seruants do serve their masters, as though they
were slaves, and they may kill them at their pleasure without incurring any
penalty of their laws: a thing far different from any good policy. Many other
things more could I declare of this kingdom, the which I do let pass, for the
reason aforesaid: and again for that the fathers of the company of Jesus, have
entreated thereof at large and vere truly.

Islands of Amazones.
Not far from these Islands of Iapon, they have discovered of late certain
Islands which are called of the Amazones, for that they are all inhabited by
women, whose ordinary weapons are bows and arrows, and are very expert in the
same: they have their right breast dry, the better to exercise their bow. Unto
these Islands in certain months every year goes certain ships from
Iapones with merchandice, and they bring from thence such as they have there:
in the which time the men do deal with the Amazones as with their own proper
wives, and for to avoid dangers that might happen amongst themselves they
deal in this order following.

A strange custom.
After that their ships are aryued, there goes on shore two messengers for to
give advice unto the queen of their arrival, and of the number of men that
are in their ships, who does appoint a day when they shall all come on
shore: the which day she does carry to the waters side the like number of
women, as they be of men, but the said women do first come thither before
the men do disembarke themselves, and every one of them does carry in their
hand a pair of shoes, or a pair of slippers, and on them their own
several mark, and do leave them on the sands at the waters side, without any
confort or order, and presently depart from thence. Then the men come on
shore, and every one take the first pair of shoes that he comes unto, and
put them on: then presently the women come forth, and every one of them
carries with her him who has fallen unto her by lot, to put on her shoes,
and makes him her guest, without any other particularitie, although it
chances unto the most vilest of them all to meet with the queens shoes, or
otherwise to the contrary.

So when the months are expired set down by the queen, in the which are
permitted the men aforesaid, they do depart, every one leaving with his
hostis his name, and the town where he dwells, for that if it so fall out
that they be with child, and be delivered of a son, that he may be carried
the year following unto his father, but the daughters do remain with them.

This is very doubtful to be believed, although I have bin certified by
religious men, that have talked with persons that within these two years have
been at the said Islands, and have seen the said women, and that which
causes me more to stand in doubt, is for that the fathers of the company that
dwell at the Iapones, have not in their letters made any particular mention of
them: therefore let every one give credit to this as likes him best.

CHAP. XX. They have notice of certain kingdoms borderers unto these Islands
of Iapon, and it treats of some things of them, according unto the truest
intelligence that has come from those parts, and of certain miracles that
happened in the kingdom of Cochinchina, that were notable.
FRom the City of Machao, which is inhabited by Portugals, and situated on
the skirt of the firm land of China, in two and twenty degrees, the
aforesaid father Ignacio did travel for Malaca, passing by the gulf of
Aynao, which is an Island and province of China, and five leagues from the
firm land, and from the Philippinas one hundredth and fourscore. It is a very
rich province and of great provision, and in the straight that is betwixt them
and the firm land, there is great fishing of pearls and Aliafar, Great
fishing of Pearls.
and those which are there found do in many killats exceed them that are
brought from Bareu, which is on ye coast of Arabia, or those that are brought
from Manar, which is another kingdom, from whence is brought many unto that of
China.

This province of Aynao is very good and strong, and the people thereof very
docible and well inclined. From this Island to the kingdom of Cochinchina, is
five and twenty leagues, and from Machao, one hundredth and twenty five: it is
a mighty kingdom and is in sixteen degrees of altitude, and the one part
thereof is joined with the firm land of China. The whole is divided into three
provinces. The first does enter forty leagues into the land, and has in it a
mighty king. The second is more farther within the land, and he that is Lord
thereof is a king of greater power then the first, and joining unto the sun
more toward the Septentrion is the third, the which is more greater and of
more riches, whose king in respect of the other two, is an Emperor, and is
called in their language Tunquin, which does signify the same. Unto him be
subject ye other two kings: yet notwithstanding his mighitinesse, and called
emperor, he is subject unto the king of China, and does pay him tribute and
parias. ^arias is a ^uetie for the ^inges own ^erson.
It is a country very well provided of victuals, and as good cheap as in
China. There is great stoare of a wood called Palo de Agnila, and of another
wood called Calambay, and both of them are very odoriferous.

Abundance ^f silk and gold.
Great abundance of silk and gold, and of other things very curious: all these
kingdoms are at a very point to be reduced unto our faith, for that the
principal (he whom they give title of Emperor) has sent diverse times to
Machao, and unto other parts whereas are Christians, and have requested to send
them persons both learned and religious, for to instruct them in the law of
God, for that they are all determined to receive it, and be baptized: and do
desire it with so great feruentnesse, that in many cities they have the
timber ready to build and edify churches, and in a readiness all other kind of
necessaries for the same.

There was in Machao a religious man of the order of barefoote Friars of saint
Francis, who understanding the great and good desire of this king, did send him
by certain Portugal merchants that did trade into his country, a cloth
whereon was painted the day of judgment, and hell, and that by an excellent
workman, and also a letter, wherein he did signify unto him the great desire
he had with some other of his companions to go into his kingdom to preach the
Gospel. The which being received by the said king, and informed the
signification of the picture, and of the religious man that sent it him, he
rejoiced very much with the present, and did send in return of the same an
other that was very good, unto the same religious man, and a letter of great
courtesy, and did accept the offer that he sent in his letter, and did promise
that all that went thither should have good entertainment, and that he would
presently make them a house next unto his.

This religious man, although h^ had a desire to put in execution the kings
will, yet at that time he could not, by reason that he had but few
companions: the which the king did understand, and caused him to send unto
the bishop of Machao three or four letters, requesting him to send him the
said religious men, with certification that having them there, both he and
all the rest of his kingdom would receive the faith of Christ and the holy
baptism: unto the which letters they did always make answer with promises
that he would send them unto him: but after because they did not accomplish the
same, the king did complain of him unto certain Portugal merchants with
great grief saying: this your bishop of Machao does greatly lie: for that I
have requested him by four letters to send me religious men for to preach the
law of the gospel, and he consenting unto my will, did never accomplish nor
perform his word. Unto this day they have not accomplished this desire, for
the great lack they have of such ministers as they do demand, and are
requisite in those parts, and cannot supply their want and necessity, except
they should leave them unprovided that be already baptized. They do drive
them off with fair words and promises, that with as great breuity as is
possible, their desire shall be satisfied. And this was the answer that was
given in Machao unto certain messengers or ambassadors that were sent by the
aforesaid king, for the same demand, the which was required with great
instance. The which messengers for their comfort and for his who sent the^, did
carry with the^ al such Images as they might have, but specially that of the
cross, in which form and likeness (as has bin informed) they have made in ye
kingdom an infinite number, and set them in all their streets, highwayes, and
houses, whereas they are worshipped and reverenced with great humility, as well
for that it is in an ensign of Christ, whose faith they do desire to receive,
as also for a notable miracle which happened in that kingdom, worthy to make
thereof a particular mention, the which I will set down here, in such sort as
the ambassadors aforesaid did declare in public before the inhabitants of
Machao, when as they came to demand religious men for to instruct them in the
gospel.

There was a man naturally borne in this kingdom, A miracle*
who for certain occasions went forth of the same, and came and dwelt amongst
the Portugals, who seeing the Christian ceremonies and being touched with the
hand of God, was baptized, and remained certain years in the same town,
giving outw^rde shows to be a good Christian, and one that feared God, at the
end thereof, he changed his mind, and determined to return unto his own
country, and there to live according unto that which he had learned of the
Christians, the which he believed to do with ease, without any gainesaying or
contradiction. Whereas when he came thither, he did observe all such things
as a Christian was bound to do: but amongst other signs and tokens of the
same, he made a cross and set it by the door of his house, whereunto he did
reverence at all times when he passed by the same with great devotion. His
neighbors when as they saw that sign, a thing of them never seen before, and
how that that Christian did make particular reverence, they began to mock
and scorn him, and the cross, and pulled it down from the place whereas it
was set, and did other things in dispite thereof, and of him that had set it
there in that place, whose hatred and discourtesie was so much, that they
determined in their minds to burn it, and to put the same in execution, who at
the same instance did all miraculously die, I say those that would have burnt
the same, the which was seen of many other, who have given sufficient
testimony thereof. And within few days after, all the whole lineage of those
dead persons did follow the same way, and not one escaped. This miracle being
spread throughout all the kingdom, the naturals thereof did set up many
crosses in all parts.

This they say was the principal motion that God put into their hearts for to
move them to demand for such as should baptize them, and preach the holy
gospel. Likewise a great help unto the same was the declaration of the
painted cloth, which the aforesaid religious man did send to the king. Since
that time there has gone unto the City of Machao certain naturals of that
kingdom, who being affectioned unto our faith were baptized there: with the
which, and with the hope aforesaid, they are all sustained, till such time as
it is ye pleasure of God to send them the remedy for their souls, the which
he has caused them to desire, which cannot be long, according unto that which
has been seen, and the miracles that God does work, the more for to kindle
their desire, as the miracle of the cross before spoken off, and others the
which certain Cochinchinos did declare in the City of Machao, in anno, 1583.
and happened the same year, and was very fresh in the memory of all those of
the said kingdom. The one of them was, that one of the Christians aforesaid
went to visit a principal man that had the palsy, and kept his bed many
years before: Another miracle.
and conferring with his long sickness, he told of certain miracles, such as
he had understanding that was done by Christ our redeemer, when that he was man
amongst men whom he redeemed: but in particular those which he did in the
healing of the like infirmities, such as he lay sick of: alonely with his
divine virtue, in touching of them with any part of his garments, or shadow.
The Judge hearing this, he had a particular faith and devotion to him that had
done these miracles that the christian had told him, and asked what his name
was, and what signs and tokens he had: he told him that his name was Jesus of
Nazareth redeemer of the world, the savior and glorifier of men. And the
better to declare unto him his signs, he showed to him an Image or picture
that he had of his, yt which was given him such time as he was baptized,
printed in paper: and of Jesus Christ when he ascended up into heaven, the which
for lack of Churches, and other of greater volume, he should have continually
with him and make his prayers thereunto. This sick man took it, and fixed his
eyes thereon with so great devotion and faith, in requesting him to give him
his health, and that he would presently believe in him, and be baptized. At
the same instant in the sight of them all, he felt himself whole of ye
infirmity that he had suffered so many years before, and never could find any
human remedy for the same, although he had proved an infinite number. He
straightwayes willed the Christian to baptize him, unto whom he gave a great
sum of money, the which he received against his will, and spent it in works
of mercy, and with part thereof he bought a big bark in the which at this
day he does pass people thorough a river, whereas they were wont to pass
great peril and danger, and he does it for Gods sake, and receives nothing
for the same.

A few days after in another part of this kingdom, there happened another
miracle of no lesser substance then the first, that is, there was a Cochinchina
in the said city of Machao, who did ask to be baptized of a barefoote Friar,
which after yt he had catechized sufficiently, he gave it unto him: and after
a great time that he had been in his company, and had experience of his
Christianity and devotion, he gave him license for to return unto his
country, with a good token, that at his coming thither he would procure to
augment the desire of Christianity, the which God had begun to kindle in
their breast.

This good new christian did procure the same with so great care, that he did
profit very much (being helped with the favor of God, who made him his
instrument) he healed certain infirmities, in showing unto the patients an
Image of our lady, the which he had continually about his neck, and had
thereunto great devotion, and would declare to them with great zeal the Lords
prayer, or Pater noster. His fame was so much spread abroad in all parts of this
province, wherein he dwelled, that it came unto the ears of a Mandarin, or
principal Judge of the same, who was many days in his bed a leaper, both of
hands and feet, and never could find any physician nor medecin, that could
give him his health, nor any other human remedy: who being very desirous to
be healed, he sent ^or the said Christian, and asked if he would take upon
him to heal him of that infirmity, as it was affirmed that he had done by
others of greater importance. The Christian said he would, then the Judge did
promise unto him for the same, great gifts and rewards, but he made no
account thereof, but oneli^ requested of him for reward, that after he should
be hole, that he would be baptized and become a Christian: the which he did
accept, and principally he showed unto him the Image that he had of our lady,
saying: If thou will believe in this lady, that is here ingraued, and in her
most holy son Jesus Christ the redeemer of the whole world, thou shall
presently be made hole. This Mandarin or Judge did behold the same with great
attention, and thought on the words which he had heard spoken. And in
determining with himself to believe the same, at the very point that he did
put it in execution, he was healed of al his infirmity, a thing which caused
great admiration in all that province.

These miracles and that of the cross, in a short time being known abroad,
have caused such a desire unto the inhabitants of that kingdom to become
Christians, that by all manner of means possible they do procure the same: the
which is not followed for lack of ministers, as aforesaid, and is no small
grief unto them that Christianly do put themselves to consider how the devil
our adversary does carry unto his infernal mansion, those souls which seem to
be well disposed for to enjoy the benefit of God, and his eternal goodness:
all the which is for lack of ministers, and not for any other default. God
remedy the same for his mercies sake.

The said father Ignacio (whom as I have said, I do follow in many things of
this Itinerario) did tell me, that as he passed by this kingdom for to go unto
Spain, he saw the devotion of the people thereof, and the great desire they
had to be Christians, and how that the people were ready and bent for to
receive the holy Gospel, very humble and of good understanding. He would have
tarried for to baptize them, and would have done it, only for charity and
compassion, seeing with what devotion they did demand the same, and the great
number of souls that were condemned: but he was constrained by force to go
unto Malaca, and again it seemed unto him, that amongst so many people, his
small force might do little good: and that it were better for him to go unto
Spain, and to procure more companions to help him, as he did, and returned
with them, and with many other rewards, of Pope Gregory the thirteenth
received: and he also received great favors of the king of Spain, and with
great hope, that his majesty will give his particular aid, for to go through
with this enterprise, which will not be of small effect. I do believe of a
truth, that in small time all that kingdom shall be subject unto the
Catholic says of Rome, and to be the gate, whereby to enter the law of the
Gospel into the mighty kingdom of China, for that this of Cochinchina is upon
the same firm land, and their language and customs are almost in one manner.

They are very white people of this kingdom, and are apparelled like unto
those of China: their women are very honest and shamefast, Their women are
honest and shamefast*
and their apparel is very curious and gallant. The men wear their hair
dispersed, and do comb and trim it with too much care. In all the country
almost, all of them are apparelled in silk, for that they have there very
much, and excellent good: the country is very wholesome, and full of old
folks and children, which is a sufficient proof for the goodness thereof.

They say that they never had amongst them neither pestilence nor hunger, They
never had plague, pestilence nor hunger.
which is the like as we have said of the kingdom of China.

Let him that can, do it in such sort that so great and infinite a number of
souls that at this day are under the tyranny of the devil, may see them in
the Christian liberty, and in the other life enjoy their creator.

CHAP. XXI. In this chapter is declared of such kingdoms as are adjoining unto
that of Cochinchina, and of some notable things in them, with the rites and
customs of the inhabitants.
The kingdom of Champa Rich of drugs.
NIgh unto this kingdom of Cochinchina, there is another called Champa, that
although it be poor of gold and silver, yet is it very rich of drugges and
gallant wood, and great stoare of provision. This kingdom is very great and
full of people, and they somewhat whiter then those of Cochinchina, they are as
nigh and as willing to become Christians as their neighbors but for the
performance thereof, they do lack that which the other do. They have the
same laws and ceremonies as well the one as the other, and are all Idolaters,
and do worship the second causes, in the same order as the Chinos do, unto
whom likewise they do make one manner of acknowledging.

From this Island you may go with ease unto Malaca, leaving on the right hand a
kingdom which is called Camboia, The kingdom of C^mboia.
the which is great and very full of people, and all of them affectioned to go
to sea, and navigations, by reason whereof they have an infinite number of
vessels: It is a very fertile country, with great stoare of provision: there
are Elephants in great number and Abadas, which is a kind of beast so big as
two great bulls, and has upon his snowt a little horn. At this day there is
one of them at Madrid, the which was brought out of the Indians to his majesty,
and many do go to see it for a strange thing, and never the like seen in
Europe, whose skin is so hard (according unto the report) that no man
although he be of great force and strength can pass it with a thrust. Some
have said that it is an Unicorne, but I take it for the contrary, and they
are of my opinion almost all those that have been in those parts, and have
seen the true Unicorne.

In this kingdom there is a religious man of the order of S. Dominicke, called
friar Siluester, whom God did carry into those parts for to remedy the souls
that are therein: he does employ himself to learn their natural language,
and to preach the holy gospel in the same tongue, and has them likewise
prepared, that if he had any companions for to help him, they should obtain
much fruit for the heavens: he has sent and requested for some unto the India
of Portingall, but they would never send him any, peradventure by some
sinister information, by men which the devil does mark as instruments, for to
stay and let the salvation of those souls, for ever to remain in his
tirannicall power. This friar did write a letter unto Malaca unto friar Martin
Ignacio, and unto other religious men, entirely requesting them for the love of
God, to give such order that he might be helped with some religious men, of
what order soever, with certification that therein they shall do great service
unto God, and put remedy in those souls, whom he dare not baptize, for fear
that after lacking the euangelical refreshing, to water and cherish them, they
return to bring forth that evil fruit of Idolatry. This petition did not
take effect according to his desire, for yt there was not to serve his turn,
nor any that was unoccupied. They understood of him that brought this letter,
that the king of that kingdom had in great veneration the said father
Siluestro, in so ample manner, as was the patriarck Joseph in Egypt: he had in
all that kingdom the second place, and every time that the king would speak
with him, he gave him a chair: and gave him great privileges, and license for
to preach the holy gospel throughout all the kingdom without any
contradiction, and for to edify the churches and all other things whatsoever
he thought necessary: this king himself helping thereunto, by giving of great
gifts and charity. He said also that in all ye kingdom there were erected many
crosses, and were had in great reverence. And for ye confirmation of the truth
hereof, the aforesaid friar Ignacio did see in Malaca a present yt the king of
this kingdom of Camboia did send unto another friend of his: and amongst many
things contained therein of great riches and curiosity: there were two crosses
very great and well made, of a gallant wood and very sweet, and all garnished
very richly with silver and gold, with their titles enamiled.

The kingdom of Sian.
Nigh unto this kingdom is that of Sian, in the hight of fourteen degrees from
the pole Artike, and three hundred leagues from Machao, whereas the Portugals do
go to trade: It is the mother of all Idolatry, The mother of Idolatry.
and the place from whence has proceeded many sects, unto Iapon, China and
Pegu. It is a flourishing country and well replenished of all such things as
be requisite for to merit the name to be good. There be in it mani^ Elephants
and Abadas, and other beasts that are nourished in that country: besides this,
it is very rich of metals, and gallant sweet wood. Faint hearted people.
The people of this kingdom for the most part are faint-hearted or cowards,
for which occasion although they are infinite in number, yet are they subject
unto the king of Pegu, who overcame them long time since, in a battle (as
afterward shall be declared:) and they do pay him ordinarily great and heavy
tributes. They would be converted very eas^ly unto the faith of Jesus Christ,
and would leave their Idols, if they had any to preach unto them: yea, and
would subject themselves unto any king or Lord that would favor them, and not
unto this whom now they do obey, for that he does entreat them tyrannously.
They have amongst them many religious men after their fashion, who do live in
common, and lead an asper and sharp life: for the which they are had of all the
rest in great veneration. The penance which they do is wonderful and strange,
as you may judge by some things that I will declare here: amongst a great
number that be told of them, there are none of them that can marry, neither
speak to any woman, and if by chance he do, they arewithout remission punished
by death. They go always barefoote, and very poorly apparelled, and do eat
nothing but rice and green herbs, and this they do ask for charity every
day, going from door to door with their wallet at their backs, always with
their eyes looking on the ground, with such modesty and honesty, that it is to be
wondered at: they do not crave their charity, neither take it with their hands,
nor do any other thing but call or knock, and stand still, till such time as
they give them their answer, or put some thing into their wallets. It is told
them for a truth, that many times for penance they do put themselves stark
naked in the heat of the sun, which is there very great, for that ye country
is in twenty six degrees of the Equinoctial, whereas they are much troubled
there with gnats, whereof there is an infinite number, and is a thing that if
they did pass it for Gods sake: it is a kind of martyrdom of great desert.
God for his mercy lighten them with his grace, that this which they do smally
unto the profit of their souls, may be the occasion that after they are
baptized, they may deserve for the same many degrees of glory.

Likewise in secreat they do great penance, and do rise up at midnight to
pray unto their Idols, and they do it in quiers, as is used amongst us
Christians. It is not permitted them any rentes, nor any other kind of
contractation: and if they be seen to deal in any, they are detested and
hated, as an heretic is amongst us.

For this kind of asper living (the which they do, according unto the report)
for the love of the heaven, and that with great zeal: they are respected of
the common people for saints, and for such they do reverence them, and do
commit them unto their prayers, when they are in any trouble or infirmity.
These and many other things mo be declared of them in like order, which may
serve for to confound us, that confessing, we do not observe and keep, having
for the same our sure reward, not of humain interest, but that which God has
prepared for the good in heaven.

The law of the Gospel in this kingdom would bring forth much fruit, for
that the people are charitable, and lovers of virtue, and of them that have it.
This experience had the father Ignacio and his companions in China, at such
time as they were prisoners, where there were in a city certain ambassadors
from the king of Syan, who were bound to the court, and there they understood
that the Spaniards were sentenced to death for entering into that country
without license: they went to visit them, and when they saw them with their
asper habites and very poor, and did resemble very much the habit of their
religious men, they had so great affection unto them, that over and above they
sent the^ good charity, the which was two bags of rice, much fish and fruits:
they did offer to the^ all the money they would desire, and to ransom them in all
that the Judges would demand ^or them: in recompense of this good will they
showed unto ye Spaniards, they did verify that aforesaid, that they are great
lovers of virtue.

CHAP. XXII. Of many other kingdoms that are in this new world, and of their
names and properties, but in espiciall, of that famous City of Malaca.
The kingdom of Lugor, and that of Patone.
NIgh unto this kingdom of Syan there are two kingdoms together, the one of
them is called Lugor, and the other Patane, they belong both unto one king, who
is a Moore and of the lineage Malaya, yet notwithstanding the people of these
kingdoms are Gentiles, and do^ understand in them to have great good will to
become Christians, if they had any to preach unto them the Gospel. Gold,
pepper and drugs.
The land is very rich of gold, Pepper and of drugges, but the people faint
hearted and cowards, and for little* for which occasion they are more given
unto things of contentment and pleasure, then unto wars or brawlings.

The kingdoms of Paon and Ior.
At the end of this kingdom is the strait of Malaca, in the which there are
two small kingdoms, the one of them is called Paon and the other Ior: the
people of the first are the most traitorous that are in all the whole world,
as the Portugals have many times experimented, and those of the second
kingdom: sometimes they are in peace, and sometimes in war with the said
Portugals. They will have peace when they do see themselves in necessity of the
same, but war ordinarily. These two kingdoms are half Moors, by reason
whereof it seems that with an evil will they will be reduced unto the law of
the gospel, if that by the help of God they be not mollified of their hearts.

This straight of Malaca is under the Equinoctial line, and is accounted from
the kingdom of Cochinchina unto it, The straight of Malaca is under the l^ne.
376. leagues: this is an evil straight and very dangerous for ships that
pass thorough it, for very few times it is without storms or some other
greater danger, as it happened unto a very great ship in the mouth of the
straight, in the presence of Friar Martin Ignacio, the which in very little
space, was swallowed up with the sea, and in it more the^ three hundred
thousand ducats in merchandice that was within her, although the success
thereof our people did attribute it more unto the just judgment of God than
unto the storm, for that according as they were informed, they had committed
grievous offenses, at the time when she sanke: for being very nigh with his
ship in the which he went, and many other more, they felt not, neither had
any suspicion of any danger. From this straight to go unto Malaca, you coast
alongest the sea, five and twenty leagues: all which coast is full of great
mighty and thick woods: by reason whereof, as also for that it is not
inhabited, there are many tigers, elephants and mighty great lysards, and
other furious beasts.

The city of Malaca in our pole articke is elevated from the equinoctial
only one degree: of ancient time it was the most principallest city of all
these kingdoms, and resident therein a mighty king a Moore, but after it was
conquered by the Portingals, who in these wars did wonderful things of great
force and courage: they did drive forth all the Moors out of the same, and
out of all the borders, and made of their Mezquita or temple, (which was a
singular piece of work) a high church, as it does remain unto this day: there
are also three monasteries of religious men, one of S. Dominicke, an other of
S. Francis, and the third of the company of Jesus, or Jesuits. It is a very
temperate country being so nigh the equinoctial line: the reason is, for that
every week ordinarily it rayneth three or four times, (which is the greatest
cause of health in all that country) and thereby is made wonderful
fruitful, and with great abundance of provision, but particularly of fruits,
for there is great store, and some sorts never seen in Europe, amongst the
which there is one, yt is called in the Malaca tongue Durion, and is so good
that I have heard it affirmed by many that have gone about the world, that it
does exceed in savor all others that ever they had seen, or tasted: it is in
form like unto a mellon, whose ryne is somewhat hard, and has upon it little
white pricks which seems like hair, and within the fruit be partitions,
which be of the color like unto maniar blanco, and of so good savor and taste
as it, A daint^e kind of mea^.
Some do say that have seen it, that it seems to be yt wherewith Adam did
transgress, being carried away by the singular savor. The leaves which this
tree yields, are so big that a man may cover himself with one of them,
which me thinks is but conjecture or defining: but there is Cannafistola for
to lade fleetes very big and good, A tree of a wonderful e^f^et.
and of a singular effect, one of the notablest things in this kingdom, and is
a marvelous tree of an admirable virtue, the which puts forth so many
roots of so contrary virtue, that those which grow toward the orient be good
against poison, agues, and many infirmities that do war against human life,
Two contraries in one subject.
and those roots that grow ^owards the west, be rank poison, and in effect,
all clean contrary unto the first. So that it seems here to be found two
contraries in one subject, a thing which in philosophy they were wont to
count impossible.

This city is of great contractation, for that there come thither all the
kingdoms that we have spoken of, and from many other more that are nigh
thereabouts: but in particular a great number of great ships from the Indians,
Canton, Chincheo, and from many other places, likewise the Iapones carry
thither their silver to sell, and those of the kingdom of Syan carry many
things very curious, but especially cloves, and pepper of the Island Malucas,
and those of Burneo bring much sanders and nutmegs, and those of Iaba and Pegu,
bring the wood of aguila, and those from Cochinchina and Cham bring great store
of wrought silk, drogges, and spicerie, and those of Samatra or Trapouana much
gold and wrought things and fine cloth of Vengalas and Coromandel. All these
and other things, make this city famous and plentiful, as also very much
enlarged of the Portingals that go thither ordinarily every year, and traficke
there.

CHAP. XXIII. Of some kingdoms of the new world, and of particular things
that have been seen in them, and treats of the city and river of Ganies.
Over against this famous city of which so many things may be spoken of, is
that mighty kingdom and Island of Samatra, The Island of Samatra supposed to be
the Island of Ophir.
called by the ancient cosmogrosers Trapouana, which is (as some say) the Island
of Ophir, whether ye fleet went which king Solomon sent* of which there is
particular mention made in the scripture, in the third book of the kings cap.
9. and 10. and in the Paralipomenon cap. 9. that went and returned again lade^
with gold and rich timber for to adorn the temple of Jerusalem, and of many
other curious things, whose memory does remain unto this day amongst the
natural people, although diffusedly. But not so much as those that have it out
of the holy scripture, neither so true. This Island is under the equinoctial
line, so that the one half does extend unto the pole artick and the other
half unto the poole antarticke. It has in longitude 230. leagues, and in
latitude three score and seven leagues: and is so nigh unto Malaca, that in
some parts it is less than ten leagues. In this kingdom there are many lords
and rulers, yet he yt has the greatest part thereof is a Moore, and is called
Achan, it is one of the richest Islands in all the world, The richest Island in
the world.
for yt it has many mines of fine gold, of the which (although there is a law
yt they cannot take out of the^ more than is necessary) yet there is great
abundance carried from thence to Malaca, Turkey and many other places. There is
gathered upon this Island great abundance of pepper and beniewyn of Boninas in
great quantity, out of whose trees (whereof there is great woods) there come
forth so sweet a smell that it seems an earthly paradise, and was wont to be
smelled twenty leagues at sea, for which respect the ships that sail that way
do come so nigh the land as they may to have the comfort of that smell. There
is also much Camphora and all kind of spices, by reason whereof there comes
unto this kingdom to traficke, many Turks that come in ships and foystes out
of the red sea, Also there does traficke thither those of the kingdom of Sunda,
Iaua the great, and Ambayno, and others that are there nigh unto them. Unto
this Island came certain Portingals to buy and sell, whereas they were all
slain, and some for the profession of the faith, for the which they are holden
for martyrs of Jesus Christ, by the opinion of christians that do dwell nigh,
when they understood ye cause. The most part of this kingdom are Moors, and
therefore they do abhor the christians, and do make with them all the warr^
they can, but in especial with them that dwell in Malaca, whom many times they
have put in great danger of their lives, and loss of their goods.

Running from this kingdom of Malaca by the north and northwest cost is the
mighty kingdom of Pegu, the which is in bigness greater the^ Samatra, and
equal in riches, especially of pearls and al sorts of stones, and very fine
crystal: there is great store of provision and an infinite number of people,
and the king thereof is mighty: to who^ (as we have said) ye king of Cyan does
pay tribute, because he overcame him in a battle which he had with him, in the
year 1568. according unto the common opinion: the occasion was, that
understanding, how that the said king of Syan had in his power a white
Elephant* (whom those of the kingdom of Pegu do worship for God) the king
sent to buy the same, and to give for it so much as he would esteem or value
it: but he utterly denied the same, and said that he would not let him have it
for all that he had in his kingdom: the which caused so great anger unto the
king, that he called together all the soldiers that he could make, with
determination to get by force of arms, that which he could not by fair means
and great riches: in the which he did so great diligence, that in a few days
he had joined together an army of a million and six hundredth thousand of
men of war, An army of a million and six hundred thousand me^.
with whom he departed unto the said kingdom of Syan, which was from his
kingdom two hundredth leagues, and did not only perform his pretense in
bringing away the white Elephant, but did also make the king tributarie, as he
is unto this day, as has bin declared unto you.

The rites of the people and priests of this country, do resemble much those
of the kingdom of Syan: they have amongst them many monasteries of men that
live honestly, solitary, and with great penance, and people very apt to
receive the holy gospel. For over and above that they are docible and of a
good understanding, they are men which do study philosophy and are well
inclyned and charitable, and have a particular affection unto virtue, and unto
such as they do know that have virtue, and very friendly to remedy the
necessity of their poor neighbors.

Going from this kingdom toward the north is the kingdom of Arracon, very
plentiful of provision, but few things of contractation or marchandice, The
kingdom of Arracon.
which is the occasion that it is not well known to the Spaniardes, for that
they have not gone thither. They do understand of the natural people, and of
their customs, that they are very apt to receive the holy gospel.

From this kingdom along the same coast, you came unto the kingdom of
Vangala, The kingdom of Vangala.
through the which does pass the river Ganges, one of the four that comme
forth of paradise terrenall, the which being understood by a certain king of
this kingdom, he determined to cause some to ascend up that river, till such
time as he had found the head spring or head thereof, and therewith paradise:
for the which effect he commanded to be made diverse ^ortes of barks both small
and great, and sent in them up the river certain men (of whose diligence he
had long experience, and were provided with victuals for many days, and gave
commandment that presently after that theyhad discovered that which he
desired, that they should return with great speed, far to give him particular
and true relation, with pretense forthwith to go himself to enjoy the things
which he thought necessary to be seen, and worthy to be desired, of his
travail, and in a place so delightful.

These men did nauigate up the river many months, and came unto a place
whereas the water came forth so softly and with so small noise, which gave
them to understand that they were not far from the first head thereof, which
should be paradise that which they went to seek. They gave to understand that
in this place, after they had seen so many tokens, and comforted themselves
with marvelous sweet smells, and aires of great delight, they thought verily
that they had bin in the paradise terrenall. And more, when as they came unto
that place, where as the river did run so peaceable, and the air so delicate
and sweet, there entered into the hearts of them all, so great and
extraordinary joy, that they seemed to be in the true paradise, and forgot all
the travail that they had passed for to come thither, and of any other thing
that did signify pain or grief. But when they did intend to go forwards
with this their pretense and intent, and thereunto did put all diligence
possible, they found by experience that all their travail was in vain, and
how that they remained always in one place: and could not understand from
whence did come or proceed that contradiction, they could not find in the
waters by reason of the peaceablenesse thereof.

This experience being done, attributing it unto a misery because they could
not get a shore, they returned back again by the same river, till they came
to their own kingdom, whereas they arrived in a very short time, and gave
their king to understand (who sent them) all as before said* and many other
things more, the which I do leave out for that I do take it apocripha. They
hold it for a certainty that the rivers Eufrates and Tygris are not far from
this river Ganges, and it seems to be true for both of them do discharge
their currents or water into the Persian sea, the which is not far distant
from this kingdom.

The people of this kingdom have this river in great reverence, which is the
occasion, that they never enter into the same but with great respect and fear.
And when they do wash or bath themselves in it, they have it for a
certainetie that they remain clear from all their sins. Likewise this
kingdom with great ease might be converted unto the catholic faith as it
seems, for that they have amongst them, many moral rites, ceremonies, and
virtues.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of the kingdom of Coromandel and others his borderers, and of
the city of Salamina, whereas was and died the glorious Apostle S. Thomas, and
of the power and riches of the king of this kingdom, and the order of their
buryinges, and other things of great curiosity.
RUnning alongest the coast from Vengala, is the kingdom of Masulapatar, and
certain other kingdoms nigh unto the same: they be all Gentiles as the rest
of their borderers yet it is understood, with great facility they would leave
their opinions. It is a kingdom that has great abundance of provision, and
lack of things of contractation or marchandice, which is the occasion that
they are little known.

Travailing a little forwards, is the kingdom of Coromandel whose chief
city is called Calamina, and now vulgarly Malipur, and is there whereas was
martyred the happy Apostle S. Thomas. And they say that at this day there
remains some of his relickes, by whom God did many miracles. The natural
people therefore have a particular memory until this day of that saint.

This city at this day is populared with Portingals and with the natural
people* there is in it a church, wherein is comprehended the house whereas was,
and died the holy Apostle: this country belongs unto the king of Visnaga,
who although he be a Gentile, he has great reverence and respect unto the
house of the holy Apostle, and for particular devotion he does give every
year a certain charity. There is in this city two couentes of religious
men, the one of the company of Jesus, and the other of the order of S. Francis.

From this city of Calamina to that of Visnaga there whereas the king is, it is
five and thirty leagues by land. This king is mighty, and his kingdom very
great and full of people, and has great rentes. They say that only the rent
he has of fine gold, is worth unto him three millions, of the which he
spends but one only, and does keep every year two millions in his
treasorie, the which according unto the report and fame, is at this day with
many millions. He has twelve principal or chief captains, and every one of
them has the government of an infinite number of people and has great rent
for the same, for he that has least rent has six hundred thousand ducats
yearly. Every one of them are bound to give the king to eat, and all the
people of his house, one month in the year: so that by this account the twelve
captains which are the lords of the kingdom (and as we might say) dukes,
do bear his cost all the whole year. The million the which he does spend, is
in gifts and in extraordinary things. The king has in his house, what with
wives, servants and slaves, nigh about fourteen thousand persons, and in his
stable ordinarily a thousand horse, and for his service and guard eight
hundredth Elephants, of who^ he does spend every day eight hundredth ducats. The
guard of his person is ^oure thousand horsemen, to who^ he gives great wages.
He has also in his house three hundredth wives besides a great number of
concubines: they go all gallantly apparelled, and with rich jewels, of the
which there are of great estimation in ye kingdom, they do almost every three
days change new colors of apparel. They do ordinarily use colors of precious
stones, such as are called in spain ojo de gato cats eyes. They have great
store of saphires, pearls, diamonds, rubies, and many other stones, yt are in
that kingdom in great abundance.

Amongst all these wives there is one that is as legitimate, whose children
do inherit: and if it so fall out that she is barren, the first that is borne
of any of ye other does inherit: which is the occasion that they never lack a
successor in that kingdom.

When the king of this kingdom does die, they do carry him forth into a
mighty field, with great sadness and mourning apparel, and there in the
presence of those twelve peers a fore said, they do burn his body with wood
of Sandalo, which is of a great smell, with the which they do make a great fire.

After that the body of the king is burned and consumed, they throw into the
same the wives that he best loved, with servants and slaves, those that he
most esteemed in his life time: the which they do with so great content, that
every one does procure to be the first for to enter into the fire, and they
that are last, do think themselves unhappy. All these do say that they go to
serve the king in the other life, whereas they shall be with great joy. This is
the occasion that they go with so good a will to die, and carry with them the
most richest and festival apparel they have. Of this is gathered that they do
believe the immortality of the soul, for that they do confess there is an
other life, and that thither they do return and live for ever without end.
They are people that would be converted with the like facility unto the holy
gospel as their neighbors, if there went any thither to preach.

Three score and ten leagues from this city, there is a Pagode or temple of
Idols, whereas is a rich fair every year, it is a very sumptuous building,
and edified in a place so high, that it may be seen many leagues before you
come unto it.

It has ordinarily four thousand men of guard, who are paid with the rent
of the temple, the which is rich and very good. There is nigh unto the same
many mines of gold and precious stones, and that is taken out of them is rent
unto the temple. There is in it a pr^est of the Idolles, whom they call in
their language brama, and is as the high priest in that country. All the
people of the land do come unto him, to understand the doubts of their manner
of living, and he does dispense with them in many things that be prohibited by
their laws, ye which he may do according unto the said laws, and many times
he does dispense with certain of the^. But here one to be laughed, at, which
is that when a woman cannot suffer the condition of her husband, or is weary
of him for other occasions, she goes unto this Brama, and giving unto him a
piece of gold, A strange custom.
which may be to the value of a ducat in Spain, he does vnmarry the^, and
sets her at liberty that she may marry with an other, or with many if she
please: and in token of this she is given a mark with an iron upon her right
shoulder, so that with that alone she remains at liberty, and her husband
cannot do unto her any harm for the same, neither compel her to return
again to his company.

There are in this kingdom many mines of very fine diamonds, and are had in
great estimation, and very well known in Europe. There has been found in
them a stone so fine and of so great value, that but few years past, the king
did sell the same unto an other mighty king his borderer, called Odialcan for
a million of gold, A diamond sold for a million of gold.
besides other things of value that he gave him over and above. It is a
healthful country, with very go^d and fresh airs, rich of provisions, and of
all other necessaries, not only for the human life: but also for curiosity
and delights that be therein. It is in fourteen degrees toward the pole
artico. All the people therein are faint hearted and cowards, and for little
travail, which is the occasion that they are nothing affectionate unto wars,
and is understood, with great facility they would receive the gospel.

Nigh unto the same there is an other little kingdom called Mana, in the which
there is a town with Portingals, ye which is called in their language
Negapatan, there is in the same a covent of the order of S. Francis, whose
religious friars, although they are but a few, do occupy themselves in the
converting of the natural people thereof, and it is to be believed that they
shall reap much fruit and do good, for they have given shows of the same:
for that about three years past the prince of that country was converted, by
the preaching of the same friars, who went now to receive the holy baptism
with great and incredible joy unto the christians. All the rest of the kingdom
(as it is believed) will shortly imitate him. In this Island there are many
pearls and aliofer, al very good, round and fine.

CHAP. XXV. This chapter treats of many kingdoms of that new world, the
rites and customs of the inhabitants, and of some curious things.
THe before said father, Martin Ignacio departed with his companions from this
cost, and went toward the Islands of Nicobar, whereas are many Moors and
gentiles, al mingled the one with ye other. ^landes of Nicobar.
They did not stay there, but presently passed to the town of Cuylan, which is
inhabited with Portingals, and from Malaca 416. leagues. This Island is situated
from six unto ten degrees under our pole, and has in longitude, three score
and six leagues, and nine and thirty of latitude. Of old^ time it was an
Island much celebrated, and in those parts had in great reverence, for that it
is said that there dwelt and died there in times past men, whose souls are in
heaven, and are celebrated and honored by the^ of the country as though they
were gods, with many sacrifices and orations, the which they do ordinarily.
There come from other kingdoms bordering thereupon, unto this Island, many
pilgrims, but our people could never understand the ground and occasion
thereof, neither how they lived, whom they do hold for saints. There is upon
the same Island a very high mountain which is called Pico de adan which father
Martin did see, and did hear the natural people thereof say, that it had that
name, for that by the same. Adam went up into heaven: but what Adam it was they
could not declare.

There is on this Pico like a monastery, the which the natural people do
call Pagode: At one time they had therein an Apes to^th, Anapes tooth for their
God
the which they did worship for their God: and ther^ came thither unto that
effect, some two hundred and three hundred leagues. It so happened in the year
1554. the vizroy of India, called Don Pedro Mascarenas sent an army unto this
kingdom, with many Portugals, with intent to reduce them unto the obedience of
the king of Portugal, all of that country, as they were before, who few years
past, did rise against them, and took away and denied their fewter. The
soldiers did sack that Pagode or monastery, and thinking to find some
treasure therein, they broke it, and beat it down unto the foundation: and
there they found the aforesaid apes tooth, the which they did worship, put in a
chest of gold and stones, and carried it unto Goa, unto the said vizroy. When
that this was understood and known to other kings their borderers, and unto
him of Pegu, of this loss (the which of them was judged to be great) they
sent their Ambassadors to the said vizroy, that they might in the name of them
all, demand the said tooth, the which they did worship, and to offer for the
ransom thereof seven hundred thousand ducats of gold. The viceroy would have
given it them for that quantity of gold which they did offer, and would have
done it in effect, if it had not bin for the archbishop of Goa, who was called
Don Gaspar, and other religious me^, who did disturb him putting great
scrupulositie, and laid unto his charge the hurt that come by their Idolatry,
in giving them the same, of the which he should give a straight account unto
God. The which did so much in him, yt he dispatched away the ambassador:
without any regard of the gold yt they would have given him in their presence,
he did deliver ye same unto the said archbishop and religious men, and they
before their eyes did break it, and burnt it, and threw the dust thereof into
the sea, which was not a little wonder unto the said ambassadors, to see how
little they did esteem so great a quantity of gold, and for a thing which
they esteemed not, but threw it into the sea with so great liberality.

This Island is fertile, peaceable, and healthful, and all full of woods, and
there are mountains very thick of orange trees, siders, Limas, Plantanos, and
Palmas, and many synamon trees, which be the best in all the world, and of most
strength and effect, for ye which they go to buy, for to bring it unto Europe,
and they give it for a small price. Likewise there is pepper, but the natural
people did pull up certain hills that were full of it, and of sinamon, because
they saw there came from far to buy these two commodities, and fearing yt it
would be an occasion yt their country would be taken from them. It is a
country of great provision, and does bring forth mighty elephants, and they
say that there is many mines of diamo^ds, rubies, and other stones yt are
called girasolis. In no part of this oriental Indies, there was none of so
good a beginning in the conversion of the souls, as was in this Island, for
that certain religious friars of the order of S. Francis did labor very much,
and did baptize in a few days more than fifty thousand souls, which gave to
understand that with a very good will they did receive the law of the gospel,
and had edi^ted many churches, and fourteen monasteries of the same religion:
but few years past, a king of that kingdom, being weary of certain things,
which in all that Indians are very public. he forsook the religion and faith
he had received, and did raze and destroy many portingals yt where there
inhabited, thrusting forth all ye religious men that did baptize, and minister
the sacraments. This evil king was called Raxu. Many of them yt were
christened, and content with the faith of Jesus Christ they had received,
detesting yt which this tirannous king had done, they went and dwelt in ye
company of the portingals, and others did build a town the which is called in
their language Columbo, whereas is a great number of them: unto this day do
endure throughout all that kingdom the crosses, in token of their ancient
christianity: along all the coast they do use many Galiotas or gallyes, and
go with them, robbing and spoiling al thereaboutes. The natural people do
say, that with a good will they would again return and receive the law of the
gospel, if they had it there preached. From this Island after they had passed a
little gulf, they came upon the coast of a kingdom called Tutucuriu, and ran
all alongest the cost of the same, running from the cape of Comerin to Cuylan.
Here there is a Pagode or temple of their gods very great and rich, thither
come all the Gentiles of that kingdom, at certain feasts in ye year with great
devotion: there is in is it a triumphant chariot, so great that 20. horse
cannot move it, they bring it forth in public upon their festiual days, and
is carried by elephants, and by an infinite number of men, who voluntarily do
hale and pull at certain roapes yt are made fast thereunto. Upon the highest of
this chariot is made a tabernacle very richly adorned, and within the same an
Idol, whom they do worship: then immediately under the same are ye kings wives
that go singing. They do bring it forth with much musick^ and reioysings, and
do carry it a good way in procession, and amongst many things of honor that
they do unto it, they do use one so brute and beastly as the reader may well
judge thereof, which is, ^ brutish use.
that many of them do cut pieces of their own flesh and do throw it unto
the Idol, and the other not contented with this, do throw them selves on the
ground that the chariot may pass over them, and there they remain all to
pieces. Those that do die in this sort, they account them for great saints, and
are had in singular veneration. Many other manners and fashions of idolatry is
declared of this kingdom, and more beastly than this we have spoken of, the
which I let pass, because I would not be tedious in this Itinerario. All the
people of this kingdom, be very bad and ill inclined, for which cause ye
fathers of the company of Jesus, that are in certain towns nigh unto the
same, cannot as yet bring them out of their errors, although they have put
therein great care and diligence.

Upon the same cost, and a little distant from this kingdom there is a town of
Portingals called Coulan, and 25. leagues further a city which is called
Cochin, in the which there are religious men of S. Francis, of S. Dominicke, of
S. Austin, and of the company of Jesus, who have there a very good study, or
seminary, whereas they do bring forth much fruit. Nigh unto this city is
Santo Tome, whereas are many baptized and good christians, very abstinent and
chaste, unto whom the patriarchs of Babylon do provide them of bishops: the
authority where with they do it, is not known, nor whence they have it, for
that as I do understand, the seat apostolic did never give it them. About the
same matter, at this present there is in Rome a bishop of this kingdom, and
one of the kingdom of Pimienta, with whom I have talked diverse times, and is
come thither to give his obedience unto the Pope and to know of him the order
that his pleasure is should be observed, in receiving of those bishops which
come thither by the commandment of the patriarch. In this kingdom there are
many kings, but the principallest of them is he of Cochin, and next unto him,
he of Coulan, and nigh unto them are many petie kings, as is he of Mangate and
Cranganor, and are all Gentiles, although amongst them there are mixed many
Moors. There has bin found in this kingdom certain Jews, that have gone
from Palestina and those parts. There is in this country universally, a law
very strange and little heard of, which is, that the sons do not inherit
after their fathers, but his brothers son, and the reason they give for the
same, is, for yt they have no certainty of their children, for that they have
no wives proper nor appointed to themselves, I promise you it seems to me,
their reason to be as barbarous as their law, for that the like inconvenience
does follow their brothers children. They have many rites and blindness amongst
the^, but one above all the rest, which is, yt in certain feasts amongst
them: they do use bathes, and after that they are bathed, they say that they
remain free and clear from all their sins They have many augorismes, of
whom I will not entreat, for that they are not worthy of memory. In this
country is gathered most of the pepper that is brought into Europe, for which
cause this kingdom is called that of the Pimienta.

CHAP. XXVI. The chapter does treat of many kingdoms of the new world, and
of the particular and curious things of them.
THe aforesaid father went from Cochin to the kingdom of Cananor, and passed
by Tanaor and Calicut which is called of the natural people Malabar they are
little kingdoms, The kingdom of Cananor, Tanaor, and Calic^t.
but in them much people. In that of Cananor there are inhabited many
Portingals, and religious me^ of the order of S. Francis: it is a country in
all things like unto Cochin, for which cause, and for that they observe and
keep one manner of customs and rites, I remit the touching of this kingdom to
the other aforesaid.

Then forwards on there are other two small kingdoms the one is called
Barcelor, and the other, Mangalor, there be in them some christians: it is a
good country and rich, and has it for certain, that within a little time,
they will be all baptized. From this kingdom they went unto Goa, a principal
city, and inhabited with Portingals, and is as the metropolitan of all those
kingdoms: it is in fifteen degrees of height* and is set from Cochin unto it a
hundredth leagues, this city is situated in a little Island compassed round
about with water, and in compass but only four leagues, and is divided from
the firm land of Odialcan by a mighty river. It is a good country and
peaceable, and does enjoy a very fair and pleasant river. In this City
ordinarily is resident the viceroy of the India, and the archbishop: there
are many Churches and couents, and besides the high church, there are fourteen
parish churches, besides fifteen hermitages that are within and without the
city: there be four couents, all very sumptuous, of S. Dominicke, of S.
Austin, of saint Francis, and of the company of Jesus. And without the city
there is another of Recoletos Franciscanos reformed Francis friars.

Nigh unto this Island are those of Salcete and Barde^, Islands Salcete and
Bardes.
there whereas the religious men of saint Francis, and the company of Jesus
have certain christian towns. Few years past, the Gentiles of Sancete did
kill certain fathers of the company of Jesus, in abhorring the faith, who died
with great spirit and strength* so that I believe they went into joy with God.

Beyond Goa on the same coast toward the North, The towns of Chaul, Basayn.
Damaun. Cambaya.
is in eighteen degrees and a half from ye town of Chaul, and beyond that
Basayn, and nigh thereunto Damaun: all these three towns are inhabited with
Portugals, and the farthest is the province of Cambaya, subject unto the grand
Tartar, or Mogor, by an other name. Two and fort^e leagues beyond that, The
city of Diu.
is the city called Diu, whereas is a very fair and good fortress of
Portugals, with a very great haven and sure, whose name does extend thoroughout
all Turkey.

Two hundred and seventy leagues beyond that, The city of Oromuz.
is the City of Oromuz on the ^oast of Persia, and in the same has ye said
Portugals; an other fortress, much better then that of Diu, and more
inexpugnable: it is the biggest in all the Indians, but not of so great name as
that of Diu. In this city of Oromuz they gather nothing else but salt, and
that in great abundance, yet notwithstanding* it is replenished of all that
may be imagined, for that there is brought thither from Persia, and Arabia,
great provision and many other curiosities. They say, that from this place they
may easily go to Uenice, taking their way to Aleph, and to Tripoli in Soria.

All this coast of the Indias unto Persia, is inhabited with many and mighty
kingdoms, in the which there an infinite number of people: one of them is that
of Odialon; Odialon,
the which is very rich, and of much people, and all Moors. Nigh unto this is
another called Disamaluco, hard by the kingdom of the great Tartar, which in
their language is called Mogor, Mogor.
the which, next unto that of China, (I do think) is the greatest in all the
world, as may be collected in that which is declared of the mightiness
thereof, both in ancient and latter histories. On the other side of Oromuz is
the kingdom of Persia, Persia.
whose king is Xactamas, or Ismael Sophi, great Sultan of Egypt, descending by
lyneall desent from the Sultan, Campson Gaurio, whom Selim, Emperor of the
Tartaros did overcome in battle, nigh unto Damasco, in the year 1516.

All those of this kingdom are Moors, although they and the Turks are as the
Christians and heretics, for that the Persians do follow the interpretation of
the law of Mahomet, of certain Alie^* or doctors. And the Turks go a
different way, and do follow others. This contractation and different
interpretation of the law, is the occasion that betwixt the one and the other:
there is ordinarily cruel wars: and it is the great mercy of God, for that
the Turk may not have any space, to come and do evil unto his Christians, or
if he do come, he shall be overtaken with the Persians, his enemy the Sophi, and
intrapped with all the evil they can do unto him: who that although he be a
Moore, and of the sect of Mahomet, yet he is a friend unto Christians.

CHAP. XXVII. Of other kingdoms and notable things that are until you come
into Spain, and to conclude, the compassing of the world.
Arabia Felix.
Near unto the strait of Oromuz is Arabia Felix, where as all the inhabitants
are of the sect of Mahomet, and do follow the same interpretation that the
Sophi does. So running a long by Arabia, The red sea.
you come straight unto the red sea, or Arabico, the which has four hundred
and fifty leagues of Longitude, and in some parts it is of a mighty depth:
the water thereof seems to be red, although taking it out thereof, it is
white: the cause thereof is, for that the ground under the water is of the same
color. By reason whereof, when as the sun does shine thereon, it seems red,
and thereby it has got the name the which it has unto this day. By this sea,
and by that of Basora, the great Turk does carry much spiceri^, silks, and
cloth of gold, and all riches out of the Oriental Indias, the which may
easily be disturbed, The land of Abexin, that of Prester John.
but the way how, is not for this place nor time. On the other side is the land
of Abexin, which is that of Prester John, a kingdom although it is very great,
yet it extends very little on this coast. Mazaubique.
From this kingdom or point going to the southwest is six hundredth leagues to
Mazaubique whereas there is inhabitance of Portingals. All this coast is black
people, gentiles and Idolaters, and is in fifteen degrees in altitude toward
the south, and in the same manner are all the rest that are inhabited from
Mazaubique unto the cape of Buena Esperansa. They are without memory of the
preaching of the gospel, if that God for his mercy do not take pity on them,
and put into the hearts of some to go thither and to procure the remedy of
so infinite number of souls.

So after the said father had informed himself of all that is said, and of
many other things more, which is left out for to euitate tediousnes, till such
time as of them may be made a particular history, he departed from Goa and
Cochin toward Portingall, and passed by the Islands of Maldiuia which are
many, and all are inhabited with Moors, The Islands of Maldiuia.
nigh unto the which they do enter the poole Antartico, crossing the
equinoctial from the coast of Arabia, from thence they sailed with a fair
wind till they came right against the Island of saint Lorenso, which is very
great, The Iland^ of S. Lorenso.
for that it has two hundredth seventy and five leagues of longitude, and
fourscore and ten of latitude. All inhabited with much people, very quiet
and civil: the faith of Christ was never preached amongst them, yet I do
believe that if it were, they would quietly receive the same. Passing from this
Island, they came unto the Cape of Buena Esperansa, yt which is another very
good Island, The Cape o^ Buena. Esperansa.
whose inhabitants and dwellers are much like to those of saint Lorenso: it is
in the temperate Zona, and nigh unto the straights of Magellanes. This Cape of
Buena Esperansa is called by another name the Cape Tormentorio: it is five and
thirty degrees large from the pole Antartico. And from Cochin unto this Cape,
they put one thousand three hundred, fifty and eight leagues, that way which
they do ordinarliy Nauigate. When they do pass by this cape, they were wont
to have great and strong winds. They go from thence to the Island of S. Elena,
The Iland^ of S. Elena,
which is beyond the Cape forwards, five hundred and seventy leagues. It is
not inhabited with people, but full of swine, goats, and great abundance of
partriges, and in all the coast is great store of fish, the which is taken with
great ease: it is but a little Island, and has circuit no more then five
l^^gues.

From this Island they do Nauigate four hundred leag^es until they come under
the Equinoctial, Guinea.
upon the coast of Guinea, returning unto the pole Artike, in four and forty
degrees in altitude (which was almost at the same place from whence he departed
at his going forth) after he compassed the world. They passed in sight of the
land, and from thence they sailed forwards, and saw other land until they
came unto Lisborne, having (after they had crossed the equinoctial) sailed a
thousand four hundred and fifty leagues. So that after the aforesaid father,
friar Martin Ignacio had made his account of all that he had traveled, from
the time he departed from Siuel, til he returned unto Lysborne, in compassing
the world, he found that it was nine thousand and forty leagues by sea and by
land, besides many other leagues that he traveled in China, and in other
parts, of the which he does make no account. All these leagues, are full of
mighty kingdoms, and al or the most part of them, are subject unto the
tyranny of lucyfer. God for his infinite mercy convert them, and take pity on
them, as he did when that he came from heaven upon the earth to die for all,
and put into the heart of the king of Spain, that amongst other good works,
the which with his most Christian zeal does intend and do, for to procure
this, which will be, so much unto the glory of God, and great desert of honor
unto himself, the which he may do very commodiously, being as he is at this
day Lord of all the Indies, and of the biggest part of all that new world.

This petition is worthy, that all we Christians do desire of God, for that
his holy name in all the world may be praised and exalted, and the sons of
Adam, who for their sins are so dispersed and forgotten of God, and first
beginning, they may go and enjoy the happy and glorious kingdom, for the which
they were created.

FINIS.

